
Al-Azhar University,
where the historian,
Ibn Khaldun, taught after
moving to Cairo in 1383.
He spent his last years
in this city
which he described as
the "metropolis of the world
enlightened by luminaries
of learning".
He died there in 1406
at the age of 74.
© Paul Almasy, Paris

éiÀ IBN KHALDUN
OF HISTORY
A universal history of the world written six centuries ago by
Ibn Khaldun establishes this great Arab scholar as the first
person to treat history as the proper object of a special
science. The story of this forerunner of the modern historian,
presented below, includes a recently-discovered account in
Ibn Khaldun s own words of his memorable meeting with
Tamerlane the Conqueror.
! . >\
by Barbara Bray
~J%
i ¿a
w;
i«:
"".i
.^
H E opened his eyes on a life
of culture and elegance,
where fountains played in sunny court¬
yards, where books and music and
quiet meditation divided the time with
exciting and often dangerous affairs
of state.
His family, which originated in the
Hadramaut in Southern Arabia, had
emigrated from there to Spain In the
eighth century, during the early years
of the Moslem conquest. By the elev¬
enth century they had become the
intellectual and political leaders of the
city of Seville. But before the middle
of the thirteenth century and in time to
escape the Christian reconquest of the
town, these proud patricians crossed
over into Northwest Africa, where
influential friends and relations soon
helped them to establish new positions
of wealth and honour.
In order to understand the world
into which Ibn Khaldun was born, and
which he spent his life studying and
BARBARA BRAY is a journalist, translator
and literary and dramatic critic, and was
formerly a lecturer in English at the Uni¬
versity of Alexandria. This article is adapt¬
ed from a radio programme she wrote for
Unesco to commemorate the birth of Ibn
Khaldun.
analysing, we need to take a gênerai
look at a period of history too often
neglected, and remind ourselves of
what Arab civilization as a whole, as
well as Ibn Khaldun in particular, con¬
tributed to the sum of human know¬
ledge.
After the founding of Islam by the
Prophet Mohammed around 630, the
new civilization rapidly spread out¬
wards from Arabia its centre until by
the middle of the tenth century, when
it was at its zenith, it included by far
the greater part of the inhabited world.
To the west it took in Egypt and the
entire North African coast, the islands
of Sicily and Crete, and nearly all of
Spain. To the north, Syria, Armenia
and the south-east regions of the Cau¬
casus were under Islamic rule; then,
further east, Mesopotamia, Iraq, Per¬
sia and Afghanistan, Transoxania and
parts of India's northern plains.
Both the cultural and geograph¬
ical horizons of Europe were boun¬
ded in nearly all directions by Islam,
which enjoyed the summit of its pros¬
perity at the time when the civilization
of the West slumbered in its deepest
darkness.
By the twelfth century the decline
of the medieval Islam had set in, and
in Ibn Khaldun's lifetime it presented
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

IBN KHALDUN (Continued)
Unable to keep out of hot water
a spectacle which while still splendid
was fatally touched by disintegration.
But in the years of its greatness it not
only kept alight and handed on the
torch of knowledge kindled by Greece,
but also made valuable contributions
of its own to human understanding and
power.
Navigation, commerce, architecture,
together with nearly all the arts and
crafts were cultivated, and their fruits
and techniques handed on to the West.
In science and philosophy, Arab
thinkers first preserved what the
Greeks had won, then in certain
important, though mostly practical
ways, developed and perfected it,
thus acting as a necessary connect¬
ing link between ancient and modern.
European interest in the works of
Aristotle, for instance, was first
awakened through acquaintance with
Arabic thought.
The Arabs produced eminent schol¬
ars and practitioners in medicine, as¬
tronomy, physics and the natural
sciences. They were the inventors
of algebra and trigonometry, and they
contributed much to the development
of arithmetical calculation.
The literary and purely intellectual
influences of Islam are harder to trace
than the scientific ones, and here as
in every field of Arabic studies much
necessary material is lost or still
unexplored.
By the twelfth century the works of
Arab scholars had begun to be trans¬
lated and accepted as authorities in
the West in Europe; and in the
thirteenth century the Arab world and
the West were intellectually much
more closely aligned than they have
ever been since.
In the sixteenth century the revolu¬
tion brought about by Copernicus in
astronomy, the reform of alchemy and
medicine by Paracelsus, and the new
anatomy of Vesalius struck great
blows at traditional Arab erudition.
Then when the Moors were defeated
and the Moslem empire in Europe came
to an end, all the eastern learning that
had not already been assimilated was
lost.
But much had been assimilated, and
Arabic no less than Hellenic lore con¬
tinued to be respected right down
until both were crushed by the advent
of modern scientific method.
Of this method Ibn Khaldun, the
first man to treat history as the proper
.*»*
6
From "The Muqaddimah" by Ibn Khaldun
© Bollingen Series XLIII, Pantheon Books, New York, 1958
MEDIEVAL WORLD MAP. The "Muqaddimah" or "Prolegomena", which Ibn
Khaldun wrote as an introduction to his monumental history of the world,
outlines and discusses contemporary ideas on geography that were based on
a still scanty knowledge of the globe. Ibn Khaldun illustrated his geographical
descriptions in the "Prolegomena" with this map of the world on which the
south is at the top and the north at the bottom. "By turning it upside down
one can pick out the outlines of Africa, the Mediterranean Sea, the Indian
Ocean and the land masses of Europe and Asia in the northern hemisphere.
object of a special science, was an
amazingly early forerunner. How did
he come to be so much ahead of his
time?
For an answer to this question we
have to look at the circumstances of
his life.
When he was seventeen Khaldun
lost both his parents and many of his
teachers in the Black Death. Three
years later he was given an important
appointment at the court of the Hafsid
rulers of Tunis, but he preferred to
leave this and travel gradually west¬
ward across North Africa, pursuing his
studies, and passing the years from
1354 to 1363 at the Merinid court in
Fez. The development of a Moslem
scholar was regarded as a lifelong pro¬
cess, and the list Khaldun scrupu¬
lously gives of the men at whose feet
he sat is a formidable one. But in
giving the list he was also presenting
his academic credentials, and these
show that his interests were wide,
not to say encyclopedic, rather than
specialized. This is an important factor
in relation to his life-work.
North Africa was at this time divid¬
ed into three warring kingdoms, each
of whose ruling dynasties was torn by
internal dissension. It was here, taking
an active part in politics, that Khaldun
got most of his material for his theories
about the rise and fall of nations. In
such an atmosphere it was hard for
someone like him to keep out of hot
water. At one period he found himself
on the wrong side and spent nearly
two years in prison, and later he
found it prudent to cross over into
Spain, to Granada. But in 1365 he
was back in North Africa, in Bougie,
as Prime Minister.
The nine years from 1365 onwards
were the most precarious in all Khal-
dun's hazardous career. It was no
easy matter to be always on the right
side in the complicated and fluid chaos
that North Africa had become. Khal-
dun's services as judge, civil servant
and politician were always in demand,
and all his attempts to escape to
scholarly peace and quiet were foiled
by suspicious rivals and demanding
princes. Finally, however, he managed
to get permission from the ruler of
Tunis to install himself and his family
in a secluded pavilion at Ibn Salamah
in the province of Oran. Here he spent
over three years in comfort and soli¬
tude, and started to write his great
history of the world.
"I completed the Introduction in the
remarkable manner to which I was
inspired by that retreat, with words
and ideas pouring into my head like
cream into a churn," he recorded.
It took him three more years, and
the opportunity to consult the libraries
in Tunis, before he completed his
enormous work, and even after that he
was always correcting it and bringing
it up to date.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 8

© Paul Almasy, Paris
In Fez, Ibn Khaldun completed his education in association with the circle of scholars »
which Sultan Abu Inan had gathered around him for study and teaching. /
Here too he met many other scholars, physicians, astrologers and artists
passing through the court of the sultan who was a great friend of scholarship.
Above, the 14th-century Bab Sagma gate in Fez, Morocco.

IBN KHALDUN (Continued)
Historian and conqueror face to face
8
The first volume consists of the
Muqaddimah or Prolegomena, which is
probably Khaldun's greatest claim to
lasting fame, containing as it does the
first real theory of history. Volumes II
to VII deal with the events of the pre-
Islamic world and Arab and Eastern
Moslem history.' But Volumes VIII and
IX deal with the history of the Moslem
West. Much of the material is based
on first-hand knowledge, and it remains
our most important source for North¬
west African and Berber history.
In November or December 1378,
Khaldun returned to his old home in
Tunis where he taught, did research,
and of course made both friends and
enemies at court. In 1382 he thought
it best to ask the ruler's permission to
make the pilgrimage to Mecca, and
sailed for Alexandria on October 24,
leaving his family behind, perhaps as
hostages. From this time on his only
contacts with the West were by cor¬
respondence and through meetings
with travellers. He reached Alexandria
after more than forty days at sea, and
after a' few weeks moved south to
Cairo where, apart from occasional
travels in the Moslem world to the
east, he spent the rest of his life.
Egypt, ruled by the Mamelukes, was
at this time the most stable and
prosperous part of Islam. Khaldun
was overwhelmed by the beauty of
Cairo, with its colleges, mosques,
crowded streets, and gardens that
seemed to him like something out of
paradise.
He was soon "giving lectures at
al-Azhar University and as soon as
the post fell vacant the ruler Barqûq
appointed him professor of Mâlikite
jurisprudence in the Oamhîyah College.
Soon after he was also made chief
Mâlikite judge of Egypt. (The Mâlikite
rite was one of the four schools of
Islamic law.) So there he was once
again in positions of both prestige and
power.
In the year 1387 Khaldun went at
last on his pilgrimage to Mecca, return¬
ing to new academic appointments and
honours. In 1399 Barqûq died and was
succeeded by his ten-year-old son.
In 1400 Khaldun, as one of the four
chief judges of Egypt, officially accom¬
panied the young prince Faraj to
Damascus, making a detour on the way
back to visit Jerusalem and Bethlehem
and other holy cities, Moslem and
Christian, as a pilgrim. Christ is of
course regarded as a prophet by
Moslems.
By the autumn of the same year
Timur or, as we now call him, Tamer¬
lane, "Timur the lame" was threaten¬
ing Syria with his cruel and all-
conquering hordes of Tartars. Khaldun
was obliged, much against his will, to
bestir himself yet again and accom¬
pany Faraj as judge and counsellor on
an expedition to relieve Damascus. A
contemporary described this ineffec
tive force as "an army without a gen¬
eral and a general without an army."
There were various inconclusive
engagements between the two forces
in the country outside Damascus, but
in the first week of the year 1401 came
news of a threatened revolt back in
Egypt, and Faraj returned home, leav¬
ing at Damascus Ibn Khaldun and
others of his retinue to fend for them¬
selves and save the city if they could.
These temporary residents of the
city, together with the civilian authori¬
ties, decided to surrender, against the
wishes of the military. Tamerlane
knew of Khaldun's presence and
expressed the desire to see him, so
he was secretly lowered by ropes from
the walls of the city and brought into
the presence of the conqueror.
Until a few years ago the only autho¬
rities for this fabulous encounter were
various Arab historians of the fifteenth
century, who all obviously embroidered
such facts as were available to them.
In all hitherto known manuscripts Khal¬
dun's own autobiography stopped in
the year 1395. But less than twenty
years ago three new manuscripts (the
second and third are simply copies of
the first), were found in Istanbul and
Cairo. (The most important was anno¬
tated in Khaldun's own hand.) And
they brought his story up to within a
few months of his death.
So now at last, after five and a half
centuries of speculation, we have a
detailed and verbatim account of one
of history's most colourful meetings.
T the time of their conver¬
sations, which were spread
out over January and February of 1401,
Khaldun was nearly seventy and
Tamerlane about five years younger.
Khaldun was described by those
who knew him as good-looking and
attractive in manner, and this was
confirmed by the speed with which he
was always admitted to favour wher¬
ever he went. Tamerlane, according
to an Arab chronicler, was "tall in stat¬
ure, with a large brow and a great
head, and very strong. His complexion
was white mixed with red; he was
broad-shouldered, had thick fingers, a
flowing beard, was paralysed in one
hand and lame in his right leg. He
had brilliant eyes, a loud voice, and
was fearless of death. He reached
the age of eighty in full enjoyment of
his senses and strength."
They were a well-matched pair who
lost no time in sizing one another
up. Although Khaldun as a historian]
was certainly intrigued to meet so
outstanding a maker of history, his
chief concern was to extricate himself
and his colleagues from Tamerlane's
clutches and get safely back to Egypt.
Tamerlane, on the other hand, knew
that Khaldun was the greatest living
expert on the Maghreb (this is to say,
the Western Islam from Tripoli to Gran¬
ada), and was anxious for military
reasons to attach him to his intelli¬
gence services.
Let Khaldun now take up the story
in his own words, from the moment
of his first arrival in Tamerlane's
reception tent:
When my name was announced he
summoned me and as I entered the
audience tent he was reclining on his
elbow while platters of food were
passing before him, which he sent out
one after the other to groups of Mon¬
gols sitting in circles in front of his
tent. Upon entering I spoke first:
Peace be with you and I made a
gesture of humility. Thereupon he
raised his head and stretched out his
hand to me, which I kissed. He made
a sign to me to sit down. I did so just
where I was, and he summoned from
his retinue one of the erudite Harrafito
jurists whom he bade sit there also
to serve as interpreter between us.
Tamerlane got straight to the point
by asking Khaldun questions about the
Maghreb, which Khaldun skillfully
evaded. They fenced for some time,
then Tamerlane got tired of beating
about the bush.
/ am not satisfied, he declared.
/ should like you to write down for me
a description of the whole country of
the Maghreb, treating all its features
in such a way as I might seem actually
to see it.
Bowls of rishta a sort of macaroni
in soup were then brought in. Khal¬
dun took some and did it justice, and
this seemed to go down very well
with his host.
But soon they both fell silent. Khal¬
dun couldn't help thinking of what his
fate would be if he made a wrong
move.
At this moment news came that the
city gates had been opened and the
civil authorities were coming out to
surrender.
Tamerlane appeared to be having
trouble with the lame knee which had
been wounded by an arrow in his
youth, and so was carried out, with
bands playing "until the air shook with
them," and rode off towards Damascus.
Khaldun duly set about writing his
account of the Maghreb. He was left
unmolested, although around him the
city was being sacked and burned.
The paper written and handed over,
Tamerlane treated Khaldun with
various marks of respect, asking him
to give his opinion on legal matters,
for example. But they still had not
got round to the vital question of
whether the scholar was to be allowed
to return home to his studies.
Khaldun decided he had better take
the bull by the horns but as tactfully
as possible.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

^^ífe5¡
Vati
?&"J?'m "
V
AN AUDIENCE WITH TAMERLANE
Tamerlane granting audience to subject princes
on the occasion of his accession
(15th century Persian miniature).
Founder of the second Mongol empire, Tamerlane
conquered all of the Middle East
and Eastern Europe, but was also known
as a patron of art, literature and science.
He was born four years after Ibn Khaldun,
in 1336, and died one year before
the great Arab historian, in 1405.
From "Bihzad and his Paintings in the Zafar-Namah"
by Sir Thomas W. Arnold, © Bernard Quaritch Ltd., London
9

IBN KHALDUN (Continued)
Author of the first real theory of history
10
/ chose from the book market an
exceedingly beautiful copy of the
Koran, a beautiful prayer rug, a copy
of the famous poem, al-Burda, by
al-Busiri in praise of the Prophet may
Allah bless him and grant him peace
and four boxes of the excellent Cairo
sweetmeats. I took these gifts and
entered to him in the palace of Qasr
al-Ablaq.
Khaldun pondered how to begin.
May Allah aid you / have some¬
thing which I wish to say before you,
he said.
Speak! replied Tamerlane.
/ am a stranger in this country in
a double sense. First because I am
away from the Maghreb. My other
absence is from Cairo. I have come
under your protection, and I hope that
you will give me your opinion regarding
what may solace me in my exile.
Speak. Whatever you desire I
shall do for you.
What do I desire? My state of
exile has made me forget what I
desire. Perhaps you may Allah aid
you will know for me what I desire.
Move from the city of the camp
and stay with me, and if Allah wills I
will fulfil your highest aim.
For the moment Khaldun had to be
content with this ambiguous sug¬
gestion. However, on the strength of it
he did succeed in getting a safe-
conduct for the Egyptian officials who
had been left behind in Damascus.
But left alone Tamerlane seems
to have reconciled himself to the idea
of letting Khaldun go, and the next
time they met he let this become
apparent, somewhat wistfully, though
characteristically he cut his losses in
a very novel way. He asked Khaldun:
You have a mule here?
A mule? Yes.
Is it a good one?
Yes.
Will you sell it?
Sell it?
/ would buy it from you.
May Allah aid you one like me
does not sell to one like you. But I
would offer it to you in homage.
/ meant only that I would requite
you for your generosity.
Is there any generosity left
beyond what you have already shown
me?
He was silent, writes Khaldun; so
was I. The mule was brought to him,
and I did not see it again.
Are you going to travel to Cairo?
asked Tamerlane.
Khaldun answered, delighted and
surprised, but still nervous.
May Allah aid you indeed my
desire is only to serve you ... If the
journey would be in your service,
surely. Otherwise I have no desire
for it.
No, but you will return to your
family and your people.
Khaldun rounds off the story by tel¬
ling how he finally arrived back in
Egypt. Soon after his return a messen¬
ger came with some money for the
mule not the full price, but the
messenger swore that was all he
was given. Khaldun warily asked the
ruler of Egypt whether it was all right
for him to take the money, and receiv¬
ing an affirmative answer, pocketed it
with a sigh of relief at having got off
so lightly.
He lost no time in writing off to
the Maghreb to tell about the infor¬
mation he had been forced to give, and
to try to counteract any ill-effects this
might have by giving his fellow-
countrymen all the useful facts he
could muster about Tamerlane. In
fact Tamerlane never did attack North
Africa. The rest of Khaldun's life was
spent in study, writing and official
duties. He died on March 17, 1406,
and was buried in the Sufi cemetery
outside the Nasr gate of Cairo. The
site of his tomb is now unknown.
In the centuries that followed, the
influence of Khaldun's teaching grad¬
ually gathered momentum, though his
name is not found mentioned outside
the Islamic world until 1636. Until the
beginning of the nineteenth century it
was the Ottoman Turks who showed
the most constructive interest. Then
European scholars began to discover
in his work ideas hitherto considered
to have been formulated more recently
in the West.
As far as we know Khaldun was
the first historian ever to regard history
not as a chronicle of more or less for¬
tuitous events, but as a continuous,
collective and organic movement
governed by hidden but discernible
laws. Moreover he identified the
science of history with the science of
civilization as a whole, and realized
that only a study of man in all his
innumerable activities can reveal the
true significance of so-called historical
events, so that the study of those
events may act as a practical guide
to the statesman.
So Khaldun, considering everything
as a function of man and his social
organization, takes all knowledge as
his province, and re-evaluates every
aspect of the highly developed civili¬
zation in which he lived.
The element of intellectual orthodoxy
from which he could hardly be expect¬
ed to escape only serves to emphasize
the real originality and breadth of his
mind. Picturesque and touching as it
is, then, it is no wonder that Professor
Arnold Toynbee, one of the most cele¬
brated historians of our own day, cites
this fourteenth-century Arab as the
inspiration of his own monumental
work, and salutes Ibn Khaldun as the
founder of the science of history.
Paul Almasy, Paris
In 1362 Ibn Khaldun left Fez and went to the court of the King of Castille
as ambassador of the Sultan of Granada. On his return
the sultan rewarded him with lands and a palace in Granada.
Above, the 14th-century Myrtle Court of the Alhambra, Granada, one of
the palaces where the landscape garden art of the Arabs flowered
in sheltered patios filled with flowers, shade, pools and fountains.
