Photos © APN Floating through the air with the greatest of ease, astronaut Adrian Nicolaiev learns to
cope with conditions of weightlessness during training session in an aeroplane in flight.

WHY WE ARE OUTWARD BOUND
by Konstantin Feoktistov
KONSTANTIN FEOKTISTOV, the author of
this article, learns to withstand acceleration
stresses. On October 12, 1964, the Soviet
spaceship Voskhod 1 made a 24-hour flight.
It carried Vladimir Komarov, the pilot, Boris
Egorov, a research physician and Konstantin
Feoktistov who carried out scientific studies
while in flight.
^^U HEN the first artificial earth
" satellite was launched a
friend and I made bets on the year in
which the first manned vehicle would
go into orbit. Our prophecies were
both wrong, but I won either by pure
luck or because I was the more
optimistic. Yuri Gagarin's flight took
place much sooner than could have
been foretold nine years ago.
What is it that compels man to leave
the confines of his own planet? Is it
rational to spend so much effort and
material on the exploration of outer
space when there are still so many
unsolved problems In our own world?
To what extent is this expenditure on
sputniks and luniks and other vehicles
justified when so many people still
lack food, clothing and proper housing?
It is doubtful whether anyone would
try to give a definitive answer to these
questions. Each answer could, at
best, be only one of many possible
points of view.
The idea of space travel has
absorbed me for many years and will,
it seems, keep me busy till the end
of my life. Here I should like to set
down some ideas on the subject that
derive from my own personal
experience.
When I was about ten I came across
a book called Interplanetary Travel
and, reading it, caught the "moon
disease". The flights seemed to me
to be so real and so easy to
accomplish, and the need for them
was so indisputable that, with all the
sincerity of youth, I accused the grown¬
ups around me of laziness and
lack of scientific acumen. I could not
reconcile myself to the idea that earth-
moon communications had not been
established. So my elder brother and
I decided to get busy on the problem
immediately.
We had to postpone our naive plans,
however. War broke out, my brother
was killed and I was wounded.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

CENTURIES BACK
Cyrano de Bergerac, the French writer, in
"Voyages to the Moon and the Sun" (1650)
imagined a weird method of becoming
space borne. His hero reasoned that the
sun causes the morning dew to rise, so
went aloft by attaching vials filled with
dew to his body. On the moon he en¬
countered another earthling, carried there
in a machine powered by geese (above).
This was the adventurous traveller describ¬
ed by the English author, Francis Godwin,
In "The Man in the Moone". (1638).
NOT SO LONG AGO
In his cell at the Peter and Paul Fortress
in St. Petersburg, where he had been
imprisoned for revolutionary activities, a
young Russian, Nicolas Kibaltchitch (1853-
1881). speculated about space flight and
devised a rocket type machine for cosmic
travel. Drawing above Is based on his
sketches of this rocket-propelled spacecraft.
YESTERDAY
The 19th-century science fiction works of
Jules Verne were a mixture of scientific
accuracy, astute speculation and outright
imagination. In "Around the Moon," a 900-ft
cannon fires a capsule into space. Illustra¬
tion shows Verne's astronauts floating hel¬
plessly in a state of weightlessness in their
cabin. But Jules Verne correctly foresaw
many space problems, including the need
for tremendous speed to escape earth's
gravity and for a means to change course
while in space by the use of retro rockets.
WHY WE ARE OUTWARD BOUND (Cont'd)
At 40, I have not lost hope
of landing on the moon
28
Despite all the dramatic events of the
war years, my dream of space travel
never left me; it was with me when
I enrolled in the higher technical school
and when I was working as an
engineer. I chose it as the subject
of the thesis I presented for the degree
of candidate of science.
Two years ago I spent a day and a
night in orbital flight as a member of
the crew of the spaceship Voskhod I.
My dream has still not been fulfilled,
but 1 am on the right road. There is
every reason to believe that the age
limit for astronauts will be progressively
raised as technical improvements
are made, and although I recently
celebrated my fortieth birthday I have
still not lost hope of one day stepping
out of a spaceship onto the moon. If
I do not, my life will seem incomplete.
The "Call of the Cosmos" emerged
from a dream. Like almost every
dream it came before its time, far in
advance of man's technical capabilities.
Eduard Tsiolkovsky (an early Russian
theorist on the principles of space
flight, see page 10), translated Jules
Verne's pure fantasy into a potentially
attainable scientific concept.
The generation born at the beginning
of this century began the job of
embodying Tsiolkovsky's ideas in
metal and of turning his prophecies
into convincing facts. At first the
work was sporadic and unorganized,
and as has often been the case in the
history of science, eccentrics and
enthusiasts watched over the cradle
of the new-born science.
When the group for the study of
rocket motors (GIRD) was founded in
Moscow, followed by the laboratory
of gas dynamics (GDL) and still later,
in 1955, by the rocket institute,
experiments that had hitherto been
rather primitive became part of the
state plan of the U.S.S.R. One of the
founders of GIRD was Sergei Korolyov,
later a member of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Sciences and a designer
of carrier-rockets and spaceships,
who died at the beginning of this year.
If a man has begun to take an
interest in a problem, he is already
mature enough to penetrate more
deeply into it. Every problem is a
challenge to man, every problem
makes him think. Thinking leads to
plans for the solution of the problem.
A sort of chain reaction sets in.
When you have given some thought
to the problem of supplying power
for a heavy interplanetary vehicle you
come to the conclusion that an
expedition to another planet cannot
use chemical fuel the engines must
be more effective, they must be ion
or plasma motors.
And when you think of the duties
of the crew that is to carry out a
certain mission you also begin to
think of the people who will compose
that crew. This naturally gives rise to
problems of providing food, water and
air for the crew during flight. Here it
is obvious that a complete ecological
cycle must be maintained on board
the spaceship) the crew must be
provided with everything necessary to
support life, and their body wastes
must be eliminated or, better still, used
in a rational way.
As this huge skein of problems is
unravelled we begin to visualize the
space expedition of the distant future.
The very possibility of visualizing turns
a man's thoughts, whether he wishes
it or not, to the search for new
solutions.

From dream to reality
From far off times man has been ob¬
sessed by the idea of space travel, and
usually the goal of his imaginary jour-
teys has been the moon. Indeed, story
ellers, poets and writers reached the
earth 's natural satellite well in advance
of the sate/lite moon probes sent out
by space science. To do so they devised
a wealth of ingenious, however imprac¬
tical, methods.
TODAY
he first guided automatic
iterplanetary station was
lunched towards Venus
y Soviet scientists on
aU^iam 10 ioßi r^;«k*-\
he station weighed 1,419
)s. Strange looking ve-
icles like this one. in
fhich science has outdone
science fiction," are blaz-
ig a trail to the planets.
TOMORROW
The four-armed monster,
in this drawing, called the
"Schmoo." is an unmanned
repair craft sent out by the
wheel-shaped space station in
background to render assist¬
ance to a nuclear-powered
space vehicle in difficulty.
A concrete scheme of experi¬
mentation and designing is born of the
free play of intellects. These flights
of fancy are becoming a necessary
stage in preparatory work that
sometimes takes years to complete.
The basis of it all is a perfectly
comprehensible and natural human
quality man finds it difficult not to
yield to the temptation to think ahead
of his time.
It would of course be naive to
suggest that this one human quality
is sufficient explanation of man's urge
to get out into the great universe.
There are objective causes of a
demographic and social nature that are
rather more difficult to understand.
One can quite easily imagine the
time, a few hundred years from now,
when the population of the world will
become so dense that each continent
will be turned into one big city like
Moscow or New York. Man will feel
the overcrowding physically so that
for him the mastery of considerable
areas in outer space will have a
practical significance. The future
spread of man is bound up with space
since he will be unable to confine
himself to his own planet, even if, for
the time being, he has not realized
this. This, too, was one of Tsiol-
kovsky's ideas.
Long before the physical over¬
crowding is felt, however, people will
begin to feel a spiritual constraint. A
surplus of energy within a close-knit
community must find an outlet or there
will be stagnation and retrogression.
Man always stands in need of a goal
that mobilizes his spiritual and physical
energy. Sooner or later all mankind
will unite and there will be no further
danger of the nuclear self destruction
of civilization.
Then, to a greater degree than now,
the single community will have before
it a great purpose the conquest of
space, beginning with circumsolar
space.
Today's space flights are mere
reconnaissance; the means for a
thorough study of conditions in space
and dangers that await man there have
still to be created. The dangers I
have in mind are solar flares, lethal
radiation, dust clouds, meteoric
showers, the effect of long periods of
weightlessness on the human organism
and other hazards specific to travel
beyond the bounds of the earth.
Wé have still to develop, on the
grand scale, ways of studying the
planets, their surfaces and their
composition, their atmosphere and
their radiation and magnetic fields.
Lastly we have still to design
spaceships capable of journeys to
other planets that may last several
years, provide them with ultra-long¬
distance communications and with
navigation instruments, and supply
oxygen, food and water for the crew
under conditions in which every ounce
of weight counts.
To do all this cybernetics will have
to be extensively developed, electronic
computers and analysers perfected
and a "Sun Service" organized that
will provide a series of circumsolar
automatic satellites to transmit data
predicting solar flares, the direction
in which radiation streams are being
generated, and so on. Space biology
and planetology must also be further
developed. There will be a need to
build observatories in space, artificial
inhabited planets from which studies
of the universe can be made and
which can be used to facilitate space
travel.
Even this sketchy programme of
space exploration gives some idea of
the colossal effort man must make
and the expenditure that will be
necessary to put it into effect.
Has not the world perhaps begun its
invasion of space prematurely? Is not
the expenditure of effort and resources
inadvisable since it has to be made
now, whereas people will live in space
in hundreds of years' time? Would it
not be more reasonable to create better
living conditions everywhere on earth
and let space wait its turn...?
In principle, one cannot open the
door to a new sphere of activity and
then suddenly slam it shut again, not
even for the sake of economy. The
process works only one way; it is
irreversible if the technical means
for space travel exist they cannot
remain unused. The exploration of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

30
Why we are
outward bound (com-d)
space, moreover, is already bringing
beneficial results, even at this initial
stage.
The implementation of an intricate'
programme for the design of carrier
rockets, automatic space stations and
spaceships is promoting the rapid
development of the more progressive
branches of science and engineering
cybernetics, physics, biology and
medicine, radio engineering and the
aerodynamics of supersonic velocities.
The results of this development also
effect ordinary "terrestrial" life
because they promote general tech¬
nical progress and thus better living
standards.
Some of the achievements of space
engineering have already made their
mark in economic and cultural life.
Retransmission satellites are used for
telecommunications, including tele¬
vision on a global scale. Navigation
satellites make sea travel more
reliable. Meteorological satellites are
reducing errors in forecasting weather
conditions in various parts of the
world.
I think it is a mistake to weigh space
exploration against man's efforts to
improve his living standards. These
are different aspects of the totality
of human progress and they are not
contradictory.
The two "space powers", the
U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A., are working
separately, independently of each
other. Does this have a negative
effect on the rate of development and
the results of space exploration?
Personally, I think not; I believe
that this involuntary rivalry has not,
up to now, been a hindrance. When
anything new is started, an approach
from different angles tends to further
its development.
Steps have already been made along
the road to co-operation. Work on
the U.S. satellite Echo 2 has begun
on an international scale. There are
also prospects of space collaboration
with France. We may expect the next
stage in the development of this
co-operation to be the exchange of
information, the exchange of orders for
the manufacture of various installations
and a certain degree of specialization.
It is quite obvious that as the
exploration of space proceeds, sooner
or later problems will arise that cannot
be solved by any one country but
which will require the united efforts
of all mankind.
