U.N. CHARTER FOR YOUTH
N December 7, 1965, the United Nations General Assembly
unanimously adopted a historic declaration on youth. The U.N.
Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual
Respect and Understanding between Peoples, as it is officially termed, calls
directly on the younger generation to help safeguard international peace
and security. "Young people," it declares, "must become conscious of
their responsibilities in the world they will be call upon to manage."
The idea and a first draft of a U.N. Declaration on youth were originally
proposed by Rumania in 1962, and the final text was adopted after four years
of discussions and consultations between states, U.N. bodies and youth
movements throughout the world. Unesco was closely associated with
this work in consultation with its national commissions and with the
Unesco-sponsored International Conference on Youth, held in Grenoble,
France in 1964.
In a message to Mr. Amintore Fanfani, then President of the U.N. General
Assembly, Unesco's Director-General, Mr. René Maheu, hailed the adoption
of the Declaration as an event of far-reaching importance, and the
Declaration itself as a valuable tool for Unesco in its efforts to foster
international understanding among youth. "1 think that Unesco's long-term
programme for youth should help to give practical reality to the
Declaration," Mr. Maheu said. "This programme seeks to help youth take
an active share in the economic, social and cultural development of their
communities and to participate in projects for international co-operation.
It also seeks to give youth an opportunity to use their energies for the
building of a more just and brotherly world."
Below we publish the full text of the six principles set forth in the Declara¬
tion which the United Nations has called on governments, non-governmental
organizations and youth movements to recognize and act upon.
From the Unesco New
O Young people shall be brought up
in the spirit of peace, justice, free¬
dom, mutual respect and understanding
in order to promote equal rights for all
human beings and all nations, economic
and social progress, disarmament and
the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Cm All means of education, including
^^ as of major importance the guidance
given by parents or family, instruction
and information intended for the young
should foster among them the ¡deals of
peace, humanity, liberty and internatio¬
nal solidarity and all other ideals which
help to bring peoples closer together,
and acquaint them with the role entrust¬
ed to the United Nations as a means
of preserving and maintaining peace
and promoting international understand¬
ing and co-operation.
©Young people shall be brought up
in the knowledge of the dignity and
equality of all men without distinction
as to race, colour, ethnic origins or
beliefs, and in respect for fundamental
human rights and for the right of peo¬
ples to self-determination.
©Exchanges, travel, tourism, meet¬
ings, the study of foreign lan¬
guages, the twinning of towns and uni¬
versities without discrimination and
similar activities should be encouraged
and facilitated among young people of
all countries in order to bring them
together in educational, cultural and
sporting activities in the spirit of this
Declaration.
Ck National and international associa-
^-' tions of young people should be
encouraged to promote the purposes of
the United Nations, particularly interna¬
tional peace and security, friendly rela¬
tions among nations based on respect
for the equal sovereignty of States, the
final abolition of colonialism and of
racial discrimination and other violations
of human rights.
Youth organizations in accordance
with this Declaration should take all
appropriate measures within their res¬
pective fields of activity in order to
make their contribution without any
discrimination to the work of educating
the young generation in accordance
with these ¡deals.
Such organizations, ¡n conformity with
the principle of freedom of association,
should promote the free exchange of
ideas in the spirit of the principles of
this Declaration and of the purposes of
the United Nations set forth in the
Charter.
All youth organizations should con¬
form to the principles set forth ¡n this
Declaration.
0A major aim in educating the young
shall be to develop all their facul¬
ties and to train them to acquire higher
moral qualities, to be deeply attached
to the noble ideals of peace, liberty,
the dignity and equality of all men, and
imbued with respect and love for huma¬
nity and its creative achievements. To
this end the family has an important
rôle to play.
Young people must become conscious
of their responsibilities in the world
they will be called upon to manage and
should be Inspired with confidence in
a future of happiness for mankind.
