4g
Paul Almasy, Paris Giant sand dunes in the coastal desert of the province of lea, southern Peru.

PERU'S COASTAL
nvrrQCrpTQ Land of three
ULOLlv I O great cultures
by Peveril Meigs Deserts reach down to the sea along some 18,500 miles of the world's
coastlines. They cover vast areas in Mauritania, South Africa, Australia and
California, form an unbroken chain from north-western India to the Red
Sea and follow the west coast of South America for well over 2,000 miles.
Coastal deserts have special characteristics whose study is of great impor¬
tance to arid zone research. The proximity of the sea and the possibilities
of desalting sea water on a large scale for domestic and industrial needs,
and perhaps eventually for irrigation, also give new importance to these
hitherto neglected areas,. This is made clear in a recently published report
on the inter-continental survey of coastal deserts (1) carried out for Unesco
by Dr. Peveril Meigs, chairman of the Arid Zone Commission of the Inter¬
national Geographical Union. In the article below, which is taken from
this study, Dr. Meigs describes Peru's coastal desert, historically and
economically one of the most interesting in the world. An international
conference on coastal deserts is to be held in Peru next year under the
auspices of Unesco and the International Geographical Union.
(/) "Geography of Coastal Deserts", Unesco, $.6.50; 33/-(stg.); 23 F.
B ordering the Pacific Ocean for 2,300 miles at
the base of the Andes stretches the longest
west-coast desert in the world. The southern part of the
desert, in Chile, is known as the Atacama. The northern
part, in Peru, has no accepted inclusive name, unless it be
simply La Costa (the coast).
Though the land offers little unity, the sea and its
associated climatic and biologic influences are strikingly
uniform along the entire coast. Directly off shore is a
belt of water abnormally cool for the latitude. Although
associated with the northward-flowing Peru Current or
Humboldt Current, the cold water belt consists actually of
upwelling water from the deep layer of the ocean.
Lowest temperatures of about 60° F. are found within a
mile of the coast, and westward they rise steadily for at
least 100 miles, to a level about 16° F higher. The tem¬
perature is remarkably uniform along the whole coast to
Punta Pariñas, where the continent reaches its western¬
most extent within less than 5° latitude of the equator.
As a result of the cool water off shore, and the pre¬
valence of south-westerly winds, the littoral has a strikingly
mild and uniform climate. The coolest month usually
August, averages above 59° F., while the warmest month,
January or February, is from 68 to 81° F. At such temper-
PEVERIL MEIGS ¡s a U.S. geographer who has specialized in
arid zone problems for many years. He is the author of "Distri¬
bution of Arid Homoclimates" , published by the United Nations
in 1952. The collection of maps specially compiled for this work
also appeared in the Unesco study "Hydrology of the Arid Zone"
(1953).
atures, practically all temperate and subtropical crops are
possible, provided water is available. As In other west-
coast deserts, the cool water off shore gives such stability
to the air that rainfall is slight or, in some years, non¬
existent.
But in winter, from June to October, there is a strong
development of low cloud, of a type locally famous under
the name garua. The garua, a fine mist, forms a layer
about 1,000 ft. thick, with its base between about 1,000 and
3,000 ft. above sea level. It furnishes enough water to
support a growth of vegetation on any hills or mountains
within its reach near the coast. In addition, the garua shuts
out the sunlight for most of the time, resulting in chilly,
gloomy conditions, and retarding evaporation in the land
below it.
The cool water off shore has other profound conse¬
quences for human activity. The upwelling water supports
a prolific growth of plankton, which in turn feed fish of
many species and tremendous numbers. From the earliest
times the fish have been an important source of food for
the Peruvians. In addition, they support many millions of
sea birds that crowd the desert islands up and down the
coast.
These birds, of which a type of cormorant, the guanay,
is by far the most numerous, nest on the islands, where
their droppings form the guano accumulations that consti¬
tute one of the most valuable resources of Peru. Such
accumulations are possible only in deserts, where there is
virtually no rainfall to erode the deposits.
Although the guano deposits were used by the ancient
Indian civilizations to maintain the fertility of the irrigated
lands of the coastal desert in Peru, their great value was
only "rediscovered" in the mid-nineteenth century, at which
CONT'D ON PAGE 14
H

PERU'S COASTAL DESERTS (Cont'd)
Less inhabited than in Inca times
14
time the guano had accumulated to depths of as much as
150 ft. on some islands. In the ensuing feverish "guano
rush", millions of tons were shipped to Europe, and the
deposits were mined out in a few years, with no thought
given to conservation of the sea fowl that made these riches
possible.
During the last fifty years, however, the Peruvian Govern¬
ment, through the Compañía Administradora del Guano, has
sponsored the necessary conservation measures to encour¬
age the multiplication of the guanayes, and the guano,
now treated as a perpetual annual crop, yields more than
300,000 tons per year. Not only are the fifty or more guano
islands set aside as bird sanctuaries, with guano harvesting
permitted only at certain seasons, but positive measures are
taken to encourage multiplication of the birds. Thus at
some localities low walls are built to prevent the young
birds from falling over the cliffs into the sea.
To expand the overcrowded nesting areas, starting in
1946 the Government has walled off peninsulas of the main¬
land so that birds can breed without molestation by animal
predators. In effect, this has already created ten or more
new guano "Islands", most of them on the southern coast
where true islands are lacking.
In recent years a new threat to the guano industry has
appeared. The vast schools of anchovies that make up
the chief food of the birds are now being harvested directly
by fishermen through mass methods, to be dried, ground
up, and sold as fresh meal for poultry and cattle feed. One
of the big questions is the extent to which direct harvesting
of the anchovies can be made without upsetting the écolo¬
gie balance that makes possible the production of guano.
Already the Government has placed restrictions on this type
of fishing.
A complicating factor In the écologie balance enters the
scene at irregular intervals: a warm countercurrent from the
north, known as the Niño (Christ Child) because it appears
about Christmas, when the solar heating system, along
with its intertropical air masses, has moved south of the
equator. The Niño annually flows southward 5° to 8° from
the equator, over-riding the northern part of the Peru
Current near the coast.
Occasionally, usually at intervals of seven or more years,
the Niño thrusts much farther south, sometimes even
reaching Pisco, 14° S., where it is finally deflected seaward
at the Paracas Peninsula.
BNORMALLY warm, this water causes the
plankton to remain far below the surface, in
cooler water, or to die at the surface where they form great
masses sometimes known locally as the "Callao Painter".
The fish, in turn, die by the millions, and the birds, weakened
by undernourishment and the effort of flying much farther
then accustomed in search of live fish, sicken and die in
such numbers that the guano crops drop disastrously,
building back to normal only after a period of some years.
The presence of the warm water off shore also gives
the air an instability that sometimes results in torrential rain
and floods in areas that may have had no rain for a year.
In 1925, one of the worst Niño years, Lima had a rainfall
of 60 in., as compared with an average annual rainfall of
1.8 in. Along the whole northern half of the coast there
was more rainfall In March than during the preceding ten-
year period.
The attractions of mild climate, abundant water from the
Andes, abundant fish everywhere off shore, vast deposits
of guano to maintain soil productivity and nearby mineral
deposits were taken advantage of to develop ancient cen¬
tres of advanced civilization in the coastal desert 2,000
years before the Spanish conquest.
Primitive agriculture may have started in this area as
early as 3,000 B.C., with cotton and later maize among the
chief crops, though sea food was the chief source of nutri¬
ment. From 1225 to 700 B.C., ceramics, textiles, architec¬
ture, irrigation and gold-working were developed. From
600 to 350 B.C., beans, llamas as beasts of burden, stone¬
walled terraces for irrigation, and copper-working entered
the picture.
HEN arose one of the greatest American civi¬
lizations, which lasted from the fourth century
B.C. to the tenth century A.D. Unlike the Egyptian, Medi¬
terranean, and ancient Greek civilizations, the ancient Peru¬
vian cultures were not ancestral to modern European-type
culture and consequently have received little attention from
Western writers, apart from the specialized academic
circles. Furthermore they had no written language. How¬
ever, they do provide valuable clues to the potentialities of
coastal deserts, and they passed on certain economic insti¬
tutions that still prevail in coastal Peru.
Many details of the material culture and chronology of
the great coastal civilization of Peru were obtained from
artefacts uncovered by the guano-quarrying between A.D.
1840 and 1880. The early Indians, in the course of their
guano-gathering, left behind articles of gold, copper, tex¬
tiles,, and other materials that soon became buried and pre¬
served under the constant accumulation of guano. We
know that arts and crafts reached peaks of excellence,
especially In pottery, textiles, and metallurgy in gold, silver,
copper and alloys (bronze was never hit upon). Agriculture
reached a level never subsequently regained in this region,
through the use of thoroughly planned Irrigation systems
and intensive use of guano.
Although the great civilization extended throughout most
of the Peruvian coastal desert, it involved numerous variants
in the different Irrigated valleys, most of which were sepa¬
rated from one another by sterile stretches of desert.
Three distinct subculture areas have been recognized: the
Mochica culture in the north, the Lima culture In the centre,
and the Nazca culture in the south.
The northern culture was the most extensive, reaching
from about Rio Jequetepeque to Rio Casma, and centring
in the great city of Chanchan, adjacent to the present-day
city of Trujilio. Chanchan, a city of 200,000 people, has
probably made more Intensive use of sun-dried "adobe"
bricks than any other locality in the world.
Great engineering works, Including one canal 73 miles
long, brought water from the Moche and Chlcama rivers to
irrigate the alluvial plain of Chanchan. Some of these
canals have been rebuilt and are In use today, though
large areas of formerly farmed land have not yet been
brought back Into Irrigation. In the Nepeña valley, near
the southern limit of Mochica culture, remains of a huge
dam have been found. Guano was systematically used to
extract maximum production from the Intensively cultivated
land.
Nazca culture In the south, In the basins of the Rio

O J. Hardouin
Monoliths engraved
with bas reliefs of
human figures stand
at the foot of Mount
Cerro Sechin, 250
miles from Lima, the
capital of Peru. An¬
cient stone sculpture
is rare in Peru, and
these standing sto¬
nes are one of the
mysteries of the old
coastal civilizations.
Nothing is known
about their origin
or their significance.
Grande and Rio lea, lacked the advanced metallurgy of
Mochica, but attained unsurpassed levels of excellence in
weaving. It had Its own distinctive pottery. The Lima cul¬
ture, in the valleys of the Rios Chancay, Chillón, Rlmac,
and Lurin, was the most primitive of the three.
In the eleventh and twelfth centuries A.D., the great
coastal cultures were overwhelmed by the Tiahuanacan
group from the Interior. ' In the thirteenth to fifteenth
centuries there was another blossoming of coastal civiliza¬
tion, known as the Chimú culture. Chanchan was a major
centre, but other small kingdoms flourished too. Then in
1470 the Inca conquest extended to the coastal desert,
and in 1533 Pizarro conquered all Peru and brought to an
end the whole highly organized civilization that he found.
The modern cultures, like those of the distant past, still
depend upon irrigation agriculture, fishing, guano, and llama
travel off the main roads. Cotton and maize remain major
crops, but two other chief crops, sugar cane and rice, are
post-Columbian In this region. Iron ore and petroleum,
unknown by the Mochlcas, have been added to the exploit¬
ed resources of the region. Hydro-electric power from the
bordering mountains is another new source of energy. Yet
the present-day population of Peru, about 11 million,
remains less than that of the Mochica and Inca periods.
15
