  N   **t M  
   N  N N N M M -
<UL) ! <Ut-O"CULTURE
by Merman Arciniegas
t T is not so long since"cul-
ture", in the singutar, was
fundamentally a creation of the West.
From Europe, ideas, philosophy, art
and civilization radiated to other parts
of the world, and the echoes awaken-
ed by their messages were regarded
as the world's responses to"culture".
In the last twenty years we have
passed from the notion of culture in
the singular to that of cultures in the
plural. We have come to realize that
cultures exist which are not European
and this wider view of the world has
opened the way to an unprecedented
process of democratization.
The messages no longer come from
Europe alone ; they come and go in
all directions, intersecting, contradict-
ing and complementing each other.
Every year folk art groups from India,
the Soviet Union, Mexico, Bali, Ru-
mania or Japan appear on the Paris
stage ; festivals of Western music are
organized in Tokyo ; the Bolshoi Bal-
let travels to London, Buenos Aires,
and Bogota ; a travelling exhibition
takes a matchless array of Japanese
art to every part of the United States.
Never before have we witnessed cul-
tural exchange on so tremendous a
scale.
Between 1950 and 1963 an exhibition
of Mexican art travelled throughout
Europe and was seen by hundreds
of thousands of people in Stockholm,
Brussels, Zurich, Cologne, The Hague,
Berlin, Vienna, Moscow, Leningrad,
Warsaw, Rome and Paris. On view
were tiny ceramic statuettes from Tla-
tilco, modelled 2, 300 years before the
arrival of Columbus, monolithic head
from Las Ventas sculptured twenty
centuries ago, and paintings by Rufino
Tamayo. Today it would be unthink-
able to write a history of world art
without giving due importance to a
civilization as ancient and extraordin-
ary as that of the Mayas.
Since the remotest time exoticism
has acted like a leaven upon art,
stimulating exploration and discovery
and feeding the creative imagination
of the artist. In our day it is every-
where, and through its contacts it
exerts a constant influence on the
evolution of ideas. The time has come,
in fact, to revise the old framework
GERMAN ARCINIEGAS of Colombia is one
of Latin America's leading historians and
thinkers. A writer and a diplomat, he has
twice been Minister of Education of Colom-
bia. Among his works in English are :"The
State of Latin America","Caribbean : Sea
of the New World"and"Green Continent",
an anthology of works by leading Latin
30 American writers which he edited. He hasdecently been taking part in studies on La-
tin American current affairs at Columbia
University, New York.
Unesco has promoted knowledge and appreciation of cultural values throughout
the world. In art and literature alike it has brought to a wide public new sources
of knowledge : travelling art exhibitions, albums of colour reproductions and art
paperbacks, translations of representative work, In 1957, Unesco launched its Major
Project for mutual appreciation of Eastern and Western cultural values which
brought a new reality to the idea of international understanding. The project has
fostered studies by research institutes, universities and scholars and has helped
to establish institutes of Oriental studies in Tokyo, New Delhi, Beirut, Cairo
and Damascus. It has also encouraged the improvement of curricula and textbooks
and has stimulated the translation of a large number of classical and contemporary
works from the Orient. Photo shows a calligraphy contest taking place in Japan,
a country whose efforts have long since vanquished its illiteracy problem.

of the philosophy of history, since no
place exists in the systems worked
out by European thinkers of the last
century for the ways and experiences
of the remote countries.
Since Columbus crossed the Atlan-
tic and Vespucci announced the ap-
pearance of an unknown continent,
people have talked of the U discovery"
of a New World. At the end of the
eighteenth century it was acknowledg-
ed that what had been"discovered"
three hundred years before, in fact
had still to be discovered. So men
of science of that day began to explore
the mysteries of the national history
of America... at a time when the Swe-
dish botanist, Carl Linnaeus was"dis-
covering"the plants of Scandinavia
and of Europe in general.
We thus see that the process of
discovery repeats itself and that from
time to time men are amazed to find
how little they really know. Then,
they begin to re-explore the world
around them, and to discover it anew,
as though entering some virgin forest.
The past twenty years have been
rich in discoveries of things that were
already thought to be well known.
Africa, for example, since Biblical times
has provided an incalcuable stimu-
lation for all kinds of cultural pro-
cesses in Occident and Orient alike.
The echoes that the Queen of Sheba
and her court left in the poetry of
Solomon are symbolic of these fer-
ments, and the works of African mo-
saic artists in the European areas of 
the Roman Empire are another out  f-
standing testimony.
It is not easy to judge to what extent
CONTINUED ON PAGE 34
Photo &commat; Japan Times

TWO DECADES OF CULTURE (continued)
A post-war phenomenon-international tourism
Negro art has been inf) ue7icing other
arts since the beginning of the cen-
tury, particularly sculpture, ballet and
certain types of music, but culturally
Africa is still an undiscovered conti-
nent.
This was emphasized recently at the
Festival of Negro Art, in Dakar, by
the Negro poet, Leopold Sedar Sen-
ghor, President of Senegal, and by
the writer, Andre Malraux, France's
Minister of Culture. Now, on the
initiative of Unesco, a General History
of Africa is to be written, as though
for the first time, and the work will
take ten years to complete. In almost
all the nations of the African continent,
technical and scientific institutes are
springing up, while more and more
flags of these newly-independent states
are being hoisted at United Nations
headquarters. For Africa the era of
rediscovery is beginning. And for
other continents too-even for Europe
itself.
What has happened in space has
also happened in time. The expanding
frontiers of history have overrun terri-
tory that until now belonged to prehis-
tory, and the modern passion for
archaeology has merged with the
attractions of tourist travel. Ordinary
people, who in other circumstances
would have always been denied such
stimulating experiences, now file in
wonder past the ruins of temples,
cities and civilizations-grandiose
spectacles which open up new hori-
zons for eye and mind alike. The
response to Unesco's campaign to
safeguard the monuments of Nubia
shows beyond doubt that a universal
interest has been awakened in art and
archaeology.
The present use of archaeologic-
al sites as settings for music, danc-
ing, opera and drama and the Son
et Lumière performances against the
background of great historical build-
ings have given us a new form of uni-
versal education. Nowadays the per-
son most averse to reading about his-
tory will trawl to Baalbek to watch
a spectacle performed in the most
imposing ruins left by Rome, and thus
sees for himself how the influence
and vigour of a civilization carried
the splendour of its arts so far afield.
And on the excavation sites in Israel
tourists from all parts of the world
discover how Greece and Rome
stretched out the golden branches of
their civilizations as they penetrated
,  into Asia Minor.
34 It is easy to make ironic remarks
about the superficial mentality of the
tourist who goes from ruin to ruin
and theatre to theatre and carries
away only a confused image of other
times and other worlds. But apart
from the fact that the spectacle has
broadened his mind, it is likely that
among any crowd of sightseers there
is at least one person who will harvest
something of value from the exper-
ience, and will make use of it crea-
tively in some form of art.
Tourism, having become the most
productive industry in many countries,
now provides ample means to pay
for the preservation and restoration
of monuments that would otherwise be
left to perish. The work of André
Malraux in cleaning up the face of
Paris, or of Piero Bergellini in doing the
same for Florence, or of the Mexicans
who have uncovered Teotohuacan, is
creating cultural wealth for all to enjoy.
And this capital increases with the help
of the anonymous tourist. The discov-
ery of the Dead Sea scrolls, a major
victory for those trying to shed new
light on the times of Jesus, is another
positive result of our century's pas-
sion for archaeology.
Another remarkable phenomenon is
the way the fever of curiosity spreads
from foreign visitors to the people of
the"tourist"countries."Domestic"
tourism has the advantage of penetrat-
ing more deeply. People who had
never before explored their own coun-
try are now discovering their rich cul-
tural heritage. This is the case in
France, for example, where visitors
from the provinces are going from the
Louvre to Chantilly and from Versailles
to the Museum of Man in Paris, and
are filling in the sketchy outline of
knowledge acquired in school or from
the newspapers.
An immense network
of cultural exchanges
is now spreading around
the world. Today,
sculpture and painting
travel even more
swiftly than did books
and music yesterday.
Left, in a special
protective packing case
Venus de Milo
is prepared in Paris
for a four-month visit to
Japan. Right, Aztec
sculptures draw admiring
visitors in Paris after
crossing the Atlantic
in t962 with other
Pre-Columbian works
of art from Mexico.
coco
<l.
'U
co
Noa.'"
< (
&commat;
o
Õ.. c :<l.

me ne last twenty years nave also
witnessed a revolution in museums.
They have ceased to be what they
were at the start of the century-store-
houses crammed with canvases, sta-
tues and jewels which were of more
v a t u e as an accumulation of
treasures than for the help they might
have offered the layman. In recent
years museums have been completely
transformed and are now an in-
dispensable extension to the school.
When the Museum of Man opened
in Paris some thirty years ago, its
strikingly new visual representation of
the history of man and his cultures
was a revelation to the world. Today
it is the turn of the new National
Anthropological Museum of Mexico to
become a world precursor in museo-
logy, and it is from the avant garde
techniques of Mexico that the Paris
museum may now draw inspiration.
Reproductions are also playing a
major role in the efforts of museums
to attract visitors in increasing numbers
from all walks of life. Outstanding
examples of museums which use this
technique are the Museum of French
Monuments in Paris and the remarkable
Civilta Romana Museum in Rome.
But these are only some of the pos-
sibilities that new means of communi-
cation and diffusion are opening up for
the spread of culture. You may show
the reproduction of a painting from
the Prado Museum in Madrid to a
schoolboy in any Latin American city,
and he will tell you without hesitation
whether it is an EI Greco or a Velas-
quez, since knowledge of that kind has
reached every level of society. And
when a museum in the United States
pays two million dollars for a Rem-
brandt everyone approves, since the
museum is acquiring a painting that
will give millions of people a clearer
idea of what art means in a world
that has entered an era of prodigious
achievements.
We have seen in recent years all
kinds of audacious experiments being
carried out in every sphere of artistic
creation. We have witnessed, for
example, the life of Picasso and
the impact it has made as he proceed-
ed to disintegrate, integrate and rein-
tegrate a whole vast field of art. In
the theatre we have seen the experi-
ments of Brecht and lonesco. In liter-
ature we have been offered the anti-
novel. The number and scope of the
experiments are infinite. But they are
not destructive.
Passion for the Greek theatre re-
mains universal. We have a perpetual
Shakespeare festival. There has been
a reappraisal of the nineteenth cen-
tury theatre. The cinema has brought
about a renaissance of Michelangelo
in our time ; it has put millions of
spectators throughout the world in
front of the paintings in the Sistine
Chapel or the sculpture on the tombs
of the Medicis, and these millions have
seen the works to better advantage
than an actual visitor to Rome or Flor-
ence. The impressionists certainly
CONTINUED ON PAGE 74
Photo C0 Gisèle Freund, Paris

Two decades in the world of culture (Continued from page 35)
never dreamed of a museum as beau-
tiful as the one they now have in
Paris, nor of awakening such a wave
of fervour in the United States, where
thousands of their works have been
on view.
In the case of books, which some
people imagine to have been ousted
by other means of diffusion, the revo-
lution brought about by the paper-
back merits a special study on its
own. In the United States, for exam-
ple, it has brought about a fundamen-
tal change that has done much to
create a new image of that country.
The first experiment with paper-
backs was made twenty-five years
ago. Today some are published in as
many as fifteen million copies. A
bookshop seNing paperbacks, which
you will find in every city, looks rather
like a supermarket. Many of the early
paperbacks were detective stories, sex
novels and mystery tales. Today there
are paperback editions of all the
classics, and in the universities stu-
dents are advised which books to
choose from paperback collections.
In the self-service bookshop, young
people no longer crowd around the
shelves piled with thrillers or"shock-
ers". Instead they look for works
on philosophy, political science, art
and literature. The same thing is
happening throughout the world-not
only in the United States and Europe,
but on every continent. Sophocles and
Euripedes have now travelled around
the globe, and those who have
read their works or seen them per-
formed by far outnumber the Athenians
of Pericles'day.
The growth of mass readership
thanks to the introduction and spread
of paperback editions (who nowadays
catches a train, goes off to the coun-
try or relaxes in the evening, without
a book in his pocket ?), has led to an
astounding increase in translations.
In 1965, 35, 000 books were translated
in 69 countries alone. The symbol of
the Tower of Babel has been revers-
ed, and a network of universal under-
standing covers countries that had
never before known advantages of this
kind.
Nowadays an illiterate person is not
necessarily an uninformed one. New
media of communication-television,
the cinema and radio-have trans-
formed and vastly expanded the
area covered by books and schools.
This does not mean that the new
media have replaced the old ; they fill
gaps, broaden knowledge and bring it
up to date, and free from ignorance
the person who was deprived of a
school education.
Admittedly there are times when all
these media pander to the lowest
tastes. But think of the marvels revealed
by the cinema and the admirable mes-
sages flashed around the world by
radio in a matter of minutes. And
what about the change that has come
in the atmosphere of the home since
one can listen there to the finest music
of all time played by the world's
greatest orchestras ?
Then there is the radical transforma-
tion of the university. Everywhere
scientists and thinkers are on the move,
reminding us of times when scholars
travelled from Salamanca to Cam-

bridge, from Bologna to Paris, on pil-
grimages that gave to ideas an extraor-
dinary mobility whose effects still
astonish us. Nowadays this journeying
to discuss problems and confront ideas
is an everyday affair. From Australia
to Alaska, from Stockholm to Santiago
de Chile, the world resembles a typical
Unesco conference, which investigates
problems, makes known its findings
and brings people from all parts of
the world into contact.
We are dazzled, and with good rea-
son, by the success of man's endeav-
ours to conquer space during this
same period. This achievement, which
is like the discovery of a new dimen-
sion, has allowed us to recapture, on
hitherto undreamed of orbits, the
experiences of great navigators from
Ulysses to Columbus and Magellan,
as they steered their vessels through
mysterious, uncharted seas.
H AS this world-wide culturalevolution brought with it a
deeper, more universal concern for the
dignity of man ? Perhaps the most
convincing answer we can give is to
cite the example of Mrs. Eleanor Roo-
sevelt who, when she was campaigning
resolutely for a new charter of human
rights, was actually fighting against
prejudices that are far more than cen-
turies old.
Nowadays the world is indignant
whenever it hears of acts of violence
committed against anyone for racial
reasons, because in the past twenty
years people have come to realize
that this is a crime not against the
dignity of one man, but of all men. Öz
Today man's eyes probe within the 
infinitely tiny world of the atom, search z
the bottom of the ocean, and trave ! 
around among the stars in satellites
that are like an image of his own pupil 
projected into the infinite. In lest =
than twenty years conquests such as 
these have changed his outlook and 
have made him conscious of being 3
a citizen of space. This is the sign
of a new humanism that is bringing '"
men together. o
\ : I
This does not mean that in the 6
past twenty years there have not been !
warning threats of a world-wide catas-
trophe, nor that all men of the sword 8'"
have disappeared. But in the domain z
of culture there has been positive
progress which we should not over-
look when drawing up a balance sheet ; :)
of our revolutionary timers.
14
