SATELLITES AND COMPUTERS
MAY MEASURE WORLD'S WATER
by Daniel Behrman
OMMUNICATIONS satellites querying rain and
river gauges all over the earth and then flashing
the answers into computerized data centres may finally
provide the picture of the world's hydrological cycle needed
for rational management of large-scale water resources and
for research.
A proposal to consider the feasibility of such a global
water information system (known from its initial letters as
GWIS) was discussed recently by the Scientific Committee
on Water Research of the International Council of Scientific
Unions. The committee, which met at Unesco H.Q. in
Paris, decided to study the idea further as more information
is developed.
The proposal for the study had been prepared by the
United States National Committee for the International
Hydrological Decade. It was presented by Dr. Paul Bock,
a member of the U.S. National Committee and director of
the hydrology and water resources division of the Travelers
Research Center in Hartford, Connecticut.
The idea is based on recent progress in communications
satellites which could make classical methods of gathering,
transmitting and processing data in such fields as hydrol¬
ogy and meteorology as obsolete as a stage-coach com¬
peting against a jet airliner.
In a country like the United States, for example, gauges
measuring the flow and levels of rivers punch their data
onto paper tape for a thirty-day period. These tapes are
then collected, mailed to a data centre in Washington, trans¬
ferred to magnetic tape and processed by computers.
WHEN and if GWIS becomes reality, the satellite
could simply Interrogate the river gauge while
passing overhead and retransmit its data. The gauge
could be programmed to report every twenty-four hours and
then, once the river reached a certain level, every six hours.
With existing computer techniques, such data can be
printed out by the machine to produce maps of many types,
charting river flows and levels by latitude and longitude.
With more development the same technique could be
used, of course, for the other components of the world's
water cycle that the hydrologlst is interested in measuring:
groundwater levels, soil moisture, snow cover, water qual¬
ity, atmospheric water vapour, temperature, lake levels
or salinity in estuaries.
These phenomena, Dr. Bock believes, could be observed,
analysed and disseminated to national services all over the
world as required. They would not only provide day-to-day
data needed for such operations as the regulation of reser¬
voirs and flood warning systems, but would offer a planetary
portrait that is essential for scientific understanding of the
global water cycle.
The cost of such a system would naturally be extremely
high, but Dr. Bock is convinced that it would prove eco¬
nomical in the long run. He suggested, for example, that
it could be integrated with the World Weather Watch which
has a target date in the 1970s.
This date would coincide with the end of the International
Hydrological Decade which began under Unesco spon¬
sorship on January 1, 1965. The cost of this satellite and
computer network needed for the World Weather Watch
might be increased by only 10 to 20 per cent if it were
programmed to cover hydrological information as well,
Dr. Bock estimates.
HEN there is the breakthrough in communica¬
tions represented by the satellite. An automatic
station recording rainfall or stream flow would need a
powerful transmitter to radio its results to a data station.
But only a minimum of power would be needed for it to
transmit to a satellite.
If existing conventional systems of collecting water infor¬
mation were enlarged to meet only minimum standards,
"mountains of data" no less than 70,000,000 items a year
on the basis of daily recordings would be produced. It
would be impossible to assimilate this mass of information
unless modern data processing systems were used on a
large scale.
Dr. Bock feels that developing countries could stand
to benefit in particular by the technological revolution in
communications. Often, the heart of their water problems
is to be found in tropical jungles or great deserts where
making the rounds of the instruments to take their readings
can be time-consuming and costly, if not impossible.
In the United States, the establishment of such a water
information system of the most advanced type is already
under preliminary study and, if adopted, it could become a
component of a global system.
Dr. Bock stressed that none of this is likely to happen
tomorrow or the day after. But . he feels certain that,
sooner or later, this image of satellites in outer space trans¬
mitting and even recording at a distance the data needed
to understand what is happening to the world's water
supply will become a reality through international scientific
co-operation.
31
