.
IN THE WClRLD
OF EDUCATION
by Lionel Elvin
HUE historian of humanityin the last twenty years
will note two things of especial signi-
ficance. The first no doubt will be
that this was the beginning of the age
of nuclear power, in which mankind
narrowly escaped destruction through
its own invention. But, assuming that
mankind continues to escape such self-
destruction, the most significant fea-
ture that the historian will note is that
this was first period in human history
in which the claim had been made,
and conceded, that every single human
being had a right to education. That
there has been an education"explo-
sion"in the last twenty years is not
a metaphor ; it is a fact.
In saying this I am speaking not of
provision, but of demand. In every
country in the world now the demand
for education-for schools and col-
leges, equipment and teachers-far
outstrips what it has been actually
possible to provide. Even the affluent
countries have been unable to provide
as much as their peoples have de-
manded.
The less affluent countries, in spite
of heavily increased spending on edu-
cation and on foreign aid, have found
it intensely difficult to cope with the
increased demand at every level, prim-
ary, secondary, higher and adult edu-
cation. And both kinds of countries
LIONEL ELVIN, director of the Institute of
Education, University of London, is consid-
24 erred as one of the world's authorities on
comparative education. He was formerly
director of the Unesco Department of
Education.
have found the greatest difficulty in
deciding on right priorities within the
educational budget, how much to
spend on trying to get primary educa-
tion for every child, how much to
spend on secondary education, how
much on the colleges and the univer-
sities, how much on trying to wipe out
adult illiteracy and on other forms
of adult education.
What is the explanation of this
demand for education ? Essentially the
demand comes from two things : first
that education is everyone's right, and
second that an expanded education is
indispensable for the kind of economic
and social modernization that every-
one desires.
The right was enshrined in the Uni-
versal Declaration of Rights, which
came at the beginning of this period
CONTINUED ON PAGE 26
For these school children
(climbing a special metallic scaffolding
designed for play and
exercises) the right to education
is a reality. But for millions of other
children it is still merely a hope.
By 1970 places will need to be
found in the primary schools of Africa,
Asia and Latin America for a further
52 million children. This means
that 850, 000 more teachers
will be required. Unesco
and the International Institute
of Educational Planning, which it
set up in Paris, are redoubling
their efforts to help governments
to train teachers and build schools,
to improve educational planning and
administration and to allocate more
funds to education. Despite
achievements in recent years, a wide
educational gap still exists between
developed and developing nations.
Er : '"
Eo
z
Q)T3
0OJ
Õ
U
: Ja
Q)
. s :;a.
Q.OJo
Õ. s :;a.
Q)"'C
. 
Qj
4 :
&commat;
0
Õ. s :;a.


TWO DECADES OF EDUCATION (Continued)
The new philosophy of investment
in our history. Article 26 said that
everyone had the right to free primary
education and to education beyond
this stage in accordance with ability
and not family wealth or status. Now
it should be noted that the Declaration
said not that this was an absolute
right-it could not be absolute but
must be contingent on the capacity of
countries to afford it and in the higher
ranges on the capacity of students to
profit reasonably from it-but that it
was universal : that is to say that it
was a right of every human being as
a human being.
TIGHTS have been definedas claims that must be
accepted because without their
acceptance a person or group of
persons cannot function properly. It
has been recognized internationally
that without education a human being
cannot realize his potentiality, cannot
be in a reasonable sense a full human
being and live a full life. There are
of course still people, individuals and
groups, subdued by the unequal past,
who do not yet realize this. But the
peoples, the ordinary people of the
wor ! d's countries, do in a broad but
most pressing sense. The result has
been a tremendous demand for schools
and higher and adult education.
Secondly, the politically and socially
conscious people in every country
understand that a prosperous economy
based on modern technology depends
on a widespread general education
and well-developed professional and
technical education and training. Fur-
thermore, countries that have gained
their political independence during this
period (and they constitute a large
proportion of the members of the
United Nations and of Unesco and the
other specialized agencies) have real-
ized how important education is for
good government and administration
and for the participation of their citi-
zens in public and professional life.
The idea that expenditure on educa-
tion does not only satisfy those who
benefit from it as individual"consum-
ers"but is also personal and national
"investment"has gained ground and
during these two decades has become
accepted philosophy.
These two pressures, then, have
been behind the educational demand
26 of the last twenty years the world over.
But how far have we been able to
satisfy the demand in practice ?
One of the functions of Unesco is
to collect and analyse statistics of
education for the world as a whole.
This is a very difficult business. So
incomplete are the statistics that one
must at times estimate rather than
announce firm figures. The compila-
tion of world totals is notoriously
difficult because the basis for them
(for instance in the structure of educa-
tional systems and the meanings of
terms that are used) varies so much
from one country to another. And the
publication of analysed figures must
inevitably always lag behind the
passage of the calendar years. Yet
something informative does emerge.
The Word Survey of Education, 1957-
1961, gives some of the figures for
these years and enables us to see
significant trends.
For world purposes Unesco recog-
nizes three levels of formal educa-
tion : the first level (primary or elemen-
tary school) ; the second level, based
on at least four years'education at the
first level (high school, secondary
school, vocational school, etc.) ; and
the third level, after successful comple-
tion of the second level (university,
teachers collage, higher professional
school). Now in these four years
only the increase in enrolments was
23 per cent at the first level, 23 per
cent at the second level and 35 per
cent at the third level (let me repeat :
this was in only four years out of the
twenty we are considering).
But there is a catch in these figures.
The world population has also in-
creased, and sensationally, during
these twenty years. What is the
increase of enrolments in relation to
the increase in population ? Here the
result is nothing like as reassuring.
The percentage of the total population
having formal education at all three
levels in 1957-58 was 12. 8. In 1961-2,
it was 14. 6-a gain, but not all that
sensational.
The plain fact emerges that we are
building schools and colleges and train-
ing teachers just fast enough to give
CONTINUED ON PAGE 29
The field of education is in worldwide ferment. Drastic changes are made
in school programmes and in teaching methods. This in turn calls
for changes in the training of teachers including their introduction to such
new educational aids as c ! osed-circuit tetevision and learning machines.
Methods of teaching foreign languages, and of the mother tongue, are under-
going radical change. Here youngsters in a Tokyo primary schoof learn Japan-
ese helped by language laboratory techniques adapted for classroom use,
Photo Unesco-Tamagawa Gakuen, Tokyo

Education at all levels is now seen as an indivisible whole. A lack of secondary schools leads to a shortage
of primary level teachers, for example, and insufficient higher education means that not enough
secondary level teachers will be trained, To help its member states to plan for the rational and
efficient development of education at all levels, Unesco has set up regional centres in Beirut and New Delhi
and educational planning sections at Santiago de Chile, Dakar and Bangkok. At the request of
many countries it has sent out consultative missions on educational planing, With the International 27
Association of Universities it has surveyed problems of higher education. At this level a big development
is foreseen for the next four years : 40, 000 more students in Africa, 250, 000 in Latin America and
1, 000, 000 in Asia. Photo shows part of the campus at the strikingly modern University of Dakar (Senegal).
Photo <ò Paul Almasy, Paris

THE FUTURE
FOR R 200, 000 ARAB
REFUGEE CHILDREN
Over 200, 000 Palestine refugee children are now
attending hundreds of primary and secondary
schools run by some 5, 000 teachers under
the technical supervision of Unesco. Launched
in 1950 by Unesco and UNRWA (United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees)
the programme is using education and voca-
tional training to build a future for the children
of Palestine refugees. It is the largest opera-
tional activity in which Unesco is at present
engaged. In many parts of the world Unesco
is carrying on activities of an operational nature
in collaboration with other institutions (Unicef,
the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, the World Food Programme) as
28 part of its educational programme. Above, aPalestine refugee family after the exodus of
1948. Right, young refugees from a Gaza camp
do homework on the beach.
Photo United Nations

TWO DECADES OF EDUCATION (Continued)
Educational re-thinking in ferment
the average child only a slightly better
chance than before. If the world popu-
lation continues to increase at its pre-
sent rate we cannot hope to get every
child into school or wipe out adult illit-
eracy within the present century. That
is a sobering thought.
Because resources are desperately
scarce in relation to what the countries
and their peoples now both need and
desire there hats to be planning. This
is the next distinctive feature of edu-
cational development in this period that
we must note. Education must be
planned in relation to national plan-
ning, if only to decide how much of a
country's resources go into education
as distinct from other things like roads
and railways and air transport, indus-
trial development of all kinds, and
other social services such as medicine
and public health.
And there must be planning in edu-
cation to see that it is of the scale
and kind that fit into the stage of a
country's economic and social devel-
opment. It is wasteful to spend large
sums on the education of persons for
whom there is no subsequent appro-
priate employment, who cannot be
absorbed into the economy and the
professions. There must be priorities
established within education.
MOST people at the beginn-ing of the period probably
thought that the first thing should no
doubt be to make primary education
universal and free. But there has been
a significant shift of opinion during the
period. To begin with, you cannot
have adequate teachers for primary
schools unless you have given them
secondary education. And a measure
of secondary education is indispens-
able for getting the"middle grades"
who will help to run the economy, as
well as to prepare students for higher
education. Clearly there must also be
some higher education.
So the concept of phasing the devel-
opment of all three levels together
has been worked out, often at the
regional conferences that Unesco has
called to consider the planning of edu-
cational development in the different
parts of the world. With a certain
level of resources it should be pos-
sible to have a given high percentage
of children in the primary schools, a
given smaller percentage in the secon-
dary schools and a given still smaller
percentage in higher education. The
setting of these targets in relation both
to national needs and to each other is
a difficult and delicate task.
It is in this work, as much perhaps
as in the furnishing of direct aid, that
Unesco has helped its member states
most in recent years. These years
have marked something of a swing in
the objectives of Unesco from inter-
national intellectual co-operation at the
scholarly level (though that continues)
towards helping the less affluent coun-
tries to develop their education, with-
out which they hardly can co-oper-
ate at that high level. And within the
aid activity more and more attention
has been paid to the various aspects
of educational planning, Unesco acting
both through its departments and
through the International Institute for
Educational Planning which is its"stud-
ies"arm.
Now all that has been said in this
article so far is"quantitative". But
what about the education itself, and its
quality ? A no less significant feature
of these last twenty years (and espe-
ciatty of the second decade) has been
the attention given to what is taught
and to how it is taught at the different
levels of education. Here we realize
(though it is indeed evident from the
quantitative pressures we have dis-
cussed) that we are in the presence
of a social and economic transforma-
tion which sets up inevitable educa-
tional demands.
General education at the first level
in what are now the"advanced"coun-
tries came in with the development of
industry. This may have had within
it the seeds of social transformation
but it did not seem very revolutionary
at first. Secondary and higher educa-
tion remained reserved for those who
would playa more privileged or more
responsible role in society. The curric-
ulum of the elementary schools aimed
at giving the barely necessary general
skills to the workers in an increasingly
industrialized society.
But, even economically, this has
proved in the present century to be not
enough. Socially it has proved too
limited to be acceptable. A great
range of new occupations has opened
up, needing both better general edu-
cation and more varied education.
With the generalization of at least the
first half of secondary education, this
has resulted in a much more varied
and rather differently based curriculum
in the secondary schools, and the
curriculum of the primary schools has
been seen as leading on to this in
terms of genuine education, not just
instruction in rudimentary general
skills. Now the secondary school
curriculum is being radically trans-
formed, in terms simply of subjects
taught.
But the content of the subjects is
also under review as well as the
balance of studies. This is connected
with new methods of teaching. We
talk now of the"new mathematics,"of
a re-thought out secondary school
physics, chemistry, and biology. Meth-
ods of teaching foreign languages,
and of the mother tongue, are under-
going radical change. This in turn
calls for changes in the training of
teachers, and not least in their intro-
duction to the use of educational aids
(from television to learning machines)
that were not thought of seriously for
educational purposes at the beginning
of our period.
FOR newly independentF countries, and oth r cou -
ries that are less affluent than the
"advanced"countries, this has set
very difficult problem indeed. Some
of them have had to free themselves
not only from methods that are outmod-
ed (for instance, from a centuries-old
tradition of learning by rote under an
authoritarian teacher) but from a curri-
culum that was almost entirely appro-
priate, not to their own people and
their needs, but to a foreign adminis-
tering power and its citizens at home.
Not least this has led to questions
about the relationship between what is
taught and the immediate environment
and the work in it. Should not agri-
cultural education, for instance, have
a quite new impetus in countries
whose prosperity will depend for some
time to come much more on modern-
izing agriculture than on the develop-
ment, say, of heavy industry ?
With all these factors at work-the
demand for education as a universal
right and as a national need, the prob-
lems of coherent planning with scarce
resources, the need to change the
curriculum at all levels and greatly to
improve methods of teaching-no one
can say that the last twenty years in
the educational history of mankind
have been dull. There have been
immense problems, and immense prob-
lems remain. But with all that, the 29
old phrase is significantly and immen-
sely true : educationally, humanity is
now on the march.
