TEST BENCH
FOR SPACE
EXPLORERS
To operate successfully in the vacu¬
um of outer space, man-made
satellites have to withstand extremes
of temperature heating on the sur¬
face facing the sun and the bitter
cold of space itself, with tempera¬
tures dropping as low as 270 de¬
grees below zero C. Last January a
large vacuum chamber for carrying
out temperature tests on space satel¬
lites was put into service at the
European Space Technology Centre,
at Noordwijk, Netherlands. Right,
model of the international satellite,
Esro I in this chamber. Esro I, due
to be launched late in 1967, will be
used for studying the ionosphere
and polar aurora. Far right, twin
domes at the European space range
now being completed inside the Arc¬
tic Circle at Kiruna, Sweden, cover
telemetry equipment for picking up
data transmitted by sounding rockets.
Photos ESRO

EUROPE'S GROWING STAKE IN SPACE SCIENCE
s
24
PACE research through
international co-operation
might be said to function like a three-
stage rocket launching a space vehicle
into orbit, with each stage completing
its task and then handing over the
operation for the next stage to carry
it one step further.
The first stage is obviously one of
paper work and planning the co-ord¬
ination of programmes, choice of norms
and general planning at the interna¬
tional level. An outstanding example
of this stage is the work done by the
Committee for Space Research (COS-
PAR) of the International Council of
Scientific Unions.
PIERRE AUGER is Director-General of the
European Space Research Organization, which
he helped to set up, and president of the
International Computation Centre (Rome).
A leading French physicist, he was head of
Unesco's Department of Natural Sciences
from 1948 to 1959. He is the author of
"Current Trends in Scientific Research", a
comprehensive survey of world scientific and
technological research (3rd ed., 1963, Unesco,
Paris; 33¡-, $6.75. hard cover).
by Pierre Auger
Next comes co-operation and the
joint implementation of specific parts
of national programmes through special
agreements and associations as, for
example, the launching by U.S. rockets
of Canadian, British, French and Italian
satellites.
The third stage, a pooling of resour¬
ces that makes it possible to carry out
an international project, is today
represented by various collective Euro¬
pean programmes set up by two
Inter-governmental organizations: the
European Space Research Organiza¬
tion (ESRO) and the European
Launcher Development Organization
(ELDO). It is primarily the work of
ESRO that I propose to deal with here.
The aims of this organization are
purely scientific. They are the study
of conditions in outer space (including
the outermost layer of the atmosphere,
at altitudea-of 150 kilometres, 93 miles;
and beyond), and the study of celestial
bodies by rockets, satellites and long
distance probes launched into space.
It is hardly surprising, therefore,
that the initiative which led to its
creation should have come from
scientists themselves. The idea was
in fact originally conceived at a meet¬
ing of the space research committee
of the International Council of Scien¬
tific Unions in 1960.
Subsequently, the programme and
operational arrangments for the future
organization were worked out in
greater detail, and a preparatory com¬
mission, presided over by Sir Harrie
Massey and subsidized by France, was
created the same year. Between 1960
and 1964 the work of setting up the
new international organization was
completed, and in March 1964 a
convention established ESRO.
ESRO's membership at present
consists of ten European states: Fran¬
ce, where it has its headquarters; the
Netherlands, where the main technical
centre is being built; the Federal Repu¬
blic of Germany, where the data-pro¬
cessing centre is being installed;

Sweden, in whose far north the sound¬
ing-rocket launching range is located;
Italy, where the advanced research
laboratory is to be built; Belgium,
which is to have a satellite tracking
station; the United Kingdom, Denmark,
Spain and Switzerland.
The organization aims to promote
collaboration among European states
in space research and technology,
exclusively for peaceful purposes. To
do so it has drawn up a scientific and
technical programme which concen¬
trates mainly on the construction, per¬
fecting and launching of space ve¬
hicles, sounding rockets and satellites
capable of carrying scientific apparatus
designed and produced by research
teams in member states. These teams
work, as a rule, either in universities
or in large research laboratories.
In short, ESRO is designed to help
scientists and researchers by providing
them with means of putting their appar¬
atus into orbit or at least of launching
it temporarily out of the atmosphere.
The organization will keep track of the
space craft and apparatus it launches
by means of a world-wide network of
tracking and telemetry stations. It will
pick up, process and analyse tJata
from space.
The organization was launched with
an 8-year financial plan totalling three
hundred million dollars, with the reser¬
vation that annual budgets may, after
the preparatory period, attain fifty
million dollars. This clearly rules out
any very major projects such as send¬
ing men to the moon; and in any case
ESRO has decided to confine itself to
unmanned space vehicles. It has,
however, been able to draw up a pro¬
gramme of rocket and satellite laun-
chings that will enable scientists to
carry out a variety of experiments in
cosmic physics and astrophysics. The
organization will procure sounding
rockets from France and the United
Kingdom; satellite-launching appara¬
tus from the United States.
T HE programme provides
for the launching of some
hundreds of sounding rockets able to
reach altitudes of between 150 and
300 km. (90-190 miles); and of a series
of artificial satellites of three types:
small satellites placed in orbit by Amer¬
ican Scout rockets, medium satellites
orbited by Thor Delta rockets, and
large satellites weighing about a ton
and needing far more powerful laun¬
chers. It is probable that the large
satellites will be placed in orbit by the
3-stage rockets of the type now being
constructed by the European Launcher
Development Organization (ELDO), an
organization which was set up at about
the same time as ESRO through the
association of seven governments,
those of the United Kingdom, France,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy,
the Netherlands, Belgium and Australia.
The first item on ELDO's programme
is the. design, development and cons¬
truction of the three-stage "Europa"
satellite-launching rocket. The first
stage will be the British Blue Streak
rocket, the second, the French rocket
Coralie and the third, a German rocket.
The satellite test vehicles are being
built by Italy, while Belgium and the
Netherlands are producing various
types of telemetry and guidance equip¬
ment and Australia is providing the
launching range at Woomera.
What kinds of experiments are
carried out with the aid of apparatus
which has been and is to be placed
in these rocket-heads and satellites?
They are designed to make a study
of the uppermost strata of the atmos¬
phere and the ionosphere, in particular
the auroral region, for which the site at
Kiruna, 200 km. (125 miles) inside the
polar circle, was selected; and to
investigate the solar radiations which
are the cause of most of the phenom¬
ena occurring in this part of the
atmosphere. Data will be obtained on
25
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

EUROPE'S GROWING SPACE SCIENCE (Cont'd)
© Mount Wilson and Mount Palomar
Observatories
SOLAR FLARES AND POLAR AURORA.
Satellites and sounding rockets have
been sent up to probe the mysteries
of solar activity which emits high-energy
particles (cosmic rays) and a "solar
wind", a stream of gas formed of pro¬
tons and electrons which is blown from
the solar corona. Millions of times less
brilliant than the solar disc itself, these
low-energy solar particles are only visi¬
ble during total eclipses of the sun
when the disc is obscured by the moon,
as on the photo above, taken during the
solar eclipse of June 8, 1918. Entering
into collision with molecules and atoms
of the earth's upper atmosphere, the
charged particles can produce the glow¬
ing aurora borealis (below).
© Upsala Ionosphere Observatory
electronic density, the temperature of
electrons, night glow, the turbulence
and temperature of the upper atmos¬
phere, and also on the ultra-violet,
X and gamma rays of the sun in its
periods of activity and calm.
Special activities will be undertaken
during the annular eclipse of the sun
(when the moon's disc eclipses the
whole of the sun except an outer ring),
which is due to occur on May 20, 1966.
Five small rockets of the Areas type
are to be launched at regular intervals;
also three large Centaure-type rockets
immediately before, during and directly
after the maximum eclipse phase.
The most important part of the scien¬
tific programme is obviously that relat¬
ing to satellites. The first two satelli¬
tes are to be launched in 1967 by the
National Aeronautics and Space Admi¬
nistration (NASA), from American
bases. One of them, Esro I, will be
an auroral satellite; the other, a cosmic
satellite. In other words, the first will
study the particles responsible for the
upper atmosphere auroral displays of
light in the polar regions; the simul¬
taneous launching of rockets during
the useful life of the satellite is also
planned.
To obtain maximum results from
these simultaneous launchings a
telemetry station will be set up at
Tromsö, in Norway. Here the data
transmitted back to earth will be pro¬
cessed and analysed immediately.
The second satellite, Esro 2, is to
concentrate on cosmic radiations, in
particular those emanating from the
sun. It will also study the rays "trap¬
ped" in the earth's magnetic field and
circulating in the vast cloak of radiation
known as the Van Allen belt.
Yet a further step forward will be
marked by the launching, scheduled
for 1968 and 1969, of medium stabilized
satellites, that is, satellites able to train
their apparatus on to any particular
region of the sky the sun, a planet, or
certain stars. The first of these (named
TD 1 because it will be launched by
a Thor Delta unit) is to concentrate
on spectrographic observation in radia¬
tion fields extending from the infra-red
to gamma ray radiation which, be¬
cause of atmospheric absorption, never
reaches the earth's surface.
It is hoped that interesting sources
will be revealed by these means; but
the satellite will in addition make a
more detailed survey of the ultra-violet
spectra of certain stars. As is known,
our ignorance of these spectra is an
obstacle to checking the validity of
theories about the origin and evolution
of the stars. Lastly, attention will
be paid to X and gamma rays: the
former in relation to radiations which
may have their source actually in
space; the latter, in relation to stel¬
lar radiations.
The second medium satellite, with
a total weight of approximately 400 kg.,
is to be placed on a polar orbit, so
as to pass over both the earth's polar
regions in succession; and its main
task will be to study the sun and its
effects during the phase of its maxi¬
mum activity. The experiments it will
carry out will be related to the ultra¬
violet and X-ray radiation from the sun
and the low energy particles streaming
from the sun, which are the sources
of the solar wind.
Other experiments will concentrate
on the emission of light from the upper
atmosphere due to the ionizing influ¬
ence of the sun; and lastly, on the
electronic density in the upper part of
the Ionosphere, studied from outside
the atmosphere instead of by sound¬
ings from the earth, as hitherto.
The fifth medium satellite Heos,
on which work has now begun, will
be launched into a highly eccentric orbit.
Heos will concentrate on the ter¬
restrial and solar magnetic fields, the
solar wind, and the radiation fluxes
occuring in the zone outside the mag-
netosphere, a zone which, thanks to
its elongated orbit, it will be able to
explore. It will attain a distance of more
than 200,000 kms. (125 000 miles) from
the earth.
We now come to the most ambitious
part of the satellite programme the
construction and launching of a large
astronomical satellite about a ton in
weight, designed for detailed spectro¬
scopy of the stars.
Some features of this satellite still re¬
main to be defined. But its equipment
will include telescopes that can be
accurately directed on selected stars,
spectrographic devices, and ultra-violet
radiation receivers or detectors.
Work on the European Space
Technology Centre (ESTEC) at
Noordwijk, the Netherlands, the Euro¬
pean Space Data Centre (ESDAC) at
Darmstadt, Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, and the launching base atKiruna,
Sweden, is now in full swing. The
launching base may even be inaug¬
urated this year, and ESTEC and
ESDAC in the course of next year.
Four satellite tracking stations are
being built, located respectively in Bel¬
gium, Alaska, Spitsberg and the Falk¬
land Islands, so as to cover as much
of the surface of the globe as possible.
Lastly, a site has been selected near
Rome for the European Space
Research Institute (ESRIN).
It can thus be seen that the orga¬
nization has made great strides since
it was officially set up in April 1964.
Meantime, several sounding rockets
have already been launched from the
Italian base in Sardinia, for European
scientists are impatient to pursue their
research.
