mm
9 4ft *.-£<tiife "
GLOBAL
ASSAULT
ON THE
WEATHER
by Robert L. Munteanu
i
©
new window on the world's
»weather was thrown open
on April 1, 1960 when Tiros I, the
first complete weather satellite was
launched. To the meteorologist's and
the world's amazement, man was on
top of the weather, enjoying a long,
intent look at its face below and
savouring the boundless exciting
possibilities of his new and revolution¬
ary approach to the exploration of
the atmosphere.
This new look at the vastness and
complexity of the weather machine
opened up a whole new horizon for
meteorology. The satellite, and its
ally, the high-speed electronic com¬
puter, as well as new developments In
communications and observing techni¬
ques should enable the weatherman
ROBERT L. MUNTEANU is external relations
officer of the World Meteorological Organ¬
ization, Geneva.
to expand his science to the point
where forecasts for longer periods
and even, perhaps, the dream of one
day controlling the weather, become
realities.
For thousands of years, men have
observed their local weather, noting
its regularities and lamenting its many
irregularities. They have naturally
looked to the skies for knowledge, but
their limited view of the world's
weather restricted and confined their
knowledge and power to predict.
For almost 100 years, meteorologists
of the world have together sought to
expose the physical laws behind
weather and climate. This, of course,
has been no easy task. Unlike other
scientists, meteorologists cannot easily
carry their research into the laboratory,
as weather is altogether too large for
study on this miniature scale, and
certainly far too large for any one
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
17

THE WEATHER (Continued)
country to undertake a sufficiently
wide-scale study.
When the study of weather became
the science of meteorology, men of
every nation realized that their fore¬
casts and research would be inade¬
quate unless they were based on
global data and that their understand¬
ing of weather processes could only
be translated into useful knowledge
by international exchange and co¬
operation. World meteorology has
become an active 24 hours a day
science, rushing to meet a host of
forecast deadlines. It has become
one of the finest examples of interna¬
tional co-operation.
Meteorological satellites and other
new techniques have increased the
need for international co-operation.
The U.S.A. and U.S.S.R., for example,
co-operate closely in weather satellite
activities through plans for the co¬
ordination of launching programmes
and through the establishment, in 1964,
of the Washington-Moscow line for
direct transmission of satellite cloud
photographs and other meteorological
information.
In 1961, the General Assembly of
the U.N. called on the World Meteoro¬
logical Organization to develop a plan
which would ensure:
that these new devices are fully
used to advance man's knowledge
of the basic physical forces affect¬
ing weather and the possibility of
large-scale weather modification,
and
that this knowledge is used to
develop the existing forecasting
capabilities of all member states.
This recent chapter in meteorological
history and to date its most important
really began on April 1, 1960, when
Tiros I was launched by the U.S.A.
Since that day, ten in the Tiros family
of satellites have been put into orbit,
and one other experimental satellite
called Nimbus. Although Tiros and
Nimbus were intended primarily for
research, the many thousands of photo¬
graphs they have taken and relayed
to earth have also proved of immediate
value to forecasters. Timely warnings
of hurricane and typhoon formations
have been derived from photographs
taken by practically all Tiros satellites.
The satellite stores its cloud photo¬
graphs on magnetic tape and relays
them to earth as electronic signals
when it comes within range of a ground
receiving station. The satellite can
transmit as many as 32 photographs
in three minutes to a read-out station,
where the signals are converted into
pictures, and where electronic com¬
puters are used to insert latitudinal and
longitudinal grids to give the geogra¬
phical location. This information is
then flashed to the world within six
hours of orbit time.
One of the latest satellite devices
is the Automatic Picture Transmission
or APT system. The APT television
system automatically transmits cloud
pictures every 208 seconds during the
daylight hours. Using a relatively
simple and Inexpensive piece of receiv¬
ing equipment, any country can
receive pictures from an APT equipped
satellite as soon as it comes within
their range. These on-the-spot pho
tographs give valuable local informa¬
tion to forecasters.
Nor is the satellite inactive at night.
Infra-red detectors measure radiation,
the relative temperatures of land, sea
and cloud surfaces, the geographical
distribution of water vapour and the
height of cloud tops. They can indi¬
cate where on the earth's surface there
is a net gain or loss of energy from
the sun. This information is invaluable
for research into long-range forecast¬
ing. The Soviet satellite Cosmos 92
has already given extensive information
on terrestrial radiation and temperature
variations through the atmosphere.
On February 3, 1966, the Tiros
Operation Satellite system was initiat¬
ed with the launching of Essa I at
Cape Kennedy. Essa I, and its
descendants, will obtain cloud pictures
over the entire sunlit portion of the
earth at least once every 24 hours.
A new weather observation window
was placed in space in August 1966
with the launching of the Soviet
satellite Cosmos 122. This satellite
is now transmitting to ground centres
television pictures of clouds covering
substantial parts of the earth's surface:
Cosmos 122, however, is also equipp¬
ed with instruments for making
radiation measurements in the infra¬
red band and can thus take "pictures"
of cloud systems during darkness,
thereby enabling meteorologists to
compare cloud pictures made in the
visible spectrum band with those made
in infra-red rays.
Cosmos 122 is also carrying out
another important piece of meteorolo¬
gical research measurement of the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
irst complete view of the world's weather
Photo U.S. Department of Commerce, Weather Bureau, Washington
This remarkable picture is a mosaic of many photos taken by the weather sati
TIROS IX on February 13, 1965, and is the first complete view showing the
world's weather. One can see storm areas and cloud cover over all the continents
and oceans; the Sahara Desert is clearly shown completely cloudless. ' Everyone
talks about the weather and today everyone is doing something about it. Every
BK 3^ÊÊÊÊMa^tft^^ÊkUStW^ÊMSÊÊSÊM^UUUÊMIÊàmmmmm
nation has its national meteorological service and ail contribute to and benefit
from the world weather system. The expansion of this remarkable example of
international co-operation is now being planned by the World Meteorological
Organization. The World Weather Watch, as this new global weather system
is named, will have three world centres at Melbourne, Moscow and Washington.


20
THE WEATHER (Continued)
No weather data
for four-fifths
of earth's surface
intensity of outgoing radiation. Solar
radiation reaching the earth's surface
is the main source of energy and the
cause of atmospheric motion. In
analyzing atmospheric processes,
scientists need to know how much
solar energy has reached the earth's
surface and in what areas, how much
is reflected back to space and how
much heat energy is being emitted by
the earth's surface and the atmosphere
to outer space. Instruments Installed
in Cosmos 122 are collecting impor¬
tant data on this radiation balance in
the earth-atmosphere system. This
information is transmitted to offices
of the U.S.S.R. Hydrometeorological
Service as well as to the meteorolo¬
gical services and research institutes
of other countries.
In six short years, meteorological
satellites have graduated from the
experimental class to the fully oper¬
ational.
Developments in space technology,
automatic data processing and tele¬
communications will bring great
changes to meteorology and to meteo¬
rological practices throughout the
world. Change and development in
this science have become more impor¬
tant than ever before.
Although more has been discovered
about weather in the past 50 years
than in all previous history, there is a
greater urgency behind each country's
need for a more perfect understanding
of weather processes and for improved
meteorological practices.
he weather may be no
more malicious, no more
devastating, no more kind than 20 or
100 years ago, but the world today
is more sensitive to extremes. Our
greater population, urbanization, in¬
dustrialization, and increased depend¬
ency on agricultural production, make
us more and more vulnerable to the
whims of weather. What was once
regarded as just a severe storm, or
unusually wet, cold or dry conditions
now quickly assumes the proportions
of a national disaster. Financial losses
soar to increasingly staggering heights.
And the more complex our civilization
becomes, the more damage the
weather can cause.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 22
«>*3> «frw^iiS <C
Photo © APN

KSMfcfc £>*&IÄ» jÊ*>Âà
Could the climate of Europe be modified by diverting the Gulf Stream further to the north?
Would blackening the Arctic ice reduce loss of energy by reflection and
make neighbouring wastelands more habitable? With the planning and launching of the World
Weather Watch the observation of the earth's atmosphere on a truly global scale yl
improved possibilities of weather modification may be expected one day, because this observation £ '
and research will lead to fuller comprehension of how nature works in creating our weather.
Photo shows Soviet far north where temperatures can drop to minus 55 degrees centigrade.
^1

THE WEATHER (Continued)
Can science change tomorrows weather?
22
The meteorologist urgently requires
information and lots of it. For every
24 hours, about 100,000 observations
of weather conditions at the earth's
surface and about 11,000 observations
of the upper atmosphere are recorded
and distributed throughout the world
under the present international weather
system. These observations come
from some 8,000 land stations, from
3,000 aircraft and 4,000 ships.
Formidable as these figures are,
they only represent adequate Informa¬
tion for 20 % of the earth's surface.
Large areas of the world have yet to
yield vital information. The oceans
and deserts have long defied the appl¬
ication of normal observing methods.
Satellite photographs are now filling
in many gaps on the world weather
map, and it is expected that new
techniques, such as more sophisticated
satellite sensors for the measurement
of temperature and moisture distribu¬
tion and surface winds, and automatic
weather stations, meteorological buoys
and constant-level balloons will fill
many more. The satellite will be a
messenger as well as an observer,
passing information from these auto¬
matic stations and balloons to data
collection centres.
The forecaster needs information,
but he also needs to receive and pro¬
cess it with all possible speed and
accuracy.
Feed a satellite photograph to a
computer and in an amazingly short
time it has painted a portrait in letters,
the shades of black and white in the
photograph becoming a variety and a
pattern of symbols. This new "photo¬
graph" is but one piece of information
the computer will use in producing
other analyses.
The computer can perform a million
calculations a second, assimilate infor¬
mation from thousands of observation
points all over the world, sort it. sift
it, following faithfully the instructions
contained in intricate mathematical
equations and print out. finally, the
probable pattern of the atmosphere.
It is a "forecast" for the forecaster.
Far lissier resdirg see three publications of
sJ-e V/crldl Meteorological Organization, Gene¬
va: 'World V.'ea-Jh.-er Watch" (No 183. TP. 92;
prise S#Jr. 1); "Weather and Man" (No 143.
TP^ £7; pi-ice St/Jr. 2); 'V/eather and Food"
Free-dorrs from Merger Campaign Basic
St^Sf Ho I (t:o 112. T.P. 50. Sw.fr. 2). See
fiîso "A H<=m Lock in l/eteorology: the World
Wes'J-jsr Watch' by K. Langlo (Unesco's
osrtsrf/ "fcrpsct ¿S Science on Society',
Ho 2. 13 annual subscription: $2.50, 131-
(stg). 9 F: p*,r copy: $0.75. A]- (stg). 3 F.
Numerical models of the atmos¬
phere, the basic instructions fed to
the computer, are a reflection of the
meteorologist's knowledge and of the
development of new computer tech¬
niques. As his knowledge Is incom¬
plete, so is the computer's "forecast".
When a computer produces a cyclone
moving across the Atlantic at 500
m.p.h. (the average cyclone travels at
a sedate 15 m.p.h.), the meteorologist
knows that somewhere along the line
there is a missing quantity in his set
of equations. The perfection of these
equations is yet another problem for
the weatherman to overcome.
The World Meteorological Organ¬
ization was quick to realize that revolu¬
tionary developments in space tech¬
nology, computing and telecommuni¬
cations were too broad and far-reach¬
ing in their implications to be simply
incorporated into the existing intern¬
ational weather system. An entirely
new approach was called for. A new
concept was needed, which would
extract full value from these new
developments, unite them with more
conventional methods and allow both
research and operational work every
chance of developing and complement¬
ing each other.
The answer is the World Weather
Watch (WWW). It may best be
described as a kind of international
nervous system, highly sensitive and
capable of immediate reaction to
change in weather throughout the
globe. Many thousands of points at
the earth's surface and in the upper
atmosphere will register any slight
change in weather conditions. Satell¬
ites will provide the eyes and the
overall view. Three world centres at
Melbourne, Moscow and Washington
and a limited number of regional
centres will be the brains and memory
of the system, receiving great volumes
of data and processing them by com¬
puter. An elaborate network of tele¬
printer and facsimile links will quickly
convey pictorial and written information
to each component of the system.
Men, money and machines, all the
resources of meteorology throughout
the world, will be poured into this
new system. Highly industrialized
nations in the temperate zone, develop¬
ing countries in tropical and sub¬
tropical regions, countries marooned
in the vast oceans of the southern
hemisphere, all, regardless of their
stage of development, will have access
to the same global information. For
those countries whose weather ser¬
vices are still in their Infancy, this
will enable them to "leapfrog" over
50 years of scientific and technical
development.

It is an easy matter to draw up a
long list of benefits which will follow
in the wake of the WWW. Improved
aviation forecasts, cyclone and flood
warnings spell Safety. Greater know¬
ledge of rainfall and evaporation mean
Power for industry and agricultural
Prosperity. And as the Watch grows
more alert, more knowledgeable, the
list lengthens.
All methods of observation, commu¬
nication and forecasting, old and new,
and all future developments will be
absorbed into the system. It is already
visualized that satellites will collect
reports from automatic weather sta¬
tions, floating balloons and meteorolo¬
gical buoys and pass this information
on to the world centres. Communi¬
cation links will be further speeded up
by using satellites for the exchange
of data between world regional and
national centres. The computer will
take over more and more of the duties
at present carried out by the forecaster
himself.
"Everyone talks about the weather,
but nobody does anything about it."
This is an old complaint. But more
frequently today there is talk of the
long-range forecast and modification of
weather and climate.
Many weather services already issue
Since 1961, more than 130
typhoons in the Pacific, cyclones
in the Indian Ocean and
hurricanes in the Atlantic have
been detected and tracked by
satellite and long-range radar.
Advance warnings of such
calamities help to minimize losses
on land and sea. Photo shows
a coastguard cutter aiding a
vessel disabled by a hurricane
in the Gulf of Mexico.
Photo US1S
Every day over 110,000
observations of weather
conditions at the earth's surface
and in the upper atmosphere
are recorded and distributed
throughout the world. These
observations come from some
8,000 land stations, from 3,000
aircraft and 4,000 ships. Right,
Argentinian weather observer on
duty at a post 4,000 metres
(13,000 ft.) high in the Andes
waves to a passing aircraft. His
post Is one of three weather
stations on the border of
Argentina and Chile.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Parl3
forecasts for periods of up to three
days ahead and with substantial
success. As knowledge of the
general circulation of the atmosphere
accumulates, the forecaster will en¬
deavour to extend the period of his
prediction.
When the meteorologist can produce
mathematical models which are faithful
to the atmosphere, the computer will
not only forecast accurately, it should
also help him to anticipate what would
happen to the world's weather if man
diverted the Gulf Stream, dammed the
Bering Strait, poured oil on the
oceans, or blackened the Arctic Ice.
By coating large areas of ocean with
chemicals, for example, he might
reduce evaporation and therefore the
heavy rainfall and violent storms in
tropical regions. By blackening the
Arctic ice, he might reduce loss of
energy by reflection and make neigh¬
bouring wastelands more habitable.
But he can only embark on such large-
scale modifications when he is per¬
fectly confident that their long-range
effects will be entirely beneficial.
The weather will be robbed of its
power to catch us unawares, and may
instead be harnessed for man's greater
comfort and prosperity.
