Man and Space
A GREAT
INTER¬
NATIONAL
VENTURE
by A. H. Abdel-Ghani
HE myriad of organizations, governmental and nongovern¬
mental, national and international, scientific and technical,
pursuing their legitimate interests in the field of outer space
exploration seems at times to be sufficient to fill the vast expanse
of outer space itself.
Each organization may be concerned with but a single facet
of space exploration. The World Meteorological Organization
follows with increasing interest the development of earth-orbiting
weather satellites; the International Telecommunication Union must
continually grapple with the growing problem of space commun¬
ications; the possibility of a navigational satellite system catches
the attention of the International Maritime Consultative Organization
and the International Civil Aviation Organization; Unesco explores
the potentialities of space communications for public information
and education; and the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR)
of the International Council of Scientific Unions is primarily
concerned with the scientific aspects of space research.
These are but a few, and one need only consult a calendar of
meetings devoted to aspects of space exploration to note the profu¬
sion of organizations involved and the variety of interests displayed.
One group, however, occupies a special position in the extensive
network of organizations active in this field. The United Nations
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space is the only inter¬
governmental body exclusively concerned with all matters connec¬
ted with outer space activities. The committee, made up of twenty-
eight member states (1), has a broad membership which includes
the two major space powers and a representative group of countries
at varied levels of economic and scientific development, and there¬
fore provides an effective forum for consideration of the problems
of outer space. At the same time, the committee furnishes the "fo¬
cal point for co-operation in the peaceful exploration of outer space"
envisaged by the U.N. General Assembly.
Because of its central position, the committee is well placed to
make an overall survey of international co-operation efforts in the
space field; to provide a basis for objective, technical assess¬
ments of international programmes and their economic and social
potentials; and to provide a "rallying point" for the many organiza¬
tions engaged in this field by furnishing encouragement and support
on an international governmental level.
In undertaking these important functions, the committee is assist¬
ed by its two specialized sub-committees one scientific and
technical, the other legal and by a small group of experts in the
United Nations Secretariat the Outer Space Affairs Group. It also
benefits from the experience of the specialized agencies and other
bodies invited to participate in its work.
When the committee was first established, there were only two
nations capable of launching earth orbiting satellites and planet¬
ary probes, the United States and the Soviet Union. At this point,
there was no doubt in any mind that the primary objective for the
committee in this field was to attempt to avoid the .extension of
national rivalries into outer space and to ensure its uses for peace¬
ful purposes only. All plans had to reflect this overwhelming
desire and necessitated, therefore, taking into account the polit¬
ical ramifications of any United Nations action in this area.
(1) Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, E
Chad, Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary, India, Iran, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, **
Mongolia, Morocco, Poland, Rumania, Sierra Leone, Sweden, U.S.S.R., United Arab
Republic, United Kingdom, United States.

INTERNATIONAL VENTURE (Cont'd)
In this spirit, the committee submitted to the General Assembly
in November 1963 a declaration of legal principles governing the
activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space. The
declaration was unanimously adopted by the General Assembly.
(See article page 17).
In addition to pursuing its consideration of the legal problems
and principles, the committee has presented a series of recommend¬
ations on the exchange of information, the encouragement of
international programmes, the creation of international sounding
rocket launching facilities, potentially harmful effects of space exper¬
iments, and education and training which lay the groundwork for
further practical action to develop international co-operation.
Recently, the working group of the whole recommended to the
committee the holding of an international conference in the latter
half of 1967 on the peaceful uses of outer space. The conference
would have two objectives: an examination of the practical benefits
to be derived from space research and exploration on the basis
of technical and scientific achievements and the extent to which
non-space powers, especially the developing countries, may enjoy
these benefits, particularly in terms of education and develop¬
ment; and an examination of the opportunities available to non-
space powers for international co-operation in space activities,
taking into account the extent to which the United Nations may
play a role.
As the first decade of outer space exploration nears its comple¬
tion, it is clear that many nations of the world are now aware of
their stake in this new activity of mankind. The nations are deter¬
mined to build the necessary international structure which will
ensure the peaceful exploration of outer space for the benefit of all.
C ABDEL HAMID ABDEL-GHANI is head of the United Nations Outer Space Affairs
Group and secretary of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
Between 1949 and 1961, he represented the United Arab Republic on several
bodies in the United Nations.
FIRST OF THE MANY. Not long ago
the "space pilot" was thought
of as a character from science fiction.
Today, well over a score or men
and one woman Valentina Tereshkova
have flown in space, and many
more are being trained
to follow them.
Below, animal pathfinders
who paved the way for man
include dogs,
mice and guinea pigs.
Photos © APN
