A FAIR DEAL
FOR THE TEACHER
by Jean Thomas
special intergovernmental conference convened by
Unesco is shortly to meet in Paris to consider and
adopt an international recommendation on the status of
teachers. The meeting will be the outcome of studies and
consultations carried out jointly by Unesco and the Interna¬
tional Labour Organization, with the help of many other
international governmental and non-governmental organiz¬
ations concerned with the progress of education. The aim
is to give the highest official approval to a set of well-defined
recommendations covering principles and standards whose
application would give primary and secondary schoolteachers
in every country a professional, social and economic standing
worthy of their calling. Why have Unesco and the Interna¬
tional Labour Organization decided to use such large-scale,
complex machinery to help resolve the problems of one
particular profession, and why has agreement between states
become necessary in a field where national law and custom
have always seemed adequate? The question is one which
applies equally to many other situations that have arisen in
the field of education.
FOR centuries, countries
and communities did their
best to provide young people with the
right kind of education. And then, as
education expanded and became
increasingly complex, the whole fabric
of the educational system began to
crack and crumble apart.
Just when the rising generations
were starting to crowd into the schools,
the schools were unable to find room
for them all. The need to build new
schools and to find teachers to staff
them became increasingly urgent. But
where education once managed quite
well with a few thousand primary or
JEAN THOMAS was Assistant Director-
General of Unesco from 1956 to 1960. He
was a member of the secretariat of the
Unesco Preparatory Commission in 1946
and in 1948 became Director of Unesco's
Department of Cultural Activities. He is
now an inspector-general in the French
Ministry of National Education.
secondary teachers, it now needs to
recruit tens and hundreds of thousands.
And there is hardly a country in the
world that is not facing this problem.
In matters of this kind people are
easily impressed by figures. So much
is heard about quantities: so many
schools to be built and equipped, so
many pupils to be taken in, so many
teachers to be recruited, so much for
capital investment, operating expend¬
iture and staffing costs.
Yet quantity is the least important
aspect of the problem. Even when
countries are quite prepared to make
all kinds of sacrifices to give their
young people an education, what
guarantee do they have that it will
be a good education, in other words,
that it will provide the intellectual and
moral training which young people
have the right to expect, and that it
will produce the leaders which every
nation needs? A country cannot afford
to make mistakes in the education of
its citizens any more than it can afford
them in matters of defence, nutrition
and health or in the exploitation of
its natural resources and the use of its
manpower.
Educational expansion is obviously a
desirable thing, but if it is made at
the expense of quality it soon becomes
a harmful one. That is why educational
planning, which has now become a
universal need, must produce an
accurate estimate of quantities, and a
no less precise assessment of the
level, type and methods of education
that will be needed in the future.
Governments throughout the world
are therefore anxious to reform educa¬
tion and to adapt existing structures,
curricula and methods to modern
needs. School systems based on time-
honoured tradition are everywhere
being transformed; new laws and
regulations are being adopted and old
ones rescinded; systems of selection
and study guidance are being ¡ntroduc-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

FAIR DEAL FOR THE TEACHER (Continued)
Drawn to careers with greater prestige
6
ed or modified; programmes are being
streamlined or enriched with new sub¬
jects, and Increasing use is made of
fresh methods and teaching aids. Our
century, at least in appearance, is the
golden age of the science of teaching.
But ultimately the successful out¬
come of this tremendous effort is bas¬
ed on one factor: the competence and
devotion of men and women whose
profession it is to teach. Even when
schools are superbly built, equipped
with the finest libraries and apparatus
and provided with well planned
programmes, what sorts of results can
be expected if the teachers are lack¬
ing in talent, poorly trained or dis¬
satisfied with their conditions?
A good teacher can enhance the
value of education; a bad one can
jeopardize it. Whether one considers
the benefit to the individual child or
the collective interest of society, there
is no escaping the fact that the quality
of education always has been and
always will be directly linked with the
quality of the teacher.
Recruiting and training enough good
teachers, giving them the work best
suited to their aptitudes and tastes,
providing the salary, working con¬
ditions and career prospects which will
both enable and encourage them to
devote themselves wholeheartedly to
their work these are not simply the
answers to equitable demands; they
are also the soundest way to meet a
nation's needs. This is just as much a
matter of good economic management
as of equitable social organization.
Thus, the obligation to give teachers
their legitimate material and moral
position in society ranks high among
the factors that can improve educa¬
tion.
These facts are generally acknow¬
ledged, but only rarely is proper
thought given to all their implications.
The first of these, without a doubt,
is that a great many well-qualified
young people must be attracted to
teaching careers. And it is here that
the difficulties begin. The range of
professions demanding top-level can¬
didates with high intellectual and moral
qualities is increasing, and so is the
range of careers offering attractive
prospects to the young.
Teachers are often told especially
when they are meeting together that
theirs is the noblest of all professions.
This belief certainly does them honour,
and there is no lack of arguments to
uphold it. But what of priests, doctors,
architects, engineers and farmers, for
example? Is there not a nobility of
purpose in consoling the afflicted, help¬
ing the sick, building new towns,
designing machines capable of trans¬
forming standards of living, or in
simply growing food for others to eat?
Even administrative careers, long
considered as humdrum and lacking in
opportunities for initiative and respon¬
sibility, are daily increasing in prestige
because of their direct influence on
every aspect of community life. A
great variety of careers, all equally
useful and noble, now offer attractive
inducements to the intelligent young
man or woman who is eager to serve.
Teaching cannot therefore claim, as
in the past, to attract the very best
minds; and indeed it would not be
in society's interests if it did. The
needs of education must take their
place among many others; there can
be no question of giving them an
absolute priority.
However, these needs must not be
sacrificed either, since this would
create the most serious kind of imbal¬
ance in society. One of the essential
preliminaries to a profession, however
specialized, is a good general educa¬
tion; and it is the teacher's task to
provide this education. Thus, of all
public services, education is, if not
the most Important, at least the one
whose need is most immediately
obvious, and it is the duty of the state,
and in its own Interests, to see that
the teaching profession receives its
proper proportion of youthful talent.
This is the point on which public
opinion, and especially the opinion of
young people, needs convincing. It
is no exaggeration to say that the
public is generally ill-informed on the
role of the teacher in modern society.
At a time when so many other careers
are taking on new lustre because they
are seen to be closely linked with the
wonders of science and technology,
the teaching profession seems to be
set in very old habits.
In a world of constant change, where
newspaper articles and television
programmes make engineers, research
workers, doctors and surgeons appear
as pioneers, the teacher has practically
come to be considered as a survivor
from a bygone age. Newspapers,
books, theatre and cinema have all
helped to build up a stereotyped image
of the "typical" teacher: a man respect¬
ed for his honesty, conscientiousness
CONTINUED ON PAGE 9
Inequalities in wages
and working conditions
In many Latin American countries, between 70 and 75 per cent of primary
schoolteachers are women. Teachers' salaries are generally very low In
some places less than those of unskilled workers. Generally speaking, a
qualified teacher earns less than a skilled worker, and in certain countries
a skilled worker is paid six times as much as a teacher. In one capital city,
for example, a qualified teacher earns as much as a building foreman; yet in
the rural areas of the same country a teacher receives hardly more than
three-fifths the salary of a building foreman. Since 60 to 70 per cent of
Latin America's people live in the countryside, the proportion of rural prim¬
ary teachers in the continent is extremely high.
In Africa, non-qualified teachers make up from ten to 30 per cent of teaching
staffs in some countries; in others they represent anything from 40 to 75
per cent. The majority of African teachers work under poor conditions,
often having to make do with dilapidated buildings or uncomfortable tents.
Many schools are built far from the main centres of population and are
often so isolated that teachers have difficulty not only in receiving school
equipment, as well as their salaries, but also in procuring food and water.
Many teachers, especially those in rural areas, are leaving the profession,
which is classed among the lower echelons of public service.
In Asia, teachers are less favoured, in terms of salary and status, than
other persons employed in public service.
In Europe, teachers' salaries have increased in most countries since 1938,
but the rate of increase has been slower for teachers than for office
employees and manual workers.

y
^
*¿
»I
FAIR DEAL FOR THE TEACHER (Continued)
Let's say good-bye to 'Mr. Chips'
and unselfishness, but who tends to
be absent-minded, ingenuous and
attached to old-fashioned principles.
It would have been surprising if this
view had not coloured the ideas of
teen-agers. They have, of course,
other and more direct ways of forming
an opinion about the teaching profes¬
sion, since it is the one they know, or
think they know, most about.
Some yougsters, inspired by admira¬
tion and enthusiasm for their teachers,
are strongly drawn to a teaching career
and their only ambition is to follow it
themselves. But it must be admitted
that such cases are relatively uncom¬
mon. Many others submit to their
teachers' authority with impatience
which shows itself in a display of
emotions ranging from indifference to
outright revolt. Later on they will
perhaps think with affection of their
former teachers, but more than likely
this will merely be nostalgia for their
own youth.
At an age when they are thinking of
choosing a career, young people are
often presented by the press, radio,
cinema and television with more
glamorous images of other jobs,
which seem to them to be in tune
with the world of today and tomorrow,
jobs which appear more active and
more "dangerous", but which offer
greater prestige and greater pos¬
sibilités of satisfying ambition.
There is room for a genuine non-
propaganda campaign, to publicize and
explain the role of the teacher. This
is not the place to set out the
particular points which should be
emphasized; they are, however, well
known to all who are familiar with
the world of education.
It would be wrong, for example, to
dwell on the sacrifices imposed by the
teacher's calling or on the haven
which the profession provides from the
agitation of the restless world points
that have so often been stressed, in all
good faith, in the past. Instead it
should be pointed out how much the
teacher contributes to the building of
the world of tomorrow, by preparing
young people for adult life and
citizenship; to the intellectual and
moral training of the makers of modern
society and to economic and social
progress. ' Teachers' associations,
which defend their members' legitimate
interests so conscientiously, might
perhaps pay more attention to raising
the standing of their profession in the
public mind, and especially in the
opinion of young people.
But it is, of course, up to the state
to set an example, and it has simple,
effective means at its disposal to do
so. The recommendation to be
submitted by Unesco to the inter¬
governmental conference deals with
the question of teachers' salaries in the
following terms:
"Amongst the various factors which
affect the status of teachers, particular
importance should be attached to sal¬
ary, seeing that in present world con¬
ditions other factors, such as the
standing or regard accorded them and
the level of appreciation of the im¬
portance of their function, are largely
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
World shortage of teachers
In 1950 the world had 5,347,000 primary schoolteachers. By 1962 their
numbers had risen to 8,052,000.
Despite this Increase there is still a serious shortage of teachers throughout
the world. In 1963 this shortage was hindering the development of primary
education in three-quarters of the 83 countries which replied to a question¬
naire from the International Bureau of Education. Fifty-one countries were
having to use staff without pedagogical training and 34 had been forced to
introduce accelerated training for teachers.
The number of teachers in secondary education (general, technical and
vocational) increased from 1,950,000 in 1950 to 4,300,000 in 1962. Never¬
theless, the International Bureau of Education reported in 1963: "the short¬
age of teachers, particularly teachers with proper training and qualifications,
gives rise to more anxiety than ever and is tending to become worse."
Teachers in higher education totalled 576,000 for 6,500,000 students in
1950; in 1962 there were 1,218,000 teachers for 14,000,000 students. The
1962 figures do not cover Mainland China, North Korea or North Viet-Nam.
9

FAIR DEAL FOR THE TEACHER (Continued)
The value nations place on education
10
dependent, as in other comparable
professions, on the economic position
in which they are placed."
Formulated in this way, the question
has two aspects. Salary is certainly
not the only factor to be considered
in a concerted policy of teacher re¬
cruitment. We have seen how, for
young people, the prestige of a career
is dependent on other factors. It is
not even sure that when young people
choose their profession they know
exactly what advantages it presents.
But it is also true that public opinion
does seem to have acknowledged once
and for all that teaching is badly paid.
Well-intentioned people have tried to
find solace in the idea that teaching is
not so much a career as a mission,
and that teachers must forego not only
wealth but many other material satis¬
factions as well. As compensation for
this, they point to the elation that
comes from fulfilling a noble task and
contributing to the development of
youthful personalities.
One need hardly point out that there
is a good deal of ignorance and hypoc¬
risy in this reasoning. Why should
young men and women at the very be¬
ginning of their working life renounce
the legitimate ambition of obtaining a
decent place in society for themselves
and their families? A profession with
the reputation of being badly paid holds
little attraction for young people, even
the most studious, and this again
dissuades many excellent potential
teachers from entering the profession.
Salary and other related advantages
are, however, also a sign of the regard
in which society, as represented by the
public authorities, holds a given pro¬
fession. It is illogical to declare that
teaching is one of the most necessary
of all public services, and at the same
time to keep teachers as impoverished
as they so very often are. Reliable
statistics collected during recent inter¬
national surveys prove that primary and
secondary teachers the former of
course more than the latter are in-
contestably among the most unfavour¬
ably treated categories of the working
population.
In many countries, it is often said
that anyone who goes into teaching
must have lost hope of entering any
other profession. How, then, can one
hope to raise the prestige of a career,
which is constantly so belittled? For¬
tunately conditions are not the same
everywhere; but examples of such in¬
consistency are too frequent to pass
unnoticed.
Teachers do not of course always
work for the state: they are often
employed by local communities or by
private enterprise. But since it is
agreed that teaching is a public ser¬
vice and that the education of young
people is one of the state's major res¬
ponsibilities, it is always the duty of
the state to supervise the quality and
operation of education.
The condition of the teacher is there¬
fore the concern of states; this means
that it is also the concern of Unesco,
whose task it is to bring about continu¬
ing co-operation between states in the
field of education. This is why Unesco
has taken the initiative, why it has
' arranged for an international recom¬
mendation to be drawn up and why it
has called an intergovernmental con¬
ference.
The question of salaries is not, of
course, the only problem with which
the recommendation deals; nor is it
the most important one. Methods of
recruitment, tenure, conditions of em¬
ployment, retirement pensions and all
aspects of social security are covered
as well. Teachers' rights must cor¬
respond to a fair assessment of their
duties and responsibilities.
A set of recommendations on the
selection and on the intellectual, pro¬
fessional and in-service training of
teachers must inevitably be associated
with this code of rights and duties; for
the status which the profession may
justifiably claim depends on the care
taken to choose and train its members
In accordance with the highest criteria.
The aim of the international recom¬
mendation is not to provide special
advantages for a particular group of
people, but to guarantee that a service
of public interest, of primary impor¬
tance for the future of every country
and of all mankind, should be carried
out in the best possible conditions.
Better training and
further education
The international recommendation on the status of teachers, which is to be
examined by the special intergovernmental conference, highlights some
major problems and suggests ways of dealing with them. Below are some
of its proposals relating to training and further education for teachers.
ADMISSION TO TRAINING. Candidates for teacher training should have
completed a well-rounded secondary education and should possess person¬
al qualities likely to help them to become worthy members of the profession.
AIMS OF TRAINING. A teacher's training should enable him to develop
his personal culture; his ability to teach; his awareness of the principles
which underlie good human relations, within and across national boundaries;
and a sense of responsibility to contribute to social, cultural and economic
progress.
TRAINING PROGRAMMES. General studies; study of the philosophy,
psychology, sociology, theory and history of education, comparative
education, school administration and methods of teaching various subjects.
Programmes should also include studies related to the student's intended
field of teaching, and practice in teaching and extra-curricular activities
carried out under the guidance of fully qualified teachers. All teachers
should be prepared in general, special and pedagogical subjects in univer¬
sities or in institutions of a comparable level.
FURTHER EDUCATION. A full place should be given to in-service
education designed to secure a systematic improvement of the quality
and content of education.
A wide system of in-service education, available free to all teachers, should
therefore be established. Refresher courses should be provided, espec¬
ially for teachers returning to their work after a break in service.
Courses should be designed to enable teachers to improve their qualifica¬
tions and to keep up to date with their subject and field of education.
Facilities should be available to enable teachers to buy or borrow books
and other material to improve their general education and professional
qualifications.
