BLAST-OFF FOR ARIEL
The first international satellite,
Ariel I, a joint United Kingdom-
United States co-operative pro¬
ject, rises from a U.S. launching
base (above) on April 26, 1962.
Ariel I (in drawing, left, as it
would appear in orbit) was de¬
signed to collect information
about the ionosphere (a layer of
the earth's upper atmosphere)
and how it is affected by solar
radiations. The Goddard Space
Flight Center in the U.S.A.
launched the satellite and later
picked up its data through a
world-wide network of tracking
stations. The U.K. designed
and arranged the instruments
to carry out six experiments to
measure cosmic, ultraviolet and
X-rays. A second satellite,
Ariel II, was launched into orbit
in March 1964, and work on a
third Ariel is now proceeding.
Photos NASA

Joint enterprises are now
a going concern
in the exciting field
of space research'
by Arnold W. Frutkln
INTERNATIONAL co-operation In the scientific exploration of
space provides both a present reality which is yielding practical
benefits and a highly attractive prospect for future contributions to the
knowledge and welfare of all nations.
The United States civilian space agency, the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA), since its establishment in 1958, has carried
out a broad and varied programme of co-operative space activities involving
70 countries and jurisdictions. The objectives of this programme are to
afford opportunities for the best brains abroad to participate in space
research, to stimulate technical development abroad, to help reduce eco¬
nomic and political strain between states, and to provide a framework within
which countries can pool their efforts and join in cost-sharing and comple¬
mentary programmes.
Existing international co-operative
space activities demonstrate the values
which flow from joint participation in
this relatively new and exciting branch
of scientific investigation and technical
development.
NASA has placed in orbit six satel¬
lites designed and engineered by
scientists and engineers in Canada,
France, Italy and the United Kingdom
and has agreements to launch eight
more co-operative satellites. From the
experiments conducted with these
spacecraft, the countries concerned
have derived a large volume of signif¬
icant information which they are shar¬
ing with the United States and the
ARNOLD W. FRUTKIN, Assistant Admi¬
nistrator for International Affairs at the
National Aeronautics and Space Administra¬
tion (NASA), Washington, has been re¬
sponsible for NASA's programmes of co¬
operation with foreign governments and
agencies in space science and technology
since 1959 when he was appointed Director
of the Office of International Programmes.
He is a member of the U.S. delegation to
the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space. Before joining NASA,
Mr. Frutkin served as Director of Public
Affairs and later as Deputy Executive Direc¬
tor of the U.S. National Committee for the
International Geophysical Year.
rest of the world scientific community.
Foreign scientists are invited by
NASA to propose individual experi¬
ments for inclusion on NASA satellites.
These proposals are reviewed In com¬
petition with those submitted by Amer¬
ican scientists and, if selected, are
funded and prepared by the sponsor¬
ing agencies abroad. Four such ex¬
periments have already flown success¬
fully, sixteen additional ones have been
scheduled for later flights and several
more are under consideration. NASA
has opened virtually all categories of
its spacecraft, including the Apollo
manned spacecraft, to foreign partici¬
pation on this co-operative basis, thus
providing opportunities for foreign
scientists and engineers to obtain
valuable data and experience.
Co-operative sounding-rocket pro¬
jects have special international appeal.
To nations wishing to initiate space
programmes, they offer relatively low-
cost opportunities on a smaller but
significant scale. They offer the use
of launching locations of unique scien¬
tific interest and permit simultaneous
launchings in different locations, a
practice required for certain scientific
objectives. More than 130 rockets
have been launched in joint NASA pro¬
jects with 17 countries.
Sounding rocket projects have
brought into being a large number of
ranges in scientifically significant re¬
gions of the world auroral, equatorial,
southern hemisphere and these
ranges now make possible increasingly
important programmes in rocket
astronomy, meteorology, aeronomy,
and ionospheric physics.
A study of atmospheric circulation
of the Indian Ocean basin, with both
India and Pakistan participating, has
resulted in valuable contributions to
scientific knowledge. A particularly
interesting by-product of this bilateral
programme has been the establish¬
ment of the first international sounding
rocket range, at Thumba on the geo¬
magnetic equator. This range is open
to all users who follow a code of
open investigation laid down by the
United Nations. To the extent that
unique advantages may be derived
from their geographic location, there
may be room for the establishment of
more such ranges.
O NE of the attractive aspects
of bilateral sounding rocket
projects is that they tend to serve as
nuclei for broadening international
activity. Ionospheric studies conduct¬
ed under a U.S. agreement with Nor¬
way have led to collaborative efforts
among all three Scandinavian count¬
ries. Argentina and Brazil are now
undertaking with NASA joint sound¬
ing rocket studies which serve as ele¬
ments in an experimental inter-American
meteorological sounding rocket net¬
work. This network, it is hoped, will
eventually engage western hemisphere
meteorologists from the Antarctic pen¬
insula to the shores of Hudson Bay.
Argentina and Brazil together have
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

JOINT SPACE ENTERPRISES (Cont'd)
Satellite beacons for ships and planes
formulated an agreement which pro¬
vides a framework for future co-opera¬
tion in space research to which these
countries can bring capabilities devel¬
oped in the co-operative programmes
with NASA.
Co-operation in ground-based pro¬
grammes has been of the greatest im¬
portance for flight projects and has
permitted participation in space pro¬
grammes of great scope without re¬
quiring expensive vehicle or space¬
craft hardware. In meteorology, the
co-operative sharing of practical space
benefits has reached new levels
through the inclusion of an Automatic
Picture Transmission (APT) system on
United States advanced meteorological
satellites.
The APT camera can provide con¬
tinuous read-out of cloud-cover photo¬
graphs. A simple and relatively inex¬
pensive ground station permits direct
and immediate acquisition and printing
of cloud-cover photographs taken by
the satellite as it passes within range.
Thirteen countries have acquired APT
sets at their own expense and used
them successfully, many reporting
direct improvements in weather fore¬
casting. Numerous other countries are
acquiring the sets which offer both
immediate forecasting and long-range
research gains for weather service and
university interests.
14
OMMUNICATIONS satel¬
lites made possible early
dramatic transoceanic telephone and
television demonstrations and have
now entered the phase of direct com¬
mercial application with the clear pro¬
mise of cultural and economic benefit.
The early experimental co-operation,
in which a dozen countries undertook
construction of ground stations at their
own expense, under agreement with
NASA, undoubtedly contributed to this
implementation.
Another prospect, of potential bene¬
fit to both air and sea transportation,
is that of navigation satellites. The
increasing density of traffic on aircraft
and shipping routes may make it
desirable and profitable to develop a
satellite navigation system which would
contribute to the safety and economy
of transportation, particularly on the
most heavily travelled routes.
Of primary importance to programmes
of space exploration and experimenta¬
tion are ground stations for tracking
and reception of data sent back by
radio. International co-operation in the
location, construction and operation of
these stations is clearly essential. In
all countries where NASA has estab¬
lished tracking and data acquisition
stations, local technicians are invited
to work side by side with United States
personnel and, in most cases, do so.
Indeed, in a number of locations, the
stations are operated entirely by crews
of the host country. This co-operation
not only provides necessary services,
but contributes to the spread of
modern technologies and the con¬
tinued growth of understanding.
Personnel exchanges and training
arrangements are important in most
international efforts. Programmes have
been set up under which senior scien¬
tists from abroad may spend a year or
more in research or experimental work
at NASA centres. Fellowships at the
graduate level are available in Ameri¬
can universities for foreign students.
Training necessary for the execution
of co-operative projects in which the
United States participates is made
available at appropriate NASA centres.
In these latter two programmes, the
requirement that the sponsoring coun¬
tries meet travel and subsistence costs
assures careful selection of personnel
selected for training, and their future
utilization at home.
In each of the co-operative projects
referred to, that portion which is the
responsibility of the co-operating coun¬
try is in fact a bona fide contribution
of that country, funded by it without
financial support from the U.S. Each
of the projects referred to is of
mutual interest to the participants and
possesses valid scientific objectives.
The scientific results of each of these
projects are made available to the
world scientific community.
What are the limitations on con¬
tinued expansion of international co¬
operation in space research and explor¬
ation? It would be unrealistic not to
recognize that constraints exist and
that the primary ones are money, tech¬
nology and will (which in turn may be
a function of the level of appreciation
of the broad benefits which can in fact
be derived from an engagement in
space technology).
One means of reducing costs to indi¬
vidual participating countries is the
banding together of a group of coun¬
tries, as in the European Space
Research Organization (ESRO) and the
European Launcher Development Orga¬
nization (ELDO) (see page 24). Other,
CONT'D ON PAGE 16
North American Aviation
TRICKS PLAYED
ON HAND & EYE
Venturing into outer space, man
encounters new, bewildering con¬
ditions that play tricks with his
vision. The earth's atmosphere
produces diffuse reflection of
light, but in space the astronaut
can see only bright objects illum¬
inated by the sun and visible
against an absolutely black
background. Such misleading
and unstable perspectives dis¬
tort human perceptions of depth
and shape and produce optical
illusions. Astronauts are taught
to beware of mirages in space.
Hold this figure (Necker's cube) at arms
length and keep your eyes fixed on it.
Its aspect will change. First the top (or
bottom) will appear as viewed from above,
and then from below. You will not be able
to retain one image for very long. This
illustrates the kind of optical illusion that
may complicate the work of astronauts in
assembling the sections of stations in
space. Against the blackness of space a
cube becomes diamond-shaped and a circle
takes on elliptical form. Right two drawings
by the Dutch engraver, Maurits-Cornelis
Escher, illustrate the same kind of optical
illusion. In "Belvedere", the men on the
ladder are placed ¡[logically, the lower one
inside and the upper one outside the edi¬
fice; below them a seated figure contem¬
plates Necker's cube. In "Perpetual Mo¬
tion", a drawing trick makes the water
falling on the wheel appear to climb again
to give the mill an unending water supply.

Stresses experienced
by an astronaut
in flight acceleration,
weightlessness, heat,
oxygen intake, magnetic
disturbances
can affect
his perceptions
and actions.
Left, checking the effect
of acceleration
on the human eye.
Circular pattern
is projected on the eye
and photographed
after flight to reveal
change caused by rapid
acceleration.
erratic squiggles, Right,
recalling certain works
of modern art,
are gestures
of astronauts
with electric bulbs
fixed to their wrists,
photographed during
simulated space flight.
1
PlSl
£ ^P
1 Jn \
IS
M 1 JL
3
T- *'
Courtesy "Jardin des Arts", Paris.

Shadowgraph reveals
the shock wave
and turbulence set
up by the profile of a Mercury
space capsule. Tests
under laboratory
conditions determine
how the capsule will
behave at high speeds
in the atmosphere.
JOINT SPACE ENTERPRISES (Cont'd)
Bridges between the continents
16
regional groupings might perform a
similarly useful function.
The scope for advanced projects of
mutual interest is also limited by dis¬
parities in the development of the
required technology. The past few
years of space activity, through nation¬
al, regional, and NASA-co-operative
projects, have, however, already estab¬
lished a significant base for more
advanced projects. Disparities in tech¬
nology can be further reduced through
regional space research organizations,
such as ESRO and ELDO, in which
each participant concentrates on those
areas of science and technology in
which it is most proficient.
Finally, genuine co-operation re¬
quires the will to co-operate on the part
of all participants. The will to co-oper¬
ate presupposes a conviction that co¬
operation can serve the common inter¬
est It is of some interest that the
United States has steadfastly sought
to open new opportunities for space
co-operation with the Soviet Union.
A certain limited success has been
achieved by the two countries. Follow¬
ing specific proposals for co-operation
by President Kennedy in 1962, nego¬
tiators were designated by both sides.
The resulting talks between the late
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Academician
A. A. Blagonravov produced an agree¬
ment dated June 8, 1962.
The agreement provided for three
undertakings. The first was for co¬
ordinated launchings of experimental
meteorological satellites and the
exchange of data thus obtained over a
conventional communications link. This
link has been established and is being
used for the exchange of conventional
meteorological data pending the avail¬
ability of satellite data from the Soviet
Union.
The second undertaking was for the
launching by each country of an earth
satellite equipped with absolute magnet¬
ometers and the subsequent exchange
of data. The third part of the agree¬
ment was for co-operative communica
tions experiments by means of the
United States passive satellite Echo II.
The communications project has been
completed. The exchange of magnetic
field data obtained by ground-based
instruments has begun and will provide
a basis for analysis of satellite data.
The most recent evidence of United
States willingness to join with others
in the exploration of space is
President Johnson's suggestion of
December 1965 that countries may wish
to co-operate in a major new space
endeavour of greater magnitude and
more far-reaching technological implic¬
ations than anything proposed hereto¬
fore. The President's proposal is, in
effect, a response to the frequently-
stated desire of other developed coun¬
tries for greater participation in the
development of advanced space tech¬
nology.
Other interested nations may wish
to share in the benefits which America
is deriving from major advanced tech¬
nological programmes through a com¬
bination of advanced management
techniques, technology and a fruitful
TURTLE-TRACKIN6
SATELLITES
Satellites have proved
their worth in many
fields, including
meteorology and
telecommunications.
They may soon be helping
zoologists discover how
green turtles navigate
1,400 miles of sea
to reach the sites where
they lay their eggs.
Professor Archie Carr,
zoology professor at
the University of
Florida, suggests that
satellites be used to
track turtles equipped
with a radio
transmitter fixed to
their shells (right).
NASA Is studying
how to co-operate
in these
turtle-tracking studies.
partnership of government, university
and private industry. Such collabora¬
tion could contribute to the develop¬
ment of mutual Interests transcending
space technology, relating it to other
technology so as to employ the total
capability for broader progress and
understanding for all peoples.
In his report to the Congress on
United States Aeronautics and Space
Activities for 1965, President Johnson
said, "As our space programme con¬
tinues, the impact of its developments
on everyday life becomes daily more
evident." It continues to stimulate our
education, improve our material well-
being, and broaden the horizons of
knowledge. It is also a powerful force
for peace.
"The space programme of the United
States today is the largest effort ever
undertaken by any nation to advance
the frontiers of human knowledge.
What we are discovering and building
today will help solve many of the great
problems which an increasingly com¬
plex and heavily-populated world will
face to morrow."
O Archie Carr
