Rugged landscape of Adi Arkai (north-west Ethiopia) strikingly illustrates
the effects of subsidences in the earth's crust that have made the great rift valleys
which cleave East Africa from Zambia to the Red Sea.
Paul Almasy, Paris


CRACKS IN A CONTINENT
Probing mysteries of the earth's crust
in the rift valleys of Africa
by Brian H. Baker
HE rift valleys which trav¬
erse a large part of east¬
ern Africa, and the high plateaux and
volcanic mountains which are associat¬
ed with the valleys, are some of the
most beautiful and interesting parts of
the continent.
The floor of the rift valley is often
occupied by lakes, and the higher
parts of the surrounding plateau are
the sites of intensive agriculture, while
the high volcanic mountains are cover¬
ed with forests. It is the rift valleys
BRIAN H. BAKER is director of the Geo¬
logical Department of Kenya's Ministry of
Natural Resources and Wildlife, in Nairobi,
and chairman of the Sub-Commission on
African Rifts of the Upper Mantle Project of
the International Union of Geodesy and
Geophysics. He has written many studies
on the geology of East Africa.
and the associated uplifted plateaux
and high volcanoes that provide much
of the scenic variety in East Africa,
and incidentally provide the basis for
much of the agriculture, forestry and
other industries.
The system of African rift valleys
extends from Zambia through eastern
Africa to the Red Sea, and continues
northwards as far as Syria. This zone
of fractures in the earth's crust is ap¬
proximately 8,000 kilometres (5,000
miles) long, and represents one of
the world's major structural features.
The rift valleys in Africa are now
known to be connected in some way
at the south end of the Red Sea with
the even more extensive mid-ocean
ridges which encircle the globe. The
recognition that the African rift sys¬
tem is the extension of the mid-ocean¬
ic ridge of the Indian Ocean, via
the Gulf of Aden, means that the sys
tem is part of the world rift system
(see the Unesco. Courier, October
1963).
, Although the rift valleys of the Afric¬
an continent are likely to differ in
some respects from the equivalent
structures which are so much more ex¬
tensive on the ocean floors, they are
readily accessible for study, and pro¬
vide excellent opportunities for re¬
search into several fundamental proces¬
ses in the earth's crust, including vol¬
canic action and vertical tectonic
movements.
Now that the African rift system is
seen to be part of a global structure
the most important structural feature
of the earth's crust, in fact its study
has taken on a new significance. For
example, if the continents have been
drifting slowly apart during geological
time, as some scientists believe, and
if the mid-oceanic ridges are the zones
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
11

12
CRACKS IN A CONTINENT (Continued)
Titanic forces
at work 400
miles beneath us
along which the rupture of the original
super-continent took place, then the
African rift system may be the early
expression of the break-up of this
continent.
It is possible therefore that there is
the opportunity in eastern Africa to
study the early stages of continental
fragmentation. In future geological
ages parts of eastern Africa may be¬
come detached islands, like Madagas¬
car is at the present day. It should
be emphasized, however, that this is
likely to be a very slow process, which
would take many millions of years to
operate.
Apart from the desirability of under¬
standing more fully the surface struc¬
ture of the African rift system and its
connexion with the oceanic structures,
there is also the question of causes.
The major structural effects of the
earth's crust the long mountain ran¬
ges, the deep troughs filled with sedi¬
ments, the zones of fracturing and ver¬
tical movement are caused by forces
generated in the plastic sub-stratum
called the upper mantle of the earth,
which occurs to a depth of about 700
kilometres (430 miles) beneath the
thin, relatively rigid crust.
It is possible to obtain a surprising
amount of information concerning the
nature of the upper mantle by indirect
geophysical methods, and study of the
differences between the upper mantle
in the zone of African rifts and else¬
where would provide information to
help to understand the development
of the crust of earth and the role of
the upper mantle in its evolution.
The African rift valleys consist of
a variety of structures, most of which
are well preserved on the surface of
the earth, since they were formed in
comparatively recent geological peri¬
ods, mostly, within the last 20 million
years. Typically the valleys are
troughlike subsidences of the earth's
crust about 50 kilometres (30 miles)
wide, varying from about a hundred
metres to 1,500 metres (a few hundred
to 5,000 ft.) in depth. In the northern
part of the rift system the valleys tra¬
verse broad volcanic highland areas
such as the Kenya and Ethiopia high¬
lands, which rise to levels of over
3,000 metres (10,000 feet).
The sides of the valley are steep
rocky escarpments, sometimes a
single high escarpment, or a series of
step-like escarpments descending to
the valley floor. The floor of the valley
may be cut up into a large number of
narrow blocks, with many small escarp¬
ments, as if the floor of the valley had
CONTINUED ON PAGE 14
Ste* -*l
© Haroun Tazieff
The expedition which explored Niragongo set
up its camp on the higher of two terraces
which overlook the central well of the crater.
This terrace is surmounted by á vertical wall
180 metres (600 ft.) high (above). Two hundred
metres (650 ft.) below this terrace a narrow
platform encircles the vast molten lava lake
(right). This great expanse of molten rock,
sometimes calm and sometimes whipped into
whirlpools and fountains of lava, awed even
the most experienced members of the party.
DESCENT
FIERY PIT
The only lake of permanently molten
lava in the world is the deep Nira¬
gongo crater, a volcano situated to
the north of Lake Kivu (Democratic
Republic of the Congo). In this area
alone there are eight active vol¬
canoes. Their presence and the exis¬
tence of a zone of earthquake activ¬
ity show that further movement and
volcanic activity can be expected
along the great African rift valleys.
The 1,100-metre (3,600 ft.) wide Nira¬
gongo crater is difficult of access,

INTO THE
and involves climbing a mountain
almost 3,600-metres (12,000 feet)
high. The molten lava lake, covering
13,000 square metres (140,000 sq.
ft.), is situated in a deep well over¬
hung by a vast ring-shaped terrace
(see the Unesco Courier, Oct., 1963).
The crater was first explored in 1958
by an expedition of Belgian, French
and Japanese geophysicists and vol-
canologists. Right, Haroun Tazieff,
leader of the expedition, descends
into the crater on the end of a cable.
Photos © Haroun Tazieff

CRACKS IN A CONTINENT (Continued)
Geyser power and minerals in plenty
broken into narrow strips along vertical
fractures. In some places the valley
is occupied by large volcanoes, lakes,
or spreads of lake sediment. In the
Red Sea sector the valley is under¬
water.
The highlands adjacent to the rift
valleys are commonly broad plateaux
areas composed of lava, but high
ranges like the Ruwenzori mountains
of Western Uganda, and the Cheran-
gani range of Kenya are blocks of
ancient rocks which have been pushed
up to heights in excess of 4,300 metres
and 3,400 metres (14,000 and 11,000
feet) respectively during the formation
of the rift valley. Other high mountains,
which occur mainly on the flanks of
the valley, are the great volcanoes
such as Kilimanjaro (5,900 metres;
19,300 ft.), Mt. Kenya (5,200 metres;
17,050 ft.), and Mt. Elgon (4,300 metres;
14,100 ft.), and the Aberdare Range
(4,000 metres; 13,100 ft.).
It can be deduced that the original
land surface has been lowered to
below sea-level in the lower parts of
the rift valleys, and the total relative
displacement reaches to between
3,000-4,500 metres (10.000-15,000 feet)
in some areas.
Broadly, the movements of the
earth's crust during the formation of
the rift valleys were a general bulging
or up-lifting of wide areas, with the
rift valley traversing the up-lifted areas
as a strip of country which appears to
have collapsed (or been dragged
downwards) in relation to the general
rise of the area. While the movements
were in progress massive volcanic
action took place in several areas, and
continued almost to the present day.
The existence of a zone of earth¬
quake activity along the rift valleys
shows that the rifts are still active,
and the widespread occurrence of very
young volcanoes indicate that further
movement and volcanic activity can be
expected at any time.
In recognition of the importance of
studying the African rift system in
greater detail, a number of scientists
met last year in Nairobi, Kenya, under
the auspices of the International Upper
Mantle Project and Unesco (1), to
consider how to co-operate in further
research. Scientists from several Afri¬
can countries agreed to take part in a
programme aimed at producing an up-
to-date account of the geology and
geophysics of the rift system, and also
to stimulate new research.
Subsequently the Upper Mantle
Committee of the International Union
of Geodesy and Geophysics establish-
(1) The 34 scientists who took part came
from Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Uganda,
Sudan, Tanzania, Zambia, U.S.A., lapan,
U.S.S.R., Belgium, and U.K.
ed a Commission on the World Rift
System, and the group concerned
with the African rifts became one of
its subcommissions. The first steps
towards a programme of co-operation
in geology and geophysics for the
study of this most interesting feature of
the African continent have been taken.
Already some research is in progress,
and other projects are being planned.
The existing knowledge of the Afri¬
can rift valleys shows that study of
this structure is of more than purely
academic interest. Associated with the
rift system are a number of bodies of
igneous rock derived from great depths
which contain valuable metals such as
columbium and the rare earths, which
are of increasing importance in modern
technology.
As a result of the internal drainage
of the rift valleys and of their volcanic
activity there are great saline accumu¬
lations such as the sodium carbonate
and sodium chloride (salt) deposits of
lakes Magadi and Natron, on the
borders of Tanzania and Kenya, and
the potash deposits of the Afar
depression in Ethiopia. These deposits
are among the largest in the world
of these substances.
As a result of the very recent volca¬
nic activity in parts of the rift system
there are areas in which ground¬
water is heated. These geothermal
areas contain numerous hot springs,
14

geysers, steam jets and gas jets, and it
is possible that geothermal steam or
gas can be tapped in some of these
areas as a means of generating elec¬
tricity. Some preliminary investiga¬
tions of this possibility have already
been carried out in Uganda and Kenya,
and these potential energy sources
are of great interest because the
cost of electricity generated from
geothermal steam is normally less than
that from conventional fuels.
Although there have been few de¬
structive earthquakes in the rift zone,
it is recognized that there is a poten¬
tial hazard from earth tremors (2).
Studies of the nature and distribu¬
tion of the earthquake activity are indi¬
cated to determine the areas likely
to be affected. It is also desirable
to establish codes of building con¬
struction that will minimize damage in
the event of destructive earthquakes
taking place.
It is very encouraging that scientists
in some African countries can partici¬
pate in the International Upper Mantle
Project, and that they are contributing
to the solution of one of the major
problems of the nature and develop¬
ment of the earth's crust.
(2) A severe earthquake did in fact occur
in Uganda on March 20, 1966, causing 100
deaths and widespread damage.
Hundreds of thousands
of pink flamingoes
grace the waters
of Lake Nakuru (Kenya)
which has now become
one of the country's
national parks.
Although this lake '
has not been formed
in a crater,
it is surrounded by
volcanoes and its waters
are heavily impregnated»
with salts.
L vast underwater mountain range estimated at 40,000 miles (64,000
kilometres) in length, several hundred miles in width and often
10 to 15,000 feet (3,000 to 5,000 metres) high encircles our planet,
mainly in mid-ocean, but also meeting the continents in western North
America, the Gulf of Aden and northern Siberia. Part of this ridge
comes down the Atlantic, turns around Africa and runs through the
Indian Ocean into the «Arabian Sea, after which, via the Gulf of Aden,
it invades Africa along the Great Rift Valley (see map above). If, as
some scientists believe, the continents have drifted slowly apart during
geological time under the impulsion of convection currents coming from
deep within the earth's mantle and if the mid-oceanic ridges are the
zones along which the rupture of the original super-continent took
place, then the African rift system may actually be an early stage in
the break up of the African continent. If, as has also been suggested,
Arabia is moving slowly in a north-easterly direction, a new ocean
basin may be forming in the area of the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea
(see map below). Some scientists foresee that millions of years hence
parts of Africa may become detached islands, like Madagascar is today.
: Recent geophysical
research has produced
new data in support
of the theory that the
Red Sea and the Gulf
of Aden were formed
by the gradual drifting
of Arabia towards
the North-east, and
that this movement is
still going on at the
rate of about two
centimetres a year.
Direction and distance
of movement of
different parts of
Arabia are indicated
by arrows. Dotted
lines show Arabia's
original coastline
positions.
X*
****" <^
li
¿4
k*^J
V \ V
t -/\
Vy % \
w
ARABIA
I /
From "New Scientist", January 27, 1966
_-»:.
