I TH /L
SOCIAL SCIENCE
by Alva Myrdal
TOE very placing of SocialScience as one of the
major headings on the Unesco pro-
gramme has undoubtedly contributed
to the status of a venture of intellec-
tual conquest that is still in its pioneer
era : the study of the world man has
built for himself-the world of social
order and disorder.
Under the guidance and prompting of
Unesco, a whole series of new inter-
national organizations has been creat-
ed : The International Political Science
Association, The International Socio-
logical Association, the International
Economic Association and The Inter-
national Association of Legal Sciences,
to name but a few. These organiza-
tions have strengthened the social
scientists ai ! over the world in their
demands for a more prominent platform
ALVA MYRDAL, the distinguished Swedish
sociologist, was director of Unesco's De-
partment of Social Sciences from 1951 to
1955. After serving as Swedish ambassa-
dor to India and Ceylon, and later to Nepal,
she led the Swedish Delegation to the
U. N. Disarmament Conference in Geneva,
in 1962. She was chairman of the U. N.
Security Council group of experts who
reported on problems of apartheid in the
Republic of South Africa (see the Unesco
Courier, April 1965). She has written many
40 boons on sociological questions, including"Crisis in the Population Problem","City
Children","Are We Too Many"and
"Women's Two Roles" (with Viola Kline).
from which to be heard, for academic
recognition as a profession and for
meeting places to share their ideas.
In the past twenty years the social
sciences have received considerable
recognition as separate academic dis-
ciplines, and their findings have been
ever more widely sought. Today, for
example, the architect who is planning
a new school sits down with both the
educator and the psychologist to learn
what they have found out about the
nature of learning. What are the best
uses of space, colour and design to
create the optimum conditions for the
varied and various learning pro-
cesses ?
When an advertising firm plans a
new campaign for a product, the
sociologist is consulted. What kind of
approach, based on certain identifiable
patterns of behaviour, will have the
greatest effect ?
The national politician, before com-
pleting his election strategy, meets
with several social scientists to dis-
cuss the characteristics and issues of
concern to the people he will meet.
Large international corporations hire
psychologists as consultants to help
create and maintain a productive
ambiance between management and
labour.
In the past, the economist who gave
advice to kings, presidents, and dicta-
tors was an amateur. Today, he is
a highly-skilled professional who plays
an increasingly large role in the
development of his country and fre-
quently, due to the nature of our ever-
shrinking world and growing inter-
nationalism, other countries as well.
Kenneth E. Boulding, the inter-
nationally known economist writes
"... I venture to predict that the role
of the social sciences... has a
potential which exceeds by whole
orders of magnitude its present utili-
zation, and that this potential may
well be realized in the next generation.
The potential arises because of the
ability of the social sciences to develop
quantitative, statistical, well-sampled
and rigorously processed images of
the wold." (1)
In the area of economics, for exam-
ple, Boulding states that systems of
collecting and analyzing economic
statistics have become so sophisticat-
ed that the economist has literally been
forced to take on greater responsibil-
ity in the formation of economic poli-
cies.
Some of the substantial ! hchieve-
ments of the social sciences have
(1) Kenneth E. Boulding,"Reality-Testing and
Value Orientation", International Social Scien-
ce Journal, Vol. XVII, No 3, 1965.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 42


TWO DECADES OF SOCIAL
SCIENCE (continued)
If you're a racist
you're definitely
not with it !
come about as a result of social
scientists'teaming up with their col-
leagues in allied fields. In the area
of race prejudice, for example, the
social scientists have sought out the
extensive research of the biological
scientists in the fields of biology and
genetics in order to deal with the
numerous theories of genetic racial
superiority. Assisted by extensive
means of disseminating information,
the social scientists have helped bring
the results of their scientific studies
to the attention of the public and,
indeed, have encouraged the general
acceptance of the concept of a
scientific approach to the study of
social groups.
The uses to which social scientists
have been able to put the continuously
expanding knowledge of the biological
and physical scientists have no doubt
contributed to the increasingly educat-
ed view of the pubic towards such
questions. It is now considered
"backward"and"uneducated"in most
countries and societies to hold beliefs
of racial superiority and inferiority.
Where racism is on the wane, it is
because insight into the fundamental
equality of all human beings is being
taught and accepted.
In this particular endeavour, whose
goal is the eradication of race preju-
dice, Unesco has played an immensely
useful role. In 1949 and 1950, Unesco
acted as host to various conferences
of social, physical and biological
scientists. As a direct result, the
authoritative statement,"The Race
Concept", was published, followed by
a series of specialized studies pub-
licized in unusual numbers. During the
past three years, additional meetings
have been held to, complement that
study in light of the newest scholarship
available and to discuss the sig-
nificance of recent research on the
nature of racial prejudice.
The development and expanding
applications of the social science
approach to contemporary problems
are themselves valuable in that this
approach helps to combat mystical and
demagogic conceptions of society.
42 Though the extent to which the social4Z sciences hav  become accep able to
decision-makers varies, there is increas-
ing acceptance of the premise that
Children's minus arse free from rapist ideals (might) sunless they adsorb facial ant religious
prejudL ; yes from their elder. Four the past 20 yearns Unesco hats forked four the attainment
ant universal respect oaf human rights,"without distinction oaf rare, color, sox, language..."
Unesco's straggle hats bees maimed nowt oily against rapist doctrine, bust alto against
the altitudes ant wars oaf thanking ant their roosts. Swithin a veneration groat strides
halve bees mate four the emancipation oaf women (abode, girt student ant a veined woman
in a Moroccan tow). Unesco hats promote the clause oaf equal mights four women
in every afield. Once aim oaf its contention against discrimination in education ins tao encourage
<1he access oaf women ant gills tao schooling oaf wall kids. Unesco ins prepaying a 10-yea
programme for raising the status of women through education, science and culture.
societies function according to cer-
tain discernible laws.
If a social system is amenable to
improvement, the discovery of these
laws can provide the basis for
appropriate action to remedy shortcom-
ings. Thus the often destructive
element of passion and false beliefs
is greatly diminished, and through a
more scientific understanding, policy
can be more efficiently directed
towards constructive ends.
The area of the social sciences
which has had the widest acceptance
by decision-makers thus far, has been
that of socio-economic planning. At
one time, in most countries, the word
"planning"was abhorred. Deficit
financing was taboo, although econom-
ic crises and large scale unemploy-
ment were rampant. In recent years,
planning has gained recognition as one
of the major instruments against these
social maladies. Even the most de-
termined individualists can no longer
deny the impressive results which have
been obtained, through planning, in
all industrialized nations-with no
severe crises and with full or even
over-employment since the war.
Some countries, have, of course,
been committed to economic planning
for several decades. Yet, whether
they have capitalist or socialist econ-
omies, countries have been making
increased use of planning techniques.
Demographers, for example, are being
consulted for projections of future
needs for food resources, schools,
hospitals and leisure-time facilities.
The techniques of market study,
being developed and taught by busi-
ness schools, are acknowledged and
utilized by companies so that they can
forecast the needs of production.
Attempts are even being made to
introduce scientific instrumentalities
(operation analysis, simulation, models,
statistics and mathematics) to the
disciplines of history and political
science.
Hitherto less developed countries,
often starting out on new courses of
economic and social development,
offer another sign of the remarkable
impact of scientific thinking on socio-
economic policies. Virtually all of
these countries have, in their early
stages of development, been examin-
ing their short-term and long-term

plans in order to determine systematic
programmes for growth. The function
of these planners is to enable their
governments to steer progress in an
organized and systematic fashion
through the maze of interdependent
channels through which economic life
flows.
That not all plans can be implement-
ed with any assurance of success,
however, is sadly apparent. In the
underdeveloped societies, the tasks in
relation to available resources are
sometimes superhumanly difficult to
reconcile. Although a great deal of
information has been accumulated
over the past twenty years, progress
has often been disappointing. The
real achievement in these societies,
however, is the knowledge that pro-
gress cannot be attained through
separate attacks on economic, social
and cultural problems ; success can
only come through planning frontal
attacks on these areas as a whole.
New demands, therefore, must now
be made on the social scientists. New
theories and new institutional studies,
devoted to the poverty-ridden areas
of the world, must now be sought and
examined. Yet, of course, the final
responsibility for attaining the goals
which have been outlined for the U. N.
Development Decade does not rest
with the social scientists. It rests,
instead, with those wielding political
power, men who are, despite good
advice from scientists, too often acting
as politicians rather than as statesmen,
too often considering only short-term
advantages instead of the needs of
the future.
Mankind is still seized from time
to time, with self-destructive con-
vulsions. The most elementary analy-
ses show, however, that using violence
is irrational ; a counter-productive way
of solving problems or harmonizing
competing interests. Causes of vio-
lence are, moreover, primitive panick-
ing, where those concerned become
unmindful of the tremendous costs in
both human and economic resources.
In other words, men too often arrive at
their most fateful decisions in a manner
which can best be described as pre-
scientific.
To the problems of conflict of war
and peace, social science has devoted,
comparatively speaking, little attention
and energy. This lack can be explain-
ed in terms of supply and demand ; in
these fields policy-makers are least
willing to take any advice from the
scientists. In his analysis of the
problem, Professor Boulding attributes
this in part to"the fact that the
decision-makers... are for the most
part insulated from the social sciences
by their own training and tradition...
On the whole, foreign offices and
state departments are manned by
people trained in literature and history,
or even the classical languages, and
for the most part unacquainted with
mathematics or the sciences, least of
all the social sciences."
The results provide a striking con-
trast to the two areas discussed
earlier. In socio-economic planning,
for example, the decision-makers have
a confidence nearing supernatural
proportions in the social scientists. In
regard to racial and other differences
which have been the objects of pre-
judice, the decision-makers have been
pressed to accept the results of
scientific investigations. But in relation
to war and peace, those who govern
states seem to prefer blindness and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
4
r
n
1
I
i 

TWO DECADES OF SOCIAL
SCIENCE (Continued)
A new look
at the causes
of conflicts
ignorance to recognition and accept-
ance of the scientific approach.
While this judgement, that social
science has played a remarkably weak
role in policy-making, is becoming less
and less true, within Unesco itself
there is evidence that the pro-
nouncements of the social scientists
are not being taken as seriously as
they would wish. The project"Ten-
sions Affecting International Under-
standing", for exampte, must be credit-
ed as a true pioneering effort, though it
was not particularly well received or
supported, and, in fact, Unesco's mem-
ber states scarcely gave it the chance
to prove its validity. Some insight
may be gained into the failures of
the study through its critics, who
felt the project was too narrow in its
approach, since it centred on the
psychological issues, and the dictum
that"wars begin in the minds of
men".
Where social scientists are begin-
ning to make key contributions, how-
ever, are in the new institutes of
peace and strategy, and in the conflict
studies that are being developed in
countries throughout the world.
New centres of research for studies
of conflicts and conflict resolutions, of
peace-keeping techniques, of inter-
cultural integration, and many others
are developing and their findings must,
of necessity, be listened to by the
decision-makers.
Our imagination can scarcely
conceive of how different the world
could look if the constructive energies
of hundreds of thousands of scientists
and technicians were turned from
refining the instruments of death to
producing wealth and improving our
social structures all over the world.
There is no doubt that if scientific
thinking, on a sufficiently large scale,
were to be devoted to the problems
in which this world has become
entangled, an era might begin more
remarkable than any we have yet seen,
for technological growth and for keep-
ing the peace ; for forging mutuality
of interests as revolutionary as any of
our engineering wonders ; for under-
standing the pathology of conflict ; for
curing social ills as important and
destructive as physical ones, against
which medicine has made such dra-
matic advances.
44 Let us remember that social science
has not yet had a chance to begin
to work on all the social problems,
and that these problems are posing
a more deadly threat to our world
every day. This work cannot begin
too soon.
