THE WHITE BIRD, an etching and aquatint
by the French painter, Georges Braque,
one of 12 works executed
by the artist when he was 80 (in 1962)
for a remarkable art book,
"The Order of Birds".
To accompany the engravings,
the French poet and Nobel
prizewinner, St John Perse,
wrote a poetical meditation on birds, which
he said, "preserve among
us like a very pure echo
something of the song of creation."

Man through his art
BEAUTY AND
THE BEAST
by Pauline Bentley HROUGHOUT every de¬
gree of civilization and
beyond the division of time and envir¬
onment, race or culture, man has al¬
ways known one perennial link of
common experience: his world has
been the dwelling place also of ani¬
mals.
Since his earliest* beginnings he has
used these sharers of his planet to
help him on the long haul of human
progress. They have provided him
with food and warmth and weapons.
He has domesticated them and put
them to work for him in peace and
war; he has used them in his quest
for knowledge and mastery; he has
formed societies to protect and hunt
them, to study and worship them;
there is no facet of his endeavours
whether for sport, magic, sustenance
or learning that has not been affected
by the existence of animals.
During this long and ancient part¬
nership man the artist has also fed
his imagination and sought inspiration
from the same source. He has taken
whatever implement lay to his hand to
depict the animals around him and in
so doing he has interpreted them not
only to himself and us, but left behind
a unique personal testimonial.
"It is the achievements in the visual
arts that have survived," writes Miss
Jacquetta Hawkes, the celebrated
archaeologist, "which brings us the
first insights into the imaginative lives
of our primitive forebears." Miss
Hawkes is writing here on the Palaeo¬
lithic cave paintings in the Dordogne,
France, in the opening chapters of
CONT'D ON PAGE 29
27

k- TK
% 1
,>*,"<
dseuc*
- *
*te
V.v
v
3*ry
&
5®
£v4V
/* #

BEAUTY AND THE BEAST (Cont'd)
© Anderson-Glraudon, Paris
METAMORPHOSIS OF THE HORSE
In the evolution from prehistory to civilization, man's relationship with animals has been
completely transformed. The change is easily distinguished In the way man the artist
has depicted his animal subjects, as witness these three horse's head sculptures.
Opposite page, top, The Horse of Commarque, in the Dordogne, France.
Some 13,000 years before the Christian era, a prehistoric artist used the natural indentation
of the rock in a narrow underground gallery to create this wild untamed horse
with sensitive nostrils a horse before Its enslavement to man.
Bottom, the Moon Horse of the Parthenon frieze In Athens, carved In marble
by the 5th century B.C. sculptor, Phidias. Found among the mutilated fragments
of the pediment, and now in the British Museum, it is the head of one of the horses
attached to the chariot of Selene, goddess of the moon. This is a modern,
domesticated animal, completely subjugated by man. Above, head of the bronze
equestrian statue of the Colleoni monument In Venice, carved by Andrea Verrocchio
in the late 15th century. The gentle, almost pensive head shows that this now docile
creature has become a companion to man.
The winged
master
of the airs

cave paintings, "takes us at one leap
to the beginning of all art. The Paleo¬
lithic tribesman, like all hunters, were
in an ambiguous position in relation to
their animals. They felt a strong emo¬
tion towards them and accepted the
closest kinship with them, yet they had
to kill them. Indeed the marvellous
animal art might be said to be a kind
of propitiary gesture, a wordless state¬
ment of admiration."
This kinship was to be transformed
as man lost his "direct line" to Nature.
The animal dominates prehistoric art
but when man came to organize himself
into settled communities he first subju¬
gated, then domesticated his animals.
This changed relationship can easily
be distinguished in the course of man's
artistic treatment of his animal subject.
It is far cry from the mystical simplicity
of the Lascaux "Horse with Feathered
Darts" to the sophisticated deliberation
of the "wounded lioness" of an Assy¬
rian hunting stone relief of 1000-612
B.C.
The sculptural splendour of the
"Moon Horse" of the Parthenon frieze,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

30
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST (Cont'd)
Imagery
of beliefs
myths and ideals
as discussed by Professor François
Chamoux of the Sorbonne in Paris in
this book, is very distant in every
aspect except as subject matter, from
the Horse of Commarque, a seven foot
long relief made some 13,000 years be¬
fore the Christian era.
Here, an artist largely using the na¬
tural indentation of the rock, created
what Professor Giedion calls "a well-
nigh breathing ¡mage, yet one which
eludes our grasp. A horse which
blooms out of the rock in absolute
freedom, a horse before its enslave¬
ment to man."
Though Greek classicism saw the
apotheosis of man over animal, the
artist continued to draw from the ani¬
mal world his illustrations for his
beliefs and history, his myths and
ideals. Sixth century Chinese wall
paintings in the Tum Huang caves
depict the Buddha legend with ani¬
mals; Coptic weavers of the third to
fifth centuries A.D. used the birds and
fishes of their familiar river Nile as a
theme for decoration. The animal ima¬
gery of the middle ages was both
extraordinarily powerful and full of
humour; the animal in Mexican and
African art has a peculiarly potent
place.
In the 19th century the French paint¬
er, Eugène Delacroix, described in his
diary a visit to the Natural History Mu¬
seum and the Jardin des Plantes in
Paris. "What an immense variety of
animals and species of different shapes
and functions. And at every turn I saw
what we call deformity side by side with
what seems to us to be beauty and
grace of form. Why is it that these
things have stirred me so much? I had
a feeling of happiness as soon as I
entered the place. . . Can it be because
I have gone outside the everyday
thoughts that are my world; away from
the street that is my entire universe?
How necessary it is to stick one's head
out of doors and try to read from the
book of life that has nothing in common
with cities and the works of man. . ."
For now there has arisen what Pro¬
fessor Otto von Simson of Die Frei
Universität, Berlin, in his introduction
to this book calls "the second aliena¬
tion from nature the replacement of
the animal by science, by the machine."
The Importance of the animal to an
artist working in a world where animals
are becoming rarer needs no stressing,
but scientific progress is no indication
that this age-old communion between
man and animal need deteriorate. It
seems significant that the last creature
chosen in the book should be Braque's
"White Bird," that winged master of the
airs whose flight in man's imagination
can bring him within the reaches of
new worlds.
Washington D.C.
THE BEAR TAMER. Bronze statuette from China (5th-4th century B.C.) Since
ancient times the Chinese have been fond of acrobatic
performances by men and animals. Looking at this bear
and Its youthful tamer, we can easily Imagine the delight of an audience at the
dexterity of an animal which can be taught to juggle, walk a tight-rope, ride a rolling sphere
and also, as the statuette shows, balance itself on top of a pole.
