\K¡üHb&J5m¡
i
ffifl K
l8*il
From behind a plastic
planisphere, specialist
at the Brétigny aero¬
space centre. France,
indicates (on right)
point where French
FR-1 satellite went into
orbit, and (on left)
where it passed over
Europe on orbit one.
0 P. Lei lèvre
fê*£
mr'i
' :
;..
\
joy Eugène Pepin
What happens if a
spaceship launched
by one country
lands in another?
Can any nation
claim sovereignty
on the moon?
What are the
responsabilities
of a country
whose satellite
collides with
a communications

satellite placed
in orbit by
another country?
SPACE FLIGHT
AND THE RULE
OF LAW
J:IURISTS did not wait for
the launching of the first
Sputnik, on October 4, 1957, before
they started considering the problems
which would arise as a result of the
exploration and utilization of space
by artificial satellites. The articles and
discussions of the "pre-Sputnik" era,
however dealt mainly with theoretical
questions, such as the scope and lim¬
its of national sovereignty in space.
Very soon, Soviet and American
space successes forced jurists to con¬
sider more practical problems resulting
from the progress of the new science
of astronautics. International and na¬
tional associations of jurists studied
and discussed the legal aspects of
EUGENE PEPIN, President of the Inter¬
national Institute of Space Law (Inter¬
national Astronautical Federation) is pro¬
fessor of air and space law at the
Institut des Relations Internationales
Contemporaines, Paris. He was formerly
director of the Legal Department of the
International Civil Aviation Organization.
space flight, and reported their findings
to various international bodies.
On December 13, 1958, the United
Nations General Assembly, recogniz¬
ing the common interest of mankind
in the exploration and use of outer
space, established an ad hoc Com¬
mittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, and included on the list of the
technical studies to be undertaken a
survey of the nature of legal problems
which might arise in carrying out pro¬
grammes of space exploration.
The first legal principles for guidance
in the exploration and use of outer
space were adopted by the U.N. Gen¬
eral Assembly on December 20, 1961,
in a resolution which affirmed that:
International law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, ap¬
plies to outer space and celestial
bodies.
Outer space and celestial bodies
are free for exploration and use by n
all states in conformity with inter- ' «
national law and are not subject to
national appropriation.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SPACE LAW (Cont'd)
No national sovereignty in space
18
In this resolution, the General As¬
sembly, envisaging the United Nations
as a focal point for international co¬
operation in the peaceful exploration
and use of outer space, called upon
states launching objects into orbit to
give the United Nations full informa¬
tion for keeping a public register of
launchings.
The need for adding to the two basic
principles proclaimed in this resolution
became evident in March 1962, at the
first meeting of the legal sub-commit¬
tee of the new permanent Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space. Whilst priority was given to
two important problems assistance to
astronauts and space vehicles and
responsibility for damage resulting
from space activities the Soviet Dele¬
gation submitted a draft declaration of
the principles which should govern the
activities of states in outer space, to
be signed by all countries. At subse¬
quent sessions, further lists of general
principles were submitted by the
United Arab Republic, the United King¬
dom and the United States of America.
HE first question to be
settled was that of the
general legal principles. In 1963, the
U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space and its legal sub¬
committee discussed at length not only
the principles themselves, but also the
form in which to embody them: as an
agreement for signature or as a
General Assembly resolution. A com¬
promise text was drafted and present¬
ed to the 1963 U.N. General Assembly,
which adopted it unanimously. This
was the Solemn Declaration of Dec¬
ember 13, of the "Legal Principles Gov¬
erning the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space."
It did not, however, satisfy all states,
some of which regarded it merely as
a recommendation; so the General
Assembly recommended that the Com¬
mittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space consider the possibility of in¬
corporating these principles in an
international agreement.
This Declaration of 1963 is both a
reasonable compromise calculated to
unite and not divide members of the
United Nations, and, at the same time
a further illustration of international co¬
operation in space activities, comple¬
menting the resolution banning nuclear
weapons in space, which was adopted
by acclamation on October 17, 1963.
This called on states to refrain from
placing in orbit around the earth any
objects carrying nuclear weapons or
any other kinds of weapons of mass
destruction, or stationing such weapons
in outer space in any other man¬
ner; also to refrain from encouraging
or in any way participating in such
activities.
The U.N. Declaration endorses the
legal principles for guidance in the
exploration and use of space adopted
In 1961, and defines them in greater
detail. The main principle proclaimed
is, as before, that all nations shall be
free and equal as regards the explor¬
ation and use of outer space and the
celestial bodies, providing that:
H the exploration and use of outer
space shall be carried on for the
benefit and in the interests of all
mankind;
the activities of states in the explor¬
ation and use of outer space shall
be carried on in accordance with
international law, including the Char¬
ter of the United Nations, in the in¬
terest of maintaining international
peace and promoting international
co-operation and understanding;
states shall be guided in their activ¬
ities by the principle of co-opera¬
tion and mutual assistance and shall
conduct them with due regard for
the interests of other states.
The Declaration also proclaims that
outer space and celestial bodies are
not subject to national appropriation by
claim of sovereignty, by means of use
or occupation, or by any other means.
The remaining articles contain a brief
enumeration of other principles to be
proclaimed in subsequent conventions.
Another problem which, since the
beginning of the space age, has pre¬
occupied countries engaged in space
research is that of giving aid to astro¬
nauts and space vehicles in diffi¬
culty and assisting their return. The
Declaration contains provisions on
these points.
As regards space vehicles the Dec¬
laration states that ownership of
objects launched Into outer space, and
of their component parts, is in no way
affected by their passage through
outer space or by their return to the
earth, and it stipulates that such ob¬
jects or their parts found beyond the
limits of the country of registry shall
be returned to that country, which
shall furnish identifying data upon re¬
quest before repatriation takes place.
As for astronauts, they should be
regarded them as envoys of mankind
in 'outer space and therefore given
every possible assistance in the event
of accident, distress, or emergency
landing on the territory of a foreign
state or on the high seas. Astronauts
who make such a landing shall be
safely and promptly returned to the
state of registry of their space vehicle.
FOR the application of these
principles detailed provi¬
sions will have to be laid down. A
number of draft conventions have been
submitted to the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, but no
definite text has yet been drafted.
Although the need for rendering
assistance to astronauts in difficulties
is generally accepted, discussion con¬
tinues as to whether astronauts should
be returned to the state of registry of
their space vehicle, and whether such
vehicles or their components should
be returned to the country of origin in
all circumstances, or only when launch¬
ings are made in conformance with
the general principles of the Declar¬
ation of 1963.
The problem of the responsibility
for damages resulting from activities
in outer space has now ceased to be
a theoretical one. Objects launched
into space or fragments from them can
cause damage when they fall back to
the earth. For instance in November
1960 cattle were killed near the village
of Olguin, Cuba, by debris from a
rocket; and fragments of rockets have
been found on the ground on several
occasions, particularly in Canada, the
United States and South Africa. With
more and more objects (rocket-stages,
CONT'D ON PAGE 35
© NASA, Washington
COLOUR PAGE, OPPOSITE: Turbulent cloud formations reveal presence
of storm approaching the Moroccan coast near Agadir in this photograph
taken from space by U.S. astronauts Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad,
during their eight-day Gemini 5 mission in August 1965. Today meteorol¬
ogists are no longer confined to a "worm's eye" view of the weather. The
first meteorological satellite launched in 1960 televised over 22,000 photo¬
graphs of global weather conditions in eleven weeks.

SPACE FLIGHT AND THE RULE OF LAW
Continued from page 18
Who put me into orbit the
wrong way round?
O Plem
What did I do with my space-
pilot's licence?
Lookl the Martian canals are
simply abstract paintings.
satellites, fragments) circulating in out¬
er space and liable, sooner or later, to
fall back to earth, the danger of their
colliding either with other similar ob¬
jects or with space vehicles traversing
the atmosphere will increase as time
goes on.
The 1963 Declaration already pro¬
claims, as a general principle, that each
state which launches or originates the
launching of an object into outer
space and each state from whose terri¬
tory or installations an object is launch¬
ed, is Internationally liable for damage
to a foreign state or to persons or
property within its borders by such
object or its parts, whether the dam¬
age is caused on the earth, in the air,
or In outer space.
This provision in general terms needs
to be followed up by an international
convention such as that which the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space is at present engaged in
drafting, on the basis of proposals
submitted by Belgium, Hungary and
the United States. The convention
will need to define what is meant by
"damage" (material damage, moral
damage, financial loss and so on). The
extent of liability will also have to be
specified. Should provision be made
for exemption or attenuation? Is lia¬
bility to be limited? How is liability
to be shared out in the event of joint
enterprises by several states?
In the case of launchings carried
out by an international organization,
who will be responsible for damage
caused? The Declaration of 1963
simply states that "responsibility for
compliance with the principles set
forth in this Declaration shall be borne
by the international organization and
by the states participating in it." Is
provision to be made for joint respon¬
sibility? Procedures to be followed
to obtain compensation for damages
will also have to be drawn up.
In addition to these two important
legal questions, now being considered,
the Declaration mentions various others
for which international agreements will
doubtless be necessary. There is, for
instance, the principle whereby states
shall conduct their activities in outer
space with due regard for the corres¬
ponding interests of other states. This
provision was included on account of
certain experiments in the past which
gave rise to some agitation amongst
the users of space, in particular astron¬
omers.
The Declaration outlines an arrange¬
ment whereby if a state believes
that an activity or experiment in space
which it or its citizens plan to carry
out might interfere with the peaceful
exploration and use of space by other
states, it should first consult them.
Conversely, such consultations could
also be requested by states if they
considered that certain activities pro¬
posed by other states might interfere
with the peaceful exploration and use
of space. However, this text lacks
precision, and lays down no specific
procedure for such consultations or
for following them up.
HE broader principle of
ensuring that certain ex¬
periments cause no harm to mankind
as a whole has been the subject of
detailed studies both at the Institute of
International Law in Brussels and at the
David Davies Memorial Institute of
International Studies in London. Both
have stressed the danger that might
result from any modifications of the
earth or the celestial bodies, their
atmosphere or space itself, by the in¬
troduction of elements liable to upset
the existing equilibrium, such as by
changing the climate or meteorological
conditions of specific regions.
The British institute has drawn up
various regulations designed to pro¬
vide against and sanction any such
activities. Here again, a convention
is called for; also a convention to
prevent biological, radiological or
chemical contamination of outer space
and the celestial bodies by vehicles
from the earth and vice-versa.
With the installation, in the near
future, of manned scientific stations
first on the moon and subsequently
on other celestial bodies, the legal
status of such stations, will naturally
have to be considered. In view of the
general principles proclaimed in the
Declaration of 1963 the installation of
such stations will not, of course,
constitute grounds for national appro¬
priation of the moon or celestial
bodies, or even of the particular area
on which such stations are located.
35
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Space flight and the rule of law (Cont'd)
36
The David Davies Memorial Institute
of International Studies has suggested
that these stations should be placed
as soon as possible under United
Nations control, but that the state
which has established, or permitted
its nationals to establish such a station
should retain jurisdiction over all
persons inhabiting it, and over such of
the surrounding area as has to be
traversed for the use and upkeep of
the station.
In the event of two stations
belonging to different states being
installed in close proximity on a celes¬
tial body, it would be essential to
define their respective fields of compe¬
tence and also to take certain other
measures designed in particular to
prevent interferences in their radio
communications.
The status of lunar or planetary
stations, and also of space platforms,
now presents an urgent legal problem
for jurists to take into consideration.
Other legal problems either have
arisen or will arise as a result of the
recent development of communications
by satellite, a new system which
clearly holds great promise not only
as a means for supplementing and
facilitating communications by the trad¬
itional methods, but also for the rapid
spreading of education and devel¬
opment of cultural exchanges. Such
communications will, however, require

the elaboration of new laws, espec¬
ially when it becomes possible for
radio and television signals transmitted
from some part of the earth to be
received direct, via a satellite, at any
other point on the earth.
Even at the present stage in the
development of telecommunications,
numerous legal difficulties have arisen,
for which a solutions must be found.
Some of these difficulties were dis¬
cussed recently at a meeting of experts
on the use of space communications
by the mass media, held at Unesco
Headquarters, in December 1965.
They are due, for instance, to such
things as differences in the laws on
the use of satellites in transmitter and
receiver countries, differences in libel
laws, variations in copyright laws
according to whether or not countries
are parties to the copyright conven¬
tions, and whether or not advertising
is allowed in radio programmes.
There will be a need for special
regulations governing the composition
of programmes for universal transmis¬
sion, so as to avoid infringing certain
regulations in force. The Preamble to
the Declaration of December 13, 1963
recalls that a General Assembly resol¬
ution of November 3, 1947, which
condemned propaganda designed or
likely to provoke or encourage any
threat to the peace or act of aggres¬
sion, is applicable to outer space.
As the science of astronautics
achieves new successes in the con¬
quest of space, fresh legal problems __
will arise, in addition to those outlined g/
above, calling for solution by wide
international co-operation.
