UNESCO
IN 50 QUESTIONS
D Has Unesco', s membershipincrease in the past 20 years ?
It has increased sixfold. Unesco (the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) legally
came into being on November 4, 1946, when twenty states
ratified the Constitution which had been drawn up at the
London Conference a year earlier. Today Unesco has
120 member states. Many of these are young nations
that cast off colonial rule and set out to determine their
own destinies. The past two decades have seen the birth
of some sixty new nations, principally in Africa, the Middle
East and Asia. These nations want not only political
freedom for their people but a higher standard of living
for themselves and their chi ! dren. This"revolution of rising
expectations", as it has been called, has had a profound
effect on the evolution of the work of Unesco and the
whole United Nations family in recent years.
 How does Unesco fit into the
U United Nations family ?
Unesco is a specialized agency of the United Nations
but both constitutionally and financially it is independent of
the United Nations though its work is co-ordinated with
the U. N. and the other specialized agencies through the
U. N. Economic and Social Council.
This independence has a very practical importance
because experience has shown that states which may differ
politically and ideologically in the United Nations itself are
able and indeed eager to work closely together in such
areas as education, science and culture (Unesco), health
and sanitation (WHO), or food and agricu ! ture (FAO).
Furthermore, this working together can itself help to break
down the barriers of suspicion and distrust which divide
mankind.
m What are Unesco's main aims
ant purposes ?
To help build a solid foundation for peace. Peace is
the central purpose of the entire United Nations family but
it is approached in different ways by different members of
the family. The U. N. itself concentrates largely on the
political aspects of peace and collective security. Its main
concern is the keeping of peace-the prevention of armed
conflict, although it has an abiding interest in social
questions through the Economic and Social Council.
Unesco, on the other hand, and the other specialized
agencies of the U. N., are concerned with building peace,
laying the foundations for lasting peace through action in
the areas of their special competence.
Ð How does Unesco contribute towold peace ?
Unesco contributes to world peace in three principal
ways : First, by encouraging international intellectual
collaboration in the fields of education, science, culture
and mass communication. Nations which are working
together for the common good of mankind are less likely
to be interested in fighting one another.
Secondly, by furnishing operational assistance to its
member states to aid in their social and economic develop-
ment, in order to reduce the glaring inequalities in standards
of living that are a major cause of international tensions
and war.
Thirdly, through ethical action in favour of human rights
and international understanding. As Unesco's Constitution
notes :"a peace based exclusively upon political and econo-
mic arrangements of governments would not be a peace
which could secure the unanimous, lasting and sincere
support of the peoples of the world, and peace must
therefore be founded, if it is not to fail, upon the intellectual
and moral solidarity of mankind."
R What is Unesco's budget and
Eft who pays for it ?
Unesco's programme and budget are determined and
voted by the General Conference which meets every two
years. The delegates to the General Conference are official
representatives of all the governments belonging to Unesco,
and each state contributes to Unesco's budget according
to a scale based on gross national product.
Unesco's first budget for 1947 totalled $7, 000, 000. Its
proposed budget for the two year period 1967-68 is
$62, 000, 000.
Unesco also has at its disposal extra-budgetary funds
which have increased sharply in recent years lentil they
are now as great as Unesco's regular budget. A total of
over $80 million'has been allocated to Unesco under
the United Nations Technical Assistance Programme since
it was launched in 1950 to aid economic and social develop-
ment. And Unesco has already received more than $91
million under the United Nations Special Fund which was
created in 1960 to encourage the flow of investment capital
52

needed for economic expansion. It is largely thanks to
these two major sources of economic and social aid
(brought together and integrated as the United Nations
Development Programme on January 1, 1966) that Unesco
is able to finance its operational action.
Unesco has been able to extend its prog, ramme still
further, especially in the field of education, by carrying
out projects in co-operation with other institutions which
have financed these activities. Three examples : The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
(over $76 million in 15 years) ; The United Nations Children's
Fund ($21 million in four years) ; The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (over $50 million in loans
to member states).
ttJttSt) JTn [< : 3hM ! Nr [<1jU ! ! r ? 1).
. intellectual
^.
'co-operation
1 1 -. 1
A How does Unesco promote
I ! J international intellectual
co-operation ?
Three main tasks are assigned to Unesco by its Consti-
tution :"To increase and diffuse knowledge ; give fresh
impulse to popular education and to the spread of
knowledge ; collaborate in the work of advancing the mutual
knowledge and understanding of peoples."
International intellectual co-operation was thus the
function that was uppermost in the minds of the men who
founded Unesco, and it includes the sorts of activities which
most people generally associate with Unesco-meetings
of experts and international conferences on major problems ;
co-ordination of international research programmes ; sta-
tistical and documentation services ; specialized publications
including source books and reference works ; and the
elaboration of international agreements in the fields of
education, science, culture and mass communications. In
the words of its present Director-Genera !, Rene Maheu,
Unesco set out to develop and co-ordinate"the intellectual
infrastructure of modern civilization in its broad univer-
sality."
CONTINUED ON PAGE 62 Photo &commat; Sciaky

D What do the Unesco Nationalcommissions do ?
Unesco differs from most of the U. N. specialized
agencies in that it is closely linked to the governments
and the peoples of its member states through National
Commissions for Unesco set up in virtually every country
(112 out of 120 Unesco member states). These Commis-
sions have come to play an indispensable role not only as
consultative and liaison bodies with national groups
interested in education, science, culture and mass commu-
nications, but in the actual execution of Unesco's pro-
gramme on the national and regional level.
National Commissions are closely linked with the govern-
ment services of their own country, with public and private
institutions as well as with the Nationat Commissions of
other Unesco member states particularly on a regional
basis. They bring together the most eminent people in
education, science and the arts, and are increasingly
becoming a key means at Unesco's disposal for the
organizing of seminars and training courses, regional or
international meetings, the appointment of experts, spe-
cialists and delegates, the carrying out of national surveys
and inquiries, the preparation of special projects as well
as regional technical aid programmes and a host of other
activities which make Unesco a living reality and enable it
to fulfil its mission by reaching down to all levels of
the population in its member states. (The Russian, Arabic,
Italian and Japanese editions of the. Unesco Courier, for
instance, are produced under the direct auspices of the
National Commissions of the U. S. S. R., the UAR., Italy and
Japan. The German edition is the co-operative effort of
the National Commissions of Switzerland, Austria and the
Federal Republic of Germany.)
iii How does Unesco work with
I ! J non-governmental organizations ?
Experience acquired during the 20 years of Unesco's
existence has demonstrated clearly that co-operation
between Unesco and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) is one of Unesco's most effective means of action.
This co-operation has placed at the disposal of Unesco
documentation assembled by NGOs in all fields of Unesco's
activities. It has secured the services of a vast network
of specialists throughout the word who are able to provide
effective collaboration and whose aims, ideals and activities
are closely linked with those of Unesco. It has relieved
Unesco of important tasks which could only have been
undertaken at considerable expense and with a much
larger staff. And it has enabled Unesco to reach a wide
and varied public whose friendly interest affords valuable
support.
The international NGOs include specialized bodies such
as the World Confederation of Organizations of the
Teaching Profession, the International Council of Scientific
Unions, the International Social Science Council and NGOs
dealing with universities, philosophy, theatre, music,
museums, libraries, monuments, etc... as well as numerous
non-specialized organizations, such as the World Fede-
ration of United Nations Associations which have given
Unesco continued support.
At present 250 educational, scientific and cultural non-
governmental organizations representing the different cultu-
ral regions of the world co-operate closely with Unesco in
the execution of its programme. During 1965 alone subven-
tions totalling $1, 393, 500 were granted to 32 NGOs, and
in 1965 contracts with 72 non-governmental organizations
amounted to a total of $478, 000. In addition Unesco granted
financial assistance to five new projects carried out by
NGOs under the scheme of associated youth activities.
Unesco has long urged the expansion of NGOs in Asia,
Africa and Latin America, and the progress which has
been'made in recent years, notably in the number of
national bodies affiliated with the non-governmental
organizations and in meetings held by them in Asia, Africa
and Latin America are extremely heartening. Here Unesco
member states and National Commissions have had an
increasingly important role to play in encouraging the
formation in their own countries of groups of educators,
scholars, intellectuals and specialists who can join existing
non-governmental organizations and thus help to make
these bodies effectively more international.
fm Research is a major factor in
my scientific devetopment. What
has Unesco done in this field ?
When Unesco was first established in 1946, the interna-
tional scientific community had been shattered by theevents of World War II. One of Unesco's first tasks was
to restore its unity. This was done first of all by reinforcing
the structure and helping to intensify the research and
other work of the International Council of Scientific Unions
(tCSU) and by creating such organizations as the Council
UNESCO IN 50 QUESTIONS (Continuedfrompage53)
62
iris Why does Unesco attach such
Importance to international
congresses and seminars ?
Unesco attaches the utmost importance to international
conferences and seminars as one of the most effective
means of bringing together scientists, scholars and other
specialists from all over the world. These meetings
encourage the free flow and exchange of ideas and infor-
mation, and promote mutual discussion. They have been
instrumental in helping to launch large-scale programmes
of international co-operation.
In recent years major conferences have been convened
on information processing (1959), adult education (1960),
oceanography (1960), hydrology (1964), problems of youth
(1964), the eradication of illiteracy (1965). Major regional
conferences for Asia, the Arab States, Africa and Latin
America have dealt with educational planning and its rela-
tionship to economic and social development, the conser-
vation and exploitation of natural resources, the application
of science and technology to development, and the develop-
ment of the mass media.

for International Organizations of Medical Sciences and
the Union of International Engineering Organizations.
Unesco helped initiate a series of international research
projects which were not only extremely fruitful in their
scientific results but also helped create a spirit of mutual
co-operation and understanding.
In 1952, Unesco helped set up the European Centre for
Nuclear Research (CERN) which has done pioneer work in
the exploration of the atom for peaceful purposes. The
International Geophysical Year, initiated by ICSU and
sponsored by Unesco, was a world-wide scientific venture
involving more than 80 nations in a common effort. The
International Hydrological Decade, initiated by Unesco, is
co-ordinating research and the collection of data on water
resources around the world. And the Inter-governmental
Oceanographic Commission has brought about interna-
tional collaboration in the investigation of the oceans.
con Oceanography and hydrologyL/J have become two major bran-
ches of world science. What has
been Unesco's role in promoting
co-operation in these fields ?
A new type of co-operation appeared in 1960 with the
creation of the Inter-governmental Oceanographic Commis-
sion, followed in 1964 by that of the Co-ordinating Council
for the International Hydrological Decade. Through these
bodies, which are integrated into Unesco, countries can
tailor their own work to fit into mutually agreed research
and study programmes. They can thus place greater
resources and facilities at the disposal of the international
community without giving up the autonomy of their own
undertakings.
Oceanography provides an illustration of how Unesco,
with a comparatively small budget, can accomptish impres-
sive results through its work of direction and co-ordination.
Unesco has an oceanography budget of only $250, 000 a
year, yet it co-ordinates international projects totalling more
than $15, 000, 000 annually.
One of the most spectacular successes of the Unesco
oceanography effort was the International Indian Ocean
Expedition, 1959-1965. This ocean covers roughly 14 per
cent of the world's surface, and in the countries
surrounding it live more than 700 million people, almost
a quarter of the earth's population. Yet in 1959, scientists
literally knew more about the near side of the moon than
they knew about this vast sea.
The six-year research programme which ended last
year explored every facet of the Indian Ocean-topography
of the ocean floor, currents, winds, water temperatures and
salinity, plant life and animal life. Taking part in the effort
were 40 oceanographic vessels from 15 nations, and
scientists and marine biological stations from 25 countries.
The data from this great expedition are now being pro-
cessed and anatysed, but it is already clear that the Indian
Ocean is a practically inexhaustible source of food for
the peoples of the world, and the impact of this one
research effort will be felt for generations to come.
For the Hydrological Decade launched in 1965, a promis-
ing start has been made with the creation of hydrological
committees in 90 countries in the international effort to
obtain better knowledge of the earth's water cycle to meet
the world's growing water shortage.
m Unesco has sponsored many
IIiJ international agreements. What
are some of the important ones ?
The Universal Copyright Convention (ratified by 53 states) ;
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the
Event of Armed Conflict (53 ratifications) ; Convention
against Discrimination in Education (30 ratifications) ; Agree-
ment on the Importation of Educational, Scientific and Cul-
tural Materials (49 ratifications).
Unesco and the International Labour Organization are
now preparing a Recommendation on the professional,
social and economic status of teachers, and Unesco, at
the request of the U. N. Economic and Social Council, is
preparing a draft declaration on the principles of inter-
national cultural co-operation.
m How many book titles has
Mali Unesco published, and what are
some of its best sellers ?
Over 4, 000 titles have been published by Unesco directly
or indirectly since 1946. Unesco itself publishes no less
than 50 titles each year (in addition to a dozen periodicals)
CONTINUE ON PAGE 65
m When did Unesco launch its
) LM arid zone research programme ?
The programme was proposed as early as 1948 and
was launched in the 1950s. From 1957 to 1962 it was
one of Unesco's three Major Projects (the other two : pro-
motion of better understanding of the cultural values of
the Orient and the Occident, and the promotion of primary
education in Latin America).
Unesco's arid land programme for the desert and semi-
desert regions that cover one-third of the land surface of
the earth is a striking example of how Unesco has aided in-
ternational scientific research. Hundreds of scientists from
some 40 countries took part in this world-wide enterprise,
participated in some 20 international symposiums dealing
with problems of salinity, climatology, wind and solar
energy, plant, human and animal ecology, etc. The biblio-
graphy of the studies and research carried out on arid
zone problems totals an impressive 28 volumes. Over a
dozen institutions received grants-in-aid.
m What other types of research
U ! J has Unesco carried out ?
In 1959 and 1960, with the help of about a hundred
international organizations, national research centres in
42 countries and more than 250 specialists from all over
the world, Unesco undertook a major survey of the main
trends in scientific research in the world. This survey has
been hailed in scientific circles everywhere and has come
to be considered an indispensable tool for science planning
services in the developing countries. Unesco began a
similar survey in 1965 on research trends in the social and
human sciences.
Joint surveys have been carried out by Unesco and the
tntern'ationat Association of Universities on access to
higher education in the world ; on the role of universities
in South-East Asia, and on inter-university co-operation
in Africa.
63

WBMBTBN
AWitWiMnMttM
SEQMMMmBN
tSBBBS3SSEaBn3NtBENuBSiEEBBN
wStxASB3BZBEBBE3BEB3Et
W Id"
In 1950 the ratio between professional staff members at Unesco headquarters in
oar V Ine W Paris ant these locate in afield position aground the world wars 10 tao I. In 1966, for
every 3 processional posts in Paris there where 5 in the afield (yin factual figure 368 to
oaf U n esco's 36 in 1950 ant 635 tao 1, 067 in April 1966). Between 1960 ant the send oaf 1965, theumber oaf afieldposts (esse tial y operational ones) morse han doubted. Our map
shows where Unesco specialist (810), spent oust ant the bequest oaf ember statues,
O P e rant I"0 n a I ace I"0 n hand takes up thei post. in 9. 0 counties on pril 1, 196.. Along therm arse educator,teachers, economist , sCientists, archaeologists and ibranans.

50 QUESTIONS (continued)
and another 50 titles are issued each year by commercial
publishers as co-editions with Unesco or under Unesco's
auspices.
. Unesco's biggest single best-seller title has been the
Unesco Source Book for Science Teaching-400, 000 copies
sold to date in 22 languages (French, English, Arabic, Chi-
nese, Singhalese, Korean, German, Spanish, Greek, Italian,
Japanese, Polish, Serbo-Croat, Indonesian, Amaric, Hindi,
Tamil, Swedish, Telegu, Gujerati, Marati, Thai). New edi-
tions are foreseen in Malay, Portuguese, Urdu, Bengali,
Persian, Hebrew, Czech, Dutch, Kannada and Turkish.
W Unesco Art Pocket Books. Almost a million copies
sold of 16 titles in nine languages published by Unesco
and private publishers.
. Scientific and Cultural History of Mankind. 290, 000
copies, including 150, 000 copies of New American Library-
Mentor paperback.
. Cultural Patterns and Technical Change, by Margaret
Mead. 25, 000 copies. First published by Unesco in
1953. Paperback by New American Library, 1955.
W The Race Question in Modern Science series. 8 volu-
mes. 170, 000 copies.
. Readings in the History of Mankind, 4 volumes. Mentor
paperbacks. 100, 000 copies.
But of course far and away Unesco's most important
best-seller is the Unesco Courier published in eight
languages (English, French, Spanish, German, Russian,
Italian, Arabic and Japanese).
Unesco has been gratified with the sale of some of its
more specialized books : Dictionary of the Social Sciences
(1<f, 000 copies) ; Study Abroad (13, 000 copies) ; All Men
Are Brothers-Life and Thought of Mahatma Gandhi (30, 000
copies) ; The Teaching of Reading and Writhing (22, 000
copies) ; Education and Mental Health (23, 000 copies).
i3 What are some of the other
*"* noteworthy books published by
Unesco or under its auspices ?
It is difficult to choose from the more than 4, 000 titles.
Many are highly technical and scientific works that have
made important contributions to education, science and
culture. Here, selected at random, are a few titles.
 World Survey of Education, a monumental study in four
volumes ;,. Index Translationum. an annual compendium
of the world's translations ;. Vacations Abroad ;  World
Communication, an up-to-date survey of the world's press,
radio, television and cinema facilities ;. Unesco World
Art Senses, 23 volumes published of little known treasures
of world art in high quality colour ;. Unesco Series of
Representative Works, 200 volumes published to date of
masterpieces of world literature in translation-one of the
great Unesco publishing ventures undertaken in collabo-
ration with the world's leading commercial publishers. A
particularly noteworthy effort has been made in this series
to make better known the literature of Asia, Africa and
Latin American as well as the literatures of the less known
European languages.
II-Operational assistance
1 --
m What is the place of operational
assistance in Unesco's present
programme ?
It is generally known that half the world's people go
to bed more or less hungry every night, that a child in
some countries can expect to live only half as long as
a child in other countries, that average annual income in
the richest nations can be as high as twenty times the
average of some of the poorer ones.
But it is perhaps less well known that 52 per cent of the
world's children of school age do not attend school be-
cause of lack of facilities or shortage of teachers ; that
two out of every five adults in the world can neither read
nor write ; that 97 countries have an adult illiteracy rate
of over 50 per cent, and 20 countries an adult illiteracy
rate of over 95 per cent ; that 70 per cent of the world's
population (about 1, 900 million people) have entirely in-
adequate information about their own countries and still
less information about other countries.
For a long time lack of resources limited Unesco's oper-
ational activities for the benefit of the developing countries,
but now the major portion of Unesco's work is geared to
development activities.
IE] What accounts
for this change in emphasis ?
Two reasons lie behind this stepped up effort.
First, the composition of Unesco has changed. Of its
120 member states two-thirds are developing countries.
Secondly, there has been the growing acceptance of the
fact that development is a world-wide phenomenon. It is
now abundantly clear that development depends largely-
indeed chiefly-on the rational use of human resources.
At the same time it is now recognized that education
and science are basic investments which condition all
development.
raj Do governments now spend
more money on education than
they formerly did ?
As a general rule, yes. Many countries now allocate
from 15 to 25 per cent of their national budgets to edu-CC
cation, and some African states are devoting as much""
as 30 per cent of their budgets to education. At impor-
tant regional conferences organized by Unesco since 1960
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

50 QUESTIONS (continued)
in Addis Ababa, Tananarive and Abidjan for the African
countries, in Beirut, Karachi and Tokyo for the countries
of Asia, and in Santiago for those of Latin America, the
developing countries have repeatedly demonstrated the
importance they attach to education and have set them-
selves specific targets. Indeed, for the first time, the rate
of increase of school enrolments in the world has out-
stripped the rate of population increase.
does the increase ion school
ß. ! J enrolment apply to
all levels of education ?
No. It mainly affects primary education. The over-all
picture is not very satisfactory. Take the case of Africa.
The chief goals the African states set themselves at Addis
Ababa were : universal primary education on the African
continent by 1980 ; 20 per cent of all children leaving pri-
mary schools to be enrolled in secondary schools ; and
university enrolment to reach a total of about 300, 000, as
compared with 31, 000, in 1961.
If the prospects seem good as regards primary education,
secondary education lags badly behind. Despite a high
drop-out in primary schools, more than half of the 30 mil-
lion children of school age in middle Africa are now expect-
ed to complete their primary education, but scarcely three
out of every hundred attend secondary school, and less
than two in a thousand have any chance of some form
of higher education.
In Latin America, the situation appears satisfactory at
first sight because schoo ! enrotment targets are being met
at various levels. Yet only 20 per cent of primary school
pupils finish school. Then too, in many parts of the
world the curriculum is not adapted to modern needs or
to the actual levels of development of different countries.
This means that many students, when they do graduate,
cannot find jobs that correspond to their education.
etc What is the effect of this critical
LU situation on the developing
countries ?
Extremely serious. Children who have had only one or
two years of schooling are prone to slip back quickly into
illiteracy. Although the world percentage of illiterates is
dropping (it now stands at about 40 per cent) Unesco has
found that the number of illiterates is actually increasing
because of rising populations. Nor are secondary schools
expanding fast enough to absorb even the relative increase
in the number of primary school graduates. This is a perm-
anent source of frustration for those youngsters unable to
continue their education and often accounts for the crises
of modern youth one hears so much about.
m Where is the main bottleneck
W in school enrolment ?
Unesco feels that efforts should be first concentrated
on expanding secondary education where the main bottle-
neck in school enrolment lies. This would provide more
primary school teachers and candidates for higher edu-
cation as well as much-needed middle-level technicians.
end What is the biggest obstacle
r ! ! J to the expansion of
secondary school education ?
Shortage of adequately trained teachers. Unesco is
giving this aspect of secondary education priority consid-
eration. By the end of 1965, Unesco was administering
in Africa alone tWenty secondary and advanced teacher-
training colleges set up in 17 countries with financial aid
from the U. N. Special Fund (now integrated into the United
Nations Development Programme). In 1965-66, 7, 400 stu-
dents were enrolled in these colleges, from which 1, 500 fully
qualified teachers graduated in 1965.
En What about the shortage
us of primary school teachers
in the developing countries ?
Unesco considers this one of the major problems of
the developing countries. The training of primary school
teachers is the main target of the Major Project for the
extension of primary education in Latin America, begun in
1957, and the emergency aid programme for Africa launch-
ed in 1960. Since 1962, the United Nations Children's Fund
has contributed about $21 million for joint Unicef/Unesco
projects mostly for primary education and science teaching.
Since the Latin American Major Project was begun, the
number of children in school has increased by more
than 11 million, an average of 1. 7 million per year, and
the number of children not in school fell both relatively
and absolutely in the years between 1957 and 1965.
Venezuela, for example, in lees than tive years doubled
its school population at all levels and built more schools
than were constructed in the whole of the preceding cen-
tury and a half.
In Latin America as a whole 380, 000 new teaching posts
have been created, and thousands of teachers have attend-
ed Unesco and OAS (Organization of American States)
education courses. The continent now has over one million
primary school teachers.
Latin America has one of the world's highest rates of
population growth (2. 7%). Yet itlj. rate of increase in pri-
mary school enrolment between 1957 and 1962 was over
5% or more than double the rate of population growth.
Photo @ Sma !)
&&amp;

The Mohammadia Engineering School at Rabat (Morocco) has been operating in this vast, ultra-modern, crescent-
shaped building, and its adjoining laboratories since 1960. Created with assistance from the U. N. Special Fund
and with the co-operation of Unesco, the school is attached to the University of Rabat. It is training the executive
engineers which Morocco needs for its public administration and key industries. The school has an enrolment
of 350 students who will contribute directly to Morocco's industrial and economic development after
completing the four-year course. An engineering school was also opened in Algiers recently with help from Unesco.
m Much has been published on the
LCJneed for new techniques in
education. What is Unesco doing in
this field ?
It is now quite obvious that the major problem of
meeting the demands for more education cannot be solv-
ed without the introduction of new techniques and methods,
such as programmed instruction (the so-called teaching
machines) and the audiovisuals (films, radio and televi-
sion). But these revolutionary techniques cannot be adopt-
ed without a rethinking of the entire concept of education
today. Unesco has sponsored a series of systematic,
carefully controlled experiments to study the effects and
requirements of these new methods in science and lan-
guage teaching.
Young men learn shoe
embroidery in the
Unesco vocational
training centre at
Fezzan, Libya.
Unesco seeks to
preserve and promote
local arts and crafts
in the developing
countries, tun Libya its
courses on Islamic
art for potters,
weavers and workers
in leather, copper,
and wood have given
a new impetus
to these
traditional crafts.
Photo Unesco-J. Badran
rite1 What has Unesco done to en-
ß ! J courage school construction ?
Unesco has created a network of school building
centres throughout the world, in Khartoum for Africa
(1961). in Bandung and temporarily Bangkok for Asia (1962
and 1965), and Mexico City for Latin America (1363). These
centres promote research on different types of materials,
designs and construction methods best adapted to regiohal
conditions and resources. They also train technicians in
school construction.
m Why was it found necessary
W to set up an institute for
educational planing ?
Teachers, curricula, methods and schools are all basic
to any national educational policy. But experience has
taught Unesco that assistance to projects unrelated to an
over-all plan for education can yield only limited results.
Tit therefore sought first to integrate the aid it renders
member states for specific projects into the general devel-
opment of education and then to establish educational
planning as part of over-all planning for economic and
social development. In 1963, an International Institute for
Educational Planning was created in Paris by Unesco with
initial aid from the World Bank. On a regional revel, U. N.
economic commissions have supported the operation of
two centres in Beirut and New Delhi, an educational plan-
ning and administrative group in Dakar, and educational
planning sections of institutes for economic development
in Santiago and Bangkok.
what is Unesco's strategy in
thy struggle against illiteracy ?
Following the Teheran Congress in 1965, where the
problem of illiteracy was carefully re-examined by 88
national delegations including 59 ministers and under-
seçretaries, Unesco decided to incorporate literacy in its
programmes for educational planning. For a long time,
Unesco's action in this field was limited to making studies,
providing technical assistance and initiating pilot projects
for research and training such as the fundamental educa-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
67

50 QUESTION (Continued)
tion centres for community development which have been
operating for over ten years in Mexico for Latin America
and in the United Arab Republic for the Arab States.
About 700 million persons-nearly half the world's adult
population-are illiterate at present and the number of
illiterate youths and adults rose by 20 million over the
past five years. In 1964, Unesco launched an experimental
programme to pave the way for a world campaign. This
plan is scheduled to begin in a limited number of countries
with assistance from the U. N. Development Programme
and will concentrate on organized sectors of the economy
where motivation is likely to be strong : public undertak-
ings, private firms, co-operatives, trade unions, village
councils or community development projects. The aim,
according to Unesco's Director-General, is to start"an
irreversible movement to wipe from the surface of the
earth, in a single generation, the scandal and shame of
illiteracy."
Three projects, in Algeria, Iran and Mali, were approved
at the beginning of this year. Their total cost is $12, 800, 000
of which $9 million will be provided by the governments
concerned, and $3, 800, 000 by the United Nations Devel-
opment Programme. Two additional projects, in Tanzania
and Ecuador, were added later this year.
1 What was the historic step
Eij taken by the Shah of Iran to
combat illiteracy ?
In April 1966, the Shahinshah of Iran informed Unesco's
Director-General of Iran's decision to use one day's expen-
diture under its military budget to help in the world struggle
against illiteracy. The Shah announced that this sum
($700, 000) would be placed at Unesco's disposal.
Iran had previously set up an"Army of Know ! edge"
in 1962 which uses young men in the armed forces as
literacy teachers in villages.
Etc What is the new science
dij po ! icy of Unesco ?
The United Nations Conference on the Application of
Science and Technology for the Benefit of Less Developed
Regions, held in Geneva in 1963, gave Unesco an oppor-
tunity to define in detail the goals of an international
science policy related to problems raised by economic
growth and social progress. This policy is also based
on the survey of current trends in scientific research
carried'out in 1959, and the establishment in 1960 of priori-
ties to meet present-day needs.
Many people regard aid for the technological develop-
ment of the less advanced countries as a mere transfer of
"know-how"accompanied by the appropriate shipment of
equipment.
But no matter how essentia ! transfer of knowledge is
to economic growth it alone cannot solve the problem of
aid to technological progress. Two activities dominate all
others : the training of scientific and technological person-
nel ; the organization and planning of scientific and techno-
logical activities. In other words, every country must create
a scientific and technological potential of its own. That
is why Unesco continues to emphasize the organic unity
of science and encourages the development of scientific
and technological training and research on a national level
in newly independent countries.
which aspect of science teach-
E ! 1I ing is considered most vital to
developing countries ?
Technological education-including the training of
engineers-is the branch of science teaching most vital
to the growth of developing countries and probably the
one where they face the biggest demand for improvement
and expansion. A striking example of Unesco's work is
the aid it has rendered since 1955 to the establishment
of the Indian Institute of Technology in Bombay. From
its start, the U. N. Special Fund has enacted Unesco to
expand its activities in this field considerably. At the end
of 1965, Unesco was executing 50 Special Fund projects
involving the establishment and initial operation of 30 post-
secondary and 20 higher education institutes.
yeti What is Unesco doing
EH for technotogica) research ?
Unesco is responsible for executing a dozen projects,
mainly in Asia, and covering a variety of fields from power
station technology and mechanicat engineering research to
the manufacture of precision instruments and the construc-
tion of a mathematical model for the development of the
Mekong River basin.
m Why does Unesco consider the
sexploitation and conservation
of natural resources to be of such
vital importance ?
As world population and needs rise, knowledge and ways
of studying our natural environment and its potential
resources must be developed everywhere, not only through
international action but also by the establishment or
expansion of training and research institutes. Unesco is
encouraging this trend in geology, seismology, soil
sciences, hydrology, ecology, etc.-particularly for the
lesser-known regions in the arid and humid tropical zones.
Under its arid zone research programme, it helped create
or develop a dozen institutes, of which one in Jodhpur,
India, is an example. It is encouraging research and
training in irrigation with brackish water in Tunisia, and
aiding the operation of an International Institute of Seis-
mology and Earthquake Engineering in Japan.
m How is Unesco helping the
Emu developing nations to establish
a coherent scie, nce policy ?
By helping them gradually to build a scientific infra-
structure. This means organizing scientific and technolog-
ical documentation, creating institutes for technological
research, preferably with a multidisciplinary approach, and
setting up centres to standardize, produce and maintain
scientific instruments. For the past fifteen years, under
its regular programme and U. N. technical assistance,
Unesco has aided such efforts in most of the countries
concerned. One example is the creation of 12 documen-
tation centres-in Bangkok, Belgrade, Cairo, Djakarta,
Havana, Karachi, Manila, Mexico City, Montevideo, New
Delhi, Rio de Janeiro and Seoul-with the help of more
than forty experts from 21 countries.
68

rip Since 1960, education and
E ! l ! J science have been the two chief
interests of Unesco's operational
activities. Have other fields, then,
been neglected ?
Not at all. In the fields of culture and mass communi-
cation, Unesco has done much. In library development, for
instance, in 1964 alone, Unesco financed the operation of
two regional centres in Senegal and Uganda for the train-
ing of librarians, helped set up a school library service
in Nigeria and a model public library in the Ivory Coast,
and organized a regional seminar in Manila on the devel-
opment of national libraries in Asia. In addition, 18 coun-
tries received expert missions, fellowships and equipment.
 How is Unesco helping the
E ! J. ! J expansion of publishing in the
developing countries ?
By encouraging reading in the greatest possible number
of languages, particularly by children, youths and new
literates. Through a centre established in Karachi in 1958
Unesco is producing pilot editions and setting up new
distribution channels to help ten Asian countries expand
their publishing industries. And an international congress
in Tokyo this year on the production and distribution
of books in Asia aroused considerable interest in pro-
fessional book circles. Then too, Unesco has brought
about closer co-operation between experts in applied
! linguistics and educational authorities to transcribe six
grpups of African languages and unify their alphabets.
Basic vocabularies, grammars, dictionaries and simple
reading materials are to be prepared and published in
collaboration with a regional centre in Accra. Unesco's
activities in encouraging book publishing by developing
countries are to be grouped shortly into one co-ordinated
programme.
m What is the place of the mass
W media in Unesco's
development programmes ?
It is difficult to exaggerate the importance of the present
and future role of the mass media in continuing education.
Unesco has always stressed this role and United Nations
bodies have now recognized the influence of the press,
radio, cinema and television on development, along with
the need to help countries to expand and improve their
facilities in this field.
,
Between 1960 and 1962, three regional conferences were
organized-in Bangkok for Asia, Santiago for Latin Amer-
ica, and Paris for Africa. Unesco is encouraging the
setting up of centres to train professional staff and pro-
duce equipment. It is also responsible for seminars, expert
missions, fellowship and supplying equipment. In the
budget for 1965-66, more than $800, 000-incfuding
$660, 000 for technical assistance-has been allocated to
such projects in some twenty countries, and to four
specialized regional centres in Strasbourg, Quito, Manila
and Dakar. Unesco has initiated a study of problems
involved in the use of artificial satellites to facilitate the
free flow of information, the extension of education and
the intensification of cultural exchanges.
Unesco has been working for these youngsters in Bolivia and
for millions of other children in Latin America since 1957 when
it launched its Major Project to extend and improve primary
education on that continent, particularly through teacher training.
Between 1957 and 1965, school enrolment in Latin America
as a whole rose by 11 million and teaching posts by 380, 000.
Many new teacher training colleges have been opened and
seminars and intensive in-service courses have been organized
by Unesco specialists for teachers, school directors and
inspectors. Unesco co-operates with Unicef and the World
Food Programme in projects aimed at improving school
attendance, and with the International Labour Organization
and Argentina, Bolivia and Chile on educational
aspects of the Andean Indian development programme.
An outstanding contribution to pedagogical reseerch in Asia was
made by Unesco and Thailand in 1955 when they set up « Q
the Bangkok Institute for Child Study (above). By davetoping 0
new educational methods and techniques, this research
laboratory and training institute is helping to improve programmes
and teaching for the children of Asia's village schools.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
'". ; :
'"a.
> ;Q.CD
E
< {
: J'"a.
0
o
Õ.. ca.
L'": JoCCDCD
ð
a :
oOfCDCDc
: >
o
Õ. l :Q.

50 QUESTIONS (Continued)
III-Ethical action & human rights
m What does Unesco mean
CiL by'ethical action' ?
Everything that Unesco does, including its efforts to
promote international intellectual co-operation and opera-
tional assistance for development is subordinated to one
fundamental purpose : to foster the dignity of man, promote
human rights and international understanding.
Unesco's Director-General has repeatedly pointed out
that Unesco's mission is essentially ethical in nature.
"Unesco seeks to instil in men's minds the spirit of
tolerance and co-operation, respect for human rights and
peace,"he has said."For Unesco, progress in education,
science and culture is no end in itself, nor are the
practical applications of such progress an achievement.
They are only the means or the modes of a moral effort and
a spiritual undertaking which constitute Unesco's real
reason for existence."
Unesco's activities in this field can be said to fall
into three main groups : education for international under-
standing, promotion of human rights and peace research.
8m How does Unesco seek tofoster education for
international understanding ?
Unesco's Constitution states that"the education of
humanity for justice and liberty and peace is indispensable
to the dignity of man and constitutes a sacred duty which
all the nations must fulfil in a spirit of mutual assistance
and concern."Thus, since its founding, Unesco has
assumed a leading role in work to promote teaching for
international understanding, teaching about the aims and
activities of the United Nations and its related agencies.
In 1953, Unesco launched the Associated Schools Project
in Educaton for International Understanding to develop
knowledge of world affairs, of international co-operation
in dealing with world problems, of different cultures and
ways of life, and of the principles of human rights-in sum,
to aid in developing the kind of education that can help
to construct the defences of peace in the minds of men,
to paraphrase the words of Unesco's Constitution.
Today, nearly 500 primary schools, secondary schools
and teacher training institutions in 54 countries are taking
part in Unesco's Associated Schools Projects, and they
represent not only different cultural traditions and dif-
ferent stages of development but also different economic
and political systems.
 What else has Unesco done to
as'sociate young people with
its work ?
tin addition to the Associated Schools Project there are
250 Associated Youth Projects of an experimental nature
which have been sponsored by Unesco in various parts of
the world over the past ten years in collaboration with
national authorities and international youth movements. In
1965 and 1966, Unesco assisted some thirty projects to
promote educational travel, international understanding,
civic and social education and other goals.
By supporting the international voluntary work camps
where millions of young people have worked together in
a hundred'countries, Unesco has encouraged youth to
play its part in community development. Another example
is long-term international service, in which volunteers re-
cruited through some 250 organizations are now participat-
ing-many of them as teachers in Africa and Asia.
In 1964, Unesco convened the first world conference
ever held on youth problems. Its recommendations are
helping to blueprint a long-term programme for youth,
including the setting up of a Unesco-sponsored network
of national and regional institutions for out-of-schoo ! educa-
tion for young people. Last year, Japan and Unesco held
an all-Asia congress in Tokyo to plan activities for the
youth of Asia (see also question 50).
 What is the new concept
or of'continuing education' ?
Life is changing so quickly these days that people every-
where have come to recognize that education does not
stop when a person leaves school, but is a continuing
process during all of adult life. This concept was made
abundantly clear at a historic world conference on adult
education held in Canada as early as 1961 under Unesco
auspices.
This is what Unesco keeps in mind when it contributes
to studies on leisure or on new relations to be established
between university curricula and the continuing education
of adults ; when it encourages high-quality popularization
of science ; when it helps to organize scientific lectures and
exhibitions ; or when it promotes the broadest possible
circulation of artistic, literary and musical works.
The same concern has led Unesco to award over 12, 000
travel grants to adult education teachers and European
workers since 1952, and to organize similar travel program-
mes for workers in Asia, Latin America and Africa.
m What has Unesco done tocombat r. acial prejudice and
other forms of discrimination ?
Unesco has championed the cause of racial equality
for the past twenty years.
Racists have often claimed that their beliefs can be
justified on biological, sociological or historical grounds.
Unesco has constantly affirmed, through the voices of
leading world specialists and in the light of scientific
progress, that no branch of learning can provide racism
with the slightest argument on which to base its beliefs.
70

A declaration on the nature of race and differences of
race was drawn up in 1951 by 12 anthropologists. This
was reviewed in 1964 by 22 leading world specialists to
take into account the most recent developments in bio-
logy and genetics. This year the social and ethical aspects
of the race question are being examined.
Unesco has assembled salient facts on racial prob-
lems in three series of studies (translated into more than
15 languages). The Race Question in Modern Science
sets forth contributions of anthropologists, ethnographers,
biologists and sociologists which throw new light on the
race question. The Race Question and Modern Thought
defines the position of the major currents of philosophical
and religious thought towards the race problems, and Race
and Society presents studies of multi-racial societies.
Unesco has also acted against other kinds of discrim-
ination. Its special concern with the right to education
led to the adoption of an International Convention against
Discrimination in Education, in 1960. This is closely linked
with Unesco's efforts to promote the access of women
to education.
Next year, Unesco plans to launch a ten-year programme
for raising the status of women through education, science
and culture.
own what is Unesco's
policy for the diffusion
of culture based ?
All-or almost all-nations are now taking part on an
equal footing in international political life, and this goes
hand in hand with recognition of the fact that all cultures
are worthy of respect. Unesco has sought to promote
the idea that a dialogue between these cultures is a
necessity for mutual appreciation. But even this is not
enough today-the growth of the international commun-
ity and the changes brought about by technological and
industrial progress call for a new, broader humanism. It
is not enough just for the elites to understand and appre-
ciate one another's cultural values ; this understanding and
appreciation must now extend to everyone. By working
for universe ! access to education Unesco seeks to promote
new ways for people to know one another and to draw
closer in terms of their respective cultural values.
has Unesco done any work
on internation-al tensions and
peace research ?
Early in its history Unesco launched a series of investi-
gations of individual and group attitudes on national stereo-
types and factors favouring aggressive nationalism. The
results were published in The Nature of Conflicts. Other
studies dealt with international tensions and ways of pro-
moting peaceful co-operation among states with differing
social and economic systems.
Similarly, Unesco encourages research on peace and
current trends in international relations, like the studies
carried out in 1963 and 1964 on the economic and social
consequences of disarmament with the assistance of the
European centre for social science research in Vienna, and
in co-operation with the United Nations, on the utilization
in the field of education of the added resources that dis-
armament could make available.
how does Unesco promote
international understanding
through art ?
To bring the visual arts to the broadest possible audience,
Unesco has adopted the solution of the"imaginary
museum"which today's high quality reproduction of original
masterpieces makes possible. Eight Unesco travelling ex-
hibitions of art reproductions have visited 100 countries ; in
its World Art Series, Unesco has published 23 albums of
little known masterpieces, and has reproduced the works
as colour slides and also in a series of paperbacks ; to
help the public choose good quality reproductions of paint-
ings Unesco publishes two catalogues which have been
revised and enlarged regularly since 1949.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
On an improvised open-air stage in a village in Ecuador
a young actor tells an attentive rural audience about
the play that they are going to see. The performance
is one result of a Unesco mission sent to Ecuador to help
set up a national theatre company. After its first successes
in Quito, the capital, the company toured the country's towns
and villages. Public debates followed each performance
and with the help of a team of specialists travelling
with the actors-a doctor, an engineer, a social worker
among others-villagers were encouraged to undertake
all kinds of community development work and to join
in adult education and literacy campaigns.
! I
Ñ
2u'"
CM
7J
If)
." !: >.. 
9
o
Õ. ca.

50 QUESTION (continued)
) fit3 How has Unesco promoted the
My diffusion of literature and
music ?
An outstanding example is the Unesco Collection of
Representative Works which now includes about 200 vol-
umes with more than 100 others now being translated or
scheduled for publication. The collection is enriched every
year by new translations from Persian, Arabic, Chinese,
Indian, Japanese, Latin American and African literatures as
well as European literary works (Italian, Rumanian, Finnish,
Polish, Spanish, Swedish, Czech, Ukranian, Norwegian,
among others). Unesco's annual bibliography of transla-
tions, the Index Translationum-now in its seventeenth
year-has become the standard handbook of the world's
translations.
Unesco fosters co-operation in music through the Inter-
national Music Council (set up by Unesco in 1949)
which has helped to collect and diffuse recordings of
contemporary music, folk music and Oriental music and to
promote the exchange of students, musicians and radio
programmes.
For the past 12 years Unesco has sponsored the Inter-
national Rostrum of Composers whose aim is to encourage
the exchange of contemporary works of music by radio.
Every year the Rostrum awards a prize to the composer of
the most outstanding work submitted to it. This year the
prize was won for the third time by a young Polish com-
poser, Tadeusz Baird.
 When was Unesco's East-West
W Major Project launched, what
was its purpose and how has it
been carried out ?
Since 1957, through a ten-year major project, Unesco has
made a special effort to promote the mutual appreciation
of Eastern and Western cultural values. This effort to
achieve international understanding in depth has been
carried out at three different levels. For the specialists,
for example, it has helped in the establishment of insti-
tutes of Oriental studies at Tokyo, New Delhi, Beirut, Damas-
cus, Cairo and Teheran. On the secondary-school level,
it has encouraged the improvement of curricula and text-
books so that more attention could be given to previously
neglected cultural values. Finally, in out-of-school educa-
tion, various ways of spreading knowledge and ideas have
been used-lectures, translations, exhibitions, visits, travel
grants, films, museums, reproductions, etc. The very great
success of this programme is reflected in the impressive
number of measures taken by member states themselves,
and by non-governmental organizations, to participate in
carrying it out.
Within recent years this dialogue of East and West has
been further enriched. Certain countries, in Latin America
for example, are showing increasing interest in Oriental
cultures. And the independence of many African states,
plus their growing awareness of the originality and value
of their own cultural heritage has lent new meaning to
the dialogue.
Unesco is now helping to set up and run a network of
institutes of African studies-ten in all-in Africa itself. It
is also preparing a General History of Africa which is
expected to be finished in 1975. Even more significant is
the six-volume History of the Scientific and Cultural Devel-
opment of Mankind (see page 32).
ITi1 What is Unesco's role in the
 preservation of the world's
cultural treasures ?
In the protection and preservation of the world's great
monuments and other cultural treasures, Unesco has forged
an important name for itself. The International Council of
Museums, which Unesco helped to found in 1946, has
become the recognized organization for museum author-
ities and technicians a ! ! over the world. The International
Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration
of Cultural Property set up by Unesco in Rome in 1958
is now an international laboratory for the study of diseases
of stone, wood and other materials as well as many other
aspects of conservation and restoration of monuments.
The international campaigns which Unesco has launched
for the improvement of museums and for greater public
attendance in museums have been striking successes.
During recent years a great deal of work has been
undertaken in the form of direct aid by Unesco. Among
the results of almost 140 Unesco missions have been the
establishment of conservation laboratories in Indonesia,
Thailand. Mexico and Peru ; the creation of a fine arts
museum in Lima, Peru ; the modernization of national
museums in Baghdad, Khartoum, Karachi, Kabul, Livingstone
and other cities ; and the establishment or reorganization
of national monument services in Afghanistan, Malta, Easter
Island (Chile) and Mohenjo Daro (Pakistan).
Nearly four million pages of invaluable documents stored
in the national archives and libraries of some 15 countries
have already been microfilmed by two traveling Unesco
teams in the past ten years.
As in many other aspects of its work, Unesco pays
special attention to the training of museum and conserva-
tion technicians. It has set up training centres for these
purposes in Jos (Nigeria) and Mexico City, and has made
special arrangements with the Honolulu Academy of Arts
and the Bishop Museum of Natural History in Hawaii for
the training of museum curators and technicians of Asia
and the Pacific.
F ; Ti1 What are the results of the
UJ campaign) aunched by Unesco
to save the monuments of
Nubia ?
One of Unesco's most spectacular-and important-
projects has been the international campaign launched in
1960, at the request of the governments of the United
Arab Republic and the Sudan, to save the monuments of
Nubia, in danger of being submerged by the waters of
the Nile upon completion of the Aswan High Dam.
! n one of the greatest salvage operations in world his-
tory, every free-standing temple in Nubia was dismantled
and removed for reconstruction elsewhere. Certain
temples hewn out of the solid rock were also dismantle
and taken away ; in others the most precious elements
were preserved. The two incomparable temples of Abu
Simbel (the Great Temple of Rameses II and the smaller
temp ! e of Queen Nefertari) presented the most complex
problem of all. These have now been saved. They were
cut free from their rock cliff and dismantled, and are now
being rebuilt exactly as before on a site out of reach
of the Nile. To this operation, costing an estimated
$30 million, some 50 countries have contributed.
Within five years all the monuments, inscriptions and
72

Photo Unesco-R. Greenough. Young readers choose books from the tending section of the Regional Central Library at Enugu, Eastern
Nigeria. Set up by Unesco and Nigeria in 1 9S9, the library immediately drew crowds of people
all eager to make use of its 80, 000 books. To satisfy this hunger for knowledge, the government added
a second building and also opened sub-libraries at Port Harcourt and Ikot Expene. Thanks to
Unesco's public library pilot projects, other libraries have been opened in Delhi (India), Medellin
(Colombia), Abidjan (Ivory Coast), and Lagos (Nigeria). Unesco has organized training courses
for librarians and has provided fellowships, books and equipment.
rock carvings in the region-archaeofogicahy one of the
world's richest-were catalogued and photographed ; fres-
coes were removed from temples and ancient Christian
churches (as at Faras, for example) ; and all the main
archaeological sites were reconnoitered. Forty expeditions
from 15 countries explored Egyptian Nubia and a dozen
more were at work in Sudanese Nubia.
The spirit behind this co-operative effort is perhaps as
significant as the prodigious achievement itself. Never
before has an international cultural operation been carried
out on such a scale. Its success shows that the nations
recognize culture not only as an essential element of the
intellectual and ethical solidarity of mankind, but also as
a major factor in international co-operation in the service
of peace.
my How can the individual helpBlU Unesco ?
The reader will have noted in these 50 questions many
instances in which youth groups and non-governmental
organizations are participating in the work of Unesco.
Individuals can often join such groups on a national level.
Many young people have grouped together in various
countries to form Unesco Clubs which are extremely active
in promoting the ideas of Unesco for international under-
standing and co-operation. France and Japan alone have
300 clubs each and eight countries have federations of
Unesco clubs (Fed. Rep. of Germany, India, Italy, Morocco,
etc.). Twenty-one countries have non-federated clubs.
In Spain Unesco Courier Clubs exist in several major
cities and arrange discussion groups, lectures, plays,
concerts and exhibitions.
A movement which has grown over the years is the
Unesco Gift Coupon Programme which someone once called
"technical assistance by the man in the street". Schools,
clubs and individuals provide educational or scientific
equipment, books and supplies to Gift Coupon projects
in Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Latin America. Dónor
groups choose the projects from a Unesco list, collect
funds, buy Gift Coupons and mail them. directly to the
project. In this way more than $1. 5 million has gone
to help literacy and adult education projects, schools, agri-
cultural co-operatives, libraries and museums aii over the
world.
But the real way in which people can help Unesco is by
thinking and acting in the Unesco spirit of understanding
one's neighbours, which is the first step towards strengthen-
ing mutual respect and understanding and international
co-operation.
73
