A chain of antennae
pointing into the
reaches of space
now girdles r
planet. With the
launching in 1962
of Telstar, the first
communications
satellite, new horizons
were opened up
for the transmission
of news and ideas.
Unesco has
helped the
developing countries
to expand
and improve their
information media,
stressing the
vital role of
these media in
"continuing education".
It has also studied
how communications
satellites can
enhance the use of
mass media for
economic and social
development and
for educational
and cultural exchange.
Z
<l.
< (
; °
. <cü=>ocro
L
cO
G
o
Õ. <c
<l.

IIN THE WORLD
S  MF Ht aMam BMti "& SS&es !  iate N8
M  '' BJB'aB aBMS
! N  
MASS MEDINA
by Robert Lindsay
and Raymond B. Nixon
A stonishing technical im-pr vements in the mass
media of information in the past
20 years hold bright promise for
eventual realization of the premise of
the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, that all men have the right"to
seek, receive and impart information
and ideas through any media and
regardless of frontiers."
Today, it is not only political and
ideological boundaries that are being
leapfrogged in the pursuit of this goal.
What only 20 years ago were consider-
ed impossible distant reaches in terms
of technical improvement of the physi-
cal channels of communication are
now within sight. Indeed, in some
areas we are at the point of crossing
what may be the last and most for-
midable"frontier"of them all-that
of a truly global, free-flowing network
of communications of all kinds, avail-
'able to all people in all countries.
Even so, this frontier is a wide and
uncharted one, and its passage will
take time as well as foresight and
enterprise on the part of educators,
ROBERT LINDSAY is an associate profes-
sor of journalism at the University of
Minnesota (U. S. A.). A specialist in broad-
cast journalism, he has recently been
engaged in a comprehensive study on
communication satellites.
RAYMOND B. NIXON is professor of jour-
nalism and international relations at the
University of Minnesota. He was formerly
editor-in-chief of"Journalism Quarterly", a
U. S. research journal for which he is now
international editor. From 1960 to 1964
he was president of the International Asso-
ciation for Mass Communication Research.
journalists, administrators and others
directly concerned with the venture.
The inescapable fact is that progress
in improving the world's mass commu-
nication facilities is at best simply
keeping pace with the still-serious
inability of many millions of persons
to make use of what few channels of
communication may be available to
them. As the most recent edition of
the UN Statistical Yearbook reminds
us all too significantly, some 40 per
cent of all adults in the world cannot
read, while less than half of the world's
children of school age in fact attend
school.
So, while it is heartening to know
that in two decades huge numbers of
people have gained easier access to
more books, periodicals and newspap-
ers and to more cinemas and more
radio and television services, we must
at the same time appreciate that exis-
tence of information facilities by no
means necessarily equates with ability
to make meaningful use of the facili-
ties. In short, we must acknowledge
and accept the enormity of the chal-
lenge still facing us-the challenge of
making wise use for universal benefit
of the marvelous tools of communica-
tion that scientists and engineers are
laying before us.
Having done this, we can take a
backward glance as the trail travelled
so far and derive therefrom a generous
measure of satisfaction for a good
many substantial accomplishments. In
1950, in its first edition of the glo-
bal survey, World Communications,
Unesco reported the disturbing fact
that"little or no modern means of
communication"existed for many
millions of people in vast areas of
the world.
To say the least, the situation has
changed, as the fourth (1964) edition
of World Communications illustrates
so clearly. The Unesco-postulated
goal of ten copies of daily newspapers,
five radio receivers and two cinema
seats per 100 people, per country, as
an acceptable minimum has not yet
been attained by any means ; never-
theless, there has been immense prog-
ress since the immediate post-World
War II years.
In the case of the daily press, news-
paper circulation in the world gen-
erally has increased, especially in a
great many developing countries (in
some of which, indeed, no newspapers
at aN existed 20 years ago). This
increase is in particular evidence in
the developing regions and countries
of Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Only in North America in fact,
do we see that daily newspa-
per circulation, although still rising,
has fallen behind population increases
- a fact generally attributed to the
phenomenal growth of television.
Concomitant with the overall surge
in newspaper circulation has been an
increase in the number of news agen-
cies serving the several media of mass
communication ; there are now 155 such
agencies in a total of 80 countries, as
compared with 96 in only 54 countries
when Unesco first surveyed the field.
The periodical press, too, figures
largely in the global picture of mass
communication. There are no reliable
world-wide data on magazines and
similar publications, but there indubi-
tably has been since 1945 a vast num-37
ber of new periodicals launched, cater-
ing for an equally vast number of
audience needs and tastes.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

TWO DECADES OF MASS MEDIA (Continued)
From transistor
to communication satellite
The periodical press may well play
an increasingly important role in edu-
cation as a bridge to wider avenues of
learning for the world's 700 million
illiterates. This is especially true in
developing countries where the spe-
cialized publication, relatively accessi-
ble and uniquely suited for extended
reading, can p ! ay a vitai part in both
literacy teaching and general educa-
tional programmes.
The cinema, despite the rise and
challenge of television, still continues
its reign as monarch of the media of
entertainment in most areas of the
world. No doubt the most interesting
development in this regard has been
the shift over the past 20 years in
the locus of film production. Espe-
cially in the last ten years, feature
films have been put out in increasing
numbers by Japan, India and Hong
Kong, in Asia ; by the United Arab
Republic in Africa ; by Argentina and
Brazil, in particular, in South America ;
and by the Soviet Union.
The United States, once the leader
in this field, now ranks fourth in the
world in terms of annual production of
feature films. Europe, too, has seen
a decline in film production (and a
lesser decline in cinema attendance),
thus reflecting, like North America,
television's competition for audiences
in search of entertainment. In the
Soviet Union, on the other hand, both
the production and attraction of
feature films has skyrocketed in the
past ten or more years-despite the
introduction of television.
The use of the film for educational
and informational purpose continues to
grow everywhere in the world. Added
to this medium's traditional attributes
of transportability and audio-visual
acceptability are new techniques in
the uses of colour, wide-screen pho-
tography, and projection facilities.
Television, the only new medium of
mass communication introduced since
the end of World War'II, has at the
same time proliferated more rapidly
than any other medium-first in North
America, then almost simultaneously
in the United Kingdom and Western
Europe and only a little later in Eastern
Europe, the Soviet Union, Asia, Latin
America and Africa. TV, yesterday's
novelty, has become a commonplace
seemingly overnight.
There had been telecasting, largely
experimental, in England and the Uni-
ted States before 1939, but World War
II shut off growth of the new medium.
Only 20 years ago, there were but six
38 to stations transmitting in the United States to a few thousand r ceivers ;
five years later, there were not even
any receivers for TV in Africa, Asia and
Oceania. Today, there are some
140 million television receivers in the
world, and in the neighbourhood of
2, 500 transmitters.
Pervasive though television has
become, however, there remain large
sectors of the world where the me-
dium, even though it may exist in the
form of transmitting facilities, is far
from being accessible to many millions
of people unable to afford receiving
sets. Despite these large patches of
TV's non-penetration on the world
map, it is incontestable that the past
two decades have witnessed the most
promising-and often spectacular-
pilot projects for the achievement of
the goal defined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
In particular, there is the exciting
promise in the continuing co-operation
among member-countries of Eurovision
and Intervision in the exchange of
programmes and on occasion, facilities,
for the education, enlightenment and
entertainment of many millions of view-
ers in the U. S. S. R.. Eastern and
Western Europe, and North America.
It is sometimes suggested that the
post-World War II years could be
termed The Age of the Transistor.
Certainly it is true that the advent of
exquisitely miniaturized electronic cir-
cuitry is among the most significant
technical developments affecting the
mass media of information in the past
20 or so years. The impact of the
transistor alone on radio broadcasting
throughout the world is almost incal-
culable.
Moreover, equally important techno-
logical innovations are promised by
scientists ; these developments, coupl-
ed with factors related to economics,
geography, and political and social
development, strongly suggest that
radio likely will remain for some time
the single medium best suited for meet-
ing the requirements of mass educa-
tion and literacy programmes in many
developing countries.
Everywhere in the world since 1946
radio has become firmly seated as the
most widely spreading of all the mass
media. In Africa, there were 140
radio transmitters as recently as 1950 ;
today, that figure has nearly tripled.
In less than 20 years, the number
of radio transmitters has nearly qua-
drupled in the U. S. S. R., tripled in
Asia, doubled in South America. Once
again, however, such figures can be
deceptive, for despite the startling
percentage increases, in the number
of transmitters in Africa, Asia and
some areas of Latin America, radio
broadcasting remains below what
Unesco considers the minimum, name-
ly five radio receiving sets per 100
people.
Finally, literally soaring over all
other instruments of mass information
conveyance, there is the communica-
tion satellite-far and away the most
significant technical accomplishment
and historical milestone of the past
20 years. As pioneered by the United
States and the Soviet Union, the com-
munication satellite has demonstrated
that there are no physical limitations
to the spatial dimensions of mass com-
munication.
Already millions of television view-
ers and radio listeners in Asia, North
and South America, Europe and the
U. S. S. R. have sat in their homes to
see and hear programmes originating
"live"from points many thousands of
miles distant, thanks to the miracle of
relay transmitters orbiting thousands
of miles above the planet.
Last December, Unesco called a
meeting of experts at its Paris head-
quarters to take up in a preliminary
way the complex problems posed by
the presumed uses of space commun-cation by the mass media. The
United Nations General Assembly has
declared that"communication by
means of satellite should be available
to the nations of the world as soon as
practicable on a global and non-dis-
criminatory basis."The recent Unesco
conference addressed itself to a
consideration of how this might be
done.
In the meantime, the communication
I
Proto Unesca-Airna ;- ; y.Vauthcy

satellite-of which only a few proto-
types have been placed in orbit-is
less than five years off the drawing
board, and what it may portend for
the future of world communications re-
mains to be systematically contemplat-
ed and structured. The United States
has placed principal authority for
development of its communication
satellite system in the hands of a pri-
vate corporation, which is just now
commencing to explore the specifics of
its mission. A complicating factor is
that the private American concern ne-
gotiates with the several European
members of a recently established
communication satellite consortium,
which for the most part represents
national governments. The role, if
any, of Unesco or of the United Na-
tions in any eventual system or sys-
tems, cannot at this time be foreseen
with certainty.
In sum, the development of mass
communication in the world in the last
20 years, quantitatively, has been
steady, encouraging and in some res-
pects spectacular. Especially since the
1950s, more people have been able to
read more printed publications, to
enjoy more cinemas and more radio
and television offerings. To the extent
that sheer numbers of communication
channels and the means for tapping
them constitute progress, the cause of
improving education and politico-socio-
economic development everywhere in
the world has been exceedingly well
served in the eventful years since
Unesco was founded.
There, remains the agenda-already
full, it would seem, yet constantly
being crowded with ever more entries
- of pressing considerations related
to the utilization and implementation of
all these efficient machines for dissem-
inating ideas and information. In the
next 20 years, or in the next ten or
five years, the world community must
attempt to reduce the number of unre-
solved items on this agenda.
To cite but one example : Twenty
years hence or even much sooner,
there will be in existence one or
more communication satellite systems.
Whether or not any of these may in
some way be available to (or perhaps
even administered by) United Nations
agencies and the countries and regions
they serve, it will be imperative for the
fundamental cause of world amity that
the United Nations in some realistic
manner should be privy to policy and
operational deliberations concerning
them. We can be grateful that Unesco
has already begun to examine how
space communication can be put
to use in its continuing programme
for the use of the mass media for edu-
cation and for literacy campaigns.
For the developing countries, espe-
cially, establishing economic and edu-
cational bases upon which to found
viable mass communications systems-
complex though this task is in itself-
may well be less crucial than ensur-
ing an adequate supply of profession-
ally trained and educated commu-
nicators-journalists and educators.
Unesco's efforts in this field are
reflected in the fact that more than
70 countries today have schools of
journalism or training programmes for
workers in the mass media, whereas
only 25 countries had such facilities
when the first meeting of journalism
educators and media experts was held
in 1947.
No mass medium-print or broad-
cast, traditional or innovative-can be
any more useful to the culture and
society it operates in than the people
who decide what it will say to its
audiences. There is always the dan-
ger, as some of the technologically
advanced countries have discovered,
that the medium can in effect"run
away with"the human beings who
created it in the first place.
More books, more cinemas, more
transmitters, more periodical and
newspapers, more receivers-we
should see to it that these remain what
they must always be : tools in the ser-
vice of and at the command of man. In
themselves, they are nothing only
human beings, speaking through these
media to other human beings, make
them worthy of our attention.
In 1954 Africa hand, neo television transmitter. Toddy it al-tional programmers in wall paris oaf the world (24 rational projects
ready hats thirsty. Let, a young television technician ant work where operating in 1965-1966), Least rear it lunched a pilot
in Laos (nigeria). Light, children in-Niamey (tiger) witch protect in Dakar tao sturdy sew method oaf adult educe-
ain educational programme on closed-circuit television. Unesco ton. Programmers four tele-clubs in Senegal (proto abode), in-
has increased its efforts to initiate radio and television educa-clude hygiene, nutrition, civic education and cultural subjects.
