THE AMBER ROUTES
OF ANTIQUITY
by Wladislaw Grzedzielski

Trading in amber began
3,000 years ago when
the merchants
of Phoenicia
made long voyages
¡n search of it,
thus launching a commerce that
was to spread
throughout Europe.
The great amber routes
of the past which
ran from the Baltic
to the Mediterranean
and the Black Sea,
are shown on this map.
Sea routes,
probably those followed
by the Phoenicians,
are shown in white;
dotted lines indicate
where merchants
travelled across country
or by inland waterways.
I NE could hardly begin the story of amber
without recalling a Greek myth which Ovid
recounts in his Metamorphoses. No doubt most people
have already heard it, but its charm is such that one may
be forgiven for telling it again.
The adventure of Phaeton, who pursuaded his father
Helios, the Sun God, to let him drive the Sun Chariot across
the heavens, may serve as a warning to any young man
who should ever aspire to take the controls of a space ship
without a pilot's licence. The adventure ended disastrously
since Phaeton, unaccustomed to driving the Sun Chariot,
came too close to earth and nearly burnt up the universe. In
his anger, Jupiter struck Phaeton with a thunderbolt and
cast his body into the River Eridanus. Phaeton's sisters,
the Heliades, were changed into poplar trees because they
had yoked the horses to the Sun Chariot, and the tears
they wept hardened into drops of amber which the river
bore down to the sea.
What is really interesting about the legend is the idea
that amber has a vegetable origin ("tree tears"). This
was eventually confirmed at the end of the eighteenth
century and in the nineteeth century by the research of
such scientists as Lomonosov, Bock, Struve and others.
Aristotle had already been on the right track in asserting
that amber was a resin since it contained fossilized plants
and insects which could only have penetrated the amber if
it had originally been in a liquid state. Similar views were
put forward during the Roman epoch by Pliny and Tacitus.
What was it that aroused the interest in amber displayed
by Aristotle, Plato and the great Roman scholars? The
answer lies in the Greek name for amber, "elektron", a
word which provides the root for the universal term,
common to all languages, "electricity". When rubbed with
a piece of woollen cloth, amber attracts nearby vegetable
bodies and it was this which linked elektron with physical
phenomena observed subsequently. The Greeks and, no
doubt even earlier, the peoples of the Near East and Egypt,
regarded amber as a magical stone because of its electro¬
static properties, its splendid colour and the fact that it
was light and pleasant to the touch.
From remotest antiquity, therefore, it was used as an
amulet, a talisman which ensured happiness, fecundity and
WLADYSLAW GRZEDZIELSKI is a Polish journalist and is secre¬
tary-general of the Polish National Commission for Unesco.
protection against illness. In powdered form it was employed
as a medicine; it was an ornament worn by kings and
warriors; it was the favourite adornment of women. The
main decorative element in the renowned crown of
Tutankhamen in the Cairo Museum is a piece of sun-colour¬
ed Baltic amber surrounded with diamonds, emeralds and
rubies.
Amber was of considerable value and the merchants of
ancient Phoenicia, made long voyages in search of it, thus
tracing out the first great amber routes.
Various varieties of amber exist in every continent but
the widest range is to be found in the Baltic Sea region
where, according to the Greek legend, the Eridanus flowed
into the sea. The amber of the Baltic coast is distinguished
by its superb colouring in various shades of yellowish-
brown, so that from earliest times it was known as
"Northern Gold" a name further justified by the fact that
it was worth its weight in gold.
Before the Ice Age, in the tertiary period from the Upper
Eocene to the Lower Oligocène between 45 and 34 million
years ago the regions now occupied by Scandinavia,
the Baltic Sea and the northern parts of the U.S.S.R.
Poland and Germany were covered with vast forests. These
"amber forests" consisted mostly of resinous trees and
especially pines (Pinus succinifer) which must have had
great powers of secretion since blocks of amber weighing
several kilogrammes are still found today.
The largest quantities of amber, whether brought up from
the sea bed, washed ashore by storms or extracted from
the earth, are to be found in the Sambia peninsula in the
eastern part of the Gulf of Gdansk, which was known to
the Romans and the Arabs.
The word amber was borrowed from the Arabs and the
Roman "ambar" is the origin of the name used in all the
Romance and Anglo-Saxon languages. In Germany it was
baptized "Bernstein", a derivative of "Brennenstein" the
burning stone. This, of course, was because of the inflam¬
mability of amber, the splendid flame with which it burns
and the perfume which it exudes.
I have already mentioned the sea route which was prob¬
ably the first followed by the Phoenicians in the search
for amber. It passed through the Mediterranean and led
along the Atlantic coasts to the Jutland peninsula which
was the base for trade with the Baltic region. Another great
European amber route ran from Massilia, now Marseilles,
which was an important trade centre, followed the Rhone
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

AMBER ROUTES (Cont'd)
The North Pole in a tomb of resin
22
and the Rhine and then proceeded overland to the shores
of the Baltic.
In the final volume of his Historia Naturalis, the Roman
historian Pliny gives an account of one of the Roman
expeditions to the Baltic Sea region which brought back
vast quantities of the precious substance, including blocks
of amber weighing as much as thirteen poundsl Among
other things, this amber was used to sand the arena of the
circus where the games were held in Nero's time.
The most important trade route followed by the Roman
and Arab amber-seekers passed through what is today
Poland, and numerous traces have been found in the course
of excavations which have uncovered coins and other
objects of Roman or Arab origin together with "amber
hoards" which were in fact the caches where the wholesale
merchants or their agents stored the amber while awaiting
the arrival of the buyers.
At that time there were no roads in Central Europe, and
dense forests, mud, snow and wild beasts made all travel
difficult. As a result, people relied primarily on waterways
and the navigable network between the Vistula, the Dniester
and the Dnieper, like a great fan linking the Baltic and the
Black Sea, was ideally suited to the purpose. This route
comprised four "spokes": the first began on the Gulf of
Danzig and followed the Vistula, the Bug, the Pripet, the
Dnieper and the Don, crossing the Kuban and the Tigris
to end up on the Persian Gulf whence the amber was sent
on to the markets of the Near East and especially those of
Persia.
The second possibility was to follow the Vistula, the
San and the Dniester to the Black Sea where the amber
found ready buyers among merchants from Egypt, Greece
and Southern Italy.
The third path was along the Vistula to the Warta and
then by minor rivers to the Odra, ending at a point on the
site of what is now Wroclaw which, to judge from the
many "amber hoards" since found there, must have been
one of the most important centres of the amber trade.
From Wroclaw, the amber was carried overland across
Moravia to Northern Italy. On this route lay the ancient
Roman colony, of Vindobona, an important trading centre,
which became the city of Vienna.
The most north-easterly route linked the Baltic Sea and
Byzantium and ran along the Neva and the Dnieper. Amber
was not the only product imported from North-East Europe,
which also supplied livestock, furs and feathers, the largest
importing centres being in the areas where Venice and
Trieste now stand.
HE Roman and Arab traders mainly bartered
amber for objects in iron and bronze, ornamental
weapons and fine cloth. From the sixth century onwards
they paid in gold coins as proved by the vast quantities
of coin from whole Mediterranean basin which have been
found during excavations along the "amber routes" des¬
cribed above.
The town of Kalisz in North East Poland boasts of a
2,000-year-old tradition: it arose on the site of the ancient
colony dating from the days of the Roman merchants'
expeditions, a colony known as Calisia which, like Wroclaw,
was undoubtedly one of the centres of the amber trade.
The great popularity of amber in ancient times came to an
end with the fall of the Roman Empire. The last mention of
amber from the period immediately following the break up
of the empire is to be found in a letter from Casslodorus,
Chancellor of Theodorlc the Great, conveying his thanks
to the Baltic Estes tribe for a gift of amber from the Sambia
peninsula. "We greet you", wrote Casslodorus, "and we
inform you that we have received with pleasure your gifts
of splendid amber. The sea bestows on you these stones
which gleam with so marvellous a light and yet your envoy
tells us you are utterly unaware of their origin even though
you were the first to receive this gift from the sea".
In the Middle Ages, as in modern times, amber was
primarily used as an ornament and a jewel. European
museums often contain superb carvings, decorated cups
or small boxes which are masterpieces of the jeweller's
art, since amber lends itself admirably to carving and
decoration, a fact of which artists have taken the utmost
advantage. Nevertheless, people continued to ascribe to it
magical and curative properties. When, for example, Prince
Albrecht sent his wishes for a speedy return to health to
Luther, in the 16th century, his message was accompanied
by a magnificent piece of amber.
N OT only the Arabs but, until the begining of the
twentieth century, almost all the peoples of
Europe used amber for making pipe-stems and cigarette-
holders. This may well have been the outcome of a tra¬
ditional belief which endowed it with what we would now
term bactericidal or disinfectant properties.
Amber served yet another purpose in the sumptuous
palace of Catherine of Russia at Tsarkoie Selo near Saint-
Petersburg (today Pushkino near Leningrad). One of the
rooms was entirely lined with amber and all the furniture
and objects which decorated this room were encrusted
with it. This unique masterpiece was destroyed during
the Second World War.
In the second half of the nineteeth century and the
beginning of the twentieth new uses were found for amber;
in particular it was found to be a valuable source of know¬
ledge concerning the plant and insect life of various
geological epochs. The resin of the "amber trees" not
only enclosed plants but also innumerable arthropods,
insects and even lizards. Such fossils helped scientists
to identify 190 species of plants and some 1,200 species
of arthropods and Insects.
The knowledge so acquired has aided research in other
fields; the fact that almost all types of "amber forests"
are similar to plant species In East Asia and North America
today led to significant discoveries concerning the climate
of that epoch and confirmed the theory that there had
been a shifting of the North Pole and changes in our
planet's climatic zones. Feathers found in pieces of amber
likewise provide ornithologists with valuable leads.
While out walking during a recent vacation near Danzig
I found a scrap of transparent honey-coloured amber In
the sand. Holding it up to the sun, I observed a host of
small dark spots Inside a microcosm of an epoch as
far distant from ours in time as the celestial bodies of
galaxies discovered in the twentieth century are from us In
space.
The wonder of amberl And the astonishing story behind
the routes which led to ¡tl They are routes which seem
made for communication and contact between men rather
than for war and pillaging. Amber fascinated scholars
and fair women, merchants and poets, and the route which
led to it has become one of the great arteries of civil¬
ization.
