Ten years ago, on October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union opened the Space Age
by launching the world's first artificial satellite. This achievement heralded
a decade of space research and exploration that already numbers
manned space flights, rendezvous between space vehicles and "walks"
in space by astronauts, scientific instrument probes to the Moon and Venus
and artificial satellites for long-range weather prediction and colour television
via space. This striking photograph (entitled "The Roads to Space")
of two research rockets bound for the upper atmosphere wa$ a prize-winning entry
in a 1966 Interpress photo contest In Moscow.
r Photo © A P N - V. Lebedev

700,000
scientists
in the
U.S.S.R.
in 1967
by Mikhail Lavrentiev
In 1913, scientific workers
and lecturers in Russlon higher educa¬
tional establishments numbered about
10,000. Today, the Soviet Union has
about 700,000 scientific workers a
quarter of all the scientists in the
world. Under the Soviet régime, the
membership of the Academy of
Sciences has grown to more than two
hundred times its former size, and
there has been an almost one-hundred¬
fold increase in the number of scientific
publications.
Each Republic of the Union has Its
own Academy of Sciences, with well
organized and equipped scientific
centres engaged in various types of
research. For example, the Academy
of Sciences of the Ukrainian S.S.R.
has about fifty scientific institutes.
Soviet physicists have synthesized
chemical elements 102 and 104 of the
periodic system of Mendeleev. Not
far from Moscow, near the ancient
MIKHAIL LAVRENTIEV is the founder and
present director of Akademgorodok, the
new city entirely devoted to science, built
in the heart of Siberia near Novosibirsk.
A Vice-President of the U.S.S.R. Academy
of Sciences and head of Its Siberian branch,
he is know primarily as a distinguished
mathematician, but has also won inter¬
national recognition for his work in aero¬
dynamics, hydrodynamics, explosion theory,
high velocity collisions and seismology.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
31

700,000 SCIENTISTS (Continued)
The mushroom growth
of research centres
32
Russian town of Serpukhov, the
world's most powerful particle accele¬
rator, a 70-Bev proton synchrocyclo¬
tron, will soon be in operation.
It cannot, of course, be said that
Soviet science began in a vacuum,
for Russia had great scientists before
the Soviet Revolution. The history of
science has an honoured place for
such researchers as Nikolai Loba-
chevsky, the inventor of. non-Euclidean
geometry, Dmitry Mendeleev, the
creator of the periodic system of che¬
mical elements, Aleksandr Butlerov,
the author of the first works on the
structure of organic compounds, and
llya Mechnikov, one of the founders
of immunology, the science which
investigates the defensive mechanisms
of the human organism.
The Czarist Government, however,
often attacked daring scientific thought,
with the result that the general level
of development in pre-Revolutionary
Russia was very low.
Despite the extremely difficult con¬
ditions created by the Civil War (1918-
22) foreign intervention, the blockade
and the economic dislocation which
affected every region of the country,
Lenin and his colleagues never lost
sight of the needs of Soviet science,
then in its infancy.
It might be thought that, in a country
whose industry and transport had been
destroyed and whose agriculture could
barely provide a starvation level of
sustenance for the population, the
first duty of the nation's leaders would
be to foster the development of applied
scientific research yielding immediate
practical results, and that abstract
science could wait.
But it was clear to Lenin that the
new society could not be built without
the active participation of the basic
sciences, for that was the only way
in which conditions favourable to the
rapid growth of applied research could
be created. Otherwise, the U.S.S.R.
would be condemned to perpetual
dependence on foreign science.
Lenin knew that unless a sufficiently
high level of development were attain¬
ed in mathematics, physics, mechanics,
chemistry, biology and the other
natural sciences, plans for building
socialism would remain merely Uto¬
pian. He therefore used all the means
in his power to mobilize scientists and
direct their efforts towards the dev¬
elopment of fundamental scientific
research and the establishment of
large, modern scientific centres.
As early as the years 1918-1920,
physico-technical, optical and radium
institutes were set up in Petrograd
(today Leningrad) while Moscow saw
the establishment of institutes of
physics and biophysics and of the
Central Institute of Aerodynamics the
famous "Tsagi" which has produced
the greatest Soviet mechanicians, air¬
craft constructors and rocket en¬
gineers. From 1920 onwards, the
number of scientific centres increased
year by year.
A second, extremely important
reason for the dynamic growth of
Soviet science was the introduction of
a universal system of popular educa¬
tion which made it possible for talented
young people to have scientific training.
Much was also due to the fact that,
from the very first years of the Revo¬
lution, scientific research was organ¬
ized on the basis of an integrated
national plan, under which goals and
objectives for the study and solution
of the most pressing problems of
science and technology at any given
time were fixed with reference to
scientific developments in the world
as a whole. The Soviet Union is
perhaps the first country which has
organized its scientific planning on a
nation-wide basis.
In 1920, Lenin Initiated the prepa¬
ration of the famous "Goerlo" plan,
which provided for the building of a
vast network of power stations and
for the development of industry over
a period of ten to fifteen years.
Lenin's electrification plan like all
subsequent scientific and economic
plans proved eminently feasible, for
the targets set by "Goerlo" were two
to three times over-fulfilled.
After the victory of 1945, world
science embarked on a new course
mapped out by the whole of its pre¬
vious evolution. Practical applications
were found for the results of a great
deal of basic research, notably in
atomic energy, electronic computing
and the exploration of space.
In nuclear physics, Igor Kurtchatov
contrived to build up around him and
to organize large groups composed
of the finest engineers and researchers
in various special fields. Soviet
scientists, for instance, were the first
to use hydrogen as a nuclear fuel.
In the conquest of space a pre¬
dominant rôle was played by Sergei
Korolyov. He, like Kurtchatov, had
a genius for co-ordinating the work
of researchers and constructors.
Soviet scientists and engineers were
the first to put into orbit an artificial
satellite and a manned capsule. The
launching of the first sputnik was a
tremendous spur to the development
of world science.
The last ten years have been marked
by the accelerated growth of research
centres, both in number and in quality.
Apart from questions of- nuclear energy
and the exploration of space, there
are many centres actively engaged on
CONTINUED ON PAGE 34
A Science City
rises from
the Siberian Taiga
Tib AUbJüJ;

Almost completely undeveloped before 1917, Siberia has
since undergone startling transformations. Novosibirsk
(600 miles north east of Lake Balkhash and close to the
Ob River) had 20,000 inhabitants in 1910. Today it has one
million. Already a big industrial centre, the city has also
become the scientific capital of Siberia with the creation
of Akademgorodok, known as "Science City." Twenty-five
miles from Novosibirsk, over 3,000 acres of virgin forest
were cleared as the site of a campus on which have been
built 20 research institutes (above right), a university, and
a special mathematics college for outstandingly gifted chil¬
dren selected by scientific "Olympiads". Above centre,
entrance hall of the hotel built to accomodate newly-arrived
scientists and students. Above left, hidden in the trees are
the homes of the several thousand scientists who work at
Akademgorodok. Below left, laboratory at Science City
whose Nuclear Physics Institute is completing a giant
proton-antiproton installation with an energy of 12»00 BeV
(thousand million electron volts). Below right, a shopping
centre, one of Akademgorodok's many community facilities.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

700,000 SCIENTISTS (Continued)
Siberia, open door to science
basic research in mathematics, en¬
gineering, solid state physics and
high energy physics.
In the last twenty years, mankind
has been experiencing a tremendous
scientific and technological revolution,
which has confronted science with a
number of complicated scientific and
organizational problems that are pre¬
occupying not only scientists but
governments in many countries.
Answers must be found to questions
such as that of determining the most
effective structure and location for a
34
SCIEIMTIST'STIME OUT
FOR RELAXATION
After working hours, scientists,
researchers and students at Science City,
near Novosibirsk young, and not so
young have ample opportunities
to enjoy their favourite pastimes.
1 Prof. Guri Martchuk, director of
* the Electronic Computing Department
at Science City, typifies the
youthfulness of many top-level scientists
at the U.S.S.R.'s second largest
scientific centre after Moscow.
Average age 33.
O Young scientists enjoy all types of
modern dancing at one of the
community clubs. Its name has
mathematical connotations
Integral".
3 Roller-skating provides an excellent
summer exercise for keeping
muscles in trim for skiing a
favourite winter sport in Science City.
A At the doorstep of Science City
is a vast artificial reservoir,
125 miles long known as "Obi Sea".
Many people have taken to boating and
sailing, and between them now have
400 to 500 motor-boats and yachts.
country's scientific institutes; planning
scientific development at a time when
the volume of scientific knowledge
can double in ten or twelve years;
finding the best ways of selecting and
training scientists and skilled workers,
the demand for whom is growing by
leaps and bounds; and somehow
strengthening the link between science
and the national economy.
As an example of how we in the
U.S.S.R. are tackling problems of this
type, I should like to say something
about the work of my own department
the Siberian Section of the Aca¬
demy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.
From the earliest years following
the October Revolution, Siberia and
the Soviet Far East experienced a
massive development, both economic
and cultural. Universities sprang up
at Irkutsk and Vladivostok; schools
and factories mushroomed everywhere
and finally a number of branches of
the Soviet Academy of Sciences were
established. In brief, this wild region,
which had previously served chiefly
as a place of exile, began slowly to
change into a civilized area.
During the first Five-Year Plan there
grew up the new metallurgical centre
of the Kuznetsk Basin, which today
has an essential rôle in the national
economy. Siberia's contribution during
the Second World War is inestimable;
together with the Urals, it sent to the
front equipment and fighting men of
the highest quality.
Victory won, the Soviet people
concentrated the greater part of its
energies on reconstructing its shatter¬
ed towns and factories and restoring
a devastated countryside. During this
difficult period, only slow progress
was made with the development of
Siberia. We had to wait until 1956,
and the 20th Party Congress, before
a fresh stimulus was given to these
regions with their fabulous unexplored
natural wealth. A plan was drawn
up providing for intensive underground
prospection, the establishment of an
infrastructure for industry and energy
resources and a huge network of
secondary schools and higher edu¬
cational establishments. Science was
given a fresh start.
To achieve rapid and complete
results it was, of course, necessary
to reinforce existing establishments
mainly regional branches of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and
government research centres. Above
all it was essential to create centres
and institutes capable of carrying out
basic studies ranking with scientific
research at world level.
In 1957 the Soviet Government
therefore decided to set up a Sib¬
erian section of the Soviet Academy
of Sciences and to build a big scien¬
tific centre which would be responsi¬
ble for all the branches and institutes
of the Academy of Sciences situated
east of the Urals.
A government committee was spe¬
cially nominated to draw up the
statutes of the Siberian section and
to establish a timetable for the
construction, equipment and launching
of the new centres. The committee
was given a programme and, drawing
upon national and international exper¬
ience, it began by laying down guiding
principles.
The site selected for the new scien¬
tific centre was in a pine forest on the
z
<

edge of the Obi Reservoir, 25 kilo¬
metres (15 miles) south of Novosibirsk.
In seeking to attract to Siberia first-
rate scientists, it was important to take
full advantage of this natural scenic
beauty.
Since its foundation nine years ago,
Akademgorodok, or "Science City"
as it has been called, has greatly
expanded. Its citizens today include
16 Academicians, 30 Corresponding
Members of the Academy, 95 Doctors
of Science and 950 Candidates.
Workers and office staff number
16,000.
The centre is concerned with all
the major problems of modern science;
every branch is represented: mathe¬
matics, physics, chemistry, biology,
geology and the social sciences, and
each yields results of the greatest
significance. Some of the work has
been awarded the Lenin Prize nuclear
physics research concerning the induc¬
ed collision of beams of particles,
studies on the theory of detonation
and on applied cybernetics. Geolo¬
gists, biologists and mathematicians
have achieved remarkable successes.
Scarcely had the organization of
the Siberian section got under way
than our research teams established
close contacts with the industry and
economy of Siberia and the Far East.
The specific problems of this vast
region with its low population density
have been studied with particular
attention. Our scientists have given
hundreds of lectures on current prob¬
lems of science in towns and in large
factories; we have undertaken a de¬
tailed study on ways in which Siberia's
special climatic conditions hamper
the development of industry notably
the mining industry.
Though in most instances we have
had to be satisfied with giving general
advice, joint studies have also fre¬
quently led to close collaboration over
several years. Today the institutes
controlled by our centre are in per¬
manent contact with more than 300
factories and enterprises in the East.
Joint efforts by scientists and in¬
dustrialists have enabled us to find
practical economic uses for fundamen¬
tally new scientific concepts. At Novo¬
sibirsk researchers and industrialists
are together studying the industrial
application of a new technology which
uses the method of flash welding to
obtain laminated materials. This most
promising technique offers almost un¬
limited combinations of metals to meet
desired specifications. For example,
we have some "bl-metals" whose resis¬
tance to heat and whose refractory
and anti-corrosive properties are quite
remarkable. These may be of great
utility for chemical apparatus, electro-
technical installations, etc.
I
HE study of the behaviour
of dynamically supercharged water has
given rise to the "impulse currents"
theory and this in turn has enabled
us to build a whole range of super-
powerful presses intended for stamp¬
ing out shaped components in different
metals. These hydraulic-impulse pres¬
ses giving an impact energy of the
order of 200 strokes per minute are at
present undergoing trials in the facto¬
ries of Novosibirsk. This alliance bet¬
ween science and production is bound
to expand in the future.
Unfortunately, experience has shown
that a direct transition from science
to industry is not always successful; we
have seen considerable efforts by both
parties end in failure, each side being
Photos © Paul Almasy, Pans
1 « |f"ll% »«»'<* *--
» ^».
m«
fully convinced that the other was
to blame. The conclusion we draw is
that it is no good approaching big
industry without adequate preparation,
and without realizing quite clearly that
the more revolutionary an idea, the
greater the need to work it out fully
on the spot and to perfect its techno¬
logy.
In response to our proposal, the Sov¬
iet Government has decided to set up
a series of pilot plants and construc¬
tion centres near to Soience City.
These are intended to be the half¬
way house between a scientific disco¬
very and its practical application. It is
here that students or trainees in the
last year of higher studies can, by way
of vocational training, gain practical
experience in new products and new
technologies so that when we submit
drawings, technological plans or proto¬
types to industrialists, we can send
them at the same time young people
who have played an active part in
their creation.
We already have two pilot projects
of this nature: one specializing in hy¬
draulic stamping equipment and an¬
other dealing with economic evalua¬
tion and planning. The first has per¬
fected a new range of machines found¬
ed upon the principles already des¬
cribed, and giving pressures and
speeds never before attained. The
prototypes have been built and are
now being tested for resistance to wear
and for stability. The second project
has a purely economic function; it is
already dealing with innumerable in¬
quiries concerning optimum layout of
equipment and buildings and the cons¬
truction of new industrial plants. We
are now setting up another pilot plant
for research and construction, specia¬
lizing in small-scale accelerators for
industrial use, catalysers, precision
instruments, etc.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
5 4 35
wm >mk

700,000 SCIENTISTS (Continued)
Photos © Paul Almasy, Pans
The man behind
Science City
Founder of Akademgorodok, Siberia's
Science City, the distinguished scientist,
Mikhail Lavrentiev finds time, between
his research, lectures and
administrative work, to take an interest
in every aspect of its life. Left,
Prof. Lavrentiev outside his 8-year-old
bungalow the city's oldest house. Above,
at the wheel of his car he stops for
a chat with one of his assistants.
Below, on a boat trip with his daughter
Vera, also a mathematician,
and his granddaughter.
Since its creation, the Siberian sec¬
tion has consistently sought to attract
young talent and to educate and train
it. The Soviet Union may justly pride
itself on possessing the largest net¬
work of secondary schools and higher
educational establishments in the
world.
The attraction exerted by science
and technology upon Soviet youth is
unmistakable. In addition to schools,
technical clubs abound where young¬
sters of 10 to 12 years of age build
model boats or aircraft, assemble wire¬
less sets and so on. Even so, we
consider that the development of our
education lags behind our needs
behind the evolution of science and
technology.
The shortage of qualified staff is
particularly acute in centres of higher
education and in those technical fields
which are working on the newest scien¬
tific discoveries. When organizing our
university in Science City, we plan¬
ned to base our teaching on the system
of laboratories attached to the research
institutes and to recruit our teachers
as widely as possible from among both
the older and the younger generations
of scientists. That is what we do in
practice.
In view of the outstanding educa¬
tional opportunities which we are able
to offer young people and because of
the limited capacity of our laboratories,
we have naturally had to adopt a
system of selection which ensures
the admission to our university of
talented young people who know exact¬
ly what they want to do.
A
S regards mathematics and
physics, and later chemistry, we solved
the problem by arranging a selective
system of "Scientific Olympics," orga¬
nized in three stages and open to the
largest possible number of candidates.
This revealed that in the remote re¬
gions of Siberia mathematical apti¬
tudes are underdeveloped solely be¬
cause of insufficiently qualified teach¬
ing staff. Today, therefore, our selec¬
tion is carried out in depth and we
have even set up a residential col¬
lege for studies in physics and ma¬
thematics, specifically for young people
who have a natural talent but an In¬
sufficient stock of knowledge.
Six years' experience have convinced
us of the success of this system. In
a few years, not only shall we be able
to provide our own replacements, but
also to supply other higher schools
and research centres with large num¬
bers of graduate and of Doctors in
Science, eminently qualified and pos¬
sessing a high creative potential.
As Science City itself has grown,
many branch centres and institutes in
the East have also been considerably
expanded. The major impetus has
been given to the branch at Irkutsk,
where the local Institute of Energy has

achieved outstanding results and now
boasts a first-class electronic comput¬
ing centre. Equally satisfying progress
has been recorded by the scientific
establishments at Yakutsk, Magadan
and Vladivostok.
Having gradually overcome the dif¬
ficulties of growth, the Siberian section
is developing and spreading; its net¬
work of research centres is expanding
and its contacts with the national eco¬
nomy grow stronger. From year to
year the wealth of our country in¬
creases, as does the rôle of science in
its industry and its economy. Yet
while working at our daily tasks, we
are also duty bound to look to the
future, paying special attention to
training a new generation of the highest
quality. The future development of
our country depends entirely upon the
men and women we train today.
Photo ©APN
Antennae of a giant radiotélescope
installed near Kharkov, in
the Ukrainian SSR. It is used to
pick up natural radio signals
coming from outer space.
Left, a prototype hydraulic press.
Despite its relatively small size,
it is four times more
powerful that any similar system
hitherto employed in industry. It was
designed by Prof. Mikhail Lavrentiev.
37
