FROM ILLITERACY
TO ASTRONAUTICS
by Viacheslav Elyutin
Photo © APN
These Soviet girls are final year
students at the teacher training
college of Narian-Mar, chief town
of the Nenets (Samoyedes)
National Area which covers
almost 180,000 sq. kms within
the Arctic Circle. Fifty years
ago this vast tundra was peopled
almost entirely by nomad tribes
of hunters and reindeer herdsmen
who were totally illiterate. The
Samoyede language had not
even a written form. Today higher
education is open to the children
of yesterday's illiterates. The
U.S.S.R. spends 18,700 million
rubles (17.6 per cent of its
annual budget) on education.
H.lalf a century ago when our
country entered on its new life, the
entire population men and women,
workers and peasants, Russians and
Ukrainians, Kazakhs and Uzbeks,
Nentsi and Azerbaijanians from the
age of eight years upwards had to learn
to read and write. Millions of citizens
were taking their place in the central,
VIACHESLAV ELYUTIN is Minister for
Higher Education and Secondary Technical
Education in the U.S.S.R. A Corresponding
Member of the U.S.S.R. Academy of
Sciences, he has written many studies on
educational questions and has been
awarded a U.S.S.R. State Prize.
national and local administrative orga¬
nizations of the country, and the natio¬
nal economy, ruined by imperialist and
civil wars, had to be set back on its
feet.
In 1913, Czarist Russia accounted for
a little over 4 per cent of the world's
industrial production, and in 1920 this
percentage was further decreased by
the slump resulting from these con¬
flicts. The country's agriculture had
also suffered heavily.
Contemporary statistics show that
at the beginning of 1917, 30 per cent of
the country's population was illiterate,
while among women, illiteracy reached
88 per cent. The local populations of
the lands surrounding Czarist Russia,
Central Asia in particular, were like¬
wise almost totally illiterate: only 5 per
cent of Tadzhiks, 6 per cent of Kirghiz-
ians, and 7 per cent of Turkmenians
could read. Only 1,400,000 out of the
165 million inhabitants in the whole of
Czarist Russia had received any
education above the primary school
level. In short, the Czarist regime
bequeathed us a burdensome legacy in
national education.
In 1919, the People's Commissariat
(or Ministry) of Public Education in the
U.S.S.R. described the level of tech¬
nical knowledge in the new Soviet
country as follows: "The number of
CONTINUED ON PAGE 13
11

Photo © APN
Time for
study,
time for
play
>
<D
i

FROM ILLITERACY TO ASTRONAUTICS (Continued)
One person in three a student
In the Soviet Union one person in three
studies (not taking into account children
in nursery schools). Programmes and teaching
methods are being increasingly adapted to
the needs of modern scientific development,
and the length of compulsory schooling has
been increased. Above left, time off between
lessons for some high spirited boys and girls
in a primary school (all Soviet schools are
co-educational). In certain schools, from the
first year children are given a specialized
education appropriate to their needs and
aptitudes. Left, games with equations are
child's-play for a rising generation of young
nfathematicans taking their recreation break.
Below, this little girl from Tadjikstan, in Soviet
Central Asia, is already learning to read in
English. Common denominator of all these
youngsters is their passion for books (annual
book production in the U.S.S.R. has now reached
1,250 million). Above, behind a young reader
in Moscow Pioneers Youth Club, the familiar
figure of Don Quixote appropriately
symbolizes the quest for adventure.
clothe»
y caí
Photo © V. Chustov - M. Alpert
engineers in our country is negligible...
Desperately insufficient too are the
numbers of those with a secondary
technical education... The general level
of technical knowledge in Russia is
low..."
Knowledge... the nation needed it
urgently, and people in every part of
the country aspired to greater learning.
Emergent countries today are under¬
going a similar experience, with this
single exception, that in the case of
the Soviet Union there was no outside
aid. Nor was there, at that time, any
international organization such as
Unesco which could have given help
in teaching. On the other hand, Soviet
Russia had a nucleus of avant-garde
intellectuals, young students, who
though not very numerous, were full
of enthusiasm and ready to give their
energy, their time and their skill to the
cause of mass education. The schools
were open to everybody.
The new students who flocked to the
institutes and to the universities were
yesterday's workers and peasants,
with their children. Few of them had
the necessary education. So, on the
initiative of the workers of Moscow,
"workers' faculties" were created,
where adults who already had con¬
siderable experience of life could learn
the rudiments of the subjects required
for admission to institutions of higher
education. Workers' faculties were a
temporary expedient, but, given the
conditions of the time, they amply
justified their creation. Now, with the
growth and improvement of secondary
education in the U.S.S.R. they are no
longer needed.
Many present-day directors of indus¬
trial and other installations as well,
and many Soviet scholars of note,
began their training in the workers'
faculties.
One of them is Professor Evgeni
Tovstykh, Rector of the Institute of
Naval Construction in Leningrad. The
son of a workman, he started work
himself at 15. From 1926 to 1929, he
was sent by Komsomol to study at the
workers' faculty of Nikolaiev, and
thereafter, from 1929 to 1933, he
attended the Institute of Naval Con¬
struction in the same town. Once qua¬
lified as an engineer, Tovstykh, though
beginning only as a foreman, climbed
the ladder of promotion to become
director of some of the biggest
shipyards in the country, including the
Baltic Factory of Leningrad. Since
1945 he has been head of the Institute
of Naval Construction in Leningrad.
He is not only an outstanding scholar
and professor but also an active and
militant social worker.
The right of the citizen to be educ¬
ated is laid down by the Constitution
of the U.S.S.R. It is guaranteed by
eight years of compulsory schooling
and by the constant expansion of faci¬
lities for general secondary, vocational
technical, specialized secondary and
higher education, which the State
encourages. In the U.S.S.R. all forms
of education are free. Most students,
and specialized secondary school
pupils, too, have grants and free
lodging.
Since the Soviets first came to
power, the schools in the Soviet Union
have trained close on 7 million spec¬
ialists who have had a higher educa¬
tion and more than 11 million with
secondary qualifications. During the
seven-year period from 1958 to 1965
alone, more than 5 million specialists,
including 2,412,000 with higher educ¬
ation, were trained in accordance with
the plan for the development of the
national economy.
A
T the beginning of 1967,
the Soviet economy was employing
1,800,000 engineers, over 3 million
technicians, 320,000 specialists in rural
economics who had received higher
education, and approximately 500,000
who had had specialized secondary
instruction, 554,000 doctors, nearly
2 million teachers with higher educa¬
tional qualifications and 1,300,000 with
specialized secondary qualifications.
It should be observed that among the
Soviet specialists who have had a
higher education there are 2,518,000
women (52 per cent). Among those
who have a specialized secondary
education, there are more than
4,400,000 women representing 62 per
cent of the total number of specialists.
From 1940 to 1966, the vocational
training schools trained nearly 17 mil¬
lion skilled workers for different trades.
During the scholastic year 1966-1967,
the number of Soviet citizens pursuing
studies of one kind or another amount¬
ed to 72 million, 48 million of whom
were pupils in schools of general
education. Today the U.S.S.R. boasts
767 universities and institutes (or
seven times as many as in Czarist
Russia) with 4,120,000 students
(34 times the number under the old
régime), and approximately 4,000 tech¬
nical schools, with 4 million students.
Institutions of higher education in
the U.S.S.R. are of.two kinds: institutes
and universities. The institutes provide
a four to six-year course and train
engineers, agronomists, doctors, teach¬
ers, economists, -jurists and other
specialized practitioners. Such insti¬
tutes are to be found today, as are
universities, in all 15 of the federated
republics of our country.
In 1967, 900,000 new students en¬
tered institutions of higher education,
405,000 of whom attended day classes,
the rest going to evening classes or
taking correspondence courses. Stu¬
dents in faculties and institutes who
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

FROM ILLITERACY TO ASTRONAUTICS (Continued)
Special privileges
for evening students
14
attend evening classes or take corres¬
pondence courses enjoy various privi¬
leges at their places of work. For
exemple, they can obtain a maximum
of 40 days' supplementary leave per
year for laboratory work, tests and
examinations, as well as paid leave
during the last year of study, Of four
months for students at higher educa¬
tional establishments and of two
months for pupils at specialized secon¬
dary schools, to enable them to pre¬
pare and present their diploma pro¬
jects.
Courses of study in colleges and
other institutions of higher education
are divided as follows: in advanced
technical colleges almost half the time
is spent on general subjects (social
sciences, higher mathematics, physics,
chemistry, a foreign language, etc.),
25 per cent is devoted to general tech¬
nical instruction (stress-resistance of
materials, interchangeability of machine
parts, theory of mechanics and machine
design, electro-technology, hydraulics,
etc.) and 25 per cent to 30 per cent to
special subjects. Practical work occu¬
pies nearly 25 per cent of the total
study time and experience has shown
that, provided the student has a sound
general training in the theory of each
subject, this is quite ample.
It should be noted that colleges and
universities have not given enough
attention to the importance of practical
scientific work as opposed to theo¬
retical training. In the last few years,
however, contacts with industry and
agriculture have been developed for
this purpose to a noteworthy extent.
At the request of industrial concerns,
co-operative farms (kolkhozes), state-
farms (sovkhozes) and various econo¬
mic bodies, student clubs and societies
now study the operating efficiency of
industrial and agricultural installations
and then draw up plans for machines
and machine-tools, survey the subsoil
and study demographic problems for
future scientific development.
As an instance of this, the students
of the Institute of Civil Engineering In
Moscow have prepared a project
for an experimental town in the
Polar regions, and a project for an
embankment involving improvement of
the area adjoining the reservoir in
the town of Ijevsk, in the Ural region.
The students of the Institute of Archi¬
tecture In Moscow have drawn up a
plan for the reconstruction of the
industrial sector of Ivanovo, north-east
of the capital.
The rapid increase in our scientific
knowledge (specialists consider that
the quantity of scientific Information in
the world Is doubled every ten years)
coupled with the relatively short time
that can be devoted to education de
mands constant improvement of study
methods. Films, radio, television and
computers are being called upon more
and more often to supplement tradi¬
tional methods of teaching. The study
of the problems of programmed learn¬
ing in the U.S.S.R. is of relatively
recent date, but positive experience
has already been acquired in this field.
In collaboration with specialists in
education, psychology, cybernetics and
mathematical logic, scientists and stud¬
ents at our institutes have invented
many varied teaching and testing
devices.
From year to year an ever-increasing
number of young people come from
abroad to study in the U.S.S.R. In
Soviet institutes there are many young
Asians, Africans and Latin Americans.
At present there are more than 24,000
foreigners from 130 different countries
in nearly 300 schools in the U.S.S.R.;
over 10,000 of these come from Asian,
African and Latin American countries.
Among the Soviet institutions of
higher education which train high-
ranking staff for the Asian, African and
Latin American nations, the Patrice
Lumumba Peoples' Friendship Univer¬
sity, founded in 1960, plays an impor¬
tant rôle. Close on a thousand young
engineers, agronomists, mathematic¬
ians, physicists, jurists, philologists
and economists have already com¬
pleted their studies at this university
and, specialists now in their field, have
returned to their own countries.
Apart from training foreign special¬
ists in Soviet colleges the U.S.S.R. is
co-operating on the technical side in
the foundation of study centres in
developing countries. With Soviet aid,
22 centres have been or are being built
in Burma, India, Indonesia, Ethiopia,
Cambodia, Guinea, Mali, Algeria,
Kenya, Afghanistan, Tunisia and else¬
where. Soviet establishments of higher
education help In working out plans for
teaching methods and send textbooks,
specialist publications and scientific
and technical information for these
study centres. Hundreds of Soviet
teachers are working there too.
The most important task of higher
and specialized secondary establish¬
ments is to improve the training and
education of specialists with due re¬
gard for the requirements of contem¬
porary production, science, technology
and culture and the possibilities for
their future development. To this end,
scientific groups have worked out
means of determining the scope and
the content not only of each branch of
Instruction but also of each subject.
This will be a sound guarantee of
further successes in the development
of higher and specialized secondary
education in the Soviet Union.

