ff A 4 The era 
1 q of synthetic 
1 SE. materials 
Bi —— 4 e Th EN Brac to industrial devel- 
; % opment in the twentieth century was 
the growing ability to use more and 
more kinds of materials to serve man’s 
needs and wants. In one sense 
twentieth-century technology was the 
greatest user of resources that the 
world had known; in another sense it 
was the greatest creator, for it 
transformed one after another of the 
elements in the land, sea and air into 
- forms which man could use. . . 
One of the most spectacular and 
revolutionary contributions of tech- 
74 nology to the supply of industrial 
materials was the creation of new 
substances, known generally as plas- 
tics, either in imitation of natural pro- 
ducts or to provide something which 
RV 5 had no counterpart in nature but which 
f possessed properties desired for a 
Ww particular use. 
Using chiefly hydrocarbons which 
could be derived from many sources 
—coal, petroleum, coal tar, cellulose 
- from wood pulp or sugar-cane waste 
y —the chemical industry learned how 
} y to put together enormously complex 
o- chains of atoms by a process known 
; p as polymerization to produce tough 
fibres, sheets or moulded forms. 
x ot , 
Since the variety and complexity of 
the chains which could be created 
was almost unlimited, it became pos- 
sible to introduce many different 
properties, both by the chemical 
elements included and by the process 
of treatment. Additional possibilities 
were being introduced by the use of 
silicones instead of hydrocarbons as 
a base. 
The prototypes of plastics had been 
developed before the turn of the cen- 
tury in the form of celluloid and 
bakelite. The first of the synthetic 
fibres, artificial silk or rayon, was in 
use in the 1890s and its manufacture 
by various methods became well 
ath ER 
  
Coastal engineers of several countries including Denmark, U.K. and U.S.A. 
are experimenting with plastic seaweed as a defence against tides and 
currents that break up sandy ocean bottoms inshore and cause coastal 
erosion. First country to make the tests was Denmark, where it had 
been observed that fishermen took refuge during storms in kelp beds 
which seemed to dissipate the effect of violent seas. Plastic seaweed 
has been set in grids on the sea bed and in experimental basins (photo). 
According to where they are placed they can halt beach erosion, 
build new beaches or prevent sanding up in harbours. Plastic seaweed 
placed on the coast of Jutland (Denmark) caused 3,000 tons of sand to be 
deposited over 1,600 square metres (17,000 square ft) in 12 weeks. 
established in the first two decades 
of the twentieth century. In the 1930s 
a number of new plastic materials 
began to be produced commercially, 
especially in Germany where they 
served as ersatz or substitute products 
for natural fibres and other materials 
in short supply. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

28 
THE ERA OF SYNTHETIC MATERIALS (Continued) 
The full potentialities of plastics, 
however, only began to be envisaged 
during and after the second world 
war with improvements in their quality. 
Such critical war materials as nylon 
for parachutes and synthetic rubber 
to keep motor transport in operation 
when natural resources of rubber were 
cut off emphasized the importance of 
synthetic products. Plastics manufac- 
turers turned from efforts to devise 
substitutes as good as some natural 
product to the development of mat- 
erials with characteristics which natu- 
ral products lacked, and they supplied 
an enormous range of fibres, sheets, 
shapes, paints, and substances which 
could be mixed with other material 
such as wood or glass to give them 
new properties. 
The development of plastics was 
paralleled in the production of glass, 
a material also based on a resource, 
sand, which was unlimited and readily 
accessible. Although glass-making 
was a very old art, glass became a 
cheap material in general use only 
after a machine process for bottle 
blowing was introduced at the begin- 
ning of the twentieth century. In the 
course of these years glass became a 
highly versatile material as ways were 
developed to preserve its impervious- 
ness to corrosion and its transparence 
while overcoming its brittleness and 
fragility. . . 
Concrete had begun to supplement 
brick, stone and wood as a structural 
material in the second half of the 
nineteenth century; during the twen- 
tieth century it became one of the 
most widely used materials for the 
construction of industrial plants and 
for most large urban buildings, 
bridges and main roads. Although 
it had the advantage of being made 
from plentiful material found in many 
localities and of being easy to handle, 
the large amount of cement and 
reinforcing steel required for strength 
condensed form, the 
Part I: Historical Introduction 
Worlds (Africa). 
A RICH MOSAIC OF WORLD HISTORY 
In this number we can give readers only a limited and very incomplete 
sampling of the great variety of subjects covered by the "History of 
Mankind”, and showing the cultural and scientific development of mankind 
in technology and philosophy, literature and the arts, the evolution of 
languages and systems of writing, education and religion, etc. 
the reader appreciate the sweep of the “History”, we publish below, in 
table of contents of Volume 
dominance and the Rise of the West (400 A.D.-1300 A.D.). 
The Migrations of the 5th and 6th Centuries — Invaders and Indigenous 
Cultures in Asia — Invaders and Indigenous Cultures: 
Chinese World of the 7th-9th Centuries — The Indian World — From the 
Arab Conquest to the Abbasids — Europe and Byzantium in the Carolingian 
Period (8th-9th Centuries) — The Moslem Zenith — Byzantium and its 
Influences in Europe (9th-11th Centuries) — Movements in Asia: The 
Chinese Orbit from the 10th to the 13th Century — Berbers, Turks and 
Mongols — Awakening and Expansion of the Christian West — The Other 
To help 
lll—Eastern Pre- 
Romania — The 
Part lll: The Moslem World: 
Part ll: Chinese and Indian Worlds: Cultural Balance-Sheet 
Technological Evolution — Teaching and the Training of Minds — 
Languages — Religion — Artistic Expression — Literary Expression — 
Philosophic Thought — Legal and Political Thought — Scientific Thought. 
Cultural Balance-Sheet 
Part IV: The Western World: 
The Evolution of Techniques — Teaching and the Training of Minds — 
Linguistic Changes — Religion, Law, Philosophy — Artistic Expression — 
Literary Expression — Scientific Developments. 
Cultural Balance-Sheet 
Material and Mental Equipment: 
and Mental Equipment: 
and Mental Equipment: 
Part V: 
The Evolution of Techniques — Material 
Teaching and the Training of Minds — Material 
Language — The Religious Sentiment — Artistic 
Expression — Literary Expression — Philosophic Thought — Legal and 
Political Thought — Scientific Thought. 
Prehistoric New World Cultural Development (Pre-Columbian 
Civilizations)   
The Arctic.   The Arrival of Man — Introduction and Spread of Pottery Making — 
Domestication of Plants — Geographical Differences and Cultural Develop- 
ment — The Interrelated Rise of New World Civilization — Transpacific 
Contacts — (The Circum-Caribbean Area, The Deserts, The Forests, The 
Plains, The Pacific Coast, The Marginal Area) — Transatlantic Contacts —   
made this a heavy building material, 
eminently suited for foundations but 
bulky when used for superstructures 
and roofs. 
New concretes, made by mixing in 
such things as sawdust, volcanic ash 
and certain lightweight minerals or by 
adding chemicals, were lighter and 
more versatile. Panels for roofs and 
partitions could be prefabricated, 
preinsulated and transported with 
relative ease. Prestressing of concrete, 
to give strength to beams at the place 
where strain was greatest, substan- 
tially reduced the amount of cement 
used and achieved the same strength 
with only a fraction of the usual re- 
inforcing material. 
Other materials such as gypsum, 
sugar-cane waste or asbestos were 
pressed and chemically bound into 
sheets for use in building construc- 
tion, and insulating materials were 
made from glass fibre or other non- 
conductors of heat in order to reduce 
the thickness of wall required for 
warmth or to conserve heat. 
Although the industrial development 
of the twentieth century rested pri- 
marily on the use of metals, plastics, 
cement and glass, wood continued to 
serve many of its old purposes and, 
in combination with plastics or sub- 
jected to chemical treatment, was put 
to new uses. New techniques gave 
wood new properties and extended 
available resources by utilizing lower 
grades and much of what had been 
discarded as waste. . . 
At mid-century divergent answers 
were being given to the question of 
whether man by his command over 
nature was so exhausting the resour- 
ces of the earth as to lay an unsound 
basis for future generations, or 
whether the process of technological 
development itself was so enlarging 
the range of possibilities that the 
balance was on the side of ever more 
abundant resources rather than of 
their depletion. . . 
Three points only were clear: that 
at mid-century the limits of technolo- 
gical possibilities in developing resour- 
ces on the basis of already known 
scientific principles were nowhere in 
sight; that the future pattern of 
resource use would undoubtedly in- 
volve as fundamental a shift as that 
of the preceding fifty years, which 
had seen the replacement of wood 
and coal by petroleum for fuel, of 
wood and brick by concrete and 
steel for construction, of iron by alloy 
steel, aluminium and magnesium in 
much machinery, and of wool, cotton 
and leather by synthetic fibres and 
plastic materials; and that the essen- 
tial resource upon which mankind 
would depend for its industrial future 
was not any specific physical material 
but technology itself. 
— CAROLINE F. WARE, 
K.M. PANNIKAR and 
J.M. ROMEIN 
Vol. VI, Pt. I, Chap. 9 
(Industrial Production)

  
Photo © Agence Rapho, Paris 
 
A view from the bridge 
In this breathtaking view from a tower of the Golden Gate Bridge, traffic crosses 29 the strait connecting San Francisco Bay with the Pacific Ocean. 
was then the world's longest suspension bridge with 1,280 metres (4,200 feet) of clear span between the main towers. It took second place in 1965 when the Verrazano Bridge (1,298 metres; 4,260 feet) was opened at the entrance to New York Bay. 
Opened in 1937, the Golden Gate
