SOUTH AFRICA'S
WASTED MANPOWER
Every year since 1965 the International Labour Organization has carried
out a survey of developments in connexion with the apartheid policy
as it affects labour. The following text is condensed from the 1966
survey (1). Examining the economic consequences of racial discrimination
in South Africa, the report notes that apartheid artificially obstructs
the flow of potential skilled manpower which South Africa needs to a
growing extent and that the Government seeks to keep this movement
under control, even at the expense of greater prosperity.
S
30
OUTH Africa is outstand¬
ingly rich in minerals. It has for gener¬
ations been the world's chief producer
of gold, output of which continues to
rise. It is the second largest producer
of diamonds, chrome and asbestos,
has the world's largest known reserves
of uranium, and vast reserves of iron
and coal. It is also a large producer of
copper, limestone and manganese.
Agriculture, which with 30 per cent, of
the economically active population at
the time of the 1960 census employed
more labour than any other sector,
produces many and varied products
both for internal consumption and
export.
Manufacturing has experienced par¬
ticularly rapid growth in the past
20 years, and now constitutes the
largest sector of the economy in terms
of output, accounting for a quarter of
the national product. South Africa
which employs a higher proportion of
its African population in the modern
sector than any other African country
has the most developed and diversified
economy in the entire continent.
These developments have materially
affected the composition and utilization
of South Africa's labour force, setting
off trends which are a growing chal¬
lenge to the purported objectives and
basic policies of apartheid. Thus,
instead of the separate development of
at least Africans and Europeans in their
own territories, economic development
Is drawing an ever greater number of
the former into the white areas, creat¬
ing a symbiotic relationship in which
the African worker is becoming in¬
creasingly dependent on wage-earning
(1) Second Special Report of the Director-
General on the application of the Declaration
concerning the Policy of "Apartheid" of the
Republic of South Africa, International Labour
Office, Geneva, 1966. Price : 50 cents ; 3s. 6d.
in the white economy and at the same
time ever more indispensable to it.
The increasing demands for skilled
manpower and the insufficient supply
of white labour to meet them are
also opening up to the non-white popu¬
lations rungs in the industrial ladder
to which conventional as well as statu¬
tory colour bars previously denied them
access, thus giving them a growing
stake in the white economy.
The strained manpower position has
likewise served to emphasize the eco¬
nomic wastefulness of the migratory
labour system and the colour bar,
which reduce the volume of produc¬
tively employed African labour, perpe¬
tuate instability and low productivity
and bar the way to utilization of vast
potential sources of skill.
T,
HE inflationary pressures
in the South African economy have
increased the urgency of making more
rational use of the country's man¬
power resources. Unless opportunities
for training of Africans are substan¬
tially increased and African education
adapted accordingly, the depressive
effect of apartheid on the quality of the
labour force will become an ever grea¬
ter drag on South Africa's industrial
progress.
African manpower in the white eco¬
nomy is treated as an imported commo¬
dity, as undifferentiated labour units
deprived of ordinary human rights: the
rights to free choice of employment,
to security of residence and employ¬
ment, to the development of Inherent
capacities, to a say in how the eco¬
nomy of which it forms an essential
component should be run.
That Is why the South African Gov¬
ernment maintains its adherence to
the migratory labour system, influx
control, the colour bar and the denial
of trade union rights to Africans.
Whatever the new openings and mat¬
erial improvements which South Afri¬
ca's spectacular development are
bringing within the reach of its non-
white population, the status reserved
for African workers in an economy
wedded to the principle of white domi¬
nation is thus scarcely distinguishable
from one of servile labour. The con¬
tradictions inherent in such a situation
are pregnant with danger to the
country's social peace.
The measure of bitterness engen¬
dered by apartheid is to be found in
the repressive apparatus which has
had to be built up concurrently with the
progressive development of apartheid
laws and practice in the social and
economic spheres. Without attempting
any exhaustive enumeration, it should
be remembered that the repressive
measures adopted include hangings,
detention without trial, house arrest,
and bannlngs of persons, organizations
and publications. To maintain apart¬
heid, South Africa is living in a per¬
manent state of emergency.
Parallel with these internal difficul¬
ties, on the international level South
Africa finds itself in a position of
isolation ¡n a world hostile to the
course upon which it is set. The Inter¬
national Labour Organization is not the
only organization from which it has
withdrawn under the pressure of inter¬
national opinion. South Africa left the
United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (Unesco) in
1955, and in 1964 it withdrew from the
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations. It has been
expelled from the United Nations Eco¬
nomic Commission for Africa and has
resigned from the Commission for
Technical Co-operation in Africa. Its
participation in the Scientific Council
of Africa has likewise ceased.
In the United Nations, South Afri-

In 1964, the apartheid
rules were provisionally
made more flexible
so as to allocate
African miners to
certain supervisory
tasks. In 1965, the
Government terminated
this experiment
"in view of the
detrimental implications
involved". Yet the
International Labour
Organization's report
stresses that South
Africa continues to
suffer from a serious
shortage of skilled
labour. The
Government's economic
development plan
forecasts that in 1969
there will be a shortage
of 47,000 white
workers, but at the
same time there will
be 240,000 non-white
unemployed.
ca's racial policies and consequential
repressive measures have been under
Investigation by a special committee,
and the whole pressure of world opin¬
ion has been brought to bear on the
South African Government to aban¬
don a policy held to constitute a threat
to international peace and security.
Because of its tremendous wealth
and developed institutions, South
Africa could play a major part in pro¬
moting the progress of the African
continent, through investments, trade
and technical assistance. An extended
market for South African goods would
not only greatly strengthen the coun¬
try's industry, but also bring immea¬
surable benefits to the entire Southern
African region.
The educational system, now biased
in favour of the white population, could
help to spread literacy. The country
could offer advanced technical know¬
ledge and participate in fighting dis¬
ease. However, the possibilities for all
such developments must remain strictly
limited so long as South Africa's pre¬
sent racial policies are pursued.
No country can easily bring itself to
reconstruct the very bases of its body
politic, particularly in relation to an
Issue so charged with passion as
apartheid.
The choice lies between a stunted,
frustrated, bitter and isolated society
and a community built on purposeful,
constructive co-operation both within
the national borders and within the
wider family of nations.
31
