With supersonic commercial airliners
designed for speeds up to 1,800 m.p.h.
(2.7 times the speed of sound) now
on drawing boards or already in prototype
construction, the day is not far off
when millions of people will be
faced with the problem of sonic
booms. This striking photo was taken
during wind tunnel tests on a model
of the Anglo-French supersonic
transport "Concorde" (designed to fly
at 1,450. m.p.h.). It shows the flow of
air that will swirl around the aircraft
(viewed from rear) as it comes in to land.
Photo Sud Aviation, France

STREET AND AIR
TRAFFIC NOISE
AND WHAT WE
CAN DO ABOUT IT
by Léo L. Beranek

N OISE once served as
man's principal warning signal. The
sound of an approaching carriage on
an otherwise quiet street warned
people of danger. A booming sound
meant an explosion, often accom-
LEO L. BERANEK is a leading American
specialist on problems of acoustics. He is a
lecturer at the Massachussets Institute of
Technology, Cambridge (U.S.A.) where he
was formerly associate ' professor of
communications engineering, and is pres¬
ident of a U.S. research and consulting
firm. Dr. Beranek has lectured on acoustics
at many European universities and institutes
(in London, Zurich, Prague, Warsaw, Mos¬
cow and Helsinki) and was visiting pro¬
fessor at the University of Buenos Aires
in 1949. He is the author of "Acoustics",
"Acoustic Measurements", "Noise Reduc¬
tion" and "Music, Acoustics and Architec¬
ture".
panied by disaster. A noisy bearing
or a shrieking cutting tool signaled
mechanical failure in the factory. The
piercing shout of a fellow worker was
a prime factor in preservation of life
on a construction job.
Historically, noise has been a ser¬
vant to man. But in the last quarter
century, noise has fallen from a posi¬
tion of usefulness to one of nuisance.
Modern technology has furnished its
own fanfare an ever-increasing din
that disturbs our sleep, interrupts our
conversation, creates anxiety and
annoyance, and sometimes damages
hearing.
Advancing civilizations will create
more noise, not less. Of that, we are
certain. In all probability, the noise
level will grow not only in urban cen
tres, but, with increasing population
and the proliferation of machines, noise
will invade the few remaining havens
of silence in' the world. A century
from now, when a man wants to escape
to a quiet spot, there may be no place
left to go.
We probably could not reverse the
trend, even if we tried; so we must
view the problem not as one of elimi¬
nating noise, but rather of controlling
it. Science alone is not the answer.
Our most troublesome noise problems
carry price tags; economic considera¬
tions must be weighed against people's
desire for culture and "the good life."
As in any democratic process, the
balance is struck in the political arena.
The people's well-being must be squar¬
ed with preserving a good educational
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

TRAFFIC NOISE (Continued)
One truck twice as noisy as a steady flow of cars
system, with maintaining a reasonable
tax rate, and with guarding the nation's
position in the marketplace of the
world. The science, economics, and
politics of several of our most impor¬
tant noise problems are the subjects of
this paper.
Sensational stories of the effects of
loud noises on the well-being of man
are often printed in the popular press.
The noises of daily life have been
blamed for increases in the divorce
rate, social conflict, indigestion, inab¬
ility to perform tasks with the limbs,
or eyes, nervous breakdowns, high
blood pressure, heart failure, and even
insanity.
Most of these allegations are the
products of vivid imaginations. Of
course, one cannot rule out the pos¬
sibility that a few people are par¬
ticularly sensitive to noise, just as
some are allergic to nuts, eggs, or
ordinary dust. But controlled social
observations have indicated that the
most important biological effects o>
loud noises are: hearing impairment,
interference with speech communica¬
tion; interference by distraction with
mental or skill work; interference with
sleep; and a feeling of general an¬
noyance.
&
14
lURVEYS conducted in Cen¬
tral London, near London airport, and
in several American cities both near
and far from military air bases have re¬
vealed some interesting statistics. Of
the thousands of people interviewed,
about one-fourth of those present in
any stratum of noise intensity seem
to be unperturbed by their noise envi¬
ronment.
These people apparently could and
often do live happily next to elevated
train routes, trucking routes, aircraft
flight paths, or other very noisy acti¬
vities. About a tenth of those inter¬
viewed seem to be disturbed by most
any audible noise not of their own
-making, regardless of level. These
same people were dissatisfied with
many other things in their environment.
It appears that fear of safety for
children near traffic routes and fear of
air crashes increases people's sensi¬
tivity to these respective types of
noise. Personal differences owing to
age, sex, income, education, occupa¬
tion, and so forth, do not seem to be
very significant. Of those in areas
with a specific loud noise, about one-
third said that they tend to get used
to the noise, while about one-fourth
said they are bothered more by the
noise as time goes on.
Carefully controlled tests performed
in laboratories and with pilots of air¬
craft indicate that noise alone does not
affect people's ability to reason, to do
mathematical exercises, or to control
flight (using flight trainers, with and
without loud cockpit noise.)
Nevertheless, we should not dismiss
annoyance as a figment of the imagi¬
nation. Some physiologists assert that
annoyance should be considered as a
biological protective mechanism, induc¬
ing man to avoid noise and to seek
recovery processes. The biological
meaning of annoyance may be compa¬
rable to other feelings of discomfort
like fatigue, hunger, cold or warm sen¬
sations.
The clip-clop of horses and the
rumbling of carriages in an earlier day
were quiet enough to be romantic.
Traffic noise was no real problem so
long as people were forced to content
themselves with these slow means of
transportation.
Today's urban noise is largely the
result of people's insatiable desire to
reach distant places ever more rapidly
and comfortably. As we have deve¬
loped faster ways to transport our¬
selves and our commercial goods, we
have created a noise nuisance that is
becoming increasingly difficult to live
with.
Cars, buses, trains, trucks, and air¬
planes are a necessary part of our
lives. It does not follow, however, that
all the noise created by these machines
must also be a part.
Which noises are the most trouble¬
some to the inhabitants of a city? The
1,400 people interviewed in a British
survey were asked, among other
things in a questionnaire, "If you could
change just one of the many things
you don't like about living around here,
which would you choose?" They res¬
ponded as follows:
Noise was mentioned as often as
slums, dirt, smoke, public facilities,
transport, government, and the
amount of traffic.
About one-third of the total samp¬
ling specifically mentioned motor-
vehicle traffic noise as one of its
major irritants.
Four to seven times as many people
were disturbed by the noise of road
traffic as by the noise of aircraft,
trains, or industry.
Traffic noise appeared to be as im¬
portant an annoyance as all other
noises together, including the noi¬
ses of aircraft, trains, industry, con
struction and demolition, domestic
appliances, neighbours, children,
radio and television, bells, alarms,
and pets.
People tolerate greater intensities
of continuous noise than they do of
intermittent noise. Also they tol¬
erate higher (but less-frequent)
levels of noise from aircraft than
lower (but nearly continuous) levels
of noise from automobiles.
Similar surveys of occupants of
apartment buildings in Rotterdam and
The Hague, Netherlands, revealed that
25 per cent were annoyed by traffic
sounds; 12 per cent by children play¬
ing; and 10 per cent by doors slam¬
ming. There is, of course, a close rela¬
tion between annoyance and the loca¬
tion of the building. The Netherlands
survey also indicated that:
Noise nuisance is greatest in homes
where children must study in the
evenings or where adults read ex¬
tensively or engage in self-educa¬
tion.
Noise nuisance decreases with in¬
crease in family size and increases
as the children grow older.
Based on these fairly representative
surveys, it is abundantly clear that a
city's first efforts to produce quieter
living must be directed at reducing
noise from traffic.
T
HE steady flow of pass¬
enger-car traffic alone would not
necessarily be irritating. Many new
cars are equipped with good exhaust
silencers and quiet tyre treads. Cities
and highway builders have it in their
power to choose quiet road surfaces.
The real trouble lies with trucks, buses,
motorcycles, and sports cars. The
average truck at 60 miles per hour is
about twice as noisy as a steady
stream of automobile traffic. Further,
truck noise is more irritating than this
difference indicates because trucks
pass less often and the loud burst of
noise that results is distracting and
annoying. The same holds for sports
cars, motorcycles, and buses.
Many old cars are more noisy than
new ones, usually due to deteriora¬
tion of exhaust mufflers. Lack of
shielding of engine noise and inade¬
quate mufflers are common on trucks
of all ages.
The British Government is consider¬
ing a law that would require all new
passenger cars and trucks to have
noise levels lower than 85 dBA.
(noise measured in decibels on the

Noise from the
growing volume of
air traffic disturbs
schools near large
airports. The Inter¬
national Congress
for Noise Abate¬
ment reports that
as much as 50 per
cent of teaching
time can be lost
through teachers'
voices being drown¬
ed by the roar of
aircraft. Outdoor
programmes have
to be abandoned
and teachers and
children suffer
from noise fatigue.
Elaborate sound¬
proofing or the
transfer of schools
to quieter locations
are often too expen¬
sive to be feasible.
'%
"A" scale which partially discriminates
against the lower tones in a noise,
much as a person does when judging
the "noisiness" of a sound). Motor¬
cycles and other mechanically propell¬
ed two-wheeled vehicles would be
limited to levels below 90 dBA.
The acoustical test for British auto¬
mobiles requires measurement of the
noise at a point 25 ft from the centre¬
line of the lane in which the vehicle
travels for three different operating
conditions:
constant speed of 30 mph in top
gear;
starting from a steady speed of
30 mph and (beginning 32 ft before
passing the test microphone) accel¬
erating as rapidly as possible over a
distance of 65 ft; and
maintaining a constant speed of
30 mph at full throttle with brakes
applied. The highest noise level
obtained under these three condi¬
tions of test is used to rate the
vehicle.
The State of California has proposed
legislation which would prohibit noise
levels in excess of 82 dBA, for passen¬
ger cars, and 92 dBA, for heavy trucks
and for trucks and buses at posted
highway speeds or the maximum speed
of the vehicle.
In France, maximum permissible
noise levels, determined under the
British test regime, are 83 dBA for
passenger cars and small trucks,
86 dBA for motorcycles, and 90 dBA
for large trucks and buses.
In Switzerland, maximum permissible
noise levels, measured laterally in an
open field at a distance of seven metres
with full engine power, are 80 dBA for
passenger cars, 85 dBA for two-stroke
motorcycles and 90 dBA for 4-stroke
motorcycles, large trucks, and buses.
Hit-or-miss municipal and state laws
designed to control the noise of sur¬
face transportation generally are not
effective. Trucking today is largely
between countries or states. The in¬
creased costs of providing and main¬
taining adequate mufflers and engine
covers are such that compliance with
noise laws will be assured only if they
are international (in Europe) or national
(in large countries such as Brazil,
U.S.S.R., or U.S.A.) and apply to all
vehicles.
Traffic noise, serious as it may be,
disturbs only a relatively narrow strip
of property on either side of the right-
of-way. To those who complain of the
nuisance, there is a reasonable reply.
Move! But not so with modern planes.
During takeoffs and landings, large
transcontinental and international jet
airplanes may disturb and annoy thou¬
sands of people spread over many
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE.
15

TRAFFIC NOISE (Continued)
Engine nacelles
ureraft have become the biggest noise in a noisy era. Having created
ngines of tremendous power, technicians have had to develop silencing
evices, like the muffler tubes on the jet engine above, that
one down the noise without an excessive loss of power. Below, a giant
exhaust pipe" leading from a Paris airport building used for testing engines.
: muffles the noise and directs what is left skywards.
acres. The increasing popularity of
helicopters promises to pose new prob¬
lems. Heliports, uniformly distributed
throughout a city, would affect all resi¬
dents.
With the advent of supersonic air¬
craft, nobody in a nation can be sure
of freedom from sonic booms. A
nation could, of course, refuse super¬
sonic aircraft entrance into its air
space, and restrict the operations of
high-powered and, hence, noisy air¬
craft to isolated areas. But this is
hardly a practical solution for nations
ever more dependent on large aircraft
for commerce, travel, and defence.
We must search for other answers.
How much aircraft noise is too
much? Attempts have been made on
a number of occasions, in the Federal
Republic of Germany, the Netherlands
England and the United States, to de¬
termine a relation between PNdB
(adjusted for the number of flights per
day) and the "annoyance" of aircraft
noise as judged by residents under
flight paths near airports. (PNdB is the
perceived-noise-level in decibels, which
takes into account the individual judg¬
ment of the loudness of different types
of noises.)
It appears that there is a significant
degree of dissatisfaction with aircraft
noise whenever the average value of
the maximums of the flyover noise
exceeds about 115 PNdB (assuming
20 to 40 flyovers each day during day¬
time hours).
The British Ministry of Aviation has
specified maximum permissible noise
levels in the main built-up areas
around the London airport for jet air¬
craft on takeoff, as follows: for hours
between 7 a.m. and 11 pm, 110 PNdB;
after 11 p.m., 102 PNdB.
At the Kennedy Airport in New
York, the Port of New York Authority
has specified a maximum permissible
figure for jet takeoffs over neighbour¬
hoods of 112 PNdB. At night, jet
takeoffs are generally permitted only
from runways that lead over water.
The airports of Paris are also discus¬
sing similar restrictions. No restric¬
tions are made on landing noise at
London's or New York's airports.
Factors other than noisiness (in
PNdB) enter into the annoyance creat¬
ed by aircraft operations. Among the
more important are the average dura¬
tion of the noise of single flyovers, the
number of flyovers per day, and the
time of day in which they occur. It
appears from judgment tests that
doubling the duration of noise asso¬
ciated with each flyover or doubling

above the wings to reduce the roar
the number of flyovers each day is
equivalent to a three to four PNdB
increase in the level of a single flyover.
People are more sensitive to aircraft
noise during the late evening or night,
partly because the ambient noise is
lower and partly because people are
trying to sleep. Some studies have
indicated that noise levels between
10 p.m. and 1 a.m. must be 10 or
more PNdB lower than those between
7 a.m. and 10 p.m. if people are to
judge the noise situation as being
about equal.
If the land around an airport were
strictly zoned to prevent residential
construction, the aircraft-noise problem
would be much less significant. But
around existing airports, zoning against
housing generally cannot be used as
a substitute for the needed exercise of
the power of condemnation and the
ensuing obligation to pay for whatever
is expropriated.
Unfortunately, private airport owners
possess grossly inadequate resources
to pay the price of expropriation and,
in the past, municipalities generally
encountered public objection to prohi¬
bition of residential construction, even
near airports.
T
HE citizens of some count¬
ries are demanding that their parlia¬
ments should pass legislation requir¬
ing all aircraft to produce lower noise
levels in neighbourhoods. However, a
law that would specify lower maximum
acceptable levels to be met by all
operating aircraft will do little imme¬
diate good, since most of today's air¬
craft cannot meet a substantially lower
noise requirement.
Noise limitations must first be im¬
posed on new aircraft entering the air¬
lines' inventories. Then attrition and
the retro-fitting of silencers to existing
aircraft, where feasible, become practi¬
cal avenues toward quieter flight.
U.S. Federal requirements on accep¬
table noise levels before certification
of new aircraft are the existing legal
means available to accomplish this re¬
sult. Without such regulation, com¬
petitive pressures in both the manu¬
facturing and operating industries will
maintain the same lack of concern
about noise as that which now exists
for noise from trucks.
Primarily as the result of regulations
by the airports of England, France, Aus¬
tralia, Denmark and U.S.A. and, in turn,
airline purchase specifications, manu¬
facturers have fitted silencing devices
to the exhaust ports of most turbojet
engines. These silencers reduce take¬
off noise to some extent.
The newer bypass (turbofan) engines
provide considerably higher thrusts
without a proportional increase in
noise. Unfortunately, silencers on their
exhausts do little additional good. For
new aircraft, manufacturers are study¬
ing ways to mount the engine nacelles
above the wings so as to shield neigh¬
bourhoods from much of the engine
noise.
Aircraft are also noisy on approach
to landing both because of the whine
of the engine-intake compressors and
because most pilots believe it is safer
to land at a low glide angle while using
appreciable engine powers. To achieve
a large angle of the glide path at
which an airplane approaches the run¬
way 6° to 8° instead of 3° the air¬
line pilots say that better instrumenta¬
tion (perhaps computer control of
landings), better engine response, and
better airplane-handling qualities would
all have to be provided in the air¬
craft.
At least one country is experiment¬
ing with regulations that require jet
aircraft to climb as rapidly as possible
to an altitude of about 1,500 ft and
then to cut back engine power in
order to reduce noise until the aircraft
reaches an altitude of 3,000 ft. To
avoid flying directly over houses at
low altitudes, the aircraft must also
turn after takeoff and until it has
gained considerable altitude follow a
river or a highway.
The means seem available for appre¬
ciable control of in-flight aircraft noise.
Included are: refinement of aircraft
design so they can climb and land at
steeper angles, embodiment of better
noise-control features in engines,
nacelles and wings, and introduction
of sophisticated operating procedures.
But until regulations spell out maxi¬
mum-permissible noise levels appro¬
priate to differently zoned urban areas
and certificate new aircraft only if they
can meet these requirements, it is not
likely that the upward trend of aircraft
noise levels will be arrested.
Many people are apprehensive of
the noisiness of the next generation of
aircraft, known as the supersonic trans¬
port, or for short, the SST. Any air¬
plane traveling faster than the speed
of sound produces pressure, or shock,
waves around the nose and around
each protruding part of the airplane.
These waves are analogous to those
on either side of the bow of a rapidly
moving ship.
Shock waves form a cone that encir¬
cles and fellows the aircraft and inter¬
sects with the earth. As the line of
intersection with the earth advances
with the movement of the airplane,
people living within the width of the
intersecting path usually hear two
closely-spaced explosive sounds,
known as the "sonic boom". Typically
when first experiencing the sonic boom
residents are startled and frightened.
Their reactions are caused in part
because the boom occurs without any
prior warning and in part because the
individual is conditioned to associate
loud explosive-like sounds with pos¬
sible damage to his home, orto his per¬
son. He may imagine that something
has exploded nearby or a vehicle has
struck his dwelling. Or, he may fear
that repeated booms will crack plaster,
loosen fixtures, and weaken the struc¬
ture of his house.
EASURED outdoors, a typ¬
ical sonic boom from a high-flying
aircraft is a pressure wave that sud¬
denly increases above normal atmo¬
spheric pressure by 0.5 to 2 pounds
per square foot, then decreases some¬
what more slowly to below normal
atmospheric pressure by about the
same amount, and finally jumps back
to atmospheric pressure. The result
is an N-shaped pressure wave less
than half a second long. The lateral
spread of the boom becomes greater
as the altitude of the airplane incre¬
ases, although the intensity of the
boom decreases.
The American Government has vigo¬
rously pursued investigations of the
effects of sonic booms on people and
structures. One of these investiga¬
tions was carried out over the Oklaho¬
ma City area from February to July
1964. During this period, the popula¬
tion was subjected, during daytimes
only, to a total of 1,250 sonic booms.
The average intensities of the booms
were 1.13 pounds per square foot (psf)
during the first 11 weeks, 1.23 psf
during the next eight weeks, and
1.60 psf during the final seven weeks
of the programme.
From complaints received and inter¬
views of the residents, it was found
that the sonic boom was, in some mea¬
sure, a disturbing influence in the lives
of most of those people living within
eight miles to either side of a line
directly below the flight path.
At the end of six months, about one- 1 "7
fourth of the people interviewed said 1 I
that they felt that they could not learn
to accept eight booms a day, at least
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20


fe
I la*)*
A sonic boom from an aircraft
"breaking the sound barrier"
may startle us, but it is still
a relatively rare disturbance.
However, the prospect of regular
supersonic flights sometime in
the 1970s is already creating
concern. Some aeronautical
specialists, including Bo
Lundberg, Director-General of
Sweden's Aeronautical Research
Institute, maintain that the
shock waves set up by planes
flying at from 1 ,500 to 1 ,800 m.p.h.
will hit the ground in every spot
within a "boom carpet" 50 to
80 miles wide along the entire
flight path. Plotted on map
(left) are "boom carpets" that
might be "unrolled" over
Western Europe unless
restrictions were imposed.
Sonic boom disturbances, say
other specialists, can be kept to
a minimum providing sonic
speeds are maintained until
aircraft are clear of certain
areas. Drawing (right) shows
how a conical Shockwave created
by supersonic flight follows plane
and intersects with the ground.
Rear shock wave
rorward shock wave
R*fr>*-' i
~^*ï£2> St* ^
Photo g " Science et Vie ", Paris
'-.> '""<CT5i-,
SUPERSONIC 'BOOM CARPET
"Stop the noise", "We want to sleep undisturbed", "Silence for our schools"
proclaim the banners carried by these demonstrators protesting, on
November 19, 1966, against the noise caused by aircraft using Orly Airport
near Paris. The demonstrators, representing some 500,000 people living in
the area, are headed by several mayors wearing their sashes of office.
Photo »© Camille Klein, Villeneuve-le-Roi

TRAFFIC NOISE (Continued from page 17)
20
8 booms a day
won't keep
the doctor away
at the 1.6 psf level. At some lower
pressure level, as yet to be more defi¬
nitely determined, very few people
should be annoyed.
The most significant result from the
Oklahoma tests was that many resi¬
dents believed their homes were being
damaged by the sonic booms, although
continuous observation of a number of
houses showed no damage. In other
parts of the country, near military
bases where supersonic military air¬
craft are regularly flown, large areas of
houses have been subjected to sonic
booms, many greater than 2.0 psf. The
number of damage claims filed by per¬
sons in those areas has been small.
Nevertheless, over 40 % of those
interviewed in Oklahoma City felt that
their homes had been damaged. This
result suggests that belief in alleged
damage to property increases annoy¬
ance and complaints. It also suggests
that people might be less concerned
with sonic booms if it were clearly
demonstrated that SST noise levels at
or below those specified by the gov¬
ernment would not damage struc¬
tures.
There is no question about the
future of supersonic transport aircraft
the French-British SST will enter ser¬
vice soon. Sonic booms are unavoid¬
able, but it seems that overpressures
should be held within limits that will
not disturb people greatly or harm prop¬
erty. It seems mandatory that accep¬
table boom levels be established inter¬
nationally and that SST operations
afterwards be policed to assure com¬
pliance with the regulations.
People in modern societies must
adapt in some measure to the noises
of modern civilization. The extent to
which adaptation is necessary is
largely a matter of economics and con¬
venience. At moderate cost and some
loss of convenience, the hearing of
workers can be protected. Noise
created inside office buildings and
dwellings can be reduced to accept¬
able levels by proper use of materials
and structures for noise control. The
noise of transportation can be made
less annoying by suitable designs of
vehicles, by requiring noise limits for
new vehicles, by legislation and enfor¬
cement of noise codes, by operating
vehicles properly, by zoning and con¬
demnation of residential areas near air¬
ports and superhighways. In the worst
cases, we may have to resort to seal¬
ed, fully climatized housing.
Photo © Albert Winkler, Bern
Motorcycle engines are powerful, compact and noisy, even though, their
exhaust pipes are fitted with silencers (left of photo). Though these have
little effect on the power output of the engine, some motorcyclists
modify them and thereby reduce their efficiency as noise mufflers.
