Since 1964, the presence of an African
in a "white" district for more than
72 hours has been severely restricted.
Wives and children of Africans working
in these districts may not live with
their husbands or fathers unless they
have resided continuously in the same
district previously. Visits between hus¬
bands and wives residing in separate
districts are limited to a maximum of
72 hours unless otherwise authorised.
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid


THE EFFECTS OF APARTHEID
ON CULTURE
The price
segregation
by Atan Patón
m
ALAN PATÓN was born ¡n 1903 in
the province of Natal, South Africa. His
famous novel "Cry, the Beloved Country"
(1948), which was translated into 18
languages and published in 22 countries,
earned him world-wide renown. An opera,
"Lost in the Stars", and a film were based
on this book which gives a moving
account of the conflicts and crises
arising from racial segregation in South
Africa. Paton's second novel, "Too Late
the Phalarope" deals with the attitudes of
the Afrikaners. All his books, some
fifteen novels and studies, have been
published outside South Africa, in England
or the United States. They include "South
Africa and her People" (1957), "The
Christian Approach to Racial Problems
in the Modern World" (1959), 'Hope for
South Africa" (1959), "Tales from a Troubl¬
ed Land" (1961) and "South African
Tragedy ; the Life and Times of Jan
Hofmeyr" (1965). Alan Paton was among
those who formed the Liberal Association
of South Africa which became the
Liberal Party of which he is President.
The Liberal Party re/ects the racial
theories used to justify white supremacy
and aims at equal rights for all South
Africans regardless of their ethnic groups.
Photo © Jonathan Cape Ltd., London
Photo © Ian Berry - Magnum
T,HE policy of apartheid, or
Separate Development as it is now
more grandly called, has as one of its
main aims the preservation of the
cultures of each of the racial groups
in South Africa,' the safeguarding of
each culture from contamination by the
others, and presumably the develop¬
ment of each of these cultures "along
its own lines". Apartheid has no
vision whatsoever of a South African
culture, enriched by contributions from
its Afrikaners, its Africans, its Coloured
people (that is, those of mixed blood,
Malay, Hottentot, and European strains

i
A ^
fl
|
amongst others), its white English-
speaking people, its Hindus and
Muslims and Jews. These streams
must not flow into a river, they must
not even flow into the sea, they must
flow parallel to one another for ever
and ever.
Nor does apartheid envisage a
group of distinct racial cultures con¬
tinually enriching themselves and
others by fruitful exchanges. In fact
the purpose of legislation is to prevent
this from happening. It is now against
the law for a mixed (1) audience of
whites and non-whites, even with
segregated seating, to attend the
ballet, the concert, the opera, the
theatre, without a special permit from
the governmental authorities.
Hardly a day passes without news
that a permit for this or that event has
been refused. The most recent
example of this is the refusal to allow
Africans to attend the quinquennial
(/) The adjective "mixed" in this article,
when used of teams, audiences, and other
groups, means that white and non-white
people are associated as co-players, co-
performers, co-spectators, etc.
showing of the Oberammergau Passion
Play in the city of Durban. The
Government is prepared however to
let the all-white cast present a
separate performance for Africans, but
it would almost certainly not be
prepared to allow the producer of the
play to use a non-white actor for the
part of Simon of Cyrene. Nor can a
coloured opera group use a white
singer without permit.
It would be tiresome to retail the
thousand-and-one permutations and
combinations for which permits would
be required. The whole thing is an
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
15

THE PRICE OF SEGREGATION (Continued)
'Like walking blindfold through a minefield'
immense fatuity, irrational and derisible,
with an element of cruelty that is
inevitably present when one race group
assumes the task of preserving the
cultures of others.
The same fatuity characterises the
Government attitude towards sport.
Spectators in segregated seating may,
if a permit is granted, witness cricket,
soccer, rugby, football, tennis, and
other games, but no mixed team can
visit the country. Nor can any mixed
team be formed in the country, except
presumably to play on some private
ground, nor can a team of one race
play against a team of another race
without a permit.
The reader must note, however, that
this would not apply if the two mono-
racial teams were both white; it is the
element of colour that is the important
consideration. It will therefore be
seen that apartheid or separate
development is not solely concerned
with the preservation of cultural
differences; it is equally concerned
with the preservation of racial
differences, and above all, of course,
with the preservation of white racial
purity, such as it is after a period of
three centuries.
Again hardly a day passes without
news that sports apartheid is being
more and more rigidly enforced.
The South African golfer Mr. Papwa
Sewgolum is of Indian descent, but he
can no longer play in any open golf
tournament. He can therefore no
longer win prizes, and must rely on
charity to enable him to golf abroad,
for example, in Holland, of whose
Open Tournament he has been the
winner on two occasions.
The Government has already
announced that if Mr. Basil D'Oliviera,
a South African coloured man living
in England, is selected to play for
England in cricket in 1968, the team
will not be allowed to enter South
Africa.
As I write this, it has just been
announced that Mr. Ronnie van der
Walt, a leading South African boxer
who has been fighting in "white"
boxing for 12 years, has now been
classified as a coloured man. When
interviewed by newspaper men, he
broke down and wept. His tears will
bring no relief; the Government will
go ahead with its task of creating a
happy and harmonious community out
of the unhappinesses of individual men
and women.
The people who suffer most from
these restrictions are those Africans,
Indians, and Coloured people who are
eager to enjoy and to learn more
about Western music, ballet, theatre,
and opera. Such people are incident¬
ally characterized by their quiet
behaviour. They do not go to concerts
and plays to demonstrate, they go to
hear and enjoy and learn. Their
numbers are in general not great, so
that they are unable to organize such
occasions for themselves. In any
event it appears to me impossible for
any non-Westerner, except the most
exceptional, to make much progress in
the understanding of Western culture
unless he is in touch with those who
are part of it.
In 1948 apartheid, though it certainly
existed, had not yet been translated
This sign at the entrance
to St. George's Anglican
Cathedral, Cape Town,
was erected in 1957
when the South African
Parliament, in session a
few streets away, passed
the Native Laws
Amendment Act one
clause of which forbids
people of different races
to worship together.
This sign has since been
replaced by a much
larger one, stating
the same message in
English, Afrikaans and
Häuser. For an article
on apartheid and
the church, see page 33.

Greatly against the desires of
the parents, primary education
is given in the vernacular,
whereas parents want it in
English. As the Unesco Report
on Apartheid in South Africa
states, this serves "to reinforce
the linguistic, social and
cultural isolation of the African
population within the country
as well as from the world at
large." Left, a school in the
Capetown area.
Photo Francos - Holmes - Lebel
into the formidable body of law the
making of which has occupied
so much of the time and energy of
successive Parliaments. Cultural con¬
tacts between and among South
Africans of different races were
steadily increasing. It would almost
appear that South Africans were
growing in cultural awareness of one
another.
This tide has now been halted and
is in fact receding. Yet one hears the
preposterous suggestion that the
children in rigidly segregated schools
should be taught to appreciate and
understand the children of other races.
They are in fact to be taught to love
others, while being strictly forbidden
to play or eat or have any meaningful
relationship with them.
Apartheid has a crippling effect on
the art of writing. I give it as my
considered opinion that any play or
work of fiction which dealt with any
racial topic or any act of injustice in
a way uncongenial to the government,
would today, have little chance of
passing the governmental organ known
as the Publications Control Board,
whose powers are very far-reaching.
I add that such a work need not be
brought before the Board, but that
few publishers or producers would risk
a ban after publication or production.
It could of course be said that the
banning of publications has nothing to
do with apartheid, but in fact the
banning of publications is directed as
much against books dealing with racial
topics and injustices as it is against
the flood of pornographic trash which
would pour into the bookstalls.
The real purpose of publications
control is shown by the attitude
of censors towards "Selma", that
distasteful tale of the freedom fighters
in the Deep South. Any novel dealing
with love or sex affairs between black
and white (unless it does so with
considerable restraint, as in my own
novel "Too Late the Phalarope") would
never be allowed to enter South Africa.
But "Selma" was allowed to enter
because it showed freedom fighters
as unsavoury characters; who would
want integration if these are the people
who fight for it?
One must not think that apartheid
and authoritarian control of thought
and education are separate entities.
They are one and the same thing.
Without authoritarian control there
could be no apartheid. Both of
them powerfully influence the culture.
Some years ago African education
was largely in the hands of missionary
bodies, who gave what one could
generally describe as a liberal
education. Today, with the exception
of the Transkei, it is firmly in the hands
of the Bantu Education Department.
Greatly against the desires of the
parents, primary education is given in
the vernacular, whereas parents want
it to be in English. They believe, and
university teachers confirm, that their
children are retarded by one or two
years by this vernacular teaching.
What is more, they want their sons and
daughters to be at home in the
Western, or shall we call it the modern,
world. They (though not often
publicly) deride the idea that their
culture must be preserved by others
and say that they will preserve what
they choose to.
I
here are already signs
that the Government would like to
exercise a tighter control over the
education of white children also, which
at the moment is controlled by the
provincial administrations. Although
white unity is thought to be necessary
in the face of threats from within
and without, Afrikaans-speaking and
English-speaking children are educated
in separate schools. They may later
co-operate in commerce, industry, and
other spheres, but during their
impressionable years they must be
kept apart. The government has also
given signs that it is preparing to
exercise greater control over university
affairs.
Finally, apartheid has had a
calamitous effect on that part of culture
which has to do with moral ideas.
Here I shall confine myself to the moral
ideas of the white population.
Apartheid, because it has been
elevated to the status of the supreme
value, has wrought devastation
amongst the other values. The rule of
law is one of the outstanding
casualties; people are banned,
banished, and detained in solitary
confinement for periods up to 180 days
without any recourse to the courts of
law. White South Africa, with
laudable exceptions, accepts this
procedure on the grounds that such
people "must have been up to
something"
Certainly the proposition that the
end justifies the means is not now
much debated. Such things as the
rule of law, university autonomy,
parental rights to choose the language
in which children are educated, the
freedom of the churches, have all
suffered erosion. The value of any
thought, any activity, is officially judged
by one criterion and one alone does
it further or does it impede the cause
of apartheid.
The Press, especially the English
language, is under continuous fire.
Although as yet no direct steps have
been taken to curb it, the editing of
a paper is, in the words of one of our
leading editors, "like walking blind¬
fold through a minefield".
Therefore although one of the main
aims of apartheid is to develop the
cultures separately, its effect is to
ossify them separately, and to make
them resistant to the entrance of new
ideas. Whether the State will be in
the long run successful in maintaining
its hold on culture, or whether culture
has some inherent and independent
life of its own, remains to be seen.
One takes hope from the knowledge
that there are South Africans of all
races who reject apartheid as a
gigantic self-deception, who reject
what is called the "traditional way of
life", who speak and write openly, and
boldly present their ideas for the
consideration and criticism of younger
generations, though it may be
dangerous for them to do so.
Nor should one overlook the fact
that despite the laws and the
conventions, and despite the attempt
to preserve the separate racial
cultures, a great deal of cultural
assimilation has already taken place,
and though attempts are made to
reverse the process (as in making the
vernacular the medium of school
instruction), there are grounds for
believing that they will not be
successful. The forces that make for
apartheid and those that make for
assimilation will continue to fight each
other, in a struggle that is as old as
South Africa itself.
17

COLOUR MAKES THE JOB
During the past five years there are records of only three non-white
engineering graduates from South African universities.
The Government may prohibit the replacement of employees of one
race by those of another race, may reserve certain types of jobs to
persons of a specific race. The Government in introducing this legisla¬
tion indicated that it was intended to protect the "white" labour force
against the infiltration of non-whites into skilled labour. The Trade
Unions have become one of the strongest supporters of a job reser¬
vation policy, and its corollary "white supremacy", in the social and
economic spheres.
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid
By interfering with their freedom
of movement and residence, says an
International Labour Organisation report
South African law tends to compel
non-whites to take up the least attractiv
jobs. Above, an African worker
arrives at a diamond mine. South Africa
is the second largest producer of
diamonds in the world.
Only the whites are eligible
for highly skilled work or
executive positions. Left, an
interview in the personnel
bureau of a diamond mine.
Each evening (right), the miners
hand in at a window the diamonds
extracted during the day. Miners
are stringently controlled to prevent the
stones from being smuggled out.
When their employment comes to
an end, the miners are carefully searched.
This man (far right) has been searched
and is about to be X-rayed.
Additionally, non-white workers are
obliged to live within the actual area
of the mine throughout their employment.
Photos © Ian Berry - Magnum

o é
