THE COLLECTIVE
DREAM
OF A CONTINENT
by Anil de Silva
I
Co/our page
Top: Bhishma, in the Mahabharata
(centre figure) expiring on the field of
battle while Krishna, holding a lotus
flower, listens to his dying words. When
Bhishma asks for water, Arjuna shoots an
arrow into the earth and brings forth a
sparkling spring to quench Bhishma's thirst.
This 19th-century painting decorates a
Vishnuite manuscript of episodes from
the Mahabharata compiled in Kashmir.
Photo Paul Almasy © Private collection, Paris
Left: A 17th-century Persian illustration
(Mughal school) for a translation of the
Mahabharata. It depicts the combat
between the powerful Bhima and the
wicked Duryodhana on a bare hillside.
Dominating the scene are the
Gods of the Indian Pantheon, among them
Indra, God of the sky and storms
and Yama, God of the underworld.
Photo © Victoria and Albert Museum, London
Right: The Ramayana is rich in
descriptive passages that bring vividly to
life the landscapes of India in all their
seasonal change. In one of them an Indian
artist of the 17th-century may have
found inspiration for this charming
miniature showing Rama and Sita travelling
in their chariot through a luxuriant land.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
he Ramayana and the
Mahabharata, though born in India,
belong to the "collective dream" of
all of South East Asia. The epics are
reborn at every age, their message
renewed, their forms changing as the
course of history changes, fructifying
and revififying and filling the human
spirit. They have charmed and
enchanted, inspired and exalted the
people of India and South Asia, form¬
ing the very foundation of their rich
and living culture.
The epics are history, myth and
folklore, and the ageless quality of
their appeal, the influence of the moral,
ethical and religious values they
contain have shaped the daily lives of
millions of men and women for gener¬
ations.
It has often been said that "what is
not in the Mahabharata is nowhere."
Mahatma Gandhi, who wrote at length
on the meaning and import of the two
great epic poems and translated the
Bhagavad-Gita (which is a part of the
Mahabharata) into his native Gujarati,
once said: "The Gita has become for
us a spiritual reference book. . . the
deeper you dive into it the richer the
meanings you get."
Later he wrote: "Early In childhood
I had felt the need of a scripture that
would serve as an unfailing guide
through the temptations of life. . .
I learned Sanskrit to enable me to
read the Gita. Today the Gita is not
only my Bible or my Koran it is my
Mother. I lost my earthly mother who
gave me birth long ago, but this
eternal mother has completely filled
her place by my side ever since. She
has never changed, she has never
failed. When I am in difficulty or dis¬
tress, I seek refuge in her bosom."
("Gita the Mother" by M.K. Gandhi.)
The Ramayana Is an epic poem of
love and beauty and tells the story of
the princely hero, Rama, who fights a
battle to bring back his kidnapped
wife, Sita, from the demon king of
Lanka (Ceylon). The Mahabharata is
the story of the Great Civil War which
rent India about 1,000 B.C., a terrible
fratricidal war between the Kauravas
and the Pandavas, the sons of two
brothers, and fought on the northern
plains of Kurukshetra, in the region of
Delhi.
Both epics were transmitted orally
for centuries before being written
down, but even today wandering mins¬
trels and baliad singers travel regularly
from village to village throughout India
and other countries of South Asia
reciting and singing the epics far into
the night under the stars. Indian work¬
ing-men, wearied with the toil of the
day, are capable of spending a whole
night seated in a circle round the fire
listening attentively to a drama of three
thousand years ago.
To the central themes of the Maha¬
bharata and Ramayana have been
grafted a multitude of subsidiary stories
to illustrate the central themes. Their
heroes find prominent mention in the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
ANIL DE SILVA of Ceylon has spent many
years of study on the art and literature of
India and Asia. She is the author of "The
Life of Buddha" (Phaidon Press, London,
1957) and "Chinese Landscape Paintings
in the Tun-Huang Caves" (Methuen and
Co., London; Crown Publishers, New York),
both of which have appeared in several
language editions. Her latest book, "India:
Conquest and Freedom" (New York Graphic
Society) will appear shortly. Anil de Silva
is co-editor with Prof. Otto von Simson "j Q
of "Man Through His Art", the series of | \J
art albums sponsored by the World Con¬
federation of Organizations of the Teaching
Profession with Unesco aid.

COLLECTIVE DREAM (Continued)
Endless variations on a theme
Indian and South Asian literature of all
ages from the fifth century onwards.
Both epics constitute a veritable
treasure-house of Indian and South
Asian lore, both secular and religious,
and give as do no other single works
an insight into the innermost depths of
the soul of the people. Both works
are great as a collection of stories,
great as epic poems describing in
magnificent language various emotions
and events, great as manuals of law
and morality, great as a record of
social' and political philosophy, and
great as sacred treatises pointing the
way to an understanding of the
supreme ends of life.
Hajime Nakamura, Professor of
Philosophy and Religion at Tokyo Uni¬
versity has written: "In the epics of
Mahabharata and Ramayana the typical
heroes of India are not national heroes
in the sense of any national and racial
consciousness, which they, as well as
their authors, lacked. Ancient Indians
preached as a virtue the offering of
one's property, even one's life if neces¬
sary, for the sake of others' happiness.
But they were never taught self-sacri¬
fice for a particular nation or race.
The concept of the national hero in
our sense did not appear in Indian
history." (1)
T
14
HE numerous variant tales
incorporated into the main story of the
Mahabharata are mainly related when
the Pandavas are exiled into the forest
after Yudhishthira loses his kingdom
in a game of dice. Many sages come
to visit them there and recount stories
and legends of the past. Over the
centuries, many of these tales have
been taken up again by hundreds upon
hundreds of writers,, rewritten and
modified, and used for plays and stor¬
ies and poems.
Among the most Important works
inspired by the Mahabharata was
that written in the 5th century by the
Sanskrit poet, Kalidasa, undoubtedly
the greatest poet dramatist of India's
Classical Age, and often referred to
as the "Indian Shakespeare." The
play, called Abhijnana-Shakuntalam,
relates a love intrigue in the king's
harem (first translation into English in
1789). The verses are simply enchant¬
ing. Goethe wrote about It, "flowers
and fruit, all that delights and all that
sustains, all heaven and all earth, are
expressed In the name of Shakuntala."
Another play inspired by the Maha¬
bharata was written by Rablndranath
Tagore for his famous Chitra. It takes
(1) "Ways of Thinking of Eastern Peoples"
by Hajime Nakamura, edited by Philip
P. Wiener (East-West Center Press, Honolulu,
Hawaii, 1964). Originally published by the
Japanese National Commission for Unesco
in 1960.
as its theme an episode about Arjuna,
the great hero of the Pandava brothers
clan. The play ¡s located in Assam
where Arjuna is said to have stayed
for some time.
There are uncounted versions of
the Ramayana. Every language of
India has its own Ramayana. The
three most famous Indian versions,
however, are the Sanskrit, attributed
to Valmiki and written about 300 B.C.;
the sixteenth century Hindi version by
Tulsi Das; and the ninth century
Tamil classic by Kamban.
Perhaps the most beautiful rendering
into English is the Ayodhya Canto of
the Kamban version, the most dramatic
part of the Ramayana, translated by
C. Rajagopalachari, and published in
1961 in the Unesco Collection of
Representative Works (a chapter of the
poem is given on page 30). Tulsi
Das's version has also been translated
into English by F.R. Allchin In the same
Unesco Collection under the title
Kavitavali (both books by George Allen
& Unwin Ltd, London). It contains
some of the poet's most highly
personal and profound expressions of
devotion to Rama.
- ~Valmiki's Sanskrit poem Is filled
with lyrical descriptions of Nature.
Rama and Lakshmana are tricked into
leaving Sita unprotected in the forest
and when they return they find her
vanished. She has been kidnapped
by Ravana. Rama, in his despair, runs
madly from thicket to thicket calling
Sita's name. In each ray of sunlight,
in each golden flower, he thinks he
recognizes her yellow robe.
Invoking the trees he cries: "Sweet
Kadambara, have you seen my fair
one? Speak, Basil, you must know,
for her limbs are like your graceful
branches	 Sweet Tila, fairest of
all, where is she who loved your
flowers? Gentle deer, has she played
with you? Is your moon-faced friend
hiding behind some tree? Have pity.
Speak to me	 Where are her soft
limbs, her moon bright face, her
shapely neck, her red lips..." (2) and
Rama throws himself upon the bare
earth in despair.
Later, wandering in the forest, Rama
and Lakshmana come to the grove by
the Pampa Lake. It ¡s Spring and
"Rama and Laskhmana bathe in the
crystal waters of the Pampa ablaze
with white and red lotus buds. The
trees are proudly crowned with flowers
along the banks and long creepers
fall from them laden with blossoms.
Screaming parrots make shrill music
and Rama feels his whole being filled
with langorous desire for Sita.
(2) This and the following quotations from
Valmiki's "Ramayana" come from an
unpublished adaptation of the "Ramayana" by
Anil de Silva and Lilian Lassen.
One of the dramatic episodes in the Ramayana is the abduction by Ravana, the
demon-king of Ceylon, of Sita, wife of Rama exiled in the forest. Rama is lured
into the forest in pursuit of a deer (a demon in disguise), and his brother Lakshmana,
guarding Sita, is tricked into leaving her. Ravana then appears, sweeps Sita
off in his aerial chariot, as seen in painting below. A great vulture, Jatayu, tries
to rescue her and though mortally wounded lives long enough to tell Rama of
Sita's abduction. Jatayu's combat with Ravana is depicted in this
miniature from the Punjab Hills school of painting, dating from about 1765.
Q
S
z
Ë
3
CD
CO
5
>-^"--^--' ¿\

Photo Indian Tourist Office
THE FESTIVAL
OF DUSSERAH
Photo © Holmes-Lebel - R.J. Chlnwalla
The three colossal
figures dwarfing the
ordinary mortals at their
feet (above) are
pasteboard effigies of the
principal demons of the
Ramayana ten-headed
Ravana (centre) flanked
by Meghdana and
Khumbhakarna. They
figure in the celebration
of the Indian festival
of Dusserah. After
celebrations dedicated to
the Goddess Durga who
helped Rama against
Ravana, giant
effigies, like those above
erected in a northern
Indian city, meet a fiery
fate when flaming arrows
shot by Rama ignite
explosives packed inside
them. Right, putting last
touches to a figure's head.
"Look, brother, the Kakila birds
mock me with their joyful notes and
the yellow clusters of the cassias
awake my longing for Sita; the Mango
tree, breaking into flower, is like a
gaily dressed lover; the wild cock
calls to his mate near the waterfall,
my darling heard his shrill notes at
dawn one day in our cottage. From
tree to tree each bird seeks his mate,
filling the air with their triumph and the
call of the Spring is unbearable. My
eyes are tortured for a sight of Sita.
"Amid the bamboo thickets the pea¬
cock dances In frantic glee, his tail
glowing like a jewelled window in the
sun; the peahen answers her mate in
his amorous dance and he pursues her
through the tangled grass, no demon
has robbed him of his lovel Look,
Lakshmana, at this butterfly whose
wings are covered with the golden
pollen of the flowers he has kissed.
In this month the cup of my widowed
grief is full. I cannot bear the loss of
her, the long sleepless nights without
her.
"Somewhere under alien skies it
must be Spring too, and my imprisoned
love mourns for me. My spirit knows
she can never live without me. Every
gentle breeze that stirs the blossoms
on the trees fans the fury of my
desires	 Where are you, Sita,
my fawn-eyed love?" Rama wanders
through the wood calling desperately
for his lost love.
T
HE ardent zest for nature
seen in these extracts goes back to a
continuous tradition and is the supreme
expression of an essentially Indian
experience. All nature's exuberance,
the cries of the Kokila, the wind, the
sun, the moon, the heat, the ralnclouds,
the Mango trees, the bee, the vine,
the curve of a pitcher, the dark Indigo-
starred sky at night, all are caressed
by the poet and nature's vitality
expresses and symbolizes love, here
expressed by Rama for Sita. The
especial place the Ramayana holds In
the hearts of the people of India and
South Asia is due mainly to the purity
of the hero and heroine who incarnate
the ideals of conjugal love and fidelity.
How revealing is this description of
Sita as a prisoner: "Ravana woke to
a new day to the strains of music as
the solemn hymn of praise to the dawn
was sung. The thought of Sita came
to his heart, he could not control the
passion that absorbed his soul.
Laying aside his bow and arrow, he
put on a spotless white robe embroi¬
dered with flowers and gold and
entered the Asoka grove impatient to
see her. A sudden fear and trembling
took hold of Sita when she saw Ravana
in his pride; she folded her arms'over
her breasts trying to screen their
beauty from his bold and amorous
glances. She lay prone like a severed
branch on the earth, her thoughts flying
to Rama to give her courage."
Valmiki's Ramayana has Ravana as
the villain, but In South India and the
15
CONTINUED ON PAGE 17

COLLECTIVE DREAM (Continued)
Ramasymbol of love and chivalry
a league Bhima decided to lift it up
with his club, which weapon, however,
broke in the attempt.
Now the Pandava knew he was deal¬
ing with no ordinary ape and he came
back to Hanuman and asked him
respectfully who he was. Hanuman
smiled and disclosed his identity. He
entertained Bhima with many tales of
ancient days, and described to him the
feats performed by the monkeys in the
"Ramayana" battle.
Bhima requested Hanuman to show
him the form he had assumed for
jumping over to Lanka. Hanuman now
stood up and began to increase in
size; but before he reached his full
stature Bhima got frightened of the
enormity of the form, fainted and fell
down. Hanuman assumed a smaller
size, revived his brother, gave him
directions as to how to get the flower
he was seeking and sent him on his
adventurous task.
Hanuman was famous not only for
his physical strength but also for his
learning. "The chief of the monkeys,"
says the "Ramayana", "is perfect : no
one equals him in the Shastras, in
learning, and in ascertaining the sense
of scriptures. In all sciences, in the
rules of austerity, he rivals the pre¬
ceptor of the gods."
Hanuman is widely worshipped in
India. In memory of his services to
Rama, monkeys are held sacred. In
many Indian cities they boldly roam
about streets and public parks.
From: "Epics. Myths and Legends of India"
by P. Thomas. Copyright held by D.B. Tara-
porevala Sons & C°. Bombay, India.
Jain versions, Ravana is the great
tragic figure for his love for Sita
carries with it his own death; he
catches our imagination and the idea
that his passion bears its inevitable
disaster follows the spirit of Greek
tragedy.
The main school of Jain poetry
follows the poet Vimalasuri (whose
Sanskrit version was written round
the first or second century A.D.) and
probably contains one of the richest
Ramite literatures to be found in Sans¬
krit, Kanerese and in the dialects.
Vimalasuri makes Ravana beautiful:
"Shining, dark brown body, his face
like a full-blown lotus, large chested,
powerful long arms, waist slender and
hips like that of a lion, thighs like the
trunk .of an elephant. . . ."
The first non-Indian version of the
Ramayana was produced in Chinese
and dates from about the fifth century.
In Tibet, Nepal and Chinese Turkestan
local versions appear to be well known
from about 700 A.D. In Cambodia an
inscription dated 600 A.D. tells that a
sage presented the Ramayana to a
temple and made arrangements for its
recitation. We know that in the tenth
century a Sanskrit scholar expounded
both epics at the Cambodian court.
By the seventh century the epics
were known in Assam, Thailand and
Laos. Ayuthia the ancient capital of
Thailand was named after Ayodhya, the
capital of the kingdom of Rama. Indo¬
nesian versions, mainly based on very
early Indian variants, are depicted in
the shadow plays and in bas-reliefs of
the temples of Panataran and Pramba-
nan. In the Javanese versions of the
Ramayana only the bare bones of the
Indian version have been retained, the
rest being the incorporation of tradi¬
tional Javanese legends. The Mughal
Emperor Akbar had the Ramayana
translated Into Persian during the six¬
teenth century, produced with mag¬
nificent miniatures (see colour photos
of some Persian miniatures, pp. 11, 12).
There Is no part of India or Ceylon
unconcerned in some way with. either
one of the epics, and thousands go
on yearly pilgrimages to Ramesvaram,
the southernmost tip of the sub-conti¬
nent, where Rama and the army of
monkeys stopped before crossing over
to Lanka to rescue Sita. And in
Ceylon Itself, Sita Eliya is said to be
the Asbka Grove where Sita was kept
prisoner.
The great Indian festivals of Dus-
serah,' Divali and Navrati are linked
with the Ramayana, while others are
associated with Krishna, a god-hero of
the Mahabharata. Divali, the festival of
lights, is concerned with the return of
Rama to his kingdom. Every house,
cottage and hut burns its little oil
lamps in célébration; painted clay
images of all the characters are made,
and all homes are open to guests on
that day (see "Unesco Courier", April
1963).
The Ramayana has a special place
in India and South Asia because of
the purity of Rama and Sita and their
love symbolizing fidelity. The ideal
of chivalry in the epic corresponds to
that of Europe in the Middle Ages,
for Rama is the protector of the
oppressed, of widows and orphans; he
is the perfect knight valiant ¡n face
of danger, protective and tender to
all women while loving Sita alone.
Many scholars have frequently
found comparisons between Homer's
Iliad and the Ramayana for they share
the basic plot of a husband who goes
forth to battle to rescue a kidnapped
wife; and the story of Jatayu, the
vulture, whose brother burnt his wings
on going too near the sun recalls the
Greek myth of Icarus.
Many other characters in the, Greek
and Indian epics have points in
common: Agamemnon and the monkey
king Sugriva, Hector and Indrajit, the
son of Ravana who abducted Sita,
Nestor and Hanuman. Other details
recall the Bible: Hanuman and Joshua
both order the sun to stop in Its
course; and Hanuman, like Jonah,
enters the mouth of a sea monster.
ANY of the folk tales found
in the Mahabharata and translated dur¬
ing the Middle Ages have become part
of the legends and stories of many
European and African countries. In the
seventeenth century, the Bhagavad-
Gita and other Indian texts were trans¬
lated Into European languages and
influenced many European and Ameri¬
can thinkers and philosophers, writers
and artists: Beethoven, Schopenhauer,
Emerson, Freud, Thoreau, Whitman,
Rodin, and in more recent times, the
Irish poet Yeats and Aldous Huxley
among others. Goethe borrowed an
Indian stage convention from Kalida-
sa's drama Shakuntala (which had
been translated Into German) for his
own prologue to Faust.
The extraordinary richness of the
two epics accounts for the unbounded
popularity they have enjoyed for cen¬
turies in India and South Asia and the
joy and pleasure they continue to
afford to millions today. Although the
epics deal with mythical beings, ani¬
mals, demons, gods and men, all these
characters endear themselves to us;
they are never all bad or all good.
Whether these figures from the remote
past come from the epics of Vyasa
or Valmiki "they are the everlasting
oracles of life; they have to be ques¬
tioned anew with every age, each age ^
approaching them with Its own variety 1 7
of understanding. ... to learn, to evoke
fresh speech from them and under¬
stand that speech."
