THE EFFECTS OF APARTHEID ON CULTURE
The fettered spirit
by Breyten Breytenbach
"I want to express by means
of the plague the suffocation
from which we all suffered,
and the atmosphere of men¬
ace and exile in which we
all lived." (Albert Camus.)
T
HERE are certain concepts
and principles which, in the Republic
of South Africa, must be stated and
restated until one is blue in the face.
This is necessary because of the con¬
stant modification, erosion and exploi¬
tation these concepts undergo in the
country at the present time. To the
extent that leaders and members of
the white community justify their laws
and actions and aspirations in terms of
the universally accepted meanings of
these concepts and principles, the
pretence must be shown up. One must
apply this constant debunking to nearly
every form of organized human acti¬
vity: education, legality and the laws,
politics, the racial concept, the right to
work, trade unions, private and public
BREYTEN BREYTENBACH is an Afrikaner
writer, poet and painter. He was born in
1939 in South Africa and studied art at the
University of Cape Town. In 1960 he left
South Africa and travelled around the world.
He now lives and works in Paris as a
painter. Exhibitions of his works have been
held in several European countries and in the
United States. A writer in Afrikaans, he is
the author of several collections of poems
and essays and a volume of short prose
pieces entitled "Katastrofes".
business, travel, marriage and the free
association of individuals, etc. And, of
course, culture. And here, we touch
not only upon the organized manifes¬
tation of culture, but also the right and
freedom of the individual to create,
to entertain or be entertained, to think,
to express himself to laugh or to cry.
Culture, to me, is the uttering of a
nation's dreams, hopes, fears, fantasies
and desires. It is national insofar as
the individual or group of individuals
formulating and expressing these, be¬
long to a nation sharing a common
heritage, living in the same country,
exploring a mutual present and mould¬
ing a brighter future. Culture is the
way in which the members of a nation
find themselves and their countrymen.
It should never be a privilege the free
expression of culture through the visual
and performing arts and literature, and
politically free access to cultural mani¬
festations should be a right never even
questioned. This is patently not the
case in South Africa.
Tribal white man has imposed a way
of life on the nation which has reduced
culture to folklore, or rather, has den¬
ied the progression from folklore to
culture. Apartheid, which puts the
accent on and favours that which
distinguishes one group from another,
inevitably means the glorification of
the banal and the local as opposed to
the original and the universal (or even
merely national): handicrafts and post¬
cards as opposed to sculpture and
painting, the beating of the tom-toms as
opposed to the discovery and enjoy¬
ment of richer musical forms, inferior
journalism as opposed to creative
writing.
Freedom is inseparable. There can
be no rich cultural life when man can
hardly aspire to the possibility of
attaining political and economic free¬
dom.
In which way does apartheid then
destroy culture? It seems senseless to
point to recent laws which, for example,
prohibit racially mixed audiences or
create a board of censorship so ob¬
viously politically motivated. Com¬
plaining about these is what I would
term "giving battle", a token (or real)
resistance to what is considered ex¬
cessive whereas the whole Ideology
underlying apartheid must be abolish¬
ed before we can think in terms of
culture, and therefore in terms of
human dignity. Advocating the libe¬
ralization of a situation is another way
of condoning the status quo. It is
like treating the patient for bilharzia
without purifying the water.
It is the basic ideology of the white
people in power (and those they re¬
present) as embodied in all the apart¬
heid laws, which denies culture and
human dignity to all the people of
South Africa, including themselves.
And this ideology is one of Chris¬
tian-Nationalism or Calvinist-Tribalism
by which one tribe is trying to perpe¬
tuate itself (according to the image it
has of itself) by monopolizing all power
and dictating to the other tribes their
supposed lines and forms of cultural,
political and economic development.
This development must always exist in
relation to the white man's central per¬
petuation of exclusive power. This tribe
dictates to its own members in that
it refuses any opposition to or ques¬
tioning of its ideology of supremacy
which may undermine the monolithic
power structure.
flPARTHEID stifles the cultu¬
ral contributions of the black, brown
and yellow man but in its denial of
morality, humanism and dignity, it is
probably well on its way towards kil¬
ling the contribution of the white man.
Other contributors will be able to
show in greater detail how the apart¬
heid laws prevent the growth of cul¬
ture, or affect the existing culture.
My intention is more general to try
and define this death for myself.
Apartheid is the big effort to curb the
forming of a South African nation
politically, economically, culturally and
therefore also racially which should
be one of the most normal things on
earth given our interdependence and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
27

THE FETTERED SPIRIT (Continued)
A cultural and national death wish?
mutually hybrid origins. And culture and
cultural exponents would have been
the links. Now it has become futile
to hope that one ethnic group may fer¬
tilize another, and the brittle contact
established previously among writers,
artists and musicians of the different
groups is being dismantled progres¬
sively. It seems to be part of a
general movement of contraction and
falling apart a cultural and national
death wish.
At this stage of the contraction and
the spasm we have influential cultural
leaders of the Afrikaans community
asking the Government to stop the
flow of immigrants from non-Germanic
countries (as they fear the extinction
of Afrikaans culture) while launching
a campaign to replace English by Afri¬
kaans among the "Bantu."
We are going to have a new law to
be tabled during the present Parliamen¬
tary session which is to seek the
prohibition of one race "interfering"
in the political affairs of another: the
Prohibition of Improper Interference
Bill. For political affairs read anything
from social gatherings to plays or jam
sessions or writers' discussions.
One would hardly have thought it
necessary to pass new restrictive
laws. It is estimated that 1,800 people
were punished without trial for their
political beliefs in recent years. At
the moment, there are about 70 people
under house arrest, 600 more are ban¬
ned or restricted, another 40 are liv¬
ing in banishment in remote areas
and over 2,000 people are in prison
as 90 and 180-day detainees.
Every Government Gazette adds to
the list of people whose creative
works are no longer allowed in South
Africa. The Classic, a literary quar¬
terly had this to say in a recent issue:
"Classic regrets... present rules that
writers of the calibre of Ezekiel
Mphahlele, Lewis Nkosi, Can Themba,
Todd Matshakiza, Bloke Modisane,
can no longer be read in the maga¬
zine or country." There are many
more.
It is not surprising. In the atmo¬
sphere engendered by these laws one
can see how simple human acts or
the description thereof can be given
quite fantastic values, interpretations
and implications. For a black man to
kiss a white woman is revolutionary.
If this act were to be described (enthu¬
siastically!) by a writer in a book or
on stage, or even shown by a painter,
the life of the work would be endan¬
gered. And in this environment unfor¬
tunately a "literary" or "artistic-
importance would be ascribed to this
work far beyond the import of the sim¬
ple description. The daring young man
on the flying words.
And to the extent that culture must
also be the expression of social ideas
28
The policy of the
Government of South
Africa is to reinforce
tribal traditions so
as to promote tribal
nationalism as opposed
to country-wide
nationalism.
Photo © Paul Almasy,
Pans

Trade unions set up by
non-white workers
are not legally
recognized in South
Africa. Non-whites are
forbidden to strike
in any circumstances
and heavy penalties
are imposed for failure
to observe this law.
In certain cases,
according to an
International Labour
Organization report,
strikes may be treated
as "sabotage" which
is punishable by
hanging. Right, a
Witwatersrand gold
mine in the Transvaal.
and values, the writer, the artist and
the musician must use It as such, and
use it to fight for political freedom,
for dignity and for justice. Man only
lives in other men, he only expresses
his dreams in human terms, his only
real fear is of other men. It should
be up to the individual to decide how
much "message" or propaganda his
work can carry, and in which form.
Already the final decay has set in
in South Africa's cultural world. If
the coloured people of Cape Town
can no longer attend concerts in the
now all-white City Hall, then music
must eventually suffer. If our painters
are relegated to painting esoteric
pastoral scenes and "Bantu" motifs,
then our paintings will be just decor¬
ations on the wall. If plays with a
mixed cast can no longer be staged,
then the spirit of the theatre must
become atrophied. The non-white
writer may, if he is lucky, leave the
country for a bitter exile. If the white
writer, to be able to continue writing,
must compromise his humanism (his
love) for apartheid is practised also
in his name then the illness has
touched and discoloured the very
blood of his being, and his writing
will be an aberration of European
culture. Perhaps the fact that no Afri¬
kaans writer has been banned yet, is
a measure of this.
And that Is where the catch lies.
Most white South Africans have sim¬
ply never opened their eyes to the
reality of there being other humans
beside the whites in this country.
They do not "do unto others," but
unto an unidentified mass of Natives."
Nat Nakasa.
As long as we have apartheid and
the mutual fear, distrust and hate this
inspires it will be impossible for
South Africa, or any of its ethnic
groups, to develop a living culture.
29
