A TV programme
girdling the world
o,
38
'VER six hundred million
viewers one sixth of the world's
population this was the potential
audience for the remarkable television
programme, "Our World", broadcast on
June 25 in 31 countries. Of course,
not all these six hundred million people
will actually have switched on their
sets at that moment; but still one
is safe in saying that no show on
earth has had such an audience
before.
The newspapers have already car¬
ried detailed descriptions of the pro¬
gramme itself. But what went on
behind the scenes is less well known
and just as fascinating.
The idea was born in Spring 1966.
For some years now, television sta¬
tions in western Europe have got
together to organize joint transmissions
of major sporting events and other
spectacles of international interest;
these link-ups, no longer a rarity, are
arranged by Eurovision, part of the
European Broadcasting Union.
At one of the European Broadcast¬
ing Union's meetings, the British
Broadcasting Corporation put forward
a suggestion: why not try for one day
to go beyond purely European colla¬
boration and arrange a world-wide
hook-up using communication satel¬
lites?
The European television organiza¬
tions were enthusiastic about the pro¬
ject. But in the United States the
commercial structure of television
caused some difficulties: the broad¬
cast was to last two full hours, and
the U.S. network could hardly accept
a period as long as that free from
publicity. However, the National
Educational Television network (NET),
a nonprofit organization, agreed to take
part. But naturally the audience in
the U.S.A. was not as big as it would
have been if the programme had been
carried by one of the major networks.
What about the other continents?
Unfortunately there could be no
question of the programme being seen
in all countries of the world, and this
above all for technical reasons. The
broadcast was relayed from continent
to continent via satellites in stationary
orbit 36,000 kilometres (22,500 miles)
by Pierre de Latil
above the earth. At present, few
countries possess the sensitive aerials
needed to receive signals from these
satellites.
Of course, the signals, once receiv¬
ed, can be sent on to other countries
by conventional means coaxial cables
or microwave transmissions and in
highly industrialized regions there are
dense communication networks of this
kind. But many parts of the world
Asia (outside Japan), tropical Africa
even Latin America lack such faci¬
lities.
When the day comes that satellite
relay transmitters are powerful enough
to be picked up by less sophisticated
aerials, direct communication with the
whole world will be possible.
The project faced one other major
difficulty. Co-ordinating the transmis¬
sion of "canned" (pre-recorded) pro¬
grammes is a relatively simple matter.
But "Our World" was broadcast "live":
what was seen on the screen was
actually happening in another part of
the world at that very moment. This
made the whole operation very much
more complicated. But as it turned
out, timing was perfect all along the
line, and world-wide television passed
with flying colours one of the stiffest
tests it is likely to meet: perfect co¬
ordination of a long programme made
up of many short contributions which
all have to fit together like the pieces
of a jigsaw puzzle.
There were tricky problems of "con¬
trol" to be solved. Let's see how
they were ' tackled. In each country
where more than one sequence was
to originate, the places where the
various contributions were coming
from were connected to a "national
control". These national controls
were themselves linked to "interna¬
tional controls": New York for America,
Australia and Japan for Asia, and Brus¬
sels for Europe. The signals were
passed across the Atlantic and Pacific
via satellite, but within Europe they tra¬
velled by more conventional means.
The "master control" was in London,
linked both to Brussels and, by satel¬
lite, to New York.
A precise second-by-second time¬
table had been drawn up, so that eacn
producer, whether he was bringing to
the world screen shrimp-fishing in
Japan, scenes from Romeo and Juliet
in an Umbrian church, or folk-dances
in a village square in Mexico, knew
exactly when his "contribution" to the
programme was due to start.
The nerve centre in London was
directed by Aubrey Singer, head of
the BBC Outside Broadcast Features
and Science Department. As Euro¬
pean Broadcasting Union Project Edi¬
tor, he had in front of him monitors
showing the transmission sequence,
and test pictures from the next two
sequences to follow. He was also In
telephone contact with these three
units, and was thus able to give them
personally their "countdown" and go
ahead signal.
As soon as one sequence went on
the air, one of the two "waiting"
screens became free for the next
sequence in line, coming either from
Brussels or New York. In the European
control room in Brussels, where the
French director Alexandre Tarta was
in charge, the set-up was the same:
two sequences "standing-by" on two
monitor screens, and as soon as one
of them went on the air, another was
switched in from Austria, France or
Sweden...
So carefully had the two-hour pro¬
gramme been planned that everything
went off smoothly.
The timing was perfect too, except
for one sequence, showing the famous
painter Miro at work in the South of
France, which overran a few seconds:
the artist took a little bit longer than
expected to finish a drawing. But
after all, age and art could hardly be
hurried in the name of technical
perfection!
This article originally appeared in "Unesco
Features", Unesco's fortnightly bulletin for
press, radio and television
