UNESCO
IN THE SERVICE
OF PEACE
by Vladimir de Lipski
i
HE 14th Session of the Unesco General Conference, which brought
together in Paris from October 25 to November 30, 1966 the delegations of
120 members states, including 60 ministers, was a memorable occasion in the
life of Unesco in more ways than one:
the 20th anniversary of Unesco, coinciding with this session, gave the Orga¬
nization an opportunity for making a frank and open "self-appraisal" and for
receiving numerous tributes to its influence and prestige throughout the world;
for the first time in Unesco's history the General Conference unanimously
adopted without abstentions the budget of $61,506,140 proposed by the Director-
General and recommended by the Executive Board for the 1967-68 programme;
affirming the ethical role of Unesco, "the moral conscience of humanity", the
Conference adopted a series of general resolutions stating its position squarely
on three major international issues, colonialism and racialism, development,
peace.
The 20th
anniversary
of Unesco
The Constitution of Unesco came
into force on November 4, 1946, having
been ratified by 20 states. The Gene¬
ral Conference therefore dedicated
November 4, 1966 to the celebration of
this anniversary.
The opening session of the celebra¬
tion was held in the presence of Gen¬
eral de Gaulle, President of the French
Republic, who paid tribute to the work
accomplished by Unesco in the cause
of human unity. "Intellectual pro¬
gress," he declared, "is an unquestion
ed aspiration of the whole world; ... in
spite of barriers and regardless of
frontiers, intellectual development
determines progress as a whole."
Earlier, Mr. René Maheu, Unesco's
Director-General, and Prof. Bedrettin
Tuncel of Turkey, president of the
General Conference, had recalled the
circumstances leading to the founding
of Unesco, traced its development, and
paid homage to all who are helping to
forge the "intellectual and moral soli¬
darity of mankind."
Later that day, Mr. Mohammed El
Fasi (Morocco), chairman of the
Unesco Executive Board, spoke of "the
extraordinary growth of Unesco, tangi¬
ble evidence of the progress of the
world towards greater freedom, jus¬
tice and respect for human dignity."
During this day of dedication to
peace and concord, the Conference
adopted by acclamation a Declaration
of the Principles of International Cul¬
tural Co-operation, Article 1 of which
proclaims that: "each culture has a
dignity and value which must be res¬
pected and preserved; every people
has the right and the duty to develop
its culture; all cultures form part of
the common heritage belonging to all
mankind."
No fewer than 98 heads of state or
heads of government sent congratula¬
tions and good wishes to Unesco on
its 20th anniversary; greetings were
also received from the various bodies
and institutions of the United Nations
family, and from 20 intergovernmental
organizations. Meeting in plenary
session, delegates heard messages
from U Thant, Secretary-General of
the United Nations, and from Mr. Abdul
Rahman Pazhwak, President of the
U.N. General Assembly. Miss Jeanne
Chaton, chairman of the Standing
Committee of International Non-govern¬
mental Organizations, which are per¬
manently associated with Unesco's
work, spoke on behalf of these organi¬
zations; 27 of these bodies had sent
congratulatory telegrams.
Nearly every country commemorated
the 20th anniversary of Unesco with
special celebrations organized by
governments, Unesco National Com-

November 4, 1966:
Charles de Gaulle,
President of the French
Republic, pays tribute
to Unesco's work
during the 14th
session of the General
Conference when the
Organization
celebrated its twentieth
anniversary. On the
platform, from left:
Bedrettln Tuncel,
President of the
General Conference,
René Maheu,
Director-General of
Unesco, and
Mohammed El Fasi,
Chairman of the
Executive Board.
Photo Unesco-Dominique Roger
missions, scientific and cultural insti¬
tutions, schools and universities, and
press, film and radio.
Unesco's
programme
for 1967-1968
This programme, which was adopted
unanimously, shows both a concern
for stability and continuity and also a
keen awareness of certain new needs.
Continuing priority is accorded to edu¬
cation and science. The budget
directly relating to Unesco's pro¬
gramme has increased by only 7.9 per
cent.
The General Conference devoted
much time to discussing Unesco's
future programmes and affirmed its
intention to co-ordinate these program¬
mes more closely, to plan them on a
longer-term basis and include more
activities designed to promote cultural
and human values.
The Conference considered that
Unesco "should seek more and more,
through medium and long-term for¬
ward planning, to devise activities
which go beyond the framework of
particular programmes and budgets."
In the field of culture it is proposed
to make a long-term study aimed at
"ensuring for all men an increasingly
full enjoyment of their common cultural
heritage and full participation in cul¬
tural activities."
Details of the various sections of the
programme education, natural scien¬
ces, human sciences and culture, com¬
munication bear the imprint of a
double aim: to maintain existing prio¬
rity activities and to give place to new
projects which can be further develop¬
ed in the future.
In education, the established prio¬
rities relate to educational planning,
integrated with the general planning of
economic and social development; the
pre-service and in-service training of
teachers and improvement of teachers'
status; functional literacy teaching; the
use of new teaching methods, and in
particular audio-visual methods; out-of-
school education for young people and
continuing education for adults; and
the access of girls and women to edu¬
cation. More attention will also be
paid to problems of educational gui¬
dance and access to higher education,
the education of handicapped children
and education for international under¬
standing.
In the field of the natural sciences,
the most important projects relate to
the life sciences, the conservation of
natural resources, and the application
of science to development. In parti¬
cular Unesco, in co-operation with the
International Biological Programme,
plans to draw up an Inventory of the
world's biological resources, taking
into account needs resulting from the
present population increase. It will
continue the work undertaken since
1965 in connexion with the International
Hydrological Decade, paying special
attention to the problem of water poll¬
ution. It will also continue to promote
and co-ordinate océanographie re¬
search. In the future, Unesco will
increase its aid to member states for
the planning of national sciences poli¬
cies, the development of science teach¬
ing and research, the training of scien¬
tists and the establishment of "the
infrastructure of science."
While continuing its survey on the
main trends of research in the social
and human sciences, Unesco will pay
more attention to the application of
these sciences. Studies will be made,
for instance, of the relation between
the development of education and
demographical evolution, as well as
of social and cultural problems creat¬
ed by the implanting of science and
technology in developing countries.
As a follow-up to the East-West Major
Project, now successfully completed, a
programme of studies of different cul¬
tures Oriental, African, Latin Ameri¬
can, and others will be carried out
in terms of their universal significance.
As for the preservation of mankind's
cultural heritage, Unesco, while contin¬
uing its activities to save the monu-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 30
29

Unesco in the service of peace (Continued)
ments of Nubia, will encourage in par¬
ticular the co-ordination of efforts to
repair damage caused to the art trea¬
sures of Florence and Venice by the
recent floods; and will promote tourism
as a factor for economic development
and the preservation of culture.
Lastly, as regards communication in
the broadest sense of the term disse¬
mination of knowledge and the interna¬
tional flow of ideas through modern
communication media the marked
increase of Unesco's activities will be
particularly felt in documentation,
through assistance to member states
to improve their documentation servi¬
ces and the fostering of international
co-operation. A book development
programme will be launched for the
developing countries; and Unesco's
interest In the use of satellite commu¬
nications for educational purposes will
be demonstrated by studies for a pilot
project covering a wide region.
On colonialism
30
and racialism,
development
and peace
On the evening of November 28,
1966, the General Conference adopted
three important resolutions on colo¬
nialism and racialism, development,
and peace. Unesco's Director-Gener¬
al, Mr. René Maheu, summed up the
historic significance of this triple deci¬
sion in these words:
"On the agenda of the General Con¬
ference were three main problems
which set the keynote for the present
session, and which are inter-linked:
namely, colonialism and racialism,
development, and peace. On the
question of colonialism and racialism,
you took stock of the world as it is,
a world which is, alas! divided by fron¬
tiers separating men and nations,
sometimes even groups within the
same nation . . . Then you unani¬
mously adopted a resolution of peace.
This is the world as it should be, the
world we dream of, the world for
which we yearn... Between the world as
it is and the world as it should be, the
resolution on development, which you
have just adopted unanimously, is of
particular importance in that it foresha¬
dows the world we are striving to
create... It is for this reason that I
regard is as the most substantial of
the three, the test of our sincerity and
our hopes."
In its resolution on colonialism and
racialism, adopted by 72 votes to 11,
with 26 abstentions, the General Con¬
ference condemns "all forms and ma¬
nifestations of colonialism and neocolo¬
nialism" and declares its conviction
that " the continued existence of colo¬
nialism and the practice of apartheid
and all other forms of racial discrimi¬
nation constitute a threat to internation¬
al peace and a crime against huma¬
nity." The Conference instructs the
Director-General "to provide the peo¬
ples concerned... with the necessary
assistance for the development of
education, science and culture and
eradication of the after-effects of
colonialism", and also to use Unesco's
activities "to expose and to help to
eradicate" all colonialist and racialist
practices.
The same resolution asks the Direc¬
tor-General "to withhold assistance
from the Governments of Portugal, the
Republic of South Africa and the ille¬
gal regime of Southern Rhodesia . . .
and not to invite them to attend confer¬
ences or take part in other Unesco
activities."
Previously the Conference had
rejected, by 60 votes to 38 and
4 abstentions, a request by the Portu¬
guese Government that the Interna¬
tional Court of Justice be asked for an
advisory opinion on the validity of a
decision by the Unesco Executive
Board which would exclude Portugal
from meetings convened by Unesco.
The resolution on peace, which was
adopted by acclamation, appeals to
all member states to "reject war once
and for all as an instrument of their
national policy and condemn all forms
of direct or indirect aggression and of
interference in the domestic affairs of
States; renounce all recourse to vio¬
lence in the settlement of their differ¬
ences; respect the right of all nations
to self-determination and independence
and freedom to choose their political,
economic, social and cultural system;
take all necessary action to contribute
to the agreement on general and com¬
plete disarmament under international
control." It further invites the Direc¬
tor-General "to submit... a concrete
plan of activity ... to reinforce the con¬
tribution of the Organization to peace,
international co-operation and security
of peoples through education, science
and culture."
This resolution marks the outcome of
the "self-appraisal" which Unesco has
made during the past year on its con¬
tribution to peace. For this purpose,
member states were consulted by
questionnaire; a first meeting of lead¬
ing international figures was held at
Bellagio in May; and a round table
took place at Unesco from October
31 to November 4, 1966. Taking part
in the round table were former presi¬
dents of Unesco's General Conference,
former chairmen of the Executive
Board, former Directors-General of
Unesco and three Nobel Prize Win¬
ners (Lord Boyd Orr, the Honourable
Philip Noel Baker, and Professor Linus
Pauling). The General Conference
resolution takes account of the results
of these consultations and meetings.
Lastly, in the resolution on develop¬
ment adopted by 68 votes to nil,
with 14 abstentions the General Con¬
ference notes that "despite the encou¬
raging results achieved . . . the gap be¬
tween the developed countries and the
developing countries is still widening
and creating greater social, political
and economic tensions."
It therefore appeals to member
states to intensify their efforts to attain
the objectives of the Development
Decade. It asks the Director-General
to explore the possibilities of introduc¬
ing more flexible methods and proce¬
dures in programmes which are related
to the Decade; and to assist member
states, at their request, to carry out
projects relating to the integration of
education in economic and social deve¬
lopment, literacy teaching, the applica¬
tion of science and technology to
development, establishment of the
necessary conditions for the optimum
development of man, cultural tourism,
and improvement of mass communica¬
tion media and of documentation and
statistical services.
It should be made clear that already
two-thirds of Unesco's total resources,
both budgetary and extra-budgetary,
are devoted to operational activities for
development projects. By making
Unesco's 20th anniversary celebrations
a demonstration of world solidarity, by
adopting unanimously the programme
and budget for the next two years, and
by defining vigorously and eloquently
Unesco's role In the service of peace,
development and human rights, the
General Conference has demonstrated
the authority, vitality and maturity with
which Unesco is embarking on its
future tasks.
