MARIE CURIE
The life of a woman
dedicated to science
The story of the life of Marie Curie recounted below is
taken from "Madame Curie", the biography written by her
daughter Eve Curie, translated into English by Vincent
Sheean and published and © 1937 by Doubleday, Doran
and Co., Inc, Garden City, New York. Drawing on docu¬
ments, narratives and recollections of Marie Curie's contem¬
poraries, and on the personal notes, letters and journals of
Pierre and Marie Curie, the book evokes with insight and
understanding the personality, astonishing career and
scientific achievements of a woman of whom her daughter
wrote: "She did not know how to be famous".
Text © Reproduction prohibited
14
IN a night pierced with
whistles, clanking and rattling, a fourth-
class carriage made its way through
Germany. The carriage had no proper
seats. Crouched down on a folding
chair Maria Sklodowska, whom the
world was to know as Marie Curie,
was thinking of the past, and of this
journey which she had waited for so
long.
She tried to imagine the future.
She thought, quite sincerely, that one
day she would be. making her way
back to her native Warsaw, in two
years, three years time at the most,
when she would find herself a snug
little job as a teacher.
It was the winter of 1891. She was
twenty-four. And she was on herway
to Paris, to the Sorbonne. It had been
a hard struggle. To leave the country
she loved. To save enough for the
fare.
What she wanted above all was to
continue her studies, to work. But
this was impossible in a Poland,
groaning under the heel of Czarist
oppression. The University of Warsaw
was not open to women. She dreamed
of studying in Paris. And* eventually,
by skimping and saving, she managed
to collect enough for her fare.
The moment came when she was
stepping from the train on to the
platform of the Gare du Nord. For
the first time in her life she was
breathing the air of a free country.
With that ardency which was part
of her nature, Marie flung herself into
her new life.
"She worked...," her daughter,
Eve Curie later wrote in the biography
of her mother, "as if in a fever. She
attended courses in mathematics,
physics and chemistry. Manual
technique, the minute precision
needed for scientific experiment
became familiar to her. Soon she was
to have the joy of being responsible
for researches, which, though of no
great importance, nevertheless allowed
her to demonstrate her skill and origi¬
nality of mind.
"She had a passionate love for the
atmosphere of the laboratory, its
"climate" of dedication and silence,
which she was to prefer to her dying
day. She decided that one master's
degree was not enough. She would
obtain two. One in physics and one
in mathematics."
She had built herself a secret uni¬
verse, dominated by her passion for
science. Her love for her family
and her country had their place in
this universe, but something which
had no place, which she had ruled
out completely from her life, was that
other kind of love, which previously
had brought her only humiliation and
disappointment. Marriage simply did
not come into her scheme of things.
"Perhaps," Eve Curie wrote in her
book, "it is not surprising that a young
Polish girl of genius, living on the
edge of poverty miles away from her
native land, should have kept herself
to herself for her work. But it is
surprising that a Frenchman, a
scientist of genius, should have kept
himself for that Polish girl."
w,'hile Marie, still almost a
child, was living in Warsaw and dream¬
ing one day of coming to the Sorbonne
to study, Pierre Curie, returning home
one day from that same Sorbonne
where he was already making impor¬
tant discoveries in Physics confided
these thoughts to his diary: "Woman
loves life for the living of it far more
than we do: women of genius are rare.
We have to struggle against women
when, driven on by some 'mystic' love,

Maria Sklodowska in
1892. She was 24. And
she had only been in Paris
for a few months. At last
her dream of studying
science at the Sorbonne
had come true. Ten years
later she discovered
radium and received world
acclaim as one of the
greatest scientists of
modern times.
we wish to pursue some path which
is against nature, some work which
alienates us from the human beings
nearest and dearest to us."
The second son of a physician,
Dr. Eugène Curie, Pierre had received
no "formal" education. He never went
to school. Instead he was taught first
by his father then by a private tutor.
It was a scheme of education that paid
dividends. At the age of sixteen
Pierre Curie was a Bachelor of
Science. At the age of eighteen he
had a master's degree. At nineteen
he was appointed laboratory assistant
to Professor Desains in the Faculty of
Science a post he held for five years.
He was engaged on research with his
brother Jacques. The two young
physicists soon announced the disco¬
very of the important phenomenon of
"piezo-electricity."
In 1883, Jacques was appointed pro¬
fessor at Montpellier, while Pierre
became head of the laboratory at the
School of Physics and Chemistry of
the City of Paris. Even though he
devoted much of his time to his pupils,
he continued his theoretical work on
crystalline physics. This work led to
the formulation of the principle of
symmetry which has become one of
the bases of modern science. He
invented and built an ultra-sensitive
scientific scale: the Curie Scale. He
took up research on magnetism and
achieved a result of major importance,
the discovery of a fundamental law:
Curie's Law.
This was the man whom Marie Sklo¬
dowska was to meet for the first time
in the beginning of 1894.
"He seemed very young to me," she
noted, "although he was then thirty-
five. His rather slow, reflective
words, his air of simplicity and his
smile, at once serious and young, all
inspired confidence. A conversation
began between us and we became
friendly; its object was some questions
of science upon which I was only too
happy to ask his opinion."
Pierre Curie later recalled their
meeting in these words: "I described
the phenomenon of crystallography
upon which I was doing research. It
was strange to talk to a woman of the
work one loved, using technical terms,
complicated formulae, and to see that
woman, so young and so charming,
become animated, understand, even
discuss certain details with an
astonishing clarity.
"I gazed at her hair, at her high
curved forehead and her hands, which
were already stained from the acids
of the laboratory and roughened by
housework. I dug into my memory
for all that had been told me about this
girl. She was Polish. She had worked
for years in Warsaw before being
able to take the train to Paris; she had
no money; she lived alone in a
garret..."
In the July of 1895 Pierre and Marie
Curie were married.
"During these happy days was
formed one of the finest bonds that
ever united man and woman", Eve
Curie wrote. "Two hearts beat toge¬
ther, two bodies were united and two
minds of genius learned to think toge¬
ther. Marie could have married no
15
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

MARIE CURIE (Continued)
other than this great physicist, this
wise and noble man. Pierre could
have married no woman other than the
fair, tender Polish girl, who could be
childish then sublime within the same
few moments : for she was a friend
and a wife; a lover and a scientist.
In July 1897 their first child was
born. Irène Curie was to follow in
her mother's steps. She took up a
scientific career, married a fellow
scientist, the physicist Frederic Joliot
and in 1932, succeeding her mother
she became director of the Radium
Institute in Paris. In 1935 Frederic
and Irène Joliot-Curie shared the Nobel
Peace Prize in Chemistry.
At the end of 1897 the balance
sheet of Marie's achievements could
show two university degrees, a fellow¬
ship and a monograph on the magne¬
tization of tempered steel. The next
logical step in her career was a
doctor's degree. Reading through
reports of the latest experiments Marie
was attracted by a paper published by
the French scientist, Henri Becquerel.
Becquerel had examined the salts
of a rare metal, uranium. After Roent¬
gen's discovery of X-rays, the French
scientist, Henri Poincaré, conceived
the idea of discovering whether rays
like the X-ray were emitted by fluo¬
rescent bodies under the action of
light.
Attracted by the same problem Bec¬
querel examined the salts of uranium.
He observed, instead of .the pheno¬
menon he had expected, another alto¬
gether different and incomprehensible.
Without exposure to light, uranium
salts emitted, spontaneously, some
rays of an unknown nature. A com¬
pound of uranium, placed on a photo¬
graphic plate surrounded by black
paper, made an impression on the
plate through the paper.
Becquerel's discovery fascinated the
Curies. They asked themselves where
the energy came from, the energy
which uranium compounds constantly
gave off in the form of radiation. And
what the nature of this radiation was.
Here, indeed, was a subject worthy of
research, of a doctor's thesis.
A II that remained was the
question of where Marie was to do
her experiments. After certain dif¬
ficulties, Marie was given the use of a
little glassed-in studio on the ground
floor of the School of Physics. It was
a kind of store-room, sweating with
damp, where discarded machinery and
lumber were locked away. Its technic¬
al equipment was rudimentary, its
comfort non-existent. Deprived of an
adequate supply of electricity and of
everything that normally forms material
for the beginning of scientific
research, Marie, however, kept her
patience. She sought and found a
means of making her apparatus work
in this hole.
And it was under these primitive
conditions, on the ground floor of the
School of Physics in the Rue Lhomond
in Paris that two new elements were
discovered : polonium and radium.
But nobody had seen radium, nobody
knew its atomic weight. The chemists
were sceptical. "Show us radium,"
they said, "and we will believe you."
To show polonium and radium to the
sceptics, to prove to the world the
existence of their two new elements,
and to confirm their own convictions,
Pierre and Marie Curie were to labour
for four more years... in a wooden
shack, an abandoned shed, which
stood across a courtyard from Marie's
original work-room. This shed had
once been used by the Faculty of
Medicine as a dissecting room, but for
a long time it had not even been con¬
sidered fit for a mortuary.
"We had no money, no laboratory,
and no help in carrying out this impor¬
tant and difficult task," Marie later
recalled. "It was like creating some¬
thing out of nothing. I may say, without
exaggeration, that for my husband and
myself this period was the "heroic"
period of our lives. And yet it was in
that miserable shed that the best and
happiest years of our lives were spent
devoted entirely to work. I some-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 18


In 1903, Marie Curie and her husband Pierre (above)
received, with the French scientist Henri Becquerel, the
Nobel Prize for Physics. Marie Curie was the first woman
to receive a Nobel Prize. In 1911 she was also the second
woman so honoured for scientific achievements, being
awarded the N°bel Prize for Chemistry. And when a
Nobel Prize was given to a woman scientist for the third
time, it went to Marie Curie's daughter, Irene who, with
her husband Frederic Joliot (photo right) was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1935. Since then three
women scientists have been named Nobel Prize winners:
U.S. scientists Gerty T. Cori (Medicine, 1947) and Maria
Goeppert Mayer (Physics, 1963) and U.K. scientist Dorothy
Crowfoot-Hodgkin (Chemistry, 1964).
THE FAMILY
OF FIVE
NOBEL
PRIZE WINNERS

MARIE CURIE (Continued)
times passed a whole day stirring a
boiling mass of pitchblende, with an
iron rod almost as big as myself. In
the evening I would be broken with
fatigue."
It was in 1902, forty-five months
after the day on which the Curies had
announced the probable existence of
radium, that Marie finally succeeded
in preparing a decigramme of pure
radium. She made a first calculation
as to its atomic weight 225.
Now the sceptics of which there
were still a few could only bow
before the facts, before the super¬
human obstinacy of a woman who had
performed one of the great scientific
feats of the century. Now radium
officially existed.
Marie and Pierre were to have four
more years together, four years during
which radium became an industry, was
used in the field of medicine to cure
growths, tumours and most impor¬
tant certain forms of cancers: another
daughter, Eve, was born; in 1903 the
Curies received, with Henri Becquerel,
the Nobel Prize for Physics; the name
Curie became world-famous.
Then one rainy morning in the April
of 1906 Pierre was making his way
home up the Rue Dauphme. Crossing
the street, he was killed when the back
wheel of a horsedrawn wagon passed
over his skull.
On that day in April, Madame Curie
became, not only a widow, but a pitiful
and incurably lonely woman.
18
hat was to become of her
now? What was to become of the
research Pierre had left in suspense,
and of his teaching at the Sorbonne?
On May 13, 1906, the council of the
Faculty of Science decided, unanim¬
ously, to maintain the chair created for
Pierre Curie and offer it to his wife.
In 1911, Mane Curie was awarded
the Nobel Prize for Chemistry. In 1912,
she was created Member of the Scien¬
tific Society of Warsaw. In 1913 she
became Member Extraordinary of the
Royal Academy of Sciences (Mathe¬
matics and Physics section) Amster¬
dam; Doctor of the University of Birm¬
ingham and Honorary Member of the
Association of Arts and Sciences of
Edinburgh. In the same "year she
attended in Warsaw the opening of the
radioactivity laboratory, dedicated to
her.
In the following year, a small white
building was completed in the Rue
Pierre Curie in Pans. Cut into the
stone, above its entrance, were the
words : Institut du Radium, Pavillon
Curie. This "temple of the future" was
now ready to receive its radium, its
workers and its director.
With the outbreak of the First World
War, Mane Curie foresaw the urgent
need to organize the manufacture of
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20
in 1895, after studying at the Sorbonne for four years,
Maria Sklodowska, the Polish student, married Pierre Curie,
the French physicist (left). Until Pierre's deatji In 1906
they pursued, with the same intense passion, what
Pierre once called "our scientific dream". Their eleven
years together, working with only bare necessities, produced
a phenomenal result: the discovery of polonium and
radium. Above, the makeshift laboratory in which Marie
Curie succeeded in producing the first decigrammes
of the mysterious white metal: radium.
YEARS OF HAPPINESS, WORK AND TRIUMPH
In 1921, seated in a chair and
encircled by reporters and
cameramen, Marie Curie
arrives in New York. A
retiring woman, she now
underwent the ordeal of being
famous. To thank the United
States for the gift of a
gramme of radium, she had
conquered her fears and
for the first time in her life she
accepted the obligations of
a great official journey. She
was the discoverer of
radium, but lacked the means
to produce it in the quantity
needed for her research.
At the University of Columbia,
in the United States, Marie
Curie advances to receive
the honorary degree of
Doctor of Science. She was
then aged 54. During her
lifetime she was so honoured
twenty times by universities
in the U.S.A., Britain,
Poland and Switzerland.
Marie Curie at the wheel of one of the radiological cars she put into service
during the First World War. More than one fnillion wounded soldiers were
examined in the 20 cars and 200 fixed posts created by Marie Curie.
photos Archives Pierre et Marie Curie


20
MARIE CURIE (Continued)
Röntgen apparatus as well as the need
for radiological cars. She equipped and
put into service 20 of these cars, retain¬
ing one for her personal use. She
asked no special favour. She who had
once nearly starved in a garret did
not find it difficult to transform herself
into a frontline soldier.
I n 1922, 35 members of the
Academy of Médecine of Paris sub¬
mitted the following petition to their
colleagues: "The undersigned members
think that the Academy would do itself
honour by electing Madame Curie as
a free associate member, in recognition
of the part she took in the discovery
of radium and of a new treatment in
medicine, Curiotherapy."
This was a revolutionary document.
Not only was it proposed to elect a
woman for the first time to a scientific
academy in France, but, breaking with
custom altogether, it was proposed to
elect her spontaneously, without her
formally submitting herself as a candi¬
date. Sixty-four members of the Aca¬
demy of Médecine signed this mani¬
festo thus giving a lesson to their
brethren in the Academy of Sciences.
All candidates to the vacant chair
retired In favour of Madame Curie.
In the September of 1927 in her
sixtieth year and not long after an
operation to stem the onset of blind¬
ness, she wrote to her sister, Bronya :
"Sometimes my courage fails me and
I think I ought to stop working and
devote myself to gardening. But I am
held by a thousand bonds, and I don't
know when I shall be able to arrange
. things differently. Nor do I know
whether, even by writing scientific
books, I could live without the lab¬
oratory."
Madame Pierre Curie died on July 4,
1934. She was 67. The cause of her
death was an aplastic pernicious
anaemia. The bone marrow did not
react, probably injured by a long expo¬
sure to radiation. At the end she did
not call on her daughters, Irène or
Eve, or on any of her relations. At
the end she was alone with the scien¬
tific work to which she had devoted
her life.
A year later, the book Marie had
completed just before ber death, was
added to the library of the Radium
Institute in the Rue Pierre Curie. It
was a heavy volume. On its grey cover
was the name of the author: Madame
Pierre Curie, Professor at the Sor¬
bonne. Nobel Prize in Physics. Nobel
Prize in Chemistry. The title was one
word : "Radioactivity".
As her daughter Eve said of her :
"She was an eternal student; she
passed like a stranger across her own
life. She remained whole, natural and
almost unaware of her astonishing
destiny. She did not know how to be
famous."
Photo Centralna Agenda Fotograficzna, Warsaw

