ORPHANAGE FOR
WILD ANIMALS
by Richard Creenough
The refuge for wild animals
which opened three years ago
on the edge of the Nairobi National
Park (Kenya) quickly proved its
worth as an experiment in the
protection of African wildlife arid
natural resources. Each year
over 120,000 people visit this
animal orphanage and a small
admission charge has made it self
supporting. This young gazelle
was taken in when three weeks old.
Photo Unesco - R. Greenough
A,IN unusual kind of orpha¬
nage is situated on the outskirts of
Kenya's capital at Nairobi. Open to
the public, it is a refuge and home for
wild animals whose parents either
were slaughtered by poachers seek¬
ing meat, skins or ivory; caught in
traps; killed in fights with other ani¬
mals; or died from natural causes. It
is believed to be unique although a
similar institution is to be established
in neighbouring Uganda.
Situated on the edge of Nairobi's
own 100-square kilometre (44-square
mile) National Park, and tiny by com¬
parison with most other parks in East
Africa, it was opened in 1964 with
eleven inmates. Its first guest was
a young and bewildered rhinoceros
Bruce, barely two-feet long and only
a few weeks old whose mother had
been killed and whose father's where¬
abouts were unknown. Bruce had to
be lured and coaxed into his new
home with handfuls of sugar cane. By
1965 there were about 130 guests,
representing some 40 different species
of animals and they were attracting
120,000 visitors a year.
"Most of our inmates are genuine
orphans found by the game wardens
in the neighbouring park," says
Mr. Mervyn Cowie, director of Natio¬
nal Parks in Kenya, whose pet inte¬
rest this orphanage has now become,
and who looks forward to expanding
it into a large national zoological and
botanical park "where Africans, espe
cially school children and teachers,
can come and learn about and appre¬
ciate the animals of their own country,
which, mostly, they have never or
rarely seen and have been brought
up only to fear or to kill."
When these young animal orphans
are found, and discovered to be too
small, weak or sick to feed or lock
after themselves, they go first to the
orphanage hospital and are cared for
or bottle-fed. This was the case with
another early guest, a baby hippo
only a few weeks old.
"We also had a leopard cub, whose
mother had died in a trap, and wno
had absolutely no coat at all. We
doctored on a new coat and now he
has as fine a set of spots as any
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
27

ORPHANAGE FOR WILD ANIMALS (Continued)
Weaned back to jungle ways
leopard in Africa," says Mr. Cowie.
"As they grow up, we slowly train
the animals to fend for themselves,
to hunt, to make their own way with
other wild animals at large, until even¬
tually they can be released back into
a game reservation."
This process of "weaning back into
the wild" must be gradual. After an
animal has reached a certain age
you can't just automatically turn him
loose and expect him to adjust to the
jungle law of wild life, as if he had
been there all along instead of being
under human care in almost domesti¬
cated surroundings, as Mr Cowie ex¬
plains. This is especially the case with
lion cubs who usually cannot be
released until they are about four
years old.
Part of this gradual process may
involve leaving an orphan's pen open
so that, if he wishes, he can wander
off to the game park and get used
to being with other animals, fending
for himself,' foraging for food and
generally learning to keep alert and
alive. But the orphan always knows
that the pen door is open and that
he can come back if need be.
But it is not only a matter of being
able to survive, hunt and forage
for food. After being brought up in
a more or less domesticated state,
some animals lose their immunity to
certain diseases, automatically acquir¬
ed in the wild state. They also lose a
sort of built-in sense of self-preser
vation that, for instance, warns wild
animals against eating infected food.
So, when they are released, animals
usually must be vaccinated against
certain diseases. Some of the cats,
mainly the cheetahs, become fat and
lazy in their easy life and find they
can't run fast enough to catch their
food. So they also come back, unable
to cope with the facts of wild life.
There have been baby elephants
in the orphanage, hippos, camels,
buffaloes, even two bears from a
travelling circus which was closed
down, wild dogs perhaps the rarest
species here at the moment for they
are in danger of dying out in Africa
all sorts of members of the cat family
such as leopards and cheetahs, bat-
eared foxes, porcupines, many species
of deer and antelope, a wart-hog, and
among the many various members of
the monkey tribe, Sebastian.
Sebastian is a four-year-old chim¬
panzee, about whom the phrase "as
clever as a monkey" could well have
been originally coined. He has all
sorts of open-air parlour tricks. He
genuinely seems to enjoy smoking
cigarettes, not only lighting them with
a match but chain smoking as well,
and he also likes his glass, even
bottle, of beer.
Given a number of keys on a key¬
ring, he can pick out the one which
will unlock his own collar and does
so. He is temperamental about came¬
ras. In general, he enjoys being pho-
A new arrival, this six-weeks-old cheetah is
now getting accustomed to humans. The most
rapid of hunting animals (up to 70 mph in
short dashes), the cheetah has difficulty in
readapting to freedom after a long stay in
almost domesticated surroundings. It tends
to get fat and lazy and finds it cannot run
fast enough to catch its food. Below, two
other guests of the zoo-orphanage: left,
Sebastian, a four-year-old chimpanzee; right,
a young African wart-hog.
/
mm
S^,rV-*&rtt*SX:T.

tographed and poses willingly, as a
rule to the accompaniment of pierc¬
ing chimpanzee laughter, though he
has been known to react by turning
his back on a photographer. Yet,
sometimes if a camera comes too
close, he will snatch it, run off and
gleefully smash it to pieces.
Quite apart from the humanitarian
aspect, the orphanage serves many
other useful purposes. "First of all,
we can study animals in more or less
natural surroundings, learn about their
habits, diet and so on. Then we can
breed some of the rarer animals in
safety, such as the wild dog," says
Mr. Cowie. "We can also help fill
demands from zoos all over the world
needing fresh stock. This is satisfactory
in two complementary ways. It allows
animals that have got used to humans
to remain tame and not run the risks
in getting back to wild life, and it
obviates the need to capture fresh
wild animals, thus contributing to the
campaign for the preservation of
wild life."
Problems concerning the conserva¬
tion of the world's natural resources,
particularly its wildlife, have always
been one of Unesco's preoccupations.
Important developments have taken
place in Africa following an internatio¬
nal conference on the conservation of
nature and natural resources in mod¬
ern African States, convened by
Unesco at Arusha, Tanzania, nearly
six years ago. Unesco specialists
have been in Ethiopia, at that
country's invitation, advising on a
conservation programme following an
on-the-spot Investigation led by Sir
Julian Huxley two years earlier.
Moreover, Unesco has opened a
Regional Centre for Science and
Technology at Nairobi.
As a result of national campaigns,
largely primed by Unesco's work,
growing pressure is being brought to
bear by all African governments for
the preservation of their wild life, and
for action against the indiscriminate
poaching of game, particularly animals
threatened with extinction.
But a big problem is how to acquaint
Africans with the wild life of their
countries, especially those people who
live in towns. It is unsafe to visit game
parks except in cars, and most Afri¬
cans are without cars. "One of our
aims at the orphanage is to bring
Africans here who cannot afford to go
into parks", says Mr. Cowie. "That
is why the National Parks Adminis¬
tration has started organizing bus
expeditions to bring people espe¬
cially pupils and teachers from Nai¬
robi to see the orphanage and,
where possible, a bit of the game
park as well." An information service
has been set up and an exhibition
hall built next to the orphanage where
lectures are regularly given about the
wildlife of Kenya, in particular, and
of Africa in general.
"This important educational work
is another reason why many members
of the Kenya administration agree that
they would like to see the orphanage
expanded into a large zoological and
botanical park where people can learn
too about the flora and fauna, soil
conservation and the conservation of
wildlife," adds Mr. Cowie.
Already, he has promises of land
for such a park. And, if the success
of Kenya's wildlife orphanage now
self-supporting as a result of admis¬
sion fees is any indication, it should
not be long before Nairobi has its
new park complete with an enlarged
orphanage for, unhappily, the number
of new inmates is not dropping.
29
