This recent painting by the
Senegalese artist Ousmane
Faye was inspired by the
tense faces of village
spectators at a wrestling
contest, one of Senegal's
traditional sports. Ousmane
Faye, who is aged 25, works
as a designer in Senegal's
national tapestery works
at Thiès.
Photo © I. Lebeer
by Pathé Diagne
This article is abridged from "African Lite¬
rature" by Ezekiel Mphahlele which appear¬
ed in "Proceedings of the First Interna¬
tional Congress of Africanists", published
with assistance from Unesco by Longmans
Green, London.
PATHE DIAGNE of Sen¬
egal is a linguist who
has taken part in numer¬
ous meetings held under
Unesco's ten-year pro¬
gramme of African lin¬
guistic studies, includ¬
ing the standardization
of alphabets for certain
languages. He Is the
author of many studies
on linguistics and Afri¬
can historical sociology.

VERNACULAR LANGUAGES
IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
L, ANGUAGE, in African cul¬
ture, occupies a special place all its
own. Nowhere else, perhaps, has the
relationship between the vernacular
and knowledge been accorded so
important a place or been maintained
for so long a time.
Local tradition in Africa has long
accepted the vernacular as the sole
means of communication, as the vehicle
for the transmission of knowledge and
the medium of thought. In fact, know¬
ledge itself, has always been closely
identified with the vernacular.
The African priest or any custodian
of the wisdom and experience of the
community who introduces the young
to his store of knowledge, almost
always initiates them at the same time
into the practice of an unknown lan
guage. The blacksmith, the saddler
or the fisherman, and the various trade
corporations and guilds, in effect, op¬
erate no differently. Their techniques
cannot be passed on to younger gen¬
erations without the use of special
formulas. Thus it has not infrequently
happened that when an African sage
jealously guarded his knowledge to
himself or was estranged from society
for one reason or another, his store
of knowledge invariably died with him
or else remained an impenetrable
secret to' those who lived after him.
The spread of knowledge suffered
greatly in Africa from this notion which
equated science with a special lan¬
guage and education with the transfer
of secret intelligence.
For centuries the spread of the
Islamic and Christian religions and cul¬
ture amongst broad sectors of "Africa's
population was blocked by this esoteric
approach to knowledge. And in the
past hundred years the introduction of
modern techniques and ideas as well
as scientific thinking have similarly
been seriously hampered. In both
cases language has played a para¬
mount role in the attempt to change
or remould society.
Knowledge can only be understood,
accepted and propagated if the vehicle
of transmission is a known language.
This has been repeatedly pointed out
by African scholars in the past. Early
in the 19th century, for example, a
renowned scholar, Thierno Samba
Mombeza, from Fouta Djallon (a moun¬
tain region in northern Guinea) stress-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
29

VERNACULAR LANGUAGES (Continued)
Any language is beautiful.
30
ed this point in the introduction to
his translation into Pular of the Vein
of Gold, one of the great masterpieces
of Islamic literature. In reply to those
who had scorned his undertaking the
translation of such a great work into
"a language without nobility", he
wrote:
Whether Arabic or Pular
Or any other dialect,
All is noble
That facilitates human knowledge.
The Senegalese poet, Moussa Ka,
who produced one of the major works
of his time in the Wolof language,
expressed the same idea as follows:
Arabic or Wolof,
Any language is beautiful
That expresses
The virtues and Science of Man.
These references to Arabic should
not surprise us, for the prestige,
science and cultural contributions of
Islam were such that in many parts
of Africa it was held to be the repos¬
itory of all essential knowledge. Many
an African generation was spared
long, weary hours of reciting and
chanting Koranic texts in Arabic, which
they did not understand, when schol¬
ars and religious leaders bravely
undertook to introduce education in
the vernacular. The translation of the
Bible into many African languages in
the last century was inspired by the
same understanding.
This is a very important point. It
reflects the evolution in attitude
towards modern ideas which took
place in Africa after it came to be re¬
cognized that the crux of the problem
was to introduce modern knowledge
to the greatest number of people.
It also serves to explain why the
vernacular languages were gradually
adopted as indispensable tools for
teaching in primary schools thus
avoiding the emotional problems raised
by removing the child from his lin¬
guistic setting. That is why, too, the
use of the vernacular in literacy cam¬
paigns and community development
schemes has been found to offer the
best chances of success.
Experiments have long been under
way in the use of the vernacular for
technical education and science teach¬
ing, and these have recently gained
new momentum.
The road to economic development
may well lie along these lines: The
experts have pointed this out; and
Unesco has stressed it at recent
meetings on the subject in Ibadan
(1964), Accra (1965), Yaounde (1966)
and Bamako (1965). A meeting of
African Ministers of Education at Iba¬
dan in February of this year re-affirmed
the idea, as did the Government of
Tanzania which has made Swahili its
national and administrative language.
The obstacles to such a programme
are nevertheless tremendous. The
non-specialist often points to them,
particularly to the multiplicity of Afri¬
can languages, the need to adapt them
to the modern world, and their so-
called lack of "literary" and "scienti¬
fic" vocabulary.
The multiplicity of Africa's languages
would seem to be the major obstacle
to their use for cultural and educa¬
tional programmes. But in point of
fact, the actual number can only be
determined after a thorough study
which clearly distinguishes between a
language and its local or dialectal
variants. Any figure based on present
knowledge is more than likely to be in
the nature of a guess.
E have become so used
to talking about Africa's countless lan¬
guages that we have lost sight of the
fact that Africa is, after all, a whole
continent. A more than cursory exami¬
nation of the languages of this conti¬
nent reveals first, that the number has
been vastly exaggerated, and second,
that the situation is hardly different
elsewhere. Europe posseses dozens of
languages and dialects; and "Standard
African" is as much of a misnomer as
"Universal European" would be.
French and Italian exist as separate
languages, so why not Swahili, Hausa
and Yoruba?
Despite the existence of local
variations, the number of linguistic
zones in Africa is really quite small.
Within each zone there is a linguistic
unity which is not only historical but
also a living fact.
Let us take the case of the zone
comprising the so-called Bantu lan¬
guages. Here we find not various
distinct and separate languages but
different dialects of the same language.
The common features are so extensive
that one can pass quite easily from
one dialect to the other.
To take one example. In the Congo
practically everyone is multi-lingual.
In addition to their local dialects, the
Lari, the Vili, the Bateke, the Bangala
and the Kikongo all speak Lingala,
Monokotuba or some other language.
From the number of dialects the Vili
of Pointe-Noire understand one might
assume that they have a special apti¬
tude for foreign languages. A Vili, for
example, can easily understand or get
along in Lari, Teke, Swahili and Chilu-
ba. This is simply explained by the
fact that they are all dialectal varia¬
tions of one and the same language.
The slight differences in these dialects
is evident from the following renditions
for the word TO EAT: KULIA in Vili;
KUDIA in Kikongo; KUDIA in Lari;
KOLIA in Lingala ; KULIA in Swahili.
As can be seen, the differences are
merely a matter of one consonant or
vowel, and serve to illustrate the idea
that the whole Bantu linguistic zone
could today be unified around one of
these dialects. As will be shown in
a moment, this unification would affect
some 100 million persons.
What is true of the Bantu linguistic
zone also applies to other parts of
Africa. In the Sudanese belt of coun¬
tries stretching across Africa just
below the Sahara, the same pheno¬
menon can be observed with regard
to Hausa, the Mandingo language
group (Bambara, Dioula, Malinke), the
Akan Baoule languages of Ghana and
the Ivory Coast, and the Fulani (or
Pular) languages.
All over the world a process of
linguistic unification is now under way.
In Africa the same thing is happening.
Differences in speech are being worn
down, and are giving way to a limited
number of major languages of commu¬
nication. This is occurring as a result
of various factors. Urbanization, the
cultural renascence and the develop¬
ment of great trading centres have
enabled a few languages to unify whole
areas.
This has completely transformed the
linguistic map of tropical Africa so that
many of the splinter dialects of the
past are now being absorbed by about
a dozen dynamic, hard-core languages
today sweeping across the continent.
Some of these languages are now
spoken by over 50 million people, but
most are used by groups of 1 million
to 12 million persons. For example,
there is the Bantu group, spoken by
100 million people; Swahili, spoken by
over 50 million persons in most of East
Africa (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Zam¬
bia) and the Kinshasa Congo; the Lin¬
gala - Kikongo - Monokotuba language
family, spoken by about 30 million
persons over most of Central Africa
(Central African Republic, Congo-
Brazzaville. Cameroon as well as
Kinshasa Congo).
The establishment of a common
language for those who speak Swahili,
Lingala-Kikongo-Monokotuba, or even
Shango and certain Bantu dialects of
South Africa and the Cameroon, is

EFFIGIES
AS EPITAPHS
This tomb of a chief
in Tulear Province,
south-west Madagascar
illustrates the unusual
funerary art of the
Mahafaly.
On their graves
they place wooden
posts (aloalos) topped
by carvings of figures
and scenes associated
with the life of the dead
person. Traditional
carvings family groups,
craftsmen at work and
animal figures are
increasingly giving way
to modern subjects such
as motor-cycles (left,
background). Horns of
Zebus
(a symbol of wealth)
are planted in the heaps
of stone over the tomb.
a task that could well be accomplished
within the reasonable future.
The languages of West Africa are
more varied. Here, Hausa, spoken by
some 40 million people in Nigeria,
Niger and Chad, could become a
unifying element for a vast area of
Africa.
Yoruba (Nigeria), Malinke-Dioula
(Eastern Senegal, Mali, Upper Volta,
Ivory Coast, Niger), Fulani (Senegal,
Mali, Guinea, Upper Volta, Niger,
Nigeria), and Arabic are all linguistic
groups spoken by from 10 to 15 mil¬
lion people.
Tamashek (Mauritania, Mali, Niger),
Ibo (Nigeria), Akan-Baoule-Bulu-Fang
(Ghana, Ivory Coast), Fon-Ewe-Mina
(Togo, Dahomey, Ghana), More (Upper
Volta), Wolof (Senegal), Sarakhule
(Mali, Mauritania, Senegal), Kanuri
(Nigeria, Niger, Chad), and Djerma-
Songhoi (Mali, Niger) also form lin¬
guistic areas in process of unification
and are spoken by 1 to 5 million
people.
Thus we see that a veritable pyra¬
mid of languages exists in West Africa,
with several languages spoken in the
same country in Nigeria, for instance,
Hausa, Ibo, Yoruba and Kanuri are
all spoken.
Photo © Siegfried Sammer
But it is clear that language unifica¬
tion, not dispersal, is the dominant
factor in Africa today.
Efforts to try to adapt African
languages to modern change have
been in progress for many many years.
These were given new impetus with
the establishment of institutions of
European origin.
In 1820, a French schoolteacher set
up West Africa's first secular, bilingual
school at St. Louis, Senegal, where
both Wolof and French were taught.
This pioneer attempt was followed by
the missionaries who first used African
languages to spread the Gospel and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
31

VERNACULAR LANGUAGES (Continued)
Einstein in Wolof, Shakespeare in Swahili
32
then gradually introduced them for the
teaching of a few new techniques in
agriculture and the crafts.
The bilingual school in the Congo
was the outcome of this development.
In the countries under British rule, a
similar approach, based on the prin¬
ciple of "native administration", helped
the spread of African languages. The
status and influence of these languages
can be observed today in the Congo
(Kinshasa), Uganda and Tanzania.
These countries, with a literacy rate
of 45 per cent, have been able to
establish an excellent political, social
and technical infra-structure by using
African languages for their newspa¬
pers, school books and other pub¬
lications.
The interesting features, here, are
the new possibilities thus opened.
The development of a script in Swahili
hastened the stabilization of the lan¬
guage and its literary growth which
had begun long before colonization,
as attested by the Kilwa dating from
the 17th century as well as an abun¬
dance of other great works of great
antiquity.
This, is- equally true of other- African
languages,' particularly those of- West
Africa,' where" Fulani. and Wolof litera¬
ture, Hausa works (those by Qàn Fodio
are an outstanding example) and the
writings of the Kanuri and Dendi chro¬
niclers bear comparison with Swahili.
Other languages like Lingala or Chi-
luba are entering the writing stage,
thanks chiefly to contemporary efforts.
The adaptation of African languages
to modern change is not yet very far
advanced. In this sense most of them
have not yet become languages of
advanced scientific knowledge or
vehicles of modern literature, reflect¬
ing either in original creative works or
translations from non-African lan¬
guages, the intellectual ferment of con¬
temporary thought.
Although many attempts have been
made along these lines, they are
mainly isolated cases. Nevertheless, a
number of notable examples by out¬
standing African thinkers can be cited.
The Senegalese writer, C. Anta Diop,
has played a pioneer role here. The
second part of his Nations Nègres
contains a series of chapters which
illustrate how Wolof can be adapted
to modern scientific writing. Anta
Diop chose literary as well as scientific
themes and produced translations in
his native tongue of extraordinary
precision and clarity. His rendering
into Wolof of Einstein's Theory of Rel¬
ativity as interpreted and explained by
the French scientist Langevin, is su
perb. He also offers us translations
of poems and excerpts of plays from
French literature that retain all the
exquisite beauty of the original. The
terminology of modern mathematics
and physics which he uses opens the
way for elaboration of a modern scien¬
tific culture in the Wolof language.
Wolof, it is true, is a language with
a long literary tradition. C. Anta Diop
makes this abundantly clear in his book
with a judicious choice of texts. Nev¬
ertheless what he has done for Wolof
can be done for any language, African
or not. Even more recently, the Presi¬
dent of Tanzania, Julius Nyerere, dem¬
onstrated the vitality of African lan¬
guages by his series of literary works,
including a translation of Shakes¬
peare's Julius Caesar.
F OR all languages there is
a problem of adaptation, but not of
adaptability. Linguists know that no
language lacks the ability to mould
itself to a new environment. Every
language has its own built-in system
that meets, the needs of its people.
The. integration of new knowledge is a
matter of .vocabulary;- It does riot affect
the system,.- .which- is" the structure-" of
the" language on which the 'vocabulary-
rests.
Moreover, the need for adaptation
is not a problem exclusive to the lan¬
guages of Africa. It is a world-wide
problem.
Japan established its economic and
scientific force by assimilating modern
skills and knowledge into its own
language, and by introducing new tech¬
niques into its culture to which it gave
Japanese words or transliterated the
original foreign ones.
No language escapes this process.
Why is there a "Franglais" or a
"Japenglish" if not because English" has
become the leading language of the
world as a result of the contribution of
American science and technology?
The best answer to the question
regarding the adaptability of African
languages to modern change is to
remind ourselves how easily modern
techniques are being assimilated into
African languages. It is a truism that
people do not accept all foreign words
indiscriminately. Train, ship, television,
mathematics, drugs in a word all the
elements of the new environment are
spontaneously translated, especially
by the women who often find graphic,
picturesque equivalents for them.
In Wolof, for example, the word for
train is saxar, for mathematics wann,
for drugs garab, all terms drawn from
the language itself. For words like
television, radar or atom, common-
sense operates In Africa as it has in
Japan, Germany or India, and the same
words are incorporated into the lan¬
guage with minor modifications or
none at all.
Today the great problem in Africa
is that of translation. School books
from the primary to the university level
must be translated to make them
available to students. This will faci¬
litate the broad diffusion of science
and technology in Africa. It is easier,
cheaper and will reach greater num¬
bers.
A nation's linguistic policy is not
decided by the individual. The indivi¬
dual can make known his suggestions,
his desires and his needs; but the final
word rests with the State. Specialists
agree that the use of the vernacular
for literacy campaigns and schooling
is certainly the best way to show one's
regard for the culture and traditions of
a people, and the most effective for
making the language the vehicle of
modern change; but the politician does
not always see things the same way
as the specialist.
However, an. increasing number of
countries .are exhibiting a' refreshing
degree of understanding in this matter,'
and this is encouraging. In addition
to those countries of Africa that have
traditionally practiced bilingualism bas¬
ed on the use of both an African lan¬
guage and a European one such as
Nigeria, Ghana, the Congo Kinshasa,
Tanzania and Uganda, others like the
Niger, Guinea and Mali have shown
new interest in the question.
Unesco's programme in Africa which
gives priority to the question of African
languages, shows that Unesco is
keenly aware of this problem and its
effect on the continent's educational
and development policy.
Many details have as yet to be
worked out in agreement with Unesco's
African member countries; but the
proposals elaborated at the Unesco-
sponsored Congress of Bamako in
1965 for the unification of certain Afri¬
can scripts is a step in the right direc¬
tion.
But the big problem remains that of
establishing an Institute of African
Languages, for the training of linguists
and the preparation of school text¬
books in African languages.
Broader and more substantial inter¬
national aid would of course be extrem¬
ely valuable for pursuing this problem
in greater depth, and should offer
greater opportunities for Africa's scho¬
lars, Africa's statesmen and all of
Africa's people.
