Two great epics of India and South Asia
THE MAHABHARATA
AND THE RAMAYANA
by Arthur L. Basham
T
4
HE religious and cultural
life of the whole of the Indian sub¬
continent and much of the rest of Asia
has been deeply influenced by the two
great epic poems of Hinduism, the
Mahabharata (pronounced Ma-ha-bah-
ra-ta, accent on "bah") and the
Ramayana (pronounced Rah-my-ana,
accent on "my"). Putting aside all
question of their merits as literature,
which by any standard are very high,
they are among the most important
poems in the world.
Of the two the Mahabharata is in
essence the older, its nuclear story
having been transmitted from the
shadowy period following the compo¬
sition of the Rig Veda, the oldest liter¬
ature of India. A few of the names
of rulers, sages and priests mentioned
in the Mahabharata also occur in
sources of the later Vedic period, and
the story of the epic may have devel¬
oped around traditions of a great
battle which took place about 900 B.C.
But with the passing centuries the
account was so enlarged and develop¬
ed by the introduction of new charac¬
ters and incidents that its historical
kernel cannot now be established.
There is even some reason to believe
that the divine hero Krishna, who
plays such an important role in the
story as we now have it, was grafted
into the poem, and had no part in the
original martial tradition out of which
it developed. From references in other
Sanskrit texts, it seems that the story,
in a form not very different from that
which we now know, was current in
northern India a century or two before
our era and perhaps as early as
400 B.C.
ARTHUR L. BASHAM is professor of Asian
Civilization at the Australian National Uni¬
versity, Canberra. He formerly taught at
London University where he was lecturer in
History of India and later professor of
the History of South Asia. This year he
has been visiting professor at the South
Asia Regional Studies Graduate School,
University of Pennsylvania. Professor
Basham has written widely on Indian history
and civilization: "The Wonder that was
India" (Sidgwick and Jackson, London,
1954); "Studies in Indian History and
Culture" (Samboohi Publications, Calcutta,
1964) and "Aspects of Ancient Indian
Culture" (Asia Publishing House, Bombay,
1966).
The plot of the Mahabharata is a
complicated one. Like the Greek
stories of the Trojan war out of which
emerged the Iliad, and like the cycle
of Germanic myth and legend which
crystalized into the Nibelungenlied, the
Indian epic tells of a bitter quarrel
which developed into a war of exter¬
mination. The five sons of Pandu are
unjustly deprived of their ancestral
kingdom by their wicked cousins, the
Kauravas, and they regain it after a
tremendous battle in which all their
enemies and most of their friends are
slain. .
Echoes of a heroic age are heard
throughout the narrative portions of
the epic, and the martial values of
bravery, loyalty and truthfulness are
much encouraged. Heroes and villains
alike never refuse challenges, whether
to battle, to contests of skill, or to
games of chance, and few major char¬
acters are guilty of serious cowardice.
The atmosphere of the main narrative
is that of a society just emerging from
tribalism, in which personal loyalty to
one's chief and fellow clansmen is still
very strongly emphasized.
But the Mahabharata as we have it
contains more than the poetic account
of a legendary war. It is replete with
interpolations of all kinds, which were
obviously introduced long after the
main narrative was composed.
The longest of these Is the Santi
Parvan, the twelfth of the 18 sections
or books into which the epic is divided,
and by no means the shortest of them.
Here the slow death of the wounded
Bhishma, the elder statesman of the
Kauravas, is made the pretext for a
long series of didactic passages on
many aspects of polity, ethics and
religion.
Similarly Yudhishthira, the eldest of
the five heroes, is a passionate but
inexpert gambler, and it is as a result
of his vice that he and his brothers
are forced into exile. This gives the
cue for the introduction of the lengthy
tale of king Nala, another addicted
gambler of even older days who lost
his wife and kingdom through dicing,
but regained them at last after many
adventures.
This interpolation, in fluent easy
verse, often forms the student's first
introduction to Sanskrit literature in
the original. From its style and content
it appears to be at least as old as the
main narrative of the epic, and looks
back to the days of small semi-tribal
kingdoms before the time of the Buddha.
Undoubtedly the most important
. interpolation of the Mahabharata is the
Bhagavad-Gita, the long religious
poem which has become the most
influential text of modern Hinduism. Of
all works of Sanskrit literature it is
probably the most widely known out¬
side India, and ¡t has been translated
into many languages and read by
millions who know nothing else of the
epic poem which contains it.'
A pretext for its inclusion is provid¬
ed, just before the commencement of
the great battle, by the misgivings of
Arjuna, the second of the five heroes,
at the thought of fighting his own
kinsfolk and friends. His mentor
Krishna strengthens Arjuna's resolu¬
tion with this long religious poem,
itself possibly a conflation of verses
from more than one source, and
reveals himself as the great God
Vishnu incarnate.
Shorter interpolations are numerous,
and include the well known and beau¬
tiful legend of the faithful wife Savitri,
who saves her husband from the clut¬
ches of the god of death, the story of
Rama, a brief summary of the other
great Hindu epic, and that of Shakun-
tala, in a version significantly different
from the plot of Kalidasa's famous
drama.
These many episodes, both narrative
and didactic, seem to have been
incorporated into the text of the Maha¬
bharata by various editors in the
course of the five centuries between
the Maurya and Gupta empires, from
about 200 B.C. to A.D. 300. By about
A.D. 500 the full epic existed in some¬
thing like its present form.
A terminal date may be established
from the lists of tribes and peoples
which occur here and there in the text.
Such lists* include the Hunas (the
Hephthalites or White Huns), who
could hardly have been known to the
Indians until about A.D. 400, when
they had established themselves in
Bactria, but they do not include other
peoples such as the Gurjaras, who
first appear on the scene in the sixth
century.

: P"
v- - ffí-ffilS' títo
iï%;&&^:tem^:*àm
Ä2VJ*Wr'-1?
Photo © Rapho, Louis-Frédéric, Paris
Sculptured on the great rock-hewn temple of Kailasanath, at Ellorà, near Bombay, this frieze
portrays episodes from one of the world's most ancient epic poems, the Mahabharata.
When this bas-relief with its innumerable figures of men and animals was carved
nearly 12 centuries ago, the stories and characters it depicted had already been well-known
to the peoples of northern India for a thousand years.
But, even ' after the closing of the
canon of the text, manuscripts were
subjected to many minor emendations
and interpolations, and three main
textual traditions of the Mahabharata
have been traced. Now the splendid
edition of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute of Poona, which has
just been completed after the labour
of many scholars for over forty years,
has provided an established text of
the epic, as it existed at the end of
the Gupta period.
Thanks to the great expansion which
it has undergone the Mahabharata is
something much more than a narrative
epic, though it is quite possible to
extract the narrative from the many
interpolations and present it as a
heroic poem.
The largest single poem in the
world, containing nearly 100,000 coup¬
lets or stanzas of two verses each,
or about seven times the size of the
Iliad and Odyssey combined, it has
aptly been described as an ency¬
clopaedia of early Hinduism. It treats
of almost every aspect of the religious,
political and social life of the India of
the time, viewed chiefly from the angle
of the orthodox brahmin. It contains
much didactic material out of which
developed the Dharmasastras, or legal
texts, and the Puranas, the long
poems on myth, legend and religious
practice which were compiled from the
Gupta period onwards. Thus, even
though no faith can be placed on the
historicity of its story, it is of the
utmost importance to the historian.
The plethora of didactic interpola¬
tions, which have expanded the poem
to so unwieldy a length, have some¬
what reduced its popularity. The main
story is widely known among ordinary
Hindus, however, and later authors
have written poems, dramas and prose
stories around many of its episodes,
in both Sanskrit and the modern lan-
guagos of India.
Abridged versions of the Mahabha¬
rata, omitting many of the interpola¬
tions, exist in most languages of India
CONTINUED ON PAGE S
5

6
MINIATURES
ON FILM
AND CANVAS
The Ramayana and the Mahabharata have been
subjects of Indian feature films for many years (see
article page 43). Left, a scene from "Sandesh," a new
Govt, of India cartoon film produced by J. Bhownagary
to help India's Save the Food campaign, using
traditional material from the Mahabharata for a
contemporary purpose. Draupadi, left, has no food
to offer except a grain on an empty plate.
Krishna replies that even one grain is important. The
images are the work of a young, gifted painter,
R.K. Malwankar. He is known for his lovely
miniatures using the thumb and fingerprint technique.
The artist has successfully caught the beauty and
atmosphere of 18th-century art in northern India, an
example of which is shown on right.
A miniature dating from 1765, it depicts
an episode from the Ramayana.

FAR INTO
THE NIGHT
WITH INDIA'S
TROUBADORS
In India, where oral and
visual tradition has
been a means of
transmitting knowledge for
centuries, the Ramayana
and the Mahabharata are
an enduring and inherent
part of popular culture.
They have found their
way into every language
and dialect of India and
South "Asia, where even
poor and isolated villages
have puppet shows,
dramas or plays based
on the epics (see pages
29 and 36). Everywhere
in Indian villages and
towns people love to sit in
a circle and listen far
into the night to the
recitations and songs of
these poems. Many
thousands of people
devote a set period
each day to reading the
Ramayana or Gita aloud,
starting again at the
beginning as soon as
the end is reached since
these works have almost
the sanctity of the Bible
among Christians.
Left and opposite,
wandering minstrels sing
the story of the
Ramayana to audiences in
Calcutta's open-air meeting
ground, the Maldan.
Popular paintings near
musician's hand depict
Rama and his wife Sita.
Photos © Georges Tcherkine, Paris
Photo © National Museum, New Delhi
r-»<- ^^ëBj^- / ;
JL" -» - Mf^^mi *- --"ul^y m, v<.

TWO GREAT EPICS (Continued from page 5)
Mahabharata, world's longest poem verses
and Southeast Asia, and the story of
the five heroes, much adapted to local
taste and tradition, is still popular in
the wayang, the shadow theatre of
Indonesia.
Few but Hindu pandits and serious
students, however, have read the
whole Mahabharata from beginning to
end, even in translation, and in the
form in which we have it it can never
become a "popular classic." But in
India it has long served as a mine of
material for later authors, and it
remains so to this day.
The second of the great epics, the
Ramayana, differs from the Mahabha¬
rata both in theme and in character.
It tells of the righteous prince Rama,
who is unjustly exiled by his father,
Dasaratha, king of Ayodhya. Accom¬
panied by his beauh'ful wife Sita and
his loyal younger brother Lakshmana
he takes refuge in the wild forests of
central and southern India (see "The
Exile of Rama", page 30), where the
three have many adventures, the most
exciting of which is the capture of Sita
by Ravana, the demon king of Ceylon,
and her ultimate rescue by the bro¬
thers, helped by an army of monkeys.
At last Rama regains his ancestral
kingdom, but the end of the story is
not altogether happy, since in order
to satisfy public opinion Rama is com¬
pelled to put away Sita, who has lost
her ritual purity residing in the house
of another man, though in captivity
she was perfectly chaste and loyal
to her husband.
The Ramayana is an account of the
marvellous adventures of an almost
supernatural hero, embroidered with
wonders of every kind, and written in
formal courtly language. For a Euro¬
pean parallel we should look not to
the Iliad or even to the Aeneid, but to
such works as Wolfram's Parzifal or
perhaps Ariosto's Orlando Furioso.
The marvellous and supernatural
elements are intensified in the first
and last books, where Rama, the hero
of the poem, is revealed as an Incar¬
nation of the great God Vishnu, who
took human form in order to save the
world from the molestations of demons.
Hence, Rama is worshipped as a god
to this day, and the Ramayana is
looked on as a sacred text.
The epic has many passages of
drama and pathos, and shows consid¬
erable psychological insight. It incul¬
cates the virtues of courage, loyalty,
faith, forgiveness and fellowship.
The Ramayana does not contain
very lengthy interpolations, and in
style and content it gives a much
greater sense of unity than does the
Mahabharata. Moreover, its length is
less than a quarter of that of the other
epic. The composition is more literary
in character, and many similes and
metaphors suggest classical courtly
Sanskrit poetry of the kind written by
Kalidasa. Lengthy descriptive passa¬
ges punctuate the narrative, and these
include beautiful word-pictures of the
seasons of the Indian year, such as
became formal and regular features
of the later Sanskrit kavya or courtly
epic.
8
The marriage of Draupadi
The text below is taken from a children's book published in India in 1965 (1) which
retells a number of stories selected from the Indian classics. This tale, "Draupadi
Swayamwara", relates an episode from the Mahabharata: a contest of skill between
the Pandava and the Kaurava clans for the hand of the Princess Draupadi.
Text (c) copyright - Reproduction prohibited
T he Pandavas were living in Ekachakra when
they heard news about the Princess Draupadi. Draupadi
was the daughter of Drupada, the King of Panchala. She
was the most beautiful princess of the time and was
greatly talented. Kings and princes of many countries
desired to marry her.
King Drupada had hoped that Draupadi would marry
Arjuna, the cleverest and the most handsome among the
Pandavas. But he heard, with great sorrow, of the tragic
death of the Pandavas at Varanavata. Now he had to find
some other suitable husband for Draupadi. There were
many young princes of great name seeking her hand. But
King Drupada could not make a choice. He decided to
hold a swayamwara for his daughter.
Swayamwara was a kind of marriage where a princess
could choose her husband from among a crowd of suitors.
The suitors would be introduced to the princess one by
one and she would make her own choice. Sometimes the
suitors were asked to perform some difficult feat of strength
or skill and he who did it first would get the princess in
marriage.
A day was fixed for Draupadi's swayamwara and invita¬
tions were sent to all kings and princes. Everyone accepted
and they came to the Kingdom of Panchala.
The Pandavas, still in disguise, decided to attend Drau¬
padi's swayamwara. They went to the capital of Panchala
with Kunti. There they stayed in the house of a potter.
On the day of the swayamwara, the Pandavas left Kunti
(/) "Tales from Indian Classics". Book 1 retold by Savitri, illustrated
by Pulak Biswas. © Children's Book Trust, New Delhi. 1965.
in the potter's house and went to the palace. They went
there not as princes but as Brahmins and took their seats
among the visitors.
The kings and princes had arrived hoping to win the
hand of Draupadi. There were distinguished warriors
among them. The Kauravas, confident of winning the
princess, were also there.
The large marriage hall was beautifully decorated. The
guests took their seats. King Drupada and his son escorted
Draupadi to the hall. Everyone stood up and looked
eagerly at the most beautiful princess they had ever seen.
King Drupada then said that Draupadi would marry any
man of noble birth who could string a bow kept in the
hall and shoot at a target. The bow was huge and heavy.
The target was a little metal fish very high above the ground
inside a disc with holes that kept turning round and round.
A vessel of water was kept on the ground below the
target and the suitor had to shoot at the fish by looking
at its ¡mage in the water.
It was an almost impossible task. But the kings and
princes were eager to compete, for each wanted to win
Draupadi. One by one they got up and went to the mighty
bow to try their luck. Many could not lift it. Some could
lift it but were unable to string it. The most famous among
them were able to lift the bow and string it but failed
to shoot at the fish.
There was disappointment on the face of King Drupada.
People looked at each other in dismay muttering that it
was an impossible feat.
Then Arjuna stood up from among the crowd of Brah¬
mins, and walked towards the bow. Everybody looked at

The account of Rama's exile, for
example, contains many fine passages
of natural description, as when Rama
describes the season of the rains:
"See how much lovelier now the
[forests are,
green from the constant rain, and gay
[with dancing peacocks.
The roaring clouds, weary with loads
[of water,
rest on the peaks, escorted by the
[cranes,
which, flying in line, rejoicing in the
[clouds,
seem like a chain of lotuses, wind¬
blown across the sky.
Green grass and flowers cover the
[warm earth,
like a lady wrapped in a many-coloured
[blanket." (1)
Successive editors introduced mat¬
erial from many sources into the narra¬
tive of the Mahabharata, which, despite
its ascription to a single author, the
sage Vyasa, and its generally correct
Sanskrit, has something of the anony¬
mity of folk-literature about it. The
(J) Translated by the author.
Ramayana is also ascribed to a single
author, the sage Valmlki, who is intro¬
duced in the first and last of the poem's
seven cantos as a contemporary of
the hero, and as the protector of the
pregnant Sita when she is cast out by
her husband.
But the Ramayana is also clearly the
work of more than one author, though
its structure is not so bewilderingly
complex as that of the longer epic.
The style of the first and last cantos
is significantly different from that of
the central five. These five cantos can
stand alone as a complete story and
have no real need of the other two.
Except for a few obvious interpolations,
they treat Rama as a mortal hero,
whereas in the first and last cantos
he is wholly divine, the full Incarnation
of the great God Vishnu.
There are many other arguments
which prove with virtual certainty that
at least two and probably three hands
have contributed to the poem in its
final form. But the most important part
of the story is the work of one man,
a conscious poet far more sophisti¬
cated and sensitive than the nameless
composers of the Mahabharata.
Since a synopsis of the Ramayana
story occurs in the Mahabharata it
seems that the former was in existence
before the process of adding interpo¬
lations to the latter came to an end.
Nevertheless the Ramayana . seems
more recent than the Mahabharata nar¬
rative, and its central portion may have
been composed no later than about
the beginning of our era. The capital
city of the Kurus, Hastinapura, on
which the story of the Mahabharata
centres, is in the western part of the
Ganga basin, some fifty miles to the
north of modern Delhi (1). Ayodhya, the
capital of Rama, is in eastern Uttar
Pradesh, and the western part of the
sub-continent plays little part in the
Ramayana story.
In the Mahabharata the Deccan and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
(1) Editor's note. The site of Hastinapura
has recently bean excavated. Romila Thapar
writes in A History of India, "a part of it was
found to have been washed away in about
800 B.C. by the flooding of the river Ganges.
This incident is referred to in the Puranas
as having occurred in the reign of the
seventh successor to the king ruling at
Hastinapura immediately after the [Maha¬
bharata] war, which would suggest c. 900
B C. as the approximate date for the war."
This extraordinary scene is only a tiny portion of a gigantic 160-foot
bas-relief at Angkor Wat recounting episodes from the Mahabharata.
It depicts the combat between the Pandavas
and the Kauravas (see also photo p. 19). The Mahabharata,
Gandhi wrote, demonstrates the futility of war, and the field of battle
is our own body: "To one who reads the spirit of the Gita (a part of
the Mahabharata) it teaches the spirit of non-violence,
the secret of realizing the self through the physical body."
him and wondered how a Brahmin dare attempt a feat
which was beyond all the heroic kings and princes. But
Arjuna confidently picked up the bow, stringed it, and
shot five arrows one after the other at the target. The
fish fell to the ground.
There was jubilation among the crowd.. Draupadi looked
at the splendid youth and garlanded him. Some of the
kings and princes did not like the idea of a Brahmin
winning the hand of a princess. They wanted to start a
fight but others said that the princess was fairly won.
Arjuna and his brothers went back to the potter's house
to tell their mother of the happy event. It was night when
they reached the house. Arjuna knocked at the door and
shouted to Kunti : "Mother, I have won a wonderful prize."
Kunti replied from inside : "Share it with all your brothers."
And then she came out and saw what the prize was. "My
sons", said Kunti, "I cannot take back what I have said and
so Draupadi shall be the wife of all." Draupadi became the
common wife of all the brothers.
King Drupada was not happy at the Swayamwara. He did
not know who the young man was.. Was he really a
Brahmin? Or was he somebody who was disguised as
a Brahmin? He wanted to find out. He sent a spy to
the potter's house. The spy returned and informed the
king that the Pandavas were not dead and it was Arjuna
who had won the hand of Draupadi.
Drupada was filled with joy. He sent messengers to Invite
the Pandavas to the palace but he did not tell them that
he knew their secret. When the Pendavas arrived clad in
the clothes of simple sadhus, the king received them with
great honour. He. requested them to tell him who they
really were. Dharmaputra then told Drupada the whole
story.
The news that the Pandavas were alive reached the
Kauravas. On the advice of Vidura, Bhishma, Drona and
other respected elders, King Dhritarashtra asked the Pan¬
davas to return home. The Pandavas and the Kauravas
then made, peace between themselves. They divided the
country into two parts, one half to be ruled by the Pan¬
davas and the other by the Kauravas.
The Pandavas set up their capital at Indraprastha and the
Kauravas at Hastinapura.
9

TWO GREAT EPICS (Continued)
Ramayana, a living ideal down the ages
10
the Dravidian south of India are little
mentioned, except in lists of places
and peoples which have obviously
been worked over in the course of the
centuries in which the epic developed.
In the Ramayana these regions, as well
as Ceylon, play an essential part in
the story, though they are looked on as
shadowy and wild lands, chiefly the
abode of demons and of monkeys
which talk and act like men.
The court of Dasaratha ¡n the
Ramayana ¡s that of a typical Hindu
ruler of classical times, not that of a
chieftain such as we meet in the
Mahabharata story, who is merely the
first among his unruly peers. Though
the Hindu tradition places Rama many
thousands of years before the heroes
of the Mahabharata, the Ramayana
reflects a much more developed phase
of Hindu culture than does the Maha¬
bharata narrative.
A strange and very tame version of
the story preserved in the traditions
of Theravada Buddhism suggests that
there actually was, sometime in the
centuries before Buddha's birth, a
king named Dasaratha whose righteous
son Rama was wrongly exiled but in
the end regained his birthright.
But the exciting account of the
capture of Sita by Ravana and her
ultimate rescue finds no place in the
Buddhist version, and this suggests
that the Ramayana, like so many heroic
tales of ancient and medieval times, is
a conflation from more than one
source, and that some of the most
dramatic parts of the finished story
had no place in the original tale. "It
is, like the Mahabharata, a legend,
not a piece of sober history, or even
the reflection of the historical process
of the Aryanlzation of the Deccan."
Much work has now been done ¡n
unravelling the skeins of medieval
European stories such as those of
the Nibelungenlied and the Chanson
de Roland, both of which have been
shown to have no reliable historical
content; and there is no reason why
the Indian epics should be more his¬
torically trustworthy than their Euro¬
pean counterparts. They are far more
than mere historical narratives; rather
they are among the greatest poems in
the world's literature, and as such they
have inspired countless millions of
people for some two thousand years.
The Ramayana has impressed itself
even more deeply than the Mahabha¬
rata upon the soul of Hindu India. It
has been translated, or more often
freely paraphrased, in almost every
Indian language, and in most of the
languages of South-East Asia. These
versions have adapted the story of
Rama to the local cultures, and made
it part of the local traditions. It has
been heard repeatedly by many gen¬
erations of illiterate peasants, who not
only have been thrilled by its stirring
and often touching story, but also have
been taught the virtues of love, fore-
bearance, obedience, courage and
truthfulness from ¡t.
Rama has long formed the ideal of
Hindu manhood, as Sita has of Hindu
womanhood. Rama is invariably obe¬
dient and respectful to his parents,
loving and protective towards Sita,
loyal and affectionate to his relatives
and friends, humbly reverent to gods,
priests and sages, benevolent and
gentle towards his subjects, just and
forgiving to his enemies. The obe¬
dience and deference which Sita shows
to her husband and her husband's
family know no bounds, but she pos¬
sesses Intense courage, and is ready
to stake her life in defence of her
virtue.
I
HE story of Rama has long
been part of the cultural tradition of
Buddhist Burma, Thailand and Cambo¬
dia. The Muslim Indonesians and
Malays, who imported the Ramayana
from India long before their conversion
to Islam, still delight in the ancient
Hindu story, adapted slightly to meet
the theological requirements of their
religion and the different cultural milieu
of the Southeast Asian archipelago.
The Muslim tradition of India and Pakis¬
tan, however, seems to have rejected
the ancient legends in their entirety,
though in the days of the Mughals Per¬
sian paraphrases of both epics were
made.
There can be no doubt that the
enduring popularity of the two epics
has been largely due to the fact that
both were adapted at a very early
period to the needs of Vaishnava Hin¬
duism. According to the orthodox
formulation Vishnu, the High God from
whom all creation sprang, has fully
incarnated himself nine times In mor¬
tal form for the salvation of the world,
and will Incarnate himself a tenth time
at the end of this aeon, in order to
restore the age of gold. Of the ten
incarnations of Vishnu those most
widely revered are Rama and Krishna,
the former the hero of the Ramayana
and the latter one of the main char¬
acters of the Mahabharata.
Thus the epics of India have become
holy books, forming a sort of New
Testament to the older, less directly
appealing, Vedic literature. Unlike the
Vedas, which were intended only for
the menfolk of the higher classes,
especially the brahmins, the epics
might be heard, read and learnt by
anyone, even by women, children and
untouchables. Thus their influence on
the religious life of India has been in
the long run far greater than that of
the Vedas and Upanishads.
The devotees of Krishna have
several other classical texts, notably
the Harivamsa and the Bhagavata
Purana, with which to sustain their
faith. On the other hand, for those
who prefer to worship God in the form
of Rama the Ramayana in its many
translations and paraphrases has
become a sort of Bible.
The Hindi Ramayan of Tulsi Das was
the only religious text to impress
Mahatma Gandhi in his boyhood, and
with his last breath he called upon
God by the name of Rama. Another
great source of his inspiration was
the Bhagavad-Gita, which forms part
of the Mahabharata.
Some Indians of later generations
may feel that many of the moral pre¬
cepts of both epics are hardly appli¬
cable to present conditions, and may
have doubts about the theology which
they reflect, but, whatever their future
as sources of religious inspiration,
these texts have so deeply affected
the heart of Hindu culture and are of
such high merit as literature that they
can never be forgotten.
The non-Hindu who wishes to
understand the culture of Hindu India
and the basic values and attitudes of
Hinduism cannot do better than read
these poems. From the point of view
of modern "western" taste, their lite¬
rary value may be enhanced by judi¬
cious abridgement.
It ¡s unfortunate that so far little has
been done to introduce the Indian
epics to the contemporary non-Indian
reader, for, though full translations of
both exist in English and several other
European languages, none of these
has been made in a style which con¬
veys to the twentieth-century reader
the forceful narrative of the Mahabha¬
rata or the subtle dialogue and fine
descriptive writing of the Ramayana.
Good abridged translations of both
poems in modern idiom are needed to
bring something of their grandeur and
beauty io a wider circle of readers,
in the lands where their stories are
not traditionally known.
DAMAYANTI THE BEAUTIFUL
Narratives of romance and tragedy,
well-springs of philosophy and moral
precepts, the epics of ancient India
are also works of splendid descriptive
poetry which with lyric sparkle
often evoke the charms of nature:
the grace and mysteries of
the world of animals and an
infinite variety of living, growing things.
Painters and sculptors of many lands
have thus found in them an unceasing
source of inspiration. This painting,
the work of an 18th-century artist,
illustrates a Persian translation of
the Mahabharata. It shows the beautiful'
Damayanti, who won the heart of the
gracious Prince Nala, resting in her
garden on a summer day. The story
of the trials and tribulations of
Damayanti and her lover is told in
one of the finest and best known
poems of the Mahabharata.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris


