NOISE AND HEALTH
Studies have shown that continued exposure to noise not only
causes damage to the ear, but can have other harmful effects
by Günther Lehmann
P
26
AST generations realized
that noise could be disturbing, and
even in the days of Antiquity there
were regulations for the abatement of
noise in town and homes. Though
we have no precise information on the
intensity of noise in, say, a Roman
city, we may be sure that the farther
back we go in history, the more noise
was restricted to certain places; it
was caused by men and animals and
to only a limited extent by machines
nowadays the worst offenders in pro¬
ducing a disagreeable din.
Volume of noise depends on density
of population and on people's activities
and behaviour. It would be a mistake
to regard the present increase in noise
as an inevitable result of the expan¬
sion of technology. The aim of techno¬
logical development should be to
serve man, to make his life more
agreeable and enrich it. So logically,
technical progress should lead to less
noise, not more.
Whether a sound strikes the ear as
an annoying or irritating noise does
not depend merely on its intensity;
very loud music may still be beautiful
whereas even minute scratching
sounds can be a disturbing noise.
What makes a sound a noise is a
GÜNTHER LEHMANN Is director of the
Max Planck Institute for Occupational Phy¬
siology at Dortmund (Federal Republic of
Germany) and president of the International
Association Against Noise. Professeur Leh¬
mann is a leading authority on the effects
which noise can have on the human
organism, and is widely known for his
studies and research in this field.
matter of psychology rather than
acoustics.
A sound which we associate with
something pleasurable is far less likely
to be considered as a noise than one
with unwelcome connotations. We al¬
ways tend to underrate the noise of our
own car, for example, and the children
next door always seem to make more
noise than our own. So whether a
sound is regarded as a noise and how
noisy it is depends also on who causes
the noise and his relationship with
the person who hears it.
A sudden, very loud noise, such as
gunfire, lasting only fractions of a sec¬
ond, may damage a person's hearing
mechanism and produce a lasting loss
of hearing or partial deafness. But
exposure to noise levels quite common
in industry and indeed characteristic
of certain branches of heavy industry
such as forging and metal cutting
leads, progressively, to "perceptive
deafness," depending in each case on
the intensity of the noise and duration
of exposure. Once a hearing defect of
this kind has set in, nothing can be
done. Protective devices can help
to postpone it and to slow down its
development, but once the damage is
done, it is irreparable.
The danger of noise-induced dam¬
age to hearing exists when noise
exceeds a certain level over that of
the normal auditory threshold. In
assessing noise, the fact that its inten¬
sity diminishes in relation to the dis¬
tance of the hearer from its source
has to be taken into account. And the
higher the sound frequencies, the
greater the reduction.
The strain of operating a noisy
machine shows in the expression
of this metal worker (right).
A noise level of 95 "phons"
(an intensity common in certain
industries) can lead to progressive
deafness. Noise above this level
(produced by engine test benches
or pneumatic drills) can damage
the hearing mechanism and
even lead to complete deafness.
In addition to a protective helmet
and transparent mask, drill
operator (above) wears ear mufflers
to deaden the din from his machine.
High sound frequencies, moreover,
are more disagreable to the ear than
low ones. Sounds produced by cer¬
tain aircraft (those with turbo-prop en¬
gines for instance) comprise many high
frequency tones and therefore grate
on the ear. As distance increases, the
high-frequency sounds rapidly fade
whereas the deeper tones die away
slowly.
The ability to hear high tones gra¬
dually wanes as people grow older.
This is a physiological effect of aging
which starts at about 45 and is often
not noticed for a long time, since high
frequencies are seldom heard in daily
CONTINUED ON PAGE 30

Photo © Omnia, Bern
'
9k/' 'j*
m
Wf

THE DANGER
OF SOUNDS
WE CANNOT
HEAR
Infra-sound has a pitch or frequency
of below 30 cycles per second and is
thus inaudible to the human ear. It can
nevertheless harm the human orga¬
nism. It is blamed for feelings of mal¬
aise and discomfort sometimes ex¬
perienced by airplane passengers. But
studies and measurements suggest
that infra-sound from aircraft cannot
cause physical injuries to people living
near airports. Exploration of the world
of infra-sound has onlyjust begun. The
French National Centre for Scientific
Research has set up a special infra¬
soundresearch laboratory in Marseilles
(where photos on these pages were
taken). The laboratory investigates the
the risks associated with infra-sound,
its connexion with certain illnesses for
example, and studies what practical
uses may eventually be made of it.
Photos Miltos Toscas "Science et Vie"
28
ACOUSTIC BEACON. This
"bouquet" of tubes in front of
Professor Vladimir Gavreau,
head of the infra-sound research
laboratory in Marseilles, is an
experimental "acoustic beacon".
It can project a long-range beam
of sound with great precision.
The researcher behind the
apparatus is in a zone of silence.
MAMMOTH ORGAN PIPE. To study
the effect of infra-sound at ultra-low
frequencies (3è cycles per second)
on the human organism, French
scientists have built an enormous
"organ pipe", 24 metres (78 feet)
long. Infra-sound is inaudible to the
ear but produces a fluttering
sensation which results in other
sounds being heard in a distorted
way. Industrial cities abound in
infra-sound, generated by many
kinds of machines and motors that
turn at a slow rate. Even infra-sound
of weak intensity can penetrate houses
and become the unsuspected cause
of such ills as dizziness and fatigue.

DEVASTATING WHISTLE. The
huge whistle shown above (similar
in form to the police whistle
in foreground) is a laboratory
instrument. It produces an
ultra-low pitched, scarcely audible
sound. Working at low power
it has a disturbing effect on
people and makes the laboratory
walls vibrate. Functioning at
full blast, it would cause the
building to collapse and could
have fatal effects on people
within a wide area. The lower
a sound is pitched, the farther
it carries: a police whistle
(2,900 cycles per second) can
be heard 500 metres away;
a giant whistle with a frequency
of 29 cycles per second has a
range of 50 kilometres (30 miles).
As infra-sound easily penetrates
walls, partitions and similar obstacles,
normal sound-proofing techniques are
completely ineffective.
SEEN BUT NOT HEARD. Right,
specialists experiment with an
infra-sound detector. The inaudible
infra-sound is shown visuaHy on an
oscilloscope. The threshold of hearing
of the average person (about
30 cycles per second) varies from
one person to another. The human
voice, from deep bass to soprano
tones, ranges from 80 to 4,000
cycles per- second.
29

Noise does not make the heart grow fonder
life. Noise-induced hearing defects
differ from those due to ageing in that
initially they are felt mostly on far
lower frequencies. By testing hearing
in the various frequency ranges it is
thus possible to decide whether a
hearing defect is due to noise or to
ageing.
In almost all countries partial deaf¬
ness due to noise is now recognized
as an occupational disease and its
victims receive financial compensation
based on the extent of loss of hearing,
with a maximum award for complete
deafness.
Workers in the noisiest industries
should obviously wear devices to pro¬
tect their hearing. Unfortunately, it is
not always easy to pursuade them to
use these ear plugs or ear-muffs al¬
though they are neither uncomfortable
nor inconvenient to wear. Apparently,
the threat of a gradual onset of noise-
induced deafness is not enough to
encourage everyone to make use of
personal protective devices.
s,
30
'UCH appliances do not of
course give complete protection from
noise, since sounds are transmitted to
the middle ear not only through the air
canal of the outer ear, but also through
the bone of the skull, which continues
to transmit noise when the passage
through the outer ear is blocked.
Even so, covering the outer ear
greatly attenuates the intensity of loud
sounds reaching the ear drum. In
other words noise is reduced to a level
at which it is no longer dangerous.
Many small easy-to-wear ear pro¬
tectors have been developed in recent
years. But, if bone-conducted noise
is also to be blocked out, which is
only necessary in the case of excep¬
tionally loud noises, then some form
of protection for the whole skull
rubber caps and helmets, for instan¬
ce is required. Such caps are used
by workers checking and testing
aircraft engines.
The range of hearing of the human
ear is usually between 30 and 20,000
cycles per second. But only the
hearing of children can reach the
20,000 cycles level. In early adult age,
the threshold of hearing drops below
20,000 cycles, and for the aged the
level is considerably lower. At 30 cy¬
cles, most people hear a tone not as
a single regular sound, but as a series
of separate beats.
In reality, comparatively few people
are exposed to the danger of noise-
induced deafness. Noise that has in
vaded every sphere of daily life may
be unpleasant and irritating the roar
of traffic, for instance, or the clamour
of a number of people talking loudly
or shouting at the same time but
this is not likely to cause damage to
hearing. Yet that does not mean those
who have to listen to such noises be¬
come indifferent to them or that the
problem is no concern of ours.
When, regretfully, we compare the
proliferating noises of the modern
world with the peace and quiet that
once existed in some places, what we
are really complaining about is the
stress and nervous strain created by
all the noise that assails our ears.
What threatens us is not the like¬
lihood of auditory troubles or loss of
hearing, but an incessant disturbance
which, under certain conditions, creates
an intolerable strain. And the amount
of the strain depends not only on the
intensity and duration of the noise,
but also, and to a large extent, on
the source of the noise and what it
signifies to the person on the receiv¬
ing end.
Many cases have been noted of per¬
sons becoming "acclimatized" to cer¬
tain kinds of continuous or frequently
repeated noise This is especially
true of those willing to accept the
noise because it is linked with some
activity in which they are interested or
which is useful or profitable to them
But such cases are relatively few.
More often, especially when no par¬
ticular interest in the source of the
noise is present, the human response
is quite the reverse, producing reac¬
tions of excitability and annoyance.
These are directed not only against
noise itself but are spread over a whole
range of sensory impressions.
Typically, people exposed to noise
of this kind easily become irritable
and unsociable. Studies show that
workers in noisy jobs tend to be more
quarrelsome at work and away from
it (at home, for example) than those
doing equivalent jobs, but who are not
Auditory nerve
INTERNAL EAR
The ear has three parts: the outer, middle and inner ear. The outer ear collects
sounds and transmits them down the auditory canal to a taut, thin membrane, the
ear-drum. The middle ear, which transmits and identifies sound vibrations, is an
air filled cavity bridged by three little bones, named the hammer, anvil and stirrup
because of their shape. The hammer, attached to the ear-drum, vibrates with It
and works with the anvil as a bent lever to vibrate the stirrup. Damage to any
of these three bones can cause deafness since vibrations no longer reach the
hearing part of the inner ear, the cochlea, or organ of Corti, whose job it is lo
transform vibrations into nerve impulses. These impulses are carrried down the
auditory nerve to the brain and there interpreted as sounds. The perceptivity of
the ear may be lowered by auditory fatigue (a temporary loss of hearing) or by
increasing age (usually around 40). It can also be impaired by damage due to
noise or disease which can result in partial or total deafness.

subject to similar noise stresses.
Noise thus has a disturbing effect on
social life even within the family
where in most cases the father alone
is exposed to noise during the day.
Scientific tests relating to the im¬
pact of noise on human beings help
to explain these psychological reac¬
tions. They reveal that changes in
the circulation of the blood and in
the action of the heart take place when
a person is exposed to a certain
intensity of noise. Even snatches of
loud conversation are enough to affect
the nervous system and thereby pro¬
voke constrictions in a large part of
the blood circulation system. These
effects are maintained as along as the
noise continues, but quickly subside
when the noise ceases.
IMPAIRED circulation caus¬
ed by the effects of noise is often
revealed by skin pallor. The greater
the noise and the longer it lasts, the
more slowly this reaction diminishes
after the noise is removed. Workers in
a boiler factory, for instance, thus
suffer from a constantly impaired cir¬
culation in the epidermis.
Glands and other organs subject to
nervous stimulation are similarly affect¬
ed. Changes occur, for example, in
the secretion and composition of the
gastric juices and this may eventually
be harmful. Effects of this kind have
been observed in workers in the iron
and steel industries. But if the noise
is removed the effects disappear
sooner or later without apparently
causing any long-term damage.
Occupational deafness of the kind
found in industry sets in comparative¬
ly slowly. It may be many years be¬
fore the defect becomes bad enough
to worry the person concerned and
still longer before it is acute enough
to cause a person real embarrassment
in communicating with others. But
in both cases it is vitally important that
steps be taken to control the genesis
and the development of hearing de¬
fects.
Medical examinations of workers ex¬
posed to high noise levels are now
made regularly in all countries so that
anyone whose hearing has become
affected can be transferred to a quieter
job before the defect becomes a
serious handicap. A psychologically
interesting point about this is that
workers are opposed to job transfers
because of fear of being downgraded
or perhaps earning less. No worker
being examined ever feigns to be
hard of hearing, but on the contrary
denies or tries to conceal any defects
in his hearing.
In the office, as in the factory, prolonged exposure to noise causes fatigue,
absent-mindedness and mental strain. Noise has been blamed for over
50 per cent of errors in typing. Before 1939, says a World Health Organization
report, office noise was costing U.S. business two million dollars a day
through inefficient work. The cost today is $4 million. In office above,
glass partitions isolate each worker from noise and clatter made by colleagues.
