Photos C.C.W.E., Montreal
EXPO 67
The world
in a thousand acres
Over 300 pavilions and structures have
been built to house the Montreal Universal
Exhibition. Photos show two Canadian
pavilions: left, the Gyrotron which will
take visitors for a "voyage through space"
inside a huge pyramid-shaped construction
and then carry them into the "boiling crater
of a volcano". Right, Ontario Province
pavillon, a multi-pyramidic structure of
plastic and fibreglass.
10
E XPO 67 the popular name for the 1967 Universal and International
Exhibition opens this month as centrepiece of Canada's 100th birthday cele¬
brations. As host city, Montreal has prepared for the exhibition a site and a
theme worthy of the occasion. The site is a one-thousand acre largely man-made
complex of islands in the St. Lawrence River. The theme: Man and His World.
Expo's theme title was suggested
by a work of the French author and
aviator, Antoine de Saint Exupéry. In
Terre des Hommes, Saint Exupéry
wrote: "To be a man is to feel that
through one's own contribution one
helps to build a world."
To create a microcosm of man's
world past, present and future
on the St. Lawrence site, some 9,000
men. have laboured for three years.
Today, Expo 67 raises a- futuristic sky¬
line of cones, spheres, cubes, bubbles,
and other shapes in all, over 300
pavilions and structures.
The exhibition presents the story of
Man and His World Man the Creator,
Man In the Community, Man the Ex
plorer, Man the Producer, Man the Pro¬
vider in five special theme buildings
and in nearly every pavilion of over
70 participating nations. These themes
embrace the most significant aspects
of human experience and endeavour
and thus interest Unesco and the whole
United Nations family, particularly the
Food and Agriculture and the World
Health Organizations.
Expo questions, explains and dra¬
matizes man and his works. It ex¬
plores the nature of man, what he does
and where he is bound. It recounts
his struggle and coming to terms

with his environment: learning to sur¬
vive in frozen lands, combating disease
and hunger, coping with problems of
life in a modern city and now facing
the results of a world population
explosion.
In its story of Man the Explorer, for
instance, Expo shows how he has
probed deep beneath the oceans and
far into the polar regions; inwards
towards the depths of the earth and
outwards into space; how he has
devised tools to explore the minutest
workings of his own body; and it
explains what he has learned of his
physical self and his physical sur¬
roundings.
In one of the three interconnected
Explorer pavilions stands a globe two
stories high the model of a human
cell magnified a million times. Actual
living cells, feeding and multiplying,
can be viewed through microscopes,
and changing light patterns on a huge
model of the human brain explain its
structure and demonstrate how it
functions. A fully-operating laboratory
shows equipment and methods used
for exploring the biological world, and
other exhibits measure man's depen¬
dence on nature.
Man and His Planet deals with man's
exploration on, in and above the earth.
Man is already reaching out to other
worlds from his own space ship, the
earth, yet he still Inhabits less than
thirty per cent of its surface. After
abusing and destroying its resources
for centuries past, only now is he
learning to conserve natural and
mineral wealth; to replant forests and
preserve wildlife; to reclaim the arid
lands; to clean the air; to share food
and knowledge.
an above the Earth opens
a window on space exploration what
man is learning about his capacity to
survive and function in space, the
possibility of inhabiting other planets,
the search for intelligent life on distant
worlds.
Man and the Oceans depicts the
birth of our great water masses and
their exploration and conquest by man.
It introduces the age of underwater
exploration, displaying diving vehicles
that are opening up one of man's last
frontiers and a preview of its potential
wealth. A forest of ocean products
fills transparent prisms that jut from
ceiling and floor like stalactites and
stalagmites.
In Man and the Polar Regions, a
moving amphitheatre can take 2,000
people an hour on an imaginary
journey to the vast polar masses, using
multi-screen images, special sound
techniques and three-dimensional
models. The value of polar research
is stressed, especially in Antarctica
where many nations work together
on peaceful studies for science.
By 1990, more than half the world
will live in communities of 100,000 or
more. What is this cramming of man
into cities doing to community and
family life? Man in the Community
uses cartoons, puppets, films, displays
and a remarkable visible and audible
"experience" called "Citerama" to
explore the impact of the city and of
technology on man. An associated
pavilion examines the problems of
Man and Health, demonstrating such
modern medical techniques as open
heart operations and kidney grafts and
underlining man's debt to medical
science. 1 1
The world abounds with natural ' *
resources. Man takes and turns them
into products and machines. Society
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

EXPO 67 (Continued)
The world
of man
the producer
creates technology which, in turn,
remakes society. Yet, overwhelmed by
his own ingenuity, man often creates
situations he cannot control. Will he
become a modern Sorcerer's Appren¬
tice? No, Says Expo, since electronics,
communications and computers offer
effective means to control the wealth
of technology created by man. This is
the story Man the Producer presented
under headings of resources, progress-
and control.
Man breaks through technological
barriers and multiplies his powers of
observation a millionfold. Dem¬
onstrations show how satellites in
space observe for him, how he uses
electron microscopes to probe the
structure of living cells, how infra red
and radar enables him to "see" in the
dark. Other displays show man
harnessing the energy of fuels, the
atom and the sun. In one, scientists
turn mineral oil ' into white edible
protein powder an important advance
HABITAT 67 : A NEW CONCEPT
The striking housing complex shown below is
probably the most ambitious single exhibit of
Expo 67 in Montreal. The seemingly haphazard
pile of giant concrete boxes (detail right) is
one of modern architecture's boldest and most
imaginative housing designs. Stacked 120 feet
high, the blocks form 158 apartments, most
with a big terrace, all with a view and a privacy
unknown in today's conventional apartment
houses. Prefabricated on the site and with
lighting and heating fixtures installed, each unit
is swung into place by a giant crane (left).
"Habitat 67", as the project is called, offers
15 different types of homes.
JE- . fc
- '-t^r~î
Photo C.C.W.E., Montreal
s«C~ 3i£>':-v.:
-SSÇ.-V--1;sP
12
MAN-MADE ISLAND. Over one half of the 400 hectare (1,000 acre)
site for Montreal's World Exhibition was reclaimed from the
St. Lawrence River. Photo left shows area in July 1963 before
work began. In centre is St. Helen's Island whose area was
doubled by reclamation. Between it and the St. Lawrence Seaway
(on right) is a complex of small islands and shoals. Photo
right shows the formidable engineering feat accomplished. A
completely new island, called Notre-Dame, has been built against
the St. Lawrence Seaway boundary dyke and is joined to
St. Helen's Island. There are now lakes and canals on both
islands. During earth-filling operations, an average truckload
entered the site every 30 seconds for 24 hours a day and
six days a week over many months. Spoil from Montreal's
metro system, then under construction, also came in handy.

Photo O Patrix, Paris
in a world so largely dependent on
animal and vegetable matter for its
food.
Also on view against a background
of the enormous range of goods man
manufactures today, are the machines
that make the products.
In a vertical automated factory,
85 feet high, materials are fed into
the top, move down the line, take
shape, and every fifteen seconds out
comes a TV set from one line and a
film projector from the other. Actually,
one set and one projector are being
turned out over and over again, after
being taken apart behind the scenes.
If kept continuously supplied with
parts, the factory would produce one
million TV sets and films projectors
by the time Expo ends next October.
Man the Creator has brought toge¬
ther outstanding collections of paint¬
ing, sculpture, photography and in¬
dustrial designs from around the world.
Focal point is the exhibition of fine
arts over 180 masterpieces of world
art, from Rembrandt to Chagal, Tin¬
toretto to Picasso chosen by an
international committee in terms of
Expo's theme. The result is a pre¬
sentation in art of the universality of
man. Some fifty works of contem¬
porary sculpture have also been
assembled and are displayed outdoors
among trees and rocks.
The community of man as caught in
the lenses of the world's great photo¬
graphers is also on display. Some
500 photographs on this theme were
chosen from among 40,000 prints.
An exhibition of the work of eighteen
of the world's leading industrial design
schools shows what art is doing to
improve the quality and appearance
of articles in everyday use.
FF
ROM the time Expo opens
its doors on April 28, 1967, to the time
it closes on October 27, 1967, nearly
35 million people will have been added
to the world 35 million new mouths
to feed. The challenge of feeding a
hungry world which is experiencing a
population explosion is the concern
of Man the Provider, largest of the
theme layouts which fills nine pavilions
on an eight-acre site.
Man the Provider is a report on
success and failure, abundance vs.
famine, farming science vs. outdated
methods. On display are the fruits
of man's agricultural ingenuity, the
improvements he has brought to soil
science, plant and animal breeding,
insect and plant disease control,
mechanization and automation. But
the problem of using these new
techniques and of developing others
that would help feed the hungry half
of the world is never lost sight of.
The theme of Man and His World
is woven into the exhibits of most
national pavilions. Canada tells how
its people meet the challenges of cli¬
mate, distance and communications.
The United States demonstrates the
creative efforts of man in a prosperous
and automated society. The Nether¬
lands builds its story around the
struggle against the sea to achieve
living space and prosperity. The
U.S.S.R. gives prominence to
man's conquests in space exploration.
Israel's exhibit is based on the theme
of man's struggle against the desert.
Expo 67 says of itself: "In the
spectacular development of the bold
theme, Man and His World, the
exhibition will provide an educational
stimulus to mankind. The examination
of man's aspirations and man's com¬
mon goals will contribute greatly to
understanding between peoples."
13
