~ "W I" ^immmmmÊmmm
Against its background
of cypress-covered hills,
the tower of the Palazzo
Vecchio has overlooked
the roofs of Florence
for six centuries (right).
In the 15th century the city
boasted some 60 square
towers clustered around
its central square, the
Piazza della Signoria.
Below, damage wrought
by the flood on the Ponte
Vecchio, the oldest
bridge in Florence, and
until the flood almost
unchanged since 1.345.
It is flanked with
goldsmiths shops, but
many of these are now
badly damaged and their
stocks destroyed.
Photo (cî Reporters Associés
Photo © Robert Descharnes. From 'Florence que J'aime"
(The Florence I love) by Carlo Coccioll, Editions Sun, Paris
A stupendous edifice
in white, green and red
marble, the cathedral of
Santa Maria del Fiore,
the "Duomo", stands
in the heart of Florence
(right). Begun in 1296
under the direction of
Arnolfo di Cambio, the
work was continued by
Giotto, Andrea Pisano
and Francesco Talenti.
In 1417 Brunelleschi
designed the cupola the
Duomo which has given
its name to the entire
cathedral. The building
did not escape the
flood waters, which ruined
two organs, the marble
floor and a work by the
15th century Florentine
painter Giovanni Balducci.

The plight
of the
Florentine
artisans
p
I LORENCE is the treasure house of Renaissance
art and thought, but it is also a treasure house of living
people, people who are heirs to the traditions that were
established when that grand creative upsurge of the human
spirit had subsided. In and around Florence live some
7,000 artisans, men and women who fashion the objects
which generations of visitors to Florence have been
delighted to admire and to buy.
Working with the skills of centuries In his fingers and
using tools that make mockery of machines, the Florentine
artisan is unique. Yet some 6,000 of them have lost their
all tools, materials, workshops. Most of them are not
young and it is feared that they will lack the resources
to start again, painfully to reconstruct their shattered lives,

nnlllnnlílr
and instead will turn to other kinds of work for a livelihood.
The world will be the poorer for their loss.
It was heartbreaking to wade through the byways of
Florence and see the owners of the little shops for which
Florence is celebrated struggling to put things to rights.
Some, hopefully, displayed the pitiful remains of their
stock, saturated and stained, for sale at rock-bottom prices
in the hope of recovering a few lire to help start again.
But more often than not the stuff was unsellable.
Some 6,000 of Florence's 10,000 shops have been des¬
troyed. Thousands of families are homeless and those
lucky enough to have ground-floor apartments still habit¬
able are doomed to live for many months in rooms satu¬
rated with water and reeking of fuel oil. Many houses,
undermined by the surging torrent of the flood have started
to collapse and are shored up with great timbers.
Nevertheless, the work of clearing the streets of debris
and mud is going ahead swiftly and methodically right
through the night. Every little shop has its owner, some¬
times alone, more often with helpers, busily scrubbing
walls, repairing floors and hammering up counters and
showcases, and every shop has in it a brazier or even
a bonfire, to dry off the interior. Over all the rain pelts
down as it has ceaselessly for weeks, perpetuating the
slimy mud in streets and alleys and adding immeasurably
to trie discomfort of the shaken city. And over everything,
in every building, in every street, a dank humidity and the
acrid tang of fuel oil.
REX KEATING
13
