DEVELOPMENT
NEW NAME FOR PEACE
Encyclical Letter
of His Holiness Pope Paul VI
On March 26, 1967, His Holiness Pope Paul VI issued a far-reaching
Encyclical Letter on the Development of Peoples, calling on all men of
goodwill to join in freeing the world of its present poverty and inequities.
"The peoples in hunger are making a dramatic appeal to the peoples blessed
with abundance", His Holiness said. Pope Paul stressed the urgency of
the action that should be taken in a spirit of universal solidarity to assure
the development of all mankind. "Development", he affirmed, "is the new
name for Peace."
The Pope made an unprecedented gesture by addressing the first copies
of the Encyclical, bearing his signature, to U Thant, Secretary-General of
the United Nations, to Mr. René Maheu, Director-General of Unesco and
to Dr. Binay Ranjan Sen, Director-General of the U.N. Food and Agriculture
Organization.
We publish below salient passages from the Encyclical, and on page 35 the
response of Mr. René Maheu, inspired by the message of this historic
document.
F
28
reedom from misery, the greater
assurance of finding subsistence, health and fixed employ¬
ment; an increased share of responsibility without oppres¬
sion of any kind and In security from situations that do
violence to their dignity as men; better education in brief,
to seek to do more, know more and have more in order
to be more: that is what men aspire to now when a
greater number of them are condemned to live in con¬
ditions that make this lawful desire illusory.
Besides, peoples who have recently gained national inde¬
pendence experience the need to add to this political
freedom a fitting autonomous growth, social as well as
economic, In order to assure their citizens of a full human
enhancement and to take their rightful place with other
nations. (6)
Colonization and colonialism. Though insufficient for the
Immensity and urgency of the task, the means inherited
from the past are not lacking. It must certainly be rec¬
ognized that colonizing powers have often furthered their
own interests, power or glory, and that their departure
has sometimes left a precarious economy, bound up for
instance with the production of one kind of crop whose
market prices are subject to sudden and considerable
variation.
Yet while recognizing the damage done by a certain
type of colonialism and its consequences, one must at the
same time acknowledge the qualities and achievement of
colonizers who brought their science and technical know¬
ledge and left beneficial results of their presence in so
many underprivileged regions.
The structures established by them persist, however in¬
complete they may be; they diminished ignorance and
sickness, brought the benefits of communications and Im¬
proved living conditions. (7)
| ncreasing imbalance. Yet once this is admitted, It remains
only too true that the resultant situation is manifestly in-
dequate for facing the hard reality of modern economics.
Left to itself it works rather to widen the differences In
the world's level of life, not to diminish them; rich peoples
enjoy rapid growth whereas the poor develop slowly. The
imbalance is on the increase: some produce a surplus of
foodstuffs, others cruelly lack them and see their exports
made uncertain. (8).
U ndeserved hardship. At the same time social conflicts
have taken on world dimensions. The acute disquiet which
has taken hold of the poor classes in countries that are
becoming industrialized, is now embracing those whose eco¬
nomy is almost exclusively agrarian: farming people, too,
are becoming aware of their "undeserved hardship."
There is also the scandal of glaring inequalities not merely
in the enjoyment of possessions but even more In the
exercise of power. While a small restricted group enjoys
a refined civilization in certain regions, the remainder of
the population, poor and scattered, is "deprived of nearly
all possibility of personal initiative and of responsibility, and
oftentimes even Its living and working conditions are un¬
worthy of the human person". (9)
V* onflict of civilizations. Furthermore, the conflict between
traditional civilizations and the new elements of Industrial
civilization, break down structures which do not adapt
themselves to new conditions. Their framework, some¬
times rigid, was the indispensable prop to personal and
family life; older people remain attached to it, the young
escape from It, as from a useless barrier, to turn eagerly
to new forms of life in society.
The conflict of the generations is made more serious
by a tragic dilemma: whether to retain ancestral institu¬
tions and convictions and renounce progress, or to admit

Photo United Nations
techniques and civilizations from outside and reject along
with the traditions of the past all their human richness.
In effect, the moral, spiritual and religious supports of
the past too often give way without securing in return
any guarantee of a place In the new world. (10)
Dangerous confusion. In this confusion the temptation be¬
comes stronger to risk being swept away towards types
of messianism which give promises but create illusions.
The resulting dangers are patent: violent popular reactions,
agitation towards insurrection, and a drifting towards tota¬
litarian ideologies. Such are the data of the problem.
Its seriousness Is evident to all. (11)
E conomic growth not enough. Development cannot be
limited to mere economic growth. In order to be authentic,
it must be complete: Integral, that Is, it has to promote the
good of every man and of the whole man. . . (14).
A world responsibility. But each man is a member of
society. He Is part of the whole of mankind. It is not
just certain individuals, but all men who are called to this
fullness of development. Civilizations are born, develop
and die. But humanity is advancing along the path of
history like the waves of a rising tide encroaching gradually
on the shore. We have inherited from past generations,
and we have benefitted from the work of our contempora¬
ries: for this reason we have obligations towards all,
and we cannot refuse to Interest ourselves in those who
will come after us to enlarge the human family. . . (17)
|he ambivalence of growth. . . All growth is ambivalent.
It is essential if man is to develop as a man, but In
a way it imprisons man if he considers it the supreme
good, and it restricts his vision. Then we see hearts
harden and minds close, and men no longer gather
together in friendship but out of self-interest, which soon
leads to oppositions and disunity. The exclusive pursuit
of possessions thus become an obstacle to individual ful¬
filment and to man's true greatness. Both for nations and
for individual men, avarice is the most evident form of
moral underdevelopment. (19)
T owards a more human condition. If further development
calls for the work of more and more technicians, even more
necessary is the deep thought and reflection of wise men
in search of a new humanism which will enable modern
man to find himself anew by embracing the higher values
of love and friendship, of prayer and contemplation. This is

what will permit the fullness of authentic development, a
development which is for each and all the transition from
less human conditions to those which are more human. (20)
I deal to be pursued. Less human conditions: the lack
of material necessities for those who are without the
minimum essential for life, the moral deficiencies of those
who are mutilated by selfishness. Less human conditions:
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
29

30
NEW NAME FOR PEACE (Continued)
oppressive social structures, whether due to the abuses
of ownership or to abuses of power, to the exploitation
of workers or to unjust transactions. Conditions that are
more human: the passage from misery towards the pos¬
session of necessities, victory over social scourges, the
growth of knowledge, the acquisition of culture. Addi¬
tional conditions that are more human; increased esteem
for the dignity of others, the turning toward the spirit of
poverty, co-operation for the common good, the will and
desire for peace. . . (21)
| ndustrialization. The introduction of Industry is a ne¬
cessity for economic growth and human progress; it Is also
a sign of development and contributes to it. By persis¬
tent work and use of his intelligence man gradually wrests
nature's secrets from her and finds a better application for
her riches. As his self-mastery increases, he develops a
taste for research and discovery, an ability to take a cal¬
culated risk, boldness In enterprises, generosity in what
he does and a sense of responsibility. (25)
Liberal capitalism. But it is unfortunate that on these new
conditions of society a system has been constructed which
considers profit as the key motive for economic progress,
competition as the supreme law of economics, and private
ownership of the means of production as an absolute
right that has no limits and carries no corresponding social
obligation.
This unchecked liberalism leads to dictatorship rightly
denounced by Pius XI as producing "the international im¬
perialism of money." One cannot condemn such abuses too
strongly by solemnly recalling once again that the economy
is at the service of man.
But if it is true that a type of capitalism has been the
source of excessive suffering, injustices and fratricidal con¬
flicts whose effects still persist, it would also be wrong to
attribute to industrialization itself evils that belong to the
woeful system which accompanied it. On the contrary
one must recognize in all justice the irreplaceable contri¬
bution made by the organization of labour and of Industry
to what development has accomplished. (26)
U rgency of the task. We must make haste: too many are
suffering, and the distance is growing that separates the
progress of some and the stagnation, not to say the
regression, of others. . . (29)
I emptation to violence. There are certainly situations
whose injustice cries to heaven. When whole populations
destitute of necessities live in a state of dependence barring
them from all initiative and responsibility, and all opportunity
to advance culturally and share In social and political
life, recourse to violence, as a means to right these
wrongs to human dignity, is a grave temptation. (30)
R. evolution. We know, however, that a revolutionary
uprising save where there is manifest, long-standing tyran¬
ny which would do great damage to fundamental personal
rights and dangerous harm to the common good of the
country produces new injustices, throws more elements
out of balance and brings on new disasters. A real evil
should not be fought against at the cost of greater
misery. (31)
R, eform. We want to be clearly understood: the present
situation must be faced with courage and the injustices
linked with it must be fought against and overcome.
Development demands bold transformations, innovations
that go deep. Urgent reforms should be undertaken
without delay. It is for each one to take his share in
them with generosity, particularly those whose education,
position and opportunities afford them wide scope for
action. . . (32)
A t man's service. . . It is not sufficient to promote
technology to render the world a more human place in
which to live. The mistakes of their predecessors should
warn those on the road to development of the dangers
to be avoided in this field. To-morrow's technocracy can
beget evils no less redoubtable than those due to the
liberalism of yesterday.
Economics and technology have no meaning except from
man whom they should serve. And man is only truly man
in as far as, master of his own acts and judge of their
worth, he is author of his own advancement, In keeping
with the nature which was given to him by his Creator
and whose possibilities and exigencies he himself freely
assumes. (34)
Efforts to achieve literacy. It can even be affirmed that
economic growth depends in the very first place upon
social progress: thus basic education is the primary object
of any plan of development. Indeed hunger for education
is no less debasing than hunger for food: an illiterate is
a person with an undernourished mind. To be able to
read and write, to acquire a professional formation, means
to recover confidence in oneself and to discover that
one can progress along with the others.
As We said in Our message to the Unesco Congress
held in 1965 at Teheran, for man literacy is "a fundamental
factor of social integration, as well as of personal enrich¬
ment, and for society It is a privileged instrument of
economic progress and of development".
We also rejoice at the good work accomplished in
this field by private initiative, by the public authorities
and by international organizations: these are the primary
agents of development, because they render man capable
of acting for himself. . . (35)
D emography. It is true that too frequently an accelerated
demographic Increase adds its own difficulties to the
problems of development: the size of the population
increases more rapidly than available resources, and things
are found to have reached apparently an impasse. From
that moment the temptation is great to check the demo¬
graphic increase by means of radical measures.
It is certain that public authorities can intervene, within
the limit of their competence, by favouring the availability
of appropriate information and by adopting suitable
measures, provided that these be in conformity with the
moral law and that they respect the rightful freedom of
married couples. Where the inalienable right to marriage
and procreation is lacking, human dignity has ceased to
exist.
Finally, it is for the parents to decide, with full knowledge
of the matter, on the number of their children, taking into
account their responsibilities towards God, themselves,
the children they have already brought into the world,
and the community to which they belong. In all this
they must follow the demands of their own conscience
enlightened by God's law authentically interpreted, and
sustained by confidence in Him. (37)
P romotion of culture. In addition to professional organiza¬
tions, there are also institutions which are at work. Their
role is no less Important for the success of development.
"The future of the world stands In peril", the Vatican
Council gravely affirms, "unless wiser men are forthcoming".
And it adds: "many nations, poorer In economic goods,
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32

A street In Lahore (Pakistan)
Photo © Paul Almasy, Pans "It is true that too frequently an accelerated demographic increase adds its own difficulties
to the problems of development: the size of the population Increases more rapidly than
available resources, and things are found to have reached apparently an impasse."

NEW NAME FOR PEACE (Continued)
32
are quite rich in wisdom and able to offer noteworthy
advantages to others".
Rich or poor, each country possesses a civilization hand¬
ed down by their ancestors: institutions called for by life
in this world, and higher manifestations of the life of the
spirit, manifestations of an artistic, intellectual and religious
character. When the latter possess true human values,
it would be a grave error to sacrifice them to the former.
A people that would act in this way would thereby lose
the best of its patrimony; in order to live, it would be
sacrificing its reasons for living. . . (40)
O pirit of solidarity. There can be no progress towards
the complete development of man without the simultaneous
development of all humanity in the spirit of solidarity. As
We said at Bombay: "Man must meet man, nation meet
nation, as brothers and sisters, as children of God. In
this mutual understanding and friendship, in this sacred
communion, we must also begin to work together to build
the common future of the human race." We also suggested
a search for concrete and practical ways of organization
and co-operation, so that all available resources be pooled
and thus a true communion among all nations be
achieved. (43)
D rotherhood of peoples. This duty is the concern
especially of better-off nations. Their obligations stem
from a brotherhood that is at once human and super¬
natural, and take on a threefold aspect: the duty
of human solidarity the aid that the rich nations
must give to developing countries; the duty of social
justice the rectification of inequitable trade relations
between powerful nations and weak nations; the duty of
universal charity the effort to bring about a world that
is more human towards all men, where all will be able
to give and receive , without one group making progress
at the expense of the other. The question is urgent, for
on it depends the future of the civilization of the world.
(44)
VV ar against hunger. . . Today no one can be Ignorant
any longer of the fact that In whole continents countless
men and women are ravished by hunger, countless numbers
of children are undernourished, so that many of them
die in infancy, while the physical growth and mental
development of many others are retarded and as a result
whole regions are condemned to the most depressing
despondency... The campaign against hunger being
carried on by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
and encouraged by the Holy See, has been generously
supported. . . (45)
Let each examine his conscience. But... it is not just
a matter of eliminating hunger, nor even of reducing
poverty. The struggle against destitution, though urgent
and necessary, is not enough. It ¡s a question, rather,
of building a world where every man, no matter what
his race, religion or nationality, can live a fully human
life, free from servitude imposed on him by other men
or by natural forces over which he has not sufficient control;
a world where freedom is not an empty word and where
the poor man Lazarus can sit down at the same table
with the rich man. This demands great generosity, much
sacrifice and unceasing effort on the part of the rich
man.
Let each one examine his conscience, a conscience that
conveys a new message for our times. Is he prepared
to support out of his own pocket works and undertakings
organized in favour of the most destitute? Is he ready
to pay higher taxes so that the public authorities can
intensify their efforts in favour of development? Is he
ready to pay a higher price for imported goods so that
the producer may be more justly rewarded? Or to leave
his country, if necessary and if he is young, in order
to assist in this development of the young nations? (47)
D uty of human solidarity. The same duty of solidarity
that rests on individuals exists also for nations: "Advanced
nations have a very heavy obligation to help the develop¬
ing peoples". . . Every nation must produce more and
better quality goods to give to all its inhabitants a truly
human standard of living, and also to contribute to the
common development of the human race.
Given the increasing needs of the under-developed
countries, it should be considered quite normal for an
advanced country to devote a part of its production to
meet their needs, and to train teachers, engineers,
technicians and scholars prepared to put their knowledge
and their skill at the disposal of less fortunate peoples. (48)
5 uperfluous wealth. We must repeat once more that the
superfluous wealth of rich countries should be placed at
the service of poor nations. The rule which up to now
held good for the benefit of those nearest to us, must today
be applied to all the needy of this world.
Besides, the rich will be the first to benefit as a result.
Otherwise their continued greed will certainly call down
upon them the judgement of God and the wrath of the
poor, with consequences no one can foretell. If today's
flourishing civilizations remain selfishly wrapped up in
themselves, they could easily place their highest values
in jeopardy, sacrificing their will to be great to the desire
to possess more. . . (49)
A World Fund. . . At Bombay, We called for the estab¬
lishment of a great World Fund, to be made up of part
of the money spent on arms, to relieve the most destitute
of this world. What is true of the immediate struggle
against want, holds good also when there is a question of
development. Only world-wide collaboration, of which a
common fund would be both means and symbol, will
succeed In overcoming vain rivalries and in establishing a
fruitful and peaceful exchange between peoples. (51)
A id without strings. There is certainly no need to do
away with bilateral and multilateral agreements: they
allow ties of dependence and feeling of bitterness, left
over from the era of colonialism, to yield place to the
happier relationship of friendship, based on a footing of
constitutional and political equality.
However, if they were to be fitted into the framework of
world-wide collaboration, they would be beyond all suspi¬
cion, and as a result there would be less distrust on the part
of the receiving nations. These would have less cause
for fearing that, under the cloak of financial aid or technical
assistance, there lurk certain manifestations of what has
come to be called neo-colonialism, in the form of political
pressures and economic suzerainty aimed at maintaining
or acquiring complete dominance. (52)
A rms race an intolerable scandal. Besides who does
not see that such a fund would make it easier to take
measures to prevent certain wasteful expenditures, the
result of fear or pride?
When so many people are hungry, when so many fami¬
lies suffer from destitution, when so many remain steeped
in ignorance, when so many schools, hospitals and homes
worthy of the name remain to be built, all public or private
squandering of wealth, all expenditure prompted by motives
of national or personal ostentation, every exhausting arma¬
ments race, becomes an intolerable scandal.

We are conscious of Our duty to denounce it. Would
that those In authority listened to Our words before it is
too I ate I (53)
D ialogue among all peoples. This means that it is
absolutely necessary to create among all peoples that
dialogue for whose establishment We expressed Our hope
In Our first Encyclical Ecclesiam Suam. This dialogue
between those who contribute wealth and those who
benefit from it, will provide the possibilty of making an
assessment of the contribution necessary, not only drawn
up In terms of the generosity and the available wealth of
the donor nations, but also conditioned by the real needs
of the receiving countries and the use to which the financial
assistance can be put.
Developing countries will thus no longer risk being
overwhelmed by debts whose repayment swallows up the
greater part of their gains. Rates of interest and time for
repayment of the loan could be so arranged as not to be
too great a burden on either party, taking into account
free gifts, interest-free or low-interest loans, and the time
needed for liquidating the debts. Guarantees could be
given to those who provide the capital that it will be put
to use according to an agreed plan and with a reasonable
measure of efficiency, since there is no question of
encouraging parasites or the indolent.
And the receiving countries could demand that there
be no interference in their political life or subversion of
their social structures. As sovereign states they have
the right to conduct their own affairs, to decide on their
policies and to move freely towards the kind of society
they choose.
What must be brought about, therefore, is a system of
co-operation freely undertaken, an effective and mutual
sharing, carried out with equal dignity on either side, for
the construction of a more human world. (54)
Vv orld peace at stake. . . This common task will not
succeed without concerted, constant and courageous
efforts. But let everyone be convinced of this: the very
life of poor nations, civil peace in developing countries,
and world peace itself are at stake. (55).
Equity in trade relations. The efforts which are being
made to assist developing nations on a financial and tech¬
nical basis, though considerable, would be illusory if their
benefits were to be partially nullified as a consequence
of the trade relations existing between rich and poor
countries. The confidence of these latter would be
severely shaken if they had the impression that what was
being given them with one hand was being taken away
with the other. (56)
I ncreasing disproportion. Of course, highly industrialized
nations export for the most part manufactured goods, while
countries with less developed economies have only food,
fibres and other raw materials to sell. As a result of
technical progress the value of manufactured goods is
rapidly increasing and they can always find an adequate
market.
On the other hand, raw materials produced by under¬
developed countries are subject to wide and sudden fluc¬
tuations in price, a state of affairs far removed from the
progressively increasing value of industrial products. As
a result, nations whose industrialization is limited are
faced with serious difficulties when they have to rely on
their exports to balance their economy and to carry out

their plans for development. The poor nations remain
ever poor while the rich ones become still richer. (57)
Liberalism in question. In other words, the rule of free
trade, taken by itself, is no longer able to govern interna¬
tional relations. Its advantages are certainly evident when
the parties involved are not affected by any excessive
inequalities of economic power: it is an incentive to pro¬
gress and a reward for effort.
That is why industrially developed countries see in it a
law of justice. But the situation is no longer the same
when economic conditions differ too widely from country
to country: prices which are "freely" set in the market
can produce unfair results. One must recognize that it Is
the fundamental principle of liberalism, as the rule for
commercial exchange, which is questioned here. (58)
Obstacles to overcome: Nationalism. Among still other
obstacles which are opposed to the formation of a world
which is more just and which is better organized toward
a universal solidarity, We wish to speak of nationalism
and racism.
It is only natural that communities which have recently
reached their political independence should be jealous of
a national unity which is still fragile, and that they should
strive to protect it. Likewise, it is to be expected that
nations endowed with an ancient culture should be
proud of the patrimony which their history has bequeathed
to them. But these legitimate feelings should be ennobled
by that universal charity which embraces the entire human
family.
Nationalism isolates people from their true good. It
would be especially harmful where the weakness of national
economies demands rather the pooling of efforts, of
knowledge, and of funds, in order to implement programmes
of development and to increase commercial and cultural
exchange. (62)
R acism. Racism is not the exclusive lot of young
nations, where sometimes it hides beneath the rivalries of
clans and political parties, with heavy losses for justice
and at the risk of civil war. During the colonial period it
often flared up between the colonists and the indigenous
population, and stood in the way of mutually profitable
understanding, often giving rise to bitterness in the wake
of genuine injustices.
It is still an obstacle to collaboration among disadvantaged
nations and a cause of division and hatred within countries
whenever individuals and families see the inviolable
rights of the human person held In scorn, as they them¬
selves are unjustly subjected to a regime of discrimination
because of their race or their colour. (63)
For a unified world. We are deeply distressed by such
a situation which is laden with threats for the future. We
are, nonetheless, hopeful: a more deeply felt need for
collaboration, a heightened sense of unity will finally
triumph over misunderstandings and selfishness.
We hope that the countries whose development is less
advanced will be able to take advantage of their proximity
in order to organize among themselves, on a broadened
territorial basis, areas for concerted development: to draw
up programmes in common, to co-ordinate investments, to
distribute the means of production, and to organize trade.
We hope also that multilateral and international bodies,
by means of the reorganization which is required, will
discover the ways that will allow peoples which are still
under-developed to break through the barriers which seem QQ
to enclose them and to discover for themselves, in full 00
fidelity to their own proper genius, the means for their
social and human progress. (64)
CONTINUED ON PAGE 36

"Freedom from misery, the greater assurance of finding subsistence,
health and fixed employment; an increased share of responsibility . . .in
security from situations that do violence to their dignity as men;
better education in brief, to seek to do more, know more and have more
in order to be more: that is what men aspire to now..."
Photo © Mireille Vautier
<-
'^ *
i*-,.» »y J*t
*v '; *s


36
NEW NAME FOR PEACE (Continued)
A rtlsans of their own destiny. Such Is the goal we must
attain. World unity, ever more effective, should allow
all peoples to become the artisans of their destiny. The
past has too often been characterized by relationships of
violence between nations; may the day dawn when inter¬
national relations will be marked with the stamp of mutual
respect and friendship, of interdependence in collaboration,
the betterment of all seen as the responsibility of each
individual.
The younger or weaker nations ask to assume their
active part in the construction of a better world, one which
shows deeper respect for the rights and the vocation of the
individual. This is a legitimate appeal; everyone should
hear it and respond to it. (65)
U evelopment, the new name for peace. Excessive eco¬
nomic, social and cultural inequalities among peoples
arouse tensions and conflicts, and are a danger to peace...
Peace cannot be limited to a mere absence of war, the
result of an ever precarious balance of forces. No, peace
is something that is built up day after day, in the pursuit
of an order Intended by God, which implies a more perfect
form of justice among men. (76)
A n end to isolation. The peoples themselves have the
prime responsibility to work for their own development.
But they will not bring this about in Isolation. Regional
agreements among weak nations for mutual support, under¬
standings of wider scope entered into for their help, more
far-reaching agreements to establish programmes for closer
co-operation among groups of nations these are the
milestones on the road to development that leads to
peace. (77)
N eed for a world authority. This international collabora¬
tion on a world-wide scale requires institutions that will pre¬
pare, co-ordinate and direct it, until finally there Is estab¬
lished an order of justice which is universally recognized.
With all Our heart, We encourage these organizations
which have undertaken this collaboration for the develop¬
ment of the peoples of the world, and Our wish is that
they grow in prestige and authority.
"Your vocation," as We said to the representatives of
the United Nations in New York, "is to bring not some
people but all peoples to treat each other as brothers. . .
Who does not see the necessity of thus establishing pro¬
gressively a world authority, capable of acting effectively
in the juridical and political sectors?" (78)
H rogress of the human family. Some would consider
such hopes Utopian. It may be that these persons are
not realistic enough, and that they have not perceived
the dynamism of a world which desires to live more fra¬
ternally a world which, in spite of its ignorance,
its mistakes and even its sins, its relapses into barbarism
and its wanderings far from the road of salvation, is, even
unawares, taking slow but sure steps towards its Creator.
This road towards a greater humanity requires effort and
sacrifice; but suffering itself, accepted for the love of
our brethren, favours the progress of the entire human
family. . . (79)
u niversal solidarity. We have desired to remind all men
how crucial Is the present moment, how urgent the work
to be done. The hour for action has now sounded. At
stake are the survival of so many innocent children and,
for so many families overcome by misery, the access to
conditions fit for human beings; at stake are the peace
of the world and the future of civilization. It is time for all
men and all peoples to face up to their responsibilities. (80)

