In the course of the past sixten years no fewer than thirty-five independent
states have emerged in Africa (see colour map, centre fold). The
transformation of the political and economic map of Africa has been
accompanied by unprecedented changes in education, science and culture
and a new awareness of its people to the growing role that this vast
continent is destined to play in the comity of nations. This issue of the
Unesco Courier is devoted to only a few of the crucial questions
pre-occupying the leaders and thinkers of Inter-tropical Africa today.
All the articles have been written by prominent writers and authorities
from Africa itself: Gabriel d'Arboussier (Senegal), K. Onwuka Dike (Nige¬
ria), Ezekiel Mphahlele (South Africa), Pathé Diagne (Senegal), N. C. Otieno
(Kenya) and Ekpo Eyo (Nigeria). Each author has attempted to examine
his subject in the perspective of the newly-independent states of Africa
as a whole, and in the light of the new ferment of ideas and .attitudes
and the renaissance which characterize the genius of African thought
and culture today.

BIRTH OF A NEW AFRICA
by Gabriel d'Arboussier
I
4
«IGHT years ago the Unesco
Courier published a special issue on
Africa's past (Oct. 1959) which drew
aside the curtain of ignorance that
history had apparently draped around
this continent, calling it Terrae In-
cognitae just before it emerged onto
the international stage in the 1960s.
The number was a timely incursion
into the past for Africa was becoming
"fashionable" and everyone was talk¬
ing about it though not always with
the best of knowledge.
One thing that strikes me today in
comparing the 1959 issue with the
GABRIEL D'ARBOUSSIER
of Senegal is an Under-
Secretary of the United
Nations and Executive Di¬
rector of the U.N. Institute
for Training and Research.
Jurist, statesman and diplo¬
mat, he was Senegal's
Minister of Justice (1960-
1962) and helped to draw
up his country's Constitu¬
tion. In I960 he headed
Senegal's delegation to the
United Nations and while
ambassador to France (1963-
1964) was Senegal's perma¬
nent delegate to Unesco.
He is a member of the Exe¬
cutive Council of the Insti¬
tute of Studies for Econo¬
mic and Social Develop¬
ment at the University of
Paris. He is the author of
many studies, including
L'Afrique vers l'unité (To¬
wards African Unity).
present one is the difference in
authors. Those who wrote on Africa's
past were Europeans. In this number
every article is by an African.
One's first reaction on looking at the
immense platform that constitutes the
African continent is surprise at its
extreme diversity, but in my opinion
this is only a first impression. Con-
strasting with it is the other factor, the
transformations which have swept
300 million inhabitants forward in a
movement which, though it may take
different forms in different places, is
nevertheless a general one.
In his treatise on peace and war
among the nations (1), Raymond Aron
says: "...every social science problem
should be examined from three points
of view:
of the dataarrangementthe
available,
the selection of the problems
bearing on the social factor studied,
distinguishing between constant
and accidental factors.
It is from this threefold point of view
that I should like to try to present the
African continent, which a French
geographer, Jacques Weulersse, has
described as "a giant question mark
on the flank of the Old World."
The oneness of our world means that
nowadays we can no longer examine
the problems arising in one part without
first taking the facts of the international
scene into account. And there are
four international facts that concern
Africa very closely.
First in importance is the world
situation, which is such that two great
powers, the "Big Two", seem to have
an almost decisive influence on world
events.
The second is the European situation,
and this undoubtedly is the one that
concerns the whole of Africa more
particularly.
The third, which perhaps does not
yet seem to have a very definite effect
on the destiny of Africa, is China, with
its 700 million people, who in a few
years will be 1,000 million; the African
continent has only 300 million, in an
area of 30 million square kilometres.
The fourth international fact is the
appearance of the "Third World", a
fundamental factor in world evolution
today.
To these primary factors several
others must be added, which are not
simply matters of fact, for they may
perhaps be said to introduce a new
political concept into the relationships
(I) "Peace and War: A Theory of Interna¬
tional Relations", Weidenfeld and Nicolson,
London.

Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris PYRAMIDS AT KANO. At harvest time sacks of ground nuts are stacked in mountainous
piles all over Tropical Africa. Pyramids of ground nuts in this co-operative
depot at Kano, Nigeria, symbolize not only prosperity but also Africa's dependence
on foreign trends and foreign trade. Because the major part of Africas's work
has been devoted to producing export crops, to the detriment of its own food
production, it now depends for almost 80 per cent of its subsistence on imports.
between peoples. One is the vast
wave of decolonization that has
swept over Africa in the past few
years. Broadly speaking, the end of
the colonial system began after the
Second World War. Only a few years
ago Africa was almost entirely under
colonial rule, and now it has become a
continent of independent states in
search of their own future. This fact
entirely changes the concepts of
relationships between peoples.
Those relationships may be establish¬
ed either on the basis of the rivalries
we knew in former times, or on that of
essential co-operation between all the
existing states. The policy of hege¬
mony formerly applied to the African
continent is now being transformed
into a policy of co-operation, a new
factor of the greatest importance.
In my opinion, these are the essential
facts on the international scene that we
must keep constantly in mind when we
are considering this immense continent.
But within this general context there
are other more specifically African
factors. First, there is the great size
of Africa which, no doubt because it
is a clearly defined unit, appears
smaller on the map than the vast
spaces we see on maps showing
Europe and its prolongation towards
Asia.
Then there are the 300 million peo¬
ple, lost, one might almost say, in
Africa's 30 million square kilometres.
In company with South America, Africa
is no doubt one of the continents with
the lowest population density. Not
only has it a low density but also
a striking inequality of distribution. In
the desert regions there are 0.4 inha¬
bitants per square kilometre, whereas
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
5

A NEW AFRICA (Continued)
The need for greater inter-African co-operation
in certain areas of Nigeria for instance
there are 40, 50, 60 and even 70 inha¬
bitants per square kilometre, which is
outstanding for Africa.
In addition to this geographical
inequality, an economic and social
inequality has now arisen. The now
familiar exodus from the countryside to
the towns has led to the growth of
sprawling cities in countries with a very
low population density. Recently es¬
tablished states often have capitals of
inordinate size in relation to the coun¬
try. I think this is general in Africa,
whereas in Europe it is rather excep¬
tional.
Our African capitals have often been
compared relatively speaking, of
course to the capital of Austria, which
also has the rather special character¬
istic of being like an enormous head
on a rather small body. The combina¬
tion of these geographical and demo¬
graphic facts leads one to wonder
whether there is one Africa or several
Áfricas.


A,
6
IFRICA'S geographical zo¬
nes do in fact differ very greatly.
There is a vast difference between the
Mediterranean coast and the Guiñean
coast (Guiñean in the sense of the
Gulf of Guinea and not the country of
Guinea), and between the savanna
countries, even in a group like West
Africa that has nevertheless come to
be considered as a single entity.
There are great differences, too,
between northern Niger and south-
em Nigeria, between the Djerma and
the Somono of the Niger and the
Ibo of Nigeria, between the Malinke,
the Fan and the Ashanti. Differences
too between the Fula herdsmen and
the Sarakolle, the Battutsi of the
Congo and the forest men of the
Gabon.
So we see the outlines of very diffe¬
rent Áfricas, different in their geogra¬
phy, their peoples and their civiliza¬
tions. Differences of civilization exist
between the men of the Sahara and
the men of the Sahel, bordering the
desert, between those of the savanna
and those of the forest. Yet we should
not let these differences, real though
they are, prevent us from perceiving the
great unity, or rather several major
unifying factors, that exist in this vast
continent.
First let us come back to the eco¬
nomic and social factors and look at
the important unity Africa possesses
because it is a developing continent.
Obviously this is not a quality that
should be stressed as an argument,
but we are looking for points of unity,
factors of unification in this huge and
diverse continent with its extraordi¬
narily varied countryside and its great
variety of peoples.
There is a second factor. Africa is
a developing continent that was under
colonial rule for a very long time and
its communities have only quite
recently acceded to a modern way of
life and statehood. Apart from Ethio¬
pia, one of the oldest states in the
world, and a few embryonic kingdoms
that were able to subsist in the nor¬
thern part of Africa, almost all the
present sovereign powers are new
ones, and almost all the states are
"apprentice states". That is a factor
permitting some generalization in talk¬
ing of the African continent.
There is one last point which seems
to me extremely important. Africa,
which except on the outer fringes
had little contact with the outside
world, had developed internal civiliza¬
tions based on a community way of
life that is the most outstanding feature
of the social structure of these coun¬
tries as a whole. So we find that civi¬
lizations which appear very far remov¬
ed from one another because of diffe¬
rences in their geography, climate or
historical past, are very near to each
other as regards the community way
of life adopted by their peoples.
Indeed, when we speak to a farmer
from Senegal, or from Ubang-Shari, or
Chad or the Congo (Kinshasa) and see
how he lives, how the various age
groups in his country are organized,
how the land is divided or the income
from collective production distributed
among the different members of the
group, we find everywhere the same
community basis, which, incidentally,
is reflected in the cultural life that is
itself one of the great unifying factors
in this continent.
The cultural aspect is perhaps one
of the most important that we should
consider. Alongside the considerable
variety of agrarian civilizations and
social structures, there has emerged
a concept of life and of the future
of man and his relationship to cosmic
forces, that is one of the essential
characteristics of the cultural outlook
of the African, in spite of the strik¬
ing differences in colour of skin bet¬
ween the Berber, the Moor, the Fula or
the Sara and the Malinke.
They all hold to the same con¬
cepts as their ancestors. This provides
an extremely important background,
expressed in religions terms by the
animism that is to be found every¬
where, at any rate below the line of
the Sahara. Where neither the Islamic
nor the Christian religion has yet
penetrated, we find a set of religious
beliefs that are all related to, all
branches of, this animist conception.
Broadly, these are the few basic fac¬
tors that give us a more exact view of
the African continent; a continent in
which the immense variety of ways of
life and the extraordinarily different
concepts of social organization that
characterize it do not preclude the
existence of a few fundamental factors
binding all together in a common
destiny.
'ITH this view of Africa in
our minds, how are we to make a
selection from among the problems
the task which now faces both the
leaders and the peoples themselves
in African countries? I think we must
classify the problems as political, eco¬
nomic, social and cultural. This is in
line with the dominant ideas now com¬
ing to the fore in these young states.
The first great objective for each of
them is to build up national cohesion.
Most of these states have been
formed on territories that were not
national territories and had not consti¬
tuted nations. That is perhaps the
greatest difference between Africa and
Europe. In Europe the State some¬
times emerged from the cohesion that
a group of peoples had already been
able to achieve among themselves and
had then wished to express, first in
their relations with the outside world,
by constituting themselves as states;
in Africa the situation is exactly the
reverse.
Africa has states that have been
constituted without any national basis
and states that are trying to achieve
national cohesion at the very time
when, throughout the world, national
sovereignty is confronted with the
movement towards the constitution of
large economic groupings, made
necessary by the new international
division of labour, the expansion of
markets, and all the new functions that
economics obliges the State to per¬
form.
The second consideration is that
these states, wishing to achieve nation¬
hood, are faced with the fact of the
absolute necessity of inter-African
co-operation, for they have very
quickly realized that modern economic
laws and the requirements of economic

African technician adjusts studio lighting
for a television transmission from Abidjan
(Ivory Coast). Five years ago Africa
had only six television transmitters. Today
a score of countries operate national
television stations.
development make it impossible for
them to attain their objectives within
the narrow framework of their own
states, and that they must therefore
agree among themselves and set their
course towards inter-African co-opera¬
tion.
The third consideration is that nowa¬
days everyone, the world over, is
talking of economic development. This
idea seems to be new but is perhaps
in fact not so very new. Economic
growth has often been confused with
economic development. I think that
when, for some etymological reason,
people try to classify countries into
developed and developing, they should
recognize that all countries, whatever
their level of development, are
constantly developing; each is always
trying to do better.
The largest states, the largest eco¬
nomic groups are formed nowadays
precisely because of this desire to
achieve a still greater degree of
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
economic development. But Africa
entered modern life at the very time
when this problem and this notion of
economic development were elevated
to the rank of theories. The notion
of economic development was imme¬
diately taken over by all these states
and made the leitmotif of all their
claims.
After the claim for independence
has come the claim for economic
development; having claimed the right
to speak on equal terms with others,
states are now claiming the right to
live like others, to have the same
means of social, economic and cultural
development, and economic develop¬
ment is obviously one of the most
important problems affecting these
countries today.
Economic development brings all
these states face to face with the
necessity of international co-operation.
For today it is absolutely essential for
them to have understandings with each
other, to regroup themselves, to have
inter-African co-operation. They have
understood that they cannot develop
if they do not have relations with
the outside world.
After an initial tendency to turn
inwards, after showing a certain desire
to break away from all its past foreign
relations, Africa is now perhaps being
swept forward by a new movement.
But there is a danger of abandoning
the concern that is expressed in the
old proverb: "God helps those who
help themselves". It may well be true
that Africa's development depends on
international relations, but it will de¬
pend above all upon the work of her
citizens and on the "will to economize"
as Arthur Lewis has termed one of the
essentials of economic development.
Work is the basis of development in
any country. The world's highly de¬
veloped countries reached their pre¬
sent state only after years and cen¬
turies of suffering, patience and hard
work.
At the political level the problem
facing the African states today is
that of independence and the need
for international co-operation. They
first need to understand that the best
way of assuring their independence
is not to isolate themselves. Inde¬
pendence is not only the independence
of a few leaders, a few families or
a few social classes, but of the whole
population. Today this independence
is exercised in an atmosphere of world
interdependence.
As regards internal organization
and here we have another common
factor It is noteworthy that African
countries have been entirely free from
the conflicts that occurred in Europe
in former times between the written
and the unwritten law, between the
written constitution and the absence
of any constitution. Today there
seems to be a general movement
leading all the African states first
towards the achievement of a written
constitution designed to establish
authority.
Why this concern with a written
constitution and why such a reaction
against custom? In Europe the law,
by its form, seemed to be the force
that operated most strongly against
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
7

A NEW AFRICA (Continued)
the imperative social evolution that
was taking place, whereas custom,
seemed more fully to meet the need
for evolution. The disadvantage, it
may be said, is that the desire to
evolve is so great that the constitution
is changed rather too often. This is,
admittedly, a fairly serious danger
lurking on our path, but I think we
should not exaggerate its importance.
Another problem is foreign policy.
Immediately after attaining indepen¬
dence, African countries were tempted
by neutrality and neutralism to the
point where a series of different terms
was invented, ranging from negative
neutralism to positive neutralism. This
was simply an expression of the desire
to avoid being tied to one bloc or
another.
Today that attitude is being some¬
what reversed. Neutralism is gradually
losing ground. Africa is realizing that
her fate is bound up with that of every
8
Photo © Hoa-Qul, Pans
This imposing monument in the
main square of Lomé, capital of
the Republic of Togo, commemorates
the country's accession to
independence on April 27, 1960.
part of the world, that there cannot
be an isolated African island. In its
foreign relations, instead of being a
stake in the rivalries between the
Great Powers, Africa would like to
be a place where the international
co-operation that has become neces¬
sary in the world of today is practised,
Concerning economic, social and
cultural factors, I should like to
point out that Africa is in the process
of making an- inventory of her own
economic resources. She is trying
to find out whether, by her own means,
she can bring her traditional economy
up to the point of "take-off", so as to
embark on a modern economic system
or whether she needs fairly substantial
assistance from abroad to reach this
stage.
Africa realizes that both these things
are necessary. Intensive work must
be done by the Africans themselves,
and above all some thinking is called
for on the subject of Africa's economy,
so as to free her economic develop¬
ment from complete dependence upon
foreign trends and foreign trade, as
has been the case so far.
a|NE of the characteristics
of Africa is that the visible and calcu¬
lable part of its national income is
largely made up of receipts from
exports abroad. A consequence of
this state of affairs, which is extremely
dangerous for Africa, is that the major
part of Africa's work has been devoted
to the production of goods destined
for sale abroad. The share of food
production necessary for subsistence
has been sacrificed, with the para¬
doxical result that a continent that
could be almost self-supporting, today
depends for almost 80 per cent of its
subsistence on imports from abroad.
We need only recall that Senegal,
which could produce rice and millet
for its subsistence (and formerly did
so) now imports huge amounts of
rice from Burma, Siam, Cambodia and
South Viet-Nam each month, and at
the same time is compelled to sell
its groundnut oil abroad because its
population consumes only a very small
part of what is produced! A reversal
of that trend would help to constitute
internal economies and internal mar¬
kets that would provide backing for
Africa's foreign trade.
In my opinion, this building up of
internal markets is the best means
of attracting capital investments. Of
course, political declarations and legal
guarantees for capital investments can
be given, but the best safeguard for
CONTINUED ON PAGE 36

BIRTH OF A NEW AFRICA (Continued from page 8)
36
invested capital is the assurance of
lasting profitability. It is precisely
because a market offers sure outlets
for a product that the capital invested
in that product brings in returns and
goes on doing so which is obviously
the best security of all.
Great changes in social structures
are now taking place in Africa. The
traditional ways are changing under
the impact of modern economy, new
ideas and information techniques and
in consequence of the desire to imitate
other countries.
So far as social structures are
concerned, the two most important
problems are the rivalry between town
and country and, in a different sphere,
a certain conflict between generations.
This conflict is liable to arise where
the bulk of the population is still vastly
out of proportion with the elite and
when the elite itself stands somewhat
apart, not fully realizing that its
destiny is bound up with the general
development of the generation coming
after it, and so is in danger of becom¬
ing isolated.
There is also a clash of culture be¬
cause the generation now bearing the
greatest responsibilities is not the one
that has been through the universities.
On a level with that generation, new
people are coming forward who have
been brought up in contact with mod¬
ern ideas, science and culture, and
who do not always see the problems
in the same way as their prede¬
cessors. Both sides bear a responsi¬
bility: the older generation should
avoid a break with the younger people,
and the younger ones must quickly
learn where their responsibilities lie,
and they must be given responsibility
practice, as the old saying goes,
makes perfect.
In the training of staff, I think Africa
faces a very great problem, perhaps
the greatest of all its problems. There
can be no political, economic or
cultural development, in the modern
sense of the term without the training
of specialists and technicians.
All countries know this. Sometimes
we move a little too fast and states
start to compete with one another,
each wishing to have its university,
or its higher education centre, even
though not always possessing the
necessary means or the social and
cultural infrastructure. This may be a
fault but I think it is a good fault, mere¬
ly indicating how very anxious all Afri¬
can countries are to train competent
staff as quickly as possible.
GABRIEL D'ARBOUSSIER
