LAUGHTER AND ENDURANCE
Well-springs of Czechoslovak literature
by Adolf Hoffmeister
L
24
ITERATURE Is like a river
which crosses the landscape of life,
reflecting the sky, the banks, the
bridges, the boats and fishermen.
Great literatures contain great rivers.
Dickens is the' Thames, Tolstoy the
Volga, Sholokhov the Don, Faulkner
the Mississippi. And the metaphor
could be taken still further. But who,
then, is the Loire, who the Seine, the
Garonne and the Rhône? Who is
the Elbe and the Moldau, the Danube
and the Vah ? Metaphors must not
be taken too far, after all. And yet
literatures are like rivers and poets
like their sources. They draw their
inspiration from a stream. They pro¬
vide the current. Sometimes, it is true,
there is nothing but water and this
water only evaporates with the lapse
of time.
In the centre of Europe, continually
threatened by invaders, the Czech and
Slovak peoples, realistic, hard-working,
heretical and inflexible, persist obsti¬
nately with their own truth and are
ready to brave every storm. Situated at
a crossroads of civilization, impelled
by centuries of oppression towards a
prudent wisdom, these peoples, with
their respect for reason, created a cul¬
ture which was also a protection.
They have persevered within their own
fortress while still maintaining contact
with the world. Czechoslovakia is a
small country which belongs to two
peoples, the Czechs and the Slovaks.
The importance of the art and lite¬
rature of this country is out of propor¬
tion both to the number of its inhabi-
ADOLF HOFFMEISTER was Czechoslova¬
kia's ambassador to France from 1949 to
1951 and since 1956 he has represented his
country at Unesco's General Conferences-
as delegate for cultural affairs. He is a
lawyer, writer, artist and cartoonist. For
several years he has been president of
the Pen Club in Czechoslovakia and has
taught drawing and animated cartoon
techniques at the High School for Applied
Arts in Prague. His numerous works,
written and illustrated, include memoirs,
travel journals and essays. He has also
written the libretto for a children's opera,
"The Bumble Bee".
tants and to the extent of its territory
and even the general level of culture.
It goes far beyond these. Should this
be attributed to the beauty of the
landscape? Czechoslovakia is like
an orchard fertile in talent. We need
do no more than consider the number
of artists who have been born or grown
up in this country and whose work has
unquestionably enriched German cul¬
ture: Alfred Kubin, Robert Musil, Oscar
Kokoschka, Adolf Loos, Rainer Maria
Rilke, Sigmund Freud, Stefan Zweig,
Arnold Zweig, Franz Werfel, Franz
Kafka. This gives a ready indication
of the number of men of letters un
known because of their language who
belong to literature.
The anchor of certainty for each
writer lies in a profound patriotism
without the slightest trace of romanti¬
cism or nationalism, a patriotism muted
by an innate modesty. As an old, and
perhaps somewhat old-fashioned pro¬
verb has it, "The smaller the country,
the greater the love it needs." What
better proof could there be of this than
the fact that a relatively small country
has so rich and important a literature?
This people supported a heavy bur¬
den during the war years. Only their
stubborn good humour enabled them
HANDY CRAFT. Below, sketched by Adolf Hoffmeister, three
personalities of Czechoslovak arts and letters display their talents
in a shadow theatre performance. From left, the poet Vitezslav Nezval,
Jiri Trnka, famous creator of puppet shows and films, and Jan Werich,
actor and playwright who, with Jan Voskovec, - created Prague's
celebrated "Osvobozene Divadlo" theatre.
Right, scene from "The Good Soldier Schweik", Jiri Trnka's
puppet film based on the novel by Jaroslav Hasek.
From "Visages Ecrits et. Dessinés" by Adolf Hoffmeister, Published by Les Editeurs Français Réunis, Paris

to overcome the propagation of a
philosophy of destruction and despair.
Czechoslovak writers were all at
their posts when the bloody history of
our century was being written. The
wretchedness of their childhood and
the experience of an appallingly hard
life were their masters up to the day
when they looked on hell with their
own eyes: the occupation from 1939
to 1945.
In the twentieth century when Czech
and Slovak literature had to make up
a certain cultural leeway in compari¬
son to the outside world, readers stub¬
bornly rejected any superficial art.
And for the same reason, neither
pragmatism nor the cult of the com¬
monplace nor popular romanticism was
able to develop. Creative artistic
expression is closer to dramatic struc¬
ture. Writers are always impelled
towards concentrated expression by a
certain impatience and a certain inner
unease. The literary language itself,
enriched by the wisdom of the people,
excludes the slow epic pace of the
roman fleuve, or saga. Everything re¬
lates to action. When writers have
been brought painfully up against poli
tical reality they have stood fast.
The only element which softened
the angles and the sharp edges was
lyrical poesy. This is typically Slav
and goes hand in hand with the musi¬
cal genius of the people. A glance at
any anthology of Czech and Slovak
poetry will provide the proof.
Laughter and endurance in the face
of evil, such are the two main elements
in the national Czech and Slovak cha¬
racter. The Czechs and the Slovaks
are fundamentally gay. They are
devoid of complexes. They are
almost wholly unreserved, free of Nor¬
dic gloom or austere detachment. All
of them feel themselves to be at one
with their fellows. Social relationships,
like the country's artistic expression,
are stamped by the spirit of the people.
Folk songs and folk melodies run in
their blood: dances, sometimes boiste¬
rous, free their limbs. Simplicity of
design is innate in their plastic arts.
Thus, the whole people preserve the
memory of the national hero, Julius
Fucik. Before he was tortured to
death by the Nazis, he bequeathed to
Czech literature the most heartrending
of heroic documents "written under the
scaffold". It is this which contains
his supreme message, "Mankind, I
loved you! Keep vigil!"
None the less, all those who were
his close friends and who knew him
well, all those who lived with him at
a time when they formed a youthful
vanguard, remember a man of gaiety'
a human man, full of life, joy, love
and laughter. He had a tremendous
sense of humour.
Similarly, Vancura and Olbracht will
remain forever in the memory of the
people as happy men. They too had
never rejected the pleasures of life
and drank from their cupped hands
simple joy and belief in people. Marie
Majerova, eternally youthful, was like
them in accepting the same principles
dictated by the spirit of the people.
Gaiety is the distinguishing feature
of the Czech and Slovak national char¬
acter. It is the very form of their
human relations. It is the accent of
their speech. It is the underlying ele¬
ment In the old popular traditions. It
is the tone of the Czech and Slovak
tales and proverbs. It is the Czecho¬
slovak way of binding up wounds, of
discovering faults and correcting
25
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

LAUGHTER AND ENDURANCE
(Continued)
errors. The sentimental side of the
Czech lyric mentality may be seen as
no more than the shadow which points
towards laughter on the sunny side.
This may be seen from a glance at
the world's great literary storehouse.
Along with Aristophanes and the other
insolent giants of Graeco-Roman clas¬
sical literature, along with the opulent
volumes of the gluttonous Doctor
Rabelais, along with the pitilessly fin¬
ished ideas of the shrewd Jonathan
Swift, along with the traditionally British
tales of inns and stables in Dickens'
Pickwick, along with Lewis Carroll's
Alice, artless yet mathematically
exact, along with certain Falstaffian
and tipsy masterpieces by William
Shakespeare, along with the rusty
armour of Cervantes' Don Quixote,
along with the small shopkeepers in
Gogol's Dead Souls along with all
these the good soldier Schweik
stands carelessly at attention.
Yes, the good soldier Schweik has
been received in the exclusive society
of immortal figures where the standard
of judgement is a world-wide scale.
This is the company of Pantagruel, Gar¬
gantua, Sancho Panza, Don Quixote,
Chichlkov and the Revizor, Tartuffe
and Harpagon, Gulliver, Falstaff, Ubu
Roi, Sam Weiler and so many others.
They are legion. But Schweik is the
only Czech in their ranks. And he
was able to take his place precisely
because he was so essentially of the
people, so Czech and so gay.
<&<&
' ¡l
26
IT is not, however, only
gaiety which is involved. There are
two sides to the Czech coin the man
of feeling, the enthusiast, uses both
sides to pay his debt of life to mankind.
If one side is laughter, the other is the
harsh decision of battle. Czechoslo¬
vak literature has always embodied
leitmotivs of revolt and obstinacy shap¬
ed in the history of the country from
its beginnings. The heroes were John
Hus, the philosopher of the revolution¬
ary intellectual and social movement
which bears his name, and Janosik, the
Robin Hood of Slovakia, the symbol of
the struggle for social justice and
freedom. Literary content in this
sense combines serious reflection with
the shadow of the agonizing tradition
of intransigence in the face of evil.
Karel Capek, the apostle of state
democracy, who was, without realizing
it, one of the first writers of modern
science fiction in the 1920s, just as
Frantisek was one of the first abstract
painters and one of the most univer¬
sally recognized Czech writers, reach¬
ed the same philosophical concept
through his profound knowledge of
man, of the toiling individual and the
simple spirit.
This text Is adapted from Adolf Hoffmeister's
preface to "Nouvelles Tchèques et Slovaques"
(Short Stories from Czechoslovakia), an an¬
thology translated into French by Francois
Kérel and published in Unesco's Collection
of Representative Works (Seghers, Paris, 1965).
International portrait gallery
A prolific author and artist, Adolf Hoffmeister has illustrated some fifty of his
own books and booklets. His sketchbook is an international gallery of famous
figures in art and literature. Top, from left: Swiss sculptor Alberto Giacometti
with one of his works; French painter Marc Chagall. Above, from left Soviet
writer and poet Boris Pasternak, Nobel Prizewinner for literature in 1958;
American novelist John Steinbeck, Nobel Prizewinner for literature in 1962. Below,
from left: Czech painter Frantisek Kupka and Italian writer Alberto Moravia.
AHS7
Toxyo
From "Visages Ecrits et Dessinés" by Adolf Hoffmeister, published
by Les Editeurs Français Réunis, Paris
