20 
The second 
scientific 
revolution 
by J. Bronowski 
1. most creative cultural 
development of the twentieth century 
was the emergence of a new scientific 
outlook and its impact on the thought 
and life of mankind. 
Beginning at the opening of the cen- 
tury, scientists conceived a new view 
of nature and her laws which made as 
sharp a break with the thought which 
preceded it as the scientific inquiries 
of the sixteenth and seventeenth cen- 
turies had made with the thought of 
the Middle Ages. 
The new scientific thought may 
appropriately be termed the second 
scientific revolution. The first great 
scientific revolution had evolved the 
scientific method of inquiry. Looked 
at from the perspective of the twen- 
J. BRONOWSKI, author of Chapter 6 “The 
New Scientific Thought and its Impact” in 
Volume VI (The Twentieth Century) of the 
History of Mankind, is the noted British scien- 
tist and thinker, distinguished in several 
sciences. He has written widely on scientific 
and cultural matters. 
> 
3 
Science has opened up vast 
new horizons for 20th-century 
man. Research into the worlds 
of the molecule and the atom, 
including studies of nucleoproteins, 
radioactive isotopes, hormones 
and viruses, already offers 
perspectives of change in 
many aspects of 
human life. Photo 
shows crystals of antipyrine 
(a pain-killing medicine) 
seen through a microscope. 
They look remarkably like 
a chain of volcanoes bordered 
by masses of glaciers. 
Photo © Fotogram - Dr Y. Bruneau 
tieth century the unfolding of scientific 
thought between 1500 and 1700 
appears critical in the creation of 
modern civilization. According to one 
contemporary historian, Professor Her- 
bert Butterfield, it “outshines every- 
thing since the rise of Christianity and 
reduces the Renaissance and Refor- 
mation to the rank of mere episodes.” 
The first scientific revolution was an 
intellectual revolution; it taught men to 
think differently. . . By the end of the 
nineteenth century the scientific meth- 
od had not only brought profound 
changes in outlook; science was re- 
making the world, root and branch. 
The second scientific revolution, too, 
began as an intellectual revolution. 
About the year 1900 the view of 
nature which the first scientific revo- 
lution had established began to 
exhaust its successes and to meet its 
first failures. Delicate new pheno- 
mena were found here and there 
which the established view of nature 
and her laws could not unravel. As a 
result scientists began slowly and with 
many hesitations to form a new con- 
ception of the processes of nature 
and a new assessment of scientific 
activity itself. The shift in outlook was 
subtle but it went very deep. 
Like its predecessor the second 
scientific revolution spread slowly from 
the minds of the specialists who con- 
ceived it. In the course of fifty years 
its practical consequences reached 
far; many of the spectacular applica- 
tions of science in the years following 
the second world war grew out of the 
new concepts and the new approach. 
In time it began to transform the out- 
look of the layman as well as the 
scientist and to enter the minds and 
affect the lives of people in all parts 
of the world. . . 
Underlying scientific knowledge and 
thought in all areas [before 1900] ran 
several strong common assumptions. 
Almost all thought conformed to four 
basic preconceptions, or unspoken 
ways of looking at nature, which at

h
v
u
.
 
once reflected and directed the thought 
of the age. 
First was the principle that nature 
proceeds by a strict chain of events 
from cause to effect, the configuration 
of causes at any instant fully determin- 
ing the events in the next instant, and 
so on for ever. This principle of 
determinism, of cause and effect, left 
no uncertainty in nature. 
Apparent uncertainty was presumed 
to be the reflection of ignorance; if 
there were full knowledge, it would 
always be possible to predict the 
future precisely. This had been said 
explicitly by the French mathematician 
Pierre Simon Laplace (1749-1827) in a 
famous passage. 
If we were given, said Laplace, the 
whereabouts and the speeds at this 
instant of every atom in the universe, 
then we should be able to forecast 
their whereabouts and speeds at every 
instant afterwards. We could there- 
fore predict without the smallest un- 
certainty the fate of the entire universe, 
its molecules and its men, its nebulae 
and its nations, from now into eternity. 
Indeed we could do more than this, 
because we could go backward in 
time as well as forward and reconstruct 
the past also to eternity. 
With the principle of determinism 
was coupled a second principle which 
expressed the exact spirit of science: 
the quantitative principle. According 
to this principle science consists of 
measuring things and setting up pre- 
cise relations between the measure- 
ments. 
Lord Rayleigh expressed this in 
another famous passage by saying 
that our ideas become clear only as 
they become quantitative, so that only 
that which is measureable is suscep- 
tible to scientific, and indeed to exact, 
discussion and can truly be described 
as knowledge. On this view nature 
should ultimately be described by 
numbers—co-ordinates in space, times 
of events and coefficients which de- 
  
"J 
> 4 
: 4 
. | “4 F 
4 Pe. a —l 
“«® v 
yo vf ) 
Lr > 
scribe physical properties, and know- 
ledge of nature advances by working 
out the relations between these 
numbers. 
The third underlying principle, which 
concerned the transitions of nature 
from one state to another, was the 
principle of continuity. It expressed 
the sense, deeply engrained in the 
outlook of the age, that the movements 
of nature are gradual. They may seem 
sudden and startling—a flash of lightn- 
ing, an explosion, the eruption of a 
volcano. But the suddenness, said the 
scientific thought of the time, is only 
apparent. 
To the nineteenth-century mind the 
processes of nature move impercepti- 
bly from instant to instant. Between 
any two instants there is another, 
shorter instant; between any two posi- 
tions there is an intermediate position. 
If any sequence seems abrupt or inex- 
plicable it is only necessary to divide 
it into smaller sections. And the divi- 
sion could be carried on for ever—the 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
21

22 
SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION (Continued) 
The scientist— no longer ‘an island unto himself’ 
processes of nature are infinitely fine 
and continuous. 
With these the nineteenth century 
pictured in nature and in science a 
fourth principle: the principle of 
impersonality. The scientist saw him- 
self not as a person but as an instru- 
ment—passionless, unprejudiced and 
somehow more than human. Nature 
appeared as a great impersonal ma- 
chine, going on its imperturbable way, 
which the human observer could only 
peek at. And the process of watching 
this wonderful engine was conceived 
as a passive one. 
The scientist did not invent; he 
saw. He did not use his imagination, 
but his observation. He did not create 
order among the natural phenomena; 
he humbly found it. Even viewing 
himself as an instrument, he did not 
recognize any interaction between that 
particular instrument and the phenom- 
ena under observation. 
In this way the nineteenth-century 
scientist cut himself off from the imagi- 
native and the creative arts. Determi- 
nism, measurement, continuity and 
impersonality were parts of one vision: 
the vision of science as remote from 
the uncertainties and stresses of 
everyday life. 
Around the turn of the century the 
facts of scientific discovery compelled 
scientists to give up this vision of 
science and the outlook on nature 
which it embodied. nA number of 
discoveries were made and a number 
of irregularities were confirmed which 
could no longer be squared with the 
principles which underlay the accepted 
scientific theories. As scientists faced 
the implications of the new discoveries 
they developed a fundamentally new 
view of nature and of scientific 
activity. . . 
i underlying assumptions 
on which the nineteenth century formed 
its picture were replaced. 
In place of the quantitative principle, 
the scientist of the twentieth century 
thought of himself as pursuing a 
concept of structure. 
In place of the principle of conti- 
nuity, the scientist recognized that the 
underlying structure of the small-scale 
world is discontinuous. 
In place of the principle of deter- 
minism or cause and effect, he recog- 
nized that the smallest units of mat- 
ter and energy follow laws which can 
only be described by probabilities and 
whose predictions are therefore always 
surrounded by an area of uncertainty. 
In place of the impersonality of 
science came an understanding that 
the operations of the scientist enter 
inextricably into his findings. 
These were revolutionary changes 
in the outlook of science, and they 
make it appropriate to speak of a 
second scientific revolution. 
The total effect of the new outlook 
was to overthrow the stark and mecha- 
nical image of the scientist serving an 
inhuman truth, remote from the every- 
day world, which the nineteenth cen- 
tury set up. Its place was taken by a 
richer image in which the scientist saw 
himself as carrying out an essentially 
human and personal activity, from 
which he must create an order, an 
understanding of the world by the pro- 
jection of his own mind. 
This was the most subtle change 
which took place in the view of science 
and of all knowledge. The twentieth 
century broke with the view that know- 
ledge is passive, that it accumulates 
the facts that nature provides like a 
card index, and that the scientist need 
do nothing more than keep the index 
accurate and tidy. Instead it saw 
knowledge as a constant activity. 
It ceased to ask that a law of nature 
be formulated as if there were no 
observers; it asked only that it be 
formulated in such a way that it looks 
the same to all similarly placed obser- 
vers. When it asked that a law should 
be universal, it did not ask for a for- 
mulation which would hold in the 
absence of human observers. It asked, 
rather, for a formulation which should 
be valid for them all, however different 
their circumstances. This was the new 
meaning of universality. 
At the same time, it gave to the 
seeker after knowledge a creative role 
which science in the past had denied. 
A fully deterministic universe, as 
Laplace pictured it, carried the impli- 
cation that everything that men do is 
already determined. On this nine- 
teenth-century view man invents noth- 
ing and adds nothing to the world. 
Everything is wholly conditioned by 
past events. 
This interpretation of nature as a 
machine ticking inexorably on a wholly 
determined course was no longer 
implied by the facts of twentieth-cen- 
tury physics. For the facts of physics 
left no room for any theory which does 
not include an unpredictable chance 
element in every forecast. 
The facts of modern physics say, 
for example, that one half of the 
atoms in a piece of plutonium will 
undergo radioactive disintegration in 
25,000 years, but they do not say which 
half. Nor do they say of any specified 
atom in a piece of plutonium whether 
it will or will not disintegrate in the 
next 25,000 years, or in any other 
period of time. 
To the scientists of the mid-twentieth 
century there appeared no possibility 
that there could be hidden somewhere 
a theory which would allow them to 
make exact forecasts of this kind about 
the small-scale events in the atom. 
The concept of chance, as it entered 
into modern physics, did not mark any 
relaxation of scientific rigour. It was 
as clear and well defined as was the 
principle of strict cause and effect in 
the past. The area of uncertainty 
with which it was necessary to sur- 
round predictions was as well formulat- 
ed and as intellectually lucid as was 
once the point of certainty. These 
were the tools of the new science, 
more supple and less familiar than 
those of the past, and highly practical. 
but no less scientific for that. 
As science and all knowl- 
edge came to be regarded as personal 
activities, the scientist was placed in 
a new relations to this theories. Isaac 
Newton did not think of himself as 
inventing the law of gravitation, and 
Charles Darwin did not think of himself 
as creating the theory of evolution. 
They thought of themselves as uncov- 
ering what had always been there. 
Each pictured the law which he dis- 
covered as wholly objective, something 
which existed in itself, as positively as 
a stone or a clockwork. 
The modern scientist saw this as too 
simple and too impersonal a view of 
knowledge. He presumed that the 
laws of nature did have an existence 
in themselves but that their character 
was more delicate, more elaborate 
and immensely more varied than any- 
thing that men were able to trace. 
Therefore the order that the scientist 
could find in nature was surely only 
one of many orders which might be 
found. And the particular order found 
by the scientist was thus in part crea- 
ted and imposed by his own imagi- 
nation. . . 
The twentieth century thrust the 
achievements of its scientists into 
daily life at a breath-taking rate. The 
legend of the remote scientist, living 
in a world of his own thoughts and 
blundering into discoveries whose 
practical importance he did not under- 
stand, survived énly in the comic 
strips. No sciéntist of the mid-twen- 
tieth century, however abstract his 
work, could be sure that it would not 
sooner or later have a technical appli- 
cation. Few would be so rash as to

boast that their work could not concei- 
vably do anyone the least practical 
harm or the least good. 
Yet the new and remote worlds 
within the atom, the cell or the uni- 
verse which the modern scientist 
explored demanded such specialized 
knowledge and techniques in order to 
be perceived that they set the scien- 
tist apart from his fellows. He pos- 
sessed the key to mysteries as inac- 
cessible to the layman and as crucial 
to his well-being as those which any 
priesthood had monopolized in other 
societies. 
we, " bo bod Neste co a1 I . Iculated tl A 
  
The public had to depend on him 
and to give him its trust and support; 
he, in turn, faced the age-old problem 
cf how to communicate the meaning 
of his knowledge to those who must 
act in the light of it and whose actions, 
in turn, affected his work. For the 
scientist no longer saw himself merely 
as a man who supplied others with 
the facts and left them to make what 
they could of them. Understanding 
that what he found, however factual, 
had practical implications, he came to 
recognize a responsibility for bringing 
these implications home to others. 
     
In turn, the practical world influenced 
the direction of scientific advance. 
This was not a wholly new develop- 
ment, for the direction in which science 
has looked, its background interests 
and its long term problems, have 
always been influenced by the preoccu- 
pations and the needs of the societies 
in which scientists have worked. 
Each society and age has created a 
climate of interest in its special 
problems. The fundamental scientist, 
immersed in this climate of interest, 
has tried his gifts on such of these 
problems as have challenged his curio- 
sity; and his choice of specific prob- 
lems may have been more or less 
directly determined by the existence of 
facilities for research enabling him to 
pursue the lines of investigation which 
he finds challenging. . . 
As science pervaded more and more 
aspects of life, societies looked to 
their scientists to contribute to national 
survival and well-being; science itself 
became an instrument of national 
defence and a means by which natio- 
nal industry could compete in world 
markets, public health could be achie- 
ved, air and road accidents reduced, 
long-distance communication perfected, 
agricultural production promoted. 
R addition the tremendous 
cost of equipment required for experi- 
mental work, especially in the field of 
nuclear physics and in the exploration 
of outer space, made generous support 
essential; even the wealthiest of the 
American universities found themsel- 
ves hard pressed to equip laboratories 
where their nuclear physicists could 
engage in pioneer research, and sev- 
eral of them joined together after the 
second world war to support such a 
laboratory in common. Furthermore, 
many problems could not be studied 
effectively by a single scientist but 
required the collaboration of a group of 
specialists, and the organization and 
funds to bring them together and 
support their work . . . 
By no means all scientific discovery 
in the twentieth century, however, 
depended on costly experiments or 
the co-operative work of many specia- 
lists. Patience and imagination often 
proved more important than complex 
equipment in yielding new scientific 
insights, especially in the biological 
and social sciences. Important charac- 
teristics of the scattering of light 
know as the Raman effect, were disco- 
vered by the Indian physicist Chandra- 
sekhara Venkata Raman with a mini- 
mum of equipment and much careful 
mathematical work, in 1928 . . . 
The close link between scientist, 
technician and layman placed a burden 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE 
23

The new scientific outlook 
and its impact on the arts 
on the scientist to make the implica- 
tions of his findings clear and under- 
stood by others. In the twentieth 
century this became an ever more 
necessary and more difficult task. It 
was more necessary because the 
impact of “science on the life of 
mankind forced non-scientists constan- 
tly to make judgments involving its 
use, and they needed understanding 
in order to make such judgments 
soundly. It was more difficult because 
of the lack of a language in which 
scientists could communicate to 
laymen. 
The imperative need for the scientist 
to bring home to others the meaning 
of his discoveries was intensified at 
mid-century by the threat to the very 
existence of mankind from nuclear 
explosion and the release of radio- 
activity. 
These fruits of scientific effort not 
only placed on scientists the heavy 
responsibility of making their implica- 
tions understood; they faced the 
scientist with a basic ethical conflict. 
In choosing what search to pursue and 
what instruments to make, scientists 
were forced to think in terms of their 
ethical duties as well as their duty to 
uncover laws of nature. The judgment 
and understanding required of the 
scientist went beyond his competence 
as a specialist in his field. 
But as the sciences grew more 
specialized and their researches more 
detailed it became difficult for the 
individual scientist to present his 
thought in the total context of science. 
With his special vocabulary of words 
and symbols he was often scarcely 
able to communicate even with other 
scientists outside his field who also 
had special vocabularies and symbols 
of their own. To make the nature 
and meaning of his discoveries under- 
stood by the public was even more 
difficult . . . 
Yet a scientific outlook did come to 
penetrate into the daily life of the 
time and some of the new scientific 
concepts, at times diluted or distorted, 
became part of current thought. In 
areas where the scientific point of 
view was accepted—and these were 
constantly growing, both geographi- 
cally as more people came in contact 
with modern techniques and in wider 
areas of daily life—people came to 
respect facts and to approach them 
rationally and empirically. This was 
particularly noteworthy not only in 
practical matters relating to industry or 
travel but in the field of health where 
new knowledge supplanted traditional 
practices at a strikingly rapid rate. 
Perhaps the most significant evid- 
ence of the extent to which science 
had entered the outlook of the twen- 
tieth century was the acceptance of 
change as a continuous and funda- 
mental phenomenon, and adaptation 
to its accelerating pace. Not only 
was this true of the western countries 
where the expectation of change had 
become a well-established attitude. In 
the historically more static societies 
of the East, where change had been 
looked upon as defection from eter- 
nally established norms, it became 
the order of the day. 
Equally fundamental was the concept 
of new potentialities which science 
brought and the public accepted. All 
over the world people who for cen- 
turies had taken poverty and disease 
for granted saw in the methods and 
the fruits of science a new possibility 
of human fulfilment. In the first half 
of the twentieth century this vision 
altered the outlook of mankind. 
Specific concepts from the new 
science were incorporated into atti- 
tudes and thought. Chief among these 
was the idea of relativity. Though 
often enough misunderstood, the idea 
of relativity as a revolutionary concept 
in physics impressed on moralists, 
artists and the man in the street the 
notion that, from other points of view, 
reality may appear different, and yet 
be as valid as that which they them- 
selves perceive. 
The concept of uncertainty also 
entered the popular mind and many 
people learned to think statistically in 
terms of chance and probability rather 
than in terms of the certainty of direct 
cause and effect. Concepts derived 
from psychological studies of learning 
and conditioning and Freudian analysis 
of personality formation entered into 
the lore associated with the rearing 
of children. The scientist's sense that 
the observer is inevitably a part of 
that which he observes was reflected 
in the inner perspective of the modern 
writer. And the fact that physics 
became concerned with atomic struc- 
ture also influenced painters and 
sculptors to portray what they saw 
as discontinuous structure rather than 
as surface appearance. 
In the swiftly changing world of the 
twentieth century science was thus an 
ever-growing force, constantly yielding 
new facts and new capabilities which 
brought changes in structures, acti- 
vities and relationships, often before 
it had developed the means to deal 
with the results of such changes. 
— Vol. VI, Pt.l, Chap. 6 
(The New Scientific Thought and its Impact) 
          
