APARTHEID
AND THE CHURCH
s EVENTY two per cent of
all South Africans and 94 per cent of
all white South Africans are Christians.
The doctrinal approach of the Dutch
Reformed Churches in South Africa
to race relations was that the Dutch
Reformed Church "could not associate
itself unreservedly with the general
cry for equality and unity in the world
today ... It is mostly a surrogate unity
and brotherhood, that men seek to
realize without Christ in a world
disrupted by sin . . ." The unity of
man already exists in Christ, and is
a supernatural organic unity... One
of the factors causing the imperfect
realization of the existing unity in
Christ is racial contrasts and racial
tensions, in South Africa as in the
rest of the world.
In April 1950 a conference of Dutch
Reformed Churches was held at Bloem-
fontein to define the church's policy
towards the African. Apartheid was de¬
fined as a way which seeks to lead each
section of the people In the clearest
and quickest way to its own destination
under the gracious providence of God.
The only way in which the permanent
subordination of one group to another
could be avoided was by total
separation; the nature reserves were
to be converted into true "Bantu
Homelands" with full opportunity for
development and self-government and
the replacing of the African in the
European industrial system.
After the riots at Sharpeville and
Langa in March 1960, nine leading
ministers of the Nederdultse Gerefor-
meerde Kerk issued a statement,
which, after protesting the "continuous
besmirching of our country, people
and church by untrue and slanted
information," and declaring that the
condemnations of South Africa "do
not always spring from Christian
responsibility but show signs of...
the hysterical efforts of the West to
overbid the East for the ' favour of
the non-whites of Africa for the sake
of the ideological slogan of self-deter¬
mination," went on to say:
"The Nederduitse Gereformeerde
Kerk has made it clear . . . that it can
approve of independent, distinctive
development, provided that it is carried
out in a just and honourable way,
without impairing or offending human
dignity. The Church has also accepted
that this policy, especially in its initial
stages, would necessarily cause a
certain amount of disruption and
personal hardship, for example, in
connexion with the clearing of slums.
The whole pass system must be seen
in this light."
The nine ministers issuing this
statement then approved of the prin¬
ciples of the policy of apartheid, but
also called for an improvement of
the wage structure for Africans, that
non-whites be treated by whites in a
more dignified manner so as not to
reap a harvest of hate and that "re¬
sponsible and law-abiding" non-whites
should not be "misled by the false
promises of agitators who are not
concerned about the utmost good of
the non-whites . . ."
In December 1960, as a result of an
Initiative on the part of the Anglican
Archbishop of Cape Town who had
publicly repudiated compulsory. segre¬
gation the World Council of Churches
sent a six-man delegation to consult
with representatives of its eight
member churches (1) at the Cottesloe
residence of the University of the
Witwatersrand. Five of the churches
sent inter-racial delegations.
T,
heir report, known as the
Cottesloe Consultation Report, stated
that while being united in rejecting all
unjust discrimination, widely divergent
views were held on the basic issues of
apartheid. Nevertheless it was possi¬
ble to make certain affirmations con¬
cerning human needs and justice as
they affected the races of South Africa:
No one who believed In Jesus Christ
should be excluded from any Church
on the grounds of colour or race;
adequate facilities should be provided
for non-white people to worship in
urban areas as well as in segregated
townships, there should be more
(1) Church of the Province of S.A., the
Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk of the
Transvaal, the Methodist, the Presbyterian,
the Congregational Union, the Bantu Pres¬
byterian, the Nederduitse Gereformeerde
Kerk of the Cape, the Nederduitse Her-
vormde Kerk of Africa.
effective consultation between the
Government and the leaders accepted
by the non-white people, there were
no scriptural grounds for the prohi¬
bition of mixed marriages, although
certain legal, social and cultural factors
might make such marriages inadvi¬
sable.
It was pointed out that migrant
labour had a disintegrating effect on
African family life, that the vast
majority of non-white people received
wages which were below the generally
accepted minimum standard for healthy
living, that the job reservation system
should give way to a more equitable
method of employment, that the right
to own land where one was domiciled
and the right to participate in the
government of the country was part
of the dignity of all adult men.
S
imultaneously, the Neder¬
duitse Gereformeerde Kerk of the
Transvaal and the Cape Issued another
statement which said that a policy of
differentiation could be defended from
the Christian point of view and
provided the only realistic solution to
the problems of race relations. The
Nederduitse Hervormde Kerk of Africa
the next day issued a press statement,
In which they dissociated themselves
from the resolutions passed and re¬
affirmed their faith in racial separation
in the belief that the ideals of Chris¬
tianity would best be served in that
way.
Opposition to the Cottesloe report
continued to grow. During March 1961,
the Nederduitse Hervormde Kerk
Synod met and decided by 487 votes
to 13 to withdraw from membership
of the World Council of Churches.
The Transvaal Synod of the Neder¬
duitse Gereformeerde Kerk meeting
in April 1961 also decided to withdraw
from membership of the World Council
of Churches, since the Cottesloe reso¬
lutions were at variance with the
policy of the Church and were
embarrassing to the Government. In
October the Cape Nederduitse Gere¬
formeerde Kerk Synod decided by a QO
large majority to reject the Cottesloe UÜ
report as "undermining the policy of
separate development"; the Synod
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

APARTHEID AND THE CHURCH (Continued)
34
also decided to leave the World
Council of Churches.
Individual members of the Dutch
Reformed Churches continued to
question South African racial attitudes.
In November 1960, 11 leading theo¬
logians of the Nederduitse Gerefor¬
meerde Kerk, the Nederduitse Her¬
vormde Kerk and the Gereformeerde
Kerk published a book "Vertraagde
Aksie" calling for a new outlook on
South African racial attitudes.
This resulted in the heresy trial of
Professor Geyser, one of the authors
of the book, before the Synodical
Commission of the Hervormde Kerk in
December 1961; he was found guilty
on one of three charges of heresy.
He decided to contest the findings in
the court of law, but an agreement
was reached out of court (in 1963) and
he was reinstated as a minister of
the Church.
In August 1963, the Christian Institute
of Southern Africa was established; it
was inter-racial and inter-denomi¬
national. The Director of the Institute
was the Rev. OF. Beyers Naudé, who
had been elected Moderator of the
Southern Transvaal Synod of the
Nederduitse Kerk, had defended the
Cottesloe resolutions and was editor
of an inter-church monthly magazine
Pro Veníate.
The Christian Institute came under
attack from certain Dutch Reformed
quarters. Prof. Verhoef of Stellen¬
bosch for example, felt that members
of the Christian Institute had made an
error in judgement: the Institute gave
the impression that it understood the
problems and the aspirations of the
Africans better than the "Boorekerk."
That apartheid is compatible with
Christianity has been denied by many
denominations in South Africa. The
Methodist Conference in 1947 and
1948 stated clearly that every human
being is entitled to fundamental human
rights. In 1952 the Conference
rejected the policy of apartheid as
being impracticable, contrary to the
interests of all sections of the South
African community and inconsistent
with the highest Christian principles.
This was reaffirmed in 1957, in 1958,
in 1959 and in 1960.
In 1960, the Conference
outlined a programme of Education in
Race Relations which included inter¬
racial study groups, pulpit exchanges
and visits between church organiza¬
tions. Moreover the possibility was to
be explored of setting up a pilot city
circuit scheme of a racially inclusive
Church.
In 1961 the Conference resolved to
proceed with the removal of racial
demarcation from its official records
and legislation. In 1963 the Confe¬
rence elected an African, the Rev. Seth
Mokitlmi as Its president.
The 1950 Provincial Synod of the
Church of the Province of South Africa
a self-governing church within the
worldwide Anglican communion (the
supreme legislature body within the
Church) made the following statement
on race relations:
"The Conference is convinced that
discrimination between men on
grounds of race alone is inconsistent
with the principles of Christ's Reli¬
gion . . . (we) believe that the effect
of much recent legislation is likely
to be the rigid division of the popu¬
lation into social classes with unequal
rights, privileges and opportunities,
and the relegation of the non-Euro¬
peans to a position of permanent
inferiority, and for this reason
condemns this legislation as incon¬
sistent with the respect for human
personality that should be characte¬
ristic of a Christian society..."
S1 everal Anglican clergymen
have made individual statements
against the policy of the South African
government. Trevor Huddleston has
protested particularly over the demoli¬
tion of Sophia Town; the Rev. Ambrose
Reeves has been outspoken in his
opposition to the government's policy
and was deported in September 1960;
the Rev. Michael Scott was imprisoned
for taking part in a non-violent
campaign against segregation, left
South Africa to take the case of South
West Africa to the U.N. and has not
been readmitted to South Africa.
In addition, in 1963 several Anglican
Bishops in South Africa made state¬
ments condemning the apartheid
policies of the government. In 1963
the Minister of Foreign Affairs was
reported as having said at a Nationalist
Party meeting that the time had come
to tell the bishops that it was not In
the interests of their Church to inter¬
vene in South Africa's political issues.
The Synod of Bishops meeting in
November 1963 issued this statement:
"In these circumstances, it seems
necessary to the Bishops of the
Church of the Province of South
Africa, now meeting in Synod in
Bloemfontein, to reaffirm their
unanimity in proclaiming their con¬
viction that the Church must openly
and fearlessly condemn all that it
believes to be evil and false In the
social, political or economic life of
any nation and, whenever the claims
of obedience to the State and God
are in conflict, it is to God that our
obedience must be given."
In 1952, 1957, 1960 and 1962, the
Catholic Bishops of Southern Africa
issued joint pastoral letters on the
situation in South Africa. In 1957 the
pastoral letter entitled "Statement on
Apartheid" condemned apartheid and
went on to say: "there must be a
gradual change . . . but change must
come, for otherwise our country faces
a disastrous future . . . This involves
the elaboration of a sensible and just
policy enabling any person, irrespec
tive of race, to qualify, for the enjoy¬
ment of full civil rights . . ."
The pastoral letter of 1962 was
headed "We Dare Not Remain Silent"
and said in part: "As Christian people
we dare not remain silent and passive
in the face of the injustices inflicted
on members of the unprivileged racial
groups..." In July 1966 the Bishops
again denounced apartheid and all
forms of discrimination which it
engenders.
Since apartheid, two great theolo¬
gical debates are being fought out in
South Africa.
The first, illustrated by the position
taken by the Bishops of the Church
of the Province of South Africa, is an
old one the obedience which a
Christian subject should give to a
State which promulgates what he
holds to be intolerably evil laws and
the right of his leaders to criticize
these laws.
The second theological debate is
primarily a debate of this century, and
in its acute form was initiated precisely
by the system of apartheid In a country
whose leaders were prominent Chris¬
tians. It was the meaning to be given
to racial equality and whether or not
the doctrine of the brotherhood of all
Christians pre-supposed a multiracial
Church.
ithin South Africa the lines
drawn were principally between the
Dutch Reformed Church, on the one
hand, and the English speaking Church,
on the other. But even within these
groupings the argument continued.
Geyser and Naudé and others within
the Dutch Reformed Church took
theological positions not unlike those
of the Bishops of the English-speaking
Church and that in spite of the strong
sanctions which could be imposed on
them to conform to the main trend
of thinking of the members of their
congregations and of their Synods.
Within the English-speaking Churches,
too, there were some missionary
leaders who advocated separatism
for Africans.
This debate was not confined to
South Africa, it was part of the
worldwide ecumenical debate of the
1950s and 1960s, although certainly
by 1965 the idea of a multi-racial
church was accepted by most churches
outside South Africa, and racial
equality took on the meaning of
multi-racialism, as opposed to racial,
separatism in the statements of
major Christian religions. The Dutch
Reformed Churches in South Africa
are being increasingly isolated, nnt
only by the withdrawal of some of their
groups from the World Council of
Churches, but by their theological
assumptions on the question of race.
o
»X
O
This text is part of a chapter from
the Unesco Report on Apartheid.
