APARTHEID
IN SOUTH AFRICA
The General Assembly of the United
Nations, has proclaimed March 21
"International Day for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination". In the
same resolution proclaiming this in¬
ternational Day, which coincides
with the anniversary of the Sharpe-
ville massacre in South África, the
Assembly again called on States
practicing racial discrimination or
apartheid to comply with the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimina¬
tion of All Forms of Racial Discrimi¬
nation and with the Universal Dec¬
laration of Human Rights.
At the beginning of this year, on
January 18, an important Unesco re¬
port on the effects of apartheid on
education, science, culture and in¬
formation in South Africa was made
public by the United Nations in New
York. This report will be published
in its final form in English and French
in some months time.
The present issue includes passages
from this document together with a
series of statements on the effects of
apartheid on South Africa's cultural
life. These articles have been spe¬
cially written for the Unesco Cou¬
rier by the distinguished South Afri¬
can writers. Alan Paton, Lewis Nkosi,
Dennis Brutus, Ronald Segal and
Breyten Breytenbach.
f~> BOTSWANA
(ex-Bechuanaland)
I SOUTH WEST
AFRICA
Mill' ,| Transvaal
SOUTH AFRICA.
M'y Orange
Bloemfontein
Cape
Province
Capetown
Cape of
Good Hope
SWAZILAND
LESOTHO (ex-Basutoland)
Transkei
Port Elizabeth 'Bantu reserves'
(approximate)

A
report prepared by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (Unesco) on
the effects of apartheid on education,
science, culture and information in
South Africa concludes that the policy
of apartheid is not only an inadmissible
answer to racial and group conflict
but is itself the major source of racial
and group conflict there.
The report, to be published later this
year by Unesco in its final form, was
prepared for the U.N. General Assemb¬
ly's Special Committee on the Policies
of Apartheid of the Government of
South Africa.
In its report, Unesco terms the situa¬
tion in South Africa "alarming" and
outlines in detail how discrimination in
the areas studied contributes to main¬
taining an ideology which it says is
"unacceptable to the world of today."
The 259-page report was prepared
by the Unesco Secretariat with the
help of various consultants and is
based essentially on official govern¬
ment publications and reports from
scientific and research institutions
within and outside South Africa.
D ISCRIMINATORY practices
at all levels of education, which keep
Africans at the most menial level of
society are outlined in the report. It
cites legislation and regulations which
require Africans to finance their own
educational institutions to a very large
extent through special taxation on them,
which limit the range of subjects offer¬
ed to them in school and which isolate
South African children of different eth¬
nic groups from each other. The report
also states that the overcrowding and
an insufficient number of teachers
for the most part poorly trained add
to a pattern which serves to prevent
Africans, and to lesser extent colour¬
eds and people of Asian extraction,
from playing a full role in society.
While there has been an increase
in the number of Africans going to
school, the report states this has been
achieved without a corresponding rise
in expenditure. In fact, the percentage
of net national income spent on African
schools is decreasing, the report adds.
The increase in school atten¬
dance, the report says, has been
achieved through the introduction of
double sessions in the first two years
of schooling, the policy of appointing
women teachers who are paid a lower
salary and the conversion of money
earmarked for school meals for expan¬
sion of education.
The sum allocated for school meals
has decreased from $1,758,960 in 1954
to $98,000 in 1966. Several surveys
among African school children, con¬
ducted around 1960, revealed that
60-70 per cent were recognizably suf¬
fering from malnutrition, 50 per cent
needed nursing and medical attention
and almost 10 per cent required hospi-
The term "white" is used for
people of European stock. The
term "African" replaces the word
"Bantu" which is at present used
by the South African Govern¬
ment to designate people of
African stock, except in direct
quotations where, if the word
"Bantu" was originally used, it
is retained. The term "Asian" is
used for people of Chinese or
Indian descent, and "coloured"
for those of mixed European and
African or Asian background.
The use in this issue of these
terms white, "African," "Asian"
and "coloured", has been un¬
avoidable, because of the nature
of "apartheid" itself. However,
the Unesco Secretariat rejects
the concepts of race and of
ethnic group relations that such
terms imply.
talization for diseases directly or in¬
directly attributable to malnutrition.
While there is no doubt that primary
level education, financed by the Afri¬
cans themselves, has expanded, the
position has remained almost stationary
at secondary and university levels,
according to the report. "That Africans
are being trained to 'take over' in the
Reserves cannot be supported either
by the numbers who graduate. . . nor
by the degree of administrative respon¬
sibility. That they are not being train¬
ed to play their part in a total South
African society is explicitely stated by
the South African Government itself."
The education section of the report
concludes: "The effects of apartheid
on education go far beyond the racial
discrimination that the facts and figures
of this report demonstrate. The most
deplorable effect is on the South Afri¬
can child whatever his colour. ..who
in all cases is educated within the res¬
trictions of an ideology unacceptable
to the world of today."
T
HE report investigates the
effects of apartheid on the employ¬
ment of non-white scientific and tech¬
nical personnel; on scientific organi¬
zation; on social field research and on
international scientific and technical co¬
operation. Among facts brought out
in the survey are the following:
There is little training available to
non-whites in engineering or in agri¬
culture where the need for non-white
specialists is probably greatest in the
so-called "Bantu Homelands."
The total number of non-white
doctors in 1960 was estimated at
around 130. The number of doctors per
head of population in that year was one
in eighteen hundred in South Africa
compared with one in eleven hundred
in the United Kingdom and one in
seven hundred and fifty in the United
States. Many scientific societies have
resisted government pressure to change
their constitutions so as to prohibit
membership to non-whites.
The difficulty which trained non-
whites experience in obtaining employ¬
ment. "This lack of suitable employ¬
ment opportunities undoubtedly dam¬
pens the enthusiasm of many a
potential non-white scientist and may
lead to mediocre performance and lack
of interest in scientific training," the
report states.
Besides taking up the influence of
apartheid on intellectuals, both "white" K
and "non-white," the report also consi- *
ders culture in the broader context and
gives details of the difficulties encoun-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

APARTHEID (Continued)
tered by non-white South Africans fac¬
ed with the official Government policy
of the separation of cultures.
The report cites the Bantu Laws
Amendment Act of 1964 which served
to create a migratory labour force of
Africans temporarily resident in urban
centres but without any permanent
rights. This Act, the report states, has
had important effects on the African
family. One of these has been the
disproportionate increase in African
male population in the suburbs of
cities. Another has been the break-up
of entire families' because of govern¬
ment refusal to permit husbands and
wives to live together.
That apartheid is compatible with
Christianity has been denied by many
denominations, according to the report,
although a 1950 conference of the
Dutch Reformed Churches, which
attempted to define that church's policy
towards the African, endorsed the solu¬
tion of "Bantu Homelands" and recom¬
mended the replacing of the African
in the European industrial system.
In the area of literature, the report
points out that major works by African
South African writers, writing in
English, have been banned as "inde¬
cent, objectionable, or obscene," and
that well-known African writers, if not
under house arrest, now live outside
South Africa.
serves "communism" under the Sup¬
pression of Communism Act of 1950.
According to the Unesco report, this
Act endangers freedom of information.
Under its clauses, the Minister of Jus¬
tice has the power to prohibit an
individual from attending a particular
meeting or playing any part in certain
organizations and may prohibit any per¬
son from living in a given area for
a period of time, as well as assign¬
ing him to a determined residence.
The Annual Survey of South African
Law of 1963 states that there were
7,500 banned publications.
The report concludes that in educa¬
tion, science, culture and information,
apartheid violates both in principle and
in practice the United Nations Charter,
the Constitution of Unesco, the Uni¬
versal Declaration of Human Rights,
as well as the standards which have
been set by the international commu¬
nity in conventions, recommendations
and declarations which have been
adopted within the United Nations sys¬
tem. Moreover, "separate develop¬
ment" as practised within the Republic
of South Africa, does not mean equality
between various ethnic groups in any
of the spheres with which Unesco is
concerned.
CQ
IN MEMORY
OF SHARPEVILLE
S
6
'OUTH AFRICA has had a
long tradition of library services. The
report states, however, that under the
policy of maintaining separate libraries,
the major libraries remain closed to
non-white South Africans. In Pieter-
maritzburg, the European library has
almost ten times the number of volumes
as the branch for non-Europeans.
Sports have also been affected by
apartheid. The separation of the
"races" in the field of sport covers
five different but related issues, the
report states. These include mixed
teams, inter-racial team competitions,
the participation of non-white players
in games played on fields of all-white
districts and the composition of foreign
teams visiting South Africa and mixed
audiences.
Through the Group Areas Act of
1950, which was later extended to
cinemas, non-whites may not be allow¬
ed to attend cinemas, theatre or opera
in a "white" district without a special
permit, and ¿whites" are not permitted
to attend cinemas and other entertain¬
ments in non-white areas.
While freedom of the press is part
of the Constitution of the Republic of
South Africa, the Government may
prohibit any publication which it deems

MYTHS OF SOUTH AFRICA
Two myths aro widely believed in South Africa: that the Dutch landed
in empty territory and that the early history of white settlement was
marked by the massacre of innocent whites by Africans. Early travellers
had very different tales to tell: "On Sunday November 26, 1497 the fleet
reached the inlet ... a number of Hottentots appeared . . . They were
very friendly"; or they "came with ail friendliness to trade with us . . .
The killing of our people is undoubtedly caused by revenge being taken
by the [Africans] when their cattle is seized ..."
In "Prejudice in the Classroom" (Johannesburg, 1966), Eleanor Hawar-
den points out that "if African peoples are presented to school children
solely as engaging in unprovoked attacks on white farmers and this is
the picture which most South African textbooks and teachers present in
both primary and secondary schools then though the facts of individual
attack may be correct, the total impact on the students and the picture
they form of past events, is untrue. It omits the attacks by Europeans,
the provocation suffered by the Africans, the loss of their lands, the
courage and chivalry with which the Ama-Xhosa fought in defending
their country from invasion."
Similarly, land tenure and its relationship to frontier clashes was one
of the key aspects of early South African history. Yet F.E. Auerbach
("Thp Power of Prejudice in South African Education," Cape Town/
Amsterdam, 1965) found that in the Transvaal no junior book explains
it and only one senior book deals with it.
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid

On March 21 1960, the crowd scatters as firing starts in Sharpeville
(South Africa). A few moments after this photograph was taken,
about one hundred Africans were killed and more than two hundred
wounded. The police had opened fire to disperse demonstrators
protesting against the law requiring non-whites to carry passes at
all times. A resolution recently adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly proclaimed March 21 as "International Day for
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination".
A COUNTRY DIVIDED
The following excerpts
are drawn from
the Unesco report
on the effects
of the policy
of apartheid on
education, science,
culture and
information.
S,OUTH Africa, a society in
which Africans, Asians and Europeans
co-exist in the same territory has been
the result of a long history going back
to the first European settlement in the
Cape of Good Hope in 1652. It is a
history not only of prolonged contact
(some of it friendly) between these
groups of people, but also a history
of conflict over land and cattle at
first, then over industrial opportunities
when towns grew up.
There were also conflicts between
the Boers, decendants of the first
Dutch settlers, and the English-speak¬
ing South African conflicts which
terminated in the Boer War and the
defeat of the Dutch-speaking Afrika¬
ners by the English colonizers.
About the mid-twentieth century,
then, the ingredients of the present
alarming South African .situation were
all present: the rivalry between the
Afrikaner and the English-speaking
South Africans which split the white
population into two main groups, the
suspicion and fear which most of the
white group felt for the Africans who
were numerically stronger, against
whom they had fought a series of wars
and whom they had traditionally treat¬
ed as a source of cheap labour.
There was also the coloured group
formed from a mixture of white, Hotten¬
tot and Malay elements and an Asian
group brought to South Africa in the
19th century as labour for the new
sugar plantations in Natal.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
7

A COUNTRY DIVIDED (Continued)
The myth of 'separate development'
At the end of the second world war
there was another factor on the South
African scene. White supremacy,
threatened occasionally over the
300 years of white settlement, was
challenged by the emergence of inde¬
pendent states in Africa and Asia.
On the political front the struggle for
independence was a struggle for one-
man one-vote, and had direct conse¬
quences for South African whites, who,
in framing the Constitution of 1910,
had resisted any effective participation
of non-whites in the political process.
There was another challenge; in all
countries arose a new demand for the
implementation of "Human Rights", a
demand encouraged by the United Na¬
tions Universal Declaration of Human
Rights of 1948. In South Africa this
meant a demand for equality of oppor¬
tunity on the social and economic
front and was thus a direct threat to
white privileges.
The Nationalist Party came to power
in 1948 on an appeal which rested al¬
most entirely on its promise to safe¬
guard and, if necessary, strengthen
"white supremacy." In its public state¬
ments the Government identified this
political, economic and social policy
with the ideology of "apartheid" which
was described in the 1947 Election
Manifesto of the National Party as
follows: "In general terms our policy
envisages segregating the most impor¬
tant ethnic groups and sub-groups in
their own areas where every group will
be enabled to develop into a self-suffi¬
cient unit. We endorse the general
principle of territorial segregation of
the Bantu and the Whites ... the Bantu
in the urban areas should be regarded
as migratory citizens not entitled to
political or social rights equal to those
of the Whites. The process of detri-
balisation should be arrested..."
F
8
ROM the beginning there
were two co-existing concepts of apart¬
heid. One was that the races should
be completely segregated into self-
sufficient territories. The other was
that apartheid was not to mean com¬
plete territorial segregation but a more
rigid enforcement of "non-white" social,
economic and political inferiority. From
1948 to 1965, the South African
Government moved in both directions.
On December 4, 1963, the Prime mini¬
ster, Dr. H.F. Verwoerd, stated
that ". . . we shall be able to prove that
it is only by creating separate nations
that discrimination will in fact disappear
in the long run."
It is certain that some idealistic
"white" South Africans hoped that the
incipient conflict in the South African
situation would be resolved by apart¬
heid. Further, many hoped that while
the political and economic aspirations
of the "African" majority and the
"coloured" and "Asian" minorities
would be met by "separate develop¬
ment" the privileges of a "white" South
Africa would be guaranteed.
The creation of Bantustans "Black
Homelands" from the scattered reser¬
ves and the establishment of the Trans¬
kei as an example of a semi-autono¬
mous state, are steps in this "separate
development."
I T is not necessary here to
go into the Government's case for
independent Bantustans or the case
against it. It is sufficient to note the
report of the United Nations' Special
Committee on Apartheid in South Afri¬
ca, September 13, 1963: "These moves
are engineered by a Government in
which the African people concerned
have no voice and are aimed at the
separation of the races and the denial
of rights to the African population in
six-sevenths of the territory of the
Republic of South Africa in return for
promises of self-government for the
Africans in scattered reserves which
account for one-seventh of the terri¬
tory. These reserves contain less than
two-fifths of the African population of
the Republic, while many of the Afri¬
cans in the rest of the country are
largely detribalised and have little
attachment to the reserves . . . The
creation of Bantustans may, therefore,
be regarded as designed to reinforce
white supremacy in the Republic by
strengthening the position of tribal
chiefs, dividing the African people
through the offer of opportunities for
a limited number of Africans and
deceiving public opinion."
One important step in any attempted
separation of the races was the enforc¬
ed removal of people of differing races
who had lived closely together.
The Population Registration Act of
1950 with its later amendments provid¬
ed for the classification of the South
African population into three main
groups: white, coloured and African
the Asians constituting a sub-group in
the coloured group. This classification
was fundamental to the whole Govern¬
ment policy of "separateness" for
each "race".
Control of the freedom of movement
of Africans has been achieved through
the "Pass Laws." A system of Pass
Laws was in effect before the Natio¬
nalist Party came to power; however,
these laws varied from province to
province. Some classes of "Africans"
were exempted from carrying them,
and in the Cape, while they existed
in theory, they were in practice no
longer required.
The Natives (Abolition of Passes
and Co-ordination of Documents) Act,
1952, repealed previous laws. Hence¬
forth all Africans were required to
possess a "reference book" which
contains detailed information about the
holder, including a space for efflux
and influx control endorsements. Fail¬
ure to produce the "reference book"
on demand is a criminal offence.
Between July 1, 1963, and June 30,
1964, 162,182 Africans had been pro¬
secuted for failing to register or to
produce these documents.
The Natives (Urban Areas) Consoli¬
dation Act of 1945 and its amend¬
ments together with the Bantu Laws
Amendment Act, N° 42, provided for
the compulsory residence in locations,
native villages or hostels of Africans
within an urban area. It regulated
the entry of Africans into the areas
and the place of their settlement. The
presence of an African in a prescribed
area for more than 72 hours is subject
to severe restrictions. To take up
work he must get permission from a
labour bureau, and to visit the area
permission must be sought from a
labour officer.
S
OME Africans are exempt¬
ed from these restrictions; for example,
those continuously resident in the area
since birth (who must provide proof
that they are entitled to be there.) But
even Africans who qualify to remain
in a prescribed area may be deemed
"idle" or "undesirable" and then be
ordered out of the area, forfeiting
their residential rights. Moreover,
there seems to be some confusion as
to what the exemptions are and to
whom they apply.
The Group Areas Act has been fol¬
lowed by a list of Group Area Decla¬
rations setting aside areas for the
exclusive occupation of one or other
population group. This Act has been
implemented in spite of repeated reso¬
lutions by the General Assembly.
The proclamations issued in October
1963 involved in Durban alone the
eviction of nearly 10,000 families, the
great majority of them Indians. In

The Extension of
University Education Act
1959 proposed to replace
attendance of non-whites
at the universities
which until then were open
to all races by
institutions for the
different groups :
Africans, Asians and
coloureds, each with its
own university, the
Africans being further
divided according to
tribal origins. The
Unesco report finds that
"neither enrolments,
nor degrees awarded,
justify the statement that
establishment of Ethnic
Group Colleges has
provided increased
university facilities for
non-whites." While 144
Africans obtained degrees
in 1956 and 182 in 1961,
there were only 105
in 1962.
Outside Durban University
(right), white and
African students protest
against racial
discrimination. This
demonstration took place
ten years ago ; today
it would be an extremely
risky undertaking. The
new laws are so
stringent that all
participants could be
arrested and detained
without charge for
nearly six months.
1964 the declarations were designed
to resettle virtually all of the 38,000 In¬
dians on the Rand.
Ejection orders are not confined to
situations in which there may be a
degree however small of mixed
residential districts; the orders were
framed to force non-whites out of the
town centres and to resettle them on
the outskirts. Thus, the joint minis¬
terial statement of February 1966
declared District Six one of the oldest
sections of Cape Town which had
been populated by coloured residents
for over 300 years, as a "white" area.
A coloured population of over 20,000
was to be forced to move.
In spite of the ideology of apartheid,
in spite of the uprooting of thousands
of families, the complete separation of
peoples into tribal and ethnic groupings
in South Africa has proved impossible.
The closely integrated economic struc¬
ture, the location of all the major
industries, all the mineral wealth, all
the important harbour facilities and all
the best arable land in that part of
South Africa which is outside the
reserves in white ownership has meant
that Africans as well as "coloureds"
and "Asians" remain dependent on
the town and farming complex of
"white" South Africa for a livelihood.
Even the Government's attempt to en
courage African-owned small-scale
industries in the Transkei has come up
against the relative poverty of the area,
the comparative lack of natural resour¬
ces and the lack of accumulated
capital.
For good or ill, "white" and "non-
white" South Africa remain economi¬
cally interdependent. If the non-whites
need the job opportunities at present
available in "white" South Africa, so
white South Africa could not maintain
its present industrial and agricultural
production nor the present high
standard of living without non-white
labour. In fact, whatever the stated
policy of the Government, there has
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
9

In 1961 an Indian, Dr Dorasamy Chetty,
a graduate of the University of the
Witwatersrand (South Africa) and the
London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, with many years of experience
on malaria eradication programmes in
the Far East with the World Health
Organization, was unable to obtain a
post in South Africa where he could
practice and teach preventive medicine.
' In 1962, "in terms of Government policy,
a highly qualified African doctor was
refused an appointment to the Liv¬
ingstone Hospital for non-whites in Port
Elizabeth because in his post he would
have had several whites working under
him" (A Survey of Race Relations,
Johannesburg, 1963).'
From the Unesco Report
on Apartheid
These Indian women (photo right),
officially classified in the so-called
"Asian" racial group, were forced,
with their families, to leave the city
and shift to the districts specifically
allotted to their group. Photo far right:
Johannesburg (1,100,000 inhabitants)
is the largest city in South Africa
and the most important industrial
and commercial centre.
A COUNTRY DIVIDED (Continued)
Photo Holmes-Lebel
10
been an increasing number of Africans
admitted to urban areas.
Between 1962 and 1964 the Afri¬
can population of Johannesburg in¬
creased from 609,100 to 706,389; the
number of African men employed in
Durban increased from 74,500 in 1946
to 136,000 in 1965. In the Western
Cape, the number of Africans em¬
ployed by local authorities, the Pro¬
vincial Administration, Public Service
Departments, agriculture and industry
increased from 1963 to 1964 by 7.5 %
(from almost 77,000 to a little under
83,000) and increasing numbers were
being recruited for employment through
the labour bureaux in the Transkei.
The main push of apartheid has
therefore been in the direction of more
rigid racial discrimination, with growing
inequalities in opportunities.
As could be expected, the policy of
apartheid has given rise to opposition.
There have been protests, demonstra¬
tions and riots from the non-whites,
while among whites opposition to the
Number of Africans admitted to and endorsed out of
during 1964 and the first three months
Admitted
the
of
main urban areas
1965
Endorsed out
Men Women
84,258 13,983
19,159 3,855
Men Women
1964	 156,352 18,747
First 3 months 1965 	 44,409 5,133
Government's policy has ranged from
criticism to more political involvement.
A minority can hardly succeed in
preserving its absolute supremacy in
all spheres without the use of force.
It is therefore not surprising that the
implementation of the policy of apart¬
heid has been accompanied by an
abuse of police power, a disregard for
the integrity of the individual and cen¬
sorship of the press.
The real or imagined fear of coun¬
ter-violence, has led those in power
to a multiplication of procedures
aimed at strengthening the system of
apartheid by destroying opposition.
Again and again during the post¬
war period, attention has been called to
the situation in South Africa with regard
to civil rights. One need only briefly
draw attention to the 90-day detention
clause in the General Law Amendment
Act, 1963, which when it was with¬
drawn was in fact replaced by the Cri-

Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
minai Proceedure Amendment Act.
Under this Act the Attcrney General
may issue a warrant for arrest and de¬
tention for a maximum of six months
(180 days) of a person who is likely
to give evidence for the State in any
criminal proceedings with respect to
certain offences, as long as that deten¬
tion is deemed to be in the interest of
such a person or of the administration
of justice.
The International Commission of
Jurists observed: "This must be one of
the most extraordinary powers that
have ever been granted outside a
period of emergency. It authorizes the
detention of an innocent person against
whom no allegations are made and no
suspicion even exists; it authorizes
detention in the absolute discretion of
the Attorney General. It denies the
detainee access to a lawyer without
special permission; and it precludes
the courts from examining the validity
Of the detention even within the al¬
ready very wide powers of the Act.
"It further authorizes the subjection
Of the detained witness to solitary con¬
finement for a period of six months
and, with the object, inter alia of
excluding, 'tampering with or intimida¬
tion' of any person, places him in a
situation where he Is in the almost
uncontrolled power of the police who
also have an interest in the evidence
he may give."
There are, too, the peculiar techni¬
ques of banishing, or listing persons,
and of banning.
Banishment is an action which can
be taken against Africans. The Native
Administration Act empowers the State
President, whenever he deems it expe¬
dient in the public interest, without
notice to order any tribe, portion of
tribe or individual African to move to
any stated place. Banishment has
been used, i.a, to remove from the
reserves persons who have been active
opponents of chiefs or of certain
Government measures.
In addition, emergency regulations
for the Transkei provide that any per¬
son suspected of committing an
offence under the regulations of any
law, or of intending to do so, or of
possessing information about an
offence may be arrested without war¬
rant and held in custody until the
police or prison authorities are satis¬
fied that they have fully and truth¬
fully answered all relevant questions
put to them. The offences include:
holding a meeting of more than ten
Africans unless with special permission
(church services and funerals are
exempted), making any statement or
performing any action likely to have
the effect of interfering with the autho¬
rity of the State, one of its officials, or
a chief or headman, or boycotting an
official meeting.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
11

A COUNTRY DIVIDED (Continued)
Salary of Africans : one-seventh that of whites
12
The person held in custody under
these regulations may not consult a
legal adviser without the consent of
the Minister of Bantu Administration
and Development.
Between January and April 1966, a
total of sixty-two Transkeians were
detained by the South African autho¬
rities.
Under the Suppression of Commu¬
nism Act, 1950, amended in 1962, a
person might be listed as member or
active supporter of the Communist
Party of South Africa (banned in 1950)
or of any other organizations deemed
unlawful (as the African National Con¬
gress, the Pan-African Congress and
the African Resistance Movement.)
In 1962 a list of 437 names of persons,
129 whites and 308 non-whites, was
published in the Gazette. At a later
date some were removed from the list;
others were added. The publication
of the names is merely for public
information, having no direct legal
consequences.
However, the Minister of Justice is
empowered to take certain actions
against a listed person. It should be
mentioned that the same actions might
be directed against certain other cate¬
gories, too, as persons convicted of
actions deemed to have furthered the
aims of Communism. Banning orders
of the most varying character might be
served. Thus, a person might be pro¬
hibited from becoming or being a mem¬
ber of specified organizations or orga¬
nizations of a specified nature.
Further, a person may be prohibited
from attending gatherings of any kind,
including social gatherings. Bans pro- '
hibiting persons from attending gather¬
ings are rather frequent. With certain
exceptions it is an offence to record,
publish, or disseminate any speech,
utterance or writing made anywhere at
any time by a person under such ban.
In addition a banning order may imply
that the person concerned is prohibited
from absenting himself from any stated
place or area, may be confined to a
town or a suburb, may be confined to
house arrest for a certain number of
hours, and on public holidays. It is
sometimes required that the person
shall remain at home for 24 hours each
day.
The publication of particulars in the
Gazette contains the date of delivery
of notice and the date on which notice
expires. The period varies, often it
is one or two years, and sometimes
five years.
At the beginning of 1964, 257 per¬
sons were subject to restrictions under
the Suppression of Communism Act.
The United Nations Special Com¬
mittee on the policy of Apartheid in
the Republic of South Africa gave the
number of persons "banned" as
approximately 600 in 1966.
While Unesco is not directly con¬
cerned with the economic and political
aspects of apartheid in the Republic
of South Africa, the policy of apart¬
heid has consequences for education,
science, culture and the dissemination
of information consequences which
follow logically from the philosophical
concept of man as conceived of by the
ideology of "apartheid", from the eco¬
nomic inequalities which the policy
creates and reinforces, and from the
political situation which severely
curtails freedom for all South Africans,
and in particular for the non-white
South Africans who form the majority
of the country's population.
N conformity with the ¡deal
of "separateness," Africans, Asians,
coloured and whites are educated as
independent groups within the popula¬
tion, the "separateness" emphasized by
the administrative structure of educa¬
tion, by methods of finance, by diffe¬
rences in syllabuses, and by different
levels of achievement deliberately
imposed to fit in with different expecta¬
tions in employment. Ultimately educa¬
tion is geared for the effective prepara
tion of the Africans for their future
occupations as unskilled labourers.
Higher training is intended only for the
small number of persons who can be
employed in skilled work in African
"homelands" or African "development
schemes."
The result of racial discrimination
in education and in the pattern of em¬
ployment is seen clearly in the field
of science. South Africa is facing a
chronic shortage of top-level man¬
power in science and technology as
well as in management. The shortage
cannot be remedied by relying on the
white population alone. Moreover, the
general repressive atmosphere is ini¬
mical to the development of a spirit
.of free enquiry and has led to the loss
to South Africa of some scientists of
great eminence, particularly ¡n the
field of the social sciences. The poli¬
tical atmosphere has also affected
recruitment of staff, particularly from
universities in the United Kingdom.
"Separate development" in the field
of culture has reduced to a minimum
all contacts between whites and non-
whites that are not purely of an eco¬
nomic nature. As in all other fields,
"separate development" is in fact
synonymous with "inequality of
access", but moreover, cultural apart¬
ness, as opposed to cultural interac¬
tion for which Unesco stands, has
limited the creative possibilities of all
South Africans.
Africans Coloured Asians Whites
Distribution of South African
population according to racial
groups 	 12,162,000 1,742,000 533,000 3,395,000
Income per capita 1960 	
Average salaries in mining, 1963
Average salaries in manufactur¬
ing, 1963	
87 Rands
(1)
152
422
346
44.40 »
109 Rands
458
660
603
City:
168
Non-City:
138
147 Rands
458
660
884
City:
168
Non-City:
138
952 Rands
2,562 »
2,058 »
1,694 «
360 »
Public Service, 1963 	
Maximum old age pension rates
(per annum) 	
Infant mortality rates. Number
of infants under 1 year of age
per 1,000 live births 1963 	
no figures
given 126.9 44.7 29.0
Percentage increase or de¬
crease of T.B. rates in 1963
over 1962 children under
5 years 	 plus 20.3 plus 7.5 minus 16.8 minus 7.0
(1)1 South African Rand = $ / .40

That policy cannot be separated from
principle is illustrated by the fact that,
whilst the South African Government
in its statements continues to uphold
the right to freedom of information, the
need to enforce the policy of apartheid
has affected the relevant legislation
and its application, the actions taken
denying in fact the principle of free¬
dom of information.
Apartheid is not only not an admis¬
sible answer to racial and group con¬
flict but is itself the major source of
this conflict. This is most serious in
relationships between whites and non-
whites, but the very heightening of
group awareness, which is part of the
aims of the apartheid system, should
per se intensify hostilities between
Afrikaner and English-speaking South
Africa, and, by the separation of Afri¬
cans into self-contained tribal units,
create a tribal nationalism leading to
increased inter-tribal rivalry.
The image of man to whatever
ethnic group he belongs or is made a
part of which results from the policy
of apartheid in South Africa, is an
image which is clearly the opposite of
the one to which the community of
nations is ethically and legally dedi¬
cated.
T
HE ill effects of apartheid
are not confined to the situation within
South Africa; "the practice of apart¬
heid and all other forms of racial dis¬
crimination constitute a threat to inter¬
national peace and security and are a
crime against humanity," as stated in
the Resolution on "Unesco's tasks in
the light of the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly of the United
Nations at its 20th session on ques¬
tions relating to the liquidation of colo¬
nialism and racialism," which was
adopted by the General Conference at
its 14th session (Nov. 1966).
The Secretary-General of the United
Nations emphasized in an address on
February 3, 1964: "There is the clear
prospect that racial conflict, if we can¬
not curb and finally eliminate it, will
grow into a destructive monster com¬
pared to which the religious or ideolo¬
gical conflicts of the past and present
will seem like small family quarrels . . .
This, for the sake of all our children,
whatever their race and colour, must
not be permitted to happen."
The group of experts, established by
the Security Council Resolution of
December 4, 1963, warned that "a race
conflict starting in South Africa must
affect race relations elsewhere in the
world, and also, in its international
repercussions, create a world danger
of first magnitude."
LU
o."
THE INVISIBLE WALL. That the Informal and personal contacts between people and pri¬
vate entertaining are important in the ordinary daily living together of any people no-one
will deny. The extent to which they can take place in South Africa is limited by the regu¬
lations governing eating together outside of the home, staying overnight in named areas
or in getting permission to visit "locations". It would be impossible for a racially mixed
group of South Africans to have tea or coffee together in any public place in the Republic.
Besides this, the whole atmosphere of mistrust between people, the basic suppositions
of the superiority and inferiority of racial groups, the difficult political problems, the
suspicion that Government-paid informers exist make meaningful human relationships not
only across colour groups, but within groups themselves, difficult to maintain. As long
as the present situation continues, one thing is certain South African culture (for whites
and non-whites) will become increasingly less creative.
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid
13
