GREAT MEN
GREAT EVENTS
Michael
Faraday
T
HE distinguished British scientist Sir Humphrey Davy was
once asked what he considered his greatest discovery.
"Michael Faraday," was his answer. The son of a blacksmith,
Faraday (1791-1867) had little formal education, but as a book¬
binder's apprentice, he became fascinated by the scientific
treatises in the books he bound. He devoured this knowledge,
attended scientific lectures and at the age of 22, was engaged
as laboratory assistant to Sir Humphrey Davy at the Royal
Institution in London. Thereafter, he was to perform experi¬
ments which yielded some of the most significant inventions
and principles in scientific history. He built the first rotary
electric motor (1821), the first transformer and the first dynamo
(both in 1831). Every generator, every electric motor and
transformer, every one of the innumerable pieces of electric
equipment all over the world operates today because of Fara¬
day's work in electromagnetism. Faraday also made notable
contributions to chemistry, including the liquifying of gases by
use of pressure and the discovery of benzine. His laws of
electrolysis linked chemistry and electricity and paved the way
for today's electro-plating industry. Faraday's outstanding
achievement was the discovery of electromagnetic induction:
that moving a magnet rapidly near a coil of wire produces an
electric current. A lady who saw his perform the experiment
asked, "But, Professor Faraday, even if the effect you explained
is obtained, what is the use of it?" "Madam", replied Faraday,
"will you tell me the use of a new-born child?"
Johann
Bernoulli
B«FORN in 1667, Johann Bernoulli, the distinguished Swiss
mathematician, came from a family which left Antwerp to
escape religious persecution and settled in Basle. Over the
next two centuries, the family produced so many scientists
that encyclopedias'today distinguish them by putting a number
beside their christian names, as in the case of kings. The
name of Johann Bernoulli, however, stands out above the rest.
As a young man he held a minor post in commerce and then
studied mathematics and medicine. In 1694 he was awarded
his doctorate at the University of Basle and the following year
became a professor at the University of Groningen. His next
post was at the University of Basle where he succeeded his
brother Jacob (a mathematician celebrated for his work on the
differential and integral calculus). A friend of Leibnitz, Johann
Bernoulli discovered the exponential calculus and was the first
scientist to determine the line of swiftest descent followed by
a body. Before he died in 1748, Johann Bernoulli trained a
number of young men who were also to become eminent in
science his sons Nicholas I, Daniel and Johann II, and Leonard
Euler. AH four made important contributions to the develop¬
ment of mathematics and physics.
Jonathan
Swift
J,IONATHAN Swift(1 667-1 745) was one of the greatest satirists
of all time and one of the most misunderstood. Many people,
not seeing what lies behind the savage irony of his work,
have represented him as harsh and misanthropic. Yet the
venom of Swift's pen contrasts sharply with the humanity
and charity he showed to friends, relatives and the poor.
He left all his modest fortune to build and endow a hospital
for lunatics, idiots and, as he put it, "those they call incurable."
Even his greatest work, "Gulliver's Travels," intended as a
ferocious indictment of human nature, delighted the world
instead of shocking it. The strange lands visited by Gulliver
had much in common with the countries Swift knew. The
tiny Lilliputians had the vices and weaknesses of ordinary
men. In the island of Laputa, where "wise" men were
engaged on fantastic projects, Swift parodied some of the
scientists and philosophers of his own day. Born in Dublin of
English parents, Swift was educated in Ireland where he entered
the church in 1695. The country vicar gradually became well
known through the writing of minor political tracts, but the
publication of "Tale of a Tub" made him famous overnight.
This satire on humanity in general and the church in particular,
and "The Battle of the Books," a parody of literary controversy
(both published in 1704) are still read for their comic commen¬
tary on human stupidity. With the "Drapiers Letters" (1724).
Swift foiled the British Government in its attempts to impose a
debased currency on Ireland, and five years later he published
perhaps his most terrible satiric pamphlet, "A Modest Propo¬
sal" that the people of Ireland eat their children as the only
way to keep England from starving them to death. Swift
continued to defend Ireland's cause and for the rest of his
life he was the idol of the Irish people.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
27

GREAT MEN, GREAT EVENTS (Continued)
28
José Enrique
Rodo
A,IMONG the score of brillant literary figures flourishing in
Uruguay at the turn of the century, the one who best embodies
the hopes and ideals of the times is the essayist and
philosopher Jose Henrique Rodó (1872-1917). A mostly self-
taught scholar, Rodó managed to reflect his vast culture and
love of beauty in a prose of extraordinary flexibility and
elegance, ill reflected in most of the translations of his works.
Rubén Dario, whose genius Rodó was one of the first to
recognize, was to say of him: "José Enrique Rodó is the
Spanish-American thinker of our times. . . I would say that
he is a sort of Latin Emerson, with a serenity originating in
Greece." For all his love of ancient Greece, Rodó had the
French philosopher Fenan for an ideological model. His own
life oddly resembles that of his master. But in a literary
magazine of which he was a co-founder in 1895, he became from
the start a penetrating critic of the new Spanish writing. He
analyzed and praised the work of the young Spanish-American
poets. "Ariel," a call to a new idealism published in 1900,
when the clouds of social change and revolution were already
gathering in the European skies, was a lesson on democracy
addressed to the Spanish-American youth; it is interesting
to note it has lately had quite a revival. The beginning of
the century was a time of social reforms, the heyday of the
liberalism and the moderation of which Rodó became a
champion. A plea for the protection of child labour made
a sensation in 1903, when he wrote a study on working
conditions in Uruguay. In 1909, Rodó published his master¬
piece, "Motives of Proteus": meditations, parables, aphorisms
and maxims whose central theme is the lifelong evolution of
man and his need to direct it through self-knowledge.
Georg Philipp
Telemann
S,MX thousand works, including 44 Passions, 100 oratorios,
40 operas and 12 cycles of cantatas, each of 52 works
composed the voluminous musical heritage left by Georg Philipp
Telemann, a gifted musician and the most prolific composer
of 18th century Germany. Born in Magdeburg in 1681, he
composed his first opera at the age of 12, an accomplishment
that displeased his parents who planned to make a lawyer
of this born musician. Aged 27 and already famous, he was
appointed as Kapellmeister at Eisenach where he met Johann
Sebastian Bach, became his friend and was later godfather
to Bach's son, Karl Philipp Emanuel. When Telemann died
in 1767 at the age of 86, his godson succeeded him as director
of church music in Hamburg. At that time Telemann's music
was admired in every part of Europe. But his works were
soon forgotten and some fifty years later Franz Schubert
condemned the world's neglect of a composer who he
considered as "a master among the masters". Today Telemann
is acknowledged as an innovator who was able to infuse
into the new classicism all the grace and vigour of Baroque
music.
Nicolai
Lobachevsky
FcOR centuries the world's basic textbook on geometry was
the "Elements" of the Greek mathematician Euclid written
about 320 B.C. For nearly 2,000 years no one presumed to
question Euclid's famous postulate that only one line parallel
to a given line can be drawn through a fixed point. The man
who challenged this by advancing his own "scandalous"
postulate that there are two parallels to the given line through
any fixed point was the Russian . mathematician Nikolai
Lobachevsky (1792-1856), who founded the new school of
"hyperbolic" or "non Euclidean" geometry. Lobachevsky's
entire academic life was linked with the University of Kazan
(a city on the Volga, and today capital of the Tatar Republic)
where he was a student, then a teacher and finally rector.
His searching mind was to question not only long-accepted
scientific beliefs but also, and as a result, some of the
foundations of the philosophy of idealism which affirmed the
a priori character of Euclidean ideas, without foreseeing that
this could ever be contradicted. Lobachevsky announced his
first studies on the new system of geometry in 1826 (when he
was 34) and completed it in 1855. Conceived and developed
independently, it agreed with conclusions reached by the
German mathematician Frederic Gauss and by the Hungarian
Janos Bolyai. The name of Lobachevsky thus remains
inseparably associated with non-Euclidean geometry and with
a striking revolution in human thought.
Petr
Bezruc
|N his homeland, Czechoslovakia, Petr Bezruc is one of the
best known and appreciated of poets, and some of his
poems have been translated into many languages. The poet's
real name was Vladimir Vasek. Petr Bezruc was the pseu¬
donym under which he wrote verses extolling the Czech
struggle for national rights and denouncing the social, economic
and ethnic oppression of his people by the Austro-Hungarian
empire. Petr Bezruc was born in Opava, Silesia, in 1867. His
father, Antonin Vasek, a schoolmaster and journalist, was one
of the Czech nationalists whose struggle against Habsburg
domination grew sharper towards the end of the 19th century.
Petr Bezruc's first verses were published in 1899 and many
of his poems were later collected in book form as "Silesian
Songs" (a selection translated into English was published by
Artia, Prague, in 1966). He was not a professional poet in the
sense of having literary aspirations. As he once put it: "Year
after year, the immense oppression weighed upon me... so I
wrote down these few poems to give voice to that oppression.
If they have had effect it is only the truth of rattling chains."

Vicente
Blasco Ibanez
V ÍCENTE Blasco Ibañez, born in Valencia, Spain, in 1867,
started writing' at the age of 12. At 14, he was already
completing, in Madrid, the works of a novelist who had engaged
him as his secretary. His youth was marked by incessant
pamphleteering and political protest, which forced him twice to
flee Spain and took him to jail about 30 times. He also was
elected six times to the Spanish Cortes. In 1909, tired of
politics, he went to Argentina, whose scene was to inspire
three of his most famous novels. One of them, "The Four
Horsemen of the Apocalypse," published in 1914 more as an
anticipation than an actual comment on the world conflict, was
the first international success among modern war novels,
opening to him the doors of the American literary market and
Hollywood fame. Blasco Ibañez died a millionaire. He wrote
no less than 30 novels which reveal his talent for creating
characters and his gift for conducting narrative action.
Charles
Baudelaire
THE "case" of Baudelaire is unique in the history of literature
already rich In examples of misunderstanding and dramatic
reversals of opinion. Charles Baudelaire, one of the greatest
names in French poetry, gained the recognition refused him
in his lifetime long after his death in 1867. Born in 1821, he
began to write at an early age. Among the poems in Les
Fleurs du Mal (The Flowers of Evil), a collection published In
1857, are some he wrote In 1842 and 1843. The book caused
a scandal and Baudelaire was prosecuted for offending against
public morals. Although such literary giants as Victor Hugo
and Théophile Gautier recognized in Baudelaire a writer of
startling originality, the poet's works were scorned by the
critics in vogue and he was wantonly vilified. It was perhapè
less his private life (somewhat wild and unrestrained for his
day) than the profound distress that imbued his poems and his
discovery of "modernity" (a word he coined) which earned
him the suspicion and hatred of contemporary society. That
society had no wish to question any of the established social
or literary norms nor to consider the possibility of the
metamorphosis of such values. Baudelaire created a new
poetical art that was to make its impact on French literature
and prepare the way for Rimbaud and Mallarmé. A brilliant
critic he drew attention to new aesthetic values in many fields.
In literature, for example, he revealed to his countrymen the
works of Edgar Allan Poe, in French versions that are
masterpieces of the translator's art. In music he analyzed
the revolutionary innovations of Richard Wagner. In painting,
his studies on Eugène Delacroix, Constantine Guys, Daumier
and Edouard Manet brought out the meaning of the new tones
and forms In colour and drawing. Baudelaire's personal
journals speak of his prolonged sufferings and his solitude
from which a serious illness delivered him in 1867.
Luigi
Pirandello
F OR nearly half a century, the name of Luigi Pirandello
dominated Italian Letters. When Pirandello was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Literature in 1934, two years before his death,
he had become a world-famous dramatist who had given the
theatre a new psychological dimension. Born in 1867 at
Agrigente in Sicily, he first taught Italian literature in Rome
and began publishing short stories and novels in 1893. Many
of these deal with the lower middle class milieu or the farming
communities in Sicily. Though Pirandello wrote some
300 stories and six novels, his work as a novelist has been
somewhat obscured by his fame as a playwright, though he
used the same themes in both media. Novels such as "The
Late Mattia Pascal" (1904) reveal the same irony, the same
compassion that inspired the author to create the contradictory
and vacillating characters found in many of his plays.
Pirandello's main themes are the necessity and vanity of
illusion, the multiform appearances, all of them unreal, of what
is presumed to be the truth; man is not what he thinks he is,
but he Is "one, no one and a hundred thousand" (the title of
a Pirandello novel) according as he appears to different
persons, and is always different from what he creates himself
in his own mind. Pirandello's plays have been translated into
many languages, and have taken their places among the
masterpieces of the modern theatre.
A
60th anniversary of the use of
Arabic in Egyptian schools
RABIC is today a language fully adapted to the needs of .
the 20th century with an abundant vocabulary of technological
and scientific terms which, as it continues to expand, constantly
adds new, expressive terms to the language of the Koran.
Scientific works, technical manuals, books and reviews on
science are written in Arabic or translated Into it. The up-to-
date vocabulary of the spoken word, with its mobility,
inventiveness and imagery is being grafted on to the traditional
written language, bringing with it the new ideas of the atomic
age and the era of space exploration. The swift renovation of
Arabic io all the more remarkable In view of the decline it
suffered for four centuries following the invasion of Egypt by
the Turks in 1517. Until the beginning of the 19th century
Turkish replaced Arabic which thus was in danger of becoming
a dead language. Since the first Arabic language university
was created in Egypt sixty years ago and the use of Arabic
was established for schools, the press and government
services, the language has recovered its vigour and powers
of adaptability. The Unesco General Conference in 1966
decided to add Arabic to English, French, Spanish and Russian
as a working language of Unesco.
Photo Unesco-G. Böhm
