THRUSTING SKYLINES. Burgeoning buildings are
transforming the skylines of scores of cities from Montreal
and Toronto to Edmonton and Vancouver. Airview shows
the downtown section of Toronto, capital of Ontario
Province. It is built on the site of an Indian village which
became an important fur-trading post in the 18th century.
Photo National Film Board of Canada

culture in the making
by F. Cyril James
One hundred years ago, vast colonial territories in North America agreed
on a basis for their union as an independent sovereign state. This was
the birth of Canada's Confederation. Here, Dr. F. Cyril James, Principal
Emeritus of McGill University, Montreal, reviews Canada's efforts over
the past century to realize its cultural identity and to develop its education
and science to the full.
D'URING the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, the world was
dominated by great colonial empires.
Canada was the first country to emerge
peacefully from one of those empires
as an independent self-governing sov¬
ereign state so that this year's centen¬
nial celebration of Canadian Confede¬
ration is of profound contemporary
interest.
In 1763, the year in which Voltaire
wrote his Treatise on Tolerance and
James Boswell first met Samuel John¬
son, the Treaty of Paris transferred
Canada from French to English rule.
The country was vast, some 4,000 miles
from the Atlantic to the Pacific and
2,500 miles from the American bor¬
der to the northernmost Arctic coast¬
line, but much of this territory was un¬
known and unexplored. The climate
was almost identical to that of Siberia,
and still is. The indigenous population
comprised some tens of thousands of
Indians and Eskimos.
Three groups of refugees, disinherit¬
ed by their own countries, laid the
foundation for the development of
Canada during the remaining years of
the eighteenth century and the opening
decades of the nineteenth aided to a
greater degree than is sometimes rec¬
ognized by both Indians and Eskimos.
The first group comprised the
French-Canadian habitants, the settlers
in Quebec abandoned by the seigneurs
and government officials who returned
to France after the Treaty of Paris.
The second comprised the Scottish
immigrants who flocked to Canada
after Bonnie Prince Charlie's army was
routed at Culloden preferring freedom
F. CYRIL JAMES, distinguished educator and
economist, was for 23 years Principal and
Vice-chancellor of McGill University, Montreal.
He has been awarded honorary degrees by
no less than 30 universities and institutions
of higher education in North America, Europe
and Asia. He is the author of numerous
books and articles on economics and higher
education. Among his books: "The Economics
of Money, Credit and Banking," 1930 (3rd ed.
1941), "The Road to Revival," 1932 and (as
co-author), "The Meaning of Money." 1935,
"Economic Problems in a Changing World."
1939 and "McGill the Story of a University,"
i960. Dr. lames is now Principal Emeritus of
McGill University and an honorary president
of the International Association of Universities.
in a bleak new country to the domina¬
tion of English and Hanoverian troops
in the highlands of Scotland. The third
group, the United Empire Loyalists, was
made up of those Americans who dis¬
liked the republicanism that engender¬
ed the War of Independence and, after
1776, trekked northwards to Canada so
that they might continue to live as
loyal subjects of the King of England.
Hundreds of thousands of refugees,
speaking different languages and most
of them impoverished, living in a
country that even today can feel bleak
and inhospitable during the winter
months! The prospect that a great
nation would emerge from such a cru¬
cible must have seemed remote al¬
most incredible but Canada had one
asset of supreme importance, the fur-
bearing animals that roamed its vast
forests.
Europe wanted furs: Canada had
them to export. French, Scots and
American Loyalists worked together to
develop the fur trade, based upon
Montreal and worked is the signifi¬
cant word in this context. "The Cana¬
dian fur trade at that time was probab¬
ly the hardest in which free men ever
engaged, and some of the feats on the
rivers astound the modern imagination.
The voyageurs paddled all day at the
average rate of forty strokes to the
minute, and over the portages they
had to carry both their canoes and
their trade goods on their backs." (1)
When, on March 29, 1867, the Par¬
liament of the United Kingdom passed
the British North America Act under
which Quebec, Ontario, Nova Scotia
and New Brunswick were incorporated
into the Dominion of Canada, agricul¬
ture and lumbering had replaced the
fur-trade as the foundation of the
Canadian economy.
Canals and railways were beginning
to provide cheap transportation for
bulky products that moved down to the
eastern seabord and steamships car¬
ried those goods from Halifax and
Montreal to the ports of England and
other European countries. The inter¬
national economy of the nineteenth 5
(1) Hugh MacLennan: "McGill, The Story of
a University."
CONTINUED ON PAGE 7

HIGHWAY
TO THE SEA
The St. Lawrence Seaway,
one of the world's
major engineering feats,
harnessed nearly 200 miles
of Canada's mightiest
river for deep-sea
navigation from Montreal,
the world's largest inland
seaport, to the head of
the Great Lakes. Since
1959, ocean-going ships
have been able to
traverse the 2,300 miles
from the Atlantic to the
farthest reaches of the
Great Lakes. On route,
between Lake Ontario
and Lake Erie, eight locks
on the Weiland Canal lift
ships 326 ft. up the
Niagara Falls escarpment
over a distance of
28 miles. On Lake Superior
ships are 602 ft. above
sea level. Top, ocean
vessel in the Seaway
moves incongruously over
a roadway spanned by a
lock beyond Montreal and
240 ft. above sea level.
Bottom, ship making for
the Great Lakes leaves
behind the lights of
Montreal. Islands (upper
left) have sincfe been joined
to create the site for
Expo 67 (seepage 12).

A CULTURE IN THE MAKING (Continued)
The surge to nationhood
century was already taking shape, and
Canada was an integral part of it.
By 1886, the Canadian Pacific Rail¬
way had been completed, spanning the
continent from the Atlantic to the Paci¬
fic Oceans so that the motto of
Canada A Mari usque ad Mare was
indeed a statement of fundamental
truth.
Canada had become a nation. It
was developing economically and poli¬
tically, but it had not found a cultural
identity.
Universities had long been in exis¬
tence. In the Maritime Provinces, Aca¬
dia, Dalhousie, King's College and the
University of New Brunswick had be¬
gun to admit students a generation
or more before Confederation. In
Quebec the Great Seminary founded
by Bishop Laval in 1765 had become
the university that bears his name and
a steadily increasing number of col¬
leges classiques were operating under
its auspices while McGill University,
endowed by one of the outstanding fur-
traders in 1813, was educating students
in Montreal. In Ontario, the King's
College that was to become the Uni¬
versity of Toronto had been chartered
in 1827 and Queens University in 1841.
Most of these, however, were at the
time of Confederation small and strug¬
gling institutions short of money and
teaching staff: they were not destined
to attain international reputation until
the twentieth century.
Much the same must be said of the
Royal Canadian Academy and the
Royal Society of Canada, which came
into existence during the generation
following Confederation so that, in
essence, the cultural institutions of
Canade were no more than feeble
copies ur those in Europe and, to some
extent, the United States.
Even in terms of railroad transporta¬
tion, Canada was still a yast country
that demanded the best part of a week
to cross from Halifax to Victoria. Local
communities were isolated to an extent
that it is hard for us to visualise.
The cultural revolution during the
twentieth century has been dramatic,
but it did not gather momentum until
the late 1920s and early 1930s and
came to full flowering only after the
second World War. As might be ex¬
pected in a country using two langua¬
ges but with no more than a minority
of bilingual citizens, the earliest deve¬
lopments were in the graphic arts
and in music.
To cite examples (and nothing beyond
this is possible in a short article) the
Group of Seven developed a recogni¬
zably Canadian school of painting soon
after the conclusion of the first World
War and Emily Carr deserves special
mention because of her effective use
of Indian motifs in her pictures. In
Montreal, during the years of the great
depression, the Symphony Orchestra
came to birth under the leadership of
Douglas Clarke, including from its in¬
ception both French and English-
speaking musicians. But, although
there was an orchestra, there was no
adequate concert hall.
As a kind of bench-mark regarding
the largest (and, to me, most fascinat¬
ing) city in Canada, it is worth record¬
ing that orchestral, operatic and ballet
performances were staged either in
the McGill University Gymnasium or
in the Forum (normally used for ice-
hockey) until the magnificent Place des
Arts was completed in 1963. Some
cities, notably Toronto and Winnipeg,
CONTINUED ON PAGE 9
Photo Canadian Government Travel Bureau
Audience at a mountain
chalet topping Mount
Royal, Montreal, listens
to a summer evening
concert by the city's
symphony orchestra.
Montreal is built around
this wooded mountain,
named in 1535 by Jacques
Cartier, discoverer of
Canada. Mount Royal
(750 ft. high) covers
500 acres and offers a
panoramic view of
Montreal, second-largest
French-speaking
city in the world.

Above, helicopter pilot scans the
horizon for geologists he has come
to pick up on Ellesmere Island.
Even on modern geological survey
operations there is plenty of
old-fashioned foot slogging to be
done. Right, the wastes of Canada's
northern forests hide immense
mineral deposists. Canada's mineral
production is worth an annual
$3,000 million and represents
40 per cent of its exports. Below,
geologist uses compass to check
direction of a mineral formation.
Photos National Film Board of Canada
Photo Paul Almasy, Pari
AIRBORNE GEOLOGISTS
About 15 years ago Canada's geologists estim¬
ated that more than two-thirds of their country's
sprawling 4,000,000 square miles were still
unmapped geologically. At this rate another
century would be needed to finish even a pre¬
liminary survey. Since then the helicopter has
increasingly entered the picture and, combined
in operations with fixed wing planes, it has
enabled the Geological Survey of Canada to
map geologically as much of Canada in a
decade as in the previous 100 years. Today
Canada launches nearly a dozen airborne op¬
erations a year on missions of vital importance
for a country so dependent on mineral wealth.
Today's flying geologist can cover
in a week an area that would
previously have taken a full season
by canoe, packhorse or on foot.
Here, a geologist in a
helicopter examines a glacier
on Ellesmere Island.

A CULTURE IN THE MAKING (Continued)
Leapfrogging barriers of distance
constructed splendid auditoriums a few
years earlier, but the Montreal bench¬
mark is relevant.
In a very real sense, this cultural
revolution that has given Canada a
new sense of national identity owes
much to the technological revolution
during the past few decades and to
the policies of the Government of
Canada.
The Canadian Broadcasting Corpora¬
tion, sponsored by the government, es¬
tablished a national network first by
wireless and later by television mak¬
ing it possible for all the people, no
matter how far away from the great
centres of population, to share cultural
programmes and events of national
importance.
The C.B.C. also spent money to com¬
mission new works from playwrights
and composers: it subsidised orches¬
tras and other cultural groups. Much
the same might be said of the Na¬
tional Film Board, another governmen¬
tal corporation, whose productions
were not only seen in all parts of
Canada but won acclaim at inter¬
national film festivals.
But if radio and television were the
first of the technological aids to the
emergence of a Canadian cultural
pattern, the aeroplane was the second.
When it is remembered that the eastern
coast of Newfoundland is one thousand
miles further from the western coast
of British Columbia than it is from
Paris, the significance of air travel is
apparent. As Trans-Canada Airlines
(another government corporation) de¬
veloped, one could cross Canada in
hours rather than days and Canadian
Pacific Airlines opened up the north-
land where there were no railways
and few usable roads.
T,
he Royal Society of Canada
and the more recently-created National
Research Council rapidly developed
into organizations where scholars and
scientists from all parts of the country
could meet and exchange ideas. The
National Conference of Canadian Uni¬
versities became a more lively and
effective body and more specialized
learned societies from classicists to
physicists came into existence.
All of these cultural trends, which
owed so much to modern technology,
were apparent before the end of the
second World War in 1945. They
would certainly have continued under
their own momentum but, in April 1949,
the Government of Canada gave a
powerful stimulus by appointing the
Royal Commission on National Deve¬
lopment in the Arts, Letters and Scien¬
ces with the Right Honourable Vincent
Massey as Chairman and the Most
Reverend Georges-Henri Lévesque as
Vice-Chairman.
The two years from 1949 to 1951,
when the Report of the Commission
was published, constitute a water¬
shed in Canadian cultural history.
Canadians were forced to look at
themselves and their institutions
broadcasting, art galleries, museums,
libraries, the theatre and universities.
They were forced to appraise their
own cultural image in contrast to the
familiar patterns of Europe and the
United States.
It is not possible here to
deal with all the recommendations of
the Report but two are significant
enough to demand emphasis. In
regard to the work of Canadian univer¬
sities, outside their formal programmes
of education, the Commission record¬
ed its opinion that:
"They are local centres for educa¬
tion at large and patrons of every
movement in aid of the arts, letters
and sciences. They also serve the
national cause in so many ways,
direct and indirect, that theirs must
be regarded as the finest of contri¬
butions to the national strength and
unity... Not only does the univer¬
sity serve voluntary groups, it is also
the fountain-head of a stream of
communal activities. University libra¬
ries, conservatories of music, collec¬
tions of pictures, films, gramophone
records, museum materials of all
sorts are placed at the disposal of
the public."
In recognition of these services, the
Royal Commission proposed that the
Government of Canada should make
annual grants to enlarge the revenues
of the universities and legislation was
promptly enacted to implement this
recommendation.
The second significant proposal of
the Royal Commission deserves to be
quoted in full:
"That a body be created to be
known as the Canada Council for
the Encouragement of the Arts,
Letters, Humanities and Social Scien¬
ces to stimulate and help voluntary
organizations within these fields, to
foster Canada's cultural relations
abroad, to perform the functions of
a national commission for Unesco
and... to administer a system of
scholarships."
Once again, the Government of
Canada promptly implemented the
recommendation and the Canada
Council was legally established with n
an initial endowment of $ 100,000,000. M
Not all of the cultural developments
that have occurred since 1952 can
be attributed to the Canada Council
CONTINUED ON PAGE 30

Racing with "skidoos", a
kind of ski scooter, is one
of Canada's latest wintertime
sports. Left, a skidoo takes
a corner during a race in
Quebec Province. This year
Canada is holding a special
centenary programme of
sporting and athletic events.
Spurred by the recent
development of oil and mineral
exploration, Canada has
become a massive producer
of transportable buildings,
including laboratories, schools,
banks and churches. Right
two halves of a housing unit
being shipped by road to
a site in the far north.
Photo National Film Board of Canada

A CULTURE IN THE MAKING (Continued from page 9)
but, in every field, it has exerted a
powerful stimulus on individuals and
organisations.
The Stratford Festival Theatre, in
Ontario, the Winnipeg Ballet in Mani¬
toba, and La Comédie Canadienne
(under Gratien Gelinas) in Quebec
to cite but three examples have
attained reputations throughout all
Canada and beyond her borders.
Among authors, of whom there are
so many that any name can be no
more than an example, Hugh Mac-
Lennan, Gabrielle Roy and David
Walker have received international
acclaim.
This developing consciousness of
national identity, together with the
greater personal contacts among
Canadians from all parts of the
country, has, however, produced prob¬
lems that were less clearly discerned
when communities were isolated and
the tempo of life was slower.
One such problem is that of langua¬
ge. As already pointed out, although
both English and French are the
legally-established languages of Cana¬
da, most Canadians speak only one
of them. In Quebec, a lawyer or a
witness .appearing in the Courts of
Justice had the right to use either
language so that Quebec lawyers
were perforce bilingual but this was
not the case in other parts of Canada.
In the Parliament, at Ottawa, spea¬
kers may use either language but
French-speaking members who wanted
to influence their English-speaking
colleagues had to become bilingual
until simultaneous translation of the
debates was introduced a few years
ago. In essence, most of the work
of the Government of Canada and
most business operations were, until
yesterday, conducted in the English
language outside the Province of Que¬
bec. Only one university the Univer
sity of Ottawa was officially bilingual.
This situation has changed consi¬
derably during the past few years.
An increasing number of government
officials are today bilingual and busi¬
ness enterprises are recruiting increas¬
ing numbers of men and women who
have command of both languages.
Radio programmes in both languages
now span the continent and there is
some hope that, when a new genera¬
tion has emerged, Canada may become
in fact, as well as in theory, a bilingual
nation.
This year is a centenary. The
International Exhibition in Montreal
Expo 67 which owes so. much to
Jean Drapeau, the dynamic Mayor of
Montreal, will have much from other
countries to show to Canada. It will
also have much that is truly Canadian
to present to the rest of the world.
Canada has reason to be proud of
its cultural development.
Photos © Agence Rapho, Paris
«fr, Wmt feur3.
30
FISHING THROUGH
THE FLOORBOARDS
Every January when "Tommy cod" or "whitefish" mount the St. Lawrence River to
spawn in its tributaries, villages of huts spring up on the thick ice (left). Every
comfort is provided electricity, heating, and even television. The fisherman breaks
the ice beneath a trap door in the floor boards and hangs his line from the ceiling.
Warm and comfortable, he sits and waits for the fish to bite (centre). As the
thaw begins (right) the fishing village disperses until next year.
