Photos © Günter R. Reitz, Hanover

Rameses
finds
a new home
The mighty colossi of Abu Simbel once more in place before
the facade of the rebuilt sanctuary. They were cut into
blocks, 15 to 30 tons in weight, lifted up a hillside and
carefully reconstructed. (Dissection of the two temples produced
well over 1,000 blocks of stone). Lines of saw cuts on statues
are hardly visible and will be filled in later. Above, the last
statue of Rameses II (on left) ready to receive its face. Large
parts of second statue, including the head, tumbled to the
ground long ago. It will be left in its present state.
Below, workers on the site attend a brief
ceremony marking the latest stage of reconstruction.
IX years after it was launched by Unesco,
the international campaign to save the monuments of
Nubia has attained its objectives. Sixty countries have
taken part in this unprecedented enterprise (see the
Unesco Courier, February 1960, October 1961, Decem¬
ber 1964, November 1965).
The United Arab Republic and the Republic of the
Sudan under Unesco's auspices and with the collabora¬
tion of these 60 countries have worked to save all that
could be saved as the waters of the Nile rose behind
the Aswan High Dam.
Twenty-two temples have been moved; all monuments,
inscriptions and rock carving have been inventoried and
photographed; all frescoes from the Christian period
have been removed from ancient walls and taken to
safety; teams of archaeologists from every continent
have explored 500 kilometres (300 miles) of the Nile
Valley; all archaeological sites have been reconnoitered
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
¿M.

RAMESES FINDS A NEW HOME (Continued)
and prospected, with the exception of a strip 80 kilo¬
metres (50 miles) long between the 2nd and 3rd Cata¬
racts of the Nile (the last area to be flooded) which is
still being explored.
The two famous temples of Abu Simbel, in the U.A.R.,
have been completely rebuilt and now stand 64 metres
(200 feet) above their original site, today under water.
Concrete domes are now being built above the monu¬
ments to support artificial hills designed to reproduce
the original settings of the temples.
Begun in April, 1964, the monumental task at Abu
Simbal will be completed by the spring of 1969 more
thon a year ahead of schedule.
International contributions from public and private
sources to save Abu Simbel totalled nearly $21 million.
This figure includes contributions already made or
pledged by 50 nations ($17,600,000), the yield from a
U.A.R. tourist tax introduced in 1964 ($860,000), proceeds
from exhibitions, particularly those organized in Japan by
Asahi Shimbun Press ($1 million), and sums collected
by the American Committee for the Preservation of Abu
Simbel ($1,300,000).
As a token of gratitude, = the government of the
U.A.R. is handing over certain Nubian temples and a
large collection of antiquities from other regions of
Egypt to museums in other countries. The temple of
Dendur has already been attributed to the U.S.A. and
that of Ellesyia to Italy.
It now remains to provide protection for the monu¬
ments on the island of Philae in the Nile. These tem¬
ples are downstream from the High Dam, and unlike
the sites upstream are not in danger of complete inunda¬
tion. They are, however, submerged to about half their
height. A plan for the work at Philae will be studied by
Unesco and tha U.A.R. Government in March 1967.
A

FACE-LIFT
FOR RAMESES
Giant crane lowers one of the last
blocks of stone from the colossi at Abu
Simbel towards its place on the new site
of the temple. This block (seen from
rear), is the face of Rameses II
cut away with an L-shaped section of
stone to anchor it in place. Hooks for
lifting are cemented into the block
with a synthetic resin compound.
I Rameses' face is swung round and
manoeuvred over gap between two
halves of skull. Operation resembles a
game with building' blocks played
on a monumental scale.
I Immense stone face back in its
3,000 year-old place. Cut up with
infinite precaution and lifted 64 metres
(200 feet) up a hillside, the
temples of Abu Simbel have risen again
in all their ancient majesty. On their former
site they would by now have been
submerged by the waters of the Nile.
Photos © Günter R. Reltz, Hanover
S
