THE EFFECTS OF APARTHEID ON CULTURE
The forbidden dialogue
by Lewis Nkosi
T
20
HE profoundest, most com¬
pelling impulses of South African
society have always been, and still
are, toward amalgamation. This is
perhaps the fact least frequently noted
about South Africa even by those most
opposed to the doctrine of apartheid;
but it is a fact which I think ought to
be set down straightaway not only
because it is true and evidence can be
adduced to support it, but because a
great deal of the legislative programme
of the Nationalist Party Government
since 1949 cannot be properly under¬
stood without taking this fact into
account.
It has also become fashionable in
writing about South Africa to empha¬
size the incompatibility of black and
white interests; yet left to their own
devices the races have always tended
to move closer, albeit unconsciously,
toward some form of integration.
Surely the most glaring proof of this
fact lies in the economic sphere; but
less obvious is a similar impulse at
work in the social sphere, which,
however denied and deeply buried,
continues to reaffirm itself and to agi¬
tate toward complete expression.
The very strong attempts to separate
the races by legislation, by force if
necessary, shows how strong this
impulse is. And how natural. The
State therefore feels compelled to uti¬
lise all its energies toward erecting
barriers against the secret, often deni¬
ed but natural tendency toward inte¬
gration; and it is my view that such an
occupation by the State is not only of
doubtful value but that it is positively
harmful to the cultural life of the
country.
That the blacks suffer untold hard¬
ships as a price for the maintenance
of the policy of apartheid is a fact
that cannot be denied even by the
proponents of apartheid. How often
has one been told that a certain amount
of hardship and injustice is inevitable
during the transitional period leading
to that perfect state of race separation
in which all races will enjoy true well-
being and in which they will experience
deep spiritual and material satisfac¬
tion?
What is not always noted is that,
though economically exploitative as
a ruling class, the whites are also
subject to certain very real deprivations
as a result of their determination to
live by a policy which would seem
to all reasonable men not only unrealis¬
tic but insane.
To say the very least, South African
whites are the most culturally deprived
community in Africa. Emotionally they
are just as stunted. White South Afri¬
cans cannot express certain emotions
which come naturally to most healthy
people simply because the State has
decided that the expression of such
emotions is subversive of the very
foundations of White Supremacy.
As a result they not only grow up
denying their innermost dreams, they
also learn to do without some of the
best works of modern world culture
(in literature, music, painting and intel¬
lectual discourse) either because such
works are considered subversive or
resuscitative of dreams that would be
better left covered, or because traffic
in culture with the outside world is
rendered almost impossible by the
maintenance of the policy of apartheid.
It must be remembered that a great
number of people active in the cultural
area are either non-white or white
people strongly opposed to a doctrine
of apartheid. Thus the white commu¬
nity in South Africa is becoming almost
as isolated in its privileged position as
are the blacks without privileges; for
not only must the blacks not see Harry
Belafonte with a white girl in his arms
in "Island in the Sun" but the whites
must not see Tony Curtis chained to
Sidney Poitier in the film, "The Defiant
Ones."
Indeed, a great number of mod¬
ern works of the best kind in the
post-war cinema are kept out of the
Republic of South Africa. The banning
of books and plays thought to be con¬
troversial is too well-known to need
reiteration. Under these circumstances
it would be surprising if the growth of
an indigenous South African culture
was not hampered and it would be
surprising indeed if the fostering of
standards on a par with the rest of the
world was not rendered almost impos¬
sible.
However, let us take a closer look
at the effects of apartheid on the grow¬
ing indigenous culture in the country
itself. I think I can write more effecti¬
vely about an area in which I myself
am interested. That area happens to
be literature.
I t seems to me that both
black and white writers are severely
impoverished by the limitations as well
as the schism existing in South African
national life, by a certain lack of shared
assumptions or sense of common na¬
tionhood, fostered by the persistent
and ruthless application of the policy
of apartheid.
For a black writer too much of his
emotional response is absorbed into
formulating his attitude toward apart¬
heid or finding his place in the revo¬
lutionary struggle; no matter where he
goes later on and no matter how bored
he is with politics he cannot be free
of the tragic burden of South Africa
until that country has freed its
14,000,000 non-whites.
Yet there are times when a writer
must suspect that his revolt against
the system is too easy, even glib, pre¬
determined rather than arrived at out
of a singular personal anguish; and

LEWIS NKOSI, South African author and
Journalist, was born in 1936 in Durban
where he was educated and later became
an editorial writer on the Zulu-English
newspaper "llanga Lase Natal" (Natal
Sun). He then joined the editorial staff of
"Drum" and of "Golden City Post" in
Johannesburg. In 1960 he was exiled by
the South African Government. In 1966
his collection of essays "Home and Exile"
shared second prize with Ralph Ellison's
"Shadow and Act" at the Dakar World
Festival of the Negro Arts. He now lives
in London where he is literary editor of
"The New African".
this revolt, so far as literature is con¬
cerned, must result in the formulation
of characters who are not only glib
and standardized but whose only claim
upon our imagination is that they are
caught in the apartheid mill. If we
confess ourselves bored with them we
then experience some guilt because
we cannot be sure that we are not
becoming unduly callous.
At the same time it seems to me
that the blacks in South Africa, no
matter how deprived economically or
politically, have a graver, far more res¬
ponsible attitude toward life. Where
white South Africans must manufacture
dreams and fantasies in order to main¬
tain some equilibrium between what
they really are and what they think
they are, the blacks have to learn quite
early to strip themselves of every illu¬
sion.
With the hindsight of modern psy¬
chology we all know what happens
to people who cannot face up to the
reality of their lives, who must live by
evasions and fantasies; a greater
burden is placed on writers or any
other kind of artists who belong to
such a community. Before they go on
to create anything of value they must
make an extraordinary effort to unlearn
everything they have been taught.
To put it more simply, in South
Africa, they must, for instance unlearn
what they are taught in schools: that
the whites, from their forefathers to
the present generation, are all heroes,
that the whites have the monopoly op
moral wisdom and intellectual enter¬
prise; the pain and the anguish which
attends the creative efforts of Afri¬
kaans writers at the moment is not a
matter for cynical amusement. It is an
agony of creative artists who must
break through a sealed cocoon in
order to see the world in its various-
ness or even to say something remo¬
tely relevant to their country.
Black writers do not have to make
any comparable moral choice; they do
not have to choose to oppose a system
which is patently contrary to all ob¬
servable reality; their colour makes the
choice for them; what they have to
do is learn to survive the system.
What they are prevented from doing
by a combination of circumstances is
exploring in depth that experience
which goes deeper than the present
apartheid setup, for there are times
when an affirmation of certain tradi¬
tional African values proves exasperat-
ingly difficult for black writers since
most of them are reacting to an ideo¬
logy which asserts again and again
that black and white people are irre¬
concilably different; that the African
mind cannot grasp certain nuances of
European thought; and, concluding
from the foregoing, that apartheid is
justifiable, indeed, the only realistic
policy to follow.
The result has been that black intel¬
lectuals in South Africa have had to
bend over backwards to prove that they
cannot only master the modes of Euro¬
pean thought but that they can beat
the South African whites at their own
game.
In the process they have neglected
to. examine those modes of thought or
cultural expression which are indige¬
nous and have sustained masses of
their fellow Africans undergoing the
process of urbanization. Consequently,
urban African music seems to me to
have provided the only example of
what South Africa can offer culturally
if she were left to develop in a natural
direction.
Music, because it is non-literal, is
not subject to the same limitations as
literature; it is hardly banned; also it
is less self-conscious in the modes it
adopts to express the agony of the
South African situation. The result has
been that popular urban African music
has provided a glaring paradigm of
what is happening to the underground
life of the nation.
The music is predominantly African,
which is as it should be, considering
the dominant numbers of Africans in
the country; but it is also eclectic; it
provides a moving illustration of cultu¬
ral diffusion in that part of the continent
which offers us the best laboratory for
the marriage of African and European
techniques and for the coming together
of European and African modes of
expression. Indeed, the phrase "popu¬
lar music" is meaningless if used in the
European sense of a music which offers
us fantasies about life, for South Afri¬
can urban music is nearer to the
blues.
hile black literature from
the Republic offers us glimpses into
an appalling situation of rare brutality
and anguish, the music not only shows
us this but goes further to affirm what
we should have known all along that
the oppressed in South Africa also
display an amazing form of resilience,
emotional certitude and optimism. On
the other hand, apartheid deprives
white South Africans of any real parti¬
cipation in such robust forms of
cultural expression.
In a short article of this nature one
cannot enlarge too much on this theme
but there is just one more disturbing
aspect trythe present cultural situation
in SoutK Africa which must be touched
upon; and that is the fear of the written
word as well as the brutality practised
against it.
It seems to me impossible to dis¬
cuss culture without discussing lan¬
guage; and language in the Repub¬
lic of South Africa seems to be work¬
ing under the severest of strains.
There are totalitarian regimes in the f\4
world, of course, in which language is ¿\\
subverted, debased, and made to serve
the interests of the regime by first
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE FORBIDDEN DIALOGUE (Cont.)
being raped and then being asked
to declare love for that which it loathes.
George Orwell's essay on this subject
and more recently George Steiner's
writings on German literature are
instructive.
White South Africans are prevented
from "naming" those emotions which
they may experience but which are not
sanctioned by the State, or they are
asked to give the opposite names to
what they truly feel. This is clearly
playing havoc with language, some¬
thing which is the very essence of
culture.
Consider, for example, what the
South Africans mean by immorality. In
South Africa a love affair between
black and white is regarded as unna¬
tural; therefore a law has been put on
the Statute Book called "The Immo¬
rality Act" which has nothing to do
with immoral acts as we understand
them: it simply means black and white
couples who feel love for one another,
even if they wish to marry.
I
11
he legislation by which
African students were deprived of
university education in the so-called
"white universities" is called "The
Extension of University Education Act";
the act by which the movement of the
Africans in urban areas was more
rigidly controlled was called "Abolition
of Passes and Co-ordination of Docu¬
ments Act.
I have to explain here that the Afri¬
cans are compelled to carry identity
documents called "passes" by which
their movements are controlled; there
have been more riots about "passes"
in South Africa than about any other
issue.
Therefore naming legislation which
was to secure a far more rigid control
of black people "Abolition of Passes"
takes on a more sinister implication as
soon as one remarks on that phrase
"Co-ordination of documents" for in¬
deed one begins to wonder what is
being "co-ordinated" if the law requir¬
ing Africans to carry "passes" is being
abolished.
This kind of abuse of language is
only indicative of a certain malaise
which is paralysing South African cul¬
ture. It is also indicative of a malaise
which compels the young, more expe¬
rimental Afrikaans writers to search
for a more poetic, transcendentalist,
symbolic language in order to comment
even remotely on the South African
situation. Otherwise it is doubtful
whether their writing, controlled as it
is by the Afrikaans publishers, would
ever see the light of day. In this res¬
pect both the literary pieces and the
paintings of a young Afrikaans writer
like Breyten Breytenbach become of
the utmost significance (see p. 27).
Apartheid and the 'All Blacks'
A white team cannot compete against a non-white team, nor can a white sprinter run in
the same race as a non-white sprinter. The Government's policy of apartheid applies not
only to South African teams inside or outside South Africa but also to foreign teams
visiting South Africa. The New Zealand "All Blacks" rugby team was due to visit South
Africa in 1967. New Zealand proposed to include in its team two Maoris. But the Prime
Minister of South Africa made a public statement: "Just as we' respect other people's
customs so we expect that when other countries visit us they will respect ours and that
they adapt themselves to our customs." The "All Blacks" decided not to tour South
Africa in 1967.
From the Unesco Report on Apartheid
