The early domestication 
H ow the first stages of the 
domestication of wild goats, sheep, 
cattle and pigs were achieved is not 
known, and is never likely to be fully 
understood. There are, however, a 
number of theories. The least accep- 
table is that the step was taken direc- 
tly from hunting practices, and in par- 
ticular by the capture and taming of 
animals for use as decoys. It is just 
conceivable that this may have been 
true of reindeer. 
of animals 
Another and contrary view depends 
upon the womenfolk having already 
made enough progress with agricul- 
ture for some extra food to be avail- 
able to tempt hungry animals. Again 
it has been suggested that in the con- 
ditions of post-glacial dessication the 
wild flocks and herds became more 
and more concentrated in the neigh- 
bourhood of water, and more and 
more open to human influence and 
control. 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

DOMESTICATION OF ANIMALS (Continued) 
Man's best friend 
becomes shorter in the muzzle 
The last two explanations are com- 
patible and can well be combined. 
“It happens that just in those regions 
of Hither Asia where ancestors of 
wheat and barley grew spontaneously, 
there lived also wild sheep, goats cattle 
and pigs. Now the hunters whose 
wives were cultivators had something 
to offer some the beasts they had 
hunted—the stubble on grain plots 
and the husks of the grain. As suit- 
able animals became increasingly hem- 
med in to the oases by the desert, 
men might study their habits and, 
instead of killing them offhand, might 
tame them and make them dependent”: 
(V. Gordon Childe, New Light on the 
Most Ancient East). 
One authority has put forward a 
theoretical time-sequence for the do- 
mestication of the different groups. 
First the scavengers, such as the dog, 
second, nomadic animals such as the 
reindeer, goat and sheep; third, beasts 
for which a settled life is essential— 
cattle and pigs; finally, animals that 
can be used for transport including 
the horse, ass and the llama. While 
the dog was certainly domesticated 
in Mesolithic times, and the horse 
not until after the Primary Neolithic 
period, the validity of the distinction 
between the other two classes is very 
dubious. 
However, at the Belt Cave in nor- 
thern Iran domesticated sheep and 
goats were found in the earliest, pre- 
pottery, Neolithic occupation dated by 
Carbon 14 to the first half of the sixth 
millennium, while pigs (the earliest 
known in the world) and cattle did not 
appear until the later Neolithic occu- 
pation dated to the second half of the 
same millennium. 
Ts evidence supports the 
priority of sheep and goats in order of 
domestication Nevertheless it may be 
a purely local state of affairs, and not 
too much weight should be given to it. 
It has already been suggested in dis- 
cussing the origins of the Neolithic 
way of life in general that it is wrong 
to look for a single precisely limited 
centre. Once the idea of taking par- 
tial charge of certain animals had got 
about, trials, some of them successful, 
are likely to have been made in a 
number of regions and by divers 
methods. 
The biological aspects of domestica- 
tion must be briefly considered. The 
beasts composing the early flocks and 
herds in the cradlelands of farming, 
and those later led into Europe, were 
usually much smaller than their wild 
counterparts. The cattle in particular 
(Bos longifrons) were as diminutive 
as the modern Kerry. The usually 
accepted explanation is that wherever 
possible men selected the occasional 
dwarf from among the wild stock, and 
continued to be best able to keep and 
to breed from the smaller, weaker and 
more docile animals. 
It was only much later when domes- 
tication was complete and irreversible 
that their human masters could afford 
to reintroduce a strain from the larger 
wild breeds and to select for size and 
weight. Most bodily changes that 
have taken place in domestic animals 
have been due to selective breeding — 
for example the increased woolliness 
of sheep. On the other hand there 
does seem some tendency at least in 
dogs and pigs to become progres- 
sively shorter in the muzzle, and for 
their coats to lose their natural pro- 
tective shading and assume bright 
colours and piebald markings. 
In spite of a human inclination to 
estimate sheep and goats very diffe- 
rently, it is in fact difficult to distin- 
guish between these two members of 
the sub-family Caprinae by their skel- 
etal remains alone, very slight differ- 
ences in the cannon bones and in the 
bones round the eye being almost the 
only reliable indication. In practice it 
has very often proved impossible to 
determine whether particular Neolithic 
peoples kept goats, sheep, or both 
together. 
All modern domestic sheep appear 
to be descended from three existing 
types of wild Ovis. The most impor- 
tant, because it was probably the spe- 
cies originally domesticated by the 
pioneer herdsmen of south-west Asia, 
is the Urial (Ovis vignei) which has a 
vast Asiatic range from the Elburz 
mountains to Tibet. It has a fawny 
brown coat with a darker band along 
the back; this is hairy on top but con- 
ceals wool below. The ram has large 
horns curving outwards and back- 
wards, the ewe small prick horns like 
a goat. 
If this was the breed first tamed in 
regions south of the Elburz (and rep- 
resented by those very early animals 
found in the Belt Cave), it was cer- 
tainly also the one first to be carried 
westward with the farming economy 
into Europe, for it is represented by 
O. aries palustris, the famous “Tur- 
bary” sheep of the earliest Swiss lake- 
dwellers. It was, indeed, the breed 
raised by most of the early Neolithic 
farmers of Europe. 
Another type of wild sheep with 
domestic offspring is the mouflon 
(Ovis musimon) with a rather more 
westerly range than the Urial; today 
varieties live in southern Europe 
(Sicily, Corsica and Sardinia) where 
they must originally have had a more 
extensive territory. It is also found in 
Cyprus; its area of distribution extends 
eastward from central Anatolia to nor- 
thern Iran. . . 
Ai wild species that has 
contributed to our modern stock is the 
Argali (Ovis ammon) at home in the 
highlands of central Asia. It is very 
large, and bears long horns making a 
forward turning coil. It is possible that 
such a powerful animal would not 
have found favour among the early 
domesticators. Its earliest recorded 
presence seems to be as a cross with 
Urial at Anau at the end of the Neoli- 
thic occupation there. Argali elements 
certainly spread westward and are 
dominant in the Merino breed. A 
beast apparently representing a pure 
Argali variety was found in deposits 
in the English Thames dating from 
Bronze Age times. 
It is still impossible to give any 
coherent account of the domestica- 
tion of what was probably man's first 
milk-giver—the goat. It is likely, 
however, that the bezoar goat of Tur- 
kestan and Afghanistan was the most 
important ancestral species. 
The big horn is the wild sheep na- 
tive to the New World. It was never 
domesticated, sheep not having been 
kept by the pre-Columbian people of 
America. 
All humpless breeds of cattle are 
believed to be descendants of the 
wild Bos Primigenius, or aurochs, that 
was a native of the plains from 
southern Russia to the Altais. The 
bull of this species is huge and carries 
wide, outspreading horns. Yet the 
cow (as is well shown among the Las- 
caux cave-paintings) has a much lighter 
build and more sharply curved little 
horns, and altogether looks less unlike 
the small, short-horned Bos longifrons 
(or Bos brachyceros) that composed 
the herds of most Neolithic farmers 
alike in the primary areas of south- 
west Asia, in Egypt and in Europe. 
— JACQUETTA HAWKES 
Vol. I, Pt. I, Chap. 10 (Farming)
