FOR FLORENCE AND
launched
on December 2, 1966
by
RENÉ MAHEU
Director-General
of Unesco
at the opening
of the International
Campaign for
Florence and Venice
4
f uring the first days of Nov¬
ember, Tuscany and Venetia were
devastated by floods of extraordinary
magnitude and violence. The damage
has been enormous. To the toll in human
lives and the loss of property were add¬
ed the destruction, in Florence and Ve¬
nice, of creations of the human spirit
which made the enchantment of the
culture and art of living that Italy has
given to the world.
In all, 885 works of art of the first
importance, eighteen churches and some
10,000 other objects have suffered. Sev¬
enty libraries and learned institutions
have been stricken. More than 700,000
volumes of archives comprising some
50 million items, of which 10,000 were
of inestimable historical and scientific
value, have been damaged.
Florence and Venice! The names
alone say why Italy's grief is ours. But
they indicate also why Italy's resolution
to preserve and restore everything that
can be saved will be the common pur¬
pose of us all. Venice sinking into the
waters, it is as if one of the most radiant
stars of beauty were suddenly engulfed;
Florence bemired, it is the springtime
of our hearts which is for ever disfigur¬
ed. We will not resign ourselves to
such disasters.
The General Conference of Unesco,
which has just concluded its fourteenth
session, has decided unanimously to
issue an urgent appeal "to the spirit of
fellowship of Member States to assist,
to the fullest extent of their means, the
efforts of the Italian people and autho¬
rities to preserve and restore cultural
property that has been or is in danger
of being damaged".
In so doing, Unesco in no way wishes
to take the place of the aid and co-op¬
eration, public and private, which Italy's
innumerable friends throughout the world
have spontaneously offered and are
prepared to furnish directly. The bro¬
therhood of man that the international
agencies seek to promote and to
organize is nurtured by the living springs
of natural and historic friendships bet¬
ween persons and peoples.
But Unesco, called upon by its Cons¬
titution to assure "the conservation and
protection of the world's inheritance of
books, works of art and monuments of
history and science" can, as the Italian
Government has requested, assemble
and distribute information regularly on
the needs, on the one hand, and offers
of aid on the other. In this way out¬
side assistance may be best directed by
stages, in agreement with the Italian
authorities, to meet the needs and fit
the possibilities of the situation.
Most important, Unesco can stimulate
international solidarity and that indeed
should be its rôle. Just six years ago,
from this very platform, my predecessor
launched a pressing appeal to the world
to save the monuments of Egyptian and
Sudanese Nubia which were threatened
to be flooded as a result of the construc¬
tion of the Aswan High Dam. Fifty
countries responded to that appeal.
Today it can be said that the safeguard¬
ing of the antiquities of Nubia is accom¬
plished or assured, including the unique
monumental ensemble of Abu Simbel.
I am sure that once again mankind will
not fail to acknowledge and act to save
its common heritage, thereby acknow¬
ledging again and reaffirming its pro¬
found spiritual unity.

N behalf of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
I address a solemn appeal to the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind
for the preservation and restoration of the damaged cultural treasures
of Florence and Venice.

I call upon the 120 Member States of Unesco, and first of all
upon their governments, to give generous aid in the form of money,
equipment and services to carry out this immense task of preservation and
restoration which will require several years.
I call upon museums, libraries, archives and learned institutions
in all the countries to put their experts, their laboratories and their workshops
at the disposal of the corresponding Italian institutions whose
installations and collections have suffered. I call upon those international
organizations of specialists which are closely associated with Unesco's work
in this field the International Council of Museums, the International Council on
Monuments and Sites, and the International Federation of Library
Associations and the International Council on Archives to promote and
co-ordinate efforts in this respect.
I call upon the writers, artists, musicians, critics and historians, indeed all
those and they are legion whose works have been inspired by the
treasures of Florence or Venice, to donate a part of what they have
gained they know better than anyone else that they can never repay their true
debt, which is a spiritual one and to help us with their talents in
reaching the public.
I call upon museums, art galleries, theatres, and concert halls, foundations
and private collections, which glory in the works we owe to the genius
of Florence and Venice, to organize exhibitions, performances, and
other events, devoted to Florence and Venice, the proceeds of which would go
to the Funds that have been set up in many countries, and by Unesco
itself, to receive voluntary financial contributions.
I call on the millions and tens of millions of persons who have visited these
famous cities, even if only once, and who have returned enriched for the rest
of their lives, to send one dollar or whatever they can to Unesco.
Finally, I also call on all those who have never been to Florence
or Venice, and many of whom may never have that chance, to contribute
something: be it money or work something of themselves.
Each one of us knows himself to be a member of the family of Man.
How then could any one of us remain indifferent to the fate of these most
precious jewels of our common human heritage?
Photo © Epoca - Giorgio Lotti
5
