THE ARCHITECTS
OF SILENCE
by Constantin Sframentov
In the construction of many modern buildings, too little attention
is paid to the problem of excluding city noises and those that echo
from floor to floor within the building. Yet effective sound-proofing
techniques exist and in many countries organizations have been
set up to encourage their use and improve their efficiency. It
is up to town planners, architects, local authorities and city
dwellers to insist on the use of proper sound proofing so as to
make the home a peaceful refuge from the rush, bustle
and noise of modern life.
D
Photo © Fotogram - A. Varge
O we need absolute si¬
lence? Those who have ever remained
for any time in a sound-proof chamber
know what a horrifying experience it
is. Absolute silence is contrary to
nature, an artificial creation of our
century. All of us at one time or
another have described a particularly
intense silence as "terrifying".
It is easy to imagine how dangerous
a completely silent car would be. It
would cause far more serious trouble
than the disturbing throb of its engine,
which our ear associates spontane¬
ously with the approach of danger.
Surprisingly then, noise has the dual
character of being both harmful and
useful.
When they produced that noisy
plaything, the automobile, for man's
gratification, Daimler and Benz cer¬
tainly never suspected that their gift
was to be, in a sense, the Trojan horse
of our civilization. We are now paying
a high price for the satisfaction of
having faster ways of transport: we
have to live constantly with the infer¬
nal din of motor traffic. Once again,
as so often happens, man is the victim
of progress, the slave of his own
invention.
So harmful is noise that it can some¬
times kill. The hooting of a car sym¬
bolizes this mortal danger. The noise
made by a motor horn two yards away
is estimated at 95-100 phons. It has
been established that man's visual
reaction drops by 25% when the noise
level rises to 90 phons. The possible
consequences of this need no ela¬
boration.
What, in fact, we are combating is
not so much noise as such (in acous¬
tics, all sounds are termed noise) as
its dual character. We are trying to
abolish noises that are harmful to
human beings, but not to get rid of all
noises, since this would deprive man
of a vital source of information. Radio,
CONSTANTIN STRAMENTOV of the
U.S.S.R. is an architect specializing In town
planning. He has written many studies on
urban development, particularly on arrange¬
ments for road traffic and the control of
noise in cities.

Absolute silence is no more welcome than uproar.
Anyone shut inside the sound-proof chamber
of an acoustics laboratory (below) quickly becomes
disturbed by slight sounds such as the beating
of his heart and pulse, his breathing and even
the movement of his eyelashes. These normally
imperceptible noises are heard with an intensity
that would» produce serious psychological effects
on anyone who stayed in the chamber for long.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris

ARCHITECTS OF SILENCE (Continued)
Using noise
to cancel
out noise
10
for instance, is a useful noise, while
music is simply a pleasant one.
In this article we shall often use the
word "phon" so it would perhaps be
as well to explain briefly what is meant
by the measurement of sound.
The physical unit for measuring the
intensity of sound is the decibel. But
the number of decibels does not give
us a precise idea of the receptivity of
the human ear. So we also have to
use a physiological unit, corresponding
to the subjective .perception of sound
by the average human ear. This unit
is the "phon".
The phon is the smallest variation
of sound perceptible to the human ear.
And the range of audible sounds bet¬
ween the threshold of audibility and
the point at which sound causes pain
is generally estimated as 120 phons.
The twentieth century has been
marked by the relentless invasion of
noise into everyday life. Yet no city
deserves to be called "modern" so
long as the sleep of its citizens is dis¬
turbed by the rumble of passing trucks.
In the daytime conditions are different
and the infernal roar of thousands of
automobiles crowding our streets and
highways scarcely bothers us at all.
It has become so familiar that it
seems to be merely a drone in the
background, especially since the in¬
crease in noise from1 year to year has
been fairly slow, as though to give us
time to become accustomed to it.
But now, in the 1960s, it has attained a
level of 80 phons on our main
thoroughfares. Here, to give a better
idea of what this represents, are some
figures for other sounds:
rustling grass ..	 10 phons
noise inside a light
vehicle 	 35-55 phons
normal noise inside a
house 	 40-50 phons
a moving tram 	 70 phons
motor cycle with silen¬
cer 	, 90 phons
pneumatic hammer at a
distance of 30 feet. . 100 phons
To take an extreme example, there
is the sad story of the metal pail which
was left by mistake inside a room used
for testing jet engines. Within a cer¬
tain time it had completely disintegrat¬
ed due to the sound vibrations set up
by the roaring engines.
Another point to remember is that
N
the range of sounds perceptible to the
human ear is relatively limited. On
either side of this spectrum are infra¬
sounds and ultra-sounds that we do
not perceive. And tests have shown
that inaudible noise, like an invisible
enemy, is even more deadly than the
noise we hear. However, enemy No. 1
is still the noise within the 0 to
120 phon spectrum.
James Watt (1736-1819) the British
engineer, once rightly remarked that
to uneducated persons noise is sug¬
gestive of power. A machine which
operates silently or without vibration is
obviously far less impressive than a
noisy one.
Some people still imagine that the
more noise there is, the more work is
being done. But tests made in post
offices, for instance, showed that when
noise increased from 75 to 95 deci¬
bels, productivity immediately dropped
Photo © Omnia, Bern
by 25 per cent, and mistakes made in
sorting mail increased four-fold.
Acousticians then placed sound-dead¬
ening screens between the employees,
reducing noise by between four and
five decibels, and even this small
reduction raised productivity by 5 per
cent. When noise was further reduc¬
ed by between 10 and 15 decibels,
productivity rose by 18 per cent.
The familiar exclamation, "Don't
make a noise", or "Quiet please" can
be translated into scientific terminology
as follows: "My work demands great
concentration and I must therefore pre¬
serve the connective functions of my
cerebral cortex. I cannot afford to
weaken the inhibitory processes and I
have to preserve the working capacity
of my nervous system."
Research of various kinds as well
as statistics show the harm caused by
noise as:

STRAINED EXPRESSION of pedestrian
in this busy street is one symptom
of noise fatigue. Not enough Is known
about the extent of the psychological
and physical ills caused by the
incessant noise to which many people
are exposed at work, in the street
and at home. But studies now suggest
that their effects are more serious
than was realized.
BOOMERANG EFFECT. Improved
techniques in Industry have reduced
the need for manual labour and speeded
up many kinds of work. But along
with power, machines produce noise
and this provokes new forms of
fatigue and» an increased risk of
occupational ills such as deafness.
Left, the air-hammer, being
used here to tamp down earth,
is one of the worst noise culprits.
MODEL 'TOWNS' are used by Soviet
city planners and acoustics specialists
to solve noise problems of cities now
abuilding or being planned. Below
noise measurements are made on
one of these models. Residential
areas are "insulated" from a main
highway by a series of non-residential
buildings seen on right of photo.
a frequent cause of street accidents
and mishaps at work
the source of disorders of the ner¬
vous system
responsible for hearing losses of
varying degrees
inimical to working efficiency
The campaign against noise cannot
be waged in isolation. The biggest
source of noise is transport (at least
in towns) and town-planners and
acousticians everywhere are confront¬
ed with more or less the same prob¬
lems.
In the Soviet Union the anti-noise
campaign is being promoted on three
fronts:
in hygiene and public health, through
studies of industrial working condi¬
tions, research into the effects of
noise on human beings and the
enforcement of noise control mea¬
sures;
in architectural planning, through the
use of more rational layouts for
towns and built-up areas, and
building and architectural studies,
including research into new methods
of sound-proofing houses;
in technology, through the develop¬
ment of new muffling techniques
and the manufacture of more effi¬
cient sound-proofing materials.
In modern industrial planning, in
metallurgy for instance, noise levels
often influence the design of a factory,
the various departments being arrang¬
ed according to the intensity of noise
they are likely to produce. The noiser
the workshop, the more massive the
noise insulating walls around it and the
more complex the screening devices.
In some cases operations are super¬
vised from observation posts. Other
arrangements to reduce the effects of
noise include remote-control posts,
closed-circuit television and special
rest rooms for workers.
Rolling mills are always controlled
from completely sound-proof cabins.
Workshops for assembling and testing
engines, where the noise cannot be
stifled at source, are isolated by heavy
screens and test benches are operated
automatically by remote control.
In the U.S.S.R. action has been
taken against abusive noise on a broad
administrative front. Regulations forbid
the use of certain vehicles on specified
routes and of noisy vehicles at night.
In August 1956 the use of motor horns
was made illegal in Moscow and the
noise level in the streets immediately
dropped by eight to ten phons. Since
then the steady increase in traffic has
to some extent cancelled out the bene¬
ficial effects of this regulation.
In our age of specialization, a new
technician has appeared in the field
of town planning and construction: the
expert who deals with the practical
problems of acoustics. Architects,
builders and acousticians now co¬
operate in planning how best to use
our urban living space.
To reconcile all the factors involved
is not easy. Controversies arise
between constructors and acousticians
on the one hand and automobile
industry engineers on the other. It has
also been found that modern architec¬
ture does not always satisfy the needs
of acoustics. The vast, flat surfaces of
modern buildings, it appears, are
acoustically less suitable for cities
than the tortuous carved stone of
"Baroque" architecture which diverts
noise and rapidly reduces its intensity.
Squares are usually thought to be
the noisiest places in a town, yet
tests show surprisingly that they are
less noisy than streets. City streets
may be likened to canals, with houses
acting as walls, between which all
sounds continue to reverberate until
they finally die out. In squares the
extra space helps to disperse the
sound waves which are also absorbed
by trees and gardens.
Ideally, noise should be eliminated
11

12
ARCHITECTS OF SILENCE (Continued)
at its source, but this is not yet practic¬
able, so for the moment efforts are
made to localize it by every means.
A miniature town, for testing tech¬
niques designed to eliminate the
scourge of modern city noise, has
been built on the banks of the Volga
River. The sources of urban noise
re-created in this artificial city provide
researchers with reliable data on
which to work and conditions in which
the vulnerable points can be identified.
Town planning in the Soviet Union
complies strictly with the principle of
separating industrial and residential
areas, and in this way city dwellers are
spared the harassment of excessive
noise.
Satellite towns without factories
have also been built and town planning
methods devised to reduce the vol¬
ume of noise, particularly by adapting
the design of main streets to the needs
of the buildings flanking them.
Reconstruction and renovation of
cities offer opportunities for eliminating
or reducing many sources of noise.
Green spaces and protective screens
are incorporated in street designs so
as to surround buildings with a "wall
of silence".
Such solutions, with the exception
of the planting of trees, can hardly be
said to improve the appearance of a
town. The acoustician, working in this
case not with the architect but in oppo¬
sition to him, conceals the buildings
behind a screen. So what is there left
for the architect to do except to seal
the windows hermetically and use
thicker panes. And that implies the
installation of air-conditioning itself
a source of noise.
So the answer is to reach a compro¬
mise. The appearance of a town
cannot be sacrificed to meet the
demands of acoustics, yet acoustics
must be taken into account for the
sake of the health and tranquility of the
inhabitants.
Some people are always hopeful
that a scientific innovation will come
along to solve the problem. Physicists,
for instance, propose using one evil to
suppress another. As an antidote to
noise they suggest using electronic
apparatus whose loud speakers would
emit sound waves with oscillations of
the same amplitude as that of the
unwanted noise, but in inverse phase.
The resulting interference, they say,
would wipe out the noise.
Whatever methods are used, the
"music" of town noises has to be re¬
written completely and rendered, if not
truly harmonious, at least acceptable
to the human ear.
