Numerous scientific institutions are
helping to prepare the General History
of Africa, particularly the network
of institutes of African studies set up
with Unesco's assistance in ten African
countries. Their contribution to the
historical studies will include the
recording and analysis of the oral
tradition. This work has a high priority
since the keepers of these traditions
are probably the last generation which
can provide the data needed by historians.
Above, interior of an ultra-modern
library building at the University
of Ibadan (Nigeria).
KENNETH ONWUKA DIKE, the Nigerian
historian and former Vice-Chancellor of the
University of Ibadan (Nigeria), is Scientific
Director of the Unesco project for a General
History of Africa. Professor Dike was chair¬
man of the International Congress of Afri-
canists which held its first meeting at Accra
(Ghana) in 1962 under the sponsorship of
Unesco. A distinguished authority on historical
research and on higher education in Tropical
Africa, Professor Dike has written many
studies, including "Trade and Politics in the
Niger Delta, 1830-1885" (Oxford University
Press, 1956) and "Origins of the Niger Mis¬
sion" (Ibadan University Press, 1957).

L ast month the Unesco Courier reported on the Scientific
and Cultural History of Mankind now in course of publication in various
languages under Unesco's auspices. Another international publishing
project of unprecedented scope and importance will be the General
History of Africa. Unesco's General Conference approved the idea in
1964 and the preliminary stage was completed last year with the appoint¬
ment of Professor K. Onwuka Dike, former Vice-Chancellor of the
University of Ibadan, Nigeria, to be Scientific Director of the project.
The preparation and publication of the History of Africa is scheduled
to take ten years (1965-1975), for which Unesco will contribute $500,000.
Work will be undertaken in collaboration with the International Congress
of Africanists (an organization created in 1962 with Unesco help) and
many other international and national scientific and historical institutes
of African studies.
The General History of Africa will comprise several volumes and will
represent the most comprehensive work on Africa's past ever attempted.
An abridged edition designed for a wider readership is also planned.
This unique venture will mobilize the combined research of historians,
archaeologists, linguists, ethnologists and other scholars from Africa and
other continents.
The History of Africa will be not only an account of events and political
institutions, but- also of countless other aspects of Africa's past : the
spread of techniques, the migrations of populations, the influence of
caravan routes and trade, and the various other cultural, commercial and
social interrelations between North Africa and Tropical Africa.
The emergence of independent African states has awakened every¬
where in the world (including Africa itself) a need to know and under¬
stand the peoples of Africa and their contributions to universal culture.
The General History of Africa, it is hoped, will help to fill an important
gap in. our knowledge of this great continent and thereby foster better
international understanding between the peoples of all countries. Here,
Professor Dike reviews ' recent developments in thé' study of African
history.

THE SCIENTIFIC STUDY
OF AFRICA'S HISTORY
by K. Onwuka Dike
T is something of an irony
that, although written sources on the
history of many parts of the African
continent antedated- the Christian era,
African History as an academic disci¬
pline, is largely a post World War II
development.
This statement is particularly true of
Africa South of the Sahara. Written
sources abound on Mediterranean
Africa from the days of the Carthagi¬
nians, the Romans and the Byzantines,
on Ethiopia since the introduction there
of Christianity in the fourth century
A.D., on Africa north of the tropical
forest since the eleventh century, on
the coast of West Africa since the
fifteenth century and on the larger part
of the continent since the beginning of
the nineteenth century, through the
accounts and journals of geographers,
explorers, missionaries and colonial
administrators.
This is not to say that scholars paid
no attention at all to Africa before the
Second World War. Academic inte¬
rest in Egyptian and North African civi¬
lization is of long standing, but North
African history was looked at mainly
as part of Asian history and its impor¬
tant links with Africa South of the
Sahara were hardly ever studied and
assessed.
Indeed, individuals and organizations
had scholarly insight into the languages
and ethnography of the southern por
tion of the continent. But none of
these organizations was primarily con¬
cerned with African history, which
until recently, remained beyond the
intellectual horizons of the universities.
Nor were the considerable writings of
administrators and social anthropolo¬
gists between the Wars generally
prompted by the necessity for the
administration to understand the Afri¬
can way of life and to investigate the
root-causes of African discontent and
riots, geared to African history.
Although in the last century Russian
explorers like Eduard Ivanovich Eykh-
val'd and A. V. Yeliseyew contributed
to our geographical knowledge of
Africa north of the Sahara, it was not
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
9

AFRICA'S HISTORY (Continued)
Vast untapped source material ETHIOPIA'S
until after 1952 that African Studies,
generally, began to receive serious
attention in the Soviet Union. As late
as 1956 none of the one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-seven his¬
torical associations and agencies in
the United States and Canada was
remotely concerned with the study of
any part or aspect of Africa.
In Britain a few years ago, the autho¬
rities of the University of London were
very sceptical when a degree course
in African History was first mooted and
waited until 1963 before establishing a
Chair of African History. Perhaps in
the academic world today, Professor
Trevor Roper of Oxford University is
not alone in his view that African His¬
tory is no more than "the unrewarding
gyrations of barbarous tribes in
picturesque but irrelevant corners of
the globe."
I
10
HE great majority of the
three hundred million inhabitants of
this continent are descendants of those
who have lived on it for several thous¬
and years. The story of these peoples
and the vast land they inhabit repres¬
ents a very considerable part of the
history of human society. The actions
of Africans have not only shaped the
pattern of human history on this con¬
tinent, but have also played their part
in the development of the civilizations
of the New World, Europe and Asia.
The real scientific study of history in
the modern sense of that term may be
said to have started in Africa with the
work of the famous Tunisian historian
of the fourteenth century, Ibn Khaldun.
He emphasized the great importance of
sociology to history, describing the
past largely by observing the interac¬
tion of state and society and by ana¬
lyzing the development of the various
elements of society.
Unfortunately, his work has, until
recently, had too little influence on the
study of history, for the medieval world
was little concerned with history, pre¬
ferring theology, law and rhetoric. It
is true that since the eighteenth cen¬
tury Europe has paid a great deal of
attention to the study of history. But
because of the abundance of written
documentary evidence, her scholars
adopted, not the sociological method of
Ibn Khaldun, but the legal and the bio¬
graphical, concerning themselves main¬
ly with the decrees, wars and politics
of kings.
When, in the nineteenth century, this
approach began to be broadened to
take account once again of social and
economic factors, documentary evi
dence had become so overwhelmingly
important for the European scholar
that he tended to equate written docu¬
ments with history. He began to take
the absence of documents to mean the
absence of history, the absence of any
events worthy of historical study.
Under the colonial regimes, this view
of history flourished in Africa. It bols¬
tered up the colonial ruler's propa¬
ganda that the African had no history
worthy of record and that the history
of the European rulers constituted the
sum total of African history.
Needless to say that this view of
history greatly hindered the develop¬
ment of African historiography, for
undoubtedly, there is a dearth of docu¬
mentary material on African history.
And as long as African historians were
brought up in the traditions which
regarded documentary evidence as the
sole material for historical analysis,
they were working in a difficult cir¬
cumscribed position. Either they pro¬
duced only what may be called chro¬
nicles or they got carried away by
flights of fancy and wrote polemics in
place of history.
Fortunately, the writing of African
history has made some progress in the
last few years. The identification of
history with the abundance of records
has been proved false. There is now
no need to belabour that Africa has a
history worthy of study at all levels
of intellectual discipline.
More than that, it is now generally
accepted that the history of Africa must
be the history of the African peoples
themselves that their actions, not the
actions of the invaders, must be the
focus of African history. Each new
work, each new edition of older works,
shows increasing consciousness of this
point of view.
I«VEN now that we have
become more conscious of the proper
subject matter of African history, we
are still faced with the problem of the
material at our 'disposal. The written
material gathered so far on African
history is not only scanty, it also
consists largely of evidence by outsi¬
ders either in the European languages
or Arabic. The bulk of it exists in
the metropolitan archives of colonial
powers, and the material tells us much
more about the actions and intentions
of the invaders than of the action and
intentions of the Africans themselves.
Because this external evidence is
still the principal source, the proper
writing of African history continues to
be inhibited. In spite of the increas-
Photo t? Paul Almasy, Paris
ing desire of many historians to des¬
cribe properly the role of Africans, the
actions of the invaders still remain
disproportionately large in African his¬
tory. Outmoded and untenable myths
continue to dominate the interpretations
of the African past. I need to give
only two examples of these myths.
First, there is the Hamitic hypothe¬
sis, the disreputable theory that Ne¬
groes have made no contribution to
human progress, that "the civilizations
of Africa are the civilizations of the
Hamites." This theory, based largely
on the scanty Arabic sources and a
dubious interpretation of some legends
of origin in Africa, continues to be can¬
vassed in spite of the criticism of scho¬
lars like Greenberg, in spite of the
clear evidence of Negro contributions
to civilization, including some of the
best known plastic arts in the history
of the world.
Secondly, there is the attempt at a
pseudo-economic interpretation of Afri¬
can history, which sees all social and
political movements in Africa from the
sixteenth to the nineteenth century as
motivated solely by the slave trade. It
is, if you like, another Hamitic theory,
that nothing went on inside Africa in
those centuries that was not connected
with European trade along the coast.

ANCIENT CIVILIZATION
There is evidence that a
protohistorical Ethiopian civ¬
ilization existed several
thousand years before the
Christian Era, though it left
no monuments. About 2,000
years ago travellers from
Egypt who penetrated to the
Abyssinian highlands found
a flourishing civilization and
large cities. One of Ethio¬
pia's best preserved monu¬
ments is the giant obelisk
at Aksum. Standing 24 me¬
tres (nearly 80 ft.) high, it
dominates the tombs of the
kings of Ethiopia's Axumite
Kingdom founded over 2,000
years ago. Ethiopia's an¬
cient legends are still told
graphically in brightly col¬
oured paintings. Among the
best known is the story of
Solomon and the Queen of
Sheba and the birth of Me-
nelik, first Emperor of Ethio¬
pia, whom Ethiopians believe
was the son of Solomon
and the Queen. Painting,
left, depicts the court of
Emperor Menelik.
©
To get behind those myths, to tackle
seriously the writing of African history
despite the scantiness and the nature
of the written sources, is the problem of
African historiography today.
My first suggestion is that we must
accumulate at different centres in
Africa the bulk of the existing docu¬
mentary evidence on African history.
In the past, the study of African history
has been held up by the quite remark¬
able dispersal all over the world of
the relevant source material. This
material includes important African
works taken out of the continent by
colonial rulers and other visitors.
The centralization of this material,
in Africa, will relieve scholars of the
enormous trouble and expense involv¬
ed in so many unnecessary journeys
from one end of the world to the other,
in quest of material for the study of
our own land. Fortunately, we now
live in the age of the microfilm and
the zerox process, and what I am sug¬
gesting is therefore practicable.
But of course the accumulation of
source material does not merely mean
the recovery of documents at present
preserved overseas. It means also,
and most important, the recovery and
organization of material at present lying
disregarded and disorganized in Africa.
This is a task of almost frightening
immensity. On the side of written
documentary material alone we are
only just beginning to appreciate the
size of the problem.
0.|NLY now is it being realiz¬
ed, for example, that colonial governm¬
ent, missionary and commercial records
in European languages are not the only
written sources for the history of the
continent outside the North African
coastlands. We have hardly yet be¬
gun to take into account the fact that
many of the peoples of Subsaharan
Africa have for several centuries been
using Arabic as an official and literary
language for many different types of
written intercourse.
We have really only just learned
also that the Swahili and Hausa lan¬
guages (to name only two) have been
written down extensively in the Arabic
script, and may therefore, for all we
know at present, have produced a fur¬
ther unsuspected source of written
material.
Again how many of us also realize
how far private African citizens such
as the Efik Chief, Antera Duke, were
using European languages for writing
in their private intercourse as far back
as the eighteenth century? The private
papers of African families are a poten¬
tial source of historical material which
to date has hardly been investigated
at all.
But private papers tend to be kept
by their owners under even worse con¬
ditions than one finds in government
offices, and their long-term preserva¬
tion will undoubtedly depend on their
deposit in proper archive repositories.
Private owners of documents must
therefore be persuaded to allow gov¬
ernmental or learned institutions to
preserve their papers for them.
There is, again, I am sure, an overall
lack of attention to the question of Ara¬
bic archives, both public and private.
We are recovering material dating from
the seventeenth century onwards in
Northern Nigeria; but it is noteworthy
that we are also recovering important
private material in areas not usually
associated with Arabic documentation
such as southern Yorubaland.
At the same time we are conscious
that we are only just beginning to
exploit this field which holds out great
promise for the future. I strongly sus¬
pect that all over West Africa it will
be found that Arabic material exists in
private hands on a scale hitherto quite
unknown. Collection of written mate¬
rial in such languages as Kanuri,
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
11

AFRICA'S HISTORY (Continued)
70 centres now exploring Africa's past
Hausa, Nupe, Fulani and so on, which
have long used the Arabic script, has
also to be attended to.
Yet the accumulation of written mate¬
rial is only a small part of the task
which faces us, and it is perhaps the
easiest to encompass if sufficient
effort is made. There are many diffe¬
rent types of unwritten sources which
we have to study before we can hope
to come near to an understanding of
the African past. More and more
attention is being paid to the value of
oral traditions and social anthropolo¬
gical studies of African countries. But
the importance of this material to the
historian is vitiated by a lack of proper
analysis.
There is need for a more systematic
approach to the question of oral tra¬
dition. The anthropologists who pio¬
neered this field of research are not
themselves agreed on the proper inter¬
pretation of oral history. What is more
they have worked too much in isolation
from the written records and from the
historians who have the information
and the analytical training to make
substantial contributions in this field.
The same, of course, is true of the
historians. Both in our training and in
our research we have not always made
enough use of the work of the social
anthropologists.
RE
12
».ESEARCH into the African
past has made tremendous strides in
the last twenty years and in the learn¬
ed circles African History has come
into its own. For Africans historical
research into their past was neces¬
sarily a concomitant of the political
emancipation of a substantial portion
of the continent.
African scholars are bringing to bear
upon their investigation the vital back¬
ground knowledge of their culture, their
language and their institutions, they
are in a position that enables them to
fathom the documents beyond depths
attained by non-African eyes, selecting
those portions relevant to Africa and
its peoples rather than concentrating
on materials bearing only on European
activities in Africa.
European and American scholars
have lost no time in the quarrying
and processing of the mines of infor¬
mation unveiled by archives in many
parts of the world. By 1964 there
had been founded sixty Centres and
Institutes of African Studies in fourteen
European countries and the United
States. In the Soviet Union African
Studies had been ably inspired by
Professor D. A. Olderogge, an out
standing philologist whose works
include The Peoples of Africa (1954),
The Hausa Language (1954) and Wes¬
tern Sudan in the 15th - 19 th Centuries
(1960).
In December 1959 an African Insti¬
tute was organized within the Depart¬
ment of Historical Science in the Soviet
Academy of Sciences. Between 1959
and 1961 alone, no less than four
hundred and thirty-three Soviet publi¬
cations on Africa appeared. Thanks to
the late Professor Potekhin, first Direc¬
tor of the Africa Institute, interest in
African Studies increased in the Soviet
Union.
In the United States, where African
History was not catered for in the
American Historical Review until 1963,
the African Studies Association was
formed in 1957. At first dominated by
linguists, ethnologists and social an¬
thropologists, it has begun to inspire
historical scholarship. In 1964 there
were no less than twenty-five Centres
of African Studies in the U.S.A. Amer¬
ican Africanists have achieved much,
particularly in Linguistics and Political
Science.
In Britain the School of Oriental
and African Studies, University of
London, blazed the trail. This institu¬
tion has accomplished a great deal in
Linguistics and the history of Bantu
Africa, under the leadership of Pro¬
fessor Ronald Oliver. A specialist
approach was lately adopted in the
University of Birmingham where the
Centre of West African Studies con¬
centrates on West Africa, under the
direction of Professor John Fage.
In Africa, naturally, African and non-
African historians in the universities
are giving pride of place to African
History more than anywhere else out¬
side the continent. Learned journals
devoted to local historical studies have
multiplied and publications stepped up.
There are now at least sixty-six
centres, all of which have the aim of
studying some aspect of African
society, history, law and culture.
Scholars engaged in the task of redis¬
covering the African past know that
African History has passed the stage
of experiment, indeed in some regions
of Africa the field is ripe unto harvest;
the information unearthed is already
enormous and the possibilities for
further investigations are almost infi¬
nite.
It must be admitted, however, that
there are still important gaps in our
knowledge of African peoples and that
in some regions, particularly in East
and Central Africa a lot of work re¬
mains to be done before a definitive
history of these areas can be com¬
prehensively written. What is needed
is not only the writing up of the
history of those areas where research
has progressed, but also the launching
of planned research in regions where
our knowledge is scanty. The two
must go hand in hand. The future
Unesco General History of Africa
intends to lay emphasis on both
aspects.
¡T is gratifying to note that
some of the problems raised have
been surveyed by the International
African Institute, which summoned a
Conference of Africanists at Ibadan
University in April 1964 to discuss
some of these problems, and by the
First International Congress of Africa¬
nists which met in Accra, Ghana, in
1962. The tasks before us are great,
but not insurmountable; their solution
will entail considerable financial outlay,
time and the close co-operation of
scholars of all disciplines.
If organized along the right lines the
planned Unesco General History of
Africa will serve to bring together
scholars of all the disciplines relevant
to the study of the African past. To
achieve this objective it is imperative
that a body of scholars should be set
up, designed to channel the energies
of the historians of Africa in tackling
urgent problems of African historio¬
graphy and in correcting erroneous
assumptions about that past.
Take for instance, the general ten¬
dency of historians to isolate Africa
north of the Sahara in a manner quite
unhistorical. Indeed, rather than being
a barrier the Sahara has from time
immemorial been a bridge linking the
north to the south. Although Medi¬
terranean Africa has had contact with
Mediterranean Europe and the Middle
East for a very long time there has
been cultural cross-fertilization, as
well as economic and political con¬
nexions between Africa north and
south of the Sahara. Both areas share
some common problems, their distinc¬
tiveness in many respects notwith¬
standing. Any scheme for the writing
of African history should be within
the framework of the entire continent.
This is not to say that a regional
approach to African history is unde¬
sirable or should be abandoned. In
fact the most practical and most fruit¬
ful way of achieving maximum results
is to consider the problems of African
historiography in their regional con¬
text. But whilst these units are to be
treated fully in their own right, they

Photo © Siegfried Sammer The graceful hull of this fishing boat from Morondava, on the western coast
of Madagascar, is an outstanding example of marine design. The craft is fitted
with outriggers, traditionally used as stabilizers by many boat builders
of Oceania. Though considered geographically as part of Africa, Madagascar
has close ethnological, linguistic and cultural affinities with Oceania.
should be conceived as units within
the organic whole of the African con¬
tinent. I suggest the division of Africa
into the following regions: North Africa
including the Nile Valley, Ethiopia, The
Sudanic Belt, West Africa, Central and
East Africa and South Africa. African¬
ists within these regions would be
able to compare notes on matters of
common interest.
Perhaps the most important meth¬
odological problem posed by African
historiography is the inevitability of a
multi-disciplinary approach, particularly
for the pre-colonial period in which
written documents do not exist for
the greater part of the continent. The
historian of Africa cannot afford to
work in isolation; he needs the aid of
several other disciplines related to
his subject. He should take seriously
oral tradition and work hand in hand
with linguists, archaelogists, social and
physical anthropologists, orologists,
and artists. And yet although the
historian of Africa is fully aware of
the vital value of other disciplines he
still tends to ignore them. Until re¬
cently, it must be admitted that Afri¬
canists have tended to work along
independent lines.
Up to now, then, no historical work
on a massive scale has been attempt¬
ed on a multi-disciplinary basis. One of
course is aware of efforts in the
Soviet Union to adopt this strategy,
and of the Benin and Yoruba Research
schemes in Nigeria. A carefully plan¬
ned programme of the continental his¬
tory of Africa on interdisciplinary lines
is the need of the hour.
Much credit is due to the well-
seasoned and understanding Africa¬
nists of the United States, Europe and
the Soviet Union. But is has to be
emphasized that the problems posed
by African history are largely African,
and therefore demand an African so¬
lution. The themes and emphasis of
the researches of African historians
show clearly that it is mainly from
within Africa that the mainspring for
the study of Africa can come.
This is as it should be. Africans
have a special responsibility which out¬
siders cannot discharge. They are
psychologically and emotionally more
drawn than foreigners towards their
continent and heritage. In the under¬
standing of documents on African cul¬
ture and institutions, in historical appre¬
ciation and use of oral tradition, in
analysis of human drama in African
society, African scholars have an
advantage over others and are more
likely to get at the root of the problem
than non-Africans.
It is not implied that non-Africans
have no major part to play in the
rediscovery of Africa's past. Their re¬
sourcefulness and skill are required
in the disciplines of Archaelogy, Lin¬
guistics and Art, in which they are pre¬
eminently qualified, for the elucidation,
illumination and enrichment of our
knowledge of African society and
human drama in Africa over' the last
three thousand years.
13
