Tracking down the slippery eel 
From ancient times men knew that young eels appeared in rivers as if by magic 
at certain seasons and they had seen the grown eels swimming downstream to disappear 
into the sea. What happened before and after was a blank. The full life story 
of this enigmatic fish was revealed by a Danish scientist, Johannes Schmidt, 
who between 1905 and 1933 covered 40,000 miles to track down the eel’s secrets. 
Schmidt showed that adult eels swam from Europe in immense migratory shoals to spawn 
4,000 miles away in the Sargasso Sea south of Bermuda. There the grown eels died 
and the newly hatched lavae, growing as they drifted and swam, made a three-year journey 
back to Europe. Migrating eels (below) have been known to wriggle overland for miles 
in order to pass from one stretch of water to another. 
TL a, VR a TN 1 al ii im -_ ." 
 
  
a 
1 
% 
n 
Ph
ot
o 
© 
Ve
ro
, 
P
a
r
i
s

The study of animal behaviour 
| had considered 
sexual selection to be one of action 
through which natural selection oper- 
ated. He postulated that the display 
patterns of male birds, for instance, 
in species in which the male is brightly 
coloured and the female drab, evolved 
as a result of the preference of female 
birds in that species for bright colour; 
that is, if two males were competing 
for a female's favour, according to 
Darwin's theory, she would choose 
the more brightly coloured for her 
mate, and thus the quality of bright- 
ness of colour would be passed on 
to her offspring. 
Many biologists saw two fallacies in 
this argument. First, a brightly colour- 
ed male might not necessarily have 
offspring all as brightly coloured as 
himself. Secondly, this concept was 
taken by some to attribute to the 
female bird the same aesthetic tastes 
and appreciations that characterized 
her human observers. 
The tendency to endow other ani- 
mals with subjective reactions similar 
to those of man became known as 
anthropomorphism and was soon rec- 
ognized as a principal hazard in the 
interpretation of animal behaviour. The 
ability to discriminate colour patterns, 
and in some cases to prefer them, 
can however be demonstrated on non- 
anthropomorphic grounds. 
In the early part of the twentieth 
century, Julian Huxley observed and 
described the highly complicated and 
seemingly bizarre behaviour patterns 
indulged in by the male and female 
great crested grebe during the breed- 
ind season. In these diving birds the 
two potential or actual mates perform, 
as in a ritual or dance, a sequence 
of different actions. 
Many of these activities, such as 
diving, erecting the crest, lowering the 
head or spreading the wings, result in 
one bird presenting in turn strikingly 
different visual appearances to the 
other. Huxley's interpretation of such 
display as a factor in sexual selection 
was somewhat different from Darwin's. 
He considered that the display of one 
bird stimulated the opposite sex part- 
ner in a combination of emotional, ner- 
vous and biochemical ways. 
This postulate permitted the analysis 
of animal behaviour in less anthropo- 
morphic terms than had previously 
 
JANE OPPENHEIMER, author of Chapter 13 
(Development of the Biological Sciences) in 
Volume VI of the History of Mankind, has 
had a distinguished research and teaching 
career in the United States in marine biology, 
embryology and other biological sciences. 
been practised. Further encourage- 
ment was given to the pursuit of such 
studies when Konrad Lorenz named 
and analyzed the phenomenon of im- 
printing, long familiar to farmers and 
other breeders of birds and barnyard 
animals. 
The reason that a duckling normally 
follows its mother is that she is the 
first organism of a certain size it sees 
when it hatches from its egg. Lorenz 
showed that if it sees for instance a 
crouching man before it sees a duck, 
it follows the man as it would have 
followed its mother; the duckling need 
only see the object for a short time 
in order to establish this pattern of 
behaviour. 
Ways by which organisms give clues 
to one another in many aspects of 
their behaviour were studied subse- 
quently in many countries and were 
incorporated in a sort of sociology of 
nature. One great significance of the 
development of ethology was that, at 
a time when much of biology was be- 
coming narrowed to examination of 
parts or organisms by complicated 
laboratory instrumentation, it, like the 
new classification, encouraged many 
investigators to return to the study 
of the behaviour of the whole orga- 
nism in its natural surroundings. 
Carian studies of 
behaviour patterns in a number of 
related species proved especially 
rewarding. In other words, even in 
the twentieth century biologists were 
continuing to develop fundamental con- 
cepts through studies made without 
complicated equipment and carried out 
by techniques peculiar to biology. 
Ethologists in some cases performed 
experiments simple in type, either in 
the field or in the laboratory. For 
example, David Lack confronted a 
male European robin, a bird which 
fights with other male robins during 
the breeding season, with both an iso- 
lated patch of red breast feathers and 
a complete stuffed juvenile robin which 
had no red breast, to ascertain which 
of these he would attack. 
Such studies led to the important 
concept of specific patterned “sign- 
stimuli” acting as “releasers” of spe- 
cific patterns of activity. The mecha- 
nisms within the robin culminating in 
the attack on the patch of red feathers 
could be inferred, but it was more dif- 
ficult to explain other patterns of be- 
haviour, such as the pulling up of grass 
by a sea-gull in the middle of a fight. 
Nonetheless, the study of such “dis- 
by Jane Oppenheimer 
placement activities” which occur 
when there is conflict between op- 
posing drives showed promise of in- 
creased understanding of animal 
behaviour. 
From the beginning of the century, 
studies on instincts and learning in 
animals were performed by psycho- 
logists as well as by biologists. In 
studies of learning processes in rats, 
they discovered that if appropriately 
rewarded with food for correct per- 
formance or punished with slight dis- 
comfort, as for instance by a light 
electric shock, rats could quickly learn 
to follow mazes or perform other feats. 
These results indicated the importance 
of motivation as a factor in learning, at 
least in rats. 
0. students of animal 
behaviour towards the middle of the 
twentieth century analyzed particular 
behavioural mechanisms in other types 
of organisms. J. Z. Young, for instance, 
studying the behaviour of the octopus, 
observed its alteration after the remo- 
val or separation of particular parts 
of the nervous system, and studied 
the latter by some of the electrical 
methods first worked out for the study 
of mammalian brains. 
Ornithologists showed that in birds, 
day migrants orient themselves with 
reference to the sun, night migrants 
with reference to the pattern of the 
constellations. Some brilliant and suc- 
cessful studies of animal behaviour 
were made on honeybees by Karl von 
Frisch, who discovered experimentally 
that bees know the direction to follow 
between hive and food through their 
ability to analyse the degree of polari- 
zation of light from the sky, and the 
distance between them through some 
internal nervous mechanism. 
He found also that they are able to 
communicate to other members of 
their community, by executing various 
movements in a dance, both the di- 
rection in which food might be found 
and its relative distance from the hive. 
This was a set of processes which to 
some biologists indicated that bees 
in their own way might have evolved 
the powers both to make abstractions 
and to symbolize them, abilities which 
had previously been considered the 
prerogative of man alone, though the 
symbolization was recognized as con- 
trolled genetically and not built up 
artificially as with human language. 
— Vol. VI, Pt. |, Chap. 13 
(Development of the Biological 
Sciences) 
Ji
