The extraordinary Coptic architecture and engineering of Lalibela in northern Ethiopia place
its buildings among the world's great cultural monuments and religious shrines. Eleven in
number, they were each sculptured in one piece down into a mountain about 800 years ago.
Left, a typical motif of Lalibela. Right, a portrait of Emperor Lalibela of the Zague
dynasty, 12th century rulers of Ethiopia, from one of the monuments in Lalibela.

JOURNEY TO
ETHIOPIA'S PAST
by Richard H. Howland
Earlier this year Unesco sent a special mission to Ethiopia to help to
organize the Ethiopian Antiquities Administration. The mission was headed
by Professor Richard H. Howland, archaeologist and architectural historian,
who in this article records his impressions of Ethiopia's immense
heritage of ancient monuments and artistic treasures. Professor Howland
is secretary-treasurer of the U.S. National Committee of the International
Council of Monuments and Sites and chairman of the Department of Civil
History at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C.
I
HE plane from Rome came
down at Asmara at 6:30 a.m., with
dawn flushing the sky and a rosy hue
everywhere, and the full moon in the
low western sky pale and fading. A
neat attractive new airport building was
alert and alive. Inside an attendant
behind the bar gave everybody small
cups of delicious Ethiopian coffee.
Then the sun rose over the distant
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
39

JOURNEY TO ETHIOPIA'S PAST (Continued)
A major compaign for restoring the three great centres
of Ethiopian culture: Axurn, Lalibela, Gondar
hill, and the waiting room was flooded
with horizontal sunshine as the atten¬
dant pulled the blinds at the big
windows facing due east. Soon back
in the plane for the 50-minute flight
to Addis Ababa.
The landscape below the plane was
incredible, like blown-up views of the
craters of the moon. Dry, desolate,
crinkly, for scores of miles as far as
the eye could see. No trace of habi¬
tation, cultivation, road, or river: untidy
sharp dusty hills, a dull red in colour.
Later the landscape became more
mountainous, with the characteristic
high plateaus and steep jagged decli¬
vities the area of the great Rift Val¬
ley. Still no habitations, but gradually
as we approached Addis and the plane
descended lower, little communities
could be seen, some winding paths,
an occasional stream, and green
planting.
0
40
NLY later, during a series
of comfortable air excursions to distant
towns, does one discover the incre¬
dible richness of the antiquities of
Ethiopia. This is a land of contrasts;
it is so highly developed as a leader
in contemporary African affairs, and
yet so remote and medieval and
untouched in its hinterlands.
The antiquities are glorious and of
international significance to archaeolo¬
gists and art historians, but one travels
to seek them outside the capital. In
Addis there are only two good mu¬
seums, and an excellent display of
indigenous building types on the
grounds of the Ethio-Swedish Building
College.
One travels far into the countryside
to see the astounding physical remains
of the three great peaks of Ethiopian
culture: To the north, where Axum
and the surrounding lands are filled
with obelisks, temples, and tombs of
the early centuries of the Christian
era, to Lalibela for the unbelievable
unique rock-cut churches of the
Middle Ages, and to Gondar, the
former capital of the Empire, where
splendid palaces and churches of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
show a sophisticated cultural develop¬
ment that reflects Arab as well as
European connexions.
The French archaeologists say it is
difficult to date the great obelisks
and tombs at Axum more closely than
from the second to the sixth century.
The obelisks are called stelae. They
are monolithic shafts, and there are a
hundred or so, most fallen. A few
are still erect or have been erected.
The largest of the fallen ones (fully
carved to represent a nine-story
building with doors and windows) is
as tall as a nine-story building. It is
bigger than any Egyptian obelisk, and
is probably the largest single worked
stone ever set up by man! The group
set in a park is overwhelming.
Nearby is the infinitely moving old
cathedral of St. Mary, called the
Basilica. It is full of life and
hoary antiquity, although the present
structure is a replacement of the
17th century. It is on the site of the
most ancient and venerated of all
Ethiopian churches, and its Axumite
terrace foundation of the second to
sixth centuries is clearly visible.
The stelae at Axum were probably
erected as memorials, as dwelling-
places for the spirits of departed
personages of importance. Many have
window and door motifs cut in low
relief, comparable to the fenestration
and portal designs of palaces of the
period. The palaces were vast in
extent, several stories high, and were
perhaps comparable to similar struc¬
tures in the Arab peninsula across
the Red Sea, past as well as present.
The foundations of many palatial and
religious structures of the Axumite
period show a sophisticated use of
stone construction without mortar,
angles re-inforced with larger stones,
and rhythmic uses of receding and
projecting planes in the wall surfaces.
To reach Lalibela one flies over the
massive stone "needles" rising in the
mountainous landscape, on which
political prisoners were isolated. It is
easy to see that they could never get
down. The unbelievable aspect is
how anybody ever got up to the tops
of these shafts that seem to rise 300
or 400 feet vertically up, with no visible
slope for ascent. Yet from the plane
one sees on the top of one of them
various walls and the ruins of a vaulted
house. From the airstrip terminal the
town of Lalibela is 40 minutes away
by Land Rover, crossing one of the
most magnificent changing landscapes
of mountains and valleys in the world.
T
HE town is large, and noted
for its two-story circular dwellings with
thatched roofs. At the far side is a
comfortable hotel, The Seven Olives,
built a few years ago under the
direction of Princess Ruth Desta, who
also has supervised the restoration
programme of the great rock-cut
churches here, which has elicited the
interest of Unesco.
There are nine major rock-cut sub¬
terranean churches here, all under
monastic or priestly care and available
for visits. The Christian faith of
course is the Orthodox Ethiopian
branch, akin to the Coptic, and has
been the religion of the country since
the fourth century.
These fantastic structures are cut
from the living rock, their tops level
with the hills, and surrounded by deep
rock-cut trenches to free them, and for
passage and access. They are
connected by long tunnels in the rock,
deep dark passages with crude stairs.
The rock cuttings, tunnels, and ditches
are sometimes 100 feet down from
the surface.
A major campaign for restoration
is in progress, involving hundreds of
labourers under the expert direction of
two Italian superintendents. The
cement for repairs is made of broken-
up and pulverized local stone, so it
will be the same colour as the original,
rather red. Some of the churches
have developed bad cracks. The
stone "roofs" of some have weathered
badly, scaling, so that water tends to
seep through. But a new water¬
proofing is being applied that will
render the roofs impermeable.
At Gondar the palaces are clustered
in a walled compound in the centre
of the city; a number of beautiful
eighteenth century country residences
and churches are in the nearby country¬
side. One of these suburban areas is
Kusquam, where one sees the ruins
of a handsome eighteenth century
country palace of Queen Mentuab.
UCH of the principal recep¬
tion room remains red stone dressed
trim around the three arched door¬
ways, lions and crosses in relief on the
facade, remains of several stories and
many adjacent buildings, with corner
circular towers, for little private
rooms, not stairs. Stairs were always
in a rectangular stair-tower. There
are exposed wooden floor beams
inside and frequent balcony beams
outside. This is sophisticated archi¬
tecture, done by and for the Ethiopian
rulers who were enlightened patrons
of the art of' architecture.
In town, the Gondar palaces are
empty today, and the visitor is free
to wander through the deserted halls,
climb to the roofs of some, and
recreate in his imagination the tur¬
bulent life and excitement of three
hundred years ago. The crenellated
wall of the compound has several
gates, and remains of 20 or so
buildings, several of which have been
restored.
The principal palace is seventeenth
century, three stories and towers, with
provision for roof-living. A nearby
palace (of Yasu the Great, 1682-1706),
is very like the country palace at
Kusquam. Several other luxurious
buildings are scattered through the
compound, including an elaborately
decorated pavilion of Queen Mentuab,
with windows having a series of
receding lintels and enframements.
One wing is a miniature version,

Air view of a group of five
monuments at Lalibela. They are
connected by trenches and tunnels
which are pockmarked with small
caves that must have once been
used as cells for monks and
rooms for pilgrims. Numerous
frescoes, bas-reliefs and paintings
adorn the interiors. The largest
building (top of photo) is the
Biet Medani Alem. Unesco has
just completed a mission to
Ethiopia to study the country's
antiquities and their preservation.
At Lalibela, the restoration of
the monuments, isolated in roclty
hills at an altitude of 8,600 feet,
is being carried out jointly
by the Ethiopian Government
and the International Fund
for Monuments Inc.
basically, of the Gallery of Mirrors at
Versailles! It was built by King
Bakaffa, 1719-1730.
Far earlier than these palaces, and
indeed long ante-dating the second-
century Axumite remains, are the
discoveries of early man, coming to
light in the Awash River Valley and
farther south in the Orno area.
Hundreds of sites are yielding stone
tools and other evidences of primitive
habitation. A four-nation expedition
earlier this year, composed of
Ethiopian, Kenyan, French, and Amer¬
ican scientists, has shown that
primitive man and homonids probably
arose in this rich section of Africa.
The Ethiopian range of antiquities
is indeed great. A recent Unesco
study, released last June (1), had for
its purpose the unification of all
branches of research concerning the
past, so that the country's excavation
programmes (by both Ethiopian and
foreign archaelogists) can be cor¬
related with an expanding museum
(1) "Recommendations for the Organization
of the Ethiopian Antiquities Administration"
by R.H. Howland.
development. Both of these are to
be co-ordinated with an expanding
programme of archaelogical studies at
the Haile Selassie I University.
Two learned journals published
in Ethiopia, Annales d'Ethiopie
and Cahiers de l'Institut Ethiopien
d'Archéologie, share with the scholarly
world the secrets of Ethiopia's in¬
credibly magnificent past. This is now
also becoming more and more
accessible because of the country's
tourist facilities that are so ably
developed by the Ethiopian Tourist
Organization.
41
