U.S.S.R. T
Metamorphosis of a continent
by Nikolai Mikhailov
Fifty years ago, the October Revolution of 1917 led to
the creation of the U.S.S.R« the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. A major part of this issue of the
UNESCO COURIER is devoted to developments in
education, science and culture in the U.S.S.R. today.
N
4
I o country on earth pre¬
sents more diversity than the Soviet
Union. Primarily this is due to the
vastness of its territory: more than
22 million square kilometres (8,500,000
square miles).
From north to south the Soviet Union
stretches for nearly 5,000 kilometres
(3,000 miles). And from west to east
still more: in the Soviet Pacific port
of Vladivostok, at the end of the rail¬
way line running from Moscow, there
stands a kilometre-post bearing the
figure "9288" (6262 miles) a distance
to be found in no other single country
in the world. This is almost equal to
the distance from the pole to the equa¬
tor. When dusk falls in Vladivostok,
it is only dawn in Moscow. The New
Year is rung in 11 times, since the
Soviet Union is divided into 11 time
zones.
In area the U.S.S.R. is the world's
largest country. It could accommodate
700 Belgiums, for example.
Geographically, it would be more
appropriate to compare the U.S.S.R.
not to other countries but to continents:
it is somewhat smaller than Africa,
bigger than South America, three times
as big as Australia. It can even bear
cosmic comparisons: wherever you
see the full moon in the sky, know that
its visible face is smaller than the terri¬
tory of the U.S.S.R.; one would have
to add Argentina, say, to the moon's
NIKOLAI MIKHAILOV the Soviet geo¬
grapher and author has written widely on
the countries he has visited in many parts
of the world. A U.S.S.R. State Prize
winner, he has devoted a number of books
to the geography and evolution of the
Soviet Union. An English translation of a
recent work, "Discovering the Soviet
Union", was published by Progress
Publishers, Moscow, in 1965.
hemisphere to bring it up to the size
of the Soviet Union.
In view of the vast size of the Soviet
Union its extreme diversity should not
surprise us.
It has mountain peaks reaching above
the clouds and endless expanses of
flat lowlands. The Great Russian (East
European) Plain and the West Siber¬
ian Lowland stretch for thousands of
miles. Among the highest mountains
are the Pamirs, the Tien Shan, the Altai,
the Caucasus. The highest peak in the
U.S.S.R. (in the Pamirs) reaches to a
height of 7,500 metres (24,600 feet).
The climate is equally diversified.
There are places in Siberia that are
colder in winter than the North Pole,
and plains in Central Asia that are
hotter in summer than the tropics. In
Yahutia the winter temperature some¬
times drops to minus 70°C, while in
Turkmenia it is sometimes plus 70°C in
the sun. In the Kara-Kum Desert in
summer one can bake an egg in the
sand, while in northern Siberia, during
the winter polar nights the mercury
solidifies in the thermometer and one
can hear the crackling of the human
breath as the vapour turns into ice
crystals immediately. The Yahuts who
live there call it the "whispering of the
stars".
In Uzbekistan people begin mowing
the barley, when the inhabitants of
Petropavlovsk in Kamchatka are digg¬
ing their houses out after another
blizzard.
On the shores of the Barents Sea it
takes a hundred years for a larch tree
to grow slightly thicker than a ski stick,
while in sub-tropical Ajaría on the
Black Sea coast a young bamboo tree
shoots up over a metre in one day.
The U.S.S.R. is skirted by twelve
seas of the Atlantic, Pacific and Arctic
oceans. The country has the largest
network of rivers in the world, the
world's largest lake the Caspian Sea
as well as the world's deepest lake,
the Baikal (1,620 metres or 5,315 feet
at its deepest point).
The country is traversed by several
soil-vegetation zones: in the extreme
north there is a long bank of treeless,
boggy tundra covered most of the year
round by snow; the polar night there
lasts several months, illuminated not
by the rays of the sun but by the
Aurora Borealis. To the south there is
a forest belt, the world's most abun¬
dant concentration of coniferous
trees. Further south the forests thin
out and give way to the steppes; the
steppe belt with its rich fertile soil
stretches across the land for several
thousand kilometres. Still further south
the steppe turns into semi-deserts and
deserts which serve for grazing. In
those places where rivers run down
into» the desert zone from the southern
mountains, there are irrigated oases
bright greenery against a yellow back¬
ground. Finally, on the Black Sea
coast and in the southern valleys of
Central Asia, sheltered from the north
by mountains, there are sub-tropical
regions which hardly ever experience
frost. There the sea never freezes,
roses bloom in January, and even such
heat-loving plants as the date palm
bear fruit.
So the U.S.S.R. has plants that
range from dwarf birches to palm, from
lichens to lotus and animals that vary
from the snowy owl to the flamingo,
from the polar bear to» the tiger.
An immense variety of raw products
are industrially processed in the
U.S.S.R. Industry has to deal with
nearly all the elements in Mendeleyev's
Periodic Table. Soviet power stations
produce electric current from coal, coal
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6

Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
Second largest city of the U.S.S.R., Leningrad has a population of over three
million. Its construction was begun in 1703 by Peter the Great and from 1712 to 1918 (first as
St. Petersburg and, during the First World War, as Petrograd) it was the capital of Russia.
The Revolutions of February and October 1917 began in this city. The northernmost
large city of the world (59 degrees N) it has been called "The Venice of the North"
since it is built on over 100 islands formed by 66 rivers and canals and has 620 bridges.
Photo shows rush hour on three-mile Nevsky Prospect, Leningrad's busiest thoroughfare.
5

U.S.S.R. TODAY (Continued)
Dusk falls ¡n Vladivostok as day dawns in Moscow
6
dust, fuel oil, peat, combustible shales,
natural gas; ever more power is being
obtained from the energy of falling
water (600,000 million kwh for 1967).
And now a contribution is being made
to the national economy by several
large atomic power stations.
Factories throughout the country are
smelting iron and steel, copper and
nickel, lead and zinc, aluminium and
magnesium, tungsten and molybdenum,
and many other important metals. The
U.S.S.R. produces machines of every
complexity from spaceships and gi¬
gantic walking excavators, each replac¬
ing 15,000 labourers, to instruments
more sensitive than a human nerve.
The diversity of climate and soil
allows a great variety of crops to be
grown In the U.S.S.R.: rice, cotton, bar¬
ley, tea and flax.
At present the U.S.S.R. has a
population of about 240 million. Only
China and India have bigger popu¬
lations. The population is made up of
many nations, large and small; it
includes nationalities of various lin¬
guistic groups: Slavic, Turk, Finno-
Ugrian, and others; the Russian popu¬
lation exceeds a hundred million, while
in the Caucasus there is the Archi
nation, all of whom live in a single
settlement.
S
OVIET children are taught
in more than a hundred languages as
different as are the histories of their
individual speakers. In the Georgian
language there are written monuments
fifteen centuries old, while the Evenki
(Tungus), who live in northern Siberia,
have only acquired a written language
since the Socialist Revolution of 1917,
just as half a hundred other peoples of
the U.S.S.R. who had no written lan¬
guage before. The inhabitants of the
Soviet Union differ widely in appear¬
ance, the colour of their skin, their
way of life, and in number of
population (1).
But in essence they are all quite
similar. In travelling across the
U.S.S.R. one can see a Russian engi¬
neer dressed in a European-style suit,
à Ukrainian peasant women in a tra¬
ditional embroidered dress, an Uzbek
in a vari-coloured robe, a Turkmen in
a huge fur hat, a Caucasian highlander
in a sheepskin coat, an inhabitant of
the cold northland in furs. But what¬
ever the region, all men and women
share one common feature: absolute
equality. Naturally, this makes for close
ties and national unity.
The landscapes of the fifteen Repub¬
lics, making up the Soviet Union, are
all different. But the people from these
widely differing areas all live under the
same social and state structure.
This unit favours the rapid develop¬
ment of the country. Since all the
basic riches belong to the state, the
country is developing according to a
single plan. In the output of major
'industry the U.S.S.R. has now sur¬
passed Czarist Russia about seventy-
fold. Industrial output has advanced
from fourth place in Europe to first
place.
Pre-revolutionary Russia provided
1/25th of the world's industrial produc¬
tion; now the U.S.S.R's share is nearly
1 /5th, thus testifying to the country's
extraordinary growth and change during
the past half century.
T
(1) The U.S.S.R. is a multinational State.
It comprises over 100 nationalities In 15 Soviet
Republics, 20 autonomous Republics, 8 natio¬
nal regions and 10 national areas.
HE Soviet Union has be¬
come one of the world's great powers,
but this does not mean that all its
problems have been solved. This
country that was once extremely back¬
ward still has many unsatisfied needs
and unrealized possibilities. The pros¬
pects for further increasing industrial
and agricultural production are self-
evident. These include, among other
things, the exploitation of its enormous
natural resources.
Essentially, the U.S.S.R. has all the
useful minerals known on earth. It
holds first place in the world in
reserves of iron, manganese, copper,
lead, and nickel ores, in potash salts,
apatite (raw material for phosphorous
fertilizers). The U.S.S.R. has an abun¬
dance of oil, gold, diamonds, uranium.
It also leads the world in water-power
resources.
One-third of all the world's forests
are located in the U.S.S.R. and no other
country can boast of such vast stret¬
ches of fertile, chernozem soil (black
earth).
Much has already been done to
exploit these resources and to raise
the living standard of the people.
In the last decades, the economic
geography of the Soviet Union has
undergone great change and continues
to change before our very eyes. The
economic map has acquired a new
look. It has become denser and more
uniform.
Before 1917, Russia's industry was
concentrated in a few isolated areas
in the western part of the nation in
Moscow and its vicinity, St. Petersburg,
the Donbass in the Ukraine, the Urals,
the Caucasian Baku and the Baltic
ports. Since then, it has spread
throughout the land, providing each of
the Soviet nations and each region with
a basis for economic and cultural
advancement and the utilization of vir¬
gin natural resources. The movement
of industry eastward has been a
continuing trend.
Top, supply plane comes
in to land near a scientific
research station in the
Soviet Far North. Bottom,
combine-harvesters at work
in the fertile black-earth
steppe zone that stretches
for several thousand
kilometres. The largest
country in the world, the
U.S.S.R. reaches from
the Baltic to the Behring
Straits and from the Arctic
to Afghanistan. Washed
by twelve seas of the
Atlantic, Pacific and Arctic
oceans, the Soviet Union
has more rivers than any
other country, the world's
largest inland sea (the
Caspian) and the world's
deepest lake (Baikal). No
less striking is its range of
climates (from minus
70 degrees C. in parts of
Siberia to plus 70 degrees
in Central Asia).
The Donbass in the Ukraine, the
nation's principal coal region, develop¬
ed sharply, but its national share in
coal output fell from nine-tenths to
one-third because many other regions,
especially in the east, began mining
their own coal. Despite their growth,
the giant oilfields of Baku fell behind
new oil regions which sprang up bet¬
ween the Urals and the Volga. The
Urals and the Kuzbass are now com¬
peting with the Ukraine in metallurgy.
One by one the rivers were deprived
of their free and useless courses... on
the Volga and the Dnieper this har-

+*-î-
Stv1 -
;.,--"-
Photo © APN - D. Kozlov
Photo APN - I. Budnievich
nessing is nearing completion, while
on the great Siberian rivers it is now
getting into full swing, on a scale
unheard of in world power engineering.
Machines are no longer being produced
in a few centres as in the past we
now can see automobiles made in
Byelorussia and Georgia, tractors from
the Urals and the Altai, lathes from
Novosibirsk, and locomotives from Bu-
ryatia (beyond Lake Baikal). New
meat, bread and clothes factories have
sprung up everywhere. The solid foun¬
dations have been laid for a nation¬
wide unified electrical power grid.
Industry and industrial development
have spread across the country. Sib¬
eria is a case in point.
In the past ten years this part of the
country, equal in area to the whole of
the United States, has witnessed fan¬
tastic transformations.
Siberia's economy is based on its
colossal natural resources and power
provided by cheap coal and rivers.
Gigantic power stations are under
construction and several are already
in operation. For example, on the An¬
gara River, in an ocean, of forests, the
world's largest hydroelectric power sta
tion, the Bratsk, has been built; and
nearby the new town of Bratsk has
grown up. Enormous enterprises are
already operating there, such as the
aluminium plant and the woodworking
complex whose buildings extend for
six kilometres. This year the first units
of a still larger hydroelectric station,
the Krasnoyarsk, on the Yenisei River
is scheduled to go into operation with
a total capacity of 6 million kilowatts.
Construction has now begun on an
even more powerful station, the
Sayano-Shushensk, further north on
the Siberian Yenisei River.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
7

U.S.S.R. TODAY (Continued)
Cities built
on permafrost
It is calculated that energy from coal
and rivers will turn Siberia into one of
the world's greatest power centres.
After all the power stations under
construction go into operation, Siberia
will be producing more electric power
than any Western European country.
And this is only the beginning.
The abundance of cheap power in
Siberia is paving the way to the rapid
expansion of industry. A number of
aluminium plants are already operating
in Siberia: one in Bratsk, another in
Krasnoyarsk, one near Irkutsk and
another in the Kuznetsk coal basin.
Iron and steel production is expand¬
ing. A large ¡ron-and-steel plant was
built In Novokuznetsk before World
War II, and a second one since the
war. In time, iron-and-steel plants will
also be built in other parts of Siberia.
Metal provides a basis for heavy
machine-building. The city of Novosi¬
birsk on the Ob River, for example,
now produces as many machines as
did all of Russia before 1917. Kras¬
noyarsk on the Yenisei has turned into
a major machine building centre, pro¬
ducing river boats, bridge cranes, self-
propelled combines, refrigerators,
washing machines, television sets and
pianos.
'xi'ijm
.i¿v ' »%
^^¿¿v«-..
©
- So
- - ^
GEOLOGISTS ON THE WING
Geologists are helping to change the economic geography of the U.S.S.R. Last year,
1,000 planes and helicopters airlifted Soviet geologists to prospection areas. Total, length
of geological probes and drilling was twice that of the earth's diamater at the equator.
Top right, helicopter "taxi" for geologists lands on the tundra in. the Chukotka region
(Soviet Far East). In foreground are antlers of a reindeer herd. On landing (above)
geological team sets off for weeks and even months of arduous work and camp life in
virtually unexplored territories. Below, bearded geologist discusses day's ventures by
candlelight. Siberia keeps engineers and statisticians hard at work revising the figures
of its known wealth in oil, copper, diamonds, nickel, iron ore and other minerals.
R
8
ECENTLY one of the
world's largest oil and gas basins was
discovered in north-western Siberia, in
the Tyumen region, in the lower
reaches of the Ob River. It is already
supplying oil and gas, and long pipe¬
lines, railways and a motor-road are
being laid. By 1970 it will be produc¬
ing as much oil as the whole of Azer¬
baijan, with its famous old oil centre
Baku, did a year or two ago.
In Yakutia, located in the distant and
formerly almost impenetrable taiga, rich
diamond fields have been found and
mining has already begun. Some of the
diamonds are as much as 106 carats
in size.
New cities are mushrooming in Sib¬
eria, and three-fourths of all the cities
east of the Urals are new. Some j of
these cities, such as Norilsk, have
grown up on permafrost, the buildings
being erected on special reinforced
concrete piles driven into the ice.
Maxim Gorky once wrote: "The fabu¬
lous scenes of a future Siberia stagger
the imagination with their grandeur..."
We are close to putting these words
into effect.
A remarkable Science City has
recently grown up in a pine forest near
Novosibirsk, in the heart of Siberia.
Here have been established 14 insti¬
tutions of higher education, a scientific-
technical library with 5 million books.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

Photo © APN - D. Baltermantz
Photo © APN - L. Ustinov
:...;'-:".: ..;
Below, sculpture of a giant hand holding a lump of iron
ore symbolizing Siberia's debt to nature which has
endowed it with natural riches to match its size.
In background are buildings of the immense steel
production complex at Magnitogorsk in Western Siberia.
Photo © APN - L. Lazarev

U.S.S.R. TODAY (Continued)
The call of the Far North
A Siberian branch of the U.S.S.R. Aca¬
demy of Sciences has been founded
there with nearly a score of Academi¬
cians, two score corresponding mem¬
bers, and hundreds of scientific
workers.
A simple enumeration of a few of the
score of institutes there provides an
idea of the scope of the work being
done in this new scientific centre: a
mathematics institute with its own
computing centre, institutes of physics,
thermal physics, non-organic chemistry,
automation and electrometry, kinetics
and combustion, hydrodynamics, eco¬
nomics and statistics, cytology and
genetics. . .
The problems being studied include
controlled thermonuclear reactions, the
interior of the earth, cybernetics. The
hydrodynamics institute has developed
a water-cannon capable of disinte¬
grating the very hardest rock. A high¬
speed electronic computer has been
put to the unusual task of deciphering
the hieroglyphics of the Maya Indians
who lived many centuries ago in Cen¬
tral America. The average age of a
scientist in the Siberian Branch of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences in Novo¬
sibirsk is about 34 years.
A
10
STONISHING changes
have also occurred in the development
of the U.S.S.R. 's extreme North. Along
the former impassable coastal waters
skirting the north of Siberia there now
operates a regular North Sea route,
equipped in summer with ice-breakers,
including the atomic ice breaker
"Lenin." In the once wild Kola Penin¬
sula there has grown up the city of
Murmansk which has more inhabitants
than the whole of Iceland. The city of
Kirovsk has become a world centre for
the production of apatite fertilizer.
Research institutes have been founded
that investigate both the ocean bottom
and the aurora borealis. Today 90 per
cent of the inhabitants of the Kila
Peninsula are city dwellers.
The Soviet far north-east was once
a wilder and even more forsaken region
than Siberia. Today in the areas such
as the Chukotka Peninsula beyond the
Arctic Circle modern industrial enter¬
prises have been built and an atomic
power plant is under construction.
The same holds true for the far south
of the U.S.S.R., where forty years ago
practically the whole population was
illiterate, while the only form of industry
was the separation of seeds from
cotton to facilitate shipping it to the
centre of the country. Today each of
the four Central Asian Republics boasts
its own independent Academy of
Sciences.
The new distribution of industry
caused new lines of communication to
spring up and, consequently changed
the face of transportation.
Not only has the overall mileage of
railways been doubled and other trans¬
portation between the capital and other
districts been increased, but the whole
country is now linked by a vast net¬
work of railways, motor-roads and
waterways. The so-called Turksib (Tur¬
kestan-Siberian railway) now connects
Central Asia with Siberia across
thousands of miles of desert. The
South-Siberian trunk line passes
through an enormous zone from the
Southern Urals to the Kuzbass and the
Yenisei and beyond. The Volga Don
Canal forms a water bridge between
the Volga Valley and the Donbass. The
Volga-Baltic Waterway provides cheap
transportation from Leningrad and the
north to the central regions of the
country. As for the railways, nine out
of every ten tons are no longer drawn
by steam-engines but by electric or
diesel locomotives.
The agricultural map of the country
has also undergone remarkable
changes.
With the adoption of co-operative
methods and the mechanization of
farming it has been possible to elimin¬
ate those shortcoming in the utiliza¬
tion of farm1 lands that were born of
the backwardness of pre-revolutionary
agriculture.
The economic map has reflected the
rapid expansion of cultivation. The
area of tilled land has increased every¬
where, especially in the East, where
a large area of the steppes beyond
the Urals in northern Kazakhstan
and southwestern Siberia has been
brought under cultivation. In a very
short time a valuable natural resource
that had lain dormant for centuries
was put to use. Up to the time of
intense cultivation of the trans-Urals
virgin and long-fallow lands, the area
of the arable lands in the U.S.S.R.
had increased since the Revolution
by no more than the area of France.
But in a few years of work on virgin
Night scene at the
Dnieproges Dam, the
"father" of the Soviet
Union's giant hydro¬
electric installations,
built across the
Dnieper (1932). Over
2,500 feet long, It
was destroyed during
World War II. When
rebuilt in 1947, its
total power capacity
was increased to
700,000 kilowatts. The
colossal new hydro¬
electric installations
in Siberia have even
larger power capaci¬
ties: Bratsk on the
Angara (4,1 million
kw) and Krasnoiarsk
on the Yenisei (6
million kilowatts).
and long-fallow lands the Soviet East
acquired arable lands exceeding in
area the whole of Italy.
Not in all regions was the land
ready for ploughing. In many places
it first had to be prepared. In the
hot south rivers had to be diverted
to irrigate fields, and in the north bogs
had to be drained and shrubs cleared
away.
N
OW nearly all the rivers of
the far South have been brought under
control in one way or another from
the modest Salgira in the Crimea to
the Kura in Transcaucasia and the
Syr-Dariya in Central Asia. The sun-
parched deserts have been traversed
by large irrigation canals, the length
of the new Kara-Kum Canal in Turk¬
menia has already reached 800 kilo¬
mètres (500 miles). In many regions
of the Byelorussian Polesie and the
Georgian Kolkhida, swamps have been
turned into fertile ploughlands. Farm¬
ing oases have been created beyond
the Arctic Circle. The slopes of the
mountains skirting the Black Sea have
become covered with plantations of
subtropical plants.
To ensure steady and abundant
harvests in semi-arid regions, a
staggering measure is being put into
effect: forest strips are being grown
in the open steppes, changing the
whole face of the region.
Important shifts have occurred in
the distribution of crops in arable
regions. Wheat has migrated further
north into the non-chernozem zone,
sugar beet has travelled from the
Ukraine to the Far East, vegetable
gardens have sprung up around cities,
apple orchards have conquered the
Urals and Siberia, where formerly
there were none.
Such are some of the important
changes in the economic geography
of the U.S.S.R.
