Photo © from "Japanese Sculpture" by J.E. Kidder, published
by Bijutsu Shuppan-Sha, Tokyo, and l'Office du Livre, Fribourg

The timeless gesture of the
calligraphier, brush in hand
(left), caught by the chisel of
a 7th century artist of
a sculpture in camphor wood,
at the Golden Temple of
Horyuji, in Nara, near Osaka.

HOW JAPAN
STREAMLINED ITS
WRITTEN LANGUAGE
N
O less than 50,000 charac¬
ters were devised by ancient China.
The Japanese, who adopted the Chin¬
ese script many centuries ago, still
employ the same number of Chinese
characters, although the number in
everyday use has been drastically
reduced In the process of moderniz¬
ation. Along with the Chinese charac¬
ters, the Japanese also use about
50 Japanese "kana" letters in their
books, magazines and newspapers
instead of the alphabets printed in
European publications.
Chinese characters were invented
four thousand years ago and the Chin¬
ese are known to have invented both
printing and the use of movable type.
The first imported books written in
Chinese characters were presented to
Japan by the great teacher Wani of
Korea in 285 A.D. The names of the
books were "Analects of Confucius,"
and "The Thousand Characters
Classic."
The "Analects of Confucius" con¬
tains 2,200 Chinese characters. So
the learned class of Japan at that time
used that many Chinese ideographs
a new experience for the Japanese who
did not possess letters of their own
to express their spoken language.
Chinese ideographs seerrv complex
and even grotesque at first sight, but
they are meaningful and even beautiful
at second sight. Although they under¬
went much change during the early
stages, many Chinese characters in
use today are hardly different from
the forms used some 2,000 years ago.
SHIN-ICHI HASEGAWA has been managing
editor of the Japanese language edition of the
"Unesco Courier" since the edition was
launched m 1961. A distinguished journalist
and an authority on problems of mass com¬
munication, Mr. Hasegawa has been for
26 years with the "Japan Times", the English-
language daily published in Tokyo, as editor
and director, and is now editorial adviser
to the paper. Mr. Hasegawa's invaluable
collaboration in the production of the "Unesco
Courier" will come to an end after the
present issue appears. He will then devote
all his time to the activities of the Japanese
National Commission for Unesco, of which
he has been a member since 1965, and to
his work as lecturer in mass communica¬
tion at the universities of Keio and Waseda.
by Shin-lchi Hasegawa
It is said that eighty per cent of the
Chinese characters have been created
through constructing new characters
by combining a pronunciation symbol
or other indicator on one side and the
meaning on the other side of the
ideograph. New characters were
constantly made afresh as men found
it necessary to express what new
thing they saw or thought. Some are
not in daily use today, but the great
mass of characters which had been
invented up to the 18th century are
recorded in the dictionary.
The Kiang Hsi dictionary, which was
published in China in 1716, during the
early years of the Ching dynasty, con¬
tains 47,000 Chinese characters. "The
Great Dictionary", which was edited
by Japanese scholars and is in daily
use in Japan now contains 14,924
Chinese characters. Each character
is numbered, so one can count them
exactly. This dictionary was first
printed in Japan in 1917 and has been
reprinted more than 2,400 times.
If the great prehistoric monsters had
survived to the present age, it would
be considered a miracle. No less a
miracle is the fact that the Japanese
use so many characters in their reading
and writing today, just as the Chinese
and Koreans did centuries ago.
Newspapers using Chinese charac¬
ters are printed in Japan, China, Korea,
Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, and
in the places where their nationals live,
for instance in the Philippines and
the U.S.A. In Viet Nam, Chinese
characters were changed to Roman
spelling eighty years ago during the
French rule, except for sacred Bud¬
dhist texts, still studied in characters.
To use so many ideographs for daily
life may seem a severe burden viewed
from the point of education. It may
also seem inconvenient at least
people who are accustomed to use
phonetic letters often think so. But
one should think it over again.
The literacy rate of Japan is 99 per
cent today. The daily circulation of
newspapers in Japan is 32,447,141
copies published by 121 newspaper
publishing companies according to a
survey in October, 1967 or one news¬
paper per 3.12 persons and 1.23 copies
per family. Japan is considered to be
one of the top three newspaper-
producing countries of the world. The
first daily newspaper in Japan was
"The Yokohama Mainichi Shimbun"
which was published in 1870.
The oldest publication that has
survived in Japan is the handprinted
book of a Buddhist Scripture published
in 770 A.D. This is said to be the
oldest extant handwritten publication
in the world. Since then the art of
book printing has gradually developed,
but for the most part, the method of
wood-block printing or lithography has
been used.
I T was in 1869, the year af¬
ter the Meiji Restoration, that metal
type, such as the Chinese had used
500 years before, and Gutenberg a
century later, was manufactured in
Japan. In 1870 a printing press was
brought to Japan from Shanghai. Since
then the printing industry has remark¬
ably developed.
The number of books published in
1967 amounted to 37,904 titles. The
estimated number of copies of books
published was 487,860,000 and the
value of sales was $614,362,500.
Top sales were in literature; social
science came second and engineering
third, with books for juveniles and
school reference texts coming next.
In the course of a century Japan has
become Asia's leading book publisher,
despite the heavy burden of using so
many ideographic characters.
Although China and Japan use the
same ideographs, there are some
fundamental differences between the
two. In a word, Japan has "Japanized"
the Chinese practice in the use of
ideographs.
Before the eighth century the
Japanese found the way to use Chi¬
nese characters as means to express
Japanese ideas. This invention was
called "Manyo-kana" and the most
important work written in this way is __
the "Manyoshu" a collection of Japa- KU
nese poems edited in the eighth cen- Uw
tury and containing about 4,500 poems
composed during the preceding
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

STREAMLINING A WRITTEN LANGAGE (Continued)
Hira-gana, the writing adopted by women
four and a half centuries. These
poems were expressed in Chinese
characters, to each of which a
Japanese pronunciation, and not the
present pronunciation of Chinese,
was assigned.
Later in the tenth century two kinds
of "kana" were invented one is "Hira-
gana" and the other "Kata-kana."
These were a Japanese innovation.
The "Hira-gana" was made by simplify¬
ing "Sosho" or quickly handwritten
Chinese characters, while "Kata-kana"
was made by using a part of the print¬
ed form of Chinese characters. They
are not themselves ideographs, but
rather phonetic syllables. "Hira-gana"
was mainly used by women. At first
it was called "women's writing."
In the "Heian" period when the
Imperial Court of Japan was so peace¬
fully prosperous, the position of court
ladies had been elevated. Chinese
ideographic characters were learned
by upper class men, while women
used "Hira-gana" in their writing.
Many novels or stories were written
by court ladies, the representative liter¬
ary masterpiece being Lady Murasa-
ki's "Tale of Genji" written early in
the eleventh century.
"Kata-kana" the other type of
Japanese syllabary was at first used
as phonetic symbols to help students
to read Chinese classics in the
Japanese way. "Hira-gana" is most
popularly used. After the Meiji era
"Kata-kana" was given a new and
important function to write words of
foreign origin in a Japanese way.
The number of forms in each of these
purely Japanese systems of phonetic
writing is about 50 they outnumber
the 26-letter alphabet, but they have
70
the advantage of connecting a vowel
to a consonant to form one sound.
This peculiarity of Japanese "Kana,"
combined with imported Chinese ideo¬
graphic characters, has enabled the
Japanese freely to express their desires
and thoughts in literature and in
daily life. This combination of ancient
Chinese civilization and Japanese-
invented "Kana" letters may be con¬
sidered the meeting and mutual under¬
standing of the Chinese continental
civilization and the Island civilization
of Japan.
Japan has created its own civilization
in the world of letters, entirely different
from the Chinese civilization. This is
the way the Japanese act when
confronted with foreign cultures. Some
of the early novels authored by
court ladies were written solely in
"Hira-gana," excluding all Chinese
characters, and they are valued highly
as literary masterpieces as well. Some
male authors subsequently imitated
the literary works of ladies, as for
example the "Tosa Diary" of Kino
Tsurayuki in the Heian Period (10th
century).
The challenge of European civil¬
ization arrived at the shores of Japan
in the person of an Italian Jesuit
missionary accompanying a delegation
of three Catholic youths sent by the
Christian feudal lords in Kyushu to
the Pope. The missionary brought a
press, European metal type and
several printers with him. This
was 1590.
More than twenty books were
printed in Latin, Portuguese, and
Roman-spelt Japanese in Amakusa,
Nagasaki, and Kyoto, in the late
sixteenth century. Some of the
Since ancient times,
first in China and
later in Japan,
calligraphy has
ranked as an art
fully the equal of
painting. The art of
calligraphy was
introduced into Japan
together with
Chinese characters,
and since then the
Japanese have
developed many new
styles of their own.
Left, Zen inscription
on a screen at the
entrance of the
Temple of Sambo-in,
near Kyoto. It
impresses the
beholder by its
graceful, flowing
forms and also by its
message. The
inscription has many
nuances, but one
possible translation
into English is: "It is
better to leave
things alone."
O © o
y
printed books are preserved as national
treasures. They include not only
Catholic texts, but "Aesop's Fables"
and the "Heike-monogatari" a romance
of the Heike, the feudal clan which
ruled in the late Heian Period.
This influence of Catholic mission¬
aries was strong, although it was
short-lived, because, for political rea¬
sons, Japan completely closed its
doors to the coming of foreigners after
1639, except for the Dutch and the
Chinese. For more than two hundred
years Japan enjoyed peace, separating
itself from the outer world. During
those years Japan could develop its
own civilization in business, politics,
and culture.
Three examples of
writing systems
used in Japan.
They show the
phrase "Nihongo"
(Japanese
language) as it
appears in
(1) Kanji;
(2) Hira-gana;
(3) Kata-kana.
Peace is the basis of culture this
was proved by the Japanese civili¬
zation. Then came the open-door
policy of the government under
Emperor Meiji. This was the third
response of the Japanese people to
the challenge of foreign civilization
which attacked this small Island
monarchy as part of the Imperialist
drive of the 19th century.
The invention of Chinese ideographs
was necessary in China, where the
strong central government was obliged
to make announcements, not by mouth,
but by letters, in such wide areas
inhabited by so big a population.
Ancient Greece was a small area and
was divided into several independent
city-states. So in the case of the
Greek people their spoken language
was endowed with the spirit of
democracy. But in China the situation
was different. Japan inherited the
literary Chinese civilization.
However, Japan is a small country
when compared with China, and it has
a dense population. Illiteracy can be
removed when government and people
unite in the efforts of advancing
education in this small country, and
Japan already had a comparatively
high standard of education when it
was opened to the world.
The significance of the Meiji
Restoration in 1868 is the change of
cultural values from Oriental to
European ones.
With regard to language policy for
the new Japan, there were four possible
courses of action. First, and the most

radical, would be to suspend the use
of Chinese ideographs and to adopt
the Latin alphabet. The second way
was to write the Japanese language
wholly in "Kana." The third way was
to continue the use of a combination
of Chinese ideographic letters and
"Kana," just as Japan had done for
more than a thousand years. The
fourth way was to limit the number of
Chinese ideographs used in everyday
writing. This way had another aim,
that is, to decrease the number of
Chinese characters to be learned dur¬
ing compulsory education and thereby
lighten for primary school children the
burden of learning so many characters.
Each of these outlets from the
burden of past civilization has been
tried by. the Japanese since the Meiji
Restoration.
First, from the point of view of
education. Although the Tokugawa
feudal government officially closed
the door to the outer world, little by
little world changes were communicated
to Japan through imported foreign
books in Dutch and by Dutch traders.
Hakuseki Arai (1657-1725), a scholar
and statesman of the early Tokugawa
age, learned the Roman alphabet used
in European countries. He wrote in
his book: "The Europeans use an
alphabet, consisting of a little more
than twenty letters. We Japanese use
more than ten thousand characters.
Unless one has a strong memory, one
cannot remember so many. This
means loss of our energy." He was
the first reformer of the way of writing
by the use of Chinese characters
which the Japanese had been
using for more than ten centuries.
Two years before the Meiji
Restoration, Hisoka Maejima, another
scholar and statesman, gave his
opinion to the Shogunate that Japan
should abolish the use of all the
Chinese characters and use only
"Hira-gana." After the Restoration,
Maejima became the publisher of a
daily newspaper printed only in "Kana."
The title of the paper was "Kana-
gawa Kana Shimbun." But it lasted
only one year. Maejima started
another daily newspaper entitled the
"Yubin Hochi Shimbun." This paper
survived until scores of years later.
A suggestion to have the entire
Japanese language spelt in the Roman
alphabet was presented by Yoshikazu
Nambu to high government officials in
charge of education in 1869.
These two attempts to reform the
written language by abolishing the use
of Chinese characters were followed
by others in later years.
But a more practical suggestion
came from Yukichi Fukuzawa, a great
leader of the new culture in Japan (see
page 12), who wrote in 1872 in his
book entitled "Moji no Oshie," or
"Teaching of Letters," that for ordinary
people the number of Chinese ideo¬
graphic characters would be enough if
they learned from 2,000 to 3,000 ideo¬
graphs, and used the phonetic "Kana"
syllables to replace the rest. "I use in
ÄSmSJB
i ! ! '
».ill Vi H* HM : ií '*, SV'*ÏU i*|Ml "¿'
«ITl^iS
Above, part of a Japanese poster advertising a programme of traditional
Sumo wrestling. The characters., reproduced here in their actual size,
are written in a style introduced centuries ago for specific use in posters.
The upper section lists the names of the competitors, and the lower
part, the names of the members of the Sumo organizing committee.
With its skilful arrangement of characters and neat layout, it could
appear to the Western eye as an extraordinary abstract painting.
this book" he wrote, "less than
1,000 Chinese ideographs. I do not
think that with the use of so few
characters, the readers cannot grasp
the whole meaning of this book." He
was a forerunner of the new trend.
The number of Chinese characters
in use was officially reduced after
World War II. In 1923 a temporary
Japanese Language Research Commit¬
tee recommended a standard list of
1,960 Chinese characters to be used
for daily life. This recommendation
was supported by twenty newspapers.
In 1946, the same year when the new
Japanese Democratic Constitution was
promulgated, the Japanese Government
reduced the standard list to 1,850
Chinese characters for daily use.
This was welcomed by most of the
people in those days, but as years
passed, criticism of this limit was
made. The critics said that boys and
girl should know more Chinese char¬
acters so that they could read their
own classics.
It has also been pointed out that
the decision regarding any consider¬
ation of a reduction in the number of
ideographic characters to be used
daily in writing should rest not with
the government but with the people.
The tide of history would then decide
how many ideographs should be used.
For a while after the war there was
another trend toward the limitation
of the use of Chinese characters
and eventually toward the complete
abolition of their use. The adoption
of either "Kana" or the Roman alpha¬
bet to the exclusion of all Chinese
characters was strongly advocated by
some. However, this tendency has
lost much force in recent years.
The growth of higher education has
tended to increase the number of Chi¬
nese characters used. The learning of
ideographs presents many difficulties,
but it also has many advantages. The
characters may look like letters to the
uninitiated but in reality they are
words. So they can represent many
ideas at a glance to the reader.
The Japanese have invented another
convenient way of writing Japanese in
the system known as "Furigana," by
which small Kana characters are
placed on the right hand side of any
Chinese character to show its pronun¬
ciation and meaning. This way enabl¬
ed less literate people to read difficult
Chinese characters.
Combination of two parts making
one word in Chinese ideographs is
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
71

STREAMLINING A WRITTEN LANGUAGE (Continued)
The pros
and cons
of two-way
writing
While a typewriter for European
languages uses about 84 symbols,
a Japanese typewriter uses 3,130 or
more, packed tightly into a large box.
Below, a Japanese typist moves a lever
over the box until it is directly above
the desired character. The characters
can be typed on the paper vertically
or horizontally as desired (above).
convenient in this age of electronic
computers. For example, almost all
"fish" names have the same "sign"
at the left side of the ideograph. The
sign for a particular "fish" tuna, carp,
trout, or any other fish is expressed
on the right side. It is quite easy to
find the appropriate word in an elec¬
tronic computer with the help of this
classification of Chinese characters.
Another merit (or demerit) of the
present Japanese language is that it
can be written both vertically and
horizontally.
When you read Japanese news¬
papers the headlines are printed in
both ways vertically and horizontally.
Signboards on the streets are also
written in either way. When you stand
at the crossroads of the busiest
shopping centre of Tokyo, the Ginza,
you see skysign news coming up from
the bottom so that you can read the
news from top to bottom, according
to the usual way of reading Japan¬
ese. Near the boulevard other sign¬
boards are written horizontally from
left to right, and sometimes, although
it has become rare these days, the
letters on the signboard are written
horizontally from right to left, following
the old-fashioned way of writing.
During the Meiji era all Japanese
letters were written vertically. With
the use of foreign languages which
are read horizontally, a new trend has
risen in Japan (as in China too),
to write the Japanese language hori¬
zontally, especially among university
students and in scientific circles.
I N 1952 the Japanese cabi¬
net made an epoch-making pronounce¬
ment that manuscripts prepared by
government officials should henceforth
be written horizontally from left to right
after a short adaptation period. This
put the official seal of approval on the
new custom, except for the Ministry of
Justice, where legal texts are still
written vertically, including the text
of the Japanese Constitution.
Now horizontal writing is over¬
whelmingly popular in writing Japanese,
including text books. Nevertheless,
in the newspapers, main stories are
printed vertically, but quotations of
markets and radio and television
programmes are printed horizontally.
Why is the Japanese usage so free
in this respect? I believe it is because
the Japanese are a practical nation.
The Japanese believe the nature of
water is free. Water changes its shape
according to the shape of the bowl.
When the bowl is round, water takes
the round shape. When the bowl is
square, water is squarely shaped. This
is the teaching of "Zen" Buddhism,
and the philosophy of the Japanese
throughout the centuries.
How to deal mechanically with so
many ideographs has been one of the
problems for those who are concerned
with printing. In 1915, typewriters for
Chinese characters and "Kana" were
invented in Japan and they are now
widely used in business. A Japanese
typewriter uses 3,130 or more.
The Chinese character typewriter
resembles the Western typewriter only
in name. The machine comprises a
large box in which all the metal
characters are tightly packed. The
271 characters most frequently used
are found in the centre with the rarer
characters placed on both sides of
this group with "Kana" and number
markings for easy identification.
Typing is accomplished by moving
an arm over the box until it is directly
over the desired character and then
pressing firmly down. Typing is thus
a slow affair, but a skilful typist can
type 714 Chinese ideographs in ten
minutes.
A
much more useful inven¬
tion of recent years in the field of publi¬
cation is the use of the teletype
setter for the classical Chinese ideo¬
graphs. An electric teletype is. connec¬
ted to a monotype machine. When the
teletype moves, it makes many small
holes on the tape which symbolize the
Chinese characters. An automatic
monotype casting machine produces
the type following the indication of the
small holes. The Asahi newspaper
inaugurated this apparatus in 1955 and
Kyodo News Agency, Japan's largest
news agency for local newspapers,
began this kind of operation in 1960.
In 1959 the Asahi undertook the
communication of whole facsimile
pages of the daily Tokyo Asahi to its
branch papers on Hokkaido, the
industrial northern island of Japan. By
the use of facsimile, identical news
pages are printed by the offset process
from the films supplied by a central
office, thus obviating the need for
setting type again. Now a similar
system is used between Tokyo and
Takaoka by the Yomiuri newspaper,
between Tokyo and Fukuoka by the
Nihon Keizai, and between several
other cities.
The coming of new means of
communication, radio and television,
has freed anew the Japanese people
from the burden of ideographs. Radio
was introduced to Japan in 1925 and
television stations, both public and
private, were started in 1953.
As this kind of new audio-visual
means of mass communication needs
no type and no printing machines, the
trouble of using Chinese ideographs
is avoided. But strangely enough, in
Japan, the publishing world has become
more prosperous in the years since
television was introduced, side by side
with the prosperity of television.
The reason for this is credited to
the expansion of education among the
population, the economic development,
and the increase of leisure among
salaried people and workers. In a
word, successful modernization in
Japan has widened the capacity of the
people to enjoy the country's literary
culture.
