THE PARTHENON
IN PERIL
by Georges Dontas
The Parthenon is in danger. The world-famous Greek temple
is slowly disintegrating and threatened with collapse unless
urgent measures are taken to save it. Greece's archaeological
services, after a stone by stone examination of the Parthenon,
are taking steps to meet the situation. In addition, a Unesco
mission is scheduled to fly to Athens in October next
to work with the Greek authorities. Here the Director of
the Acropolis describes the present plight of the greatest
masterpiece of Greek architecture.
Trapped by a tumbled section of cornice, the
horse of Selene seems to cry aloud the
distress of the Parthenon, which today faces
new perils. The whole of the eastern pediment
(photo right) was once decorated with
sculpture by Phidias and his school depicting
the birth of Athena (the original sculpture
of horse of Selene is now in the British
Museum, London). Yet even in its ruined
state the Parthenon seems to be the very
embodiment of perfection, with its noble lines,
harmonious proportions and the purity of
its stones the smooth and close-grained
marble of Attica on which the hand of time
has gently laid a golden patina. Left, some
of the shafts of the outer colonnade. Doric
columns, each with 20 grooves, they average
10 metres in height, and have a base diameter
of 1.9 metres which diminishes to 1.5 metres
at the top. For an explanation of how optical
illusions were corrected by Greek architects,
see illustration page 18 and footnote alongside.

ORE than 2,000 years have
passed since the last mason picked up
his tools and left the temple of the
Parthenon, dedicated to Athena, the
patron goddess of Athens. Situated
on the high rock of the Acropolis,
the temple's fresh-hewn marble and
magnificently coloured sculptures
then gleamed in the warm Greek sun.
Today, the simple, majestic silhouette
of the temple still dominates the busy
modern city of Athens sprawled at its
feet. Across the centuries it has
GEORGES DONTAS is director of the
Acropolis and the Acropolis Museum, and
director of antiquities for a section of
Athens. - He was formerly In the archaeo¬
logical service in the Dodecanese, inspec¬
tor of antiquities in the Ionian Islands and
director of the National Museum, Athens.
He is the author of many studies on Greek
architecture and art and on archaeological
research in Rhodes, Athens and Corfu.
resisted the ravages of time and the
many depredations of- men blind to
its immortal beauty.
Three centuries before Christ,
Demetrios Poliorcetes, King of Mace¬
donia, took up his quarters there with
his large retinue; the Christians turned
it into a church in the 6th century; the
Turks, in the 15th, into a mosque.
But the greatest disaster came in
1687: the Venetian doge, Francesco
Morosini, was laying siege to Athens,
and the Turkish army, which controlled
the city, had converted the Parthenon
into a powder magazine. In the
bombardment that ensued, a Venetian
shell hit the Parthenon and the powder
magazine exploded, slicing the Doric
temple in two and causing heavy
damage. In 1803, Lord Elgin had most
of the sculptures removed and taken
to England. They are now in the
British Museum.
Photo © L.Y. Lolrat
Mutilated though it was, the Par¬
thenon has nonetheless remained
better preserved, for all its changing
fortunes, than many other temples of
Greek antiquity. The soaring columns
still proudly enclose what was once
the "sekos" of the goddess Athena;
part of the frieze is still in place; some
of the original sculptures on the
entablature have survived.
Yet in 1830, just after the liberation
of Greece, all that remained of the
Parthenon were two separate groups
of ruins, one to the west the other to
the east. The temple regained its
structural unity as a result of the large-
scale restoration work undertaken by
the Greek archaeological services in
the 19th and 20th centuries (especially
between 1922 and 1933).
But today the Parthenon is once
again seriously threatened. Major
restoration, however, cannot be
CONTINUED ON- NEXT PAGE
17

PARTHENON (Continued)
The seven plagues that have smitten the Acropolis
envisaged without adding a large
number of new elements which would
be tantamount to what is known as
"reconstruction". And any "recons¬
truction" of an ancient monument,
even if only partial, is now condemned
as a technique except in very, very
rare cases where it is the only possible
hope of saving the structure.
There are now seven dangers
threatening the Parthenon and these
come from two sources: internal
structural deteriorations of the edifice
itself and external factors. The Greek
Archaeological Service has made
plans to try to meet both types of
danger.
First, there is the problem of the
foundations of the monument. The
Parthenon rests on a relatively soft,
calcareous stone, known as tufa, which
poorly resists long-term humidity.
Until a few years ago, the marble
flagging was missing in many places,
18
OPTICAL CORRECTION. These drawings
of the east front of the Parthenon show
techniques used by Ancient Greek
architects to correct optical illusions.
1. The temple as it appears to the
viewer; its lines seem to be perfectly
horizontal or vertical, though in fact they
are curved and inclined as in figure 3.
2. The temple front as it would appear
if it had been built as in figure 1 without
optical correction.
3. The temple as it is actually built with
vertical axes inclined inwards and with
convex stylobate, architrave, entablature
and pediment so as to produce the optical
impression shown in figure 1.
Drawings from "A History of Architecture on
the Comparative Method" by Sir Banister Fletcher,
Charles Scnbner's Sons, New York; B.T. Batsford
Ltd., London, 1948.
allowing the rain water to seep through
to the foundations and exposing the
tufa stone to a slow but inexorable
process of disintegration which under¬
mined the stability of the whole
temple. Almost all the flagging has
now been restored and sections that
have not will shortly be completed.
One of the most serious dangers
now threatening the Parthenon is the
alarming amount of wear and tear to
the horizontal flagstones caused each
year by the thousands upon thousands
of shuffling feet. This is a problem
that of course affects not only the
Parthenon itself but all the other sites
on the Acropolis, as well as the rock
platform itself. But as regards the
Parthenon, it is greatly feared that the
convex curvature of the horizontal
lines will be worn down, especially at
their point of maximum rise, unless ur¬
gent protective measures are taken (1).
Perhaps the most radical solution
would be to exclude all tourists from
the interior of the temple. Aesthetic¬
ally, the interior is now far less
impressive than the outer façades
since the Parthenon has lost the
cohesive unity it formerly had when
the original walls of the "naos" (the
principal chamber inside the temple
containing the statue of the deity)
were standing. From the naos the
visitor could not actually see the
exterior landscape through the
long rows of columns. The Greek
archaeological services are at present
considering the implications and con¬
sequences of closing the interior to
the public.
The original sculptures still in
position present another problem: how
to protect them from the ravages of
wind and weather. A few years ago,
the Greek Archaeological Service had
worked out a plan to protect the west
(1) It is well-known that the Parthenon
does not have a straight line in its archi¬
tecture. If a raised edifice is built with
perfectly straight horizontal and vertical lines
it will appear to the viewer to curve outward
and downward. To correct these optical
illusions many refinements were practised
in the great period of Greek architecture.
The Parthenon is the supreme example
of such refinements. The long horizontal
lines of such features as the architraves,
cornices, and stylobates (the horizontal base
or substructure on which the columns stand)
were formed with slightly, almost impercep¬
tible convex outlines. If straight they would
appear to the eye to sag or drop in the
middle of their length. The stylobate of
the Parthenon had an upward curvature
towards its centre of 2 61 inches on the
east and west façades, and of 4.39 inches
on the lateral façades. Similarly, the vertical
shafts of the columns were inclined inwards
towards the top to correct the appearance
of falling^ outwards and also give a subtle
convex curvature towards the bottom to
counteract the hollow appearance which
results from straight-sided columns (this latter
correction is known as "entasis"). It has
been found that in the Parthenon the incline
is such that the axes of all the columns, if
continued, would meet at a distance of a
mile above the ground.
frieze by restoring the ceiling which
originally covered the frieze on
the western façade along the
outer colonnade. The scheme was
abandoned for fear that the addition
of new blocks of marble, with their
tremendous weight, might jeopardize
the stability of the edifice.
It is now proposed to use blocks
of much lighter materials (made of
wood or plastic) and to retain the lines
of the original architecture. In the
meantime, the figures on the frieze
were consolidated a few years ago by
the use of cement, glue and other
ordinary techniques.

THE PARTHENON IN PERIL (Continued from page 18)
The sculptures still in position on
the two pediments of the Parthenon
present a far more serious problem.
Unlike the figures on the frieze, they
are so placed that no measures can
be taken to protect them. They
should, I feel, be removed to the safety
of a museum and replaced by copies,
as was done after the carvings at the
ends of the east pediment were taken
down and sent to the British Museum.
Even more complicated is the
problem of the metopes the carved
marble slabs set between flutings
located on the frieze, just below the
pediment supporting the sloping roof
of the Parthenon. To remove the
metopes and replace them by copies
would be such a delicate operation
that it is preferable to leave them
where they are and include measures
for their protection in the plan for
saving the temple as a whole.
For the temple as a whole is
threatened by other dangers. One is
the damage caused by the iron clamps
applied during construction of the
temple or during later restorations for
consolidating the stonework. These
iron clamps have become so rusted
with time that they have lost all
usefulness, and what is worse, they
have expanded and caused the marble
to split. It is thus absolutely vital to
remove all the old clamps and replace
them by new ones made of bronze or
some other rust-proof alloy. This is a
vast undertaking which has only just
begun and will no doubt take several
years to complete.
The countless fissures in the marble,
caused by the 1687 explosion as well
as the ravages of time, are a
permanent cause for concern. Water
infiltrates into the marble through
these fissures, and on cold winter
nights the water freezes and expands,
thereby splitting the stone.
On the morning after such freezing
spells our people go around picking
up the fragments of marble, carefully
noting the precise, spot where they
belonged or where they fell. Later
they are stuck back again, as are the
fragments that become detached from
the iron clamps. Steps are now being
taken to seal up all fissures in the
hope of reducing such damage.
But by far the biggest predicament
of the Parthenon today is its steady
disintegration before the onslaught of
the elements. This of course is more
or less true of any monument, but it
is particularly serious in the case of
the Parthenon because of the heavy
calcification of the marble. This
calcification (known as the Parthenon's
"disease") has been brought about by
the fires and exposure to inclement
weather the temple has suffered across
the centuries, further aggravated by
industrial fumes from the many
factories going up around Athens.
How can this slow, relentless
process of deterioration be stopped?
The only answer would seem to be to
coat the entire marble surface of the
Parthenon with a transparent film to
protect it from the eroding effects of
the atmosphere. But this technique
is also fraught with danger. If the
liquid film is too strong it could eat
into the marble and accelerate the
fragmentation of the stone; some films
could give the monument an ugly
veneer or alter the present colour of
the marble.
Much caution and experimentation
will therefore be needed before a final
decision can be taken. At present
various chemical products are being
tested on samples of ancient marble
found on the Acropolis and known to
have come from the Parthenon. But
so far, I regret to say, no miracle
substance has been found that offers
full protection and no drawbacks.
Certain products recently introduced
on the market and believed to be
effective, have proved, on testing,
either useless or actually harmful.
Finally, there is the new problem
of jet planes and helicopters flying
over the Parthenon. The vibrations
from these aircraft are so strong that
it is feared they will cause fragments
of marble to come loose or even shift
the position of the big stone blocks.
Steps have been taken to alert the
authorities to this danger and to halt
such overflights.
Time and the hand of man have
inflicted on the Parthenon serious
wounds which call for constant,
vigilant attention. Greek archaeolo¬
gists are deeply conscious of these
grave responsibilities and are doing
their best to preserve their most
cherished artistic heritage for the
benefit of all mankind.
34
PROTECTING EUROPE'S CULTURAL HERITAGE
IHE 18 member coun¬
tries of the Council of Europe (1)
have launched a continent-wide
programme to safeguard the cul¬
tural monuments, historic cities, and
natural sites that enrich Europe's
cultural heritage.
As a first step, a systematic in¬
ventory of this heritage is being
made in many countries. Details
of each monument and each his¬
toric, artistic or archaeological site
will be recorded. When a complete
"card-index" of Europe's monu¬
ments and sites has been compiled,
a summary of each "case history"
will be published.
This survey on a continental
scale might serve as a guide for
(1) Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark,
France, Fed. Rep. of Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta,
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzer¬
land, Turkey, U.K.
other regions which are syste¬
matically taking stock of their cul¬
tural heritage and making plans for
its protection.
Since 1965 the Council of Europe
has organized international sym¬
posia at which specialists have
examined different aspects of the
problem:. conservation and enhance¬
ment of Europe's monuments and
sites; co-ordination of modern town
planning with the preservation of
historic monuments and sites; pro¬
blems of many historic cities faced
with the tremendous increase in
motor traffic and growing real
estate speculation.
Unesco views the problem of pro¬
tecting man's cultural heritage in
the broader context of action on a
world scale. In June 1964, it launch¬
ed an International Campaign for
Monuments which sought to foster
greater public and official aware¬
ness of the need to safeguard our
monuments and cultural treasures
of the past (see "Unesco Courier,"
Jan. 1965).
More recently, in February and
March of this year, two Unesco-
sponsored international meetings
for specialists and observers from
many specialized organizations as
well as the Council of Europe and
the League of Arab States were
held at Unesco, Paris.
The first meeting aimed to co¬
ordinate, for international adoption,
the principles and scientific, techni¬
cal and legal criteria for the effec¬
tive protection and enhancement of
monuments and sites. The second
meeting approved the text of an
international code drawn up by
Unesco to ensure better protection
for cultural property threatened by
public and private works. The text
of this code will be submitted to the
Unesco General Conference for
approval in November 1968.
