A BOLD PLAN
FOR CULTURAL TOURISM
IN BRAZIL by Michel Parent
I
12
HE very name Brazil has
a universal fascination. It evokes
images of virgin forests, colourful,
rhythmic folklore, and a history rich
MICHEL PARENT is senior inspector of
historic monuments in France and has
special responsibility for the preservation
and restoration of historic sites. He has
worked on a plan for the creation of a
series of national and regional parks, and
has carried out special operations for the
preservation of historic monuments in Bur¬
gundy and the Paris area. He is the
author of several books on art history:
"Cathédrale de Strasbourg", "Bourgogne",
"Histoire de l'Architecture" (published by
Ed. Quillet, Paris). His other written works
include plays for the experimental theatre
and studies on scenographical research.
He recently carried out a Unesco mission
to assist Brazil in drawing up a broad
programme of restoration and protection of
its cultural resources and natura/ sites
within the ' framework of a national plan
for tourist development.
in fabulous tales of adventures and
. discovery. In a word, a tourist's
paradise.
Opposed to this vision we also
find one of the most audacious exper¬
iments in town planning in the new
capital of Brasilia, . looked upon by
many as a model for tomorrow's cities
(see "Unesco Courier", June 1961).
This is so true that people now ask
not "Have you been to the Carnival
of Rio?" but "Did you get a chance
to see Brasilia?"
None of the marvels of Brazil,
however, from its magnificent scenery
to its bold, contemporary architecture
has been decisive enough to make
tourism a major factor for the develop¬
ment of Brazil.
In 1966, Brazil could boast no more
than 100,000 foreign visitors, and of
these a fourth came from the neigh¬
bouring countries of Argentina and
Uruguay. The figure also includes
foreign travellers who come to Brazil
for business or other purposes not
directly connected with tqurism.
Even domestic tourism is extremely
limited. Brazilians from Sao Paulo or
Rio de Janeiro who can afford to
travel prefer to go to Europe, North
America or even far-off Asia instead
of trying to discover the beauties of.
their own land.
But all this may well change in the
years ahead in Brazil (as in other
parts of the world), with faster inter¬
continental air travel, lower fares, and
the overcrowding of certain European
coastal summer resorts, In contrast to
the endless ocean beaches of Brazil
offering sunshine and shade all the
year round.
But two things are necessary if
this radical change is to come about.
First Brazil must possess an adequate
network of roads and hotels without
which no real expansion in tourism

Photos © Carlos de Sa Moreira
I
On the terrace of the church of Congonhas do Campo (State of Minas Gerais, Brazil),' stands
a remarkable group of polychrome statues the 12 prophets. They are the work of Antonio
Francisco Lisboa, known as O Aleijadinho ("The Little Cripple"), Brazil's most celebrated artist
of the late 18th century. Left, head of one of the prophets, Joel, seen against a backdrop
of church bell-towers. O Aleijadinho gave Brazil a distinctive style of Baroque art infused with
great power and vitality. Many of his works adorn the churches of Ourp Preto, the town that
has now been made a Brazilian national monument.
^^to
is possible. Secondly, everything
must be done to preserve the natural
beauty and architecture of the country,
still little known abroad. At the rate
things are going now these are likely
to vanish before the rest of the world
has a chance to get to know them.
If this plan is to succeed three simul¬
taneous operations must be carried
out. One, a survey of Brazil's artistic
and natural treasures summarized in
adequate form for the tourist. Two,
administrative and legal measures to
preserve these treasures, with the
expansion of existing services to carry
them out, and the promotion of public
opinion in Brazil to support these
measures. Three, the maintenance
and restoration of the sites and monu¬
ments themselves and the develop¬
ment of their touristic possibilities.
During the past two years, at the
request of the Brazilian Government,
three Unesco missions (with the aid of
the U. N. Development Programme),
have co-operated with Brazilian spe¬
cialists in mapping out a programme
for the development of Brazil's cultu¬
ral resources within the framework of
a nation-wide plan for economic deve¬
lopment. The "overall plans for the
preservation of natural and artistic
treasures" which the Brazilian Govern¬
ment seeks to promote can only take
place if incorporated into "plans for
economic development as a whole."
But the integration of cultural deve¬
lopment into economic development
can only be accomplished by incor¬
porating economic development into
cultural development. Let me explain
what I mean. As a country's standard
of living rises we find that cultural
questions tend to occupy a greater
place in the individual's and indeed the
whole of society's leisure activities.
At least we hope so.
Too often, however, we find that
cultural matters are looked upon and
dealt with in piecemeal fashion and
rarely, if ever, viewed within the frame¬
work of an overall plan for cultural
development. The development of
theatre or music, for example, is
rarely seen in conjunction with that
of architecture or cultural monuments.
What is needed is a general plan
for the cultural development of a na¬
tion, and this should be integrated into
the broader plan for general economic
development.
Brazil, a nation endowed with
exceptional natural and cultural wealth,
could well lend itself to such' an
approach, on condition that certain
problems of general development are
solved, such as town and country
planning, improvement in communica
tions, professional training, and that
tourist facilities are provided for.
With its eight and a half million
square kilometres, Brazil is a nation
of vast open expanses. Once con¬
sidered a drawback, these empty
stretches are now a boon. Overcrowd¬
ing and lack of space are a feature of
many countries today with air and
water pollution and other incon¬
veniences that go with them. But
Brazil could accept a large increase in
its population and a sharp rise in
tourism without any difficulty.
Certain areas of Brazil, it is true,
are heavily populated while others are
witnessing what is tantamount to a
full-scale exodus. The causes are
both underdevelopment, as in Recife
and Salvador in north-east Brazil, and
overdevelopment as in Sao Paulo.
What is called for here is the decen¬
tralization of the economy, the disper¬
sal of industry and modernization of
agriculture. The growth of tourism
depends on these fundamental struc¬
tural reforms. But tourism itself can
spur economic growth and a rise in
living standards, and thereby promote
and open up new avenues ror eco¬
nomic development.
This is the background against
which we must examine the expansion
of Brazil's future tourist development.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

CULTURAL TOURISM IN BRAZIL (Continued)
Reviving the glory of Brazils sumptuous mansions
14
Brazil's great attraction, apart from
a number of famous, breathtaking
sites, lies in her spectacular expanse
of territory and her 3,600 miles of
unbroken coastline. But Brazil's
natural wealth is much- more fragile
than would appear. In the past two
hundred years the tropical forest has
suffered such a gigantic onslaught
that it now represents only eight per
cent of the territory, Amazonia exclud¬
ed (Amazonia accounts for 30 per
cent; open scrub land for 62 per cent).
The remaining coastal forest belt as
well as the interior forest areas must be
preserved at all costs. On this will
depend the choice of future sites for
seaside and tourist resorts to be link¬
ed with the nation's lovely cities and
historic sites so that the two insep¬
arable facets of the Brazilian scene
nature and the arts are easily
accessible to the visitor.
When the Portuguese arrived in
Brazil in the 16th century they found,
unlike the Spaniards in Mexico and
Peru, that the Brazilian Indians had
developed no great architectural civil¬
ization of their own. In the settlements
they founded they Introduced the
European style of architecture, and
throughout the 16th and 17th centuries
the Jesuit priests were to be great
builders of churches, monasteries and
other edifices, all strongly marked by
the influence of Europe.
This was not to be the case for the
"fazendas", the great country houses
built during the "Colonial" period,
especially in the region of Sao Paulo,
which signalled the emergence of a
truly original Brazilian style.
This was followed in the 18th and
19th centuries by the eruption all over
Brazil of Baroque architecture, again
influenced by Europe but enriched,
revitalized and inspired anew by the
lush tropical vegetation and environ¬
ment. The magnificent sculptures of
Aleijadinho in particular reached a
height of mystic expressionism un¬
matched in Europe except during the
Middle Ages.
Clt would be a mistake, however, to
imagine that Brazilian art is purely
religious in nature. The era of the
rural "fazenda" architecture was soon
followed by the city "sobrado", large,
typically Brazilian mansions, several
stories high, built to form a homoge¬
neous unity. The "sobrados" are found
in many cities of north-eastern Brazil
and elsewhere, and the ones in Sal¬
vador de Bahia are particularly beau¬
tiful and striking. It was within the
urban framework of this city of art, as
well as in Sao-Luis and Olinda, near
Recife, and in the cities of Minas
Gerais, that the sumptuous Baroque
churches sprang up.
Today, the magnificent "sobrados"
have been abandoned by the upper
classes that built them (as have the
"fazendas") and have become the
most decrepit sections of each town
(as decrepit and insalubrious as the
"Favellas" of Rio de Janeiro) grimy,
over-crowded slums, neglected, falling
in ruin, or else threatened by awkward
attempts at modernization or half
measures for sanitation improvement
that do little to better the lot of the
poor who now dwell in them.
Less than fifty years ago these
sumptuous mansions were the pride
of Brazil's cities. Even today, amidst
their tropical surroundings, they stand
as some of the foremost examples of
Brazilian architecture. Steps must be
taken to make them the harmonious
settings they once were this time for
the inhabitants now living there. For
there can be no question today of
evicting them without depriving the
"sobrados" of much of their signifi¬
cance. It would obviously be unfair
to evoke their cultural and touristic
value as an excuse for removing the
sobrado-dwellers from everthing that
attaches them to their towns and
ancient districts.
In other words, tourism must be
looked upon as only one of the
reasons for the future renovation of
these ancient districts. The tourist
will then be able to take part in and
hence better appreciate the daily life
going on around him. It is in this
way that "cultural tourism" can help
to bring different peoples closer to¬
gether, not by turning these areas
into empty shells devoid of life.
B
UT here I ought to point
out that the problem of saving the
cultural heritage of Brazil's cities, and
particularly a city like Salvador de
Bahia, calls for a global policy of
urban renovation. This demands a
co-ordinated effort to restore large
sections of the big cities and even
entire small towns, not merely by
repairing the buildings but also by
modernizing the whole urban infra¬
structure (water and sewage systems,
electricity, roads, etc.).
Brazil's heritage in stone is found
not in great ruins and monuments of
past civilizations but in its living cities.
Thus its cultural heritage cannot be
divorced from the life in these cities.
This heritage draws its vitality from
popular lore and customs, from the
beliefs, rites and festivals, the music
and literature which are all anchored
in tradition and in the Brazilian pattern
of life.
In this respect Brazil is privileged
in being the meeting point of three
currents of thought and culture: In-
dianism, Africanism, and Latin Chris¬
tianity. These currents have become
so intermingled that, though they may
be discernable to the scientific eye, for
the people of Brazil they are fused
into an inseparable whole englobing
many fine shades of differences.
Just as the past fifty years have
seen the deterioration of Brazil's mon¬
uments, so the rapid modernization
and changes now taking place (and
which are of course indispensable for
the country's development) constitute
a threat to Brazil's rich traditional
heritage. Fortunately, the Brazilian
people possess great vitality and have
managed to adapt and incorporate their
traditional patterns to the new, modern
ways. Furthermore, they are adept
at adjusting modern trends to fit their
environment (as they have skilfully
done in fashion and the use of modern
fabrics) and in pioneering in moder¬
nization (as in architecture).
Despite this, Brazil's traditional tech¬
niques are in extremely grave danger
of disappearing much more so than
its monuments or its natural scenery.
If this heritage is debased to serve
only as a tourist attraction it will have
lost all authenticity and meaning. We
must not fail to realize that once
started this process is irreversible,
changing what were once techniques
and customs rooted in the life and
work of the community into "manu¬
factured objects". Steps must be
taken at once to preserve the authen¬
ticity of these traditions before it is
too late, and a programme of ethno¬
logical study needs to be undertaken
with this in mind concurrently with the
actual restoration and preservation of
Brazil's monuments.
A repository of local tradition and
arts and crafts can be built up by
such scientific studies, with the aid of
museums, and this in turn will help
to foster new interest in and support
for these traditions. The study of
traditional techniques, furthermore, is
in itself a means of preserving their
authenticity, and the imaginative use
made of them by contemporary artists
and craftsmen can prepare the way
for the universal, yet diversified, civili¬
zation of tomorrow.
Everywhere today it is important
that monuments and traditions of the
past be more closely linked to modern
life so that contemporary culture can
draw inspiration from traditional
sources. The vitality of the Brazilian
theatre, the many folk and popular
festivals that take place all over the
country enrich and give sparkle to
Brazilian life, attract foreign tourists
the year round, and promote easier
contacts between people.
It is a striking fact that Baroque
art in general and the form it has taken
in Brazil in particular stem' from this
notion of social life exalted by the
institution of the festival.
If architecture is the art of rhythm
in space, for the eye and body it has
the added function of providing rhythm
to man's life not only in his work and
day-to-day affairs but also in his
festivals and other celebrations.
Leisure activities usually take place
within a certain architectural or struc¬
tural framework, and if separated from

SPLENDOUR AND DECAY are neighbours in
the city of Salvador de Bahia (northeastern
Brazil) which boasts many hundreds of churches,
gems of architecture and decoration. The
Church of St. Francis (above) was built in the
typical Brazilian Baroque style of the early
18th century. Right, air view of the Barrio
Jésus in Bahia. Here, the Brazilian Government,
with aid from Unesco, has launched a programme
for the restoration and enhancement of an
entire section (Pillory Square) of the city's
ancient buildings and churches, as part of
a nation-wide plan to preserve and protect
monuments and artistic treasures.
this framework they often lose much
of their quality. Hence, in those
countries where traditional ways are
still alive and have not been perverted
we should see to it that all data
concerning these traditions are re¬
corded so as to encourage the devel¬
opment of contemporary forms of
culture based on them.
Brazil's gift for spontaneous festivals
has emerged within the context of its
architectural surroundings. The de¬
velopment of such festivals will cer¬
tainly help to make Brazil's architec¬
tural heritage better known, once its
buildings and monuments have been
restored to their full glory by the
preservation operations now planned.
For the tourist the attraction will be
more durable and meaningful than the
"exotic" Brazil he now finds against a
backdrop of misery and dilapidation.
The deterioration of Brazil's monu¬
ments and buildings is paralleled by
the degradation of the countryside,
deforestation, the whittling away of its
agricultural zones and the new
invasion of wild undergrowth, the
pauperization of Its citizens and the
exodus of whole populations to the
coastal areas and the large over¬
crowded cities.
Undisciplined deforestation further
accentuates this disequilibrium, and
with the weakening of the soil that
ensues, seriously hampers the devel¬
opment of Brazil's road network. The
Brazilian writer Miran do Barros Latif
has pointed out that the luxuriant
vegetation of the tropics, the profuse
flora and fauna, are so intricately
linked together that they tend to
crowd out man. It was only by sub¬
mitting to its rigid laws that man was
able originally to settle there; and
later, when European civilization did
break through, this was possible only
by continually hacking, chopping and
struggling every foot of the way
against the ever-encroaching jungle.
But the situation is quite different
in the Brazil of today, and we must
completely revise our thinking about
the relation between nature and civil¬
ization in that country. Today, both
are interdependent and call for recip¬
rocal utilization and respect.
I might add that of the technical aid
operations considered most useful for
the cultural development of Brazil, I
would place first and foremost the
assistance of soil scientists to draw
up a programme for the stabilization
of the soil if only to prevent certain
monuments from collapsing.
This would be the most effective
type of assistance since Brazil, with
its long humanistic tradition, possesses
the necessary infrastructure for its
cultural action. What is. needed is to
develop this action. The Brazilian
historic monuments and fine arts
service has a top-rate staff of archi¬
tects and archaeologists. But their
work is not yet integrated into an
overall plan for national development.
Brazil's schools of architecture must
also be equipped to train a larger
number of restoration technicians who
could then be usefully employed for
a nation-wide programme of restoration
and maintenance of historic monu¬
ments. For the various reasons outlined
above, all of Brazil's cultural activities
would gain by being strengthened and
expanded at the Federal level as the
historic monuments and fine arts
service has been.
The launching of a broad programme
for the protection and exploitation of
Brazil's cultural heritage would be no
vain enterprise. Brazil has a rich cul¬
tural life rooted in tradition and a
great thirst for science and humanism.
It may need international co-operation
to carry through its project success¬
fully but this success will be a price¬
less gift that Brazil will offer to the
whole world community.
15
