The basic principles of medical ethics have not
changed since the time of Hippocrates 2,500 years
ago and therefore are not always easy to apply to
new situations created by biomedical advances. In
what circumstances should experiments be made
on a sick person? Or on a healthy one? What
weight has the consent given by a volunteer for
experimentation ? What criteria, for example, should
be used to choose a donor for organ transplantation ?
Medical men are justifiably concerned over these
problems which have aroused keen public interest.
In the practice of medicine, unprofessional conduct
is punished by prosecution for malpractice, but
experiments on man are still not controlled by law
in most countries. Medical science thus faces a
dilemma. The different aspects of these problems
were examined at a Round-Table organized by the
Council for International Organizations of Medical
Sciences (CIOMS) in Unesco's headquarters, Paris,
on October 7, 1967. CIOMS was set up in 1949 by
Unesco and the World Health Organization. We
publish below the opening address by Professor
Marcel Florkin, of the University of Liège (Belgium),
president of CIOMS and (on pages 25-27) passages
from the Round-Table discussions between eminent
scientists in medicine and medical research. These
reveal the diversity of views and the complexity of
problems posed today by medical ethics.
Round-table on
the doctors' dilemma
MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS
20
ON MAN
by Marcel Florkin

Photo 0 Erling Mandelmann
ScSCIENTIFIC progress rests
at one and the same time on obser¬
vation of patients and on the results
of experimental science. The founda¬
tions of the development of clinical
science are to be found in animal
experiments, and no one denies that
one of the most essential conditions
of medical progress is freedom to
carry out such experiments in accor¬
dance with well established principles.
Nevertheless, it is also equally obvious
that the prime condition of advances
in diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment
is the application of clinical science
to man.
Indispensable though they indeed
are, trials on human beings clearly
have limitations. Is it not sufficient to
leave it to the conscience of the
doctor himself? Such an attitude has
been shown to be tragically insuf¬
ficient, as was demonstrated by the
criminal actions of Nazi doctors.
During the Nuremberg trial, Briga¬
dier-General Telford Taylor, after
stressing the necessity of trials on
human beings, since the results could
not be obtained by any other means,
formulated on August 19, 1947 a
series of principles which he claimed
to be universally acceptable.
The first of these principles requires
that the subject of an experiment
should be fully informed and give his
voluntary consent to the experiment.
But already there are difficulties here,
for the principle is inapplicable to
children and to mental patients.
However, the voluntary consent of the
fully informed family of the subject
can take the place of the subject's
own consent. The definition of con¬
sent raises other problems, such as its
mode of delivery, whether oral or
written.
One serious drawback of the first
principle of Nuremberg is that to
inform the subject may be to thwart
the purpose of the investigation, as
when drugs and placebos are admi¬
nistered successively. However, it
seems that full information need not
necessarily be given in respect of
obviously harmless aspects of the trial.
The second Nuremberg principle
requires the investigation to be such
as to provide results that are for the
good of mankind and cannot be
obtained by any other method. There
has been speculation on several
occasions as to whether the demons¬
tration that a new therapeutic method
is ineffective could be considered as
a result redounding to the good of
mankind. It seemingly could be
regarded as such in the broad sense,
since it prevents the application of
ineffective methods.
The third Nuremberg principle lays
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
21

MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS ON MAN (Continued)
The ethics of clinical research
Ô5W
ID LU
O »
o
©ë
22
AUXILIARY HEART
This machine is an artificial heart.
It Is not designed to replace a
human heart but to help
persons with serious
cardiovascular diseases such as
myocardial Infarction, by relieving
and resting the damaged heart until
it can again take over its normal
functions. The four elements of the
machine, used in the U.S.A.,
recall the auricles and ventricles of
a real heart. But the artificial
heart, basically a pneumatic pump,
does not beat. Its pumping
system sends blood coursing
continually through a patient's
arteries and draws back blood from
the veins while maintaining the
correct blood pressure.
down that trials in man should be
based on animal experiments and on
such study of the natural history of the
disease as would raise the presump¬
tion that trial in man would lead to
important results and so be justifiable.
If this principle means that trials
should take place to verify acceptable
theories, it is undoubtedly useful.
But the requirement of preliminary
animal experimentation excludes psy-
chopharmacology as a whole.
T HE fourth and the sixth
to the tenth rules of Nuremberg spe¬
cify that any unnecessary suffering
and injury should be avoided and that
the experiment should be carried out
by a qualified experimenter. They
also provide that the subject of the
experiment should be free at any
moment to cut short the experiment
and that, if the experiment at a given
moment takes a dangerous turn, the
experimenter himself should stop it.
One of the Nuremberg principles,
the fifth, can be placed only in the
context of the trial of the Nazi crim¬
inals; it lays down that experiment
cannot presuppose the death or
invalidity of the subject unless the
subject is the experimenter himself.
It seems to us inadvisable to intro¬
duce any consideration of murder or
suicide into rules governing experi¬
ments on human subjects. Neverthe¬
less, the provision should be main¬
tained that, when the experiment
involves a foreseeable danger, there
is no alternative for the experimenter
but to try it on himself.
After the Nuremberg rules came the
Declaration of Helsinki, promulgated
by the World Medical Association in
1964. On the whole it corrects what
in the Nuremberg rules was circum¬
stantial, related to Nazi crimes, and
places those rules more correctly in
the context of generally accepted
medical traditions.
Whether research is clinical or not,
it should be based on laboratory and
animal experiments, and conducted
only by scientifically qualified persons
and under the supervision of a qua¬
lified medical man. The objective
should be in proportion to the inherent
risk to the subject, and there should be
a careful assessment of the inherent
risk in comparison to the foreseeable
benefits. Special caution should be
exercised when the personality of the
subject is liable to be altered by drugs
or experimental procedures.
The Declaration of Helsinki also
states that in the treatment of a sick
person the doctor must be free to
use a new therapeutic measure if in his
judgment it offers hope of saving life.
If at all possible, consistent with pa¬
tient psychology, he should obtain the
patient's freely given consent after the
patient has been given a full explana¬
tion. In case of legal incapacity, con¬
sent should also be procured from the
legal guardian.
With regard to non-therapeutic clini¬
cal research, the Declaration of Hel¬
sinki is very close to the Nuremberg
rules. It nevertheless specifies that
consent should as a rule be obtained
in writing after the subject has been
fully informed. The responsibility for
the experiment, however, always re¬
mains with the research worker.
The investigator must respect the
right of each individual to safeguard
his personal integrity, especially if the
subject is in a dependent relationship
to the investigator, as a student to his
teacher, a prisoner to society, or a
conscientious objector to justice. The
two sections of the Declaration of Hel¬
sinki can be considered separately.
The application of new therapeutic
measures is undoubtedly essential for
the progress of medicine, as no one
will deny, but it is impossible to state
categorically that such new therapeutic
methods have always been applied
with all the requisite precautions.
Generally, the methods are based on
judicious physiological reasoning and
adequate anatomical knowledge.
N ONE the less, the analysis
of the history of gastrojejunostomy
made by John A. Ryle, in his book,
"Changing Disciplines", proves with
ample detail that new methods are not
always sufficiently subjected to criti¬
cism or correctly tested statistically in
practice. As Ryle has stressed, treat¬
ed cases should be followed up for
several years, possibly as many as
ten, and most of the subjects treated
should be given a control examination
by competent investigators. The con¬
trols should preferably be carried out
by a small number of large, very well
equipped medical centres and in
accordance with standardized me¬
thods.
With regard to trials of very active
new drugs, as in the case of anti¬
biotics, there would obviously have

been no Indication for delaying till the
end of a long control period their
employment in such serious illnesses
as septicaemia, meningitis, or endo¬
carditis. But a long control period
seems necessary where the illnesses
have a low mortality and spontaneous
cure may be mistaken for therapeutic
effect.
L ASAGNA, in his book
"The Doctor's Dilemma," cites the
case of a trial carried out on a group
of soldiers suffering from strepto¬
coccal sore throat, in which half
received sulfonamides and the other
half antibiotics. It was certainly not
possible at the time to foresee that
the subjects given sulfonamides would
not be protected against rheumatic
fever, but it was foreseeable that the
control group not receiving antibiotic
treatment would show an incidence of
about 3 per cent of that condition.
The control group should therefore
have been given penicillin, which was
already at that tirrve known to reduce
the incidence of rheumatic fever follow¬
ing streptococcal infection. A practice
also to be condemned is to subject
patients with a fatal prognosis to trials
of a kind not likely to improve their
condition.
In the United States of America, the
National Institutes of Health conti¬
nually carry out clinical research on
human beings at their enormous Cen¬
ter of Clinical Research. A Clinical
Research Committee studies the pro¬
jects of experimental research, which
cannot proceed without their previous
agreement.
A check of the same kind is made
before clinical research is under¬
taken in the medical centres of the
Atomic Energy Commission. Patients
are invited to go to the centres free,
but they are advised not to accept the
invitation unless they agree to submit
themselves to a period of research
in accordance with guidelines laid
down by the appropriate committees.
Non-therapeutic research is practis¬
ed on a large scale in certain countries,
the subjects seeking payment, or re¬
mission of punishment, for their parti¬
cipation or counterbalancing their posi¬
tion as conscientious objectors in
relation to military actions, or the like.
Although consent of the subject is
particularly necessary in these cases,
it is not sufficient to guarantee that
the rights of the Individual will be
respected.
A few years ago, an Inquiry was
carried out in Harvard Medical School
(U.S.A.), into persons appearing as
volunteers for experiments. It showed
that 60 per cent of them were mal¬
adjusted and had problems in adapting
themselves to their social environ¬
ment. Other inquiries have confirmed
that volunteers for experiments may,
from the psychological point of view,
differ considerably from the rest of
the population. This further compli¬
cates the concept of informed consent.
It could be held today that a doctor
sending consenting human beings to
the moon and back in accordance with
a plan popularized among the public
would not be different in his attitude
from the Nazi doctors who were tried
at Nuremberg (unless of course the
trip was a success).
This can be said today, when the
trial-and-error methods and the gamb¬
ling on success that were so long in
favour in space exploration have just
very recently become Inacceptable and
a preliminary programme of animal
experiment, especially on monkeys, is
being developed in that field.
If anyone, worried about the pro¬
tection of the individual in spite of a
lively interest in astronautics, had said
so a year ago, he would have been
considered a defeatist and a despiser
of both human courage and the skill of
the engineer.
T,HE need to improve the
cure rate in illness seems more and
more necessary, and it can only be
done with the help of trials on the
human being. It is conceivable that,
to ensure that the trials are conduct¬
ed in the closest possible accordance
with medical ethics, clinical research
should be carried out in particularly
well-equipped large clinical centres,
especially university hospitals. A cli¬
nical research committee, acquainted,
beforehand with research projects,
should approve them before they are
instituted; and the responsibility should
be not the experimenter's but that of
the clinical institution concerned or of
the State.
Whatever the methods and rules
might be, they can only be the fruit
of the constructive thinking of doctors
and the thousand-year old tradition of
medical ethics, and the objective is to
give medicine foundations that are
both more scientific and more humane.
A colony of the green mould called
Pénicillium chrysogenum (penicillin).
This antibacterial substance was
discovered in 1929 by the British
bacteriologist Sir Alexander Fleming.
From mutations of the structure of
the original penicillin, chemists have
obtained over 500 related substances
that vanquish many forms of infection.
This small device, called the pacemaker,
Is used to deliver regular electric
impulses to a heart whose own natural
pacemaker is faulty. Implanted In
the thorax or under the patient's skin,
it Is connected to the heart by wires
and powered by a battery that keeps
it functioning for three years. Thanks
to pacemakers, thousands of people
are able to lead normal lives.
w
to
Cl
E
(0 i
CT.
O
O
Lj_
c
o
(fí
o
O
O
o
o
-C
Q_
i^H
Swallow a radio transmitter and find out
what Is wrong with your stomach.
This is what actually happens when
someone gulps down this
half-centimetre-long capsule' containing
a micro radio transmitter. The
strength of its transmissions is
regulated by the amount of acid in the
gastric juices.
23

Medical experiments
on man (Continued)
THE SCIENTISTS SPEAK UP
Bernard HALPERN
member of the Institut de France; professor
(chair of experimental medicine) Collège de
France. Paris, France
24
T HE term "human experimentation" raises a
sinister echo in each of us. But fear solves no scientific
problems. For my part, the recommendations of the WHO
Group that safety tests of new drugs should be carried out
on fully informed volunteers in conditions of almost absolute
security is more in conformity with the requirements of
ethics than the thousands of such trials hypocritically carried
out daily in hospitals in all countries on individuals who are
totally ignorant of what is being done to them.
E Sir John ECCLES
~ Nobel Prizewinner for Medicine 1963; member,
~ Institute for Biomedical Research, Education
~ and Research Foundation of the American
~ Medical Association, Chicago, U.S.A.
T HE brain is the most wonderful organized
structure in the universe... The other remarkable thing
about the brain is that you can do very considerable
damage to It, make massive lesions In it, and you do not
get overt symptoms...
I would say, In relation to Investigations which are of a
dubious, or to my mind unallowable, kind, that a great
proportion of these investigations could be satisfactorily
done in primates; that there should be a great develop¬
ment of primate, and particularly anthropoid ape, inves¬
tigation centres. I do not say that everything can be done
on primates, but I would say that a great deal more should
be done before we subject man to these traumatic proce¬
dures under any conditions.
When you say that you fully explain something to the
subject, telling him what the lesion is or what he is going
to be subjected to, and he gives his consent, I do not
believe in the case of the brain that you can explain what
you are going to do, because none of us knows sufficient
about the brain to be able to say to a subject simply,
precisely and with assurance that this is all that it will do.
André LWOFF
Nobel Prizewinner for Medicine 1965; director.
Department of Microbiological Physiology,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
W E know today that very many pharmaceutical
preparations produce in the long run a whole series of
illnesses and disturbances. In this connexion, the con¬
clusions of a WHO Scientific Group were the following:
"The administration of biologically active substances to
human beings must always be accompanied by some
element of risk that cannot be avoided by the most careful
and exhaustive scientific study of the drug before it is
Introduced. The introduction of new drugs... should be
judged from an evaluation of the balance between benefit
and risk."
Thomas Adeoye LAMBO
professor of psychiatry. University of Ibadan,
Nigeria
IN most of the developing countries, and espe¬
cially in Africa we find it extremely difficult to apply regu¬
lations and declarations based on experiences derived from
developed countries.
The use of psychopharmacological drugs in developing
countries is widespread and there is often abuse or indis¬
criminate use of the drugs, as also of antibiotics, narcotics,
analgesics. Practically every village in Africa today has
got some of these drugs, because of the indiscriminate
advertisements in the newspapers, on the radio, and so on.
And in fact some of the rural areas and the most remote
villages in Africa are completely invaded by the people who
sell these drugs. This again raises a great many questions,
difficulties and dilemmas for those of us who are involved
in medical practice and who are concerned with the philo¬
sophy and with the entire management of medicine.
We feel that there is an urgent need for young countries
to learn from the developed countries and to avoid the
mistakes which probably have been committed In most of
these highly sophisticated countries. In practice, we have
not been able to avoid some of them and there ¡s a great
room for flexibility and for original thinking.
The whole area of human rights is fundamental, but the
contents, the priorities, and the nature of the so-called
fundamental human rights may have to be altered to suit
the needs of young developing nations because of their
own evolution, and again this would raise quite a number of
problems problems which are religious, cultural, sociolo¬
gical, physiological, as well as questions which are entirely
local.
S Alfred GELLHORN
ZZ director. Institute of Cancer Research, College
~ of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University,
New York. U.S.A.
T.HERE is a need and necessity for experimentation
on patients with neoplastic disease [cancer] because no
experimental animal tumour model system is directly com¬
parable to cancer in man. The therapeutic or physiologic
studies should have a formal protocol which can be
evaluated by others competent in oncology [the study of
tumours].
The results should be systematically collected and also
be subjected to objective scrutiny. The consent of the
patient should be obtained, but the investigator and society
should understand that this gives recognition of the status
of the subject as a person and does not constitute a true
informed agreement by the patient involved.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 26

'PHANTOM'
OF
THE X-RAYS
This plastic figure, nicknamed "the phantom", is used by specialists
at the Cancer Institute in Villejuif (France) to perfect radiotherapy
techniques for the treatment of cancer. Each of its numbered
plastic sections offers the same resistance to radiation as
the corresponding part of the human body.
The exact intensity of X-rays that will reach the human organism
is measured beforehand with a radiation meter at different
points inside the figure. Doctors use the "phantom" to calculate
precisely where to direct the beam on area needing treatment.
- fe^C e. s
? -ÄF.
-v

THE SCIENTISTS SPEAK UP (Continued)
The patient with incurable cancer is not a hopeless case.
No special liberties should be taken in the use of such
subjects in clinical research. In my opinion such patients
should not be utilized in studies of potential value to
mankind without relevance to their own disease problem.
The cancer patient must be accorded the same status
as a person as any other human. To do otherwise places
cancer in the category of the leprosy of past centuries; it
is an expression of the lack of Information of the medical
profession in the management of disseminated neoplastic
disease.
Finally, the use of human subjects for research in which
there is any real risk and from which results relevant to
the subject cannot be expected is, I believe, a danger to
the ethical fibre of the investigator, introducing an attitude
of carelessness to the welfare of a fellow human being
which ultimately could destroy his value as a physician.
= Paul M ILLIEZ
professor ofclinicalmedicine. FacultyofMedicine,
Paris, France
I have heard people talk for years past of the
absolute necessity of the patient being completely informed
about new drugs being tried on him. In my field of work,
hypertensive disease, which involves a large number of
functional disturbances, therapeutic trials are difficult to
carry out if the patient is fully informed of the disturbances
he might have. If we tell him about all the real, but extre¬
mely rare, disturbances he might experience during an inves¬
tigation or the trial of a new form of treatment, we are faced
with either a blank refusal to take the test or undergo the
investigation or, on the other hand, the appearance of the
disturbances we fear. I should like some means to be
found of testing drugs with an unquestionable action in valid .
conditions, while maintaining the freedom of the individual,
not endangering his life, and keeping the conscience of the
experimenter clear.
authorities such experiments should be strictly forbidden;
in all such experiments man should be replaced by animals.
The great danger must be pointed out of sacrificing
human beings on the altar of science and glorifying
subjects who volunteer to be guinea-pigs. Someone has
written that voluntary death of that kind is not suicide but
a sacrifice in the service of science. Such a view is the
more dangerous because it exalts the spirit of sacrifice
as an ideal. But the real ideal places the value of human
life above all.
However, it must be said that not all experiments
jeopardize the life of the subject. Is an experiment on a
healthy person that involves little risk acceptable? Many
authorities say yes, on the absolute condition that the
subject is a volunteer.
The proof of consent has given rise to differences of
opinion. To begin with, most experiments in biomedicine
are so technical in their details that the subject cannot
understand them. When the experiments are such as to
involve the subject in a real danger, the question of the
volunteer is very controversial. In France, free consent
in those circumstances mostly conflicts with our respect
for human individuality in life.
Trials on themselves by the experimenters are debatable.
Pasteur wrote in 1884: "I have not yet tried to treat people
after they have been bitten by mad dogs, but the time
to do so is perhaps not far off and I am very tempted
to begin with myself, that is, to inoculate the rabies and
then stop its effects, so much have I become seasoned and
sure of my results."
I shall say nothing about the clinical trials that have
been carried out on prisoners condemned to death or on
civil prisoners in for a term of years. To me they seem
to be contrary to the moral concepts of the human person.
E Maurice B. VISSCHER
~ professor ofphysiology. University of Minnesota,
¡¡¡¡2 Minneapolis, U.S.A.
26
= Theodor BRÜCKE
member, Austrian AcademyofSciences ¡professor
of pharmacology. University of Vienna, Austria
| N Austria therapeutic experiments are permitted
in university clinics, but the law forbids them in other hos¬
pitals. Thus the patient admitted to a university hospital
knows that new procedures not yet In current use may be
used for his benefit. This being the case, it is unnecessary
to inform him fully; nor is it possible when a new procedure
is being utilized. In any case the surgeons, even in current
practice, do not tell their patients that an accident occurs
in every 10,000 cases. It is undesirable that the patient
should know everything, and that is indeed the problem
involved in his being informed of a trial to be carried out
on him.
Robert de VERNEJOUL
president. Conseil National de l'Ordre
Médecins, France; professor. Faculty of
Medicine, Paris
des
I N each "therapeutic" case the decision is one
for the conscience of the doctor, who must weigh the
risks to his patient and compare them with the risks arising
from his doing nothing at all. At present, the most charac¬
teristic example is that of the extraordinary rapid progress
of organ transplantation surgery.
Experiments on healthy people are an entirely different
matter. Their sole aim is to advance medical science and
they raise a large number of questions. For a great many
ÏÏ E have some experience with law relating to the
regulation of animal experimentation, in the operation of the
British Cruelty to Animals Act of 1876. British biologists
are in agreement that the Act has had at least one out¬
standingly useful result. It has relieved them of day-to-day
harassment by anti-vivisectionists. It has also undoubtedly
been useful in impressing upon students and working
scientists, the need to exercise care to avoid pain and
distress in the animals they use.
On the other side of the coin, however, it has, I believe,
greatly hampered medical education because of the res¬
trictions and bars that it places on the use of higher animals
by students and also the bars It places on the use of such
animals by surgeons-in-training, and it has virtually barred
the performance of a number of types of scientific study
of animals. Animal experimentation is of such importance
to safe clinical investigation that it should never be unwisely
Impeded.
It may be of Interest to point out that British law In
general is very permissive with respect to the use of human
subjects in scientific study while it is highly restrictive with
regard to the use of animals. The great interest in animal
welfare is not limited to Great Britain. In the United States
today, for example, no popular national movement exists to
lobby for regulation of clinical investigation on human sub¬
jects, while at least three very well-supported national
organizations are clamouring for additional legislation to
regulate animal experimentation.
The public has a large interest in avoiding the establish¬
ment of conditions which would cripple clinical Investigation.
It also obviously has a great interest in protecting the rights
of individuals. But all unnecessary red tape should be cut
and necessary controls should be exercised with the advice
of the most competent scientists available to give it.

A BALL
TO THE HEART
Where formerly a diseased
heart was irreparable,
today surgery can often
renovate It. Left,
performing 'a delicate
though now classic
heart operation:
after opening up the
heart, a surgeon prepares
to suture Into place an
artificial valve (a small
plastic ball) to replace
the damaged human valve.
The ball will move with
the pulse of the blood
within the confines of a
metal cage. X-ray photos,
right, show (top) ball
closing the aorta while the
ventricle fills with
blood from the left auricle;
and (bottom), lifted by
the pressure of blood
coming from the ventricle
the ball has risen to the
top of its cage, allowing
blood to pass to the aorta
during the systole
contraction that impels
blood outwards from the
heart. During the surgical
operation a machine takes
over the action of the
patient's heart and lungs,
and blood, diverted from
the heart, is pumped
through the body after
being oxygenated.
Photo WHO Illustration <D. Courtesy "Le Livre de la Santé", by loseph Handler.
Editions Rencontre, Lausanne. Photos Broussais Hospital, Paris
In all clinical investigation in which there is any risk to
the subjects studied, prior extensive study on many species
of lower animals is a sine qua non to safety. Consequently
every one concerned about human welfare should be equally
solicitous about maintaining freedom of investigators in the
humane use of lower animals in scientific study.
kidneys. I think that this is an important example. I think
that at present all countries where kidney grafts are
commonly and successfully carried out should have regu¬
lations protecting the rights of donors and also of the
medical profession. At the moment, there Is on the whole
some illegality In their position.
E Jean HAMBURGER
professor. Faculty of Medicine, Paris ; professor,
^ Nephrology Clinic, Necker Hospital, Paris, France
I HE problem of the voluntary donor of a kidney
graft may appear a model for the problems with which we
are dealing. On the one hand there is a risk for the donor
of 0.12 per cent and on the other a probability of operative
success of as much as 75 per cent.
In such circumstances, have we the right to accept- the
voluntary gift of the donor? Tradition says no, both moral
tradition and legislation in most countries holding that it is
not permissible to carry out an operationin -this case a
nephrectomy on a subject when it is not for the benefit of
the subject himself. But in recent years, I think, everyone
has come to agree that in the particular case of the graft
of an organ to save a human being about to die such a
tradition should not be maintained. All the thinkers and
doctors who have dealt with the problem find nothing
illegitimate in accepting that a subject should take a
reasonable risk to save someone dear to him.
But it is necessary that the doctor should verify two
things: first, that there is a reasonable balance between the
risk and the probability of success, and second, that the
volunteer ¡s a real volunteer...
In June 1967, Italy the first country in the world to do so,
I think promulgated a law on voluntary donations of
E Alexis de MURALT
~ president, Swiss National Foundation for
Scientific Research; professor of physiology,
University of Berne, Switzerland
I have the feeling that there ¡s a great deal of
duplication going on at the moment in clinical investigation.
I would not say that it should be a government regulation,
because I think this would hamper the free development of
research, but the Idea of having a group of experts, not
connected directly with the investigation, to review the
problem and issue a licence or give permission, or
something like that, seems to me very sensible.
The teaching of clinical pharmacology should .be estab¬
lished at every medical faculty. Postgraduate courses on
the techniques and the responsibilities of clinical inves¬
tigation should be organized regularly for the more senior
people of the group as well. Because the techniques and
the possibilities of investigation are improving every day,
new methods come up and the research groups have to be
informed about them.
I think that, if a human experiment is undertaken, only
the best and the most modern techniques should be
allowed. The planning of clinical investigation should be
submitted to a review by a knowledgeable body of experts
In the particular field Involved. And duplication of human
experimentation should be avoided if possible, at least
within one country, and later if possible in the whole world.
27

MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS ON MAN (Continued)
VIEWS OF THE
SCIENTIFIC PRESS
28
TRANSPLANTS :
THE SOCIAL DILEMMA
Leader by Dr. Dennis Melrose
"Science Journal", Feb. 1968
The ethical problems raised by our
ability to transplant human organs are
symptomatic of a much more funda¬
mental advance: man's new ability to
control the course of his own evolu¬
tion. . .
So far, [biology] has revealed rela¬
tively little about how to overcome the
immunological rejection of transplant¬
ed tissues.
When, and if, it does we shall have
to face a series of complex ethical
and legal issues which cannot lightly
be brushed aside. Should organs such
as the' heart be taken from patients
who are alive but incurable? Should
they be taken only from patients who
are dead and, if so, with what can
we replace our now totally obsolete
definition of death? If doctors are
forced to make such decisions, how
are they to reconcile this with their
implied undertaking to strive ceaseless¬
ly for the life of one patient and not to
follow courses of action which they
personally believe to be for the most
good of most people?
I do not pretend to know the an¬
swers. But, perhaps more important,
I do not believe that the answers
should come from experts involved in
the technical issues. Ultimately, they
must come from society from the
people who are to donate and to re¬
ceive transplanted organs. . .
Here, then, is the crux of one of the
most pressing problems raised by
modern biology. The scientists whose
work gives rise to these issues in
the first place cannot disclaim all
responsibility for them. Equally, they
themselves cannot dictate solutions to
democratic societies. Where, then, is
the machinery for exposing these sit¬
uations which are certain to become
more and more common and where
is the machinery for taking action to
meet them? Sadly, it does not yet
exist. Our ability to control our own
evolution, as Aldous Huxley rightly
predicted, has overtaken our ability to
direct its course in the most meaning¬
ful way.
THE ETHICS OF
THE CLINICAL TRIALS
OF DRUGS
By Sir Derrick Dunlop
" The Medical Journal of Australia",
March 4. 1967
There is a general tendency to admit
as ethically acceptable the uncontrol¬
led experimentation with unproven
drugs to which unsuspecting patients
have been continually exposed in ordi¬
nary practice; but if in Britain a consul¬
tant in hospital. . . carries out a care¬
fully planned trial in hospital, that is apt
to be regarded by certain people as
treating like guinea-pigs National Ser¬
vice patients who have right to better
things, and questions may be asked
in the House of Commons about it.
There must always be some patient
or group of patients who receive a new
drug for the first time; it is surely de¬
sirable that this should happen under
careful observation by experts in hos¬
pital and that the experience of such
patients should be made of value to
others. . .
It is therefore not surprising that
various authorities have attempted to
draft codes of ethics to govern human
experimentation the Nuremberg Code,
the Report of the World Medical Asso¬
ciation and that of the British Medical
Research Council. While it is possible
to enunciate some very broad rather
platitudinous principles, which are
really intrinsic to the doctor's training,
it is doubtful whether precise rules
can be framed applicable to all the
immensely varying circumstances of
clinical trials, about which it is easy
to generalise and so difficult to parti¬
cularize. . . A rigid ethical ideal may
be too restrictive when one is facing
real-life problems.
ETHICS, CONSENT AND
CONTROLLED CLINICAL
TRIAL
By Maxwell Finland
"Journal of the American Medical
Association ". Nov. 7, 1966
Considerable interest has been fo¬
cused recently on the moral, ethical,
and legal issues involved in human
experimentation. . .
The more recent thalidomide tragedy
spurred the provision of many new
regulations to insure the efficacy as
well as the safety of drugs. In each
of these instances, the uncovering of
some major tragedy, and scrutiny of
the events leading to it, have resulted
in a wider scope of investigation,
which revealed other improprieties
and, in turn, led to broader and
stronger restrictions in the laws and
into the regulations provided for ¡n>
plementing them. . .
Among the recent fallout of these
explosive events, have come some
broad accusations as well as specific
indictments of immoral and unethical
practices in studies carried out by un¬
named but readly indentifiable investi¬
gators. . . Many thoughtful and res¬
ponsible individuals involved in the
current discussions have expressed
concern that, as a result of all this
turmoil, restrictions may stifle further
scientific pursuits essential for im¬
provements in our understanding,
management, and prevention of the
ills of man. . .
MEDICAL ETHICS
Editorial by I. H. Page
" Science ". July 22, 1966
The sanctity of the human body has
long been considered inviolate, as has
the relationship between patient and
physician. It is just on these questions
that the problem of consent for ope¬
rations, drug testing, organ transplanta¬
tion, and experimentation has hit a
snag. Despite millions of words, we
are no closer to solving such prob¬
lems than we were before the Ke-
fauver investigation. Indeed, we have
managed to hide our dilemma by the
simple device of word coverage. . .
In the present circumstances, all of
us might well consult the ancient Hip-
pocratic Oath. It reads in part as
follows: "The regimen I shall adopt
shall be for the benefit of my patients
according to my ability and judgment,
and not for their hurt or for any
wrong. . . Whatsoever house I enter,
there will I go for the benefit of the
sick, refraining from all wrongdoing or
corruption. . . Whatsoever things I see
or hear concerning the life of men,
in my attendance on the sick or even
apart therefrom, which ought not to be
noised abroad, I will keep silence
thereon, counting such things to be
as sacred secrets."
Those words have been a guiding
light for medicine for 2,500 years.
Does not their spirit provide a beacon
reliable for both today and tomorrow?
ETHICAL ISSUES
IN RESEARCH WITH
HUMAN SUBJECTS
By W. Wolfensberger
"Science", Jan. 6, 1967
We have now arrived at a point
in the evolution of science at which
both scientists and the intelligent lay
public consider universality of pro¬
cedure, approval by peers, sharing of
risks, and even use of volunteers ques¬
tionable or even unacceptable and un¬
ethical in some research situations. . .
There is a danger that, if scientists
do not respond to the public's concern
about research conduct, research rules
will be imposed on science from with¬
out. Such rules may be formulated
in an emotional atmosphere; may be
selective, inconsistent, and inadequate;
and may be enacted into law in such
a fashion as to be unnecessarily bur¬
densome, restrictive and rigid or even
absurd. . .

Medical researchers consider experiments on animals
indispensable to progress in medicine. Here, lymph (a liquid
surrounding all body cells) is being collected from a
rat in the biological laboratory of a cancer research institute.
The great French biologist, Louis Pasteur, wrote ¡n 1884, when
working on a vaccine against rabies: "It is only when I am
sure that I can successfully innoculate a number of dogs after
they have been bitten that I shall dare to innoculate a
human being. And even then my hand will tremble, for what Is
possible in the case of a dog may not be so when it comes to a
human being. However, I shall have no further scientific scruples."
In 1964, the World Medical Association affirmed In its
Declaration of Helsinki that "clinical research should be based
on laboratory and animal experiments or other scientifically
established facts."

