by
Masunori Hiratsuka
THE SECRET
OF JAPAN'S
EDUCATIONAL
TRIUMPH
"IulAPAN is a country of
Islands in the Orient far away from
here. . . As an Oriental country, Japan
has her own fine cultural traditions;
at the same time she has achieved
a remarkable advancement in mod¬
ern technology and such rapid
economic progress that it has even
been called "a miracle." I believe it
is very significant for us to study the
education of such a country."
These observations were made by
Professor Joseph A. Lauwreys, one
of the world's outstanding scholars
on comparative education, in introduc¬
ing a lecture on the development of
modern Japanese education which
I gave at the Institute of Education
of the University of London several
years ago.
Japan ¡s a small country, smaller
than California only one of the fifty
states in the U.S.A. Yet its population
is just over 100 million and it is now
one of the world's giant industrial
nations.
The development of modern edu¬
cation in Japan has been so remarkable
that its enrolment ratio in higher edu¬
cation is today one of the highest in
the world. The enrolment ratio in the
second stage of secondary education
(senior high schools) is now the
world's second highest, and that of
elementary education has been main¬
tained at more than 99 per cent for
boys and girls alike since 1920.
People from every continent have fre¬
quently asked me the same question :
"How has Japan managed to achieve
such rapid progress In schooling within
MASUNORI HIRATSUKA is director of
Japan's National Institute for Educational
Research and chairman of the National Fede¬
ration of Institutes for Educational Research.
A leading authority on educational prob¬
lems in Japan, he became Dean of the
Faculty of Education at Kyushu University
in 1953. Dr. Hiratsuka was director of
Unesco's Department of Education in I960,
and is now a member of the Japanese Na¬
tional Commission for Unesco.
a single century?" Some have even
asked me to divulge the "secret" of
this success.
What interests me particularly about
the question in that those who pose it
appear to imagine that Japan's educa¬
tional resources were almost negligible
before 1872 when its modern school
system was established.
So I always make a point of explain¬
ing that Japan is a country whose
people have maintained a high respect
for education and culture throughout
their long history, and that facilities for
education in various forms did in fact
exist before the Meiji Restoration in
1868. And I never fail to stress the
fact that a solid foundation had been
laid for the rapid advancement of
modern Japanese education.
In 1966 Unesco commemorated the
anniversary of the great Japanese
woman novelist, Shikibu Murasaki, who
wrote her famous "Tale of Genji" in the
Heian Period, 950 years ago. The trans¬
lation of this work into English in the
1930s, revealed to Western readers the
narrative skill of Shikibu Murasaki, in
her account of the adventures of the
hero, Prince Genji, and also her per¬
ceptive descriptions of the court life
of her day.
Shikibu Murasaki is only one of a
number of highly gifted Japanese wo¬
men writers, essayists and poets of the
Heian Period, which witnessed a rich
flowering of art and literature in Japan
and many kinds of cultural and educ¬
ational activities in which Buddhist
priests notably played a leading role.
St.Francis Xavier, a Jesuit priest who
came to Japan in the 16th century,
recorded in one of his letters that the
country had two universities and that
the Japanese people were very In¬
dustrious and polite. Besides the two
universities there were many Buddhist
temple schools whose functions were
similar to those of the cathedral and
monastery schools in medieval Europe.
When we talk about modern educ
ation in Japan, we should not overlook
certain important historical develop¬
ments of the Edo period (1603-1868)
which immediately preceeded the Meiji
Restoration :
Under leyasu Tokugawa, founder
of the Tokugawa Shogunate which
governed Japan during the 265 years
of the Edo period, respect for learning
was made the highest principle of
government, and military training was
relegated to second place ;
With the exception of some minor
troubles, Japan enjoyed over 200 years
of peace a fact unprecedented in
world history ;
Through the integration of Chinese
and Japanese classics with Buddhism,
a religion which had done much to
enrich the country's arts and learning,
a unique Japanese culture was formed ;
Though society was divided into
four categories warriors, farmers, ar¬
tisans and merchants people in all
parts of the country spoke a single
language ;
Japan had two major religions
Buddhism and Shintoism whose
followers were drawn from every class
of society.
Of paramount importance was the
fact that various types of educational
facilities existed and were open to
people from every section of the
community. Towards the end of the
Edo period, Japan had more than
50,000 "Terakoyas", a form of one-
teacher one-classroom school, through¬
out the country. These schools, where
reading, writing and arithmetic were
taught to commoners, were run without
financial support from the government.
For the warrior class there were about
300 schools which were equivalent to
the levels of present-day senior high
schools and junior colleges.
Other types of popular education 1 Q
provided instruction in needlework, 1 3
practical training in various everyday
activities ard apprenticeship in tech-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

Photo Japanese Embassy. Pans
First day of school for six-year olds in Japan.
99 per cent of Japan's children receive nine years
of free primary and lower secondary education.
Photo Paolo Koch - Rapho, Pans
Secondary school girls make a pilgrimage to
Nagasaki. Japanese students can often be seen in
droves visiting the great monuments, museums
and other sites throughout Japan, sometimes
JAPAN'S EDUCATIONAL TRIUMPH (Continued)
20
nical and professional skills ; opportu¬
nities for education were also available
in winter youth camps in agricultural
communities and in Buddhist and
Shinto pilgrimage groups. Through all
these facilities designed to meet the
practical needs of daily life, many
people received some measure of
education.
All children of the warrior class, most
townspeople and a large proportion of
the more prosperous farmers were
literate. Thus, in 1872 when the modern
school system was established in Japan
and the State made itself largely re¬
sponsible for education, a solid found
ation for the development of public
education on modern lines had already
been prepared.
Japan's national leaders at the time
of the Meiji Restoration were resolved
to give top priority to education in their
plans for developing and modernizing
their country. They were dissatisfied
with Japan's existing educational sys¬
tem and looked abroad, seeking to
learn from the experience of other
countries. The great spirit of the Five-
Point Imperial Covenant "to seek
knowledge far and wide" was given
full effect in the field of education.
Japan learned a great deal from the
educational systems of the Nether¬
lands, England, France, U.S.A. and
Germany.
In August 1872 the new public educ¬
ation system, of which Japan can be
rightly proud, was established. It laid
special emphasis on democratic prim¬
ary education. Regardless of sex,
social status or means, all students
were enrolled in the same type of
primary school.
The emphasis on equality in educ¬
ation had already been demonstrated
in 1871 when the Japanese Govern¬
ment, with the future development of
national education in mind, sent

travelling many hundreds of miles to do so. The
number of girls now attending colleges and
universities in Japan has» almost doubled in the past
15 years, to total 17 per cent of the student body.
Photo © Japan Illustrated
Graduation day for 15 thousand students at Japan's mammoth Ninon University
in Tokyo. With its student body of over 52 thousand, it is by far Japan's
largest institution of higher education. The ceremony is being held in the
university's auditorium (also Japan's» largest) with a seating capacity of
100,000. It was formerly a gymnasium reserved for Japanese sumo wrestlers».
five girls to study in the U.S.A. The
youngest, surprisingly, was a little girl
aged seven. Thus the government
affirmed its belief in the important role
that women would play in the modern¬
ization of Japan. Needless to say
many young men also went abroad to
study. Without exception they returned
to make important contributions toward
the making of the new modern Japan.
The first government programme for
the development of education was an
ambitious one. The initial plan,
announced by the Ministry of Education
in September 1872, envisaged the
division of the country into eight uni
versity districts, in each of which there
were to be one university and 32 se¬
condary schools. Each secondary
school district, in turn, was to include
210 primary schools.
In other words, it was proposed
to establish eight universities, 256 se¬
condary schools and 53,760 primary
schools in Japan. The strong em¬
phasis placed by the Meiji govern¬
ment on a democratic education with
equal opportunity for all provided the
basic foundation on which the modern
nation of Japan has been built.
By 1880 there were 28,000 primary
schools with over two million pupils
(just over 40 per cent of school
age children). The enrolment ratio
which was only 25 per cent in 1872
rose to 95 per cent by 1905, and in
1907, the period of compulsory educ¬
ation was extended to six years. Today
the duration of compulsory education
is a full nine years, and enrolment
throughout this period is 99.9 per cent.
Japan's secondary school system has
undergone some important changes
in the course of its development.
After 1886, the main function of sec¬
ondary education, in line with the
European pattern, became more or less
a preparatory stage for college en-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 23
21

Photo © H. Cartier- Bresson - Magnum, Paris
Students visiting
Tokyo's National
Museum gaze
attentively at the
golden funerary mask
of Tutankhamen seen
reflected In the glass
showcase. This»
priceless relic from
ancient Egypt was the
centre-piece of an
exhibition of ancient
Egyptian art treasures,
"Tutankhamen and his
Times" which drew
visitors from all over
Japan in 1965.
If the Japanese love
cameras, they also love
sport. Sports such
as judo, baseball,
basketball, ping-pong etc.
are very popular.
Sport is» also an
increasingly important
feature in the school
curriculum. Here, a
girl student shows
her skill as an adept
of Kenpo, the art of
self-defence with a
stick, unlike judo, or
jujutsu in which the
agility of the sportsman,
devoid of any weapon,
is paramount.

JAPAN'S EDUCATIONAL TRIUMPH (Continued)
'Operation 6-3-3' renovating a nation's school system
trance rather than an extension of
primary education. At the same time,
many types of secondary schools for
technical and vocational training were
opened in order to meet the various
needs of a developing society.
In 1941, only about 20 per cent of
primary school graduates entered
regular four or five year secondary
schools. But this did not mean that
for the remaining 80 per cent schooling
ended with primary education. Statis¬
tics show that some 60 per cent en¬
tered higher primary schools and about
10 per cent were enrolled in part-time
courses for young people. Thus only
about 10 per cent did not receive any
further schooling.
Various opportunities for technical
and vocational training were offered to
graduates of higher primary and pri¬
mary schools through apprenticeship
and on-the-job training in private enter¬
prises. Many young people attended
the so-called miscellaneous schools
which gave short courses in such
fields as dressmaking, cooking, type¬
writing, hairdressing and car driving.
Before the Second World War, a
great variety of institutions of higher
education were open to pupils after
they had completed six years in prim¬
ary school and five years' secondary
education. As of 1945, universities
numbered 48; higher schools, 33;
various kinds of professional schools,
309; teacher training schools of various
types, 106; and higher normal schools,
seven. But the number of students in
these institutions amounted to only
four per cent of the 17 to 21 age group.
Japanese education since the Meiji
era has played a very important role in
promoting social mobility. Many of
Japan's outstanding leaders, including
scholars and statesmen, came from
remote villages. They attained their
present positions not only by their
own efforts, but because educational
opportunities were offered them.
The country people of Japan have a
well known saying that children should
be given a good education even if
farmland has to be sold to pay for it.
Japanese people have continued to
maintain their traditional respect for
learning since the Edo period. Various
types of scholarship programmes have
been established which have aided
a great number of young people from
the poorer sections of the community.
In 1947, in the midst of social chaos
and economic strains due to the war,
the 6-3-3 educational system (six years
of primary school, three years of lower
secondary school and three years of
upper secondary school) was adopted,
and compulsory education was extend¬
ed to nine years.
This was regarded by some as a
rash enterprise, but the decision was
taken because the Japanese people
were convinced that their country
could be reconstructed only through
the promotion of a truly democratic
system of education. And indeed, the
development of the new educational
system was achieved through the
efforts of countless people.
In this connexion, I recall a visit I
made to the U.S.A. in 1950, at the
invitation of the State Department, to
study the U.S. system of higher educ¬
ation. While I was in Abilene, Texas,
I happened to mention that Japan had
adopted the 6-3-3 system simultan¬
eously throughout the country. One
professor told me that he did not see
how that was possible. I was happy
to be able to tell him that by the
sincere and enthusiastic efforts they
had made for their country's recon¬
struction, the Japanese people had
turned the impossibility into reality.
A
LTHOUGH the 6-3-3 sys¬
tem was set up in Japan under the
guidance and inducement of the occu¬
pation authorities, its introduction was
not due to their compulsion alone.
Already in the mid-1 930s there were
scholars among the Japanese Prime
Minister's advisers who regarded the
6-3-3 system in the United States as
the most advanced democratic system
of education in the world, and they
recommended that it be introduced
into Japan.
At the beginning of the 6-3-3 system,
about one half of lower secondary
school graduates entered upper sec¬
ondary schools while most of the
other half left school and took jobs.
Today about 75 per cent enter upper
secondary schools.
The rapid increase in this ratio in
recent years has given rise to many
serious problems. Due to the severity
of the examinations for entry to upper
secondary schools, the lower second¬
ary school has become a preparatory
stage for such examinations rather
than an intermediate stage between
primary education and secondary educ¬
ation proper in which special emphasis
is given to observation and guidance of
the individuality, aptitude and ability of
each pupil.
There has been a tendency in Japan
to regard upper secondary schools of
the general academic type as being
superior to most of the other types,
such as those which provide technical
and vocational education. Regrettably,
those who are labelled good teachers
in Japan are in most cases so judged
by the number of their students who
enter the best-known higher schools.
Japan's Central Advisory Council on
Education has now submitted a report
on the reform of upper secondary
education. After an examination of the
whole situation, it proposes, among
other changes, to diversify the contents
of upper secondary school education;
to provide compulsory education, in
one form or another, up to the age of
18 for those who do not enter the
regular upper secondary schools ; and
to considerably improve and expand
facilities for part-time education, cor¬
respondence courses, miscellaneous
school education and social education.
The Council particularly insisted on
the need for an all-out effort to provide
pupils with educational opportunities
that correspond to their individuality,
aptitude and ability. The Ministry of
Education and local governments are
now striving to implement the Coun¬
cil's proposals.
Under the postwar reform of the
educational system In Japan, various
types of institutions for higher educ¬
ation were reorganized simultaneously,
in 1948, into four-year colleges whose
courses strongly emphasized general
education. Later, a Master's course of
two years and a Doctorate course of
a further three years were offered at
the new colleges which had formerly
been universities. More recently, grad¬
uate school education has also been
rapidly expanding.
The number of students receiving
higher education has been increasing
far more rapidly than was foreseen,
particularly since 1955. The enrol¬
ment ratio is now about 18 per cent.
One of the main reasons is the rise
in the standard of living; another is
Japan's rapid economic growth. A
further and even more important
reason is that those who believe
in the democratic right of equal oppor¬
tunity in education have increasingly
sent their children to colleges and uni¬
versities.
As of 1967 there were 369 univer¬
sities and university institutes, 451
junior colleges, and 54 technical
colleges in Japan. Within ten years,
the enrolment ratios are expected to
reach 85 per cent for upper secondary
schools and 25 to 30 per cent for
higher education.
The number of women students at
higher educational institutions has
been Increasing year by year, which is
very gratifying in a democratic society.
Prior to the war women were not
admitted to the Tokyo Imperial Univer¬
sity, except in rare cases. Christian
mission schools played a very impor¬
tant role in the education of Japanese
women, and most of the outstanding
women leaders were educated in pri¬
vate colleges. Today most junior
colleges are for women.
Instruction in special fields is provid¬
ed by various educational institutions ma
such as the miscellaneous schools / j
where cooking, dressmaking, flower
arrangements, etc. are taught. On-the-
job training in private firms and factor-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

24
JAPAN'S EDUCATIONAL TRIUMPH
(Continued)
ies and correspondence courses have
been becoming increasingly popular.
Recently, education for mothers ^ has
been promoted through special "mo¬
thers'" schools throughout the country,
but Japan is still far behind other
advanced countries in this respect.
Needless to say, teacher training is
the most fundamental factor for the
development of education, and has
been given special priority by the
government. In 1943, teacher training
schools were reorganized into colleges
at the higher education level. In 1948
it was decided that school teachers,
including those in primary schools,
must qualify at a four-year university
course, and at the same time, the
status of teacher training colleges was
raised to university level.
With the rapid advance of science
and technology, mass communication
media such as radio and television
have themselves become a major area
of education. The school broadcasts
of NHK (Japanese Broadcasting Cor¬
poration) have been very useful not
only in enhancing the educational
effect of classroom teaching, but
also for correspondence course pro¬
grammes in secondary education.
They are now proving to be an indis¬
pensable means of education for chil¬
dren and students at schools in remote
areas where educational facilities and
materials are still insufficient. Thus,
they are playing a big role in elimin¬
ating regional differences in educ¬
ational levels and in improving general
educational standards.
Radio, TV, films and other kinds of
audio-visual aids to teaching have been
increasingly utilized in Japanese
schools, improving the quality of educ¬
ation at all levels.
In conclusion, I would like to point
out some of the fundamental problems
facing Japanese education today.
Firstly, education is generally consid¬
ered as a form of school education.
Not enough attention is paid to
education at home, which is extremely
important, nor to the significant
influence of pre-school environments
upon children. No less important is
the significance of social education or
adult education after the end of school
education. What is really important
is the idea of life-long education.
Secondly, a limited view is taken of
human ability. Ability is generally
understood as intellectual, while the
existence of other kinds of abilities
technical, artistic, social (for better
human relations) and physical abilities
are easily forgotten.
Thirdly, the evaluation of vocations
is based on this erroneous view of
human abilities. It is unfortunate that
the meanings and social roles of dif¬
ferent vocations are not fully appre¬
ciated.
Educational leaders in Japan are now
trying to develop an education that is
truly worthy of the name, taking into
consideration the individuality, aptitude
and ability of each student.

