im
WOlMEN
New letters
of credit
30
LTHOUGH women have made encouraging pro¬
gress in their quest for equal rights with men, there are
relatively few nations even among the so-called developed
countries where their sex is no longer a factor in deter¬
mining their position in society. Where mankind has been
only too eager to embrace new ideas and approaches in
other matters, when it comes to human rights it still often
clings to anachronistic concepts which do not, in fact
never did, correspond to reality.
The Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women, adopted by the United Nations one year
ago, and reaffirmed at the International Conference on
Human Rights in Teheran in April this year, is by the
necessity of its existence an indictment against the
injustices which continue to be inflicted upon women.
Implicitly calling the world's attention to the laws,
customs, regulations and practices which still discriminate
against women, it urges their complete abolition, and the
establishment of effective legal protection for equal rights
of men and women.
By stipulating the need for full political rights for women
to be guaranteed in law, it is at the same time a reminder
and a rebuke to countries whose women are denied voting

rights, to hold public office or exercise public functions.
In many areas, women who marry citizens of another
country are forced to take their husband's nationality, or
become stateless; inequalities in civil law often prohibit
them from acquiring, administering, and inheriting property;
the difference in the status of husbands and wives remains
an almost implacable obstacle to equal rights; and the
practices of child marriage and the betrothal of young
girls is still common in certain countries. In enumerating
these abuses, the Declaration on the Elimination of Dis¬
crimination against Women lays down positive guidelines
for their removal.
Because there are legal and traditional barriers still
blocking women from exercising their right to an education,
and thus diminishing their contribution to society, equal
rights are imperative at all levels of education, including
equal opportunities to benefit from scholarships and grants.
Even basic requirements like the right to participate in
adult literacy programmes are often denied them.
Progress has, of course, been made in the field of
education. But as educational opportunities become more
extensive, enabling women to acquire greater knowledge
and skills, safeguards must be instituted to ensure that
they can enter professional and business life on a basis
equal to men.
The Declaration insists that strong measures must be
taken wherever women do not have free choice of
work, equal pay for equal work, discrimination on account
of marriage or maternity (such as dismissal from work due
to maternity) and insufficient social benefits.
Against the background of International Year for Human
Rights, 1968, the Declaration on the Elimination of Dis¬
crimination against Women stands out as a major Instru¬
ment in the struggle to secure the rights and freedoms of
all human beings.
United Nations Secretary-General U Thant, in his
address to the international non-governmental organizations
at their recent conference on human rights at Unesco
headquarters in Paris, said "The discriminations against
women which still persist, the "incapacities" of women,
whether political, legal, social or economic, are unlikely
to be overcome without the active co-operation' of men
and women who must join in persuading governments and
society to assure the advancement of women to full
equality, and to enable women to participate fully in the
development and progress of their nations."
31
