Wearing special protective clothing
to guard against exposure to
radioactivity, technicians in the
radiation control laboratory of a
nuclear power plant examine an item
of reactor equipment. Checks
of this kind and stringent security
precautions have given nuclear
power stations and other
installations» where atomic energy is
used a safety record better than
nearly all other major industries.
Photo © EDF, Perls

ISOTOPES
WITH
'KID
GLOVES'
by Stanley White
'HEN the Second World
War ended, despite the preoccupations
with the military aspects of nuclear
energy, the Great Powers as well as
other nations turned their attention to
the task of examining its potential for
beneficial purposes.
By 1949, the late Sir John Cockcroft,
one of the world's pioneers and a
sage guide of peaceful programmes,
predicted that production of electricity
could be achieved within a few years.
His prophesy was fulfilled in 1954
when the U.S.S.R. started up a nuclear
reactor producing five million watts.
Two years later, other stations started
operating in France and the U.K.,
followed quickly by another In U.S.A.
The operation of these stations was
watched throughout the world and a
great deal of information about them
was revealed at the first two con¬
ferences , in Geneva on the peaceful
STANLEY WHITE, a science writer,
formerly with the United Kingdom Atomic
Energy Authority, is now a . member of
the International Atomic Energy Agency in
Vienna, Austria.
uses of atomic energy, arranged by
the United Nations in 1955 and 1958.
These early stations demonstrated
both the feasibility and the safety of
obtaining power from the atom.
A tremendous amount of work has
been going on since that time to
improve the methods and the econo¬
mics of nuclear power production.
Within the last three years the
breakthrough has come and it is now
clear that nuclear power, when used
on a large scale, will be cheaper than
the coal, oil and gas-fired station to
which we have been accustomed in
the past.
Because of the breakthrough there
has been a remarkable surge in the
use of nuclear power. This year will
see altogether 94 reactors in use at
power stations in 16 countries (1) and
their generating power will be more
than 14,000 megawatts a megawatt
being one million watts. Many others
are being built, most of them much
more powerful than at present, so that
(1) Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia,
France, Fed. Rep. of Germany, Eastern Ger¬
many, India, Italy, Japan, Norway, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, U.K., U.S.A., U.S.S.R.
in four years' time just over twice as
many reactors will be producing nearly
five times as much power.
Forecasts for the future are being
continually revised upwards and at the
moment it is expected that by 1980 the
quantity of power being produced will
reach 350,000 megawatts, enough to
run 50,000 large factories or satisfy
the needs of more than 100 cities the
size of Paris or to run 350 million
single bar electric heaters, all burning
at once. They could also, if not under
some control, make enough plutonium
to make about twenty bombs a day.
But the plutonium is much more
valuable as a power producer itself.
All this is happening for two
principal reasons. One is that power
produced in this way is rapidly becom¬
ing cheaper, a trend that will continue
with advances in knowledge and tech¬
nology, and with the continuous growth
in demand for power. The other is
that the elaborate attention to safety
is satisfying the stringent demands
made by governing authorities, and that
operating experience -as well as the
efforts made by these authorities have
done much to reassure the public.
The greater part of a nuclear power
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
17

ISOTOPES WITH 'KID GLOVES* (Continued)
Edible fishbones without waste
18
station is very similar to any other
power station. Heat produces steam,
which runs generating equipment,
from which electricity .is passed
through cables. In many conventional
stations the heat is created by burning
coal, oil or gas-, in others energy comes
from fast-running water. In nuclear
stations the energy gained from
splitting atoms of uranium, or in some
cases plutonium, is released as heat.
When the splitting, or fission, occurs,
it also happens that new elements,
some highly radioactive, are created
in the core of the atomic furnace.
If not contained safely, this radio¬
activity could cause great harm, but
fortunately the ways of controlling it
are well known just as well known
as ways of controlling the fires in con¬
ventional furnaces. Nevertheless the
scientists and engineers have not only
readily accepted all conditions impos¬
ed on them, but in all matters where
radiation is concerned have themselves
set much greater restrictions.
Here are some examples of the
meticulous way in which the interests
of the population are considered.
When the discharge of radioactive
wastes into the sea from the Wind-
scale Works in the U.K., was being
considered, it was discovered that a
food product known as "laver bread"
was made from a type of seaweed
harvested in the region. Laver bread
is eaten by a relatively small group
of people living 200 miles away, but
since the seaweed tends to absorb
radioactive ruthenium, the amount of
radioactivity in the discharge had to
be set low enough not to affect those
consumers.
When determining permitted dis¬
charges from the Bradwell nuclear
power plant, also in the U.K., it was
the fact that oysters might absorb
radioactive zinc that influenced the
decisions.
Even more selective was the result
of an investigation when a pipeline
was being prepared to take waste into
the sea from the Winfrith Atomic
Energy Establishment on the south
coast of England. It was learned that
one fisherman on the coast consumed
an average of four ounces of lobster
meat a day, roughly four times the
average in the whole country for all
sea food. When this was discovered
the pipeline was extended at con¬
siderable expense to a point further
out to sea beyond the area of the
lobster beds.
At the Hanford plant in the U.S.A.,
a survey revealed that some local
inhabitants who fished extensively in
the river there, were in the habit of
eating bones as well as flesh of the
fish. Fish tend to absorb radio¬
active phosphorus in their bones, and
since some of this material was includ¬
ed in the low-level discharges of waste,
it was considered necessary not only
to reduce the rate of discharge of this
element but to re-design the effluent
treatment plant.
The examples given above were all
due to the care taken in seeing that
harmful amounts of radioactivity are
prevented from contaminating food.
That is only one of the factors that are
always considered in designing any
type of reactor, in deciding where it
will be built and in operating it. Many
"ologies" have to be called in
meteorology, seismology, geology, bio¬
logy, entomology among them all
over and above the many sciences
concerned with the nuclear and
engineering details of reactors.
Whether it is a power station, a
research reactor or a laboratory, great
care is always taken to remind those
who work there that radiation can be
dangerous. Terms like "maximum
credible accident" are used in discus¬
sing reactors long before they "go
critical", or reach the stage at which
a chain reaction is sustained. Radiation
exposure is in terms of "maximum
permissible dose" and alarm signals
have words like "scram", which has
been interpreted as "run like hell".
To the outsider terms like these
must seem alarming, but what does
the record show? No reactor accident
has yet occurred in a power station
causing any ¡II effects to the public.
There have been a few accidents in.
handling materials and in reactors at
other plants, which have affected a
very few workers, but altogether the
safety record has been better than
nearly all other major industries.
Because of the unremitting study
which has been made, we know far
more about the effects of radiation
than we do about many of the more
common risks run every day, risks
which claim human lives. We are
still appallingly ignorant, for example,
of the dangers arising from pollution
by motorcar exhausts or from other
forms of industrial pollution in the
atmosphere.
In fact, nuclear power plants will
help considerably to relieve the prob¬
lem of air pollution because what
little escapes from them is carefully
filtered and even then only released
at heights which ensure that radio¬
activity is practically unmeasurable by
the time it reaches ground level.
Strangely enough, coal-burning plants
release more biologically significant
radioactivity to the atmosphere than
nuclear power plants.
One of the problems that will grow
with the industry Is how to dispose of
radioactive wastes. The greater
proportion of these are comparatively
easy to handle since they do not
contain "dangerous quantities of radio¬
activity. But there is a very small
percentage which is highly radioactive
and the quantities will of course grow.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 44

ISOTOPES IN 'KID GLOVES' (Continued from page 1'S)
44
Some of them may have to be
contained and isolated for perhaps
hundreds of years.
This may sound formidable, but
there are ways of reducing their
volume for safe storage and new ways
are continually being found of turning
a number of the elements In them to
good use. Some of their constituents
are in fact placed in machines used
for medical work, for processes linked
with agriculture and for some indus¬
trial work. There Is no doubt that
more and more uses will be found to
relieve the burden of storage. There
are some scientists who claim that
the by-products to be found in the
waste can become the most valuable
boon to man from atomic energy.
So far, I have been dealing mainly
with ways of obtaining power from the
atom to create electricity because
abundant and cheap power will
provide one of the most significant
ways of improving living standards and
reducing tension between nations.
There are, however, many other ways
in which discoveries and techniques
arising from nuclear energy are being
applied for the well-being of the world.
Radioactive materials and devices
linked with them have brought about
notable advances in medical research
and treatment, are assisting in conserv¬
ing and increasing food supplies, are
helping to improve industrial efficiency,
and are contributing to progress in
many branches of science.
This means that in many walks of
life workers are handling such mater¬
ials daily and that many more will
do so in the future. The fact that this
can happen without adding consider¬
ably to the risks of life is due to the
immense amount of research under¬
taken before any project is started and
to the intensive restrictions imposed
by governments and all the authorities
working under them.
Sometimes this super caution is
Irksome to nuclear specialists, who
feel that they have to overcome bigger
obstacles than those engaged in other
industries. There is no doubt that the
development of many promising ideas
is slowed down for this very reason.
Nevertheless, the caution demonstrat¬
ed has had Its effect in proving that
the safety both of populations and of
individuals overrides all other consider¬
ations.
It is for this reason that confidence
will grow and that atomic energy will
steadily expand its role of contributing
to the peace, health and prosperity
desired by the peoples of the world.
