CARBON
Nuclear clock
for archeology
22
Will radiocarbon, a remarkable device for
dating geologic time, show us that the dawn
of man's history was more remote than we
think? Carbon-14 has solved many problems
for archaeologists and historians, but has
also posed quite a few new ones.
about 5,700 years; a good part of the
radiocarbon in our body was produced
before the dawn of history.
So as we see, the material from
which life grows comes from the air
and comes from the carbon dioxide
in the air, and in eight thousand years
the atmosphere will have been very
thoroughly mixed by the winds.
We know now, incidentally, from
our work on radioactive fall-out, that
the mixing process takes only five to
ten years at the most before the
atmosphere is thoroughly mixed. So
even though the radiocarbon is pro¬
duced at greater altitudes than ten
miles, in a matter of a few years it
will have come down to the lowest
levels where it can be incorporated
into plants.
The plants eat the radiocarbon from
the cosmic ray manufacture and then
we eat plants, so all living things
become radioactive with carbon-14.
e are made of three things
in essence carbon dioxide, water
vapour, sunlight and a pinch of salt!
Photosynthesis produces green
plants by the conversion of carbon
dioxide and water to plant materials,
using the energy of sunlight.
Nature produces radiocarbon by the
irradiation of the air by cosmic rays.
Radiocarbon has an average lifetime
of 8,000 years and a half lifetime of
WILLARD F. LIBBY, Nobel Prize Winner
for chemistry, 1960, is a leading inter¬
national authority on radiocarbon dating,
and has been active in the field of atomic
energy and nuclear studies for a quarter
of a century. A member of the U.S.
Academy of Science and many other
scientific institutions both in the U.S.A. and
other countries, he is the author of
numerous articles, appearing principally in
scientific journals. Professor Libby's text
is based on an address he delivered at
the International Atomic Energy Agency
headquarters in Vienna, in 1966.
History is a really very recent matter
in terms of radiocarbon. Our oldest
historical records are less than one
half-life of radiocarbon. In terms of
the age of the earth, however, radio¬
carbon is short-lived. The age of the
earth is something like 5,000 million
years, which is a million half-lives of
radiocarbon. Radiocarbon has little
application to the broad sweep of
geological processes, but it does have
application to human history.
This is how it works. In the to'pmost
layers of the atmosphere, at altitudes
of about 50,000 feet, cosmic rays pro¬
duce radiocarbon by converting the
nitrogen into carbon-14, with a differ¬
ent chemistry. Carbon in air will burn
and the product is mainly carbon
dioxide. Carbon dioxide is our sub¬
stance.
Most important for radiocarbon dat¬
ing is that our contact with cosmic
rays exists only so long as we continue
to eat. As long as we are alive and
continue to eat, we continue to absorb
and ingest radiocarbon.
The carbon-14 atoms in our body,
which are 8,300 years old on the
average, have been many times in the
air as carbo<n dioxide, have been
brought down to the earth as part of
the plants, or more likely have been
dissolved in the great depths of the
ocean. In this great span of time, the
winds blow the radiocarbon around,
the ocean currents mix It, so that even

Carbon-14 is the best example of a
planetary hour-glass. It has been produced
in the upper atmosphere at a virtually
constant rate for the past 50,000 years.
The C-14 cycle, then, is like an hourglass
in which the sand in the upper part is
replenished as fast as it runs out of the hole
in the waist. Newly produced C-14 is
taken up by all living plants» and animals.
All carbon in living organisms contains
a constant proportion of C-14. When a
plant or animal dies no more new C-14 is
added but the old C-14 continues to run
out, and starts to measure time as an
hourglass should. Ancient objects can be
dated by determining how much C-14
remains and then calculating back to the
time when the radioactivity from the C-14
was» the same as that now found in a
living organism. The processes used are
very complicated, involving the reduction
of the carbon to a gas either by burning,
or chemically (photo left) and counting
the C-14 disintegrations in the gas.
Photo U.S. Geological Survey
Reproduction
carved in cedar
wood of the
fabulous gold
sarcophagus in
which the mummy
of Tutankhamen
(1361-1342 B.C.)
was placed in the
Valley of the Tombs,
near Luxor, Egypt.
It is one of the
great wealth of
objects 2,000 in
all recovered from
the royal tomb on
its discovery in
1922. Scientists
are now checking
all the ancient
dynasties of ancient
Egypt to see how
close they concur
with the established
historical dates.
Photo © Jean Feuillie
though the cosmic rays vary very
strongly with the geographical latitude
being much more intense in north¬
ern and southern latitudes than in the
equatorial after this great period of
time we should expect the distribution
over the earth to be uniform.
We do indeed find that, in Nature,
living matter such as pieces of wood
and flesh, or other living material from
various species and various locations,
all have the same amount of radio¬
carbon in them (per unit amount per
gramme of carbon). That is, the
composition the concentration of
radiocarbon in the carbon of the living
matter is uniform over the entire world
and in all species, because of this
continuous mixing. As long as we
live, we are part of a giant system
which is continuously stirred. We
belong to the oceans and to the air
and we are all part of the same
system, but our connexion is through
our mouths, through food.
Radiocarbon dating, operates on this
basic principle. Once we die, we stop
eating. Once we die, the ingestion of
radiocarbon is terminated. Of course,
it is a characteristic of all radioactive
materials that they themselves disin¬
tegrate and disappear and transform.
In the case of radiocarbon, the trans¬
formation occurs at the rate of 50 per
cent every 5,700 years, and the result
is the re-formation of the original nitro¬
gen from which the carbon came.
In the course of this transformation,
a radiation is emitted which allows us
to detect the death act of the radio¬
active atom. If we put carbon dioxide
gas (obtained by burning a piece of
wood) in a counter, by listening to
the count-rate we can detect the
disappearance of the carbon atoms
as they are reconverted into nitrogen.
It takes somewhat over 4,000 million
radiocarbon atoms to give one disin¬
tegration per minute, because the
average life of radiocarbon is 8,300
years, or 4,400 million minutes. So
4,400 million radiocarbon atoms are
needed to get a detectable radiation
in the carbon dioxide in a counter.
Although this seems a large number
of radiocarbon atoms, it is not large
percentage-wise. The total number of
atoms in a gramme of carbon is
1012 times this that is, we have only
one radiocarbon atom in a million mil¬
lion ordinary carbon atoms. This is the
standard concentration in living matter.
And at the time of death, all living
things begin with this rate. They will
have a count rate which corresponds
to the occurrence of about 66,000 mil¬
lion radio atoms per gramme of car¬
bon that is a total disintegration rate
of about 15 per minute per gramme.
The first thing in our development
of radiocarbon dating was to prove
that it was indeed so, that radiocarbon
occurred in all living tissues and at
the expected uniform level. This was
done fairly quickly and it was grati¬
fying to find that our rather simple-
minded theorizing was correct.
Now, as the years have gone by and
more accurate measurements have
been made, we find that it wasn't
actually absolutely correct. There are
very tiny differences between species
for example, sea life has just a little
bit less radiation than it should have,
for there seems to be a kind of natural
barrier against carbon dioxide in the
air dissolving in sea water. It doesn't
dissolve rapidly.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

24
CARBON-14 (Continued)
Dating the
Dead Sea Scrolls
In a general way, we went forward
in our innocence finding that every¬
thing worked. I have never been con¬
nected with such a lucky piece of
research. For example, we supposed
that the oceans mixed rapidly, and
that most of the hold-up of radio¬
carbon would take place in the ocean
which has far more carbon dissolved
as sea salts than is contained in all
living matter.
We had to calculate from our
knowledge of the cosmic ray produc¬
tion rate what the expected concentra¬
tion would be. If we only considered
the biosphere [the part of the world
where life can exist] its expected con¬
centration would be thirty times greater
than the level which we actually found.
However, we rightly guessed that the
oceans would mix rapidly and that the
concentration in the biosphere would
be thirty times lower than the rate of
cosmic ray production would seem to
suggest.
There is, in fact, thirty times more
carbon in the ocean than in the whole
of the biosphere. We were lucky
there. We were lucky also in suppos¬
ing that the turnover of humus is rapid,
or rather that the hold-up is not serious
in the terms of the whole inventory,
although we knew full well that coal
and oil and all organic matter of this
sort would be long since purged of
radiocarbon by radioactive decay.
The next stage of the research was
to see if it was really so that
5,700 year-old mummies showed only
half as much radiocarbon as a person
living today. There are no 5,700 year-
old mummies, the oldest ones are
4,800 years o»ld that is, ones whose
ages are relatively well-known, so
that we could use them for a check.
These are the first dynasties of Egypt,
where the oldest recorded history
applies.
When one goes back to the dawn
of history, the certainty with which
the historians know the dates de¬
creases. I would say, from talking with
historians, that they would stake their
lives on 3,750 years, but with anything
older than that, they begin to shake a
little bit. But they can go back to
Sesostris III in the 12th dynasty of
Egypt and argue very firmly.
So we had two periods in which
to check our method one was 3,700
years and the other was about a
thousand years preceding that. We
were very fortunate in that our checks
with one or two exceptions were
excellent. One of the exceptions was
discovered when we worked in colla¬
boration with the distinguished Oriental
Institute of the University of Chicago
with the great collection that James
H. Breasted had made from Egypt.
And our third object from Egypt turn¬
et out to be modern! It was one of
the famous U.S. egyptologist's prize
collections, supposed to be from the
fifth dynasty, as I remember. This was
a dark day.
But having succeeded on the first
two measurements, the people in the
Institute checked their records and
said they thought it was entirely
possible that the U.S. egyptologist
had been hoaxed. The only Inter¬
pretation we have for that measure¬
ment today is that he was "sold a
bill of goods".
But by and large, we have had few
shocks. For example, on Stonehenge
we obtained 3,700 years, which agreed
excellently with the predictions of
WORLD'S
OLDEST
TREE AND
CARBON-14
To find out the age
of a tree, all we
need do is count
the rings in the
trunk (right) since
each ring
represents a year's»
growth. Wood,
which contains
radiocarbon, can be
used for a simple
countercheck of
results obtained by
carbon-14 dating.
The oldest living
organism on earth
is the American
bristle cone pine
(left) which has
lived for 6,000 years
or over. With the
help of this tree it
has been found
that beyond 3,500
years» ago, dates
obtained by
carbon-14 diverge
increasingly from
established
historical dates.
Carbon-14 seems to
"rejuvenate" a
material by
200 years at
3500 B.C. and by
800 years at
4000 B.C.
Professor Stuart Piggott, the great
scholar of Stonehenge.
Throughout Roman and Egyptian
history, we have no disagreements.
We haven't had very many measure¬
ments to make because in general
the archeologists know the dates
better than we can measure them, and
it is usually as a favour that they give
us samples.
We take about an ounce of material
to make a measurement about 20 to
30 grammes of fairly rich carbona¬
ceous material is the normal amount,
and in some of these objects that is
too large an amount to be spared. On
the other hand, we can sometimes
make do with samples which would
otherwise not be useful. For instance,
we dated the Dead Sea scrolls the
manuscript of the book of Isaiah by
using the linen wrapping in which it
was found.
There has been no serious shortage
of materials back to about 3,700 years
with which we could check the accur¬
acy and reliability of dating by car-

-
*"»*»W OHI^*uf«* '
Jm.mk
Photo © Georg Gerster - Rapho
bon-14. And the answer is that the
method seems to be reliable to> within
the error of the measurement as it
existed when we began the method
in the early 1950s an error of about
± 100 years or so.
More recently, extremely careful
measurements with very accurate
instruments have shown that there are
systematic deviations, indicating that
the rate of radiocarbon production was
not strictly constant.
A rate had been an implicit assump¬
tion at the outset. When we com¬
pared the radiocarbon in an Egyptian
mummy with that in a modern man,
we assumed that he lived under similar
conditions. This assumed that the
radiocarbon production rate at that
time was the same, that cosmic rays
were the same, and that the amount
of ocean water was the same in
other words, that the amount of carbon
dilution was the same. We have fairly
good evidence that the ocean hasn't
changed much, either in composition or
level, In 5,000 years. This ¡s a very
brief time in geological history.
But the problem of cosmic rays is an
open question. Peo»ple have very little
understanding of the origin of cosmic
rays. We believe that they come from
outside the solar system, and have
very good evidence for that. But
there are various subtleties about even
that because, even if they come from
outside the solar system, they have to
reach the earth.
Cosmic rays are deflected by matter
and particularly by magnetic fields,
and the sun is continuously sending
off ionized matter in clumps, which
carry locked-in magnetic fields capable
of deflecting cosmic rays.
According to a study made by Dr.
Hans Suess, of the University of Cali¬
fornia, San Diego ("The climatic
changes in cosmic ray production rate
of radiocarbon") when there is hot
weather for as long as a century, it
means that the sun is specially active
in sending out lots of plasma, and
therefore the production of radiocar¬
bon Is especially low. In consequence,
during that century radiocarbon dates
are too old.
Conversely, when there is a century
or two of cold weather, the sun is
inactive and the cosmic rays come in
better, so radiocarbon dates are too
young. The errors are about ± 50
years, so it is almost within our exper¬
imental error.
Dr. Suess has been very ener¬
getic in making lots of measurements,
using tree rings for his materials, so
he knows the dates quite accurately,
and I think there is little doubt that he
is right.
We have been doing work on
English manor houses in recent years;
the historical dates are excellently
known for many of these homes and
we find our agreement has improved
if we make Dr. Suess's little correc¬
tions. He has made the point that
there is a deviation which is small but
measurable. But by and large the
agreement has been gratifyingly good.
The consequences of the agreement
are interesting namely that the cosmic
rays, the level of solar plasma and the
earth's magnetic field have remained
CONTINUED ON PAGE 28
25

RADIATING
MONSTERS
Several nuclear dating techniques
(see box below left) now enable
scientists to determine the age of the
extraordinary prehistoric animals
which roamed the earth millions of
years ago. What is usually dated,
is not the fossil itself, but the
sediments surrounding it, that Is, the
actual environment in which it
lived the nuclear scientist works
hand in hand with the geologist
investigating the strata. Left, this
strange mammal was discovered close
to the palace of an Egyptian queen,
Arsonoië, from whom it takes its name,
Arsinoitherium. Living 40 million
years ago, he was a newcomer
compared to the Pterodactyl (below),
a winged reptile, which goes back
180 million years, but an earlier
inhabitant of the earth than the cave
hyena (right), one of the great
carnivorous animals of Europe a mere
50,000 years ago.
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris
>'<-
*f
m^m
r*5
LONG-LIVED
NUCLEAR CLOCKS
The time span for dating materials by the carbon-14
method is from 1,000 to 50,000 years. As this is
a relatively short time measured on the geologic
scale, scientists have searched for and have found
in nature other nuclear clocks with far longer lives.
Their dials tell the time not merely in centuries and
thousands of years, but in millions and thousands
of millions. The long-lived clocks measure age in
the same way as carbon-14 by the time taken for
their radioactive atoms to decay, but their rate of
decay is» far slower than that of carbon-14, slow
enough in fact for them to have survived in certain
rock and mineral formations. By studying the natural
decay of uranium to lead, for instance, scientists
have been able to calculate the age of the earth
as 4,500 million years. Other materials present in
rocks have provided a number of nuclear dating
methods. With potassium-argon it is possible to
tell the age of rocks 100,000 to 10,000,000 years
old; calculations based on the natural fission of
uranium-238 permit the dating of materials up to
1,000,000,000 years old; and the rubidium-strontium
method has a time span of over five million years.
Nuclear dating methods, which are constantly being
improved, have already contributed substantially to
man's knowledge of his planet's history.
NUCLEAR DATING METHODS
Time span (years)
Carbon-14 	
Potassium-argon : .
Rubidium-strontium
Uranium 238 	
Uranium lead 	
1,000 - 50,000
100,000 and up
5,000,000 and up
100 - 1,000,000,000
200,000,000 and up
kSi
-"? ;-.
vi
mw
' .- X'
V
fe
Photo © Jean-Marie Baufle, Paris
r* ' J
4


CARBON-14 (Continued)
The oldest Englishman : 10,400 years of age
28
essentially constant and that the ocean
depth has not changed appreciably.
This is not a very surprising result.
But when we finish with recorded
history, we have not used even half
the radiocarbon. The way radioactive
decay goes, you lose half in one half-
life and then you lose half of the
remainder in another half-life so that
at the end of two half-lives, that is
11,400 years, you still have 25 per cent
left.
It will take ten half-lives 57,000
years to get down to a tenth of one
per cent. Even with our most sensitive
methods of measurement at this time,
we cannot measure a tenth of one
per cent of the natural life.
So radio»carbon will not apply to
things older than about 50,000 years;
in fact when we go back to 40,000
things get a little uncertain. But
between the dawn of history that is
4,800 years and 40,000 years is a
great span of time.
Within the span of radiocarbon there
were three Ice Ages. It appears that
an Ice Age ¡s world-wide at least it
would be surprising if it were not. It
certainly is hemisphere wide. So if
we find a glacial advance occurring
in North America at a certain time,
we ought to find it occurring in Europe
at the same time. This was one of
our critical prehistorical checks.
We took material from a forest in
Wisconsin which had been pushed over
by a southward-moving glacier. We
measured tree trunks, we measured
the soil in which the trees grew, and
we measured all parts of the verdure
of that forest which had been pre¬
served when the glacier pushed some
twenty feet of dirt which covered it.
We got the same answer for all of
these various parts 11,400 years
to within two or three hundred years.
This had several important messages
for us. One was that even the tiniest
fibres on the rootlets, if properly
cleaned, could be used for reliable
dating, because they were of the same
dates as the pieces of wood on the
big trees. And the humus in the soil
was still authentic and reliable.
Then we went to Europe, and in S
England and northern Germany and ~!
northern France found the same dates. ^
Now we have also found limited à
evidence but it looks conclusive in -5
the southern hemisphere. ©
o
Another epoch in human history f
was the advent of man in North,
South and Central America. For rea¬
sons which are not entirely clear, man
came to the Americas after the melting
of the last ice sheet. He came 10,400
years ago, and he came at the same
time to all three continents.
That is in the sharpest contrast to
the European situation. The oldest
Englishman is 10,400 years old because
he was chased out by the glacier and
then the glacier swept all evidence of
previous man away. That is why
Piltdown worried the life out of us
because Piltdown man was presumably
much older than 10,400 years, and it
was therefore with great comfort that
we learned he was a hoax. We contri¬
buted a little bit towards discovering
the hoax (1). However, the oldest
Englishman is 10,400 years old because
that's when the ice sheet left England
and he was able to walk into Eng¬
land because the Channel was dry.
The oldest American is also 10,400
years old.
We can understand why the oldest
Englishman is 10,400 years old, but it
isn't at all easy to understand why
there isn't someone older in the Ameri¬
cas since not all the Americas were
glaciated.
(1) In 1912, a skull, ¡aw and other bone
fragments thought to be those of an ancestral
human type of the Lower Pleistocene (about
500,000 years ago) were discovered at Pilt¬
down (Sussex), southern England. The
reconstructed skull appeared to conflict with
all the theories of human evolution held at
that time, since it represented a creature with
an entirely modern head and a thoroughly
ape-like jaw. Some scientists were sceptical,
but it was not until 40 years later that
fluorine and other tests showed the skull
to be not more than 50,000 years old and the
jaw that of a modern ape, cunningly faked.
Piltdown Man had finally been exposed as an
elaborate archaeological fraud.
I
V- z- -' > - »y* i* ' mU 1 1 1
Hi -
I »^v
-Hs^ -m i I
What men did in Europe was
to move to the Mediterranean basin
we have abundant evidence of man
around there that goes back way
beyond radiocarbon. We have just
begun a new dig in Israel, near the
Sea of Galilee, which we think is two
million years old. That is-way beyond
radiocarbon, but we are interested in
it as we may be able to help in dating
the later phases.
After we had dated about a dozen
different sites of earliest man, in North
America, Central America and South
America and obtained 10,400 years for
each one, we began to believe that,
unlikely as it seems, our findings were
true.
As far as I know with one possible
exception all the earliest man sites
in all the three Americas are 10,000
years old, within the error of measure¬
ment. This gives us a consistency
check as well as a new result in human
history.
We could rationalize it and say that
for reasons unknown to us, man didn't
come to the Americas until the Behring
Strait was laid bare by the drop in
sea level resulting from the glacial
formation in the last Ice Age. The
amount of ice was such that the sea
level throughout the world fell by
150 feet. If the ocean level drops by
150 feet, a wide stretch is dry between
Siberia and Alaska and down the west
coast of Alaska and then as far as the
State of Washington. It goes pretty
far out into the ocean.
We have never been able to find
10,400 year-old men in Alaska itself.
This also fits, for the simple reason
that the area was covered In ice. Man
didn't come through Alaska. He walk¬
ed across the Behring Strait and then
he came down the coast which is now
submerged, and his trail is now 150
PREHISTORIC
SHOE SHOP
About 20 years- ago, a cache of.
300 pairs of rope sandals like this
one were found neatly stacked in a
cave in Oregon, U.S.A. Carbon-14
dated them as 9,000 years old.
They had been woven by the
prehistoric inhabitants of North
America who are thought to have
arrived on the continent 1,400 years
earlier, after having crossed the
Behring Strait, laid bare by the
drop in sea level resulting from
glacial formation in the last Ice Age,
since all the prehistoric sites
in the Americas have been dated
by carbon-14 at 10,400 years.

feet underwater. Then he came inland
to about the State of Washington and
he moved south, and we found him at
the southern tip of South America.
Our most recent date was in the
highest level of the Peruvian Andes at
the 10,400 date.
Other consistency checks include
the measurements of various cultures
that the archeologists may not be
precisely able to date, although they
can pick out certain cultural character¬
istics of a given period. I might
mention one or two. Our 10,400 man
was a very sophisticated person in
some ways. He was a six-footer. He
wore clothes the size of those that we
would wear and, as I have said, he
covered the three continents of the
Americas within the measurement of
error of radiocarbon that is within a
couple of centuries.
E were fortunate in finding
a most remarkable cache in eastern
Oregon (U.S.A.). A road was being
dug there in the late 1940s, and an
archeologist at the University of
Oregon, Dr. Cressman, happened to
warn the foreman of this particular road
crew to be on the look-out he knew
that they were going to make a deep
cut in a pumice deposit of Mount
Newbury.
One day, the foreman called Dr.
Cressman to tell him that he had found
something. And in a cave which was
apparently accidentally covered with
pumice like the pumice that preserved
Pompeii was found a collection of
marvellously artistically woven sandals,
which we date at over 9,000 years.
We have actually succeeded in col¬
lecting a few samples from other sites;
we had one in 1965 which we dated at
8,500 years. These are the shoes that
our prehistoric man wore. In the cave
which Dr. Cressman and his crewmen
found, were three hundred pairs of
these shoes, neatly stacked. A shoe
store!
We were very lucky in this research,
which dates from before the radiocar¬
bon dating method was Invented. Dr.
Cressman took his glue pot to lacquer
these shoes but he ran out of glue.
The glue ruined the shoes for radio¬
carbon dating, but there were six pairs
which he didn't shellac and we got
those for dating.
We found the body of a prehistoric
man on Santa Rosa Island, off the
coast of California, a few years ago.
Why these men, of such ability, did
not write is an amazing enigma. It
is hard to imagine that they were not
intelligent enough. The Lascaux caves
in central France, as is well known,
have been dated at 15,000 years, so
Tartaria tablet Jemdet Nasr tablet (Sumer)
Romania (6 cm.)
THE ENIGMA OF THE TARTARIATABLETS
Dating by Cdrbon-14 of three ¡nscnoed tablets found in Romania has created
a disturbing enigma for archaeologists, who have long accepted as an exact and
scientifically established fact that writing was invented in western Asia. The earliest
known examples of writing were incised on clay tablets uncovered at Uruk, a Sumerian
city that flourished in Mesopotamia during that region's early Bronze Age, and known
as the Jemdet Nasr tablets, from the site of their discovery. These tablets are known
to be a little over 5,000 years old, and the writing on them, part ideographic, part
pictographic, later evolved into the cuneiform system of writing of which numerous
examples have been unearthed on tablets of clay and stone.
Archaeologists and historians concur on the idea that, in the western world, writing
spread from east to west. But in 1961 they were shaken when three small inscribed
tablets were unearthed from the remains of a Neolithic village at Tartaria, in the
Transylvanian region of Romania. Not only did some of the signs appear to be almost
identical with Sumerian ones of 3000 B.C., but in addition the tablets looked much
like written records produced in Crete around 2000 B.C. The idea that here was
additional proof of writing's spread from east to west was soon dispelled when the
ash-filled pit in which the tablets were found was dated by the carbon-14 method.
From this analysis, the tablets appeared to be 6,000 years old, a thousand years older
in fact than the oldest Sumerian ones.
Could writing have been invented, not in the urban and highly developed civilization
of Sumer, but in a rural European culture only just emerging frdm the stone age?
Scientists found this hard to believe, particularly as the Tartaria tablets were the
unique vestiges of a culture which apparently vanished thousands of years ago.
A number of theories have been advanced to explain this i discovery that seemed
to challenge all previous concepts of the birth of writing. Some archaeologists, while
not doubting the scientific principles of carbon-14 dating, suggested that the method
still involves a considerable margin of error due to factors that are not yet understood.
Another theory, advanced by a Czech archaelogist, was that the geological strata at
Tartaria might have been disturbed by underground movements, and that the tablets
are not as old as the stratum they were found in shows.
If rejuvenated in this way, by some 1,500 to 2,000 years, the Tartaria tablets would
no longer challenge Sumer for the fame of having invented writing. But it still remains
to be shown how inscribed tablets came to be hidden in a remote part of Europe.
Their existence Imay be linked with the extensive trade routes that stretched in
Neolithic times between Europe and western Asia and were used by merchants dealing
in gold and the volcanic glass obsidian of which Transylvania had rich deposits.
Syrian merchants notably were active in spreading knowledge of pottery and other
craft techniques and in establishing cultural contacts. As intermediaries between
Sumer and Crete, they ventured deep into Europe by way of the Danube. Perhaps
they carried a form of writing to the peoples of Transylvania. But it is not yet clear
whether the Tartaria inscriptions were actually writing or simply served as conventional
signs (as, for instance, the owner's marks found on ancient pottery), or again whether
or not they had a religious or magical connotation. In any event, the enigma of
Tartaria remains and is likely to occupy the world's archaeologists for years to come.
Comparison of Sumerian signs (left) and Cretan (centre) with marks on
Tartaria tablets (right)
DJEMDET NASR CNOSSOS TARTARIA
g 0 El Np
mn- o # ; +H+fr DD oo
9- 4- =» 6 4 3 fr =i= »
tí X ( *- 29
Drawings above and top left reprinted with permission. Copyright 19(58 by Scientific American Inc.
all rights reserved
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

CARBON-14 (Continued)
Ice Age casts a chill
on Carbon-14
we have proof that beautiful paintings
were executed five thousand years
before our 10,400 man came along.
To me it is quite clear that these
people were as intelligent as modern
man. Maybe they did write. Maybe
we just haven't found the evidence.
But in any case they have left these
remarkable works.
In the prehistoric Paleolithic Era
there are many fine ancient monuments
of unknown age and history even in
Egypt. We did pre-dynastic work in
Egypt and went back as far as 6,500
years in a fairly continuous record.
We worked with Dr. Caton Thompson,
of Cambridge, who furnished us with
some remarkable samples of ancient
Egyptian grain which she had found
in granaries in the hills surrounding
the Nile valley.
The granaries were filled by farmers
nearly 1,500 years before the first dyn¬
asty, and they still had grain in them
when she came upon them 50 years
or so ago. They were holes dug in
the top of the hills and lined with
straw; the grain was put in and then
covered. We dated that grain.
In England, there is a continuous
unbroken record going back to 10,400
man. Some of the sites are truly re¬
markable, as for example, the Star
Carr site excavated by Professor Gra¬
ham Clarke, at Cambridge, and dated
at nearly 8,000 years.
E
30
VEN in the historic period,
there are known sites in lots of areas,
such as the Americas. But we had no
written records at all in the Americas,
apart from the Mayas. This leaves
only the circumstantial records and
about all we have for dating in many
parts of America is radiocarbon. It
fits reasonably into the sociological
evidence of pottery and things like
this, and we are thus building up a
story in the Americas.
But the point is that even in the
historic period of the last 4,000 years,
radiocarbon does have applications in
various parts of the world, as it does
for the prehistoric periods; it is essen¬
tially all we have in absolute dating.
This question of absoluteness is a
difficult one. It isn't possible to say
unequivocally that radiocarbon dates
are correct. It is possible, I think, to
say that in the last 3,700 years, a radio
carbon date is probably accurate to
within one or two per cent.
In the prehistoric periods, we simply
have to hope that we can develop
some auxiliary check to show whether
the variation of the solar magnetic field
is substantial. We already have con¬
siderable evidence in that the first dy¬
nasty of Egypt agrees pretty well.
There is a tendency for the first dyn¬
asty dates to be different from the
historical dates, and the difference is
such that Dr. Suess's conjecture might
fit.' His conjecture and he himself
insists that it is conjecture, because he
is extrapolating is, in effect: "If you
had a really cold period, then it would
be an Ice Age, and then the radiocar¬
bon dates would be different and so
we must correct the radiocarbon dates
by maybe as much as 2,000 years at
11,000."
This is about the biggest catastrophe
that we can imagine at the moment
happening to radiocarbon dates. In
the 4,000 most recent years, they are
probably good to a couple of centuries.
When they are calibrated in the last
2,000 years, they are probably as
accurate as we can measure.
There are more questions in the
measurement than just the counting
error; there are problems like the tree
rings. If we take a piece of wood, we
find it has various rings and each year
has its own radiocarbo»n in it, We have
to determine very carefully how many
rings there are and whether the wood
came from the inside or the outer part
of the trunk.
We find in the old English houses,
for example, that there is considerable
evidence of the re-use of major tim¬
bers. In the pyramid at Teotihuacan
near Mexico City, we have positive
proof that timbers were used in the
central structures which were several
hundred years old when the pyramid
was built. Things like this have to be
taken into account.
We have been re-investigating the
12 first dynasties of Egypt with the
help of the British Museum for that
very reason. All the graves of early
Egypt were robbed and therefore
there is a serious question of authen¬
ticity in any moveable material. We
have recently developed a technique
of removing protein from bone and
dating it. We are going to do this
on the mummies as we think it is very
unlikely that any grave robber would
have stolen them and later replaced
them.
MEET MTTIMOLEON. HE'LL SHOWyoU
AROUND THE ATOMIC CENTRE.

