The new Unesco Statement on Race and Racial
Prejudice, published below, is a document of
paramount importance in our world today, faced
with the challenge of peaceful relations between men
of different races. It is painfully clear to anyone
who follows current events that prejudice and
discrimination rooted in differences of race have
led to many acts of violence and constitute a serious
menace to the future peace of the world. The
"Unesco Courier" sincerely hopes that this Unesco
Statement will be carefully read and studied in
every part of the world and that it may serve
as a guide and inspiration for individuals and
governments alike.


STATEMENT ON RACE
AND RACIAL PREJUDICE
30
"All men are born free and equal both in dignity
and in rights". This universally proclaimed demo¬
cratic principle stands in jeopardy wherever political,
economic, social and cultural inequalities affect human
group relations. A particularly striking obstacle to the
recognition of equal dignity for all is racism. Racism
continues to haunt the world. As a major social pheno¬
menon it requires the attention of all students of the scien¬
ces of man.
Racism stultifies the development of those who suffer
from it, perverts those who apply it, divides nations
within themselves, aggravates international conflict
and threatens world peace.
The conference of experts meeting in Paris in Sep¬
tember 1967, agreed that racist doctrines lack any
scientific basis whatsoever. It reaffirmed the pro¬
positions adopted by the international meeting held in
Moscow in 1964 which was called to re-examine the bio¬
logical aspects of the statements on race and racial
differences issued in 1950 and 1951. In particular, it
draws attention to the following points:
All men living today belong to the same species and
descend from the same stock.
The division of the human species into "races" is partly
conventional and partly arbitrary and does not imply any
hierarchy whatsoever. Many anthropologists stress the
importance of human variation, but believe that "racial"
divisions have limited scientific interest and may even
carry the risk of inviting abusive generalization.
M Current biological knowledge does not permit us to
impute cultural achievements to differences in genetic
potential. Differences in the achievements of different
peoples should be attributed solely to their cultural
history. The peoples of the world today appear to
possess equal biological potentialities for attaining any
level of civilization.
Racism grossly falsifies the knowledge of human biology.
The human problems arising from so-called "race"
relations are social in origin rather than biological.
A basic problem is racism, namely, anti-social beliefs
and acts which are based on the fallacy that discriminatory
inter-group relations are justifiable on biological grounds.
Groups commonly evaluate their characteristics in
comparison with others. Racism falsely claims that
there is a scientific basis for arranging groups
hierarchically in terms of psychological and cultural cha¬
racteristics that are immutable and innate. In this way
it seeks to make existing differences appear inviolable as
a means of permanently maintaining current relations bet¬
ween groups.
Faced with the exposure of the falsity of its biolo¬
gical doctrines, racism finds ever new stratagems
for justifying the inequality of groups. It points to
the fact that groups do not intermarry, a fact which follows,
in part, from the divisions created by racism. It uses this
fact to argue the thesis that this absence of intermarriage
derives from differences of a biological order. Whenever
it fails in its attempts to prove that the source of group
differences lies in the biological field, it falls back upon
justifications in terms of divine purpose, cultural differences,
disparity of educational standards or some other doctrine
which would serve to mask its continued racist beliefs.
Thus, many of the problems which racism presents in the
world today do not arise merely from its open manifesta¬
tions, but from the activities of those who discriminate on
racial grounds but are unwilling to acknowledge it.
Racism has historical roots. It has not been a
universal phenomenon. Many contemporary socie-
ties and cultures show little trace of it. It was not
evident for long periods in world history. Many forms of ra¬
cism have arisen out of the conditions of conquest, out of the

justification of Negro slavery and its aftermath of racial
inequality in the West, and out of the colonial relationship.
Among other examples is that of anti-semitism, which has
played a particular rôle in history, with Jews being the
chosen scapegoat to take the blame for problems and
crises met by many societies.
The major techniques for coping with racism involve
changing those social situations which give rise to
prejudice, preventing the prejudiced from acting in
accordance with their beliefs, and combating the false
beliefs themselves.
M The anti-colonial revolution of the Twentieth century
has opened up new possibilities for eliminating the
scourge of racism. In some formerly dependent
countries, people formerly classified as inferior have for the
first time obtained full political rights. Moreover, the
participation of formerly dependent nations in international
organizations in terms of equality has done much to under¬
mine racism.
There are, however, some instances in certain
societies in which groups, victims of racialistic
practices, have themselves applied doctrines with
racist implications in their struggle for freedom. Such an
attitude is a secondary phenomenon, a reaction stemming
from men's search for an identity which prior racist theory
and racialistic practices denied them. None the less, the
new forms of racist ideology, resulting from this prior
exploitation, have no justification in biology. They are a
product of a political struggle and have no scientific
foundation.
In order to undermine racism it is not sufficient
that biologists should expose its fallacies. It is
also necessary that psychologists and sociologists
should demonstrate its causes. The social structure is
always an important factor. However, within the same
social structure, there may be great individual variation in
racialistic behaviour, associated with the personality of the
individuals and their personal circumstances.
The committee of experts agreed on the following
conclusions about the social causes of race
prejudice:
Social and economic causes of racial prejudice are
particularly observed in settler societies wherein are
found conditions of great disparity of power and property,
in certain urban areas where there have emerged
ghettoes in which individuals are deprived of equal
access to employment, housing, political participation,
education, and the administration of justice, and in many
societies where social and economic tasks which are
deemed to be contrary to the ethics or beneath the dignity
of its members are assigned to a group of different
origins who are derided, blamed and punished for taking
on these tasks.
Individuals with certain personality troubles may be
particularly inclined to adopt and manifest racial preju¬
dices. Small groups, associations, and social move¬
ments of a certain kind sometimes preserve and transmit
racial prejudices. The foundations of the prejudices
lie, however, in the economic and social system of a
society.
Racism tends to be cumulative. Discrimination deprives
a group of equal treatment and presents that group as
a problem. The group then tends to be blamed for its
own condition, leading to further elaboration of racist
theory.
It is recognized that the basically important changes
in the social structure that may lead to the elimin¬
ation of racial prejudice may require decisions of a
political nature. It is also recognized, however, that
certain agencies of enlightenment, such as education and
other means of social and economic advancement, mass
media, and law can be immediately and effectively mobilized
for the elimination of racial prejudice.
The school and other instruments for social and
¿| economic progress can be one of the most effective
agents for the achievement of broadened under-
standing and the fulfilment of the potentialities of man.
They can equally much be used for the perpetuation of
discrimination and inequality. It is therefore essential that
the resources for education and for social and economic
action of all nations be employed in two ways.
The schools should ensure that their curricula contain
scientific understandings about race and human unity,
and that invidious distinctions about peoples are not
made in texts and classrooms.
Because the skills to be gained in formal and vocational
education become increasingly important with the pro¬
cesses of technological development, the resources of
the schools and other resources should be fully available
to all parts of the population with neither restriction nor
discrimination.
Furthermore, in cases where, for historical reasons,
certain groups have a lower average education and
economic standing, it is the responsibility of the society
to take corrective measures. These measures should
ensure, so far as possible, that the limitations of poor
environments are not passed on to the children.
In view of the importance of teachers in any educational
programme, special attention should be given to their
training. Teachers should be made conscious of the degree
to which they reflect the prejudices which may be current
in their society. They should be encouraged to avoid
these prejudices.
Governmental units and other organizations con-
cerned should give special attention to improving
the housing situations and work opportunities avail-
able to victims of racism. This will not only counteract
the effects of racism, but in itself can be a positive way
of modifying racist attitudes and behaviour.
The media of mass communication are increasingly
[|f important in promoting knowledge and understand-
ing, but their exact potentiality is not fully known.
Continuing research into the social utilization of the media
is needed in order to assess their influence in relation to
formation of attitudes and behavioural patterns in the field
of race prejudice and race discrimination. Because the
mass media reach vast numbers of people at different
educational and social levels their rôle in encouraging or 01
combating race prejudice can be crucial. Those who work **
in these media should maintain a positive approach to the
promotion of understanding between groups and popula-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

STATEMENT ON RACE (Continued)
tions. Representation of peoples in stereotypes and hold¬
ing them up to ridicule should be avoided. Attachment to
news reports of racial designations which are not germane
to the accounts should also be avoided.
Law is among the most important means of ensuring
equality between individuals and one of the most
effective means of fighting racism.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 10 Decem¬
ber 1948 and the related international agreements and
conventions which have taken effect subsequently can con¬
tribute effectively, on both the national and international
level, to the fight against any injustice of racist origin.
National legislation is a means of effectively outlawing
racist propaganda and acts based upon racial discrimina¬
tion. Moreover, the policy expressed in such legislation
must bind not only the courts and judges charged with its
enforcement, but also all agencies of government of what¬
ever level or whatever character.
It is not claimed that legislation can immediately eliminate
prejudice. Nevertheless, by being a means of protecting
the victims of acts based upon prejudice, and by setting
a moral example backed by the dignity of the courts, it can,
in the long run, even change attitudes.
Ethnic groups which represent the object of some
form of discrimination are sometimes accepted and
tolerated by dominating groups at the cost of their
having to abandon completely their cultural identity. It
should be stressed that the effort of these ethnic groups
to preserve their cultural values should be encouraged.
They will thus be better able to contribute to the enrich¬
ment of the total culture of humanity.
Racial prejudice and discrimination in the world
today arise from historical and social phenomena
and falsely claim the sanction of science. It is,
therefore, the responsibility of all biological and social
scientists, philosophers, and others working in related disci¬
plines, to ensure that the results of their research are not
misused by those who wish to propagate racial prejudice
and encourage discrimination.
This statement was prepared by a committee of experts on
race and racial prejudice which met at Unesco House, Paris,
from 18 to 26 September 1967. The following experts took part
in the committee's work:
Professor MUDDATH1R ABDEL RAHIM (University of Khar¬
toum, Sudan); Professor GEORGES BALANDIER (University of
Paris, France); Professor CELIO DE OLIVEIRA BORJA (Univer¬
sity of Guanabara, Brazil); Professor LLOYD BRAITHWA1TE
(University of the West Indies, Jamaica); Professor LEONARD
BROOM (University of Texas, United States of America); Pro¬
fessor G. F. DEBETZ (Institute of Ethnography, Moscow, USSR);
Professor J. DJORDJEVIC (University of Belgrade, Yugoslavia);
Dean CLARENCE CLYDE FERGUSON (Howard University, United
States of America); Dr. DHARAM P. GHAI (University College,
Kenya); Professor LOUIS GUTTMAN (Hebrew University, Israel);
Professor JEAN HIERNAUX (Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bel¬
gium); Professor A. KLOSKOWSKA (University of Lodz, Poland);
Judge KEBA M'BAYE (President of the Supreme Court, Senegal);
Professor JOHN REX (University of Durham, United Kingdom);
Professor MARIANO R. SOLVEIRA (University of Havana, Cuba);
Professor HISASHI SUZUKI (University of Tokyo, Japan);
Dr. ROMILA THAPAR (University of Delhi, India); Professor
C. H. WADDINGTON (University of Edinburgh, United King¬
dom).

