CHARTING THE
NUCLEAR LABYRINTH
A basic survey of the atom
and its peaceful uses
by I. H. Usmani
N.
8
I EVER in the annals of history has a scientific discovery so
profoundly affected the course of human destiny as the discovery of atomic
energy. Its potential for destruction is enormous and its use for econo¬
mic development unlimited. It is this co-existence of fear of annihilation
and hope for the progress of human welfare through its application that
has ushered us into the present era rightly known as the "Atomic Age."
Let us see what an atom is and
how it becomes such an enormous
source of energy and a tool to solve
problems of development in the fields
of industry, agriculture and medicine.
All the tangible things that we see
around us, whether in the form of
solids (like paper, pen or pencil),
liquids (like water), or gases (like
air), are all combinations of certain
basic materials or substances called
"Elements" of which only 92 are found
in nature: copper, iron, gold, uranium,
hydrogen and oxygen, etc.
Each of these elements has certain
specific physical and chemical proper¬
ties or characteristics by which it is
identified. The last indivisible particle
of an element is called the "Atom."
Thus, we have an atom of Iron, an
atom of gold and an atom of hydrogen,
each having characteristics typically its
own.
If these elements are arranged in
order of their weights in a tabular
form, Hydrogen, being the lightest,
occupies position number one and
Uranium, being the heaviest, occupies
position no. 92. All others fall In
between these positions.
DR. I. H. USMANI of Pakistan, one of
Asia's foremost nuclear physicists, is
Chairman of the Pakistan Atomic Energy
Agency. He was responsible for estab¬
lishing the Pakistan Institute of Nuclear
Science, the Atomic Energy Centres of
Lahore and Dacca, an Atomic Energy
Agricultural Research Centre in Tandojam
and five Atomic Energy Medical Centres
in Pakistan. He commissioned and super¬
vised Pakistan's first atomic reactor in
1965 and was responsible for launching
Pakistan's first space rocket in 1962.
Atomic Structure
To give an idea of the size and
weight of an atom of hydrogen,
nearly 36 billion atoms can be accom¬
modated on a pin-head and one million
million atoms weigh only one millionth
part of a millionth of a gramme!
All atoms have internal structures
which are built out of a combination
of only three fundamental "bricks"
called the "Electron," the "Proton,"
and the "Neutron." The last two have
more or less the same weight and size
but the electron Is about 1,800 times
lighter in weight. Further, the electron
Is electrically negative, carrying the
smallest possible electric charge, while
the proton carries a positive charge
equal to the negative charge of the
electron. The neutron carries no
charge and is electrically neutral,
hence its name.
Finally, the structures of all atoms
are built in such a way that in the
centre there is an inner core or a
"Nucleus" which consists of protons
and neutrons held together by a very
strong binding nuclear force. Around
ATOMIC ANGLER.
The patient angler
(left) is not what he
appears to be.
He is actually
measuring the flow
of water in
the River Arve, near
Chamonix (France)
in preparation for a
local hydro-electric
project. His sounding
lines are linked to
Geiger counters
which record
radioactivity brought
down by the water
from a radioisotope
half a mile upstream.
Only a minute,
harmless amount of
tracer is needed to
measure the quantity
of water flowing in
the river.

^
V
'ÉÊLt' ^,
Photo CSF- J.C. Georgel
Paradoxically, the deeper the nuclear scientist probes the infinitely tiny structure of
sub-atomic matter, the larger and more powerful are the tools he needs, notably
giant particle accelerators such as the cosmotron and synchrotron. Shot at fantastic
speeds from these machines, atomic particles pass into a "sorting" apparatus, such as
the particle separator shown above, and are then detected visually and studied by physicists.
/
m
\
\ki
f m
x
*
the nucleus, the electrons revolve In
orbits just as the planets revolve
around the sun in our solar system.
Isotopes
Based on the above theory of atomic
structure, it has been found that it Is
the number of protons in the nucleus
(and, therefore, the number of elec¬
trons in the orbits) that determine the
chemical properties of an element.
The presence or addition of neutrons
in the body of the nucleus does not
cause any change in these properties.
Thus, it Is possible to have two
atoms of the same element having the
same number of protons in the nucleus
but a different number of neutrons.
Both will have identical chemical pro¬
perties but the nucleus of one will be
heavier than the other. These are
known as two "Isotopes" of the same
element ("Iso" in Greek means "same"
and "tope" means "place"). Thus, all
elements have isotopes which are
chemically indistinguishable from one
another but which are physically
different in weight because of the pre¬
sence of a different number of
neutrons in their nuclei.
Radioactivity
Building up the structures of atomic
nuclei by adding protons and neutrons,
as we go along from hydrogen, the
lightest, to uranium, the heaviest, we
find that a stage comes when the
piling of protons and neutrons causes
instability and the nucleus begins to
disintegrate by emitting the extra pro¬
tons and neutrons or combinations
thereof. This emission of radiations in
the form of particles or rays is known
as "Radioactivity."
When the unstable nuclei of radio¬
active elements disintegrate, they emit
three kinds of "radiations" called
"Alpha" particles, "Beta" particles and
"Gamma" rays. The alpha particles
are nothing but a combination of two
protons and two neutrons (helium
nucleus without the orbiting electrons)
carrying a positive charge due to the
two protons. The beta particles are
just negatively charged electrons
moving at high velocities and gamma
rays are deep penetrating radiations.
All the disintegrating nuclei "decay"
till such time as they revert to the most
stable nuclear structure. Time taken to
decay to half the original number of
atoms of a given kind is referred to by
the scientists as the "Half Life" of a
radioactive atom or "Radioisotope" for
short.
Transmutation of Elements
According to the theory of atomic
structure outlined above, If one ele¬
ment differs from another element by
just the number of protons and neu¬
trons in the body of the nucleus, it
follows that if somehow these numbers
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
9

NUCLEAR
ENERGY
IN THE
POLAR
REGIONS
Photo © APN
The polar regions may not seem a likely place to
find atomic power plants, yet at least two are now
in operation in these frozen regions. Above left,
the Soviet icebreaker "Lenin" operates regularly in
the Arctic ice equipped with a nuclear reactor. Be¬
low, nuclear reactor, supplying heat, power and
electric light at the U.S. scientific research station
at McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. Small reactor unload¬
ed there in 1961 is shown in photo left. A Soviet
Antarctic research station is seen reflected upside
down on a heliograph (meteorological measuring
instrument) in striking photo, right. A dozen coun¬
tries have been working together in the Antarctic
"Land of Science" since 1957. Radioisotope meas¬
urements have revealed that the oldest Antarctic
rock is some 3,500 millions years of age.
Photos Martin Company
10
NUCLEAR LABYRINTH (Continued)
could be changed by adding or remov¬
ing protons and neutrons to or from
the nucleus of an element, it could
be changed into another element. That
this is possible was first demonstrated
by Lord Rutherford in 1919.
Fission
The German scientists Otto Hahn
and Fritz Strassmann in 1938 found
that, when slow neutrons hit the
nucleus of the radioisotope uranium-
235, the nucleus fissioned into two
almost equal halves and there was a
tremendous burst of energy! How was
this to be explained?
As early as 1905, Einstein had prov¬
ed that matter and energy are inter¬
convertible and that if somehow matter
could be destroyed, it would appear in
the form of energy and this intercon-
vertibility would be governed by a very
simple equation E =Mc2 where E is
the energy liberated, M is the mass
converted and c is the constant velo¬
city of light which is 186,000 miles or
300,000 kilometres per second.
Einstein's equation satisfactorily
explained the phenomenon of fission
observed in the experiments of Hahn
and Strassmann. This led to calcula¬
tions which showed that if one pound
of uranium-235 could be fissioned it
would liberate as much energy
1,400 tons of high grade coal.
as
Reactors
The fission of every atom of uran¬
ium-235 results in the liberation
of energy as well as the release
of two to three secondary neutrons
from the disintegrating nucleus. These
neutrons if slowed down by a
erator," like graphite or water, could
get absorbed by another atom of
uranium-235 present in a piece of
uranium and cause another fission
which in turn would release energy and
two to three more neutrons and so on.
Thus, a chain reaction can be set up

and liberation of energy can be con¬
trolled by adjusting the absorption of
secondary neutrons by inserting some
material like boron or cadmium. A
contrivance sustaining a controlled
chain reaction is called a "Reactor".
Nuclear Power
Liberation of atomic energy once
controlled in a reactor can be used to
heat water which can produce steam
which in turn can drive a turbine to
generate electricity for supply to a
town. Thus, a nuclear power reactor
can replace a coal, oil or gas-fired
bojler of a conventional thermal power
plant.
The scale of energy produced from
the conventional' fuels and uranium is,
however, vastly different. The burning
of one pound of coal generates
3.5 units (Kwh) and one pound of oil
5.5 units (Kwh) of energy, the fission¬
ing of one pound of uranium liberates
10.5 million units (Kwh) of energy!
It is this enormous difference in the
output of energy that has propelled
the development of modern nuclear
power reactors to a degree that has
made them the cheapest source of
power generation.
Today, It Is possible to generate a
million KW (1000 MW) from a single
nuclear reactor producing power at
only about one quarter of a cent (US)
per unit (Kwh). Such a cheap and
Photo © APN
abundant supply of electric power has
made conversion of sea water into
fresh water on a large scale for
domestic and industrial purposes a
distinct economic possibility. In future,
it might be possible to establish big
energy centres on sea coasts with
agro-industrial complexes producing
power, water and fertilizers (from sea
salts), thus creating a thudding impact
on economic development.
In countries where the resources of
fossil fuels (coal, oil and gas) are
limited and where power is needed, not
at a "competitive cost" but at "any
cost," to accelerate the pace of eco¬
nomic development, as in countries of
Asia, Africa, and Latin America,
nuclear power is a boon.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
11

NUCLEAR LABYRINTH (Continued)
Strawberries and oranges that stay fresh
12
Even in highly industrialized coun¬
tries of Europe, in the U.S.S.R., Canada
and U.S.A. where cheap and abun¬
dant supply of coal is available, nuclear
power stations are replacing the con¬
ventional thermal stations because the
uranium1 fuel is so compact that a
comparatively small quantity can easily
be transported to feed a big nuclear
power station in the heart of the load
centre resulting in saving on transport
of fuel and long distance power trans¬
mission lines (see article page 17).
Breeder Reactors
Natural uranium contains 99-3 per
cent of the isotope uranium-238 and
0.7 per cent of the isotope uranium-235.
When a slow neutron hits atoms of
uranium-235 in a reactor, fission take-*
place and we get energy which is con¬
verted into electric power. But when
the neutrons hit the nucleus of uran¬
ium-238, which is present in the
reactor fuel in abundance, transmuta¬
tion takes place converting uranium-
238 into a new element, neptunium,
which, after the emission of a beta-
particle, decays into a very long-lived
element called plutonium, having an
atomic weight of 239 and atomic
number 94.
Like uranium-235, plutonium-239 is
fissionable. In other words, while
uranium-235 fissions and gets con¬
sumed, the uranium-238 breeds into
plutonium-239 which on recovery
from the spent-fuel as a byproduct,
can either be recycled back into the
reactor or used as fuel in fast "Breeder
Reactors", using fast neutrons without
a moderator. It is hoped that the
technology of such reactors will be
perfected within the next 10-15 years
which would bring a power revolution
in its wake.
Production of Radioisotopes
Because a reactor is a big source
of neutrons released from the fission
of uranium, it is employed to produce
a large number of radioisotopes of
different elements either by the trans¬
mutation or the activation process.
For example, if sulphur is inserted in
the reactor, the neutrons convert it
into radioactive phosphorus with a half
life of 14.5 days and if tellurium is
inserted, it gets converted into radio¬
active iodine with a half life of 8 days.
Similarly, ordinary cobalt, when hit
by neutrons, is activated into radio¬
active cobalt with a half life of nearly
5 years. These "artificially" produced
radioisotopes have been used in a
variety cf ways to solve problems in
the fields of agriculture, hydrology,
medicine and industry. In fact, the
limit to which they can be used, is the
limit of man's imagination and genius.
Uses of Radioisotopes
as Tracers
The principle underlying the use of
radioisotopes is that the radiations
emitted by them can be detected by
sensitive electronic instruments and
can also be recorded on a photogra¬
phic plate, co that even where they are
present in' minute quantities of say
one In a million, they can be "traced."
Agriculture. One of the important
applications of tracer technique in the
field of agriculture is the determination
of the uptake of fertilizers by a plant
from the soil. Labelled phosphate fer¬
tilizer is mixed in the soil and the
uptake by the plant from different
types of soil is studied from the radio¬
graphs. Similarly, if "labelled" fertili¬
zers are applied at different stages of
the growth of a rice or wheat plant
(seedling stage, flowering stage, etc.),
the radiographs can help to determine
the right stage when the fertilizer
should be applied for maximum yields.
Medicine. Certain organs of the
body have great affinity for specific
elements which are absorbed from' the
intake of foods, For example, iodine is
absorbed entirely by the thyroid gland,
iron plays a vital role in the blood¬
stream and cobalt helps the synthesis
of vitamin B in the liver.
Thus, when radioiodine dissolved in
water is administered to a patient and
a "scanner" is placed against his
throat, the emission of electrons from
radioiodine are recorded on the pho¬
tographic paper in the scanner giving
an idea of the functioning of the
thyroid gland.
Labelled pharmaceuticals and radio-
medicines are being increasingly used
in the diagnosis and treatment of
diseases, so much so that nearly
80 per cent of the total production of
isotopes and their uses today, is in
the field of medicine and public health.
Hydrology. The injection of radio¬
isotopes which can mix with water, like
bromine, iodine and tritium, has helped
to "trace" the movement of sub-soil
streams and to discover underground
reservoirs of water for pump irrigation.
Similarly, the directional flow and
volume of seepage water from the
beds of irrigation canals can help in
the study of the problems of water
balance in the waterlogged areas.
One very successful application of
tracers has been in the use of labelled
sea-sand, to determine the movement
of silt in harbours. Such studies
carried out have not only helped in
the dredging of the silt but in dumping
it at an appropriate spot so that it is
not brought back into the harbours by
the undercurrents. The London Port
Authority seems to have cut down its
dredging budget by at least 50 per cent
as a result of the studies carried out
with the help of labelled sand.
Uses of Radioisotopes as
Radiation Sources
Although the application of radio¬
isotopes as tracers is important, their
use as sources of radiations Is equally
significant. The radiations most
widely used are the gamma rays from
radioactive-cobalt activated in a
reactor. These are such deep
penetrating rays that they have been
put to a variety of uses in the fields
mentioned below:
New Varieties of Crops. When
seeds of rice, wheat, maize, sugar¬
cane, tobacco, cotton, jute or, for that
matter, flowers are exposed to a
measured dose of gamma rays, they
undergo profound genetic changes
with the result that, on sowing, the
irradiated seeds give a variety of
plants, some of which are high yielding
and pest resistant.
Sterile male technique. There are
some insects and pests which mate
only once in life. The males of such
pests can be reared in the laboratory
on a mass scale and sterilized by a
dose of gamma rays. When such
sterilized males are released in the
pest infested area, they mate with
their females and die. Because of
sterility, no new generation is born
and after some time the females also
die resulting in the ultimate wiping
out of the pest. The eradication of
the screwworm attacking the cattle in
the United States, is one of the success
stories of the sterile male technique
which is being applied in the case of
fruit flies and other pests in many parts
of the world (see article page 18).
Disinfestation of stored foodgrains.
Gamma rays have also been used to
destroy insects and pests which infest
stored foodgrains. Experiments in
many countries have shown that the
irradiated wheat and rice do not
undergo any significant change in
taste or nutritional properties provided

MINING URANIUM FROM THE SEA. Man is not likely to run short of uranium for nuclear
power installations. The sea around him is virtually a limitless reservoir of uranium in
solution. The Norwegian Current, which flows past the north of the British Isles and along
the coast of Norway towards the Arctic Ocean, for instance, carries with it about 250,000 tons
of uranium par annum. Over a million tons of uranium pass through the Florida Straits and
the Japan Strait each year. For the past ten years scientists in Britain have experimented
with different ways of extracting the low concentration (3.3 microgrammes per litre) of
uranium in sea water, though these methods are still economically unattractive. One absorbent
substance they have used is hydrated titanium oxide which takes up uranium and can then
be treated to give solutions, in which the uranium concentration is increased ten thousandfold.
It gives good results» when prepared in the granular form being examined here by a scientist.
the dose of gamma rays is controlled.
Gamma-rays do not induce any radio¬
activity so that irradiated grains are
totally harmless.
Food Preservation. Fresh fruits,
fish, poultry, meat and vegetables
decay either on shelves or in cold
storage after some time. Experiments
have shown that sprouting in potatoes
and onions is inhibited by exposure to
gamma rays and that certain varieties
of oranges, strawberries etc. stay
fresh after a light dose of these rays.
The shelf life of fresh fish is extended
by several days when treated with
gamma rays and poultry and bacon
remain preserved when exposed
to radioactive cobalt. The results
obtained in this field are so promising
that in the next few years irradiated
preserved foods will be a common
sight in the world markets.
Cobalt Therapy. Nearly every
modern hospital has what is known
as a cobalt-therapy unit. It has a
pellet of radioactive cobalt embedded
in a shielded chamber which wjien
opened gives out an intense beam of
gamma rays. These are used to
destroy malignant growth of tumours
and cancerous tissues. This has
helped many patients not only to live
longer but to get completely cured.
Sterilization of Medical Supplies.
The lethal power of gamma rays is
also employed in the sterilization of a
variety of medical supplies, such as
syringes, needles, blades, sutures and
hospital linen. In advanced countries,
gamma-ray sterilized hypodermic
syringes are standard items used for
only one Injection so that there may
not be any cross infection if used a
second time on another patient.
Radiography. Because of the very
penetrating power of the gamma rays,
they have been used to detect the
faults in the castings of thick steel
plates, forgings, welded joints, pistons
and pipelines, etc. At one end of the
defective specimen is placed a cobalt
source and at the opposite end a
photographic film or a plate. The
image showing the voids and
defects is registered by the gamma
rays passing through the specimen.
Industrial radiography is now a well-
established technique which has
helped to improve the quality of
manufactured products and detection
of faults in hundreds of metallic items.
Grafting on Wood & Fibre. Under
the influence of gamma rays, grafting
of certain chemicals (polymers) has
been successfully accomplished on
fibres and wood which gives them new
properties. Many varieties of soft
wood become hard, adding to their
usefulness. Similarly, fibre and tex-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

14
NUCLEAR LABYRINTH (Continued)
tiles treated with certain chemicals
under the influence of radiation may
help to produce new materials.
Chemical Compounds. Gamma rays
have been found to have a catalytic
effect on certain chemical processes
and have also helped to form new
chemical compounds (which would
not otherwise form under ordinary
conditions of chemical reactions). The
usefulness of this effect to the chemi¬
cal industry ¡s, therefore, invaluable.
Thickness and Density Gauges.
Radioactive sources emitting beta-
particles (electrons) are used as
thickness gauges to ensure uniform
density of products like paper. The
rollers are pre-set to pass through a
certain thickness of paper which is
rolled off the production line. The
electrons passing through the desired
thickness of paper are detected by a
counter which in turn controls the
setting of the rollers. As soon as
thicker paper passes over the rollers,
more electrons from the radioactive
source are stopped and there is less
detection by the counter which brings
the rollers closer till the pre-set value
is reached.
Thus, defects in thickness of
industrial products like paper, can be
detected and quality control exercised.
Similarly, density of packing of tobacco
in cigarettes is detectable with the
help of such gauges.
Carbon Dating. Old archeological
fossils and bones contain organic
matter and all organic matter contains
carbon. All natural carbon has a
very minute percentage of the radio¬
active isotope carbon-14 which has a
half-life of about 5,700 years. Thus,
if archeological specimens containing
organic matter such as bones, etc. are
placed before highly sensitive elec¬
tronic detectors, the faint emission of
radiations from radioactive carbon can
be registered and counted. As radio¬
active carbon must have decayed over
the period of antiquity, the intensity of
emission can determine the age of the
carbon and thus "date" the archeolo¬
gical specimen (see article page 22).
The scientist has learnt to tame the
atom in the service of man and his
quest to discover new horizons will
continue as an integral part of the
making of the scientist; but scientists
do not rule the world. It ¡s the
statesmen and politicians who hold the
key to two doors; one leading to
peace, progress and prosperity and
the other to total destruction and anni¬
hilation. Let us pray that sanity will
prevail and the key shall never be
turned to open the second door.

The peaceful
use of nuclear
explosives for«
large-scale
earth-moving
might one day
enable us to
change the
geography of
our planet.
One proposal
already made is
for the nuclear
construction

of a new,
sea-level
Panama Canal,
wider and
deeper

than the
present

one and withow
locks. Above,
artist's
impression of
what this
tremendous
man-made
waterway would
look like.
