SCIENCE
AND THE CULTURE
OF OUR TIMES
by Laurence Af. Could
W,
HILE modern society
seems confident that science and
technology can take care of all human
needs, I still think not enough people
appreciate the magnitude and the vio¬
lence of the scientific technological
revolution in which we are involved.
Today, there is no other influence
comparable with science in changing
the foundations, indeed, the very
character of our lives.
Science and its products determine
our economy, dominate our industry,
affect our health and welfare, alter
our relations to all other nations, and
determine the conditions of war and
peace. Everyone who breathes is
affected, and cannot remain imper¬
vious to them.
Our very existence is so completely
dependent upon science and techno¬
logy that it would be impossible to
materially alter our present methods.
We have no option. We can't stifle
man's curiosity. It is only from the
knowledge that we gain by asking
questions, no matter how terrible, how
dreadful they are; it is only by these
questions that man achieves final
dignity.
When I was president of the Ameri¬
can Association for the Advancement
of Science, I attended the British
Association meetings. I was dumb¬
founded and delighted to hear
J.C, Dancy, the great classical scholar,
headmaster of Marlborough College,
argue "technology and a liberal edu¬
cation, far from being antithetical, are
not even complementary; some expe-
4
LAURENCE M. GOULD is former president
of the American Association far the
Advancement of Science. He is now
chairman of the Committee on Polar Re¬
search, U.S. Academy of Sciences, and
has taken part in several expeditions to
the Arctic and Antarctic. He has written
extensive/y on Antarctica, the International
Geophysical Year and international science.
Readers will recall his article, "Antarctica,
International Land of Science" which
appeared in the January 1962 issue of the
"Unesco Courier".
rience in technology is an essential
ingredient in a liberal education."
The Greeks did not scorn techno¬
logy. Classical Greek civilization was
characterized by a unity between art,
science, and technology; a unity which
is the hallmark of all great civiliza¬
tions; a unity which disappeared then
until Leonardo da Vinci. A historian
of science might say that the schism
we now know began then, and yet
philosophy and science were indis¬
tinguishable until almost the end of the
18th century. You can date with
exactness when the split came: when
philosopher Immanuel Kant said that
science dealt only with the world of
appearance, and philosophy with the
world of reality. Nonsensel
Nevertheless, a dangerous gap has
developed. It was greatly overstated
by C.P. Snow. I do not subscribe to
the idea of two cultures. The gap
exists, but the feud between science
and the humanities is without substan¬
ce. It is time it be ended. We must
have humanists who comprehend and
include scientific and technological
knowledge in their dreams of the
world, else we shall have no world
at all. We must recover the Renais¬
sance. The pursuit of wisdom must
at long last be a single enterprise,
or liberal education has no meaning.
I studied geology, therefore, I'm a
scientist and not a humanist? Some¬
body studies philosophy or art and,
therefore, is a humanist? Nonsense!
It isn't true at all. To major in philo¬
sophy does not make you a humanist.
Don't you remember the greatest of
all teachers once said, "Not all who
cry Lord, Lord, shall enter the King¬
dom of Heaven"? A chemist with
an omnivorous intellectual appetite
may be a greater humanist than a
philosopher whose interest is confin¬
ed to existentialism.
Part of the problem is semantics.
Certain words lose their meaning.
I think humanism has. It implies that
all else may be something less than
human. I was delighted when Joseph
Wood Krutch wrote in a "Saturday
Review" article, "the trouble is that
Text copyright © Reproduction prohibited
"humanities', narrowly interpreted,
ceases to mean much more than the
polite accomplishment analogous to
the needlework and flower painting
which (adíes were once supposed to
dabble in, primarily to demonstrate
that they were ladies rather than
something economically and socially
inferior."
Let me state a little more seriously:
a great disservice has been done to
the truly humanistic tradition by trying
to identify it too closely with particular
fields of study. Many supposed
conflicts rise from a gross misunder¬
standing of what science is all about.
Science is not a form of black magic.
A thousand blind alleys must often be
explored before a right road is found;
a thousand amateurs must have their
fling before a Darwin or an Einstein
comes along.
Whenever you hear a scientist say,
"This is the end of it; this is all of it",
that man is no longer a scientist.
There is no quest for truth in scientific
research which does not carry within
itself the possibility, even the proba¬
bility, of error. We respect the find¬
ings of science because they are
always open to re-examination and to
question. Scientific truth is dynamic
and self-correcting and never final.
When someone asked Einstein how
he discovered the theory of relativity,
he replied, "By challenging an axiom."
There never was a great scientist who
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6
Though science has long been changing
the very nature of human life,
surprisingly little place is given
to the great discoveries of science
in many history books. Certain do not
even mention such famous names
as Galileo, Kepler, Descartes
and Newton. Photo recalls one of Galileo's
studies on the laws of bodies in motion
his demonstration that bodies of
different weights fall with equal
velocities, said to have been carried
out in 1589 from the Leaning Tower
of Pisa (in background).

I>
^^iiBi , a
I
I
» l>
»*
j s f t ' e
i
-' -
Photo © Erich Lessing - Maqnum

SCIENCE AS CULTURE (Continued)
Why not an epic poem on Relativity or DNA?
did not make bold guesses, and never
one whose guesses were always right.
The scientist looks for order. He
believes in a real world and he
believes that science is a means of
teaching the truths about that world.
But still, he's got to make guesses.
He must invent concepts to make the
world intelligible.
So the scientific world never reflects
completely the real world, but only
selected characteristics organized on
accepted assumptions.
The best definition of science is
one by George Boas: "Science is
the art of understanding nature."
There is no better definition.
It is oversimplification to talk about
"the scientific method." There isn't
one. There are a thousand, all rational
methods. But human rationality is
the most important realm in which
man can fruitfully live.
To me, pure science has been, along
with religion and art, one of man's
great avenues in his quest for truth.
As Jacob Bronowski points out, "1
believe the concepts of value in the
humanities are not as different in kind
from those of sciences as many would
have us believe. Both seek to express
the deep relations between the human
mind and the world it matches."
Coleridge, trying to define beauty,
always returned to: "Beauty is unity
and variety." Well, reverse it science
is the search to discover unity in the
wild variety of nature.
Both the scientist and the poet seek
to explore and to understand. It is
only the form of exploration which
is different. You cannot enter any
world of meaning without making
postulates. In religion we call them
faith; in ethics we call them norms
or ideals; in science we call them
hypotheses or theories; the choice of
these hypotheses or theories or
assumptions is always a matter of
faith.
There is a fallacious idea that
science is objective while the human¬
istic studies are subjective. This is
complete nonsense. Science is always
the record of someone's personal
experience. There is no kind of
experience that can be impersonal.
No one can have the same experien¬
ces I have had; the best he can do is
have the same kind, and in no case
has science reduced the personal
6
Building has always drawn on
technological innovations, and
architecture is as much a science
as an art. From the use of concrete,
steel and glass have come new concepts
of building design and construction.
Right, a building in Chandigharh,
capital of Panjab (India), built to the
plans of Le Corbusier.
equation to zero. Science is subjective
within man's nature in the same sense
that the other humanistic studies are.
If what I say is true, why has not
science played a larger role in liberal
education? And though science is so
all-pervasive, why have scientists not
become a part of the ordinary citizen's
experience of knowledge. More stran¬
gely, poets and playwrights have not
drawn heavily upon science and tech¬
nology. Twentieth century art and
letters do not have great expressions
concerning the industrial revolution
and its science and technology.
Shelly, in his defence of poetry,
said that one of the tasks of the
literary artist is to "Absorb the know¬
ledge of the sciences and assimilate
it to human needs; colour it with
human passions, transform it with the
blood and bone of human nature." In
other words, literature ought to concern
itself with the whole of life, including
science.
Dante and Milton especially among
Renaissance writers were inspired by
astronomy and dealt with it in their
own sublime language. When Milton
was fascinated by the new optical
instruments of Galileo, and when he
was portraying his Satan tempting
Tr rnn r11inr i r

In the 5th century B.C., Pythagorus, the great
philosopher and mathematician, demonstrated
the interrelation of music and mathematics,
that music was "the numeral thing par
excellence", as the French musicologist Louis Laloy
has put it, and that musical intervals are determined
by whole numbers. Pythagorus showed
that from a string and the note it produces,
all the notes of the scale may be obtained by
lengthening the string according to given ratios.
In ancient times the Chinese too perceived
the correlation of music with mathematics.
Right, illustrations from a famous work,
"The Theory of Music" (1480), by the Italian
composer Franchino Gafori, show Pythagorus
demonstrating the mathematical essence of music
with the aid of a series of strings (on left) and
with tubes of different lengths filled with air.
From "Enciclopedia délie grandi scoperte et dell'era atómica," Tomaselll, Rome
Christ, he displays to Him the Kingdom
of this world not in antique fashion
through the naked eye, but by "optic
skill of vision multiplied by air or glass
of telescope."
In "Paradise Lost", Milton wrote
about Antarctica: "Beyond this flood
a frozen continent lies dark and wild,
beat with perpetual storms, of whirl¬
winds and dire hail, which on firm land
thaws not but gathers heap, and ruin
seems of ancient pile; all else deep
snow and ice." No one is writing
like that about Antarctica today. Yet
science has given some of the greatest
epic themes in the history of man¬
kind the nuclear atom, the chromo¬
somes, and DNA, more beautiful than
anything man has contrived.
Oh, I wish Milton could have orbited
the earth with John Glenn or Gordon
Cooper! It should have been.
The general theory of relativity by
which Einstein renounced absolute
space and time gave us a picture of
unity and harmony surpassing any
that man had ever dreamed before.
It's probably the finest intellectual
achievement of our times, and yet the
only poem that I've ever been able to
find about relativity is this:
There was a young lady
[named Bright
Who learned to move faster
[than light
She set out one day m a
[relative way
And came back on the pre¬
vious night.
That isn't enoughl
We need more scientists who are
literate and articulate, but we need
more imaginative literature to interpret
our mechanized existence into noble
language to reach and inspire us. In
Shelley's words "which will trans¬
form it with the blood and bone of
human nature."
How shall we do that? In medieval
universities, philosophy gave unity to
the whole. We still have that notion
preserved in the fossilized expression,
Ph.D., Doctor of Philosophy. You know
very well one can have his degree in
economics, animal husbandry, or even
geology without ever having been
exposed to philosophy. There is no
unifying study in our culture today.
But let me suggest that history,
broadly conceived, could provide the
cultural bridge to bring the disciplines
of our academic world into order.
This idea was said more eloquently by
William James: "You can give human¬
istic value to almost anything by teach¬
ing it historically geology, economics,
mechanics are humanities when taught
with reference to the achievements of
the geniuses to which these sciences
owe their being. Not taught thus,
literature remains grammar; art a cata¬
logue; history a list of dates; and
natural science a sheet of formulas,
weights and measures. The sifting of
human creations is what we ought to
mean by the humanities."
What James is saying is that the
humanistic content of any subject lies
in its history. Well, history is built-in
the humanities. You can't teach art
or letters without teaching its history.
But science can be taught; it is too
often taught, as formulas, weights and
measures. Yet science is the product
of historical development. It is the
one truly cumulative aspect of man's
history. Science makes history, but
is largely neglected by historians.
Bacon conceived of the history of
all learning and Bacon insisted that
such history would include the scien¬
ces and the humanities.
In the 1800s, a young German
scientist, Liebig, detected phosphate
and potash in the ashes of burned
plants and found ammonia in the
vapours. He tried all three in a
barren plot of ground. Shortly Darm¬
stadt became a cradle of agricultural
chemistry. Artificial fertilizers were
created which doubled the food capa¬
city of Europe almost overnight. I
have never found any reference to
Liebig in any historical document.
Well, I picked up a text used at
Carleton College called "European
History, Renaissance to Waterloo,"
752 pages. Science was mentioned on
only 33 pages. Even worse, Toynbee's
600-page "Outline of History" did not
mention Kepler, Copernicus, Galileo,
Descartes, or Newton. What kind of
a history of the world is it that leaves
out Newton, the greatest investigator
of all times?
The historians will think I am pick¬
ing on them, and yet I'm not. In some
ways we scientists are worse offen¬
ders. Unfortunately for the human
aspects of science the study of the
past isn't necessary. You can become
a first rate research man in physics
and chemistry without knowing the
history that produced both. So the
rich humanistic heritage of science is
almost as badly neglected by scientists
as by others.
We as scientists and technologists
are so surfeited with information, so
bogged down with the immediate job
that we have neither the time nor the
patience to inquire into the meaning
of what we are doing. T.S. Eliot
summed it up, "Where is the wisdom
we have lost in knowledge, where is
the knowledge we have lost in inform¬
ation?"
Yet you can take any product of
science and technology, trace it to its
ultimate origin, and you would see the
end result of a long and continuing
tradition embodying parts of man's
unending record of failures, stupidities,
and genius.
Lynn White, remarkable medieval
historian, said "To be as concrete as
possible, we shall not have built a new
hberal education in democratic terms
until we can give in our colleges a
course on the internal combustion
engine as humanly conceived as the
course on Shakespeare's plays. Both
are supreme expressions of the mind
and should be studied as such." I
agree.
But, dedicated as I am, I couldn't
hold that an internal combustion engine _
is comparable with the works of 7
Shakespeare. Nothing that man has '
ever done, no split atom, nor any
other achievement is comparable with
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

The germs of science as old as man
8
his words and phrases. Here is man's
creativity at its greatest.
In the 1920s, on a 2,000-mile sledge
journey in Antarctica, five companions
and I mapped mountains and glaciers
no one had ever seen. I wrote in my
journal: "No work of art of which
I have stood in awe, no symphony
I have ever heard, ever gave me the
thrill that came when I picked up a
piece of rock and found it was the
sandstone I had come all the way to
Antarctica to find." This was true.
It was one of the great spiritual experi¬
ences of my life.
But, if I had to change that experi¬
ence for the satisfactions of having
read and reread Hamlet, which is
surely one of the half dozen wonders
of the world, I would have to choose
Hamlet; but, I don't have to choose.
Neither do you. Both are part of a
larger whole.
In old Europe, scholarship developed
under an all-covering canopy of truth
from the church, and force from the
classics. Both are largely gone. The
Hebrew-Christian tradition has become
so tenuous that many theological
schools say God is dead, and refer to
our times as the post-Christian era.
Twenty-four centuries of Hellenic
domination are gone. Now there is
no generally accepted view on funda¬
ments as in the Renaissance. We are
adrift without an anchor in a world of
shaken beliefs.
That remarkable classical scholar,
the late Sir Richard Livingstone, said:
"We are a generation without either
illusions or a positive faith, kept from
collapse by dead convictions which
still influence the conduct but are no
longer anchored in our beliefs."
My thesis is a simple one: we've
got to find some stronger unifying
element in our intellectual life than
any now apparent. Science, viewed
'historically, is the great untapped
reservoir of humanism which can help
fill the void caused by the decay of
the classical humanism.
We have studied Aristotle as a
great philosopher and metaphysician.
Do we realize he was one of the great
figures of science? Are we taught
he was considered the greatest natu¬
ralist, the father of biology, the man
who opened inquiry into physiology,
embryology, comparative anatomy, and
ecology? Darwin didn't know this,
Darwin was fairly old before he heard
of Aristotle. Then, he wrote: "I had
not the remotest notion what a won¬
derful man Aristotle was."
My comment on the lost unity of
humanist education is an expression
of profound regret. All the great
cultures China, Athens, India were
held together by ideas based upon
spiritual unity, and of all the things
that are part of our lives, science and
technology are the most pervasive.
They diffuse more rapidly than any
other. Literature and art remain pro¬
vincial. But not science and techno¬
logy. Their product is immediately
understandable to all peoples. Scien¬
tific workers have a sense of world
citizenship. Discoveries have signi¬
ficance only when communicated to
other scientists. Scientific knowledge
is a living, growing thing. Scientific
knowledge must be used; it doesn't
keep any better than fish.
The universal status of science, its
proudest claim, is also its greatest
opportunity. In an age characterized
by perfection of means and confusion
of ideals, the disciplines of science
which admit no frontiers of race or
creed, provide a basis for effective
international co-operation. Science has
long since made the world one com¬
munity; a statement that cannot be
made about any of the other avenues
that man has followed in his quest for
an orderly world. Today the contend¬
ing forces which make the strongest
appeal are the national and the
racialist movements which deny this
principle of science.
Science came into being and has
evolved because man is curious; he's
relatively intelligent; to become intel¬
lectually enlightened he had to have
a desire to better understand his world,
and in the broadest sense, science
was the first common enterprise of
mankind.
My fellow scientists know that
it takes two or three thousands of
millions of years to account for me.
I have a documentary body, I am a
museum of all life, I am a part of all
that has preceded me; and science,
like biology, like life itself, has grown
not by revolution, but by evolution.
The germs of science are as old as
man.
When we use the word "science"
now, we think of only four centuries.
Yet it began when man got up off his
front feet and began using stones for
tools. Progress was infinitely slow,
and then came the discoveries of the
Egyptians, Sumerians, and Babylo¬
nians; and upon these the Greeks
built their own system of knowledge.
The historian who follows a single
people finds them dust and forgotten,
but their science lives on.
Science and technology have woven
unity into our society and we could
not escape if we would. Here are two
examples: the International Geophy¬
sical year began July 1, 1957, and
ended theoretically, December 31,
1958. It was the greatest peacetime
activity in mankind's history, with
nearly 70 nations, 40,000 scientists in
4,000 stations from pole to pole
observing planet earth. There was an
almost magical quality about it. Inter¬
national barriers were lowered and
closed doors opened. There was
simplicity, flexibility, freedom from
political consideration. At its peak,
the whole secretariat consisted of
only eight people.
It was carried out in a period of
worldwide unrest, and yet, we dem¬
onstrated that it is possible to engage
in rational and reasonable conduct at
the scientific level, and that inter¬
national scientific co-operation is the
best model for worldwide organization.
And out of our I.G.Y. co-operative
effort in Antarctica, the coldest con¬
tinent, came the first thaw in the cold
war. For from 12 nations there came
the Antarctic treaty. Hear these
words: "Recognizing that it is in the
interest of all mankind that Antarctica
shall continue forever to be used
exclusively for peaceful purposes and
shall not become the scene or object
of international discord."
I believe the Antarctic treaty is a
breakthrough of international impor¬
tance. It may take its place alongside
the Magna Carta because for the first
time a large part of the world is
dedicated, for the first time, to peace¬
ful purposes. It is a treaty which
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

Photos © Frank J Malina. Paris
Art and science are combined in the work of Frank J. Malina, who is himself both an
artist and a scientist. He has made an original contribution to art with his kinetic paintings,
using electric light and real movement. Unesco recently acquired the work, left, "Ladders
to the skies III", which now hangs in the reception room of the Director-General. Above,
"Planetscape I", impression of extra-terrestial landscape (Will Feijer Collection, Chicago).
9

SCIENCE AS CULTURE (Continued)
prohibits nuclear explosions; a treaty
which provides freedom of scientific
investigation, a treaty which is a prece¬
dent in the field of disarmament, his¬
tory's first test-ban treaty. It is its
first disarmament treaty. It is the first
treaty designed to protect a scientific
programme and then, by some kind of
magic, the programme is implemented
by the Scientific Committee which is
not a government body at all. That
may be one of the reasons it works.
As a result of Antarctica's isolation,
it's the one continent that has never
been the home of man, and the flora
and fauna of Antarctica represent the
only sizable assemblage of organisms
anywhere almost uncontaminated by
man. Neither by accident nor by
design has man introduced new plants
and animals into Antarctica. Perhaps
one tiny part of our earth will remain
as it was before man started spoil¬
ing it.
When I retired as president of
Carleton College in 1962, the student
body gave my wife and me two round
trip tickets to Athens. I had over the
years spoken so often of my fascin¬
ation of classic Greece, that we did
go to Athens and when we arrived,
for some reason, I had a great reluc¬
tance to go and see what I had always
wanted to see.
In the earliest things that I ever
read, I became fascinated with two
people one was Abraham Lincoln
and the other one was Socrates. I had
read so much about the Acropolis, so
much about the Parthenon that I was
afraid to go see them.
Well, a remarkable Greek, Constan¬
tinos Doxiadis a remarkable man
who is doing things about pollution
and many other problems arranged
for us to go up the Acropolis. We did,
and as I stood in the midst of the
columns of the Parthenon looking out
over this beautiful city, it was one of
the most thrilling experiences of my
life, and I realized this was indeed
one of the noblest experiences of the
human spirit.
The next day when I had lunch with
Doxiadis and said of the Acropolis,
"This is the greatest and noblest
expression of the human spirit I have
ever seen", Dr. Doxiadis said, "Yes,
but remember this. For its time, it
was also one of the world's greatest
engineering feats."
You see, the technology and the art
that produced the Parthenon are parts
of a larger whole.
Now, I want to quote from another
philosopher, a friend of mine. He has
been buried for more than 20 centu¬
ries, but he's more alive than two-
thirds of us. His name is Plato, and
he once said this: "What I'm saying
may not be true, but something very
like it is."
10
Text published by and copyright, World
Book Encyclopedia Science Service, Inc ,
Houston, Texas, U.S.A.
