THE THOUSAND PARADOXES
OF VENICE
In this issue, the UNESCO COURIER presents the salient findings of a
comprehensive study on the problems of Venice recently completed by Unesco.
The study makes the first systematic assessment of the complex ensemble
of problems, physical and human, that face Venice today, and reviews the solutions
proposed by Italian specialists and other authorities. The article below describes
the struggle waged by the island city against the tides and currents eroding its
foundations, and a second article (page 35) examines the problems encountered
by Venice in its adaptation to the needs and demands of modern life. In a
third article inspired by the Unesco study (page 20) Louis Frédéric surveys
the ravages suffered by the city's unique heritage of art and monuments.
D ESPITE all her splendid
achievements, perhaps Venice's great¬
est triumph has been the ability to
survive. Even the facilities of her
lagoon, so advantageous to Venice,
were not a gift from nature. If the
ancient Venetians had not wrested it
from its natural course, the lagoon
would long ago have silted up and
leveled out to form a plain.
Its mirror-like waters, immortalized
by so many poets and painters, would
have long since given way to rising
land, and Venice herself would have
become another Aigues-Mortes (the
medieval French port now isolated
from the sea by marshland), if the
immense work carried out through the
centuries had not saved it from the
fate of other great lagoons, described
by Pliny, Strabo, Vitruvius and Livy,
which have disappeared along the
Adriatic coast, north of Ravenna.
The Venetians had to be exception¬
ally perceptive to calculate what
steps to take, and to avoid errors in
judgement or rash moves that would
allow the sea to take its revenge
on the haven they so tenaciously
defended against the fatally soft river
mud.
Of course, their ingenuity and
wisdom were not always as infallible
as their respectful descendants would
like to believe. Yet, despite the fact
that they have not been able to assure
their successors an entirely secure
CONTINUED ON PAGE 13
Right, the resplendent façade of the
11th century Basilica of St. Mark on whose
decoration Venice lavished rare marbles,
sculpture and mosaics right down to the
17th century. A triumph of Byzantine
architecture adapted to the artistic tastes and
genius of Venice, St. Mark's is the illustrious
symbol of the art and culture that flowered
in Venice when the city was mistress of the
seas and the link between East and West.
Left, reflected in the flood waters covering
St. Mark's Square, the 98 metre (324 ft.)
Campanile. The Square's original bell tower
was built in the 12th century, reconstructed in
the 14th and completed in the 15th with a
marble spire. The structure collapsed in 1902
and was rebuilt in 1912.
o

I
1
1 X \»
, 1 pS
I
-^ " " /j
TTv^
a V Í
if r' 1
\ - il r- "
J
4
\i
\
j \
«
Î
t
s


THE THOUSAND PARADOXES (Continued)
domain, they have at least been able
to show them how to use their own
skills to turn nature's "bulldozer"
leveling power to their advantage.
The Venetian lagoon, formed from
an ancient sea marsh, is Italy's largest
inland sea water system. Shaped like
a shallow crescent running north-east
to south-west, it is approximately
55 kilometres long while its width
varies from 8 to 14 kilometres; its
total area, including all its islands, is
approximately 550 square kilometres.
This salt water lake is separated
from the open sea by a broken
offshore barrier, consisting of flat,
elongated islands and peninsulas of
glacial and alluvial origin, dating from
the Quaternary Period, and therefore
relatively recent and soft. The
hundreds of tiny islands dotted over
the lagoon are of the same origin and
substance: clay and sand.
The rivers which had helped to
form the lagoon might eventually have
filled it up with mud. In fact, they
did carry a profusion of rushes and
reeds to the populated islands,
which slowed down the currents and
hindered the free passage of boats.
The Anopheles mosquito thrived in
the river waters, spreading disease
which, in the 17th century, gradually
decimated the population of Torcello,
the "first Venice".
It is not at all surprising that one
of the main concerns of ancient Venice
was to protect herself from the
capacity of the rivers to spread
disease. People often said, forgetting
all that it owed them, that the lagoon
had three enemies: the land, the sea,
and man.
The formidable task of mastering
the rivers was not accomplished
without intellectual and physical diffi¬
culties. Experts disagreed on the
nature and urgency of both the
problem and its solution. Many
engineering works had to be
abandoned, dismantled or completely
remodelled, when they proved to have
a disastrous effect on some aspect of
the lagoon's economy.
But seen as a whole, in the
perspective of time, the Venetian
Republic's defensive system against
the rivers is nonetheless an im¬
pressive achievement. They succeed-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Far left, the entrance to the Palazzo
Garzoni on the Grand Canal, in its
present state. This majestic
15th century building was Intact at the
turn of the century, when it housed the
French Consulate in Venice. To restore
its walls, eaten away by damp, and its
damaged frescos would cost 200 million
lire ($320,000). Left, one of Venice's
narrow canals with its traditional
gondolas. A "century ago, ten thousand
gondolas plied these waterways; today
there are barely 400.
flllilf
Photo © Fulvio Roiter, Venice
Above, the remarkable spiral staircase which
climbs the tower of the 15th century Palazzo
Contarini. Entirely built of Istrian marble,
it strikingly recalls the Tower of Pisa.
13

THE THOUSAND PARADOXES (Continued)
See-saw battle of sinking land and rising waters
ed in taming the Po and turning it
southward, as well as diverting the
Brenta, the Piave, and the Sile away
from the lagoon. And, although the
contermmazioni (trenches or canals
built on the outskirts of Venice) did
not prevent the areas nearest the sea
from gradually turning into marshland,
they did at least succeed in regulating
the salt content of the water, thus
eliminating malaria.
Some maintain that these measures,
necessary though they were, may have
been too radical, and have deprived
the lagoon bed of the supply of fluvial
sediment which would have com¬
pensated for the loss or settling of
its original alluvium, thereby speeding
up the subsidence process. A
secondary and less hypothetical result
of the diversion of the rivers is that
the bottom and banks of the lagoon
have become more exposed to the
effects of erosion by sea currents,
whose force is no longer absorbed by
a cushion of silt.
The Venetian lagoon is connected
to the open sea by three porti, or
channels, in the narrow off-shore sand
bar. From north to south, they are
the pgrti of the Lido, Malamocco and
Chioggia.
E
14
VEN before 1,000 A.D., the
Venetians were studying possible ways
of preventing the mouth of the Lido
channel from silting up. One of the
first steps was to close the channel
which existed at that time north of
the island of San Erasmo, while at
the same time, digging a new channel
to connect the basins of the northern
lagoon, the waters of which were
quite distinct. This made the Porto di
Lido the main entrance to the lagoon,
despite the ancient naval supremacy
of Malamocco, once the seat of the
Byzantine suzerainty.
Chioggia, the third porto, was
improved recently, as were the very
long parallel breakwaters, built under
the Austrian and Italian governments
to guide the tide through the three
porti, and protect them from silting up.
These channels have many advan¬
tages, one of which is to allow ships
access to the lagoon, enabling Venice
to continue to be an important
passenger and cargo port. But their
most important function is hydro-
dynamic: the purifying tides which
move through the porti twice a day,
assure that the Venetian lagoon
continues to be a living, dynamic part
of the sea.
Tides move in a vertical direction:
if the lagoon were an open bay, the
water would rise and fall along the
embankments of the city without
running through the rii, the city's
narrowest canals. Because it is
connected to the sea only through the
narrow bottlenecks of the porti, there
is a time lag between the level of
the lagoon and that of the sea. Here
we see the scientific principle of
communicating vessels at work one
of which is small (the lagoon) and the
other infinitely larger (the sea).
As the tide rises, the sea water
spreads horizontally inside the lagoon,
its movement helped or hindered by
such factors as the season, time of
day, direction and speed of wind, and
atmospheric pressure. The water
forms into currents at each porto,
which then flow across the lagoon
and through the channels between the
islands, until they reach the mainland.
The speed of the currents is deter¬
mined by the size of the lagoon basin
in relation to the size of the entrance.
The larger the basin, the faster the
current entering it; conversely, the
smaller the basin, or the greater the
proportion of land above water within
it, the slower the rate of flow. By
altering the size of the port/, this flow
can be corrected. Unlike its speed,
however, the height of the tide is
decided by lunar and meteorological
factors.
The latest measurements of the
tidal flow at the entrance to the Lido
channel show that its speed can be
as much as two metres per second.
Usually, it is not more than one metre
per second and naturally loses its
impetus as the current crosses the
lagoon, especially slowing down after
entering the maze of canals within the
city, and coming to a complete stand¬
still in some of the small rii.
As the tide goes out, the lagoon is
momentarily at a higher level than the
sea: its waters spill out into the open
sea through the same porti at about
the same speed and volume at which
they entered, six hours before.
IHIS ebb and flow of salt
water plays an essential rôle in the life
of Venice. It allows the lagoon and
the urban canals, at present the only
sewer system the city and the islands
have, to be cleaned, or "swept" (as the
ancient Venetians used to say.) And
its oxygen content is almost sufficient
to purify the water. In those interior
canals where the flow is strong, the
current carries away silt, keeping the
waterways open, but where it is weak,
they become blocked by silt deposits
which build up at the rate of seven
centimetres per year.
Obviously, the movement of the
lagoon - waters is not beneficial in
every respect. The same currents
that "sweep" the canals, eat into the
foundations of the buildings which line
them. Dramatic examples of the
damage that can result from this
insidious erosion occurred in June,
1950, and again in January, 1952, when
an entire wall of the ancient Fort of
Sanf Andrea and an abutment of the
San Nicolo bridge collapsed into the
waters of the canals near the mouth
of the Lido.
Moreover, in addition to the shores
of the islands, the currents erode the
porti themselves, gradually increasing
their size and allowing more water to
pass through them at greater speed,
a phenomenon that gives rise to other
dangers.
These currents, accused of being
much too weak when they are needed
to clean out sluggish canals, and of
being too strong and destructive in
other respects, constituted a problem
over which the Venetian Republic
laboured with great difficulty in its
search for satisfactory and permanent
solutions.
V.ENICE must certainly pay a
high price for the advantages of her
porti in calm weather. When the sea
and the winds beat against the city,
they leave the lagoon exposed to the
onslaught of the acqua alta, or "high
water" (a temporary but critical
increase in the level of the lagoon),
and prompt many a Venetian to wish
that it were completely cut off from
the seal But once fine weather
returns, they need only think of the
stagnant, fetid pond that it would
become, if it were not connected to
the sea, to be grateful for the regular
irrigation of the salt water which has
determined the rhythm of their life and
culture for 15 centuries.
It would be reasonable to suppose
that the waters which pour into the
lagoon at high tide through the narrow
gaps in the off-shore barrier would
blend together into one great body
of water, which would then ebb away
at random through one or other of the
entrances, i.e. the water that entered
at Malamocco would depart from
Chioggia, and vice versa. In fact,
such is not the case.
The waters sweep in through the
three porti at the same time, and
spread out into the lagoon at different
speeds. Although they draw close
together, they do not merge, each
staying within its invisible boundaries:
horizontal movement is theoretically
nil. As the tide ebbs, the waters
retreat back to the sea along their
same course, and leave the lagoon
through the same porti by which they
entered.
These "watersheds" divide the
lagoon into three basins of unequal
size. The northern (Lido) basin, which
contains the city itself, takes up
nearly- half the area of the lagoon.
The two others (Malamocco and
Chioggia) respectively account for
approximately 30 and 20 per cent of
the area, including land, water and
barene (islets and sand-banks, both

Below, Venice as depicted on a map made in 1534. Located on its
archipelago of islands in the centre of the lagoon, the city is
protected from the Adriatic only by a narrow cordon of islands and
peninsulas bisected by channels through which flow the tides that
clean and refresh the lagoon waters. Venice was formerly well
protected from the sea, but today its safety is dangerously
threatened by high water levels. Photo right shows the little
island of Burano, in the north-eastern part of the lagoon. Around
Burano spread the "barene", marshlands which the sea covers
at high tide, daily in certain places, from time to time in others.
Many of these marshes have now been drained and consolidated
to create new land for the development of industrial complexes.
above and below the water.) But the
dividing lines between these basins
are often temporarily shifted by winds
and other sources of instability.
Movement through the lagoon, both
for ships and sea currents, follows the
channels between the shoals created
by nature or dug by man. A look at
a hydrographie chart shows how many
there are and how tortuous are their
courses. Those which follow a
straight line, like the Vittono Eman-
uele III channel joining the western
end of the Giudecca Canal to Port
Marghera, are artificial and mostly of
recent construction.
A potential danger for the historic
city of Venice was created when large
oil tankers started to take this route,
via the Porto di Lido. It became clear
that a more suitable approach had to
be found for these cumbersome ships
whose cargoes could catch fire,
explode or leak out into the water.
In 1953, the maritime section of the
Ministry of Works proposed that a
new navigable channel be opened
between the Porto di Malamocco
(further away from the city), and the
industrial zone on the mainland.
This new channel is nearing
completion. Eighteen kilometres long
and 180 metres wide, it begins in the
open sea, five kilometres beyond
the lagoon, at a depth of 14.5 metres
below sea level, from where it slopes
up to 12.5 metres at Marghera: it will
allow ships of 65 thousand tons to
pass through to the oil port, and ships
of 40 thousand tons to the industrial
port. The channel project is part of
a programme of economic expansion
for reclaimed areas on the mainland.
Misgivings have been voiced about
what effects this interference with the
basic structure of the lagoon could
have on its hydrological conditions,
and ultimately its ecology (the inter¬
relation of living organisms and their
environments) and the security and
preservation of historic Venice itself.
According to experts from the
Netherlands, a new deep channel
between Malamocco and Marghera
will certainly make the tides in the
lagoon correspond more closely to
sea tides; Venice would be nearer
to the sea, so to speak, and there
would be less difference between the
high tide levels in the city and those
in the open sea.
An "Old Venetian" commenting on
the matter, said that he could see
other things besides advantages in
the prospect of the waves breaking
against the Doge's palace with the
same violence as they lashed the
embankments. Certain experts are
afraid that the freakish force of
the waters and their power to erode
the foundations of the city would only
be strengthened by such changes,
not to mention the probable increase
in the occurrence of "high water."
They also feel that the new currents
which are formed might gradually suck
away the original river mud in which
the piles of Venice are embedded, thus
making its buildings even more
unstable.
There are other experts who declare
that if the Malamocco tidal basin were
enlarged, the Lido basin would auto¬
matically become smaller, reducing
the force of the currents entering the
Lido channel, and making them less
erosive. But the capacity of these
currents to "sweep" and purify their
part of the lagoon and the canals of
Venice by renewing their water, would
also be reduced.
The choice between sacrificing the
city's salubrity to its solidity, or vice
versa, is a dilemma on which experts
have disagreed to the point of
questioning the fundamental data of
the problem. Some think that the
ground and the walls are firmer than
they are said to be, and that the main
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
15

THE THOUSAND PARADOXES (Continued)
Sentinels against the invading sea
thing is to promote the hydrodynamic
exchanges which can cleanse the
waters. Others consider that the
speed of the currents pose a threat so
serious that sooner or later, it will
cause Venice to collapse.
The pessimists also fear that the
changes in the hydrodynamic structure
of the lagoon, brought about by the
large-scale projects in progress, will
render Venice even more vulnerable
to "high water."
Located off the north-south mainland
shore are tiny islands caught in a
network of micro-canals; they are
covered by flowers which blossom
into lilacs in summer and autumn, and
provide a desolate haunt for sedentary
and migratory birds. Some of these
islands (the humid barene) are
submerged at high tide while others
(the dry barene) are permanently above
water, except at times of "high water."
This landscape is gradually giving
way to thermoelectric installations, oil
and chemical factories, harbour
facilities, residential districts, airports,
and agricultural areas, as new sections
of this "dead lagoon" are drained to
meet the requirements of economic
development.
Earth dredged from the deep Mala-
mocco-Marghera channel is brought
by pipeline, and used to create
1,200 hectares (almost 3,000 acres) of
solid land. Destined to become the
"Third Industrial Zone" of Venice-
Marghera, this new area will rise from
the lagoon bed to a height that will
assure its safety, even from the most
exceptional tides.
This industrial development and the
alterations to the lagoon's morphology
are not looked upon with favour by
those who, relying on the theories and
experience of past centuries, advocate
the preservation of the natural move¬
ment and equilibrium of the lagoon.
In fact, where the Venetian Republic
sought to protect the lagoon from
encroachment by the mainland, the
trend today is in the opposite direction.
The determination of the ancient
Venetians to preserve the barene, was
based on the belief that these
shallows, combined with the capillary
attraction of water to the mainland,
acted as a "regulating valve" in the
complex dynamics of the lagoon tides.
Today, the decrease in these natural
overspill areas is generally regarded
as one of the factors responsible for
the increasingly severe floods suffered
by Venice.
IHIS situation could de¬
teriorate even more if the Malamocco
currents their speed increased by the
depth and straightness of the new
channel are no longer absorbed by
the buffer zone of the barene, but
instead hit an earthbank which could
turn them back to the north, and
possibly direct their force on Venice.
Any increase in the proportion of
land to water (two examples are
Tronchetto, and other new islands,
and the Liberta Bridge, linking Venice
to the mainland), and even the
installation of fish preserves, might
compromise the security of Venice.
Altering the shape of the lagoon
would, of course, affect the movement
of the tides and their currents (about
which little is known even today), so
the reclamation of the barene poses
a definite problem.
The authorities responsible for the
monuments and historic buildings of
Venice have stressed that if more
marshy areas are dried out, the
preservation of the cultural heritage
of the city would be in potential
danger. They have asked the
appropriate ministries to re-examine
the implications both of the work in
progress and future projects.
The ancient defences earth and
stone embankments, palisades and
breakwaters which the Venetians
built to protect the eastern shores of
the coastal islands, did not stand up
for long against the repeated assaults
of the great waves. And what
remained of them were swept away
by the tidal waves of 1686 and 1891.
With their shore-lines their only
defence, these sentinels, comprising
from north to south the lido of
Cavallino, the islands of San Erasmo,
Vignole, Certosa and San Andrea, the
off-shore regions of the Lido and
Pellestrina, and the Lido of Sotto-
marina, became more and more vul¬
nerable as the waters ate into their
banks, and their populations increased.
To forestall the effects of the sea,
the Venetian engineers conceived the
Murazzi which, it was hopefully
claimed, would "last longer than
brass." The project was completed
WAVE-SMASHERS.
These massive
tetrahedral-shaped
blocks of concrete
are used to
reinforce the
bastions which
Venice has raised
against the sea.
Sunk along the
shores of the
Adriatic, they help
to break the force
of the waves and
tidal currents that
surge across the
lagoon and smash
against the
unprotected city
buildings.

Venetians
skating on the
lagoon to the north
of their city in the
bitter winter of
1708an
18th century
engraving.
in 1782, after 38 years of work (the
swan song of the republic, which only
15 years later would surrender its
sovereignty.)
Built of Istrian stone and consisting
of embankments, levees, and walls,
these dikes protect over four
kilometres of the shore of Pellestrina
and more than one kilometre of
Sottomarma's shore. They held firm
until 1825, when a tidal wave damaged
them.
They were repaired but during the
catastrophe of November 4, 1966, they
were breached in several places.
They are in the process of being
rebuilt according to improved plans,
and with the help of a government
credit of 9,000 million lire to the muni¬
cipality.
Another project that has been
approved calls for the construction of
sea defences on the islands in the
mouth of the Lido channel. The Lido
is not defended by the Murazzi.
Although its wide beaches ought to
help protect it, the sand is carried
away by the strong tides, and the
which once helped to replace
the sand have been greatly decreased
by man-made river embankments.
Other impediments , are the upper
breakwater of the Porto di Lido and
the lower breakwater of the Porto di
Chioggia, which stop sand from
drifting in from the north and the south.
Consequently, the beaches of the
Lido and Pellestrina "loosen up" more
each year and shrink, despite fresh
loads of sand brought in at great
expense by hotelkeepers. Even the
ground supporting the Murazzi may be
threatened eventually by subsidence,
due to this loss of sand.
In an effort to retain the sand, small
jetties perpendicular to the beaches,
called pennelli, have been built. The
same idea was unsuccessfully tried
centuries ago by the Venetian
>Republic; unfortunately its effec¬
tiveness does not seem to have
improved with time.
A FTER the Murazzi have
been rebuilt, the "sentinel islands"
protected, and the beaches streng¬
thened, it should be possible at least
to hope that the coast and the lagoon
will be safe for a time from the fierce
onslaughts of the sea, although it will
still be able to enter the lagoon through
the three port; of the Lido, Malamocco
and Chioggia.
The floods of November 4, 1966,
which damaged Venice and the
coastal islands, aroused the attention
and sympathy of the world, and the
concern of Unesco. Although a
dramatic catastrophe, it was not
unique; simply the most spectacular
example of a recurring phenomenon
the aqua alta, or "high water."
"High water" is caused by the
chance combination of lunar, meteor¬
ological, and hydrodynamic factors,
and its nature is fairly well known.
Less is known about what causes it.
The effects of "high water" are
increased by a permanent geophysical
condition which, although not unique
to Venice, takes on grave significance
in the lagoon: the gradual settling of
the lagoon bed, combined with the
world-wide rise of the sea level, is
causing the Venetian water level to
rise at the rate of three centimetres
every ten years.
If all the "high water" factors were
present at the same time, and at
maximum strength as could happen
any autumn or spring it has been
calculated that the level of the lagoon
would rise by 2.5 or even three
metres, and Venice would drown.
According to mathematical prob¬
ability, such a disaster could occur
only once every ten thousand years.
But a repeat of the November 4, 1966
flood, which submerged Venice for
24 hours under almost two metres
of salt water, oil and mud, could
happen every 250 years. And "high
water" with levels only 50 centimetres
less than that of the flood, can come
much more often: in fact, on
November 5, 1967, a year and a day
after the 1966 flood, such high water
conditions did occur, without making
much impression on public opinion.
Such calamities have always been
frequent in Venice's history. But
statistics show an extraordinary
increase in the number of heavy floods
in the last 25 years. None of the
aforementioned crisis factors, or even
the chronic condition which is causing
Venice to sink, can explain this
process. One theory is that the
recent work carried out in the lagoon,
which has led to changes in its
original structure, could be partly 1 |
responsible for this alarming develop- I '
ment.
The aqua alta is not a high tide,
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE THOUSAND PARADOXES (Continued)
The missing steps in Canaletto's paintings
nor is it a freak tide, nor even a
freak high tide: it is the result of the
more or less normal phenomenon of
the tide coming in on top of an
abnormal and exceptional rise in the
level of the sea.
However, this exception is enough
of a rule in Venice for the local
language to distinguish between a
normal, reasonable overflow from the
sea, and the "exceptional" high water
which exceeds the usual level and
sweeps through the traditional de¬
fences, invading the countryside and
flooding the ground floors of houses.
When . the flooding assumes cata¬
strophic proportions, the Venetians
ask many anxious questions about how
to preserve their city and culture.
According to scientists geogra¬
phers, oceanographers and meteor¬
ologists "high water" has numerous
causes, and they must all be present
to create a catastrophe.
This confluence of unfavourable
factors can only be attributed, in the
light of present knowledge, to the
hazards of nature: it is impossible, at
least for the present, to forecast when
it will occur. As knowledge of the
maritime, lagoon, lunar, atmospheric,
and hydrodynamic laws grows, it
should be possible to predict
dangerous levels of "high water"
several hours in advance and, with
the help of technology, avoid its more
harmful effects.
There is another phenomenon, which
in its relentless development, con¬
tributes to the insecurity of the inhab¬
itants of the Venetian coastal area.
It is caused by a general disturbance
of the world's seas in combination
with a specific disturbance of the
lagoon bed.
I
18
HE gradual rise in the
earth's temperature about one-tenth
of a degree centigrade per century is
causing a general increase in the level
of the world's seas. As the glacial
masses melt, the volume of the oceans
grows, and raises the sea level along
the coasts.
In Venice, the speed of this
increase has varied throughout the
years; at present, it is estimated to
rise 11 millimetres ever - ten years.
At the same' time, certain parts of the
Venetian lagoon are settling. Marine
tide-gauges show that the rise in the
level of the lagoon always exceeds
the readings taken elsewhere in the
world: in other words, the lagoon is
steadily sinking.
The readings have revealed that
in 53 years (1908-1961), the officially
measured sites had settled between
eight and 18 centimetres, depending
on where they were located.
Certain archaeological discoveries
point .to the possibility that the rate
of subsidence in Venice has recently
increased: old paving stones have
been found in the Piazza San Marco
which, in relation to the present
pavement, show an average subsid¬
ence of only about 11 to 12 centi¬
metres per century, instead of the
present 30 centimetres.
A study of the works of Venetian
landscape artists supports ' this evi¬
dence. In paintings by Canaletto and
Bellini, the number of steps showing
above the water in front of churches,
as well as the tide marks which they
reproduced as a greenish trace in the
mud on the walls, indicate an average
rate of subsidence of 12.5 centimetres
per century, when compared to the
present position of these marks.
I F, every ten years, the sea
rises about one centimetre and Venice
sinks by two centimetres, then the
water comes closer to the inhabitants
at the rate of about three centimetres
per decade, or more than 20 centi¬
metres during a normal lifetime. At
this speed, the buildings are sinking
one storey each thousand years.
Natural and artificial causes are
equally blamed for the subsidence of
the city and lagoon. The natural
causes include deep tectonic phenom¬
ena, and the settling of the alluvial
and marine deposits on which Venice
is built.
The artificial causes excite more
discussion, although there is a great
deal about them which we do not
know. The first cause concerns the
diversion of the rivers, blamed for
depriving Venice of new alluvial
deposits, which could offset the na¬
tural settling process.
The second cause involves the
excessive weight of the new build¬
ings, which may have accelerated the
settling process: ancient Venice was
built mostly of wood, but the pros¬
perous Republic was able to import
Istrian stone, marble, etc. This
"overweight" theory is reinforced by
the fact that Marghera, at the height
of its industrial development, settled
more quickly than San Marco, possibly
due to the heaviness of the factories
which were built there.
Excessive drainage of ground water
from under and around Venice is also
a possible cause of subsidence.
Water from artesian wells has always
supplied the city and the nearby
region. But now infinitely greater
quantities are being extracted to meet
the recent needs of industry on the
mainland.
Settling may have also been pro¬
voked by drilling for methane gas in
the Venice region. This possibility
is based on experience in the Po
valley where drilling for methane was
prohibited after the surface had sunk
in some places at the rate of 40 centi¬
metres per year. Similar situations
have occurred in the United States
and Japan.
The aqua alta has been a part of
Venetian life since its earliest history.
The ancient chroniclers bear witness
to the fact that no century was spared
its effects:
589 "We live neither on water nor
land", said the people of Venice,
quoted by Diácono in his Historia
Langobardorum.
circa 782 "There was so much
water that almost all the islands
were submerged".
875 "The water flooded the entire
city, penetrating the churches and
the houses".
1102 "Earthquake and heavy
flooding".
The floods of medieval Venice have
been more than matched by those of
recent times: in 1960, the water
reached a height of 1.45 metres; in
1966, 1.95 metres; in 1967, 1.45 metres.
Fifty-eight times in the last century,
the waters in Venice have flooded to
over one metre above their average
level. Of these 58 floods, 48 occurred
in the last 35 years, and 30 in the
last ten years, alone.
These almost chronic inundations,
which Venetians have been compelled
to accept as one of the less pictur¬
esque aspects of their city, are
definite cause for alarm, especially
because of their effects on the eco¬
nomic and social life of the city.
With the ground floors of houses
uninhabitable, constant dampness and
interrupted communications, Venetians
are gradually moving away from their
historic city. And they are not leaving
Venice for fear that they will be
drowned within the next ten thousand
years. They're simply tired of getting
their feet wet every day.
Masterpieces of Gothic and Baroque
architecture along the Grand Canal.
Right, detail of the Gothic Ca d'Oro
(see also page 4) and, facing it, the
Baroque splendour of the Palazzo
Pesaro, a late Renaissance building.
While innumerable pigeons grace
and animate the Venice scene, they
are also responsible for serious
damage to the city's monuments
(see article page 20).

\
