KAZANLUK
Detail of mural in domed burial chamber of the great Thracian tomb unearthed in
1944 near Kazanluk, Bulgaria (see colour photo, pages 20-21). Here, a groom
leads four horses harnessed to a chariot. The motif also figures on many funerary
monuments and sarcophagi found in the Near and Middle East.
On looking into a Thracian tomb
In April 1944, soldiers digging near Kazanluk (Bulgaria),
100 miles east of Sofia, came across the entrance to an
ancient tomb. Outwardly it resembled other graves found
in the tumuli that dot the region which was inhabited by
the Thracians before the Christian Era. But on being
opened, the Kazanluk tomb was revealed as a unique
discovery the first known Thracian tomb whose walls and
ceiling are entirely covered by murals. These masterpieces
of antique art have been termed the most perfect example
of mural painting of its kind and period known to man.
They show the intermingling of Thracian and Hellenistic
Section drawing of the Kazanluk tomb discovered in an
earth mound over 7 metres high and 42 metres in diameter.
It consists (from right to left) of a lobby, a corridor
and a burial chamber which is 3.25 metres high and
2.65 metres in diameter.
From "The Ancient Tomb near Kazanluk", by Vassili Micoff, published
by the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, 1954
í^amfwki^h
r-^^y7{r~rr'f ".'»ç»
^B - A-	-n
cultures in the late 4th and early 3rd century B.C. when
the tomb was built for a Thracian chieftain and his wife.
Murals in the passage leading to the domed burial chamber
depict ancient battles which probably relate to episodes
from the chieftain's life. Those on the walls and ceiling
of the burial chamber, masterpieces of grace and vivacity,
show a chariot race and a funerary banquet at which the
chieftain and his wife occupy the central places. Around
them are servants, a cup bearer, flute players and a groom
leading four horses harnessed to a chariot. For the
archaeologist and the historian the murals of Kazanluk
throw new light on Thracian life and culture, dress and
customs. The farewell feast offers a detailed pictorial
record of one aspect of the life of the Thracian nobles in
the Hellenistic period following the death of Alexander
the Great. Yet hardly 25 years after revealing to modern
eyes images of a long-vanished age, Kazanluk is already
in peril. Removal of the earth which covered the tomb
for 2,000 years disturbed the "climatic" stability which
had preserved the monument. Temperature and humidity
are now subject to considerable variations which have
produced harmful physical and chemical changes. Some
paintings are beginning to flake away and cracks are
appearing. The monument has been closed to visitors to
prevent the humidity produced by the presence of persons
in the tomb from causing further damage. But the master¬
pieces of Kazanluk are not doomed to disappear. The
Bulgarian authorities have carried out detailed studies for
their protection with the aid of Unesco. A Unesco
mission of six specialists has exhaustively analyzed the
physical and chemical causes of the damage and has
suggested several techniques that could help to preserve
this unique cultural monument.
35
