THE NEW FRONTIERS
OF INTERNATIONAL LAW
by Sean MacBride
T
26
HE Universal Declaration
is, and remains, the most important
instrument and landmark in the recent
history of mankind. It Is the Charter
of liberty of the oppressed and down¬
trodden. It defines the limits which
the all-mighty state machine should
not transgress in its dealings with
those whom it rules. And, from the
lawyer's point of view, most important
of all, it proclaims that the rights of
human beings "should be protected by
the Rule of Law".
The Universal Declaration is no
abstract statement of general prin¬
ciples; it is specific and detailed.
Many of Its provisions have now been
embodied in national constitutions and
have been used for purposes of judi¬
cial interpretation in different jurisdic¬
tions. It has received repeated con¬
firmation in numerous international
conventions. The unanimous decision
of the General Assembly to mark its
twentieth anniversary by the Interna¬
tional Year for Human Rights is in
SEAN MACBRIDE, of the Republic of Ire¬
land, is chairman of the International
Committee of Non-Governmental Organi¬
zations for Human Rights Year. An emi¬
nent international jurist, he was president
of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe (1949-50) and has been
a sponsor and signatory of a number of
international treaties, including the Geneva
Convention for the Protection of War
Victims (1949) and the European Convention
of Human Rights (1950). He is a former
member of the Irish Parliament and was
Minister for External Affairs for Ireland
from 1948 to 1951. Since 1963 he has
been Secretary-General of the International
Commission of Jurists.
itself a positive act of confirmation of
its provisions.
Indeed, there is a growing view
among international lawyers that some
of Its provisions, which are justiciable,
now form part of "customary interna¬
tional law; this conforms with what
the often forgotten Hague Convention
of 1907 describes as:
"... the law of nations, derived from
the usages established among civilized
peoples, from the laws of humanity
and from the dictates of the public
conscience."
The Universal Declaration does now
represent In written form the basis for
the law of nations, the laws of huma¬
nity and the dictates of the public
conscience as accepted in the twen¬
tieth century.
A S is fitting, the United
Nations does not regard 1968 as being
merely an occasion for paying empty
lip-service in grandiloquent speeches
to the Universal Declaration or to the
achievements of the United Nations in
the field of Human Rights If the Inter¬
national Year for Human Rights is to
have any real meaning, it must be a
stock-taking of the extent to which the
principles enunciated by the Univer¬
sal Declaration are applied in practice
at the national, regional and interna¬
tional level. In this view all the
international non-governmental organ¬
izations involved in the field of human
rights, concur fully. Action in 1968,
and a programme for action in the
immediate future must emerge; new
targets must be shaped and new fron¬
tiers must be breached.
It is, of course, in the field of the
practical application of the provisions
of the Universal Declaration that the
efforts should be concentrated; what
we term implementation. In protecting
human rights, it is not sufficient to
enunciate the rights involved: it is
essential to provide a remedy readily
accessible to those affected. In curb¬
ing cruelty and crimes against human¬
ity it is not sufficient to deplore them;
it is essential to pass judgment and
if necessary outlaw the individuals
responsible.
At national level, first priority must
be given to the provision of domestic
judicial machinery to ensure the effect¬
ive protection of all the rights enun¬
ciated in the Universal Declaration;
such judicial protection to be effective
must be exercised by an independent
and objective judiciary not subject to
political pressures, and not the object
of political patronage.
However, experience unfortunately
has shown that purely domestic reme¬
dies are not always adequate. In
times of political turmoil or ideological
passion, governments, and even jud¬
ges, readily impose their views without
regard to the rights of the individual
or of minorities. With the continued
advance of technocracy bureaucrats
also, in many countries, tend to ride
roughshod over the rights of those
they dominate. For these reasons, it
has been found that international
supervision of the mechanism for the
protection of human rights is essential.
This can be provided at regional inter-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 28

Detail of a giant mural by the Spanish painter Jose
Vela Zanetti, in the United Nations Headquarters
Building, New York, symbolizing international
co-operation in the struggle for justice and peace.
Photo United Nations

NEW FRONTIERS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW (Continued)
Has the time not come
to create a Universal
Court of Human Rights ?
national level and at universal level;
ideally, it should be provided at both.
At the regional international level,
the only valid system which exists so
far is that provided by the European
Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Free¬
doms. The adoption of analogous
Conventions in other regions Latin
America, Africa, Asia and Eastern
Europe has repeatedly been urged.
Interest is not lacking, and even drafts
exist, but progress has been slow;
one of the 1968 targets should be the
formulation and adoption of such
regional systems for the protection
of human rights.
At the universal level the progress
in regard to implementation machinery
has been also extremely slow and
disjointed. The International Conven¬
tion on the Elimination of Racial Dis¬
crimination and the International Cove¬
nants on Human Rights do contain
some form of implementation machi¬
nery. This implementation machinery
is far from satisfactory but it does
represent a step forward. However,
none of these instruments is in force;
they are still awaiting ratification by
a sufficient number of states to enable
them to come into operation.
findings would certainly carry far more
weight than those of transient and
often ill-equipped part-time U.N. com¬
mittees or sub-committees, selected
on a political basis.
T
28
HE great defect of the
present efforts of the United Nations
to provide implementation machinery
is that it is piecemeal and disjointed,
and political rather than judicial.
Effective implementation machinery
should be objective and automatic in
its operation; it should not be ad hoc
nor dependent on the political exped¬
iency of the moment; it should also
conform with established judicial
norms.
Has the time not come to envisage
the establishment of a Universal Court
of Human Rights analogous to the
European Court of Human Rights with
jurisdiction to pronounce on violations
of human rights? Even if initially its
judgments were to be only declaratory,
they would be of considerable moral
value and would help to create stan¬
dards in the field of human rights. Its
a»NE of the obvious immed¬
iate tasks upon which all efforts should
be concentrated is the ratification of all
United Nations conventions and cove¬
nants in the human rights field. In
many cases governments which have
supported, and even signed, interna¬
tional conventions have failed to ratify
them. Sometimes this is due to bu¬
reaucratic inertia ; sometimes to poli¬
tical feet-dragging by governments or
parliaments. Whatever the reason, a
special effort should be made in 1968
to secure the ratification of these in¬
ternational conventions. Some of these
have been under discussion for close
on twenty years; some of them have
been adopted unanimously by the
General Assembly.
One of the factors that influenced
the adoption of the Universal Decla¬
ration was the determination of world
leaders in 1948 to ensure that the
world should never again witness the
genocide, the destruction of human
rights and the brutality that engulfed
humanity in the neo-barbarism that
accompanied World War II.
Yet, twenty years later, humanity
is again witnessing in many areas acts
of brutality which disgrace the present
era. Such acts create a momentary
horror which shocks the human
conscience but are only too easily
relegated to the "lost property" com¬
partment of the public conscience.
Brutality is nearly always contagious.
In a conflict, it engenders counter-
brutality. The fact that cruelty is
tolerated and even easily forgotten
tends to encourage others to resort
to ¡t.
Cruelty is a contagious disease that
leads to a degradation of human
standards. This is a serious problem
which has grave ethical implications
that require the urgent attention of
Church leaders, statesmen, sociolo-
THE RIGHT
TO JUSTICE t
Everyone charged
with a penal offence
has the right to be
presumed innocent
until proved guilty
according to law in
a public trial at which
he has had all the
guarantees necessary
for his defence...
Article 11 of the Universal
Declaration
gists, philosophers and lawyers alike.
Would not the International Year for
Human Rights be a suitable occasion
to launch a campaign to arouse world
opinion against brutality? Article 5
of the Universal Declaration must be
given reality. This is a field in which
Unesco has done much; it is hoped
that in the future it will continue in¬
creasingly to devise ways and means
to minimize the brutalization of man¬
kind.
Most countries have laws making
acts of cruelty and brutality criminal
offences. Should not such acts also
be made offences under international
law? After all, international law does
operate successfully in such rela¬
tively less important fields as extra¬
dition, communications, crime detec¬
tion, commerce, shipping and consular
relations. Has the time not come for
the United Nations to create an inter¬
national jurisdiction to deal with crimes
against humanity?
For a start, violations of the United
Nations and the Red Cross Conven¬
tions could be made indictable
offences before an International Tri-

Photo © Magnum - Henri Cartier-Bresson
bunal to punish crimes against human¬
ity. Such a Tribunal could, in addi¬
tion, be given general power to pass
judgment on crimes that violate "...the
law of nations, the laws of humanity
and the dictates of the public cons¬
cience". Gradually, later, a code of
Crimes against Humanity could be
evolved and embodied in an interna¬
tional convention, but the Tribunal with
the jurisdiction indicated could be set
up now.
At the end of World War II a bold
new concept of international jurisdic¬
tion was adopted under the Charter
of the International Military Tribunal
that dealt with crimes against human¬
ity. Accepting the principle upon
which this new jurisdiction was found¬
ed, Sir Hersch Lauterpacht (in the 7th
edition of Oppenheim) rightly says
that:
"... it affirmed the existence of fun¬
damental Human Rights superior to
the law of the State and protected
by international criminal sanctions,
even if violated In pursuance of the
law of the State."
This jurisdiction suffered from one
major defect: it was a trial of the
vanquished by the victors. If this was
a defect, is there any good reason for
not creating now a permanent judicial
tribunal to deal with all crimes against
humanity? Such a permanent judicial
tribunal would not suffer from the
inherent defect of being set up on
an ad hoc basis to deal with a partic¬
ular situation.
T HE decisions of such a tri¬
bunal might remain temporarily un¬
enforceable in some regions. But be¬
hind every act of cruelty there is an
individual who perpetrates or inspires
the act of cruelty. That individual
could at least be identified and brand¬
ed as an international outlaw. Such a
sanction would have a restraining
influence and would reduce the trend
towards the brutalization of mankind.
It is true that the creation of a
Universal Court of Human Rights or
of a criminal jurisdiction to deal with
crimes against Humanity would involve
an acceptance of some degree of
supra-national jurisdiction: the extent
of such acceptance could be regulated
by optional clauses.
In the world in which we live, the
old outworn concepts of "absolute
leave and licence" to rulers to act
as they wish without regard to the
rights of the human beings over whom
they rule cannot subsist. This concept
of "absolute leave and licence" is in
fact what governments glibly encom¬
pass when they euphemistically refer
to "infringements of national sov¬
ereignty". Every convention, treaty or
even trade agreement involves a
limitation on absolute national sov¬
ereignty.
In this connexion it is noteworthy
that some of the very sovereignty-
conscious states of Europe have ag¬
reed to limit their absolute sovereignty
in the domain of human rights by
adhering to the European Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms. An even
greater limitation of national sov¬
ereignty has been accepted by the
States that compose the European
Economic Community, which many
other European states now are seek¬
ing to join.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
29

NEW FRONTIERS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW (Continued)
Despotic regimes no longer immune
from impact of world opinion
30
International jurisdictions of the kind
suggested must be "automatic" that
is, must be free to act and be capable
of acting on receipt of a complaint
without the intervention of a govern¬
ment. This is one of the defects of
the European Convention in regard to
those States which have not subscrib¬
ed to Articles 25 (the right of indivi¬
dual petition) and 53 (the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court) of the Con¬
vention.
¡N any international juris¬
diction which is created, it is essential
that the individual aggrieved should
have the direct right of petition or com¬
plaint to the instances created. It is
important to ensure that a complaint
will not be stifled by a government or
be made dependent upon the prevail¬
ing political alignments.
Some of those governments which
still cling to the old outworn doctrine
of "absolute leave and licence" for
themselves argue that the individual
can never have rights under interna¬
tional law. This is quite erroneous;
this concept was abandoned after
World War I, when the Upper Silesian
Treaties specifically gave individuals
the right of petition. The European
Convention as well as the Interna¬
tional Convention on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination and two Interna¬
tional Covenants on Human Rights all
recognize the right of individual peti¬
tion under international law.
The composition of any international
court or tribunal set up must be above
suspicion of bias. Its members
should as far as is possible be select¬
ed on a non-political basis; they should
not be merely functionaries of their
governments but should be jurists of
high standing who would command
respect.
Independently of any international
judicial implementation machinery,
there is at the moment a vitally impor¬
tant proposal for the establishment of
a United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights with a status in some
ways analogous to the High Commis¬
sioner for Refugees.
This proposal, if adopted, will pro¬
vide the United Nations with a modest
but useful instrument for the fulfil¬
ment of its mandate, under article
13 of the Charter, to assist "in the
realization of human rights and funda¬
mental freedoms for all".
One aspect of the proposal which
is of considerable importance is the
power the High Commissioner would
have to render assistance and services
to governments when requested to do
so. Governments, particularly of
newly independent states, are fre¬
quently faced with complex problems
affecting human rights in regard to
which they require advice and assist¬
ance. At the moment there is no
United Nations body to which they can
turn. The result has been that non¬
governmental organizations receive
requests from governments for assist¬
ance, but non-governmental organiz¬
ations are not the ideal bodies to
carry out this sort of mission; they
have not the necessary resources to
undertake this work; nor are they
always politically acceptable.
This is a function which would be
much better performed by a High
Commissioner appointed by the Gene¬
ral Assembly, with all the moral author¬
ity that he would have as represen¬
tative of the General Assembly. There
is a considerable field in which, for
lack of an appropriate United Nations
authority, the non-governmental organ¬
izations are the only bodies to take
an active interest. The appointment
of an independent and objective High
Commissioner would provide a United
Nations authority able to perform
some of the functions now being dis¬
charged by non-governmental organiz¬
ations.
Modest though it is, the proposal
for the institution of a U.N. High
Commissioner for Human Rights would
make a useful contribution to the pro¬
tection of human rights. It in no way
can be said to encroach upon national
sovereignty.
As six non-governmental organiz¬
ations concerned with human rights
issues recently pointed out in expres¬
sing their support:
"The functions proposed for the
High Commissioner fall short of those
which the undersigned international
organizations would wish to have
assigned to such an independent
Office. They do, however, appear to
represent the maximum likely to be
acceptable to a number of governments
in the present circumstances."
It would be a great pity if this pro¬
posal were not adopted at least in
1968; it has now been under active
consideration for three years.
While there is every reason to feel
despondent at the slow progress which
is being made in the protection of
human rights and at the increase in
brutality, this is no time for apathy
or cynicism. On the contrary, inform¬
ed public opinion in the world is now
more than ever before in a position to
make its voice heard. And world
public opinion is ahead of governments
in its desire to minimize brutality to
ensure the protection of human rights.
T HE advent of higher stand¬
ards of literacy and the availability of
mass media of communication have
given a new dimension to the important
role of world public opinion. No dictator
or authoritarian regime can now remain
immune from the impact of world
public opinion. There is no centre of
power, be it in a democratic state or
in a totalitarian regime, which now can
ignore world public opinion for long.
Indeed, it can be said that a shift is
taking place ¡n the centre of power
a shift that makes governments more
subject to world public opinion than
ever before. The importance of this
new factor is not yet fully appreciated
even by governments.
In this article I have concentrated
on the practical measures which
governments and the United Nations
might take to protect human rights
more effectively. I cannot conclude
without paying a special tribute to the
work of Unesco in this field. At the
educational and cultural levels which
are all-important Unesco has system¬
atically emphasized the importance of
the spiritual and cultural aspects . of
safeguarding the rights that are
inherent to human dignity. Indeed, if
today there is a better appreciation on
the part of world public opinion of the
importance of human rights, it is in no
small measure due to the foresight and
work of Unesco.
