MAMMOTH TEMPLES
OF SOUTHERN INDIA
In the 17th century, Madurai (Madras State) was the capital of a
principality whose ruler, Tirumala Nayak, a renowned patron of the
arts, gave his name to a style of architecture elaborately embellished
with sculpture, outstanding examples of which are the gopura
(gate-towers) of the Meenakshi Temple in Madurai. Photo below,
taken from the summit of the tallest gopuram (see also photo inside
front cover) shows griffon sculpture crowning the gateway and
below it, steps leading to the Golden Lotus pool in which pilgrims
wash their feet before entering the sanctuary. Beyond the two other
temple gateways is the wall enclosing the temple precinct and in the
background the city of Madurai, today a large industrial centre.
Photo right, shows temple's Hall of a Thousand Pillars through which
processions pass to reach the sanctuary. Sculptured figures on the
monolithic pillar in foreground are believed to symbolize the Iron Age,
and the domination of man by woman.
Photos © Rapho - Louis Frédéric

TiHE vast Indian sub-continent teems with art
treasures and monuments, heritage of an illustrious past
encompassing 20 centuries and more. In India, successive
peoples, philosophies and religions created cultures of
infinite complexity, leaving a profound imprint on the whole
nation.
It is in the perspective of this rich historical and spiritual
evolution that the unique artistic significance of southern
India's temples should be seen. After adopting Brahmanism,
the Dravidian peoples of the southern regions created an
architecture different from' that of northern India. Their
mammoth temples are veritable tomes of sculptured stone,
narrating the lives of gods and men.
This architecture took flight and flourished towards the
11th century A.D. As the square-shaped temple shrines,
called "vimanas", became less lofty, so the great temple
gateways, or "gopura," increased in size and by the end
of the 18th century had taken on the aspect of skyscrapers
(see photos on these pages and inside front cover).
Striving to attain ever greater heights, architects and
builders renounced the use of stone and extended the
already towering edifices with brick and wood, enriching
them with a multiplicity of stucco figures and brightly
painted decorative motifs.
As the number of the faithful increased, the temples grew
in size, extending their enclosures and multiplying their
"gopura" to the point where the outer enclosures were
occupied by the streets and houses of the city, as at
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32
29

TEMPLES OF SOUTHERN INDIA (Continued)
Ganesha the elephant, eldest son of Siva,
dances in the sanctuary of Meenakshi at Madurai
(left). With Meenakshi seated on his leg,
Ganesha, bestower of prosperity, holds a purse
of gold in his trunk. Divinity of merchants
and travellers, and the god of worldly wisdom,
Ganesha is depicted with an elephant's head
to symbolize his sagacity. As the possessor
of so many attributes, he is widely venerated.
CONSERVATION AND ABANDON. These photos are not
the same temple before and after conservation. Twelfth-
century temple on left, abandoned and invaded by jungle, is
no longer a place of worship, and even its name is forgotten.
One on right of same period has been carefully preserved.
Both are at Bhuvaneswar, in the State of Orissa, not far
from the east coast of central India. Curvilinear towers shown
here were a distinctive feature of Orissan architecture, which
flourished between the 8th and 13th centuries.

The large temple of Sri Ranganathaswami, in Madras State, India, has suffered much
damage and decay over the centuries. At the request of the Indian government,
a Unesco mission in 1966 carried out a survey of the deterioration of the temple
and formulated proposals for Its conservation. Water infiltrating through stucco
coverings, and extremes of temperature have damaged numerous structures; stone
"disease" has defaced sculptures; cracks have appeared in many roofs. Some
temples are defaced by posters and hoardings, and by power and telephone lines.
Below, one of the temple's gate-towers on which innumerable sculptures narrate
Incidents from the cycle of legends of the God Vishnu. Rearing horse (right
foreground) is part of the celebrated "Court of the Horsemen." Left, detail of
other equestrian statues in this court, a masterly ensemble of architectural sculpture
threatened by the elements and the hand of man.
Photos © Rapho - Louis Frédéric
e p
tWxC
ïi\
-*»
!ïsi
KT
MK Wr
xl
fc ÉÊÊ
^)'ti
rvr?
JSF&L
tOJ
t ,
jñrtffir*^'
&fi
»v.1
'
tâî? % ^1» f
-
^áiti^
Tí -
\rä* Mi4.-*-4
fl/ï
t"^- im t*~ ^

Photo © Rapho - Louis Frédéric

MAMMOTH TEMPLES
OF SOUTHERN INDIA
(Continued from page 29)
Three towering gateways of the Meenakshi Temple
dominate the skyline in this panoramic view of
Madurai (Madras State). Characteristic features
of temple architecture in southern India, these
tapering towers are sometimes 50 metres high.
Comparison with the pyramids of the ancient
Maya temples in Guatemala is striking. Photo
opposite, shows Maya pyramid at Tikal, also
50 metres high.
32
Srirangam, whose "temple-city" of Sri Ranganathaswami
comprises no less than seven enclosures and 21 "gopura".
Construction of this monumental edifice between two
rivers near Tiruchinapalli (Madras State) probably began
in the 10th century. Today its structure and sculptures
show signs of serious wear and weathering.
At the request of the Indian Government, Unesco has
made an on-the-spot investigation of the problems of
renovating and conserving the Srirangam temple. One of
the largest in India (its outer wall is four miles in circum¬
ference), it is perhaps the most representative of the
Vijayanagar dynasty architectural style (1350-1565) with
its multiple monolithic columns adorned with stone sculpture
and decorative carving (see photos pages 30-31).
Several other temples of southern Jndia are also to be
restored, among them the 10th century Brihadiswarar
Temple (Great Temple) at Tanjore, whose central shrine,
27 metres high, is crowned by an octagonal dome carved
from a single stone block weighing 80 tons. Built on the
bank of the Cauvery River in troubled times, the temple
was designed not only as a place of worship, but as a
fortress in which the population could seek refuge when
danger threatened.
