Facing the 21st Century
LONGER UFE -
LESS SICKNESS
by Jean-Michel van Cindertael
In this plastic model,
showing how blood
circulates through ' the
body, pulses of light
produce an illusion of
movement, simulating
the flow of blood and
the pumping action of
the heart. The model
is one of the exhibits
in the Hall of the
Biology of Man, a
permanent exhibition
explaining the functional
processes of the
human organism, in the
American Museum of
Natural History,
New York.
O what extent can man
hope for a longer life-span in the
world of to-morrow? We are not
talking about the normal expectation
of life at birth. This has certainly
increased almost doubled, in fact
in the space of a century and a half.
Expectation of life is more a ques¬
tion of mathematical probability a
science which the actuaries are
constantly seeking to perfect and
according to which a man in the deve¬
loped countries now rates an average
life expectancy of 75 years, and a
woman a span of 80.
If we are to increase that estimation
within the coming decades, it will be
necessary to reduce all mortality
factors. This would include infant
mortality, the accidents that happen
to children, the cardiovascular dis¬
eases that affect the mature adult,
and so on, and not simply the factors
that affect old persons who have gone
beyond the normal span of life as we
see it today in 1968.
How far will the works in the human
clock go on ticking? The likeliest
estimate is about 100 years. Already
there are cases here and there of
people living to 120, 130, even 150
years.
But is modern man then biologically
different from his ancestors? Yes and
no. For while it many be true that life
for early man »was short (20 to 40
years, and very exceptionally 50), the
Bible fixes the normal human life-span
at three score years and ten. "And we
have precise information concerning
the lives of the ancients: Virgil died
at 51, but Pythagoras lived to the age
of 82. Plato lived until 80, Plutarch
Co to 74, Xenophon to 73, Epicurus died
| at 71, Cicero at 64 and Ovid at 60.
These figures do not differ a great
deal from those which are applicable
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

.
Photo 0 APN
FACING THE 21 ST CENTURY (Continued)
THE CHALLENGE
OF CANCER
Cancer is the second killer
disease after cardiovascular
diseases in industrially
developed countries. Cancer
is a cell disease which can
affect any organ or tissue of
the body. When a cancer
cell appears it divides in
two and then sets off a chain
reaction of rapidly multiplying
cancer cells. Division, seen
in photomicrograph, right,
takes 90 minutes. Photo left
shows treatment of cancer
patient by cobalt bomb.
Drawings, far right, show
experiments by an American
doctor of Buffalo, New York,
using a special graft
technique: (1) Grafts are used
to exchange tumours between
patients with identical forms
of cancer. (2) Patients
develop antibodies against
foreign tumour and graft is
rejected. (3) Patients receive
reciprocal transfusions of
white blood cells. (4) White
cells are tolerated by both
organisms and tumours and
secondary growths are
reduced and in some cases
eliminated.
Promise and dangers of genetics
6
today, in developed countries, to the
majority of men. And yet the way of
life of the ancients, their nutrition,
habitat, activities and preoccupations
were in many respects different from
ours. And while it may be true that
we are still following some principles
of medicine that have come down to
us from Hippocrates, the ancients had
nothing to compare with modern medi¬
cal knowledge and the therapeutic
advantages we derive from it.
However, this consistency in man's
biological patterns across two thou¬
sand years of history should not sur¬
prise us: it must be admitted rather
that a hundred generations is precious
few in the perspective of man's ances¬
try. We all know examples of longevity
running in families, and the study, for
example, of monozygotic twins (com¬
monly called "identical" twins) shows
that their respective life-spans are
often of similar length, even though
they may live in divergent environ¬
ments.
w E also know, and it is
perhaps here that man's future may for
the first time be radically affected, that
ionizing radiations (those used in
industry and medicine much more than
nuclear fallout) as well as certain che¬
mical substances are capable of bring¬
ing about mutations, for the most part
harmful, in the genes, or hereditary
characteristics. If a gene is altered,
the normal functioning of the human
body can be affected to an extent far
beyond what is acceptable.
One of the tasks of modern research
is to discover the exact functions of
the genes of the individual. Already
we have learned how to avoid the
effects of certain serious illnesses of
genetic origin such as phenylketonuria
which causes serious mental retarda¬
tion, albinism, and diabetes, and other
afflictions of an hereditary nature.
Eventually we will learn how to repress
the ill-effects of certain genes by a
biochemical process.
However, although man Is now able
to correct at least partially some of
the built-in errors of metabolism (phe¬
nylketonuria is a case in point, because
its effects can be neutralized if the
disease Is detected after birth), we
have to face the fact that the problem
has been moved to another area rather
than eliminated. Up to now, children
who had these afflictions either died
very early or else were incapable of
reproduction. Now that science has
intervened, they can procreate, trans¬
ferring their handicap to an increasing
number of human beinas through the
years to come.

Illustrations 0. Courtesy "Le Livre de la Santé", by Joseph Handler
Editions Rencontre, Lausanne. Drawing Folon, photo Stern.
In the opinion of the geneticist,
Hermann J. Muller, a Nobel Prize
winner (1946), we should seek to go
further, producing super-beings by
artificial insemination, using freeze-
dried spermatozoa from men of
acknowledged intellectual stature.
This view, and similar arguments
linked with the concepts of the post-
Darwinian school, lead us to revolu¬
tionary theories of "manipulation" of
the human species, so that man's phy¬
sical attributes will match the complex
society of the future. In the same way,
if we follow the thinking of the Ameri¬
can biologist, J. Lederberg, also a
Nobel Prize winner (1958), we will find
ourselves on the threshold of an era
when artificial human organs such as
the heart or the kidney will be mass-
produced, and hormones, enzymes,
antibodies, etc., will be synthesized
at will.
As far as present possibilities are
concerned, such proposals remain in
the sphere of science fiction, apart
from the fact that they present us with
difficult philosophical, social and reli¬
gious questions. What criteria would
we select, for example, in creating our
supermen? But we cannot shrug the
whole thing off, for science is on the
brink of achievements that would make
the fiction of today a fact tomorrow.
The future dilemmas posed by such
doctrines as eugenics (Müller) and
euphemism (Lederberg), and euthana¬
sia as well, are likely to rack men's
minds even more than the problems
of the past 25 years, i.e. since the
discovery of nuclear weapons.
A PART from genetics, we
must seek also to achieve fuller com¬
prehension of immunology if we are to
improve the conditions of existence.
I am referring now to that essential
balance which, when disturbed by the
appearance of a foreign body, brings
about the production of an antibody
specially designed to neutralize it and
defend the organism.
There are of course cases where
the response is insufficient or too
slow, and others where the antibodies
commit "errors of identification", and
illnesses result. Immunology is, there¬
fore, in spite of popular belief, much
more than the science of vaccination
(which is in essence but the first and
most elementary application of the
principles involved).
Let us take an example from the
battle against cancer. If we accept
the theory that the cancerous cells
which multiply in the body contain a
substance foreign to the normal tis¬
sues of the organism, the immunolo¬
gical system should intervene to anni¬
hilate the invaders.
Experiments have been made with
the transplantation of cancerous tissue
in men and animals. With animals, it
was established that vaccination with
extract from cancerous tissues pre-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
7

FACING THE 21ST CENTURY (Continued)
vented diseased tissue from spreading
when transplanted.
On the other hand, an experiment
was conducted in which 50 cancer
patients received an injection of an
extract from their own cancerous
tissue, and an injection from1 their own
normal tissue for comparison. There
was a positive reaction in 27 per cent,
of cases in regard to the cancerous
tissue; but a negative reaction to the
extract of normal origin.
In fact it is quite possible that
something like 10,000 cancerous cells
invade our bodies every day and are
halted and neutralized by our anti¬
bodies. According to a theory advanc¬
ed by Sir Macfarlane Burnet, it is only
when the reaction by the antibodies is
insufficient, too weak, or too slow, as a
consequence of the aging of the organ¬
ism, that cancer gets the upper hand.
This would so explain why cancer
affects mainly the elderly.
Immunology is, of course, but one
approach to the cancer problem. (It
is also possible that the disease is
caused by a virus or some other factor
which alters the information code of
the cell to such an extent that the cell
is no longer controlled by the central
system.)
A quotation from Dr. Alex Comfort,
one of the best-known experts on the
problem of senescence, sums up the
argument:
"The most important single change
in our world, where life-span is con¬
cerned, is that in privileged countries
our children grow up and reach old
age and our wives no longer die in
childbirth. Men have always known
the probable limit of their lives. We
now know more accurately than ever
before when we are likely to die. The
most important future change depends
on the progress of our understanding
of fundamental age processes. If the
present trend of medicine continues
without such progress, all that will
happen is that the commonest age of
dying will shift from being nearer 75
to being nearer 85, and the commonest
causes may change so that we die of
conditions which are not now so com¬
mon, today's most frequent killers hav¬
ing been removed to uncover the next
layer of the onion."
But he points out that there are
other aspects of the issue. If it is
possible to make fundamental changes
in the human organism, it should also
be possible either to increase the
period of adult vigour alone, or the
period of adulthood and the period of
onset of old age, without extending
the average length of life.
Another and more valuable possibi¬
lity would be not to prolong unduly
the infancy cycle, but to be able to
insert between the years of 20 and
30 a "bonus" of, say, five years, after
which the person concerned would
revert to his normal life cycle.
If such progress and it is much
more radical than the question of
simply adding a few years to the ave¬
rage human-life-span is ever achiev¬
ed, medical science will have succeed¬
ed not only in altering the processes
of life for man's benefit, but in chang¬
ing all his ideas about death. The
grim Reaper will come, without the
usual forewarnlngs, at an age which
remains undetermined, and that may
well lie beyond the "limits" which we
know today.
Bigger populations less food
T
8
HE world's population has
been increasing steadly for centuries,
but the growth is accelerating. Accord¬
ing to the experts, the world's entire
population was only about two or three
hundred million at the beginning of the
Christian era. It took 16 centuries,
i.e. until the Renaissance, to double
in size. But by 1850 the total had
reached 1,000 million, and 2,000 million
by about 1930. The pace continues
to quicken, creating an impetus con¬
demned by many as foolish and
unconsidered, for they argue that the
earth cannot feed an infinite number
of mouths. Even now, in the year
1968, only a few privileged countries
enjoy an abundant or indeed over¬
abundant food supply.
It may however be wrong to see the
problem in a pessimistic light, for it
has not been demonstrated that our
planet will be unable to nourish a much
larger population. The British econo¬
mist Colin Clark has asserted that,
by making the most of science and
technology, it would be possible to
produce enough amino-acids to sustain
45,000 million people.
This figure is challenged by other
authorities, however, for a world popu
lation of such dimensions would throw
unbearable strains of a different nature
on our resources. Not only would it be
necessary to cultivate every inch of
available land further space would
have to be found, in itself agricultu¬
rally unproductive, for new towns, new
roads, all the other bits and pieces
needed on account of man not living
"by bread alone".
It must not be forgotten, however,
that there are many countries today
which cannot develop their agriculture
efficiently because of low population
density. It is not always the most
densely-populated countries which
have nutrition difficulties. Malnutrition
occurs in New Guinea, for example,
where there is only one person per
square kilometre, as well as in scan¬
tily-populated areas of South America
and Africa. On the other hand, den¬
sely-populated countries like Belgium
and Holland have ample food supplies.
The equation linking overpopulation
and hunger can only be understood if
a number of other essential factors
are taken into account. These factors
include the level of economic develop¬
ment, education, climate, and the qua¬
lity of the soil. There are also some
highly industrialized countries which
rely largely on food produced else¬
where.. But a developing country
which has to make huge purchases
of wheat or other foods abroad in
order to meet the needs of her people,
inevitably weakens her foreign exchan¬
ge position thereby putting a brake on
her own industrial and agricultural
development and puts off the day when
she will be independent of foreign
economic aid. The food situation in
many countries is also worsened by
religious taboos, by lack of nutrition
education and by vast though prevent¬
able wastage (by rats, for example).
Education has a very important part
to play. Too often we find malnutri¬
tion, even hunger, in regions where
in theory food should not be scarce.
When, for some local reason, there is
a ban on eating eggs or fish or certain
kinds of meat, people often substitute
things which are low ¡n vitamins, iron
and amino-acids, and therefore are not
sufficiently nutritious.
Very often these dietary deficiencies
aggravate the condition of persons
already weakened by parasitic dis¬
eases, such as bilharziasis and ancylo-
stomiasis. In Africa, for example,
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

f ^
°/ <*Y
*# I S \ y y/ \
t±.
m
«
. ^ ^¿»lZá
»<Sf
HUMAN CELL
MAGNIFIED
ONE MILLION TIMES
Photo © Ezra Stoller Associates, Rye, N.Y.
Scientists have constructed a three-dimensional model to show the complex structure
of the cells in the human body. Photo shows close-up view of centre of model,
which is 24 feet in diameter and 12 feet in height, and more than one million times the
size of a living cell. The human body contains 100 million million cells in wfiich protein
molecules constitute the enzymes that operate complex chemical changes in the cell.
Each cell contains thousands of different kinds of protein molecules, and nearly
every one of these protein molecules contains several thousand atoms.

FACING THE 21ST CENTURY (Continued)
Pills and synthetic foods...
10
deficiency diseases, such as kwashior¬
kor, are widespread. Their early
stages have been diagnosed in 30 per
cent, of children in the weeks following
weaning, and they cause thousands
of deaths every year.
Fortunately, modern science is
potentially capable of meeting the chal¬
lenge of a population of 6,000 million
or 7,000 million by the year 2000. But
to do so, total world food production
would have to be Increased by 170 per
cent., and products of animal origin
by 200 per cent. The production
increase required in the developing
countries, where nutritional déficiences
are most frequent, would have to be
of the order of 500 per cent. (i.e. six
times the present output).
There would also have to be a
radical adjustment of world trade
sweeping away the present division
between "rich" and "poor" countries.
We could take another step in the
right direction if consumers could be
persuaered-to-cimnge their food habits
to some degree. Governments could
make important contribution by
subsidizing certain food products
which are rich in protein. Groundnuts,
oilseed and even some industrial
residues now used in their raw state
as cattle fodder could be specially
treated for human consumption.
A cautious optimism seems justified.
Certain amino-acids can already be
manufactured synthetically, though in
small quantities, but we are still a
long way from the point where they
could usefully be incorporated in
actual diet. Studies have also been
made of the possibilities of using
plankton, seaweed, yeasts, even bac¬
teria operating on chemical products
with a petroleum base.
Sea farming also offers interesting
possibilities. During a recent confe¬
rence on development, it was suggest¬
ed that large-scale breeding grounds
be established where fry_ would be
safe from their natural enemies, and
fed until big enough to fend for them¬
selves. They would then be released
in the fishing grounds. Since the
fishing fleets of all nations have equal
rights in these grounds outside terri¬
torial waters, systematic restocking
would have to be carried out within
the framework of international agree¬
ment.
Some experts at the conference
even suggested that the sea-bed
which, to all intents and purposes, is
a vast compost heap, might be exploit¬
ed. Remote-control harrowing equip¬
ment might be used, or even com¬
pressed air, which would turn over the
sediment and bring rich, nutritive
materials closer to the surface.
But it is not enough simply to find
more food. Man also needs shelter,
education, welfare and a social life.
He needs not only the means, but also
a reason to live. All this may still be
within the bounds of achievement in
the world of 7,000 million people, as
predicted for the year 2000. But all
our hopes would be submerged if the
present geometric rate of progression
were to continue: some 40 years later
there would be a population of 12,000
million. Children now being born may
well live to see the year 2040.
The mind has difficulty in grasping
such possibilities, and many may dis¬
miss the figures as mere abstractions.
It does appear that the rate of increase
in the industrialized countries started
flattening out as soon as a certain
level of economic development and
social well-being was reached. But
by a quirk of fate it is in those coun¬
tries where existence is most pre¬
carious that the population is expand¬
ing most rapidly.

FIRST DOCTOR IN SPACE
On October 12, 1964, a young Soviet doctor, Boris Egorov, oribited in
space for 24 hours as a crew member of the Voskhod I, a 6-ton Soviet
spaceship. His task was to study the effects of space flight on the
organisms of cosmonauts, including the nervous and cardiovascular
systems. In flight he recorded the biological currents of his own brain
and those of his companions, Konstantin Feoktistov and Vladimir Komarov.
Dr. Egorov's medico-biological space research, notably his studies on
the vestibular apparatus of the ear, including the effets of weightlessness
on the sense of balance, was the subject of the thesis he later submitted
for his Master of Science degree. Left, a medical check-up for the doctor-
cosmonaut before his flight. Below, studying his route over the world.
Right, undergoing the strenuous physical training of a cosmonaut.
A number of explanations have been
advanced by sociologists. The most
persuasive is based -on the steady
improvement of man's health over the
past hundred years. This is perhaps
to be ascribed not so much to medical
progress as to general advances in
hygiene, ranging from the purity of
water to working conditions in fac¬
tories, without forgetting the important
role of compulsory schooling for all
children.
In the absence of statistics, we have
no means of knowing the full ravages
of mother and child mortality before
the beginning of the 20th Century.
What we do know, however, is that
even in recent times in Europe, it was
taken for granted that of a family of
six or seven brothers and sisters,
three or four would die in childhood.
On the other hand, in an economy
where child labour was quite legal and
children were exploited without the
slightest scruple see the pages of
Dickens the large family offered a
primitive kind of social security at a
time when official systems were non¬
existent. Farms were unmechanized,
and needed armies of workers, while
in the cities the apprenticeship system
was a substitute for schooling, and
relieved the father of a family of his
material responsibilities as early as
possible.
While this social pattern has almost
vanished in the developed countries,
such is far from being the case in the
economically less advanced countries
which are desperately trying to catch
up the hundred years' advance that
industrialization and increasing social
justice have bestowed on North
America, Europe, the U.S.S.R., Japan,
Australia and New Zealand. But until
industrialization arrives, the developing
countries adhere to the traditional
family pattern, even though we are
now in an era where a child born
anywhere in the world has a better
chance than ever before of achieving
his normal life-span.
That infantile mortality is decreasing
is obviously to be welcomed, and we
must see to it that over the next
decades a common standard of health
is achieved for all mankind, something
which is far from being the case at
present. The fact remains that health
work is ahead of economic develop¬
ment, and if this gap persists, it will
be detrimental to both.
It took India hundreds of years, from
the dawn of her history until the pre¬
sent day, to bring her population to
500 million. But if the population
continues to increase at its present
rate, another 500 million will have been
added between now and the end of
the century, i.e. in about 30 years.
It is hard to imagine the gigantic
investments needed to create a viable
economy that would yield adequate
reinvestments in the form of housing,
hospitals and roads for a population
that has doubled in size. Yet even
if all the aid now available from the
highly developed nations were devoted
to India alone, it would still not be
enough to meet present needs.
Should there be fewer children?
Some countries say yes as far as
they are concerned. In other countries
where the population pyramid is
already out of shape and where the
progress of medicine by increasing the
average life-span threatens to make it
top heavy there should be more
children. Birth control is advocated
in some countries, condemned in
others, and in yet others is a matter
of indifference. Clearly, in 1968 at
least, there can be no world-wide
solution.
We must hope that advances in
scientific knowledge will ease the
pressures which soaring birth-rates
are already now creating in some of
the developing countries. The year
2000 is likely to be difficult, the more
so since the population explosion is
linked with an inexorable process of
urbanization which, in spite of its many
unpleasant aspects, will probably affect
at least two-thirds of mankind.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
11

FACING THE 21 ST CENTURY (Continued)
° Bigger cities - less green space
W.
12
. J HEN the twenty-first
cenfury dawns the world's population
will have grown to six or seven
thousand million people, according to
present demographic forecasts. The
majority will be living in vast conurb¬
ations, compact yet tentacled as the
octopus, heaving seas of anonymity,
which will either have exploded from
their present confines or arisen
virtually complete in areas which today
are still deep in the countryside.
The fact that In 1968 such a prospect
causes us to shudder a little, or that
at any rate we view it without pleasure,
is an indication that the transformation
will not take place smoothly. The
ordinary individual fears that he will
be starved of light, air and space, and
most of all that he will lose his indivi¬
duality in what will become a vast
ant-heap. In effect, he fears that his
health, his physical and psychological
well-being, is going to be at risk. Is
he wrong?
Yes and no. He is wrong, in the
sense that the urban experience has
not in fact up to now endangered his
health, and has had rather the contrary
effect. It was because his daily life
was hard that the individual left his
fields, came down from the mountain,
emerged from the jungle to settle in
the town, and earn there the bread
that he could not find elsewhere. The
town gave him the liberty of the labour
market, opportunities for culture and
recreation, and some guarantee of
health care. Statistics confirm that, in
regard to general health at any rate,
the promise offered by city streets has
been fulfilled.
And yet . . . Even while granting that
the town or city as we know it today
takes man's needs into account, can
we say as much for the city of tomor¬
row? In the developing countries, the
expansion of population around the
urban zones has created hideous
shanty-towns that lack the most ele¬
mentary sanitary equipment. And in
the big cities of the industrial nations,
pollution of every kind is rife. It mani¬
fests itself in the uproar of city streets
and in the vicinity of airports, in the
discharges into the atmosphere from
the exhaust pipes of our cars, in the
hurried, jagged patterns of daily life
which create around us a kind of psy¬
chological pollution.
There are, therefore, an army of
challenging problems facing the man
of tomorrow. But we should say,
rather, the man of today, for the
possible solutions require time as
much as money, imagination as much
as goodwill. Social problems are
linked with economic plans, health is
affected by conditions of work and
housing, in short, the approach must
be integral, excluding nothing, forgett¬
ing nothing.
For the citizen of a developed
country, nothing is more commonplace
than water. He uses it freely since,
as a general rule, it costs him almost
nothing. And yet it is not an inexhaus¬
tible resource. In some western cities
such as New York, he is reminded
of this by occasional periods of water
during drought.
But when we turn to the developing
countries, water ceases to be a preoc¬
cupation and becomes a problem 'of
dramatic proportions. Very often,
there is no water supply of any sort
in those hovels one sees in the shanty-
towns and bidonvilles, dwellings made
from a few bits of wood and corrugat¬
ed iron, even of mud, in the middle of
scrap-heaps and dumps.
Water has to be searched for, often
very far away. As often as not it is
of doubtful quality. Hence the enorm>
ous number of cases of cholera,
typhoid,, bilharziasis and filariasis.
The two last-named diseases are sel¬
dom immediately fatal but have such
debilitating effects that they reduce
the economic potential of the sufferer
and, as a direct consequence, the
chances of material betterment for
both him and his family.
I T is clear that the urban
development of the next 30 years must
not be a development of shanty-towns.
The authorities must first solve the
fundamental question of water supply
which constitutes the real point of
departure. An example of the impor¬
tance of this ¡"s the city of Teheran,
in Iran, which in 1932 before a hygienic
water supply was installed had a mor¬
tality rate of 25 per 1,000. Thirty years
later, and in spite of the fact that the
population had greatly increased, the
death-rate had fallen to 11.5 per 1,000.
WHO experts have attempted to
calculate the cost of providing a regu¬
lar water supply where it is needed
to inhabitants of developing countries.
A study carried out in 1962 with a
projection of urban growth over a
period of 15 years, i.e. until 1977,
estimated that some 207,000,000 peo¬
ple now need or will need in the future
some type of water supply. The total
cost is put at about $6,000,000,000
($1,000,000,000 for India alone,
$1,000,000,000 divided between Brazil
and Indonesia, and the rest spread
over 72 nations of Africa, America and
Asia, as well as Turkey).
This may seem a. considerable sum.
Nevertheless, if the investment is
spread equally over the 15-year period
it hardly amounts, on average, to
0.25 per cent, of the gross national
product of the 75 countries in question.
This is not a great deal in view of the
fact that 10 per cent to 20 per cent
of the gross national product of a
developing country is generally used
for essential national investment.
However, a clean water supply must
be accompanied by means of getting
rid of the water when it has been used,
along with refuse and excreta. If not,
the results can be catastrophic, as
witness the unhappy example of
Rangoon.
A clean, modern city before the last
war, Rangoon underwent several bom¬
bardments and then, at the end. of
hostilities, a massive invasion by^,
refugees. The sewage system had
been destroyed, pipes were blocked,
pumps were out of action, and refuse
was left to rot on the ground. It was,
of course, a situation which invited
the proliferation of mosquitos on an
enormous scale. Today there are
thousands of millions of the mosquito
Culex fatigans in Rangoon the insect
which transmits filariasis, the disease
which often manifests itself in the
form of elephantiasis.
Communities need to gauge their
present and future needs, and make
the requisite financial investment: at
present Calcutta in India is devoting
$500,000,000 for the progressive res¬
toration and repair of its waste dis¬
posal system.
But granted the fundamental import¬
ance of water supply and waste dis¬
posal for the health of a big city, they
still constitute but a proportion of the
many factors involved in maintaining
the well-being of modern man. Under
this heading pollution, unfortunately,
merits particular mention.
There is good reason to believe that
most victims of the pollution of the
atmosphere characteristic of big cities
are to be found among persons of
weak health suffering from chronic
bronchitis old people and children in
particular. , We still do not know
enough about the role that air pollution
may be playing in the development of
cancer or its effects on the human
genes, but there are grounds for
concern about the future.
In the same way, we need to keep
a careful watch on the proliferation ot
various types of radiation, both in
industry and for medical purposes.
Water pollution is no less a danger,
even in the cities of developed nations.
Sewage, fuel and industrial wastes are
frequently dumped into lakes, rivers
and the sea, inevitably contaminating
the fish and other sea food destined
for human consumption.
It is in the city of tomorrow, then,

WONDERS WITHIN A DROP OF BLOOD
At the end of the 17th century the invention of the microscope first enabled
scientists to perceive the complex nature of blood. A new science, hematology,
was born. A modern laboratory count made on a single drop of blood (one cubic
millimeter) normally reveals 5 million red corpuscules, 8 million white corpuscles and
200,000 platlets (particles which help blood to clot). Studies of the blood show what is
happening in the human organism, since the proportions of its constituents vary according
to a person's state of health. Drawing shows the ten chemical components in a drop of
blood: (1) Sugar. (2) Cholesterol. (3) Urea. (4) Fibrinogen. (5) Bilirubin. (6) Proteins.
(7) Potassium. (8) Calcium. (9) Lipides. (10) Sodium.
that man will work out his destiny.
This is not only because three-quarters
of the world's population will be
involved in the urbanization process
when the twenty-first century begins.
It is also because man today must
make his readjustments both biologic¬
al and intellectual in the shadow of
the city.
We have not yet managed to solve
the contradictions to which we are
subject in this regard. Modern man
displays a revulsion from the village,
from the little rural backwater, and
avidly seeks the great collective and
social confrontation, the competition
in which he will be tested by his peers.
At the same time, he flees from the
undiscriminating touch of the crowds
and the great agglomerations, seeking
for himself and his family a private
spot, a country cottage for weekends.
We must try to reconcile these
opposing desires rather than bring
them to the point of open rupture by
allowing them to continue to pull in
different directions. Town planners and
architects have a major role to play
here, since their previous creations
have perhaps gone too far in the
direction of the purely functional or
aesthetic. Vast green spaces, for
example, are indispensable around
new residential zones, and some
experts even advocate that they be
left as wild wood and thicket, affirming
the union between nature and anti-
nature that the city represents.
I
Illustration ©. Courtesy "Le Livre de la Santé"
Editions Rencontre, Lausanne. Drawnlng Broutin.
by Joseph Handler.
HE second rupture we
must avoid is that between home and
the place of work. While it is true
that over the past 100 years the hours
we must spend each day in factory
or office have diminished, it also
appears that modern man is steadily
losing this "leisure time" so painfully
gained in commuting twice a day, often
in conditions which are a menace to
his health. These comings and goings
between the suburbs and the city
centres are unproductive and must be
reduced, particularly since they involve
increasing congestion of transport.
The solution, as is immediately appa¬
rent, is to decentralize the factories and
offices, a trend which has already
begun in Sweden and Great Britain, for
example. But the new towns springing
up in consequence must offer more than
a place to sleep and to work, must be
more than a pale reflection of the big
cities they seek to replace. They must
have a soul, must offer a point of
contact between those who live there.
Beyond these preliminary steps, we
must have a wider vision. We should
seek to build our cities again, this time
in harmony with the kind of life we
will live tomorrow. They may be cities
on stilts, freed from the earth and
freeing it. They may be cities under
the sea, as is sometimes predicted in
science fiction. But whatever technical
innovations are used, the cities should
be conceived, designed and built for
man and only for man.
13
