"The Great Bridge in the Rain" (right) was painted
ten years before the Meiji era by Ichiryusai
Hiroshige, one of Japan's greatest landscape artists
of the Edo period. (See page 36 for a full colour
reproduction of another Hiroshige print.) Far
right, a contrasting symbol of modern Japan, the
mighty Wakato bridge: sharply etched against
the night sky, it spans the 2,063 metres (6,500 feet)
between Japan's southernmost island, Kyushu,
and the main island of Honshu.

YUKICHI
FUKUZAWA
Master of enlightenment
in the Meiji era
WE COPY A PHYSICS BOOK
IN TWO DAYS AND NIGHTS
by Yukichi Fukuzawa
In the middle of the 19th century, a bitter controversy raged
in Japan whether to reject all things Western or to adopt
Western science and ideas. Outstanding among the men
who supported the introduction of Western ways was
Yukichi Fukuzawa (1835-1901), an outstanding scholar of
Chinese, Dutch and English. Fukuzawa visited Europe
and America and gained firsthand knowledge of Western
customs and institutions. He wrote voluminously on the
subject for 30 years. He started a newspaper which
became one of the great Tokyo dailies. He founded a
school which is now Keio University. All this is delightfully
told in his "Autobiography" which appeared in 1899, two
years before his death. We publish here a section from
the chapter entitled "Student Ways at Ogata School," in
"The Autobiography of Yukichi Fukuzawa" translated by
his grandson, Eiichi Kiyooka, and published by Columbia
University Press, New York and London, 1966, in the
Unesco Collection of Representative Works.
Text copyright © Reproduction prohibited
0
n
GATA Sensei was a doc¬
tor to Lord Kuroda of Chikuzen, the
grandfather of the present nobleman
of that name. It was not that he went
to Chikuzen or to Yedo to serve him,
but he was simply the lord's favourite
doctor in Osaka. Whenever Lord
Kuroda passed through Osaka on his
annual journey to Yedo, Ogata would
present himself to pay his respects in
the feudal headquarters on Nakano-
shima.
One year the third or fourth year
of Ansei (1856-1857) Ogata Sensei
had returned from this visit of state to
his lord when he sent for me in his
own room» and showed me a new
volume of Dutch print.
"Today on my visit to his lordship,
he showed me this book, saying he
had recently acquired it. So I asked
for permission to look it over during
his stay here."
I took in the book with devouring
eyes. It was a new text on physical
science recently translated from Eng¬
lish into Dutch with the name of

Photo © Musée Guimet, Pans Photo Japanese Embassy, Paris
Vanderbilt (?). The contents seemed
to hold much that was new to us, es¬
pecially the chapter on electricity.
All that we knew about electricity
then had been gleaned from fragmen¬
tary mention of it in the Dutch readers.
But here in this new book from Eur¬
ope was a full explanation based on
the recent discoveries of the great
English physicist, Faraday, even with
the diagram of an electric cell. My
heart was carried away with it at first
sight.
"This is a wonderful book, Sirl" I
exclaimed. "How long do you think
we might keep it?"
"Well," he replied, "I was told that
my lord will stay in Osaka for two
days. I suppose he would not mind
our keeping it until his departure."
"I should like to have my friends
share in seeing the book," I explained,
and bore the volume back to the dor¬
mitory.
"Look at thisl"
All the young men rose up as one
and crowded around me and the book
as eager as I was. Two or three of
the older students and myself decided,
on talking it over, to make a copy
of it.
"See here," we said. "Just looking
at the book won't do you any good.
We must get together and copy it."
But then, to copy a volume of a
thousand pages! We decided to do
just the final chapter, the one on elec¬
tricity. If we could have broken the
book up and divided the copying
among the thirty or fifty "ready-quill
men," the entire contents might have
been kept. But of course injuring the
nobleman's possession was out of the
question.
However, we worked at full speed,
and the Ogata students could work
expertly. One read aloud; another
took down the dictation; when one
grew tired and slowed down, another
was waiting with his quill, and the
exhausted one would go to sleep
regardless of time, morning, noon or
night.
Thus, working day and night, through
meal hours and all, we finished the
whole chapter in the time allotted, and
thus the section on electricity, about
three hundred pages including its
diagrams, remained with us in manu¬
script. We finished reading it against
the text for correction and regretted
that we had no more time for the
other parts.
But to have retained so much we
counted fortunate, and when the even¬
ing of Lord Kuroda's departure came,
we all handled the book affectionately
in turn and gave it a sad leave-taking
as if we were parting with a parent.
When we heard from Ogata Sensei
that Lord Kuroda had paid eighty ryo
for the book, we were dumbfounded.
Such a cost was so far beyond our
conception that we should never have
had even the desire or ambition to
acquire such a treasure.
This event quite changed the whole
approach to the subject of electricity
in the Ogata household. I do not hesi¬
tate to say that my fellow students
became the best informed men on the
new science in the entire country. I
dare say I owe to the copy of this
book much of the knowledge which
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

14
FUKUZAWA (Continued)
Student
to Samurai
via a foreign
language
enables me to understand something
of the electrical industry today.
Many years later I remembered the
book and wished to see the original
again. A number of times I called at
the Kuroda residence for the times
had changed and I had become a per¬
sonal friend of the lord but I was
always told that since the great uphea¬
val of the Restoration (1868), the book
had been lost. I have always regretted
this, feeling its loss like separation
from an old friend.
I think this incident will prove that
the young men around Ogata Sensei
were, as a group, as zealous for
foreign culture as any students in the
world. Every now and then a student
came from Yedo to Ogata's school
to study, but never did anyone leave
it for that purpose. If any went to
Yedo, it was for teaching and not for
more study.
We often talked about this fact
among ourselves, and said proudly
that we, the Osaka students, were
above any In the country. But it could
not have been that all the good stu¬
dents gathered in Osaka and no able
ones lived in Yedo. It seems to me
that the situation of the country then
created this contrasting standard of
scholarship in the two cities.
In Yedo, though the country's inter¬
course with foreign lands was yet at
its beginning, there were constant de¬
mands for the Western knowledge
from the government offices and from
the various feudal nobility resident
there. Consequently anyone able to
read foreign books, or make any
translation, secured the reward of this
patronage. There was even the possi¬
bility of a poor language student being
made a high salaried Samurai of
several hundred koku overnight.
Osaka, on the contrary, was a city
of merchants devoted to internal com¬
merce; it was hardly to be expected
that anyone there wanted to be in¬
formed on Dutch gunnery or Western
arts. Therefore, however much we
studied, our work and knowledge had
The Meiji era was preceded by 700 years of feudalism, begun in 1192 when
Yoritomo became Japan's first governor, establishing the Shogunate which ruled
independent of the Emperor until 1868. Throughout the centuries of Shogunate
domination, innumerable statues of the first Shogun were carved. Wood
sculpture of Yoritomo (above) dates from later Edo period (1603-1868).
Under the Shoguns Zen Buddhism flourished, and its impact on the cultural life
of Japan led to the creation of some of the finest Japanese literature and art.
practically no connexion with the ac¬
tual means of gaining a livelihood or
making a name for ourselves.
Not only that, but the students of
Dutch were looked upon with contempt
by most men. Then why did we work
so hard to learn Dutch? It would seem
that we were simply labouring at diffi¬
cult foreign texts for no clear purpose.
However, if anyone had looked into
our inner hearts, he would have found
there an untold pleasure which was
our consolation. In short, we students
were conscious of the fact that we
were the sole possessors of the key
to knowledge of the great European
civilization. However much we suffer¬
ed from poverty, whatever poor clothes
we wore, the extent of our knowledge
and the resources of our minds were
beyond the reach of any prince or
nobleman of the whole nation.
If our work was hard, we were proud
of it, knowing that no one knew what
we endured. "In hardship we found
pleasure, and the hardship was plea¬
sure." To illustrate, our position was
like that of someone taking bitter medi¬
cine without knowing exactly what it
was good for. We simply took it
because nobody else could take it the
more bitter it was, the more gladly
we took it.
