JAPAN'S CONTRIBUTION
TO WESTERN
LITERATURE
AND THE ARTS
by Earl Miner
J
28
UST as there ¡s a creative
interplay between tradition and change
within a national literature, so is there
commonly a fruitful encounter between
the artistic genius of one nation and
the differing genius (which is common¬
ly not well understood) of another.
Among the nations, Japan is at once
unusually creative and unusually sus¬
ceptible to foreign modes. It has also
proved highly effective in exporting
features of its culture to other nations.
More than that, we may say precisely
that the dominant spiritual or intellec¬
tual effect of Japan upon other nations
has been artistic.
If too little is known abroad about
Japanese law, philosophy, linguistics,
rhetoric, social theory, and other na¬
tional achievements, the reason is
hardly that Japanese are by nature
without talent for such enterprises than
that other countries have had a greater
need for Japanese understanding of
human experience in artistic forms.
Enthusiasm and doubt over Japan
are not new responses. After arriving
in Japan in 1549, St. Francis Xavier
declared, "these people are the delight
of my heart." In 1577, another Jesuit
wrote that, religion apart, Europeans
were barbarous by comparison with
Japanese. In 1668, it was claimed
that Japan "exceeded in beauty and
magnificence all the pride of the Vati¬
can at this time and the Parthenon here¬
tofore." But the country was often
regarded as a symbol of the far-away,
and the cruel or "impenetrable."
By 1856 the self-isolation of the
EARL MINER, professor in the Depart¬
ment of English at the University of Cali¬
fornia (U.S.A.), has written widely on
Japanese literature and its influence on
Western arts and literature. He is the
author of "Japanese Tradition in British and
American Literature" (Princeton University
Press, New Jersey, 1951). A well-known
translator into English of Japanese litera¬
ture, and notably poetry, he is co-author
with Professor Robert Brower of "Japanese
Court Poetry" (Stanford University Press,
Stanford, U.S.A., 1962). As a Fulbright
professor of English literature, he taught at
the universities of Osaka and Kyoto in 1961.
country had become a source of irri¬
tation to powers like England, France
Russia, and the United States ; and
there was a sense that little more could
be said or done until the nation was
open once more. Yet in that same
year, according to cherished French
legend, Félix Bracquemond discovered
a volume of Hokusai's wood-block
prints which soon became his "bre¬
viary."
Because the terms in which French
writers and artists regarded Japanese
culture were to dominate or charac¬
terize Western cultural interest in Jap¬
an for half a century or more, we may
defer consideration of them for the mo¬
ment while we examine the responses
of those two countries more closely
involved in the opening of Japan.
It might seem strange that the Unit¬
ed States and England benefitted far
less artistically from first-hand contact
with Japan than the French from more
detached interest, but it was France
that was on the verge of a great artis¬
tic revival, and we must understand at
once that a nation, in this case Japan,
is often most influential in these mat¬
ters from a dim distance.
I NSTEAD of seeking aesth¬
etic inspiration, the United States
entered into its passionate and ambi¬
valent attachment with Japan (one need
only compare the American story, Ma¬
dame Butterfly, with the cold exoticism
of Pierre Loti), and England showed a
characteristically restrained enthusiasm
that found its highest expression in the
work of some remarkable scholars
B.H. Chamberlain, James Murdoch (a
Scot), W.G. Aston, and several others.
They and their successors built upon
the worthy foundations of Jesuit wri¬
ters, of seventeenth-century German
historians like the very able Englebert
Kaempfer, and the Dutch historians
who carried all before them in the
eighteenth century. Scholarly inter¬
est in Japan, leading as it often does
to translations of major literary works,
has always been important in control¬
ling more fanciful responses to Japan.
In nearly every Western country today
there are scholars treading on the suc¬
cessive footprints of Spaniards, Ger¬
mans, Dutch, and English.
In nineteenth-century America, Clio,
the severer Muse of history, was less
welcome than her more rapturous and
mythographic sisters. The excitement
began with news of Commodore Mat¬
thew Perry's success, in 1853. When
a Japanese mission, come to ratify
Perry's treaty, visited several Ameri¬
can cities in 1860, excitement was un¬
bounded.
On June 26, "The New York Times"
wrote of the unparalleled magnificence
of the spectacle. The next day it
carried a poem by Walt Whitman, "The
Errand-Bearers." The Japanese were
"lesson-giving princes," and they
brought the Orient "The next of
languages, the bequeather of poems,
the race of old." Much in this derives
from the philo-orientalism of the Amer¬
ican Transcendentalists, but Whitman
had actually seen Japanese visitors,
as it were from Eden.
Such enthusiasm came to be
heightened and hazed over by a
veil of exoticism, and in particular
that associated with Lafcadio Hearn.
Partly because of the titles of his
writings, partly because of the slow
surf that beats in his prose style, many
assumed that he told of life in a
distant paradise. He himself sought
to harmonize Buddhism with the evo¬
lutionary philosophy of Herbert
Spencer, and if he was in Eden, he
grew increasingly dissatisfied with it.
He was, however, sufficiently Ameri¬
can (again the contrast with Pierre
Loti is valid) to be deeply attached to
that which he grew to dislike. What
seemed mere exoticism actually con¬
cealed the cultural relativism and aesth-
etlcism in which was rooted the artistic
plant that nourished Hearn: Impres¬
sionism.
So significant and widespread an
artistic movement as Impressionism
has many causes, manifestations, and
effects. But no one has ever question¬
ed that its characteristic expression
was French, and its characteristic
medium, painting. If a Hearn could
take Impressionist thought and prose
style to Japan, it was in no small mea-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 30

The Meiji Restoration not only opened the West to the people of Japan;
it also opened Japan to the Western world. The wealth of Japan's cultural
heritage, especially its art and literature, struck the West with full force
and has since had an abiding influence on Western art and thought. The
way in which both the arts of Japan and the arts of the West have mutually
benefitted from this contact is the keynote of a series of manifestations
organized by Unesco to commemorate this year's centenary of the Meiji
Cultural Revolution. Among these are an international round table on
these mutual influences, held in Kyoto and Tokyo, in September, an exhibi¬
tion of works of art by Japanese and Western artists, in Tokyo, as well
as the publication of an art album (now in preparation), all on the same
theme. A special study on the translation of Western literature into Japa¬
nese, and its effect on the development of Japanese writing is also being
undertaken by the Unesco-sponsored Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies
(Tokyo). The present article is condensed from an essay on "The Signifi¬
cance of Japan to Western Literature," by Professor Earl Miner, presented
to the Unesco International Round Table.
Photo © Louis Frédérlc-Rapho, Paris
Detail of a unique portrayal in wood of Kuya Shonin, a famous wandering monk of
10th century Japan. Known as "the market sage", he went among the people to
teach them the wisdom of Nembutsu (Buddha of Infinite Enlightenment), also called OQ
Amida in Japan. Here, the 13th century sculptor Kosho has depicted Kuya Shonin L.Q
with little images of Buddha emerging from his mouth. Legend has it that these appeared
whenever the monk invoked the name of Nembutsu.

JAPAN'S CONTRIBUTION (Continued)
The triumph
of Japonisme'
Japanese art, especially the Japanese
print, exerted a strong influence
on Western painting during the last
30 years of the 19th centuiy.
The Impressionists agreed with
Vincent Van Gogh when he called
Japanese prints "the true religion".
Van Gogh studied the prints
minutely, analyzing their bold
perspective, their structuring of space
and their use of bright colour.
He tried to imitate the techniques
and even the motifs of masters
like Hiroshige and Eisen, seeking
to capture their conception of
landscape painting with all its poetry,
which dominated many of
Van Gogh's works before his death
(see colour reproductions page 36
and caption page 34). Below,
"Le Père Tanguy", painted by
Van Gogh in 1887 and now in
the Rodin Museum, Paris. The
painting is a frank mixture of
Western art (the model) and that of
Japan (the background). Père
Tanguy, a dealer in artists' materials,
was well known in Paris as a
collector of "Japonaiseries" (prints
and things Japanese). Van Gogh
painted him seated before works by
the two great early 19th century
Japanese artists, Eisen and Kunisada.
sure because Japan was a significant
part of Impressionism.
In the latter half of the last century,
a French vogue for things Chinese
was followed by Japonisme, which was
taken up from about 1865 to 1895 by
the foremost French writers and paint¬
ers. The brothers Goncourt, Clemen¬
ceau, Montesquiou, Huymans, and
Renan shared in the promotion of
Japonisme. The painters Manet,
Monet, Duret, Gauguin, Toulouse-
Lautrec, and such others as Van Gogh,
Whistler, and Mary Cassât set Japo¬
nisme as the highest and most mean¬
ingful contemporary artistic code.
Duret insisted that "the Japanese are
the first and finest Impressionists,"
and Van Gogh, that Japanese art is the
"true religion."
Today we are apt to regard other
elements as more formative in shap¬
ing Impressionism than the exoticism,
naturalism, and aestheticism so pecu¬
liarly mixed in Japonisme. It is there¬
fore all the more remarkable that the
Impressionists and Symbolists them¬
selves attributed so central a role to
Japan and its art. A rhetorical question
by Jules de Goncourt says it all: "The
search after reality in literature, the
resurrection of eighteenth century art,
the triumph of Japonisme are not
these the three great literary and artis¬
tic movements of the second one-half
of the nineteenth century?"
How was it possible to write in such
terms? To this question, as to many
questions, the simplest answer is to
be preferred. French painters discov¬
ered that the sensibility, colour, and
composition revealed in Japanese art
spoke to them as nothing else did. To
writers as well, what was Japanese
seemed beautiful, new, real and a
revealing model for their own work.
The colour blockprint became the
badge of Japonisme; indeed it became
in a double sense the lingua franca of
Impressionism. When so much that
was Japanese still lay closed to
Western eyes behind the wall of lan¬
guage, the colour print (which was then
in fact despised by cultivated Japan¬
ese) required, it seemed, no dictionary
to translate its meaning, no gloss for
its eloquence. To Manet it could teach
colour; to Zola it could show a slice of
Naturalistic life.
Certain features of the Japonisme
adapted by the Impressionists have
continued to dominate artistic respon¬
ses to Japan. The first principle Is that
of the so-to-speak contemporaneity of
Japanese civilization to our own. To be
sure, block print artists like Hokusai
and Hiroshige were only a generation
or so senior to the Impressionist paint¬
ers, but one frequently discovers later
writers treating Matsuo Bashô (1644-
1694), Motokiyo Zeaml (1363-1444), and
even Kakinomoto Hitomaro (680-700)
as their contemporaries.
Whatever such attitudes may do to a
historian's equilibrium, they imply
highly significant beliefs. First, with
the Impressionists Japan became rele
vant for the first time to what was
most creative in contemporary Europ¬
ean civilization. Second, the major
relevance, apart from the general one
of sensibility, was artistic technique.
In the century since the Meiji Rest¬
oration this double view has dominated
most significant artistic approaches
to Japan. And until perhaps World
War II it was also likely to be the case
that enthusiasts for Japan were first
captivated by the Japanese print.
Europe also owes to France the first
popular discovery of Japanese poetry.
There had been in France, as in other
countries, a certain amount of dread¬
ful pseudo-Japanese writing; indeed
there would continue to be some. But
after the publication of Marcel Revon's
Anthologie de la Littérature Japonaise
(1910), simple exoticism was no longer
intellectually respectable.
There was, however, a sudden vogue
for haikai in French (1). Some French
poets composed so-called haikai in
the trenches during World War I, and
thousands of these verses were sent
to competitions held by the "Nouvelle
Revue Française." But the really
creative discovery of Japanese poetry
was peculiarly international prompted
by France, it was an American discov¬
ery in England.
IHE important figure in the
poetic adaptation of Japan is Ezra
Pound, who wrote in the "Egoist" for
June 1, 1914: "I trust that the gentle
reader is accustomed to take pleasure
in *Whistler and the Japanese'. Other¬
wise he had better stop reading my
article until he has treated himself to
some further draughts of education."
Pound clearly regarded his fellow
American expatriate as a catalyst for a
widespread cultural reaction involving
Japan, France, and his own poetic
interest. In fact, Whistler had preach¬
ed Japanese gospel in England since
the late 1860s. The Identification of
him with Japanese art was a com¬
monplace, and his erstwhile friends,
Swinburne and Wilde, sometimes
went so far as to make the connexion
between Whistler's French terminology,
by writing 'nocturnes' or 'études' in
their poetry, and his Japanese interests,
by writing an "Impression Japonaise".
At all events, Pound's phrase,
"Whistler and the Japanese," shows
that the first Impressionist lesson had
been learnt: Japan is creatively relev-
(/) In Japan as In the West the terms
haikai, hokku, and haiku are often used
Interchangeably. Strictly speaking haikai
are integrated sequences, or single verses
that might be integrated a presumption
lasting to the beginning of the Meiji period;
hokku are first verses of such a sequence;
haiku is a term really current only In the
Meiji period and after for a discretely
considered form of 5, 7, 5 syllables. Today
haiku is often used loosely for all three
terms. It is curious that in the early years
of this century usual French usage was
haikai, English was hokku, and American
was haiku.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 34

Colour pages
JAPAN'S CONTRIBUTION (Continued from page 30)
ant to contemporary Western art.
The relevance was brought home to
Pound when he received Ernest Fenol-
losa's notebooks in 1912. During his
long residence in Japan, Fenollosa had
examined the art of the country with
great care and to a lesser extent had
studied its language and literature.
Pound was fascinated by Fenollosa's
(mistaken) belief in the ideogrammatic
properties of the Chinese written char¬
acter and by the metaphrastic trans¬
lations of certain Nô plays which
Fenollosa had set down with Japanese
assistance. (It is not clear whether
Pound learned of his hokku from Fen¬
ollosa or not.)
Here was literature more relevant to
contemporary writing then the Europ¬
ean tradition. As W.B. Yeats put
it, the writers who created the
conventions of Nô were "more
like us even than Shakespeare
and Corneille. Their emotion was self-
conscious and reminiscent, always
associating itself with pictures and
poems."
T
34
HE second Impressionist
lesson the relevance of Japan to tech¬
nique was the one that Pound soon
began to practice and to teach, as it
were, under the three heads of hokku,
"ideogram," and "Nô." In a well
known article on Vorticism (Pound's
development of Imaglsm) in the "Fort¬
nightly" for September 1, 1914, he
recounted how he had responded (in
1911) to a scene in the Paris Metro
with a poem of thirty lines, which in
six months he reduced to half as
many, and which after another six
months he made into the following
hokku-like sentence:
The apparition of these faces in a
crowd;
Petals on a wet, black bough.
Citing the translation of a hokku, he
went on to say that "The one image
poem is a form of super-position; that
is to say it is one Idea set on top of
another." Essentially, Pound invented
a technique, modelled on hokku, in
which a vivid image is superposed on
a more discursive passage. Gentil-
donna gives a good example of the
technique of superposition.
She passed and left no quiver in
the veins, who now
Moving among the trees, and cling¬
ing in the air she severed,
Fanning the grasses she walked on
then, endures:
Grey olive leaves beneath a rain-
cold sky.
Gentildonna is not precisely a one-
image poem, but it does function
effectively in terms of the focus given
the first three verses by the fourth.
Hokku are very brief. They might
serve as models for brief poems or for
passages, but what relevance did Jap¬
anese poetry have to the long poem?
As Pound said in the "Fortnightly"
article: "I am often asked whether
there can be a long imagiste or vor-
ticist poem. The Japanese, who evolv¬
ed the hokku, evolved also the Nô
plays. In the best Nô, the whole
play may consist of one image. I mean
it is gathered about one image. Its
unity consists in one image, enforced
by movement and music. I see nothing
against a long vorticist poem."
Pound later called such a technique,
or phenomenon, "Unity of Image," and
Yeats wrote similarly of "a playing
upon a single metaphor" In Nô. The
concern with unity of technique and
sensibility which played so large a role
in the criticism of Pound, Yeats, and
Eliot was obviously inspired by a con¬
viction of disunity or "dissociation" in
contemporary experience.
To Pound, one of the few modern
poets to achieve a degree of success
with the long poem, unifying devices
were an obvious formal necessity in
a poem eschewing a straight narrative
line. In the Cantos there is not a single
unifying image nor even "Unity of
Image." But there are such unifying
images as the mountain, light, the
voyage, and the heavenly visitor. It
is almost inevitable that long poems
should have recurrent images, but
Pound consciously takes the essence
of a given ¡mage (the mountain-ness
of a mountain) rather than its particu¬
lar attributes (Mount Fuji, Vesuvius,
Taishan, etc.), as a passage shows:
The lake flowing away from the side
was still as Is never in Sirmio
With Fujiyama above it.
The passage shows, in addition to
the technique modelled along Japanese
lines, that Pound sometimes includes
Japanese details or illusions. In mak¬
ing them at once popular and a basis
for theory and technique, Pound suc¬
ceeded in doing for haiku and Nô what
the Impressionists had done for the
colour print.
In the years following World War I,
Western contacts with Japan multiplied.
Some still took their understanding of
Japan from prints and books, but others
took theirs from visits to Japan, from
visiting Japanese, or from a variety of
sources.
Among the Imagists following in
Pound's wake, there was for example
Amy Lowell, whose brother Perclval
represented the United States in cer¬
tain Asian countries. The colour prints
he sent home inevitably fused with
what she understood of haiku and
Japanese customs, enabling her to
provide her readers with (if it Is pos¬
sible) a well-informed exoticism.
Others were affected by visits to
Japan. Paul Claudel, ambassador of
France to Japan in the 1920s, found
kabuki a revelation, "for me a veritable
professional school of dramaturgy."
Since his play writing days were
largely past, it is not altogether clear
what he had learnt at that school, but
CONTINUED ON PAGE 43
OSAKA (page 35)
Japan's third busiest port,
Osaka was opened to foreign
ships just a century ago. In
1970 it will be host to EXPO 70,
Asia's first World Exposition.
Photo © Dominique Darr. Paris
KYOTO (page 35)
Tokyo-Osaka line (world's
fastest rail service) passes
8th century Toji Temple, Kyoto.
Photo © Rapho-Brian Brake
TREE'S-EYE VIEW (page 35)
Top, "The Temple of Uyeno
seen through a pinetree
branch", by Hiroshige, one of
Japan's most celebrated 19th-
century landscape artists. His
prints alone number 8,000. Hiro-
shige's art inspired many
Western painters, notably Whis¬
tler, Degas, Toulouse-Lautrec
and Van Gogh. Bottom, Van
Gogh's "The Sower" strikingly
recalls Hiroshige's treatment of
landscapes (see photo page 30).
THE POTTER'S ART (page 37)
Today's master potters uphold
the prestige enjoyed by a Japa¬
nese art that goes back almost
6,000 years. "Tradition is like
the underground water", says
»the distinguished ceramist,
Shoji Hamada. "No matter
how much you pump out, it
is never exhausted. More and
more gushes forth."
,V: r f^y^s^L
© Japan Times
THE EMPEROR'S COACH (pages 38-39)
In 1877 Emperor Meiji inaugurated Japan's first
Industrial Fair. Held in Ueno Park, Tokyo, it
was an immense success. Print shows the
Emperor's coach (emblazoned with the Imperial
emblem, a chrysanthemum with 16 petals) arriving
at the Fair, followed by that of the Empress.
¥" LU..
©H
| J ü QUEST FOR KNOWLEDGE
I N (page 40)
Top, print from Edo era (1603-
. i 1868) preceding the Meiji Res-
'a-M'- toration, shows typical primary
school, of which some 50,000
existed towards the end of that
period. (See article page 19.)
Bottom, teacher of today ex¬
plains to city children how rice
seedlings are planted.
FESTIVAL OF THE STARS
(page 41)
Tanabata Matsuri (Festival of
the Stars), in July, is one of
Japan's gayest and most anc¬
ient customs; originally an
occasion to wish for an abun¬
dant harvest and plentiful pro¬
duction from the weaving
looms. This busy street in
Hiratsuka is richly decorated
for the occasion.
AUTUMN AT THE THRESHOLD
(page 42)
The splendour of an autumn
morning beckons through the
gateway of one of Kyoto's
1,600 Buddhist temples.

JAPAN'S CONTRIBUTION (Continued from page 34)
Exciting new ideas for poetry, theatre and cinema
he did achieve a signal success with
a play emulative of Kabuki, La Femme
et son ombre. He Is surely the only
Western writer to have a play per¬
formed twice (1923, 1929) in Japan
by a major Kabuki company.
Another visitor, whom the Japanese
have taken even closer to their hearts,
is the English poet and scholar,
Edmund Blunden. One will not often
find evident or exotic traces of Japan
in his work, but perhaps because of
that, Japan has played a part In lending
a new perception to the natural fine¬
ness of his writing: "I have written
many (poems since leaving Japan) in
which experience in Japan and
acquaintance with Japanese art and
poetry play a part though inconspic¬
uously."
Another English traveller to Japan,
William Plomer, should be mentioned
because he brought to his fiction and
poetry a sense of humour and a wit
very much lacking in most writing
about Japan.-
Sometimes Japan went west, as
when in 1928 the Kabuki company of
Ichikawa Sadanji visited the Soviet
Union and other countries. It could
not have arrived in Russia at a better
moment. Vsevold Meyerhold and Ser¬
gei M. Eisenstein in particular managed
both to grasp the principles of Japan¬
ese theatre and to devise from it
major innovations in cinematic tech¬
nique. Meyerhold had studied some
Japanese at the University of Moscow
just after World War One progressing
far enough to have a Poundian enthu¬
siasm for the "ideogram," which
attracted him by its supposed com¬
bination of artistic concreteness and
intellectual symbolism.
Eisenstein understood far better the
practical "language" of Kabuki theatre.
He grasped before anyone else in the
West the truth that the varied elements
in Kabuki also form a "monistic ensem¬
ble"; and that "elements of signifi¬
cance" (words, song, dance, etc.)
show a "transferring" "from one
category of 'provocation' (of the sen¬
ses) to another." Eisenstein's under¬
standing was remarkable enough, but
his greatness as a director and creator
of cinematic techniques gave his under¬
standing unusual, and highly influential,
significance.
Many Western film directors have
obviously learnt a good deal since the
1950s from such brilliant Japanese dir¬
ectors as Kurosawa Akira. More
than that, Japanese films have done
more to create an appreciation (if not
always an understanding) of Japanese
life and civilization than has any other
artistic form.
There is a generation that dates its
understanding of the cinema as an art
from Kurosawa's Rashômon »(Venice
Prize, 1951). And yet, decades before,
Eisenstein had articulated in theory
and demonstrated in practice the likely
possibilities for a cinema absorbing
traditional techniques of Japanese act¬
ing. It is the more appropriate that
Japanese films, so influential in the
West, should themselves owe a debt
to Eisenstein and that he should have
written knowingly (who else had?) on
Japanese films as early as 1929.
In France and Germany, Nô has
seemed more important than Kabuki.
As early as 1924, there were plans to
present a Nô directed by Suzanne
Bing, at Copeau's School at the Vieux-
Colombler. Highly successful re¬
hearsals were held, and the actual
performance was aborted only by the
Injury of a principal actor. Even the
sceptical Harley Granville-Barker was
impressed.
The partisanship of Paul Claudel for
Japanese theatre and the scholarly
French works on Nô by Noël Péri and
others continued to stimulate French
interest in both Nô and Kabukl. Char¬
les Dullin in his teaching and pro¬
ductions alike inculcated the virtues
of Japanese drama in his students,
among them Jean-Louis Barrault.
But it is a sobering and Illuminating
fact that the real article the Kanze
company of Nô that performed at the
Théâtre des Nations in 1957 was
neither understood nor appreciated.
Ten years later, English audiences
were perhaps more receptive but
almost as baffled when Nô was per¬
formed at an international theatre
festival in London.
IT seems to be true that to
be effective in the European theatre for
all but specialists, Japanese drama
must be accomodated, modernized,
or creatively misunderstood. Bertolt
Brecht was remarkably faithful (to
Arthur Waley's translation) in his two
versions of the Nô play Tanikô Der
Jasager and Der Neinsager but these
Lehrstücke have not been his most
popular plays.
Similarly, Gabriel Cousin adapted
the Nô play Obasuteyama for Le
Voyage de derrière la montagne (1962),
but he was far more successful in a
play using a Japanese subject, Le
Drame du Fukuryu Maru (1954-57; per¬
formed 1963). The subject is Japanese
or universal the problem of the
effects of radioactive fallout but the
technique is merely "Japanese."
Nô has also had particular appeal
in Germany, again thanks to careful
work by scholars. Eva Hesse's trans¬
lations (1963) of the Fenollosa-Pound
renderings of Nô have been performed
at a number of German theatres. After
they had been shown, it was easy for
the public to accept the "modern Nô
plays" of Mishima Yukio (Kindai Nôga-
kushû, written 1950-55) and then the
visit of the Kanze company. In spite
of its momentary popularity and its
deep impressions upon some German
directors, Nô, like most Japanese arts,
has had to date little apparent impact
upon Germany.
Postwar English interest in Japan has
also been disappointing to many peo¬
ple. Although there are very few
works to consider, by all odds the most
significant postwar work inspired by
Japanese literature or theatre is the
"church opera," Curlew River (1964),
the music by Benjamin Britten and the
libretto by William Plomer.
At Plomer's urging, Britten had
attended in Tokyo a performance of
the Nô, Sumidagawa. His enthusiastic
response led to an agreement that the
Japanese play would be transferred
from its medieval Buddhist setting to
a Christianized situation by the Curlew
River in East Anglia.
Britten and Plomer are at present
working on "two more works In the
same style The Burning Fiery Fur¬
nace, and The Prodigal Son." There is
no pretence that these "church op¬
eras" are faithfully Japanese, but as
one would expect from a composer of
such stature and a writer so familiar
with Japan, they are the more indirectly
indebted, and better, for that.
In the United States, Japanese
theatre, like many things Japanese, has
had a much more far-reaching effect.
It may be recalled that one of Giacomo
Puccini's most universally loved operas,
Madame Butterfly, grew from one of
the greatest successes in the Amer¬
ican theatre, David Belasco's Madame
Butterfly, itself based on an American
novel of that title published in 1897.
Since World War II,. Japanese
theatre has gained a reputation with
American directors, choreographers,
actors, and playwrights greater than
any other foreign tradition. There have
been visits of "Kabuki dancers," Kabu¬
ki proper, Nô, Bunraku, and even
Bugaku groups. At the University of
California, Los Angeles, there has
been a Gagaku orchestra for several
years, and other colleges or univers¬
ities have been performing bits of
Japanese plays or Yeats's "Nô plays"
since the early 1950s.
The major Japanese impact upon
American theatre has, however, center¬
ed upon the New York theatrical
world. Those most affected have been
those actors, choreographers, and
directors who do not so much write
plays as make theatre. The choreo¬
grapher Jerome Robbins, the ballet
director George Balanchine, the direc¬
tor Elia Kazan, and even the writer
Thornton Wilder are among those who
have adapted Japanese drama to their
purposes.
Interest has grown so strong among
those significantly involved in theatre
and dance in New York that Japanese
CONTINUED ON PAGE 45
43

JAPAN'S CONTRIBUTION (Continued)
Thirteen ways
of looking
at a blackbird'
methods have reached the summit of
esteem accorded the Stanislavsky
"method" years ago. In fact, it may
be thought that things have gone too
far.
It is one thing for Greta Garbo to
think Utaemon's New York perfor¬
mance in Dôjôji the greatest theatri¬
cal experience of her life; it is quite
another for directors to adapt essen¬
tially meaningless bits and pieces of
a now fashionable Japanese stage
technique.
The problem in the United States is,
then, quite different from that in other
countries. American theatrical circles
do not lack enthusiasm for Japanese
theatre, but often there is too little real
perception and creative discipline. It
may be that all would come right if
really significant playwrights emerged
at this moment. But what above all
distinguishes the genius of Japanese
theatre is that it is in large measure
the creation of perhaps the world's
most skilful actors.
The great postwar American Interest
in what are widely called "haiku and
Zen" resembles somewhat the French
interest about the time of World War I.
But there are differences, especially
those involving a more detailed back¬
ground and a greater American com¬
mitment to things Japanese. The back¬
ground is of course that of Pound and
those who followed him in particular
the post-lmagist "Others" group, which
included both Wallace Stevens and
William Carlos Williams.
Stevens approached Asian art and
literature, like all else, obliquely, but
his Thirteen Ways of Looking at a
Blackbird is the finest series of
"English haiku." His formal experi¬
mentation, involving some echoes from
specific Japanese poems, is accom¬
panied in this series of poems by a
transformation of that French inheri¬
tance of Impressionism and Symbolism
that Stevens so prized. The transform¬
ing process is akin to the transcenden¬
talism of earlier American enthusiasts
for the Orient in that the blackbird is
inter-related with its surroundings and
with the human observer.
In many ways, Williams presents an
objectivity opposed to this transcen¬
dence. Certainly the realities he treats
are often low-keyed. Yet there are
some points at which one would be
-o hard-pressed to identify the lines as
~ those of Stevens or Williams.
= So different, this man
c And this woman:
S. A stream flowinq in a field.
to &
© Before describing the more purely
2 literary characteristics, one must con-
£ sider "Zen." Most people know by
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
45

46
JAPAN'S CONTRIBUTION (Continued)
now that "Zen" consists of a partially
understood version of D.T. Suzuki's
partially modified version of Rinzai
Buddhism, which is but the second
largest group of Japanese Zen
Buddhism. "Zen" has provided a new
version of that transcendentalism and
individual protest against social forms
which would have been wholly con¬
genial to Ralph Waldo Emerson and
Henry David Thoreau in the nineteenth
century.
To such irrational or suprarational
transcendentalism, we must add objec¬
tivity and formalism as the chief
features of postwar poetry inspired by
Japan. The objectivity is owed to Wil¬
liams and to haiku (usually in trans¬
lations). The formalism is yet another
version of the Romantic search for
expressive form, whether in terms of
brief "English haiku" or lengthy serial
poems.
The combination of "haiku and Zen"
has meant that the best poets of this
kind have made every effort to find
their way by experience, by devotion
of their faculties and personalities in
a search for an illumination transpiring
at once in verse and within themselves.
It can be seen, therefore, that the
Impressionist or Poundian enthusiasm
for technique as such means much
less to them: if transcendental exper¬
ience can be gained, that is, object¬
ified, the desired form will come by
itself.
There are numerous other Americans
who write "haiku" or "tanka" or who
are interested in "Zen." Primary and
secondary school teachers often find
"haiku" in English an effective device
to stimulate their pupils to experiment
with poetry. Many institutions of
higher learning in the United States
offer lectures on Japanese literature
in translation. And the largest group
of scholars and teachers of Japanese
outside Japan sustains and nourishes
such interests.
Of course it is true that there is
no American poet who knows Japanese
as well as Dryden or Racine knew the
Graeco-Roman classics. And there is
some discrepancy between the under¬
standing of Japanese literature held by
the remarkable postwar generation of
American scholar-translators (who
nonetheless are not poets) and the
Japan-inspired poets (who nonetheless
inadequately comprehend Japanese).
Yet it is fitting that the Western coun¬
try closest to Japan in war and peace
should be the one to think Japan most
important to its scholarly and poetic
interests.
Years ago, C.S. Lewis remarked
that "the whole tone of medieval love
poetry can be explained by the for¬
mula, 'Ovid misunderstood'." Partial
understanding or misunderstanding is
inevitable in any effort to adopt cultural
features of another nation, especially
when the culture of that nation is, like
Japanese civilization, so closely guard¬
ed by its unique language and its
insular situation.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 48
THE CID Pierre Corneille's 17th century French classic presented
as a Kabuki play in 1911. From left to right, four richly,
costumed actors in roies of Rodrigo, Don Diego, Gormas
and the King.
WAITING FOR
GODOT
Jukichi Uno and Masakane Yonekura of the
Mingei Theatre Company as the two tramps
in Samuel Beckett's play.
MOTHER COURAGE A scene from the work by the famous
German playwright, Bertolt Brecht, as
presented by the Haiyu-za Company in
1966. On the wagon are Mother Courage
(Teruko Kishi) and her daughter.

CAMILLE In 1957, Bunraku puppets re-enacted for a
Japanese audience the ill-starred love story
of Marguerite and Armand in "La Dame aux
Camélias" by Alexandre Dumas fils.
World theatre
on Japan's stage
From the start of the Meiji era, the Japanese theatre
ventured beyond the bounds of tradition. In 1872,
two plays inspired by the work of the Scottish writer,
Samuel Smiles (one of Emperor Meiji's favourite authors)
were performed in Kyoto by actors in Western dress.
Soon, plays on contemporary themes as well as Western
classics were being produced. In 1912, the enthusiastic
reception given to Ibsen's "The Doll's House" and Gorki's
"The Lower Depths" in Tokyo's theatres marked the
opening of Japan to the mainstream of world theatre.
!p less than a century, a broad selection of works from
the spectrum of Western dramatic art from Shakespeare
to Ionesco had been introduced to the stages of Japan.
Photos show some of these landmarks in the moderni¬
zation of the" Japanese theatre.
HAMLET Entitled "Hamuretto," Shakespeare's immortal
tragedy was produced in Japan by a Kabuki
company in 1907. Here, a Japanese actress in
the role of the distraught Ophelia.
Photos © Toshio Kawatake THE MISER A 1962 Japanese-language presentation of Mo-
lière's comedy, performed in the classic French
style by the Bungaku-za Company.
MADAME BUTTERFLY Devious journey of a
Japanese heroine from
an Italian opera based on an American novel and play to a
Japanese Bunraku puppet theatre in 1956.
THE LOWER DEPTHS Natasha and Luka in Maxim Gorki's play
staged in 1960 by the Mingei Drama
Company. Gorki's works were introduced to Japan half a century ago
by the Modern Theatre Movement.
47
mmBBBÊÊÊmmmÊBm wsêêêê mm

JAPAN'S CONTRIBUTION (Continued)
Is Bashô better known
than Aristophanes?
But If no effort will insure full under¬
standing abroad, so no degree of
linguistic protection or geographical
isolation can now insure a culture
against being understood and mis¬
understood by other peoples. (It
should be said of course that numer¬
ous political, economic, social, and
other factors relate to and modify
artistic concerns.) Moreover, behind
every effort of people in Western
countries to reach out to the artistic
48
Gagaku literally means» "elegant
music" and is the broad designation for
ancient Japanese music. It is» performed
in only a few temples (above) and in
concerts at the Imperial Palace. When
the music is accompanied by dances,
it is know as "Bugaku".
Top, a modern New York ballet
interpretation of Bugaku created by
George Balanchine in 1963.
wealth of Japan is a sense of need
for what those riches are supposed to
contain.
The almost total indifference of our
novelists and short-story writers to
Japanese prose fiction is itself a
phenomenon that and this must be
insisted upon resembles French and
American enthusiasms for haiku in
telling us more about Western writers
than Japanese. It would be difficult to
guess from Western indifference to
Japanese prose fiction that it began
so early with The Tosa Diary (ca. A.D.
935) or that the greatest work of
Japanese literature is The Tale of
Genji (ca. 1010).
In other words, Western writers and
artists have turned to Japan for what
they needed, not necessarily for what
is there. Their Japanese counterparts
have of course done the same. It
would be as foolish to expect a full
understanding of another national cul¬
ture as it would be wrong to think no
gain in understanding has been reached
or to be content with what has been
gained. (After all, not many people
understand their own national artistic
inheritance very fully.)
B UT it is striking that where¬
as American poets, for example, have
scarcely seemed to notice Japanese
prose fiction, Japanese writers have
found pre-Soviet Russian fiction far
more to their use than American poetry.
There is, we must also recognize, a
social prestige attached to French
literature in Japan perhaps unmatched
by any other national tradition, and yet
the number of Japanese with adequate
command of French is very small.
Such matters show that the story
of Western borrowings from Japan is
one largely concerned with a Western
need to search out for what it was
felt was represented by Japan. All
considered, that meaning of Japan
(whether one that accords with reality
or not) has been much more important
than might reasonably have been
expected. A dim racial sense that the
origins of life are in the East, the
accidents of wars and geography, the
passing enthusiasms and sudden won¬
derful perceptions of possibility all
these and more mark the past century
of Western contact with Japan.
Fifty years ago there were probably
more Frenchmen who had heard of
Hokusai than of Phidias, and today
there are probably more Americans
who have heard of Bashô than of
Aristophanes. Whatever we may de¬
cide to be fit in such matters, we may
be sure that the American poet, like
the French painter, has discovered in
Japanese civilization that which gives
his art and life a special grace.
"Photo © Japan Illustrated
