The abuse of drugs
-a growing menace
s
4
OCIETIES in all parts of the world have
discovered substances which can alleviate pain and
relieve various symptoms and which also give plea¬
surable sensations when consumed.
Some of the more important of these substances
are opium, from the opium poppy; the leaf of the coca
bush, which contains the active principle of cocaine;
and the tall weed cannabis or Indian hemp, whose
preparations are known variously as marijuana,
hashish or bhang and by many other names. The
medical value of opium is so high that this drug has
been a boon to humanity to the present day; coca
and cannabis, on the other hand, while they once
had medical uses, have become relatively obsolete.
However, all these substances are dangerous
because they share the quality of giving temporary
euphoria and contentment; one can develop a craving
for them in a short time that leads to complete
dependence. It is this dependence which causes
obvious harm to the user and society. Today, the
abuse of cannabis is more widespread than that of
any other substance under international control.
In recent years, however, we have witnessed the
appearance and increasing resort to new stimulants,
new sedatives and new hallucinogenic substances.
The U.N. Commission on Narcotic Drugs, in an official
report prepared in January 1968, pointed to the grow¬
ing danger of these psychotropic substances not
under international control barbiturates, certain tran¬
quillizers, amphetamines (or "booster" drugs) and
"psychedelic" or hallucinogenic drugs such as LSD.
The non-medical consumption of these substances,
the report stated, has already become a "serious
social and public health problem in a number of coun¬
tries and is tending to assume increasing proportions
in others." It foresaw the growth of the problem
and the possibility that "epidemic abuse will clearly
be a very real danger in countries which are unpre¬
pared to meet it."
Until the end of the nineteenth century, the question
of narcotic drugs was not widely regarded as an
international problem calling for concerted action on
a world-wide scale. The trade in narcotic products
was viewed as a more or less legitimate business
and the misuse of dependence-producing substances
such as opium, coca leaf and Indian hempwas
believed to originate in deeply ingrained habits of
the populations of certain countries.
Prior to multilateral co-operation in the field of
narcotics control early in this century, several bilateral
treaties curbing the imports of narcotics into Far
Eastern countries had been concluded by certain
powers with political and trade interests in the area,
but essentially the problem was considered a domes¬
tic one, which could be solved within the limits of
national jurisdiction.
Developments in the latter part of the nineteenth
century, however, gave a new dimension to the
problem. First, through technological progress, labo¬
ratories began producing from opium and coca leaves
an increasing number of alkaloids and their deriva¬
tives. Further, expansion of transport and inter¬
national trade reduced geographical distances and
natural barriers between nations until what originally
seemed to be a local problem of a few countries
became a matter of concern to the world community
as a whole. Moreover, the association of traffic in
narcotics with misery and crime contributed to a
growing conviction that the sale of drugs could no
longer be viewed as a simple commercial transaction,
free from government interference.
Attempts at collective efforts by governments to
deal with this menace to health and social order were
backed by enlightened public opinion and by an
interest in self-protection on the part of those who
became aroused by a danger to which they had
previously thought themselves immune.
The reasons which led to the establishment of a
system of universally applied control over narcotic
drugs were humanitarian rather than economic or
financial. In the general interest of mankind, govern¬
ments freely consented to limit their own freedom
of action and to give an account of their activities
in the field of narcotic drugs to international organs
originally created within the framework of the League
of Nations and now operating under the United
Nations.
Addressing the U.N. Commission on Narcotic Drugs
in January 1968, Pier Spinelli, Director-General of the
United Nations Office in Geneva, reported that the
abuse of narcotics had assumed epidemic proportions
and that more people especially young ones were
questioning the justification of the struggle against
drug addiction and notably against the abuse of
cannabis. Appropriate action was necessary, he said,
to counter such attitudes.
