NUCLEAR ENERGY
AND OUR FUTURE
by Glenn T. Seaborg
Nobel Prize, 1951
IAN lives by energy. The
more he can put to work, the better
he lives. By harnessing energy, he
can flick a switch to pump water, start
a train, heat a home or light a city.
In the 21st century, most of this
energy will come from the nucleus of
the atom, and by using it wisely man
can Improve the way he produces
food, uses water and raw materials»,
handles waste and builds cities.
The need for improvement is
evident. By the year 2000, experts
predict the earth's population will
double. Some expect an eventual
population of 15 thousand million
people, five times today's total.
But the earth itself will not grow,
and to support these extra thousands
of millions we must learn to use and
reuse our resources with an efficiency
we rarely even approach today.
Energy is a resource, and by far
the most important contribution the
atom will make to the world of
tomorrow will result from the com¬
bination of very cheap electricity and
heat for use in manufacturing proces¬
ses which it can make possible, part¬
icularly with the full development of
breeder reactors which create more
nuclear fuel than they burn.
One must emphasize that having a
large amount of cheap energy is not
a panacea in itself. We must develop
the technology to take advantage of
this energy; it must be applied skil¬
fully, productively and wisely by
people who have the tools and train¬
ing to use it.
Some scientists have considered
42
GLENN T. SEABORG, chairman of the
U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, and
Nobel Prize Winner in chemistry (1951,
with E.M. McMillan) has a distinguished
record in nuclear chemistry and leadership
in scientific and educational affairs.^ He
was co-discoverer of plutonium, of the
isotopes plutonium-239, uranlum-233, nep-
tunium-237; and of the elements 94 (ame-
ricium), 96 (curium), 97 (berkelium), 98
(californium), 99 (einsteinium), 100 (fer-
mium), 101 (mendelevium), and element 102.
Dr. Seaborg and his colleagues have also
identified over 100 isotopes of elements
throughout the Periodic Table. He is the
author of some 200 scientific papers, and
was a member of the U.S. delegation to
Moscow for the signing of the 1964 Test-
Ban Treaty.
the concept of using these huge
amounts of energy in giant nuclear
powered industrial complexes, which
we have called "Nuplexes", the
energy heart of which would be
breeder reactors, with a generating
capacity in the multi-million kilowatt
range.
A variety of industrial plants coupled
to the energy centre would interchange
goods and services through a maze
of underground arteries, conveyor
belts and pipelines.
Iron might be produced by reduc¬
tion methods. Steel, phosphorus or
calcium carbide might be made by
electric furnace methods. Other
plants might produce aluminium, cop¬
per and nitric acid using electrolysis
and electrolytic hydrogen. Synthetic
materials of all kinds would be pro¬
duced in still other plants.
If we can develop the sophisticated
chemical techniques to capitalize on
the cheap power, we might some day
be able to completely recycle all our
materials and water so that we would
have an endless supply of raw mater¬
ials and a virtually junkless civilization.
It should be emphasized, however,
that planning, setting up and success¬
fully operating facilities like this will
be a mammoth undertaking requiring
great advance study, a massive
infusion of capital and, above all, the
devotion and hard work of a great
many talented people.
Yet the prospects are so great that
they have excited the imagination of
many of us.
A study conducted last year at the
U.S. Atomic Energy Commission's
Oak Ridge National Laboratory looked
into the possibility of placing nuclear
agro-industrial complexes in arid areas
such as desert coastal plains.
We know already, for instance, that
the economic use of nuclear energy
to desalt water is not far off. A large
dual purpose nuclear powered electric
generating and water desalination
plant has been planned for construc¬
tion in the United States near the
city of Los Angeles.
A report on energy centres by the
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which
will be available later this year, in¬
dicates some exciting prospects .for
coupling large dual-purpose plants
located in coastal desert areas with
highly scientific farms or "food
factories."
One study in this report considers
the energy heart as a huge breeder
reactor which could generate 1,000,000
kilowatts of electricty and desalt
400 million gallons of water a day.
At the same time, power from the
plant could be used to make ammonia
fertilizer and phosphorus-bearing fer¬
tilizer. It could be that many other
by-products from the seawater brine
could be produced and used locally
or exported.
Electricity from the plant would be
used for highly mechanized farming
and food processing, as well as to
supply light, air-conditioning and power
for transport and communications for
the personnel operating the complex.
On 200,000 acres, irrigated with the
desalted water and fertilized with
locally manufactured products, crops
would be grown which were spec¬
ifically bred for the area. Hardly any¬
thing would be left to chance or the
whims of nature.
Such a food factory could produce
a thousand million pounds of grain
each year, enough to feed almost
2,500,000 people at a level of 2,400
calories a day. In addition, it could
export enough fertilizer to other agri¬
cultural areas to cultivate another
10,000,000 acres of land.
I N our concern over the
world's food supply we tend to con¬
centrate our thoughts on the produc¬
tion of more food, often forgetting that
one-fifth of the world's entire annual
food crop is lost or destroyed by pests
and spoilage.
By the year 2000, we expect to
have largely perfected the techniques
of food irradiation so as to greatly
reduce such losses. Carefully con¬
trolled doses of radiation from certain
radioactive isotopes can destroy pests,
extend the shelf and storage life of
fresh foods and help create new and
hardier crop strains.
Whenever and wherever man can
benefit from heat and electricity,
nuclear energy in its many forms can
help bring about a better world.
Several other nuclear uses of the
future deserve at least a brief mention.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 44

Brussels in the 25th century as visualized by a 20th-century artist.
In the city centre is a "Sacred Isle," on which have been
preserved the central square, the "Grande Place" with its great
Town Hall and other historic buildings. The drawing is
taken from a calendar foreseeing the world of tomorrow,
published in Belgium in 1962 by the Shell Petroleum Company.
Photo © Shell, Brussels

NUCLEAR ENERGY (Continued)
Far beyond our wildest imagination
Nuclear power could be coupled
with tube-well pumps to tap the vast
water resources which lie deep under¬
ground in many arid areas and which
are being identified by the United
Nations Hydrological Decade studies.
Radioisotopes will power batteries
in weather, navigation and com¬
munications satellites. And they may
even serve as power supplies for
surgically implanted artificial hearts.
Before the end of the century,
nuclear reactors no larger than a small
car will be used to propel space craft
for manned missions to Mars. Life
support systems for space travel will
be nuclear powered and some day
nuclear reactors may help man create
a habitable environment for a future
moon colony.
In the future, it may be primarily
nuclear energy and its associated tech¬
nologies that allow man to explore
and exploit the ocean.
Nuclear-powered deep sea research
vessels are already being developed.
By the 21st century, man may be
harvesting food from the sea, mining
its mineral resources, perhaps even
living for extended periods deep
beneath the surface.
If present development programmes
are successful, engineering with
nuclear explosives could help to
release deeply contained gas and ore
reserves and create underground
reservoirs to hold rainfall in regions
where rapid surface evaporation takes
place.
Peaceful nuclear explosives might
also be used to build a canal, a new
harbour or cut through a mountain
barrier (see article page 14).
Because nuclear fuel is compact
and long-lived, the atom's benefits are
less tied to any accident of geography
which gives one country fuel while
denying it to another.
Once a nuclear power station is
built it can be used economically as
readily in the desert as in an industrial
centre. In fact, as I indicated earlier,
it could turn the desert into an in¬
dustrial centre.
Since real economies in nuclear
reactors are most often in large size
plants, the future may see several
nations joining together, in co¬
operation with the advanced nations
and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, to share large nuclear
generating plants as they now share
research machinery in centres such as
the European Organization for Nuclear
Research (CERN) in Geneva, which
Unesco helped create.
This drawing together of men from
many nations to work together and to
share scientific knowledge and tech¬
nological benefits can be a very
important spin-off of nuclear energy.
It would be naive of me to ignore
how nuclear energy was introduced
to the world. I have not forgotten,
nor should my optimism on the power
of the peaceful 'atom be taken to
indicate that I am not realistic about
the ever present question of nuclear
annihilation. I have lived very close
to this question for more than 20 years.
But I have also seen the birth of
nuclear power to light homes and run
factories, to drive ships across the
ocean, to power satellites in orbit. I
have seen the atom used to study
life, to help create knowledge, to im
prove agriculture, to save lives and to
make living more understandable and
more enjoyable.
There is a cosmic 'glue' that binds
the nucleus of the atom. It is a force
stronger than any other force found
in nature. As that cosmic force is
released to the probing of man, and
as we put it to work for man, perhaps
another force will come into existence
one that will bind men together in
a universal way, matching our human
will with the physical powers we have
learned to wield.
If this comes to pass, we may
expect quite a future, and I think it
might well be one far beyond that
which you or I could dare to imagine
today.
best all-around reference book about V N
A COMPLETE HANDBOOK
OF THE
ACTIVITIES AND
EVOLUTION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS
DURING ITS
FIRST TWENTY YEARS
everyman s
R T) I
united
nations
NEWsth EDITION '
THIS NEW COMPLETELY REVISED EDITION
PRESENTS IN CONCISE, OBJECTIVE FORM
THE MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS AND ACTIVITIES OF
THE UNITED NATIONS SINCE THE SIGNING. OF
THE CHARTER IN SAN FRANCISCO IN 1945.
CLOTHBOUND $6.00 PAPERBOUND $2.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)
ORDER FROM YOUR LOCAL BOOKSTORE OR DIRECTLY FROM
UNITED NATIONS ROOM 1059 NEW YORK. N. Y. 10017
UNITED NATIONS PALAIS DES NATIONS GENEVA

