Although the world
illiteracy rate has
dropped during the last
15 years, the total
number of illiterates
continues to rise
because of the
population explosion.
Rural areas have by
far the highest
illiteracy rates. Photo
shows rural living
quarters of workers on
a banana plantation in
South America.

Literacy: the ABC
of development
Unesco has carried out a major inquiry on world progress in
literacy since 1965 and has published its findings in a special
report, "Literacy 1965-1967." The report describes the
methods used by different countries to fight illiteracy, and the
new strategy that has shaped world action since 1965.
0
RIGINALLY and until quite
recently, action against adult illiteracy
was the almost exclusive concern of
non-governmental organizations, of pri¬
vate groups and of missions. In short,
it was due to the initiative of volunteers,
as though its fundamental purpose was
action of a social and humanitarian
character or an effort to "rehabilitate"
underprivileged groups of men and
women.
Today, however, most governments
consider themselves directly respon
sible for adult literacy teaching.
Simultaneously, the unconcern in
varying degrees of businessmen, in¬
dustrialists and planners for literacy
work has been replaced by a growing
interest on the part of those
responsible for economic affairs and
development plans, who have begun
to endorse the major principles adopt¬
ed in Teheran by the World Congress
of Ministers of Education.
A new approach to literacy is thus
emerging in many countries, first
through the incorporation of literacy
programmes in plans for educational
development and more generally
through their integration in plans for
economic and social development.
The idea launched at Teheran of
linking literacy teaching with the pri¬
orities of economic development has
impelled authorities to reconsider the
whole question of such priorities. It
has led Ministries of Education to
open discussions with planning au¬
thorities and other ministries and to
envisage broad and coherent plans of
action.
Striking examples of a dynamic, inte¬
grated approach to these problems
are found in numerous countries.
Algeria's choice of the irrigated area
of Bou-Namoussa, the petro-chemical
complex at Arzew and the "autono¬
mous" estates at Staoueli as sites
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

ON THE
PAINTED WALLS
THE LIFE
OF THE VILLAGE
Photo Unesco - Eric Schwab
14
ABC OF DEVELOPMENT (Continued)
for a pilot project in functional literacy
can be considered as a model
application of the selective strategy
adopted in Teheran.
Similar functional literacy projects
are linked with textile factories at
Chbin-el-Kom (United Arab Repub¬
lic) and in the Ghab Valley (Syria),
with oil installations in Saudi Arabia
and Kuwait, with fisheries in Qatar,
and With the semi-rural district of
Tazerka in Tunisia.
Others have been launched in indus¬
trial plants at Cap Vert (Senegal), for
harbour works and a rubber factory
at Monrovia (Liberia), in the "co-opera¬
tive villages" of the Republic of the
Congo, the Tuncbilek mines (Turkey),
the Youth Settlement Schemes in Cey¬
lon, the Nam-Ngum barrage in Laos,
the Rodovia project in Brazil and
agrarian reform areas in Chile and
Guatemala.
Many countries have taken far-
reaching steps in planning for literacy.
Due to profound differences in nation¬
al structures, these measures vary
widely; but the aim of many is to
introduce more rigorous programming
and to fix medium term objectives.
Some Arab countries, for example,
aim to make certain age groups of the
population literate within ten years;
others have set a target date of
15 years. A Philippines government
decree and laws provide for a 6-year
systematic literacy campaign (1966-
1972). Burma hopes to attain its liter¬
acy goals even more rapidly. Iran's
fourth five-year development plan
(1967-1972) envisages a 30 per cent
reduction in the illiteracy rate. Italy,
Mexico, Turkey and other countries
have adapted literacy programmes to
conditions in various regions and to
the population groups concerned.
A NUMBER of countries
have passed laws making it compulsory
for certain sections of the population to
participate in literacy programmes. In
Libya and Iraq laws are being drawn
up to compel illiterate adults to attend
classes. Elsewhere (as in Guatemala
and Venezuela) new legislation aims
to extend a system under which firms
invest a part of their profits in literacy
programmes for their employees. In
Cambodia and Ecuador recent laws
require literate adults to help teach
illiterate fellow citizens.
To meet the demands of literacy
development, other laws covering
administrative reorganizations have
been promulgated or are being adopt¬
ed. New national literacy services have
thus been set up in Argentina, the
Republic of the Congo, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Korea, Mauritania and the
Republic of Viet-Nam.
In Indonesia, Madagascar, Mauritius,
Paraguay and the United Arab Repub¬
lic, existing services have been re¬
organized, and many countries have
created new regional, provincial or
municipal administrations to deal with
literacy.
An important recommendation by the
Teheran Congress calls for the adop¬
tion in literacy projects of the multiple
approach used in programmes of
economic and social development. The
idea has had major repercussions in a
number of countries which have given
an interministerial structure to the body
responsible for drafting and directing
the national literacy policy.
In some (Burma, Chile, Colombia,
Greece, Nepal and Senegal), these
bodies and consultative committees are
primarily concerned with interminis¬
terial co-ordination; in others (Ivory

Photos Unesco - P. Bertelsen
A colourful panorama of scenes from village life unfolds on the painted walls of most of the houses
in this Tanzanian hamlet near Dar-es-Salaam. The Tanzanian artist, Ali Panga, a sisal plantation worker,
has portrayed various community activities: fishermen in their boat and workers in the fields (above)
and a village meeting (opposite far left). Left, a village literacy class. Tanzania is one of the countries
where literacy campaigns have made most progress in recent years. Mobile libraries, a gift of the Scandinavian
countries, now bring books to newly-literate villagers, and adult education and literacy programmes
have been aided by Unesco's Gift Coupon Programme. A major experimental literacy project launched
near Lake Victoria with Unesco help has been geared to the development of local irrigation works
and the modernization of cotton and coffee production.
Coast, India, Mali, Thailand), national
committees, whose members represent
a broad range of activities, draw up
the overall national literacy policy.
The composition of these committees
which, in Algeria, Iraq, the U.A.R. and
Tunisia, for example, include not only
representatives of the usual adminis¬
trations, but also spokesmen for poli¬
tical parties and associations with
mass memberships, shows that the
role of literacy in development is now
fully understood.
In some countries literacy cam¬
paigns are controlled by several
authorities. In Afghanistan program¬
mes are being run simultaneously by
the Ministry of Education, the Rural
Education Department of the Ministry
of the Interior, the Welfare Society
(which organizes courses for women)
and the Army.
In Latin America, where many liter¬
acy programmes are operated jointly
by private organizations and indepen¬
dently-run vocational training centres,
Ministries of Education usually insist on
assuming the general direction or at
least the co-ordination of these pro¬
grammes.
In some African countries literacy
services come under the authority of
other ministers than the Ministei of
Education: in Zambia, the Ministry of
Community Development and in Kenya
the Ministry of Co-operatives and
Social Services, for example.
I
HE impulse given by the
Teheran Congress to literacy cam¬
paigns in general is shown by an
encouraging increase in the literacy
budgets of many countries.
The cost of literacy programmes
represents only a small fraction of the
total resources assigned to education
and is thus only a relatively light
burden. Even so, the budgetary in¬
creases are seen as a significant
development in the struggle against
illiteracy.
And as literacy teaching is given
a more functional emphasis, private
enterprises, particularly those in the
production sector, are bound to
become more closely involved with
such campaigns and therefore the cost
of literacy projects should no longer
fall on public budgets alone.
A look at recent statistics on the
number of people made literate in cer
tain countries reveals first, a sharp
increase in new literates during 1965-
1967, but secondly, a persistently low
ratio of these new literates as a percen¬
tage of the total illiterate population. In
other words, the results are appre¬
ciable but still far from adequate.
The modern approach to literacy
teaching is based on a better under¬
standing of the direct connexion bet¬
ween illiteracy and underdevelopment.
This has brought a clearer view of
ways in which literacy programmes
can be integrated with national plans
for economic expansion.
Literacy programmes of this new
type, launched in many parts of the
world, fit into a coherent pattern of
economic and social objectives in each
country.
In Gabon, a national committee
plans literacy activities to meet pri¬
ority needs in specific sectors of the
economy; in Nigeria a literacy cam¬
paign is being run for tobacco workers;
in Brazil projects have been launched
for illiterate workers engaged on the
Urubupunga Dam and a number of
electrification schemes; India has its
Hyderabad literacy programme for
agricultural workers in the High Yield
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
15

ABC OF DEVELOPMENT (Continued)
Literacy on the beam
(via radio and TV)
Crop Varieties Programme; and in
Yugoslavia factory workers' councils
organize education and literacy pro¬
grammes in conjunction with voca¬
tional training.
Increasing attempts are being made
to combine literacy teaching, even
where it retains a classroom flavour
in its teaching methods, with vocatio¬
nal, civil or political education.
In Madagascar, Niger and Senegal,
literacy work is combined with cam¬
paigns for rural development. Else¬
where in Africa (Ghana, Malawi, Ni¬
geria), in Asia (India, Malaysia, Paki¬
stan, Republic of Viet-Nam), and in
Latin America (Haiti, Dominican Repub¬
lic) it is becoming more closely inte¬
grated with community development
projects.
In Tunisia literacy teaching has
become an integral feature of agri¬
cultural and industrial enterprises,
providing a general education in eco¬
nomic and social questions, which
aims above all to stimulate an aware¬
ness of development problems.
In Indonesia, the "Pancha Marga"
programme merges literacy and adult
education with a long-term develop¬
ment project.
c
16
'UBA'S literacy campaign,
as a follow up to the efforts made in
1961, aims to bring adults up to the
sixth year of schooling so that they may
share fully in the nation's social and
economic development. Priority is
given to the functional aspect of liter¬
acy and adult education programmes
by linking them closely with the work
of the Institute of Agrarian Reform,
and the Ministry of Industry and
Training of Intermediate Technicians.
The "psycho-social" literacy method
introduced in Chile seeks to make a
functional contribution to social edu¬
cation; it brings group-dynamics into
play and uses dialogue as a method
of stimulating the critical faculties and
an awareness of community and na¬
tional problems.
Much has been done since 1965 to
provide reading material for illiterate
adults and handbooks for their tea¬
chers. Teaching manuals and readers
for new literates have been prepared
and printed in Latin America, Africa,
Asia and the Arab countries.
Significant experiments have been
made by publishing special news¬
papers or inserting pages in existing
newspapers for the benefit of newly-
literate adults so as to maintain their
interest in reading and offer them
articles on suitable subjects written
at the appropriate level.
Newspapers of this type are publish¬
ed in Cameroon, Guatemala, Haiti,
Kenya, Madagascar, Nepal, Spain and
elsewhere. In addition, literacy activi¬
ties have been publicized in articles
and special features in the popular
press of many countries, including
Ceylon, Republic of the Congo, Ecua¬
dor, Mali, Paraguay and Syria.
N UMEROUS countries are
using the audio-visual media in their
literacy programmes to supplement and
sometimes to replace traditional teach¬
ing media and materials. Media thus
employed range from the simple poster
to television programmes.
Radio has been widely used in
literacy programmes after first serving
to stimulate interest and mobilize
public opinion in support of literacy
campaigns.
Ethiopia launched an experimental
literacy programme by radio in 1965;
in Madagascar hundreds of radio
receivers have been supplied to liter¬
acy centres; in Mali a "radio school"
programme is broadcast every evening
for those who speak Bambara; much
radio time in Niger is devoted to
educational broadcasts, including the
teaching of spoken French.
Iran uses a special transmitter for
literacy teaching in the Ghazwin dis¬
trict; every literacy centre in Ceylon
is equipped with a radio receiver;
in Nepal an adult education programme
is broadcast weekly and in Malaysia,
over 1,500 receivers have been
supplied to literacy centres.
In Latin America, Argentina uses the
radio to bring literacy to the country's
most isolated communities; Guatemala
has radio schools; Mexico started
literacy courses by radio in 1966 and
Peru has distributed 1,300 receivers
to schools running literacy classes.
Jamaica, Spain and the U.S.A. also
use radio for literacy teaching.
An active ally of literacy, the cinema
has proved particularly effective in
campaigns to stimulate the incentive
for literacy and for popularizing educa¬
tional themes. El Salvador and Tuni¬
sia in particular have employed it with
outstanding success.
Television is used to teach reading,
writing and arithmetic in only a small
number of countries as yet and mostly
on an experimental basis. But its
potentialities in education are far-
reaching.
Brazil, Ivory Coast, Senegal, Ghana,
Italy, Iran, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, the
United Arab Republic and the U.S.A.
have all used television for literacy
and adult education, and Chile, Ethio¬
pia, India and Uganda plan to do so.
The transition from traditional liter¬
acy teaching simple schooling in
reading and writing to functional
literacy forming an integral part of
a programme of vocational guidance or
training necessarily involves changes
in the recruitment and training of
teachers.
In most countries adult literacy
courses are chiefly run by school¬
teachers in addition to their normal
work.
It has been noted, however, that
fully trained schoolteachers tend to
follow the conventional approach to
education and traditional teaching
methods. So an effort is being made
to recruit volunteer teachers from
other callings: agricultural instructors
and nursing personnel in Niger,
rural development leaders in Laos,
instructors on loan from apprentice
training schools in Senegal and
factory foremen in Tunisia.
In other countries such as Algeria,
Mauritania and Morocco, the urgent
need for trained workers in the new
industrial plants has led authorities to
recruit literacy workers from among
factory overseers, who are given short
training courses.
IHIS new trend is even
more marked in countries where the
majority of literacy workers are recruit¬
ed not from the teaching profession,
but from among part-time volunteers
belonging to the better-educated sec¬
tions of the community.
This survey of national efforts
affirms the reality of international co¬
operation in efforts for literacy, be¬
cause the progress so far made has
often only been possible thanks to an
appreciable contribution in the form
of international assistance.
The concept of international assis¬
tance has developed considerably in
the past two years and must continue
to do so, since it has now become
obvious that the eradication of illiter¬
acy as an obstacle to development is
in the interests not only of the coun¬
tries where the evil exists, but of those
which have freed themselves from it.
