PHILAE
AN APPEAL BY THE
DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF UNESCO
NOVEMBER 6, 1968
46
E, years after the international
appeal launched on March 8, 1960, by my
distinguished predecessor, Mr. Vittorino Vero¬
nese, the Government of the United Arab
Republic and Unesco, on September 22, 1968,
solemnly inaugurated the reconstructed temples
of Abu Simbel on their new site in the heart
of the Nubian Desert. Removed block by block
from the sandstone cliff out of which they had
been carved, the temples had been raised more
than 180 feet and reassembled exactly as they
had stood in the past.
The success of this unparalleled enterprise,
which bears striking witness both to the extra¬
ordinary potentialities of modern technology
and to the effectiveness of international co¬
operation, should not blind us to the fact that
the Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia
is not yet finished.
Spectacular as the results already are,
success will not be complete until the temples
of Philae are also saved. It has been possible
to defer this operation until now because, owing
to their position between the old and new
Aswan Dams the final immersion of these tem¬
ples has so far been delayed. But work must
now go forward as quickly as possible.
On the basis of a study carried out by a
group of Egyptian consulting engineers and
architects, the Government of the United Arab
Republic has selected a project whereby the
temples will be dismantled, removed and
reconstructed on a nearby island. The work
will take four years and should start in the
spring of 1969. The operation will be partly
financed by the United Arab Republic, but to
guarantee its completion, Unesco must collect,
before the end of 1972, at least six million
dollars, representing about one-third of the
contributions made by the international com¬
munity to save Abu Simbel.
I cannot imagine that the member states of
Unesco, which have given such abundant proof
of their generosity, should fail, when so near
the goal, to make the final effort necessary
to save this wonderful group of monuments,
justly called "The Pearl of Egypt", from dis¬
appearing forever beneath the waters. Such
a failure would be all the more incomprehensible
to our own and future generations because the
temples of Philae are probably the best known
of all the Nubian monuments, and geographically
more accessible than many others for the
increasing number of visitors who will un¬
doubtedly be attracted to them.
It is therefore with confidence, and in
accordance with the unanimous wish expressed
by the General Conference of Unesco, that I
solemnly call upon governments, institutions and
foundations, both public and private, and upon
all men of good will to contribute, as the means
of each allow, to the success of the final stage
in a cultural undertaking whose high signi¬
ficance is obvious to the whole world.
May the intellectual and moral solidarity of
mankind, which it is Unesco's mission to
promote, be further strengthened on this
occasion in the saving of this precious treasure,
thus vindicating the worth of the human spirit
and advancing the cause of peace.
RENÉ MAHEU
Director-General
of Unesco
The Great Temple of the goddess
Isis on the island of Philae in Nubia.
Photo shows temple half submerged
by the waters of the Nile. Unesco has
launched a project to rescue the
monuments of Philae. In foreground,
the celebrated colonnade of the
"mammisi" or "birth house" of Horus,
son of Isis. Temple and colonnade
were built over 2,000 years ago.
Photo © Max-Pol Fouchet
All photos by Max-Pol Fouchet are from
"Nubie, Splendeur Sauvée," published by
Ed Clairefontalne et Guilde du Livre, Laus¬
anne, Switzerland
f
f
H
1 ^.¿Jt
-
1

