Tranquillizers are not narcotic drugs
but nevertheless constitute a
hazard with prolonged and
continuous use. It has been
pointed out that people who abuse
these drugs tend to rely on them
to solve their difficulties, thus
reducing their ability to react and
face up to life's everyday problems.
In many countries tranquillizers and
"pep" pilis (amphetamines) are
supplied only on medical
prescription.


THE VOGUE
OF THE PILL
(tranquillizers,
that is)
by Grigory Avroufski

WHO photo - K. Brodle
T HE second half of the
20th century has seen remarkable
progress in the fields of chemistry and
pharmacology; with the advent of
antibiotics, man suddenly found himself
in possession of a wide range of
medicines for curing or alleviating the
most varied diseases.
New scientific discoveries have
enabled man to gain still more victories
over Nature. Nevertheless, repeated .
danger signals lead us to ask
ourselves today if these gigantic
forces which have been unleashed are
not slipping out of our control like
some Sorcerer's Apprentice.
The simplicity in the use of modern
drugs and their safety in terms of
secondary effects and complications
have led them to be used increasingly
for general "routine therapy", as it is
called, which patients can follow at
home for extended periods, often years,
instead of in accordance with strict
medical prescription..
Since such treatments are relatively
inexpensive and the drugs are
GRIGORY AVROUTSKI is one of the lead¬
ing psychopharmacologists in the U.S.S.R.
He is head of the Psycfiopharmacoíogíca/
Section of the Institute of Psychiatry, Mos¬
cow and author of "Contemporary Psycho¬
tropic Products and Their Use in Schizo¬
phrenia Treatment" and other works, some
of them translated in English and German.
manufactured industrially, pharmacies
are now overstocked with a multitude
of patent medicines in attractive
wrappings. The same product is
sometimes distributed under different
brand names with extravagant
advertising.
Advertising, low prices and ease of
purchase have led to the present
tendency to use drugs indiscriminately
or, in any case, more often than is
necessary. And a paradoxical phe¬
nomenon has occurred, known as
"drug dependence".
A patient suffering from a chronic
internal complaint is prescribed a
certain drug to relieve his pain and
to' be taken over an extended period.
Any attempt made to cut down on the
medication leads to worsening of his
condition and the reappearance of
morbid symptoms. This is a case of
necessary and beneficial dependence.
In another case, the medication has
done its work, the illness has receded,
but the patient continues the treatment
through fear of a relapse. This is
dependence of a different kind which
can be considered psychological and
which is more often than not harmful
to health. This dependence generally
develops among the anxiety-prone.
It can be dealt with by dissuasion, by
explaining to the patient that his
medicine is no longer needed and has,
in fact, become dangerous.
However, the situation is more
serious when dealing with so-called
psychotropic producta one of the
miracles of modern medicine, which
are used in the treatment of
psychological disorders. Some have
a sedative effect and are called
tranquillizers; others, on the contrary,
are stimulants and are referred to as
psychotonics.
Thanks to these drugs, thousands of
mental patients have been freed from
serious disturbances such as delirium,
hallucinations and depression, without
having to be confined to a psychiatric
ward. In these cases, psychological
dependence on the drug is entirely
beneficial. By constantly operating on
the organism the psychotropic drugs
help to free the patient from the
psychopathological disturbances that
imprison his mind; if these are not
completely cured, they may well
reappear as soon as the dose of the
prescribed drug is reduced.
However, in the great majority of
cases, psychotropic substances, both
tranquillizers and psychotonics, are
used by healthy persons or in cases
where doctors diagnose only minor
nervous complaints, such as fatigue,
irritability or other personality disor¬
ders; indecision, anxiety syndromes
or apathy.
In all these cases, treatment by
tranquillizers gives excellent results
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
21

Photo © Holmes-Lebel - Michèle Vignes
VOGUE OF THE PILL (Continued)
"Hippy" meeting in Golden Gate
Park, San Francisco during a festival.
The unforeseen boomerang effect
22
and the symptoms disappear quickly.
In the past six or seven years sedatives
such as meprobamate, librium, valium,
trioxazine, etc., have been consumed
on an unprecedented scale. In 1963,
for example, American drugstores sold
60,775,000 units on prescription alone,
without counting those sold freely
across the counter.
There can be no doubt that
absorbing a drug which can bring
rapid, effective action against severe,
often unbearable, psychological tension
produces an impression of tremendous
relief. The patient finds that he can
face what until then had seemed
unsurmountable difficulties. It is
precisely because these drugs have
taken on the aspect of a "miracle" cure
that tranquillizers and stimulants have
come to occupy such an important
place in the rough-and-tumble pace of
modern life. It has even become
fashionable nowadays after the usual
remarks about the weather and other
no less serious topics, to ask one's
friends which brand of tranquillizer
they use.
And why not? These drugs are
supposed to be harmless and can be
taken for as long as one wants to
without any fear of secondary effects;
at least, that is what certain advertise¬
ments and some medical men say.
Helenium and librium sometimes cause
dizziness and slight difficulties in
co-ordination to be sure, but these are
only passing symptoms. '
From this it is a natural step to the
conclusion that there is no need to
submit one's nervous system to the
permanent strain created by modern
life; that there is no reason to insist
on training our will power to control
our nerves, anxiety or lack of self-
confidence since miracle products do
it all for us as if by magic.
The box of tranquillizer pills first
makes its appearance on the bedside
table; then it is carried in coat pocket
or handbag so that one can swallow
a pill just before going into the boss's
office or before facing the audience
on opening night or simply after a
family squabble.
As a rule, this is considered better
than smoking a cigarette, which is
quite true. At least it does no harm
to the lungs. But gradually the user
notices that instead of the two or
three pills a day prescribed by the
doctor, he is now taking four or six.
This indicates that the nervous system
has got used to the drug and that a
bigger dose is now needed to achieve
' the same effect.
At this point one hesitates and
begins to get pangs of conscience.
Are the pills as good as they are said
to be? And then one. remembers the
drugs which were first developed to
cure people but soon turned out to
have a boomerang effect.
This is precisely what happened with
the amphetamines, a group of drugs
widely used in the early 1950s and
which, like the tranquillizers, belong
to the psychopharmacological family,
but have a tonic or stimulating effect.
The amphetamines are "pep" pills that
stimulate physical and mental energy;
they also reduce the appetite and help
in slimming, which accounts for their
great popularity, particularly as a
result of a vast advertising campaign,
and the fact that they were once sold
without a prescription. In 1954,
200,000 persons are believed to have

used amphetamines in Japan, and the
Japanese Government finally clamped
strict medical controls on their use.
The use of amphetamines can
lead to physical and psychological
disturbances such as sharp loss
of weight, insomnia, and nervous
disorders culminating in psychosis, and
the urge to keep on taking the pills is
almost uncontrollable. In spite of the
control measures adopted, these drugs
still represent a serious danger,
especially for the young. Cases of
misuse are still as frequent as ever,
reports the World Health Organization.
Doctors and scientists have recently
renewed their campaign in medical
journals to tighten -controls and limit
the medical prescription of ampheta¬
mines. The brief history of the am¬
phetamines shows how a medical drug
which in other respects has various
valuable properties, can virtually
become a "narcotic" drug although
in fact it is not.
Amphetamines differ from narcotics
in the first place by their action, since
they are stimulants. They differ also
through their chemical structure and
pharmacological properties. It was
difficult to foresee the hidden dangers
in the use of amphetamines when
pharmacologists first suggested that
they be given to night pilots to help
combat fatigue and drowsiness. It was
only after extended and exhaustive
clinical tests that the amphetamines
revealed how dangerous they really
were. In fact, no way has yet been
found to eliminate their untoward
effects completely.
What, then, are the effects of the
amphetamines that have raised doubt
about their value?
The amphetamines are a drug that
acts principally on the nervous system.
The capacity of amphetamines to ele¬
vate mood and induce a state of well-
being is probably largely the basis for
their widespread use as stimulants.
Since this commonly involves conti¬
nuous and prolonged administration,
the users of these drugs develop
varying degrees of psychic dependence
on them.
The abuse of this class of drugs
originates in and is perpetuated by the
psychic drive to attain maximum eu¬
phoria. No physical dependence is
created. Nevertheless the sudden
withdrawal of the stimulant drug which
has masked chronic fatigue and the
need for sleep now permits these con¬
ditions to appear in an exaggerated
fashion.
Thus the withdrawal period is cha¬
racteristically a state of depression
both psychic and physical, which
probably reinforces the drive to re¬
sume the drug. In this respect, it is
much less important and does not
compare in magnitude with those that
occur with - morphine, . barbiturates,
alcohol and other drugs that create
physical dependence. Withdrawal of
drugs of the amphetamine type is
never threatening to life and requires
psychological rather than somatic
therapy.
. A unique feature of the ampheta¬
mines is their capacity to induce what
is technically known as "tolerance", a
quality possessed by few central ner¬
vous system stimulants. Tolerance
means that the individual finds that the
same quantity of drug produces less
effect or response, or to put it another
way, that larger doses are required to
produce the . same effect. This in¬
crease in dosage can eventually result
in death.
We'HAT about the tranquilli¬
zers? Is it correct to assume that they
are suspect in the same way as the
amphetamines and other narcotic drugs
now are? The answer is "No". Al¬
though certain tranquillizers definitely
have properties in common with some
narcotic drugs, they differ markedly
from the latter in that they do not in¬
duce the physical dependence and tole¬
rance characteristic of most of these
drugs. It cannot be denied, however,
that certain tranquillizers do produce
psychological dependence.
Hence we may conclude that tran¬
quillizers are quite different from nar¬
cotic drugs like marijuana, cocaine,
morphine as well as the amphetamines.
They are usefully and legitimately em¬
ployed for medical purposes in the
treatment not only of psychological and
nervous disorders but many somatic
illnesses of the so-called "neurogenic"
type, such as cardialgía (neuralgic
pains in the region of the heart) and
hypertonic diseases (high blood pres¬
sure). Such sedatives as meproba-
mate, librium and trioxazine have
proved highly -valuable and effective
in dealing with diseases of this kind.
But like all drugs, tranquillizers and
sedatives should be used with
moderation and should be used only
on a doctor's prescription.
The sense of security engendered
by the possibility of resorting to
tranquillizers results in the atrophy of
our psychological functions, weakening
will-power and character; in short,
inhibiting those aspects of our per¬
sonality which should help us to face
up to day-to-day difficulties.
The real use of tranquillizers is to
help people overcome some patho¬
logical disturbance at a certain
moment. The purpose, I repeat, is to
"help" and not to replace individual
effort. In the case of a fracture,
crutches are helpful in enabling the
bones to mend more quickly, by
supporting part of the weight and
keeping limbs immobile. But if
crutches are used permanently,
muscles which have remained in
enforced inactivitv for too long
become atrophied and the healing
process is delayed. This is equally
true of tranquillizers.
And so we find that the continued
use of tranquillizers results in psycho¬
logical dependence. People have con¬
fidence in the drug and believe that
it will help them in moments of stress
and strain. A person who makes
moderate use of tranquillizers can
usually stop taking them when he or
she decides to do so. Sometimes,
however, it is not as easy as one
believes, and psychotherapy measures
are called for.
A person who suddenly stops taking
tranquillizers after many months of
heavy dosage usually finds that the
break is accompanied by very unpleas¬
ant effects, and patients are known
to have suffered convulsions as a
result. As a general rule, however,
with moderate use, one can usually
stop taking most tranquillizers without
experiencing major difficulties, and
certainly without the pathological with¬
drawal symptoms associated with the
physical dependence produced by nar¬
cotic drugs and the psychological de¬
pendence produced by amphetamines.
For all the above reasons, it is our
opinion that tranquillizers should not
be sold freely across the counter and
should be supplied only on medical
prescription. Furthermore, in pres¬
cribing tranquillizers, the doctor should
take into consideration not only the
patient's physical and nervous tempe¬
rament but the gravity of the illness
requiring treatment.
In many countries commercial
advertising for tranquillizers is pro¬
hibited, and information regarding
these products is sent exclusively to
doctors through their specialized
journals. In these countries tran¬
quillizers are not sold without a
doctor's prescription.
The near future will no doubt bring
new achievements in pharmaceutical
chemistry, pharmacology and clinical
psychiatry, and we may then have at
our disposal tranquillizers which are
more effective and harmless. We
should like to think that progress in
this field will be properly controlled
and that tranquillizers will remain what
they are today a wonderful instrument 00
in the hands of doctors as a more ^*»
effective weapon against nervous and
psychological disorders.
