ONE OF
KARL JASPERS'
LAST
COMMENTARIES:
GANDHIJI
by Karl Jaspers

IT was not by force of arms
but by non-violence founded on right
that Gandhi liberated India from British
rule. His action was political inas¬
much as he had to deal with the
authorities in power, but his politics
took an approach of unprecedented
character.
In a world which made a pretence
of living according to right and morali¬
ty, Gandhi tore off the mask of
hypocrisy. He focussed attention on
the sway of violence in society not
only in his analytical writings (others
had done so long before him) but
above all in his daily life by exposing
himself to violence and openly suffer¬
ing under it.
Gandhi's strength lay in his readi¬
ness to endure all the consequences
of his actions from the ruling author¬
ities and in his ability to instil this
readiness to suffer in the Indian
masses. He amazed the world and
inspired the Indian people by his
unwavering method of non-violent
struggle against violence.
Gandhi was a man who sought to
achieve the impossible: politics based
on non-violence. His success was
extraordinary. Did the impossible thus
become possible?
Gandhi repudiated all physical
violence. Imprisoned many times dur¬
ing his lifetime, his very life threatened,
he finally died the victim of assassin¬
ation. But was he opposed to all
forms of violence? This, I think, is the
fundamental point. As sincere and
explicit as Gandhi was when he declar¬
ed that he wanted to convince his op¬
ponents, convert them and reach
agreement with them, in point of fact
he deliberately had recourse to moral
compulsion. His personal capacity
for suffering, with its tremendous
Left, all the worldly possessions left
by Gandhi, "the Great Soul in beggar's
garb", as the poet Tagore once called
him: dinner bowls, wooden fork and spoon,
three porcelain monkeys, his diary,
prayer-book, watch, spittoon, paper knives
and two pairs of sandals. They are kept
in the house in New Delhi in the garden
of which Gandhi met his death.
repercussions on the endurance of
the Indian people, itself became a form
"violence" which ultimately drove the
of English out of India.
We are reminded of the ancient
Indian theory of the power of ascetics.
By the unparalleled self-mortification
they inflicted upon themselves, they
accumulated a magic power which
gave them mastery over all things.
Even the gods feared the power of
these ascetics.
The self-discipline which Gandhi im¬
posed upon himself was no doubt the
result of a kind of violence exercised
on his inner self. But this self-violence
or compulsion is not limited only to
oneself, for he who inflicts violence
on himself is equally prepared to have
it apply to others. For Gandhi, the
force of moral pressure is one of the
factors of action and accounts for
no small part of the response he
achieved.
If Gandhi's method of non-violence
could not actually do away with
violence but only shift it elsewhere,
he nevertheless achieved his political
success without physical violence even
though a few individual followers of
his resorted to a minimum of physical
violence which he disapproved of.
Did not Gandhi thus discover a
political method by which right can
overcome might? To grasp the full
import of this success we must under¬
stand what makes it such a unique and
remarkable experience.
History teaches us that obedience
can indeed be achieved by exterminat¬
ing other men and spreading destruc¬
tion, as the Athenians did at Samos,
the Romans in Palestine, the medieval
Church in Provence and Cromwell in
Ireland. Whenever it is exercised with¬
out restraint or scruple, power turns
absolute, be it by deliberate policy or
in the name of divine revelation.
People who were once proud of their
freedoms find themselves swept away
by this tyranny.
On the paramount question how far
is a ruling power prepared to go when
its authority is gravely threatened, the
English had their answer ready: better
get out than resort to terror. Gandhi
was always free to speak in public.
Even when he was jailed he was
allowed to act. English liberality and
their concept of legal rights made it
possible for Gandhi to develop the
full scope of his activities. Thus Gan¬
dhi's accomplishments owe as much
if not more to the English approach
to politics as they do to Gandhi's own
ideas.
But the extraordinary fact remains
unique perhaps in history that here
was a man who created an instrument
of political action from an idea that
transcends politics, and whose entire
life was a constant illustration of this
conviction.
Gandhi was the theoretician of his
own action. His politics is rooted in
religious principles transcending poli
tics. It is grounded in the action of
the inner self which leads to Satya¬
graha, the tenacious clinging to Being,
to Truth. Gandhi himself set the
example of this principle. Outward
resistance must stem from the active
power of Love, Faith and Sacri¬
fice. The person who lives by Satya¬
graha must adhere to Truth, Chastity,
Courage, Will to Sacrifice. He must
cheerfully accept all suffering inflicted
upon him, not passively, but as a
"Warrior of Truth". The Satyagrahi
practices mental and spiritual discipline
just as the body is exercised in the
handling of weapons. He lives in
self-purification.
GlANDHI also differed from
the holy ascetics in that all his life was
a permanent search, a never-ending
quest for self-purification with an
awareness of his own guilt. He
scorned all efforts tending to make of
him a saint, and this became one of the
great preoccupations of his life as he
strove to resist the tide of Indian
darshan-seekers who wished to deify
him. Such misrepresentation, he felt,
could only hurt the cause he sought to
advance.
By his spirit of self-sacrifice he
showed that a "supra-political" idea
could be converted into a force for
political action. Here lies the great¬
ness of Gandhi in our times. For him,
politics was not only inseparable from
ethics and religion but was constantly
and totally nurtured by them: Better
to die, better to let "an entire people
be wiped off the map" than to sacrifice
the purity of the soul.
Gandhi has become the unique
example in our day of the moral and
religious politics of the man who lives
for undisguised truth. Humiliated in
South Africa because of his race, in¬
spired by his Indian origins though
educated in England, this man was
driven by his love for a free India
which would regain its dignity, by a
readiness for suffering and a spirit of
unlimited sacrifice. At the same time,
he never lost that feeling of inner guilt
which is the spark which spurs one
on to greater determination.
Today we face the question: how
can we escape from physical violence
and war, and avoid the holocaust of
nuclear weapons? Gandhi, through his
action and words, has given us the
true answer: only political values that
transcend politics itself can provide the
force that will save us. It is inspir¬
ing that this answer is offered us today
by an Asian.
KARL JASPERS, born at Oldenburg, Germany
in 1883, was one of the great philosophers
of modern times. His work, spanning almost
three-quarters of a century, has had a
profound influence on contemporary thinking.
He died at Basel, Switzerland in February,
1969. The article above is one of the last
he wrote and appears m "Mahatma Gandhi:
100 Years".
27
