PLANETARY MANAGEMENT (Continued)
40
Establishment of wilderness areas
and natural areas are prompted by
both spiritual and aesthetic concern
and biological need. There is a widely
diffused element of human feeling that
wishes there to be wildernesses. Even
if many individuals never reach the
wilderness, there is satisfaction and
comfort in the knowledge that it
exists. Biologically we need the natur¬
al areas as reservoirs; their study can
provide datum lines from which we
can more intelligently study other
environments.
Conservation agriculture can also
help us to preserve our environment.
Some tribes of people in limited or
constricted habitats have arrived at
conservation practices empirically, but
the science of conservation in farming
and water relations, together with for¬
estry, has come from change of heart
after orgies of exploitation.
One would say guardedly that con¬
servation agriculture was fairly firmly
established in developed countries, but
these same developed countries have
made some shocking mistakes in under¬
developed countries . This now could
be arrested if the necessary prelimin¬
ary studies concerning sites' poten¬
tialities and limitations and the neces¬
sary investments for conservation are
made. We have the tools and we
must use them correctly.
Outdoor sports in many forms in
developed countries lead to care of the
environment. Care of rivers has been
mentioned already in the Interests of
fishing;' a diversified agriculture and
the maintenance of strategic wood¬
lands and covers has been followed
in western countries in the interests
of sport.
Sometimes sport has removed ani¬
mals from large areas, but understand¬
ing of the ecological place of predators
is bringing about much greater toler¬
ance. All in all, farms run by those
who like to keep the sporting interest
are richer in a variety of plant and
animal life than others. Sometimes, the
sporting farmer progresses to the state
of being a definite naturalist enjoying
specifically the natural life of no sport¬
ing interest.
Changes in industry have also play¬
ed their part. This can best be
presented by examples. In the United
States, agriculture moved from the
eastern seaboard to the Middle West.
The forests that had never relinquish¬
ed their hold took over again. Even
60 years ago much wood was being
cut for fuel in these eastern forests.
Now, oil-fired central heating is fairly
general and the woods have grown
more beautiful. What is more, the
eastern woods have reached a new
high destiny, of being the Suburban
Forest, the Pleasance of the urban
communities of the seaboard. Pub¬
lic opinion is now solidly behind main¬
tenance of this pleasing region of the
East.
Likewise, in Europe, the concentra¬
tion of agriculture on the best soils and
the consequent abandonment of mar¬
ginal lands, have opened the way for
rural area development based on
afforestation for soil conservation,
forest management for timber produc¬
tion and recreation, establishment of
national parks, and, generally speak¬
ing, conservation, recreation and
extensive management of natural
resources.
In conclusion, do all these examples
give us reason to be optimistic?
Ecologists can scarcely afford to be
optimists. But an absolute pessimist
is a defeatist, and that is no good
either. We see there need not be
complete disaster and if our eyes were
open wide enough, world wide, we
could do much towards rehabilitation.
The biggest danger of all is our in¬
ability to control the explosive rate of
growth of human population. A real
damping down of this would lessen
the all too frequent policy of exped¬
iency, bolstered by technology divorc¬
ed from the philosophy of science.
The scientist as a social entity must
eventually establish the necessity for
the ecosystem approach to world prob¬
lems as a safeguard against unbalanced
technological action. We have yet to
realize that political guidance and re¬
straint is nothing like so operative on
technology as on other major fields
of human action.

u,INESCO has now embarked
on its programme in education,
science, culture and communication for
1969-70. The programme, approved by
Unesco's General Conference in Nov¬
ember 1968, together with a two-year
budget of $77.5 million, confirms the
priorities hitherto accorded to educa¬
tion, the natural sciences and techno¬
logy.
Presenting the programme to the
General Conference, Mr René Maheu,
Director-General of Unesco, who was
elected to a second six-year term of
office, drew attention to what he term¬
ed the "four major crises" the
crisis in development aid, the crisis of
human rights, the world crisis in edu¬
cation and the crisis of youth.
Of the youth crisis, he said: "It
is not in fact a crisis of youth; it is a
crisis of our society... and youth... re¬
veals the strains and stresses in that
society... I believe that, just as over
the past ten years Unesco has given
special attention to the developing
countries, it must now couple this
attention with a growing concern for
youth."
In the programme now envisaged;
Unesco will work not only for youth but
with youth. In the next two years
Unesco will hold several important
meetings or conferences dealing with
problems of youth: one in Uruguay
on "Youth and Development," a sec¬
ond, on the impact on young people
and adults of violence as portrayed by
mass media, and a round table on
university reform, to be held in Latin
America.
Importance will be given to the par¬
ticipation of young people in all these
conferences as well as others not
dealing necessarily with youth prob¬
lems.
Of Unesco's 125 member states, 70
sent ministers to the conference, which
elected as its president Mr. William
A. Eteki-Mboumoua, Minister of Educa¬
tion, Arts and Letters in Cameroon,
from 1961 to 1968. Under his chair¬
manship, it debated and approved
basic guidelines for Unesco's policy
during the coming years:
Confirmation of the priorities accord¬
ed to education, natural sciences and
technology.
Substantial contribution by Unesco
to the Second Development Decade,
which depends, "not only on the ra¬
tional use of natural resources but on
making the most of human resources
by a co-ordinated process of educa¬
tion and training."

Unesco's programme
for 1969-1970
Basic concept of the idea of life¬
long education, "embracing in indus¬
trial and developing regions alike all
levels of the education systems, al|
forms of out-of-school education and
even all policies for cultural develop¬
ment."
Recognition that the problems of
youth "are an indication of a rapidly
changing society", and the realization
that a growing awareness of these
problems must be the starting point of
general progress to benefit students
and young urban and rural workers.
Importance of the modernization of
universities in which administrators,
professors and students should all be
involved.
An urgent need "to propagate the
scientific spirit," and, at the same
time, to define national science poli¬
cies, allowing for the establishment of
the necessary structures and staff
training, "needed in the less favoured
countries, to accelerate their develop¬
ment."
Growth in the contribution social and
human sciences can make "in analyz¬
ing situations within societies and
seeking new solutions".
Strengthening awareness of a
common human destiny through mu¬
tual appreciation of cultural values and
the preservation of the heritage and
traditions of the past.
Use of modern information techni¬
ques for promoting educational activ¬
ities and the scientific spirit.
In Unesco's world programme for
the next two years, one of the pro¬
jects in education is the development
of pedagogical research, in co-opera¬
tion with the International Bureau of
Education (IBE), which is to be merg¬
ed into Unesco as an international
centre for the study of comparative
education.
This year's International Conference
on Public Education, convened by
Unesco and IBE, will be devoted to
the improvement of education systems.
In 1970, Unesco will organize a region¬
al conference, at the ministerial level,
on education and economic planning
in Arab States.
Aid programmes in educational
planning will be continued and special
attention given to problems of wastage
and drop-outs at primary and secon¬
dary levels, and to the improvement
of programmes and teaching methods.
Aid in teacher training and the up-grad
ing and re-adaptation of teachers will
be expanded, particularly for rural
areas in Africa and Latin America.
Studies on special education for handi¬
capped children are also planned for
1969-70.
Unesco's aid to literacy programmes
will be continued and intensified,
especially in the case of experimental
pilot projects.
Unesco's programme in the natural
sciences will now follow three main
lines: science policy, scientific infor¬
mation and fundamental research ;
science education and technological
training and research ; environmental
sciences and research on natural re¬
sources.
In 1970, Unesco will organize the
first European conference of ministers
concerned with science policy. In col¬
laboration with the International Coun¬
cil of Scientific Unions, Unesco will
continue its formulation of a world sys¬
tem for scientific information.
Unesco proposes to take a fresh look
at science teaching at all levels by
means of pilot projects involving new
programmes and methods and improv¬
ed teaching equipment. Other pilot
projects will see what can be done to
limit the effects of the "brain drain"
of highly qualified personnel from
developing countries. Unesco will also
continue to help train scientists, engin¬
eers and technicians in countries
where they are most needed.
Results of the first part of the
Unesco-sponsored International Hydro-
logical Decade launched in 1965, will
be studied at a conference of spec¬
ialists this year, and following the
International Conference on the Bio¬
sphere, in September 1968, an inter¬
disciplinary programme on "Man and
the Biosphere" will be mapped out (see
page 4).
While continuing its survey on the
main trends of research in the social
and human sciences and its promotion
of teaching in these fields, Unesco
will sponsor studies and hold a sympo¬
sium on the contribution the social
sciences can make to social and eco¬
nomic planning and development.
Other studies will be made on different
aspects of demography and on family
planning in relation to education.
Unesco's programme of studies of
different cultures (Oriental, African,
Latin American, Balkan, Scandinavian,
among others) in terms of their univer¬
sal significance will be continued.
Unesco will promote cultural develop
ment by encouraging the creative arts
and art education and by promoting
wider diffusion of art and literature.
As for the preservation of mankind's
cultural heritage, Unesco will organize
the first world conference of ministers
of culture next year. Other salient fea¬
tures of Unesco's cultural programme
are the adoption of an international
Recommendation for the protection of
cultural property endangered by public
or private works, studies on the prob¬
lems of Venice and the campaign to
save the monuments of Philae in Nubia
(see the "Unesco Courier", Decem¬
ber 1968).
Lastly, as regards communication
in the broadest sense of the term
Unesco's activities are two-fold. First¬
ly, it will continue to promote the
improvement of documentation ser¬
vices, nationally and internationally,
and will assist member states to deve¬
lop documentation centres, libraries,
archives and statistical services.
Secondly, it will continue to foster the
free flow of ideas by word and image,
studies abroad, book promotion and
the development of information media,
especially as these relate to education.
One of the new projects to be
launched in 1969 is a wide-ranging
study on the international travel of
persons whose occupations relate to
areas of Unesco's competence. The
survey will begin by charting and
assessing the pattern of travel of
scientists, engineers and technicians,
data being gathered on the numbers,
countries of origin and categories of
these specialists, on the types of
study and length of stay abroad and
the use made of the knowledge and
skills thus acquired.
The role of communication in
society, and the question of agree¬
ments covering the use of satellite
communications for televising educ¬
ational, scientific and cultural pro¬
grammes will be discussed at two
meetings this year.
For further facts we refer readers
to Unesco's official monthly publica¬
tion, "The Unesco Chronicle," whose
December 1968 issue is devoted to
the decisions of the 15th Session of
Unesco's General Conference. Pub¬
lished in English, French, Spanish and M4
Arabic editions, it can be obtained *f|
from Unesco National Distributors
(see inside back cover). Annual
subscription: $3.00; 18/-;. 10 F.
