THE ALASKAN EARTHQUAKE
THAT SHOOK FIVE CONTINENTS
A T 5.36 p.m. on Good Fri¬
day, March 27, 1964, a devastating
earthquake " hit south-central Alaska,
releasing in three to four minutes twice
as much energy as the earthquake that
destroyed San Francisco in 1906. One
hundred and fifteen persons were kill¬
ed in Alaska, $300 million worth of pub¬
lic and private property was destroyed,
and the state's economy was crippled.
The quake's magnitude, duration, and
geographical scope rank it among the
major earthquakes of history.
That the death toll was not many
times higher was due to a happy
combination of several chance ele¬
ments: the sparse population, the for¬
tuitous timing (the earthquake occurred
on the evening of a holiday, when
schools were empty and most offices
deserted), a low tide, the absence of
fire in residential and business areas,
the generally mild weather, and the
fact that it was the off season for
fishing.
Since then, the Alaska earthquake
has become the best documented and
most thoroughly studied in history.
Accurately described as a "natural
scientific experiment on a grand scale,"
it has provided insights into a host of
long standing scientific problems.
The first report in what will even¬
tually be an eight-volume series on the
earthquake has now been published
by the U.S. National Academy of
Sciences. With the overall title "The
Great Alaska Earthquake of 1964," the
series is intended to be a compre¬
hensive report on the earthquake. Its
volumes will cover in detail subjects
in the natural sciences, engineering,
and the social sciences.
The first volume, "Hydrology," (1)
describes the effects of the earthquake
on water in all its continental forms
on groundwater, on surface water, and
on masses of snow and ice.
Most people do not associate water
with earthquakes. But much of the
epicentral region of the Alaska earth¬
quake was covered with water in the
form of snow and glaciers.
The hydrologie effects were spec¬
tacular: frozen lakes shattered, giant
landslides spread over large glaciers,
and snow avalanches plunged down
steep mountain slopes. Human sig-
(1) "The Great Alaska Earthquake of 1964:
Hydrology." Committee on the Alaska Earth¬
quake of the Division of Earth Sciences, Na¬
tional Research Council, U.S.A., 1968. Text,
441 pp. illus.; with portfolio of 7 charts. $19.75.
(Pub. 1603). Available from Printing & Pub-
blishing Office, National Academy of Scien¬
ces, 2101 Constitution Ave., N.W., Washington,
D.C. 20418, U.S.A.
Awesome and little
understood
subterranean forces,
straining at the
earth's crust, erupted
on March 27, 1964
to spread a 500 mile
path of destruction
through Alaska the
worst earthquake in
North America since
1899. The main
street of Anchorage
(photo left) shows
the capricious nature
of the earthquake:
the right side is a
shambles, the left
side remains intact.
In places, buildings
and pavements
dropped 30 feet.
Photo right shows
pattern of earth
fissures in residential
area. In background
are ruins of a new
but unoccupied
apartment building.
Photo © Gene Daniels Rapho, Paris

nificance, however, lies in the less
spectacular: in the compaction of
underground reservoirs, causing dimin-;
ution of community water supplies;
in the hazard of landslides in valleys
once filled by glaciers but now oc¬
cupied by man; and in the damage
to lake shores and lake facilities.
This earthquake was the first such
event known to have affected water
levels in wells, aquifers (underground
water beds), and rivers across a con¬
tinent indeed, across several contin¬
ents.' - Fluctuations in water level were
recorded in more than 700 wells in
Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, and
North America. Seismic seiches (sud¬
den oscillations of the water levels
in lakes and streams) were recorded
at more than 850 gauging stations in
Australia and North America; nearly
half of these latter occurrences were
along the U.S. Gulf Coast. (This fact,
the report said, suggests that a local
earthquake along the Gulf Coast might
cause more damage than one of the
same magnitude anywhere else in the
conterminous United States.)
Permanent changes in water level
were observed and measured in many
wells. Such effects have been sus¬
pected after previous earthquakes, but
now for the first time the changes
have been. carefully documented.
Generally the amount of the change
was found to depend on the total input
of energy at the well site. Some wells
in Alaska increased in level as much
as five feet or decreased as much as
fifteen feet; permanent changes out¬
side Alaska are measured in hundredths
of a foot. Not all wells in any one
region were affected to the same
extent, however. This variation in
response has been fairly clearly related
in some cases to porosity changes
and compaction of aquifers in un¬
consolidated sediments.
The earthquake altered stream vol¬
ume and water quality in places. It
also brought down at least a year's
expected quota of snow avalanches
and a decade's quota of rockslides on
to glaciers. Some 51 rock avalanches
covering areas as large as a mile
long and more than a quarter mile wide
plunged on to many glaciers. The
largest covered 4.4 square miles.
One the most spectacular (and most
accessible for study) occurred on
Sherman Glacier, 170 miles south-east
of Anchorage and only seven miles
from the Cordova, Alaska airport.
Here, at least 13 million cubic yards
of rock from two mountains fell on to
the glacier, covering three square miles
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo © Marshall Lockman - Rapho

This stranded fishing boat, below, was swept
onto the beach by a tsunami (seismic sea
wave) created by the Alaska earthquake.
Sometimes 30 feet high and travelling at
100 miles an hour, tsunamis surged ashore to
batter coastal areas, flood towns and wreck
port installations. The rugged beauty of the
far north is captured in photo right of a
moose making its way across an Alaskan lake.
Photo © Time-Life
ALASKAN EARTHQUAKE (Continued)
of its surface with a layer of mixed
rock debris and ice three to ten feet
deep. That such a massive slide
spread on to a glacier where nobody
lives, notes the report, was a lucky
accident.
An intensive study of this slide has
been made, and a long-term study
of its future effects on the glacier has
been started. Already, it is clear, the
shielding effect of the debris has
changed the glacier from one shrinking
in volume each year to one growing
markedly in size. ,
The most startling aspect of the be¬
haviour of avalanches triggered by the
earthquake is probably their surprising¬
ly great trajectory over long gentle
slopes and even up reverse slopes as
high as 490 feet. To explain the
mechanics of sliding in these long
trajectories, a novel theory has been
proposed: that much of the motion
took place over a cushion of com¬
pressed air trapped beneath the mass
of rock and ice that came down. Al¬
though the scientific verdict is not
yet complete on this theory, it could

íl
Photo USIS
Avalanches racing uphill on cushions of air
explain why relatively soft surface
snow was buried intact under the
blanket and why some low bushes
survived.
A possible alternative theory is lubri¬
cation on snow and ice. This is
supported by the fact that the long
avalanche paths were over glaciers
and that at the time of the earthquake
snow covered the areas of the slides.
In summarizing the effect of the
earthquake on glaciers, the report notes
that a negative conclusion is perhaps
the most significant one. The enigma
of rapid glacial surges, which occur
only occasionally and during which
glaciers move forward at rates of 10
to 150 feet a day, is still unsolved:
but the Alaska earthquake has seeming¬
ly eliminated the "earthquake advance"
theory which for years held that vast
snow avalanches in the upper regions
of a glacier during an earthquake
caused changes in the glacier's mass
balance, making it surge ahead for a
few months.
Snow was abundant in southern
Alaska on the day of the earthquake,
but surprisingly few snow avalanches
were caused, and no significant in¬
crease in glacier surges has followed
in the critical areas, nor can any be
detected in the making. Nevertheless,
surges have gone on apace in random
fashion since 1964.
Glacier fronts and ice-dammed lakes
have shown surprisingly few immediate
effects. The 25 tidal glaciers entering
the sea near the earthquake's epicenter
were "unperturbed." How little we
actually know, says the report, is
shown by the simple fact that the
immediate effects on glaciers after the
earthquake were far fewer and less
conspicuous than had been expected.
All in all, the report notes, the
hydrological effects of the earthquake
were more a threat to the Alaska eco¬
nomy and to comfort than to lives.
If the earthquake had been in a centre
of broad-valley agriculture as in Cali¬
fornia or in an area of industrial con¬
centration, the hydrological damage
could have been a hundredfold greater.
The report suggests that a scientific
task force be readied by an agency
of the U. S. government to gather
data and to make immediate studies
within hours of the next major earth¬
quake in the United States, and that
a number of types of recording instru¬
ments be installed now in quake-prone
areas to assist such studies. Some
of these instruments, such as hydro-
seismic recorders in test wells and
precise level gauges on lakes, might,
the report observes, foretell an im¬
pending earthquake.
Another suggestion is that the fore¬
casting of avalanches be extended to
all seismically active valley areas and
that signs showing danger levels for
the day, similar to those warning of
forest fire hazard, be posted on all
major approaches to the areas.
Some of the major lessons to be
drawn are those of zoning: which areas
people should not inhabit (such as
within two miles of an avalanche area)
and where to build with caution, pro¬
tection, or strength. It is foolhardy. OC
the report states, to locate dwellings ^**
less than 10 feet above a large lake
in a quake-prone area.
