TOWARDS
by Alexander Corbovsky
I
28
.XTREMIST, passive, in¬
different to everything, idealistic, eager
to serve society, sceptical, cynical.
These are only a few of the conflicting
terms used to describe the youth of
today, often backed up by the results
of public opinion polls. Little wonder
then that it is claimed that youth as a
separate entity simply do not exist.
Just how true is this last statement?
Or to put it another way, are the
horizontal ties that link young people
to their own age group stronger than
the vertical ties linking them with the
older generations?
In former society the vertical ties
were certainly stronger. The son of
an aristocrat became an aristocrat like
his father, the son of a clerk was a
clerk in embryo from the day he was
born, and there was little chance of
escaping this socîal and often self-
imposed hierarchy.
If things are different today, and
if there is a feeling of solidarity among
young people often transcending
national, religious and social barriers,
it is the result of a long process that
has gone on for generations. The
trend really began when increasing
numbers of young people sought
independence from their parents at
an earlier age, leaving home and
striking out on their own. It has
culminated with the present movement
that has gone beyond individual protest
against the family to the organized
revolts we are witnessing today.
To understand what lies behind
these revolts we must not overlook the
changes that have taken place in what
we can call "the social ideal."
Whereas in the past what counted
most for young people were the
material things in life, new values have
taken on greater importance. Thus
many young people now prefer creative
careers to those that pay more but
offer less scope for creativity.
A recent poll of almost 3,000 students
in Rostov-on-Don brought this out
clearly. Asked to indicate why they
had chosen their particular career for
study the vast majority answered:
ALEXANDER GORBOVSKY of the U.S.S.R. is
a research sociologist at the Moscow Institute
of the World Workers Movement, where he
heads a research group of scholars now
studying the psychological characteristics of
intellectuals. This study will be part of a
broad Soviet enquiry concerning the future
of intellectuals. Alexander Gorbovsky has
written widely on sociological and historical
questions.
"Because it's creative." Only 11
students replied, "Because I will earn
more money." This attitude is not
limited to students but reflects the
thinking of Soviet youth in general, as
other surveys have borne out. Similar
findings have been made in many
other countries.
Many sociologists feel that there
is now not just a gap or even a
yawning gulf between the generations
but open antagonism and hostility.
The connexion between the revolt of
young intellectuals against the rule
of material values and the much talked
of "conflict of generations" is not hard
to find: we see it wherever the older
generation clings to the ideals and
values the younger generations flatly
reject.
There is a growing conviction among
young people that money can't buy
everything and that money isn't the
only worthwhile thing in life. The
Beatles' song, "She's Leaving Home,"
makes this point in the story of the
girl who runs away from home while
her parents can't figure out why since
they "gave her everything money
could buy."
L,.OOKED at from this angle
the student unrest and the revolt
against the older generation, the
appearance of the beatniks, the
hippies, the provos and other protest
groups, would seem to be part of a
single process; the change in the
existing system of values. But while
older folks see this change as a slow,
gradual affair young people see no
reason for waiting and their impatience
is often expressed in explosive, violent
form. The whys and wherefores of this
are both "objective" and "subjective."
Let us look first at the objective
causes. All the countries hit by
student unrest in the past year have
one thing in common: first, a
concentration of jobs and power in
the hands of older folk while young
people often have neither; second,
little or no voice by youth in civic and
social affairs.
The technological revolution and the
advent of automation have given rise
to what sociologists term "factory
depopulation." A young man stepping
out into the world often finds that
there is no job for him. Although new
jobs are being created all the time
there are not enough to meet the
demands of the many who want to
start work. And even if many
employers eagerly welcome the hiring
of young people, it is youth who make
up the biggest percentage of unem¬
ployed today.
Youth also want a real voice in
political life. In many countries the
voting age is twenty-one (1). This
tradition goes back to the days of
King Arthur and Richard the Lion Heart
when knights were dubbed at the age
of twenty-one. But political maturity
has nothing to do with knighthood,
and this ancient tradition still deprives
countless young people from voting
in elections.
As for the making of laws and the
drawing up of national or local legisla¬
tion, the position of youth is even
worse. Age and a host of other
qualifications are such for would-be
members of parliament that young
people are virtually barred from
becoming members in many countries.
Since young men and women now
make up a quarter of the world's
population why shouldn't they be
better represented in legislative bodies
and allowed to decide too on their
country's affairs, not least of all in
matters relating to youth questions?
In most countries" a person must be
at least 25 years old to run for a seat
in parliament and 30-35 to qualify
for election to the Senate.
In the U.S.S.R. the minimum age for
members of local legislatures, the
legislative bodies of the different
republics and the nation (Supreme
Soviet) is respectively 18, 21 and 25.
There is now a proposal that 30 to
35 per cent of local Soviets should
be made up of deputies in the
18-30 age group since almost half the
population of the Soviet Union is under
the age of 30.
The second or subjective reasons
for youth's impatience with things as
they are have to do with some of the
psychological characteristics common
to youth generally. More than
2,000 years ago Aristotle wrote:
"All their mistakes arise from the
fact that they exaggerate everything
they do and that they do it with
passion. All they do is done to
excess: they love to excess and hate
to excess, and the same with all other
things." In the light of much that is
going on in the world these words are
(1) Exceptions are Brazil, Israel, Uruguay
and the U.S.S.R. where the voting age is 18,
and Japan and Switzerland where it is 20.

A NEW KIND OF INVOLVEMENT
perhaps truer today than when the
great Greek philosopher expressed
them two millennia ago.
But the emotional exuberance of
youth has both a positive and negative
aspect: "black" is not just black, it is
"the blackest"; "bright" looks "radiant
bright". That is why both positive
and negative situations provoke such
strong reactions on the part of young
people.
Soviet youth are no exception here.
If they accept as their own the overall
values of the society they live in, they
vigorously reject everything they think
is wrong, obsolete and bureaucratic.
They are much more vehement than
their elders in the things they disagree
about, and the more educated they are
the more critical they become. One
survey carried out in a town in the
Sverdlovsk region revealed that
people who had had a higher education
were five times more critical than
those who had not.
This of course does not mean that
increasing the number of educated
people automatically builds up a
stronger negative element in society.
Education raises the intellectual level
of society as a whole and makes
people want higher standards and
expect more from one another.
Young intellectuals adopt a highly
critical attitude not only towards their
environment; they are also their own
severest critics. To the question
asked by Soviet sociologists, "Do you
like your generation?", the highest
proportion of negative answers came
from young intellectuals.
IHE problems and difficult¬
ies that young people come up against
are partly responsible for this attitude.
One such major problem is access to
higher education. In the U.S.S.R.
higher education is free, and almost
all students receive study grants.
Higher education has become so
popular that Soviet colleges and
universities are literally besieged each
year by many thousands of young
applicants.
Between 60 and 80 per cent of the
students graduating from secondary
schools In Soviet cities try to enrol in
a university or other institute of higher
education. In some faculties as many
as 10 to 15 applicants compete for
each vacancy. But as a rule only one
out of three candidates can be
accepted. The remaining two-thirds
must resort to other kinds of study or
try again the following year.
Surveys carried out in Novosibirsk
(only 25 miles from Akademgorodok,
the "Science City" of Siberia) show
that a good half of all the students
leaving secondary school want to be
doctors, engineers or scientists, or
wish to study for other intellectual
professions. Careers in agriculture
and the service industries are far down
on the list of popular trades and
professions.
Even when a student is lucky
enough to gain admission to one of
the universities other disappointments
may well be in store for him (or her).
An extensive survey recently made at
the university, the teacher training
college and the medical college in
Rostov-on-Don revealed that one
student in eight was unhappy with his
chosen course of study. Despite this,
most of these students do not switch
to another field and will eventually
wind up working in a profession they
have little enthusiasm for.
When graduates of the technical
institutes in Leningrad were questioned
about their future plans it was found
that four out of five of the young men
and women polled wanted to go into
research or creative design work. But
everybody, obviously, cannot become
a research worker or a creative
designer, and many of these young
people are in for a big disappointment.
The ardour for a better education
manifests itself in a variety of ways.
At. a number of Moscow industrial
complexes a major reason for the
migration of young workers is not the
pay (17 per cent of those polled) but
the lack of adequate conditions for
raising their cultural and technical
level (26 per cent). Furthermore,
75 per cent of rural youth from the
Oryol and Kurgan regions want to
leave villages for towns in order to
continue their general education.
The real problem, then, is how to
relate young people's aspirations to
the actual possibilities as well as to
the interests of society. The gap
between the two is naturally the cause
of much discontent.
But as we have noted earlier, the
exuberance of youth finds its outlet
not only in negative reactions. When
young people become enthusiastic
about an idea they go all out for it,
too. This is exactly what happened in
the case of the virgin lands in
Kazakhstan as well as in Siberia and
the far north.
A survey carried out in Leningrad
not long ago revealed an amazing
fact: one out of every five young
people in that modern, industrial
metropolis was quite prepared to
abandon "the ease and comfort of city
life at the prospect of adventure and
pioneering work in the frozen north,
the isolated tundras of Siberia and
other remote areas of the Soviet Union.
A. _ few years ago a call went
out for volunteers to help build a rail¬
way line from Abakan to Taishet in
Siberia. Of the 35,000 persons who
responded to this call, 26,000 were
young people 20 years of age or under.
Despite the horrible climate and the
harsh working conditions the volunteers
pushed the railway line through the
Sayani mountains, across taiga and
marshland, and over the turbulent
rivers and waterways that cut across
their path, transforming what had at
first seemed a wild dream into an
accomplished fact carried out with
gusto and enthusiasm. A similar res¬
ponse came when a call was issued to
help build the Bratsk power station,
also in Siberia.
Thus we see that the vitality of youth
can find expression either in an
explosion of discontent or an explosion
of enthusiasm. The answer to many
of the problems now facing a large
number of countries would seem to lie
in a dual approach: on the one hand,
to see to it that the causes making for
discontent among young people are
reduced, if not eliminated; on the other
hand, to see to it that new opportuni¬
ties are opened for young men and
women so that they can realize their
aspirations by putting their natural
enthusiasm to constructive use.
Experience has shown, not only in
the U.S.S.R. but in every corner of the
globe, that if given half a chance and
the trust and respect they ask for and
deserve young people everywhere
come through with flying colours.
They have amply shown that they can
think for themselves, act courageously,
efficiently and with vigour. What they
need is to be given the chance. Is it
not true that everywhere where the
chance has been opened up to them
they have taken the lead in new
branches of science, engineering,
production and industry? What are
we waiting for?
2!
