THE FORBIDDEN DIALOGUE
T,J HE profoundest, most com¬
pelling impulses of South African
society have always been, and still
are, toward amalgamation. This is
perhaps the fact least frequently noted
about South Africa even by those most
opposed to the doctrine of apartheid;
but it is a fact which I think ought to
be set down straightaway not only
because it is true and evidence can be
adduced to support it, but because a
great deal of the legislative programme
of the Nationalist Party Government
since 1949 cannot be properly under¬
stood without taking this fact into
account.
It has also become fashionable in
writing about South Africa to empha¬
size the incompatibility of black and
white interests; yet left to their own
devices the races have always tended
to move closer, albeit unconsciously,
toward . some form of integration.
Surely the most glaring proof of this
fact lies in the economic sphere; but
less obvious is a similar impulse at
work in the social sphere, which,
however denied and deeply buried,
continues to reaffirm itself and to agi¬
tate toward complete expression.
That the blacks suffer untold hard¬
ships as a price for the maintenance
of the policy of apartheid is a fact
that cannot be denied even by the
proponents of apartheid.
What is not always noted is that,
though economically exploitative as
a ruling class, the whites are also
subject to certain very real deprivations
as a result of their determination to
live by a policy which would seem
to all reasonable men not only unrealis¬
tic but insane.
To say the very least, South African
whites are the most culturally deprived
community in Africa. Emotionally they
are just as stunted.
They not only grow up denying their
innermost dreams, they also learn to
do without some of the best works of
modern world culture (in literature,
music, painting and intellectual
discourse) either because such works
are considered subversive, or because
traffic in culture with the outside world
is rendered almost impossible by the
maintenance of the policy of apartheid.
It must be remembered that a great
number of people active in the cultural
area are either non-white or white
people strongly opposed to a doctrine
of apartheid. Thus the white commu¬
nity in South Africa is becoming almost
as isolated in its privileged position as
are the blacks without privileges; for
LEWIS NKOSI of South Africa was exiled
by the South African Government in 1960.
He is now consulting editor of "The New
African", published in London.
not only must the blacks not see Harry
Belafonte with a white girl in his arms
in "Island in the Sun" but the whites
must not see Tony Curtis chained to
Sidney Poitier in the film, "The Defiant
Ones".
Indeed, a great number of mod¬
ern works of the best kind in the
post-war cinema are kept out of the
Republic of South Africa. The banning
of books and plays thought to be con¬
troversial is too well-known to need
reiteration. Under these circumstances
it would be surprising if the growth of
an indigenous South African culture
was not hampered and it would be
surprising indeed if the fostering of
standards on a par with the rest of the
world was not made almost impossible.
It seems to me that both black
and white writers are severely impo¬
verished by the limitations as well as
the schism existing in South African
national life.
For a black writer too much of his
emotional response is absorbed into
formulating his attitude toward apart¬
heid or finding his place in the revo¬
lutionary struggle; no matter where he
goes later on and no matter how bored
he is with politics he cannot be free
of the tragic burden of South Africa
until that country has freed its
14,000,000 non-whites.
It seems to me that the
blacks in South Africa, no matter how
deprived economically or politically,
have a graver, far more responsible
attitude toward life. Where white
South Africans must manufacture
dreams and fantasies in order to
maintain some equilibrium between
what they really are and what they
think they are, the blacks have to
learn quite early to strip themselves
of every illusion.
We all know what happens to people
who cannot face up to the reality of
their lives, who must live by evasions
and fantasies; a greater burden is
placed on writers or any other kind of
artist who belongs to such a commun¬
ity. Before they go on to create
anything of value they must make an
extraordinary effort to unlearn every¬
thing they have been taught.
In South Africa, they must, for
instance unlearn what they are taught
in schools: that the whites, from their
forefathers to the present generation,
are all heroes, that the whites have the
monopoly on moral wisdom and intel¬
lectual enterprise; the pain and the
anguish which attends the creative
efforts of Afrikaans writers at the mo¬
ment is not a matter for cynical amuse¬
ment. It is an agony of creative artists
who must break through a sealed
by Lewis Nkosi
cocoon in order to see the world in its
variousness or even to say something
remotely relevant to their country.
Black writers do not have to make
any comparable moral choice; they do
not have to choose to oppose a system
which is patently contrary to all ob¬
servable reality; their colour makes the
choice for them; what they have to do
is learn to survive the system.
There are times when an affirmation
of certain traditional African values
proves exasperatingly difficult for
black writers since most of them are
reacting to an ideology which asserts
again and again that black and white
people are irreconcilably different;
that the African mind cannot grasp
certain nuances of European thought;
and, concluding . from the foregoing,
that apartheid is justifiable, indeed,
the only realistic policy to follow.
The result has been that black
intellectuals in South Africa have had
to bend over backwards to prove that
they can not only master the modes
of European thought but that they can
beat the South African whites at their
own game.
Urban African music seems to me
to have provided the only example of
what South Africa can offer culturally
if she were left to develop in a natural
direction.
Music, because it is non-literal, is
not subject to the same limitations as
literature; it is hardly banned; also it
is less self-conscious in the modes
it adopts to express the agony of the
South African situation. The result
has been that popular urban African
music has provided a glaring paradigm
of what is happening to the under¬
ground life of the nation.
The music is predominantly African,
which is as it should be, considering
the dominant numbers of Africans in
the country; but it is also eclectic; it
provides a moving illustration of cultur¬
al diffusion in that part of the
continent which offers us the best
laboratory for the marriage of African
and European techniques and for the
coming together of European and Afri¬
can modes of expression.
While black literature from the
Republic offers us glimpses into an
appalling situation of rare brutality and
anguish, the music not only shows
us this but goes further to affirm what
we should have known all along; that
the oppressed in South Africa also
display an amazing form of resilience,
emotional certitude and optimism. On
the other hand, apartheid deprives AQ
white South Africans of any real parti- Qjy
cipation in such robust forms of cultu¬
ral expression.
March 1967
