Canaletto's paintings helped rebuild shattered
by Jerzy Hryniewiecki
48
IHE first of Warsaw's citizens who returned to the
city in January 1945 found nothing but a vague trace of its
former outlines visible amid the rubble a cemetery for hundreds
of thousands. A few pockmarked buildings and an area on the
right bank of the Vistula alone had escaped the holocaust Apart
from its ruins, nothing remained of Warsaw... except its name.
Warsaw's reconstruction was soon being hotly debated by
town planners and architects. Some had Utopian visions of a
futuristic city. Many saw a unique opportunity to sweep away
the past and the city's former shortcomings and to create an
entirely new Warsaw. But the people of Warsaw had no time
to wait. Swarming over the ruins they began to rebuild the city
themselves.
In time a new city emerged that reflected the beauty of its
historic past while meeting the needs of 20th century life. A
dynamic schooi of town planning was born. Medieval squares
were recreated and 17th century houses rebuilt, but behind their
façades were dwellings with every modern convenience. Palaces
and mansions were restored as cultural and administrative centres.
The Gothic cathedral was rebuilt with its original stones. The
city's new opera house was given the same classical façade as
its predecessor, but behind it is a modern concert and operatic
theatre ranking among the best equipped in Europe. New and
broader bridges now span the Vistula on the piles of those that
were destroyed.
But Warsaw's architects had recourse to a most unusual pro¬
cedure in reconstituting the city's historic buildings: the celebrated
paintings of Warsaw by the 18th century artist Canaletto.
To the people of Poland the name Canaletto evokes Warsaw
not Venice. In 1767, Bernardo Belotto, better known as Canaletto
the Younger (not to be confused with his uncle Antonio Canal the
famous Canaletto of Venice scenes) arrived in Warsaw. He fell
in love with the city and remained there until his death in 1780,
leaving behind him a series of paintings of Poland's capital of
unrivalled fidelity: living street scenes with a wealth of detail of
houses, churches, public buildings and grandiose panoramic views.
Canaletto's paintings have been called "a fascinating full-colour
film of Warsaw's life in the 18th century." He always painted a
building with adjoining ones, with its square or street filled with
people, teams of horses and carriages, and the bustling life of
the city about it.
Warsaw's architects made huge enlargements of the 25 cele¬
brated townscapes by Canaletto in the city's national museum.
They studied and recorded the details painted by Canaletto and,
embodying them into the reconstructed monuments, churches and
buildings, thus restored to Warsaw the true image of its ancient
past.
March 1961
IERZY HRYNIEWIECKI is professor of architecture
at the University of Warsaw.


Left, panoramic view of 18th century
Warsaw painted by Canaletto the
Younger; below, detail of painting
showing church at centre of skyline.
Warsaw's architects used Canaletto's
paintings as guides in reconstructing
the city's ancient buildings after
their destruction in World War II.
From "Canaletto", Warsaw. 1959

Warsaw
Below, Warsaw's Krakowskie
Przedmiescie Street with the Holy
Cross Church after post-war
reconstruction. Below left, the
street as Canaletto painted it
200 years ago, when it was already
one of Warsaw's busy thoroughfares.
Photo © Janusz Smorgorzewskj. Wars:
