by Basil Davidson
THE REDISCOVERY
OF AFRICA
66
I S the Negro a man without
a past? Not many years have passed
since the outside world took an
affirmative answer more or less for
granted.
But now, in the wake of the colonial
hurricane, there emerges a new
approach to the whole question. It is
increasingly realized that the cultural
contributions of African peoples to the
general history and progress of man¬
kind were not limited to interesting
works of art, whether in wood or ivory
or in bronze or gold, but compre¬
hended a wide range of political and
social achievements that were no less
important or remarkable because they
were ignored or little known.
It is seen, indeed, that these works
of art that so many Asians and Amer¬
icans and Europeans have admired
were not the more or less mysterious
products of a social vacuum, but, on
the contrary, the ornament and attri¬
bute of early African civilizations.
These middle years of the 20th
century may be remembered for many
troubles and upheavals, and for risks
and dangers greater than any that
humanity had ever run before: on the
side of good they will also be remem¬
bered as the central years of African
emancipation. And they mean, of
course, much more than a purely
political emancipation; they mean, as
well, an intellectual and moral eman¬
cipation, a breaking down of obstacles
that have stood between Africans and
a sense of full equality with the rest
of the world, and of barriers that have
helped to isolate these African peoples
from the general family of man.
Homo sapiens may first have seen
the light in central or east Africa. For
some thirty years now, Africa has
yielded discovery after discovery
revolutionizing earlier concepts of the
remote origins of humanity.
What now becomes possible is to
sketch the outline of the comparatively
recent pre-history and history of large
regions of Africa: the record, that is,
of the pre-medieval and medieval
centuries that came immediately before
European contact and penetration.
It is this that is really new this
assertion that Africans went through
successive, distinctive, and knowable
phases of growth and development in
BASIL DAVIDSON, British author and jour¬
nalist, has written widely on African affairs.
the fifteen or twenty centuries before
the European records of Africa became
frequent and various. Reassessment
of the African past, in the sense that I
have spoken of, is essentially the
unravelling and writing of the history
of the African Metal Age In the lands
that lie to the south of the Sahara
desert.
Late Stone Age peoples on the
lower reaches of the Nile, and in
nearby regions that were much more
fertile then, thrust their way into
history in about 3000 B.C., when the
"first dynasty" of the Pharoahs took
power in the delta of the Nile. This
great forward step in northernmost
Africa, interwoven with the comparable
achievements of peoples in the Near
East and the Mediterranean, acted and
reacted as the centuries went by on
lands to the south and west.
Its influence spread southward up
the Nile and there, reacting on the
peoples that it found, stimulated and
helped to create the civilization of
Kush of that renowned kingdom of
Napate and Meroe whose kings and
queens would rule in more or less
continuous succession for a thousand
years after about 800 B.C.
Its influence also spread westward
along the southern shores of the Medi¬
terranean: Phoenician Carthage, found¬
ed in the ninth century B.C., helped
to stimulate and create the Libyco-
Berber civilizations of northern Africa.
And, thirdly, these ancient civilizations
of the Near East and of Egypt pro¬
duced in the southernmost tip of
Arabia that Arabia of the Queen of
Sheba whom Solomon knew and loved
another region of high civilization;
and from southern Arabia this civiliz¬
ation of antiquity despatched its
settlers and traders and warriors
across the Red Sea into the Horn of
Africa, and its mariners and colonists
down the long east coast of Africa.
These pioneers and their mastery
of metal-working and of other material
techniques did not move into a void.
They moved into a land that was
peopled then, if thinly, by several
branches of the human family to which
anthropologists have awarded the
names of Bushman, Negrillo, Hottentot,
Negro, and Hamite.
Now the origins of these peoples of
continental Africa are obscure and
confused. They too, apparently, had
moved southward across the continent,
coming perhaps from outside it, In
centuries beyond calculation.
Perhaps the Hottentots the natives
whom the first Dutch settlers would
find at the Cape of Good Hope in
1652 arrived some time after about
5000 B.C.but nothing of this is
clearly known the peoples whom we
know as Negro and Hamite began to
emerge, multiply, and follow the earlier
migrants in a generally southward
direction.
As they wandered across the con¬
tinent these later peoples, often
mingling with earlier peoples whom
they found, worked out new ways of
living. They invented tropical agri¬
culture. They began to settle and
raise new crops. They learned how
to smelt natural copper and make
primitive tools and weapons of this
metal.
AIT a time that was shortly
before or after the beginning of the
Christian era these peoples of the sou¬
thern continent began to mine and
smelt iron, and to make more efficient
tools and weapons; and with this they
acquired a new and, as it would prove,
revolutionary control over the material
environment in which they lived. It is
from about this time from about
2,000 years ago that the peoples of
the continental heart of Africa begin
to multiply and form their present
major groupings.
It is from then, as it seems, that the
largest of all of Africa's existing human
groups begins to spread into and
populate the empty or near-empty
forests and savannahs. This group
is called the Bantu; but the term has
little or no racial significance, being a
linguistic term for all these many
peoples who speak a closely related
language.
Racially the Bantu are the product
of intermingling over long periods of
time between Negro and Hamite and
Bushman and Hottentot. Physically,
therefore, they vary greatly among
themselves; but all their languages go
back, more or less obviously, to a
common root. We do not know the
origins of this root.
Thus it is the last 2,000 years, more
or less, that emerge as the formative
period of most of the peoples of conti¬
nental Africa. This is the period of
their Iron Age. Some authorities
prefer to call this their Metal or Pal-
aeometallic Age, because, although
knowledge of ferrous metallurgy was

the decisive influence, African peoples
also knew the working of several
other minerals, including gold and
copper and tin. In time, too, some
of them worked extensively in brass
and bronze; but they never knew, as
ancient Asia and Europe had known,
a Bronze Age that made a long dis¬
tinctive period of development before
their Iron Age.
Now it is in studying this Metal Age
or, more narrowly, the fifteen or
sixteen centuries before European
contact along the coast that present
research is principally and dramatically
engaged. Advancing along three dif¬
ferent but related lines, history and
archaeology and anthropology now
begin to bring their findings together
and to offer a coherent picture that
was invisible only a handful of years
ago.
New translations are being projected
or prepared of several classic works,
such as the first century A.D. Periplus
of the Erythraean Sea (in Britain) and
the 16th century writings on the
Western Sudan of Leo Africanus (in
France). The Central African Ar¬
chives (of the Federation of Central
Africa) is collaborating with Arquivo
Histórico de Mozambique in the editing
and publication of some 15,000 hitherto
unpublished documents from the librar¬
ies of Goa, Lisbon, and the Vatican;
and these should throw much new light
on early European contacts.
Joseph Needham, in his monumental
study of the history of science in
China, has meanwhile devoted part of
his sixth volume to Chinese maritime
technology, and, in so doing, has
shown how great was the Chinese
contribution to that Indian Ocean trade
which had its western terminals on the
East African coast.
|N the past few years,
African archaeology has had Important
successes. Mauny and Thomassey
have gone far towards completing the
excavation of the ancient city of Kumbi
Saleh, probable site of the capital of
medieval Ghana. J. P. Lebeuf and An¬
nie Masson-Detourbet have uncovered
the remarkable bronze-using civiliza¬
tion of the Sao people of early medie¬
val Chad. Jean Vercoutter, in the Su¬
dan, has completed a preliminary list
of sites of the imposing civilization of
Kush. Other French specialists have
continued the investigation of early
Ethiopia.
In East Africa, Gevase Mathew and
G.S.P. Freeman-Grenville have listed
ancient and medieval sites on the
coast of Kenya and Tanzania, while
J.S. Kirkman has excavated the late
medieval ruins of Gedi, near the
Kenyan port of Malindi. Further to
the north, in Somaliland, Enrico Cerulli
and Vinigi Grottanelli have thrown
important light on early settlements
and migrations on the coast and coast¬
al islands.
Coins and durable imports such as
china offer hopeful means of dating
these many stone ruins of the coast
and interior. "I have never in my
life," remarked Sir Mortimer Wheeler,
the British archaeologist, after a fort
night's visit to Tanganyika in 1955,
"seen so much broken china as
I have seen in the past fortnight
along the coast here and the Kilwa
Islands: literally, fragments of Chinese
porcelain by the shovelful... In fact, I
think it is fair to say that as far as the
Middle Ages are concerned, from the
tenth century onwards, the burled
history of Tanganyika is written in
Chinese porcelain."
To the southward there is fresh effort
at uncovering the story of another
great complex of stone ruins forts and
huts and vast hillside terrace systems
that stretch over several thousands
of square miles in Southern Rhodesia
and neighbouring lands. Roger Sum¬
mers has lately completed an initial
survey of the stone ruins of Inyanga on
the Rhodesian-Mozambique border;
and now, with Keith R. Robinson, is
working on the foundations of the great
walls at Zimbabwe in the hope of find¬
ing out whether those tall ruins were
built on the site of a previous and more
humble culture, or whether the first
settlers were also those who built so
well In stone.
We are only at the beginning of this
search for the history of pre-medieval
and medieval Africa. Beyond the
barriers of ignorance we may glimpse
an historical landscape that is thick
with cities or strong stone settlements
and loud with the din of ports and
ocean-going shipping, that glitters with
old armies and the pomp of states and
empires and is restless with the rise
and fall of dynasties and powers. But
at present we can only glimpse at this.
This great task of unravelling the
African past remains, and must remain,
an international endeavour. Occa¬
sional conferences on African pre-his-
tory and history have proved, over the
past few years, how much can be
gained from the pooling of knowledge
and the wide discussion of problems.
They have stimulated public interest,
and helped to create an atmosphere
that is favourable to more intensive
research. It is to be hoped that they
are only the forerunners of many
others of their kind. To this end,
indeed, Unesco can powerfully con¬
tribute.
October 1959
EDITOR'S NOTE : Unesco Is now engaged,
in the preparation of a General History G J
of Africa which will take several years to \j f
complete. The History is being written under
the leadership of Prof. K. Onwuka Dike,
former vice-chancellor of the University of
Ibadan, Nigeria.
