Photo © Franclllon, Paris
WATER POLLUTION AND THE LAW
A.ILMOST every country in
the world has tried to meet the threats
of water pollution by means of legis¬
lative action. But passing laws does
not automatically bring the situation
under control. Unless legislation is
supported by a strong climate of public
opinion and unless adequate funds
and staff to enforce the regulations are
provided, the results are usually disap¬
pointing.
Because of the importance of legis¬
lative measures, both national and
international, increasing attention has
been directed toward this feature of
pollution abatement, in recent years,
the International Water Supply Assoc¬
iation has devoted much time to the
legal aspects of this problem. Simi¬
larly, the International Law Associa¬
tion, the International Association of
Legal Science and the International
Institute of Administrative Sciences
have taken up these questions.
Where watercourses have formed
the boundaries of, or crossed states,
agreements, conventions and treaties
have been entered into. Significant
examples are those between Belgium
and France, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia,
and Switzerland and Italy.
Experience in the joint international
management of watercourses is of
long standing and is sometimes effec¬
tive. But more often there have been
delays in taking action to maintain an
agreed quality of water acceptable to
all countries concerned. Among other
examples, this has occurred in the
case of international arrangements on
the Rhine and Lake Constance in Eur¬
ope, on the Great Lakes in North
America, and on the Rio Grande in
Central America.
Wherever population density is high
and hence pollution abatement calls
for constant vigilance, continuing
efforts will no doubt be made to estab¬
lish at least common criteria and stand¬
ards of water purity, and increasing
discussions are likely to take place on
the best ways of preserving the purity
of waters.
The history of national legislation
abounds with examples of declarations
of good intention and high aspiration,
but nowhere are these matched by
equally high standards of implementa
tion. Abatement of pollution has not
been at a standstill. On the contrary,
a great deal has been done, but not
enough and not fast enough.
The situation was summed up suc¬
cinctly a few years ago by a World
Health Organization expert committee
which declared: "Countries with severe
laws against pollution have not in fact
avoided the occurrence of widespread
pollution. One reason for this may be
that laws calling for no pollution at all
do not represent a practical policy and
therefore fail into disrepute. In a
world becoming rapidly urbanized and
industrialized, it is not possible to pre¬
serve rivers in their natural condition.
The law should aim at controlling pollu¬
tion."
In spite of such clear definitions of
the situation, countries, large and
small, under the lash of perfectionists
and opportunists, continue to pass acts
designed to recapture the pristine
purity of past eras. The record of such
legislation is far from gratifying as is __
pointed out by two important analyt- x7
ical studies published by the World *"
Health Organization.
