Photo © Emil Brunner Braunwald, Switzerland

THE WORLD'S GROWING WATER SHORTAGE
OiFUR need for water is constantly increasing. Though
it is difficult to calculate the exact amount, it is safe to say
that in 20 years' time the demand for water will be roughly
double.
Faced with such a situation it is obvious that we should
search as widely as possible and with every available means for
sources of fresh water that seem to be the least costly. But
where do these sources exist? Only a sustained and co-ordinat¬
ed programme of scientific observation and research in hydrology
will tell us the answer. This is the purpose of the International
Hydrological Decade, 1965-1975.
Underground water reserves are much larger those on the sur¬
face, but as they are unseen we tend to underestimate them. It
is vitally important that we make use of these underground
reserves, but never haphazardly. For example, where does the
water come from which we find in one or another of the under¬
ground water-bearing layers ('aquifers')? How does it move? How
is it renewed? And if this water is used, what effect will it have
on the discharge and future level of the water table? What are
the laws of hydrogeology? Despite the immense progress of
recent years, all these questions have still not been fully ans¬
wered.
A similar need for scientific research exists in the branch of
hydrology that deals with the quality of water. In nature, there is
no water like the pure water defined by chemists, made up of
only hydrogen and oxygen. River water, ground-water, and even
rainwater always contain other dissolved or suspended elements,
and these, even when present in small quantities, play an important
rôle.
In the case of irrigation farming, for instance, every drop of
water brings with it a little salt: the water evaporates, but the
salt remains and gradually poisons the soil and plants. In general,
we now know how to remedy this problem of salinity with the
help of leaching and drainage.
But many questions remain unanswered regarding the effect
of irrigation and drainage on the quality of ground-water, and the
possibility of maintaining the ground-water level below the zone
of the plant roots while bringing to the surface the water necessary
for irrigation.
What happens exactly in this thin layer of soil which preserves
the moisture necessary to plant life? What form liquid or
vapourdoes the water take in this zone? What forces act
on the water, depending on the kind of soil present? How long
will this life-giving moisture last?
Evaporation from the soil and transpiration from vegetation are
responsible for the direct return to the atmosphere of more than
half the water which falls on the land. How exactly do these
phenomena, which represent an enormous loss of resources,
occur? What part does a forest play in the water balance-sheet
of a given area? Does it act merely as a water-consuming
mechanism operating through the absorption and transpiration of
the trees thereby reducing the quantity of runoff which reaches
the riversor, on the contrary, does it result in a slow seepage
into the earth which can later be recovered in the form of
ground-water, while at the same time preventing erosion?
These are the kinds of problems which still have to be resolved:
the answers will only be found through a vast programme of
scientific research.
The International Hydrological Decade is such a programme. It
is making possible the global observation of hydrological events
the quantities of rain and snow that fall, the discharge of rivers
and underground reserves and a world-wide stocktaking of our
water resources. It is promoting scientific research in every
branch of hydrology: water run-off, soil moisture, evaporation,
movement of ground-water, the dynamics of lakes, estuaries and
deltas, the evolution of glaciers and the geochemistry of water.
It is a unique co-operative enterprise to provide the scientific
foundations for decisions that governments must take to meet
the world's growing need for water.
July-August 1964
MICHEL BATISSE
Head of the Division of Natural Resources
of Unesco's Dept. of the Advancement of Science

Palm trees seen In this
striking air view of the
Sahara have survived by
drawing nourishment from
underground water, one of
man's almost untapped
resources. First half mile
of the earth's crust Is
thought to contain about one
million cubic miles of water.
During long months the
lands of South Asia have
sweltered under the
searing heat. Now, as the
monsoon brings relief, a
young Indian woman joyfully
raises her face to greet
the first drops of rain.
Many efforts have been
made to find efficient and
economical ways of
converting salt water Into
fresh water, but the major
obstacle is still the cost
of the conversion process.
Below right, a giant
distillation plant on the
Persian Gulf. Research has
also been going on to
produce rain artificially.
Below, scientist produces
cloud of ice fog during
weather research
experiments in Yellowstone
Park, Wyoming (U.S.A.).
Photo USIS Photo © Paul Almasy, Far!
