Photo © Doeser, Netherlands

ERASMUS
universal thinker
of yesterday for today
by
Jean-Claude Margolin
W.
In the Great Market Square
of the new Rotterdam,
which rose from the ruins of
the Second World War,
stands the statue of Erasmus
reading (left). Wrought In copper
by Henry de Keyzer in 1622,
it replaced two earlier
statues of the great humanist,
one of polychromed stone
raised in 1557, the other a wooden
effigy placed In 1549 in front
of the house where Erasmus
was born 100 years earlier.
Below, a 16th century
engraving of Rotterdam, then
only a tiny township on the
River Rotte.
HAT a strange story we
have In the life of that nameless
child who was born In Rotterdam
in mysterious, if not shameful, circum¬
stances on the night of 27-28 October
in the year 1469 (or was 1466, 1467
or perhaps even 1468?). Yet in the
course of his lifetime he won the name
of Prince of Humanism and left a mark
so profound that for five centuries he
has deeply influenced Man's think¬
ing, an influence now being marked in
the Erasmus 500th Anniversary Year.
But in studying his influence, the
historian of philosophy has come to
realize that the case of Erasmus leaves
more questions unanswered than it
supplies real answers. This has clearly
JEAN-CLAUDE MARGOLIN of France is one
of the leading European authorities on Eras¬
mus. He is the author of eight major works
on the Dutch thinker, one of which his trans¬
lation and critical study of Erasmus's "De-
clamatio de Pueris Statim ac Liberaliter Ins-
tltuendis" won him in 1967 the Prix Langlols
of the Académie Française. He is now at
work on the second volume of a fully annotat¬
ed edition of the complete works of Erasmus,
undertaken by the Royal Netherlands Aca¬
demy of Sciences and Letters, and Is direct¬
ing the translation of Vol. VIII of the Corres¬
pondence of Erasmus for the Institute for the
Study of the Renaissance and Humanism, of
Brussels.
emerged from the recent seminars,
congresses, conferences and scholarly
publications which the Anniversary has
provoked from Basel to New York,
from Mons to Tours, from Brussels to
Rotterdam and Paris.
The fact Is that the author of In
Praise of Folly a book which, despite
its innumerable editions, translations
and printings, is better known for its
title than for its contents has achieved
fame and influenced the thinking of
individuals and nations through chan¬
nels not those generally thought
of as ensuring posthumous fame.
Erasmus was no leader of men, his
name is linked to no philosophical sys¬
tem, and if today much is made of
"Erasmism" or the "Erasmian spirit,"
the sense of these terms is at best
loose and subjective. Unlike Luther,
Zwingli or Calvin, he was not the foun¬
der of a religion; he escaped all forms
of persecution at a time when unrest,
civil and foreign wars were taking a
toll of his best friends, victims of their
religious faith or political involvement.
And while he produced a large body
of work, he did so in a language acces¬
sible only to scholars, Latin, and the
greater part of his writings is made up
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
.. , lU I K,> Il RtiDMM M
ROI I LR DAM A
Photo Netherlands Ministry of Education and Science

6
ERASMUS (Continued)
The life
of a wandering
scholar
of philological commentaries, annota¬
tions of the Bible, translations from
Greek into Latin, which in our time are
of immediate interest only to a hand¬
ful of scholars.
What Is it then that has given Eras¬
mus his immortal name and why is he
considered so modern that Unesco
feels justified in paying tribute to this
Dutch monk with an ill-chosen career
who during his life was not always
successful in dominating the particu¬
larly complex and seething period of
time stretching from the fringes of the
Middle Ages to the Renaissance?
Any attempts on the part of his
commentators to reduce him to a
system are defeated by the many-sided
aspects of the Rotterdam "philoso¬
pher". His mobility of mind, his richly
impressionable nature, his many con¬
tradictions and the hazards of his life
in which historical events played a part
that did not enter into his scheme of
things, place him beyond the standard
classifications found in encyclopedias.
For all that, I shall attempt to show
that in spite of his extreme individ¬
ualism, in spite of his being so pro¬
foundly a man of his time, and so dif¬
ferent from our own, we cannot help
recognizing in Erasmus a universal
thinker, standing high above his epoch
and free from the temptations and
snares of anti-humanistic nationalism,
whether viewed in terms of his own
16th century or our 20th century.
»'
y- y% %&>'
The illegitimate son of a priest from
Gouda (named Geert of Gerard) and
of the daughter of a physician from
Zevenbeque, he gained renown under
the Latinized name of Desiderius Eras¬
mus Roterodamus, which he assumed
after the death of his parents, thereby
immortalizing the little town on the
Rotte where he was born.
His first schooling was at Gouda
under Peter Winkel, then as a choris¬
ter at Utrecht and finally, at the age
of nine or ten, as a pupil of the famous
school attached to St. Lebwin's Church
at Deventer. His parents having died
of the plague, he was put in the care
of his uncles who dispossessed him
and sent him to Hertogenbosch to be
prepared for a monastic life in the
community of the Brethren of the Com¬
mon Life. Although he was to declare
later that he had wasted three or four
years of his life there, he was never¬
theless initiated into logic, dialectics,
the study of the Bible and, towards the
end, a grounding in humanities.
He was driven back to Gouda by the
plague and in 1487 entered the Augus-
tinian convent at Steyn where he was
ordained priest on April 25, 1492, the
very year Christopher Colombus
reached America. There he was able
to read the classics to his heart's con¬
tent, make a careful study of the
Italian humanist Lorenzo Valla's De
Elegantiis Latinae Linguae (Latin Ele¬
gances) and write poems in Latin.
These activities apparently suited
him better than monastic life, although
he formed a close friendship with Ser-
vatius Roger who was later to become
prior of the convent. Permission was
granted him to leave Steyn to become
Latin secretary to the bishop of Cam¬
brai, Henry of Bergen, who was soon
to consent to his going to Paris to
attend a course in theology.
In 1495, Erasmus did, in fact, enter
the "Collège de Montaigu" in the Latin
quarter of Paris, the "foul-smelling,
infested pauper's school" as he called
it and as Rabelais was to qualify it in
almost identical terms. Then, after a
short stay in Cambrai and in Holland
where he had already gained a repu¬
tation as an "orator" or "poet", that
is to say as a learned man, he returned
to the French capital where he eked
out a living giving rich pupils lessons
in grammar and literature.
One of these pupils was Lord Wil¬
liam Mountjoy who invited him over to
England at the end of 1499. He was
happy in England and the friendships
he formed amongst the most prominent
people there, while ensuring him the
material means he needed to satisfy
his love for learning, gave him the
opportunity for discovering his real
bent as a humanist and theologian.
Two English friends were to exercise
a profound influence on his thinking
and personal life. One was John Colet,
then professor of Theology at Oxford

and soon to become Dean of St. Paul's
Cathedral in London; the other was
Thomas More, his companion in work
and honest pleasures, future Chan¬
cellor and future martyr of the Tower
of London whom he praised as "a man
for all seasons," the famous formula
that the playwright, Robert Bolt, used
for the title of his play which was
recently staged in many countries the
world over.
Erasmus returned to the Continent
in 1500 and thereafter was to remain
true to the double purpose of his life:
the scholar who was soon to publish
the first edition of the Adagia (1500)
and the theologian whose Enchiridion
Militis Christiani, or Manual for a
Christian Soldier (1503) ¡s a bold plea
for the internal reform of the Church.
Until his death in Basel on July 12,
1536, he continued to lead the life of
a wandering Scholar, driven as he was
by motivations so diverse as the search
for a Patron, the study of a rare manu¬
script, flight from an area devastated by
war, the plague, sweating sickness or
much later subversive ideas, pro¬
posals from a printer wanting to secure
the exclusive rights to his literary
works, or the presence of the Emperor
at Aachen or Brussels.
So it came about that Erasmus of
Batavia (the Latin name for the Nether¬
lands) who had always professed deep
attachment to his small country, was
to become increasingly European and
Photos © Snark International
cosmopolitan. Remaining true to his
nature and to the ethical and
Christian purpose of his writings, he
was to discover his true vocation for
universality and receive consecration
as the first citizen of the Republic of
Letters which, in his mind, he always
identified with Christendom.
I think that this vocation for univer¬
sality which perhaps partly explains his
significance today, appears through¬
out his work as well as in his per¬
sonal behaviour. The man who proudly
proclaimed as his motto: "I make con¬
cessions to no one," but who was also
at the mercy of political and religious
antagonisms, ("I am a Guelph for the
Ghibellines and a Ghibelline for the
Guelphs") was neither an individualist
grimly clinging to his rights and prero¬
gatives nor a neutral or indifferent in¬
tellectual standing aloof from the gen¬
eral fray, as certain careless or dis¬
honest commentators have claimed.
He was uncompromising on princi¬
ples, but not on ways of applying them.
And to safeguard peace, that most pre¬
cious of all treasures, he would readily
have advised using manoeuvres like
those of Ulysses the Greek and Hector
of Troy, to avert the Trojan War, as
Jean Giraudoux imagined in his play
"La Guerre de Troie n'aura pas lieu".
This is what he himself tried to do
when Christendom was not yet divided
in two and he maintained courteous
relations with Martin Luther.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Far left, the only known full-face portrait
of Erasmus. A charcoal sketch,
It was made in 1520 by the famous
German painter and engraver,
Albrecht Dürer, who became friendly
with Erasmus while on a visit to Holland.
Most of the portraits of Erasmus were
painted by Hans Holbein (see back
cover) who also made several
drawings of Erasmus's hands, including
the one (left) of his right
hand holding a pen. A man of vast
learning, Erasmus had also a keen
humour as shown in the "doodles" (below)
which he made in the margins of
some of his manuscripts. The topmost of
these little faces is a self-caricature
of his own long-nosed profile.
Photo Netherlands Ministry of Education
and Science

ERASMUS (Continued)
Champion of the Spirit of Dissent
Today, when old university structures
and educational methods are being
seriously challenged in virtually every
country, when Vatican Council II has
set in motion inside and outside the
Catholic Church a wave of liberaliza¬
tion and a powerful movement toward
a new Oecumenism, when people
everywhere, through countless private
and public organizations, are voicing
their determination that the principles
of human rights be uncompromisingly
applied in all countries and clamour¬
ing for positive action to free mankind
from the paralyzing effects of greed
and narrow self-interest, mutual fear
and suspicion and hopeless despair,
how can we fail to respond to the
words of Erasmus, even If the problems
of his time were quite different from
those we face in our day?
T.
8
HIS master humanist, who
might fittingly be called the Tutor of
Europe, just as his friend Melanchthon
was appropriately named "Tutor of
Germany", proved to be a better edu¬
cational adviser than a teacher. Neither
his temperament nor his inclinations led
him to engage directly or persistently
in any specific educational activity.
But in his educational treatises, the
most important of which was De pueris
instituendis (On a liberal education for
children), he advocated active teach¬
ing methods based on children's emo¬
tional reactions and their intellectual
curiosity. In this method, dialogue
between teacher and pupil and
absolute respect for the freedom and
natural inclinations of the Individual
child constituted a complete break
with the "old-style" education based
on mechanical repetition of abstruse
formulas and fear of corporal punish¬
ment.
Erasmus proposed to the school¬
masters of his time and to the young
people for whom he wrote most of his
pedagogical treatises and works of
rhetoric a study plan (ratio studiorum)
in which the cultivation of the mind
was inseparable from a moral and
religious education.
But whatever reading material he
recommended to students whether
from pagan Greek or Roman antiquity,
the Gospel and the Church Fathers, or,
for those who were older and more
advanced, Hebrew and the Old Testa¬
ment his aim was to develop an open
mind devoid of dogmatism. He made
a selection of works from among the
best writers and proposed them for
study, but taught that subservience to
the ideas and style of any single writer
of the past, be it Cicero himself, was
always to be condemned.
He tried to inculcate this critical
spirit in his teachings, warning of the
dangers both of choosing one's
authors haphazardly and without pur¬
pose and of blindly imitating their
writings which can lead only to sterility
of the mind. His work, Ciceronianus
(On the best style) demonstrates not
only the keen and sarcastic wit he
excelled in but to what lengths of folly
the blind glorification of a man, a book
or a civilization can actually lead.
It is here that we find the originality
of Erasmus's humanism as an educator
and his universality as a man: a
humanism directly linked to his overall
conception of man in the world. When
he proclaims in a phrase that is central
to his thinking, "man is not born man,
but learns to be so", he is saying that
thanks to the educational process
which is embodied in the teacher who
teaches and the student who parti¬
cipates actively in this teaching ani¬
mal nature becomes human nature.
No other humanist has carried the
very conception of culture to such a
high degree of practical effectiveness
as has Erasmus, because to him the
"humanities" or to use an exact
translation of the Latin expression,
these "letters of humanity" which
make man more "human" are not
intended as mere ornaments of the
mind. It is in the community, in the
Church,, in Government that this
culture should find its proper use
because "Man does not live for him¬
self alone". "Nature," writes Erasmus,
"is a great power but reason is a
greater one."
We must not forget that he believed
human reason to have been created
by God as an integral part of His great
design, and that the contradictions
within the Erasmian concept of nature
sometimes good, sometimes inclin¬
ed towards evil, more often indifferent
are resolved in the philosophical
and theological dialectics on nature,
the main lines of which are given in
his treatise, De libero arbitrio (On free
will), published in 1524.
Several objections might be advanc¬
ed against the contention that Eras¬
mus's educational methods are either
modern or universally applicable
today. One in particular concerns the
use of Latin the only language the
Dutch humanist deemed worthy to be
taught or written (with the possible
exception of Greek, although Greek, to
be sure, was never seriously consid¬
ered as a universal language).
Latin was in fact understood and
spoken only by a very small minority
of his contemporaries those who
were socially and economically privi¬
leged by birth. And was it not for the
children of the richer classes that
Erasmus recommended the ideal
method of home tutoring and highly
individualized teaching?
When he spoke of a "liberal" educ¬
ation for children an expression he
played upon and exploited constantly
did he not actually have in mind the
education of Christian princes or the
sons of the aristocracy or of the upper
middle class? Who spoke Latin out¬
side the Universities, the chancelleries,
the law courts or the Church? Who
could read Erasmus in the original
and who for that matter can do so
today? Very few people, indeed, even
though in many countries today the
study of Latin is not confined to the
privileged rich.
I would reply that to this
objection every age and every civiliza¬
tion generates its own special form of
universality. The Renaissance and Eur¬
opean humanism had theirs. The most
effective arm at its disposal against
the contradictory movements of polit¬
ical nationalism and religious sectar¬
ianism wast the rediscovered culture
of antiquity, and the schoolmaster or
university professor was the natural
wielder of this arm.
The correspondence of the great
humanists of the time, the most emi¬
nent of whom was Erasmus with his
thousands of letters addressed to
correspondents all over Europe, reveals
to us the importance of this "third
force" culture, which stood between
the two great powers struggling in the
Middle Ages to shape and control that
European segment of the world errone¬
ously believed at the time to represent
all mankind.
Latin, whose universality and cultural
importance are seriously questioned
today for reasons that are perhaps
justified by the social, political and
economic conditions of our modern
world, was, at the time of the Renais¬
sance, and even later, an instrument
for the transmission of knowledge and
faith, at least in their Roman and
Catholic forms of expression.
In the 18th century, Rivarol could
hold forth about the "universality of
the French language", a universality
that the 19th century and the first years
of the present century seemed hardly
to contest. Today, the problem of
culture is posed in different terms,

and a national language often seems
to a people to be one of the most
effective means to assert or defend
its political rights, rights that a more
universal language, practised more
widely throughout the world, would
have a tendency to stifle.
Erasmus wrote, spoke and taught in
Latin. But he also hoped that the
ordinary people like the weaver and
farmer would come to know his trans¬
lation of the New Testament. But this
was obviously only possible through
the medium of a vernacular language
and not Latin.
As to his most celebrated book, In
Praise of Folly, with which he is rather
too readily identified in the public
mind, it was translated into French and
Czech immediately after its publication
In Latin, and since its appearance four
and a half centuries ago it has been
translated into many European and
non-European languages and has
continued to be a source of inspira¬
tion and enlightenment for men and
women everywhere.
Today with the widespread changes
marking modern societies in which we
are increasingly challenging the notion
of culture limited only to certain social
classes or privileged groups, it is com¬
forting to know that the poorest
student in Zagreb or Ankara, Riga or
Jerusalem can now afford a copy of In
Praise of Folly in paperback form and
in his own language.
Surely it is a sign of the vitality
and true universality of our time that
Asian languages such as Japanese
and Malay, or more recently, Hebrew,
are contributing to the widespread
circulation of a work that is so far
removed in spirit and historical back¬
ground from Japanese, Malaysian or
Jewish culture.
The same remark might be made
about the writings which constitute the
bulk of Erasmus's work: his books on
the spiritual and theological problems
of Christianity, his translations of and
commentaries on the Bible and the
Church Fathers.
One cannot deny that until very
recently, and perhaps even today,
Erasmus's interpretations of the New
Testament along with his biting sati¬
rical writings on monastic life and the
not infrequent scandals and abuses
within the Church, gave rise to totally
erroneous and biased conclusions and
made him the unwitting target of
attack particularly on the part of un¬
critical minds, or else made him
appear to be the standard-bearer of
religious sects or groups which he
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
ON THE THRESHOLD OF A NEW ERA. Above, in "Epitaph for the Burgomaster
of Nordhausen, " (a work destroyed during the Second World War), Lucas Cranach
the Younger assembled some of the outstanding figures of the 16th century
humanistic and religious renovation that presaged the Reformation. Among
them are Philip Melanchthon, the German theologian and reformer
(far right); Erasmus (fourth from right); and Martin Luther, leader of the Reformation
in Germany (left foreground). Already before 1530 the chasm was opening
between Luther and Erasmus. Although they had once appeared to have
much in common, their ways now parted and they became irreconcilable enemies.
FROM UTOPIA TO THE SCAFFOLD. During his first visit to England
(1499-1500) Erasmus met Thomas More, lawyer, wit and scholar, who was to
become one of his closest friends, and in whose house he later wrote,
within a matter of days, his witty satire "In Praise of Folly" (1509). Thomas More
too -was the author of a famous satirical work, "Utopia", a commentary
on government and society in an ¡deal state. After enjoying royal favour and
being made Lord Chancellor of England, Thomas More was beheaded in
1535 on the orders of King Henry VIII, for refusing to abjure the
authority of the Pope. The drawing below of Sir Thomas More and his family,
. was made by Holbein in 1529 at the request of More's daughter, Margaret
Roper who presented the work to Erasmus. Thomas More, wearing a chain
of office, is seated in the centre, and his daughter Margaret at far right.
9

ERASMUS (Continued)
ERASMUS
IN JAPAN
This wooden statue
of Erasmus was
once the figurehead
of a Dutch vessel,
the "Erasmus",
which was later
renamed the
"Charity". With two
other ships, named
"Faith" and "Hope",
It sailed from
Rotterdam
to the East Indies
in 1598, reaching the
Pacific via the
Magellan Strait.
The statue is now in
the Tokyo Museum.
Forerunner of a 'United Europe'
10
EMBLEM FOR
A HUMANIST
Above, a wood engraving
made about 1533, in
which Holbein depicts
Erasmus with one hand
placed on the head of the
Roman god Terminius.
Erasmus chose as his
emblem this guardian
of boundary stones,
and associated with him
the watchword:
"Think always on death".
In 1520, Erasmus
ordered a silver seal
bearing the image
of Terminius.
He himself made a
little drawing of Terminius
(right) which at his
friends' request was
carved on his
tombstone in Basel.
would certainly never have approved
of during his lifetime.
In fact, if these works are read with
no other passion than the love of truth
and within their historical framework,
the reader, be he Christian or non-
Christian (and my remarks are parti¬
cularly addressed to the non-Chris¬
tian reader), will be struck by the
depth and sincerity of his faith, his
fidelity to ancient Church tradition, his
unflagging devotion to the teachings of
Christ, but also by the feeling of
individual responsibility which he
sought to instil in all the Christ¬
ian adepts for whom he had written
his manual of piety (the Echiridion,
referred to earlier). The Greek title of
this work which has the double mean¬
ing of "handbook" as well as "hand
weapon" was certainly chosen by
Erasmus to convey the idea that here
was a portable weapon to protect man
against all temptations.
Ever since his early childhood, Eras¬
mus was steeped in the tradition of
"modern devotion" which was a meta¬
physical synthesis of the wisdom and
science of pagan antiquity and the
teachings of the Gospels, and which
was inspired by the mystical convic¬
tion that there was no separation
between spiritual and physical man.
Erasmus gathered together in this
major work the best of the teachings
of St. Paul which he had also directly
received from his friend Colet at
Oxford and from the Franciscan monk,
Jean Vitrier, whom he often visited at
Saint Omer, in France, and greatly
admired.
It would be a mistake to conclude
from a reading of the twenty-two rules
of this Manual or the treatises on
pure theology that followed it that his
conception of Christianity was mainly
ethical and that the Church hierarchy
or the taking of the sacraments matter¬
ed little to him. But what I particu¬
larly wish to stress within the context
I am writing about, which is to show
the universal scope of his Catholicism
(the words universal and Catholicism
are both synonymous and quite dis¬
tinct), is the absence of dogmatism in
his theological concepts. This is indi¬
rectly demonstrated by the bitter war
of opposition waged against him by an
army of theologians from Louvain,
Paris, Toledo and elsewhere.
Even in the metaphysical debate
about human nature and divine grace
and in his theological quarrel with Lu¬
ther about free will, he never abandon¬
ed his watch-tower regard for the
human person, reaffirming his resolve
to stand halfway between the two
concepts: God is all, man is nothing;
and Man's freedom can conquer
everything.
This "middle course" brought him
the fierce hostility of both camps, at
a moment when the Scholasticism of
Lutherans and Catholics had reached
its most dangerously heated pitch.
But for Erasmus, who considered
charity second only to faith itself as
the foundation stone of Christianity,
and the exercise and promotion of
charity as the chief duty of a Chris¬
tian on earth, the incomprehension of
the Scholastics was of little import
or rather, he could answer their
attacks with an acid pen not always
imbued with Christian charity!
"The basis of our religion," he wrote
in a famous letter to the Archbishop
of Palermo, Jean Carondelet, "is peace
and concord." He wanted such peace
and concord to prevail not only
amongst Christians but between Chris¬
tians and Turks. And he often contrast¬
ed the humane behaviour of the latter
with the outright barbarism shown by
the former in slaughtering each other,
and the hypocritical pretexts under
which they mounted crusades against
the Infidels.
For Erasmus, warrior of the spirit
and fighter for peace, all forms of bar¬
barism and intolerance that set man
and nations against one another were
equally reprehensible and horrible.
In the recent words of Pierre Gros-
claude, he was the forerunner of a
"United Europe" and he would cer¬
tainly have been an ardent advocate
of the reconciliation, if not the fusion,
of all the Churches of Christianity.
The racial and nationalistic fanati¬
cism current today would have shock¬
ed and horrified him. Of this there
can be no doubt. In his writings, he
made this clear again and again in
countless texts, the most famous of
which are The Complaint of Peace
and the adage Dulce Bellum (War is
sweet to those who have not known
it).
In his deeply rooted pacificism he
CONTINUED ON PAGE 12
Despite his frail appearance,
Erasmus was a tireless worker and
a seasoned traveller, accustomed
to long journeys on horseback
in all weathers. He incidently showed
special concern for conditions
conducive to hygiene in an
age when these counted for little.
Here, Holbein has drawn in travelling
attire the man who "wished to be
a citizen of the world, at the service
of all, but allied to none",
as Erasmus himself put it.

s\.VN
X
'&
v1^
-,. -s
s".
ë

ERASMUS (Continued)
'War is sweet to those who have not known it'
was prompted by many motivations,
chiefly due to his nature which made
him recoil both physically and men¬
tally from all forms of violence and
brutality.
His personal situation and his natio¬
nal background also help to explain
this attitude, for he was the political
adviser to Charles the Fifth, beholden
to Francis I of France, enemy of the
warrior Pope Julius II, though opposed
to Louis XII and to the French conquest
of Italy.
But if we examine the arguments
against violence which he himself put
forward with so much forcefulness
and clarity that his sincerity can hardly
be placed in doubt, we find that they
fall into three categories in increas¬
ing order of importance. 1) Nature is
opposed to the terrible slaughters
between men which are without par¬
allel even amongst the most ferocious
of wild beasts. 2) Common sense and
cold calculation of the advantages to
be gained should prevail on any chief
of state who is contemplating war to
change his mind, since there can be
neither victor nor vanquished in a
world of ruins. 3) The teachings of
religion are in direct opposition to war
and all the evils which it brings with it.
While he often appealed to the
Ancients, particularly to Plato, the
decisive argument for him was the fla¬
grant contradiction between God's
Commandments and the precepts of
the Gospel on the one hand, and, on
the other, the behaviour of Princes
who are Christian in name only. And
it is to one such "Most Christian"
Prince, Francis I, that Erasmus address
ed a long exhortation on behalf of
peace in the preface to his Paraphrase
of Saint Mark, published in Basel In
1523:
"...Of all the ills that destroy the life
of man, the most odious and the most
harmful is war. Does it not strike the
most dreadful blow at morality and at
intelligence as well as at men's lives . . .
When it will be necessary to come
before Christ's tribunal, this judge, as
severe towards the meek and the
humble as he is towards the great,
will not demand less strict accounts
from the most powerful Princes of this
world. That is why those who believe
that they do but little harm when they
pillage, destroy, exile, burn, crush and
kill the meek and the humble, call into
question the wisdom of Christ who
shed his precious blood for all who
are enslaved..."
Let me quote, In closing, the pero¬
ration of the sad Complaint of Peace,
dating from 1516, that is to say a
period when a reconciliation between
Charles of Burgundy and Francis I
seemed possible and the spectre of
war seemed to be fading. Who among
us, in this time of the Viet Nam War,
of the Israeli-Arab conflict, of ideolo¬
gical tyrannies, of recent colonialist
oppressions, of racial violence, of
revolutionary or pseudo-revolutionary
movements, of the menace of the
atomic bomb, but also of the Ency¬
clical Pacem in terris and the Inter¬
national Red Cross, does not feel him¬
self to be directly and personally
concerned by these words of the Wise
Man of Rotterdam?
"The majority of the people hate
war and desire peace. A minority,
whose wretched good fortune always
depends on the misery of the people,
wants war: must their inhumanity out¬
weigh the will of so many good
people? If we look at the past, we
will see that never until now has any¬
thing lasting been achieved by treaties
or by family bonds, by force or by
acts of vengeance: there is no surer
refuge against danger than gentle
benevolence. Wars lead to other wars;
revenge provokes revenge; indulgence
generates indulgence; benevolence
calls forth benevolence; and the
highest esteem will be reserved for
those who give up something of their
rights. That which man attains is not
always the result of human effort; but
human undertakings carried out under
the auspices and in the spirit of Christ
will, thanks to his wisdom, flourish. He
will protect and give assistance to
those who favour peace, to those who
will sacrifice most to the common
good, in the knowledge that by this
sacrifice they contribute to their own
felicity.
"Princes will reign with true majesty,
when they govern a happy and vir¬
tuous people, ruling by laws rather
than by arms. Noblemen will be more
worthy; priests will enjoy more quietly
their moments of leisure; the people
will profit from greater tranquillity and
more peaceful abundance."
Doubtless, the tone and the spirit
of this passage do not resemble those
of the Abbé Saint-Pierre or of Kant
in their projects for eternal peace, nor
those of certain modern fighters for
peace. But the man whose constant
Folly speaks: "...To your
health, cheers, live and
drink, O most celebrated
devotees of Folly."
"...in the same way that
Atlas supports the
heavens on his shoulders,
according to the poets."
If
mm
mm
-iV, \l / //,'
"...I have always found it
more agreeable simply to state
whaf is on the tip of my tongue."
VNgMj	*j^T=/
RS^t
I
rï;
Photos Netherlands Ministry of Education and Science

thoughts and daily activities incite
him to make "war on war" will find
fraternal echoes in reading Erasmus:
pursuing his personal labours In the
specific circumstances of his histor¬
ical time and place, making use of the
means given to him by his own genius,
Erasmus achieved that tangible univer¬
sality which allows for an amicable
exchange of contradictory ideas and
convictions without loss of the diverse
identities which they express.
What we men and people whose
expansion, diversity, behaviour pat¬
terns and perspectives for the future
he could not foresee can learn from
Erasmus, at a distance of five hundred
years, is not that we should try to
achieve an impossible fusion of huma¬
nism and Christianity considered as
absolute and timeless values, but
rather that we should follow the
example of open-mindedness and free¬
dom of thought which characterize his
educational, political and religious
thinking, so as to fashion a humanism
within our own needs and our own
new possibilities in a universe whose
centre of gravity has been displaced,
but whose cohesion is as indis¬
pensable today as it was yesterday.
"The world has its own order,"
wrote Erasmus, "and we should do
well not to disrupt it." This thought
has lost nothing of its pertinence or
Its universality today, like that of
Fichte, another universal thinker, who
declared: "The unique aim of human
existence on earth lies neither in
Heaven nor in Hell, but only In carry¬
ing to Its highest perfection the huma¬
nity which we bear within us." g
Aeripito candide lc¿lor er asm] ro*
TERODAMI.proucrbiorum Chiliadas,
ïam rertiú ab ipfo non xftimandis fado i
nbus recogmtas, KcxprobahiTimisauto
ribas ficlocuplrtacas.utcui (upcrioris Tcli
rionis fummx.fcrmc quartapars ab hinc
bienniú acootlcr.it, huic nunc baud multo
minus fit adieílú.Nosnccj! fumprui no.]:
labori pcpcrrimus, uc ram eruditii opus.
tarn copiofum.utucrc flume aurcú uoca
rcpoflis. Cpcmcndandmúcnoítraoffia;
na prodi retín luce, plane nouumSChaclc
nus à nomino oxcuiu . EnK.frucrc.ac Vale.
ININCLYTA GERMAN! At
BAÏILEA.
ALL THE WORLD'S A STAGE... FOR FOLLY
In 1509, Erasmus left Italy and set out for
England. It was while riding through the
Alpine passes, he recounts, that he
conceived the idea for In Praise of Folly,
the satirical masterpiece exposing the
foibles and follies of Man, which became
his most famous, controversial and "mo¬
dern" work. Hans Holbein was only
18 when he made a series of pen draw¬
ings in the margins of a copy of the
original edition. He did so to amuse
Erasmus, but the drawings became fam¬
ous and have since illustrated numerous
editions of the work. Right, Holbein's
drawing for the commentaries of Folly
on the teachers of that time and the sad
plight of their students: "They beat the
little wretches with rods, straps, or a
punishing stick..." Above, a drawing by
Holbein for Erasmus's Adagia, published
at Basel in 1515. With Solomon (top
centre) are 21 philosophers and writers
of antiquity.