NURSERIES
OF THE SEA
by Wesley Marx
0
YSTERS on a half shell,
steaming clams, broiled salmon steaks,
shrimp cocktail all these cherished
seafoods and many more may dwindle
unless we stop ourselves from des¬
troying their very birthright.
A common misconception contributes
to the rise of such a tragic spectre.
WESLEY MARX has written widely on the
Impact of technology on the environment,
particularly the ocean. He has participated
In several scientific expeditions and made
extensive field trips on both the Atlantic and
Pacific coasts of the U.S.A. to gather
material for this article. His book on ocean
conservation 'The Frail Ocean" (Coward-
McCann, New York) was published in 1967.
While the ocean regime may appear to
stop at the shore, its vital processes
extend into our bays, salt marshes,
rivers and even our mountain streams.
In a magnificent migration, silver-
toned salmon rise from cold ocean
depths, navigate to river mouths in
Europe, Scandinavia, Asia and the
Americas, swim Intently against river
currents, hurdle small waterfalls and
finally pause in green-shaded mountain
streams far from the blue ocean. Here
they were born and here they will
give birth, their tail fins scratching out
cribs in the gravel bottom. Many other
marine fish use rivers as nurseries:
shad, striped bass, alewlfe and the
ugly, caviar-bearing sturgeon. These
river-ascending fish are called anadro-
mous "upward-running".
An even greater spectrum of marine
life is nursed and reared in estuaries,
those places where the oceans and
rivers of the world collide to form bays,
salt marshes and fjords. Here, suc¬
coured on rich nutrients and shelter¬
ed from sharks and other marine pre¬
dators, young tarpon, snook, mullet,
menhaden, dab, plaice, flounder and
smelt prepare themselves to enter the
vast ocean.
Estuaries nurse West Africa's prin¬
cipal catch, the bonga, and India's
favourite fishes, the hilsa, bombay duck,
cock-up and pearl spot. Shellfish
clams, oysters, scallops, mussels and
Crustacea shrimps, lobsters, crabs
flourish in estuaries. In the Ur'ted
States, two-thirds of the marine catch
¡s estuary-dependent. Many fish which
keep to the sea are, in turn, dependent
on estuaries for providing forage fare.
Our rivers and our estuaries are thus
vital nurseries of marine life, the re¬
pository of the birthright of so many
fish and shellfish.
Much of the world's population lives
on or near coast-lines and we tend
to see estuaries and rivers in man-
made roles: harbours, navigation chan¬
nels, land reclamation projects, sewage
ponds, sand and gravel pits. This
narrow vision triggers a tragic collision
between human geography and natural
geography, as exemplified by one
beautiful, world renowned bay. San
Francisco Bay makes the city of San
Francisco one of the most charming
urban regions ¡n the world, part penin¬
sula and part ocean bay, part green
mountains and part blue plains. Here
the United Nations was created. The
bay traditionally serves as a vast mar-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

NURSERIES OF THE SEA (Continued)
Let's not kill the fish that lay the golden eggs
¡ne nursery and a passageway for
salmon and other anadromous fish.
At one time, the Pacific coast's larg¬
est commercial fishing fleet docked
in the bay. Yet today no commercial
fishermen trawl their seine nets in
its sunlit shallows. The marine nur¬
sery is a ghost nursery. It exists
largely as a giant cesspool, a gar¬
bage dump and a real estate reservoir.
As a cesspool, it receives the dis¬
charges of over 80 sewage outfalls.
Daily, some 60 tons of greases and
oils cascade into the bay and paralyze
the nerves of striped bass. Acid
wastes burn salmon gills and disrupt
breathing. Papermill effluents disrupt
the normal division of eggs and fisher¬
men catch freakish flounder. These
wastes have transformed the life-giv¬
ing bay waters Into a toxic broth.
Ninety per cent of the bay is closed
to shellfish harvest. Keeping it clear
as a navigation channel means that
fish habitat is dredged up and oyster
beds interred under silt avalanches.
As a garbarge dump, marshes that
once nurtured eelgrass and other nu¬
trients now exude only hot, pungent
odours of decay. Tideland habitat
has been buried to accommodate
apartments, shopping centres, airport
runways and athletic stadiums. A third
of the bay some 257 square miles
has been reclaimed.
Te
14
HE bay that once provided
15 million pounds of oysters annually
no longer supports oyster production.
The bay that once provided 300,000
pounds of clams annually no longer
supports clam production. The bay that
once provided six and one-half million
pounds of shrimp annually now pro¬
duces only 10,000 pounds.
Such a tragic waste is repeated in
other famous estuary and river systems
throughout the world. Dr. Pieter Kor-
ringa, Director of the Netherlands
Institute for Fisheries Investigation
notes:
"The river Rhine, in season, used
to teem with salmon making their way
to their spawning grounds in Germany,
France and Switzerland. Old paintings
in art galleries reveal that salmon was
on the table of the poorest people in
the Netherlands. In the Netherlands
today, few people have even seen a
salmon which did not come out of
a tin, or was on display, smoked, in a
fishmonger's shop. The Rhine is now
called Europe's open sewer."
In the 1900s, fishermen on England's
River Tees harvested 8,000 pounds of
salmon yearly: by the 1920s, 3,000
pounds; now, virtually zero. A new
and deadly tributary empties into the
Tees: twelve million gallons of sewage
daily. Sewage-nourished "blooms" of
scum algae render some of Norway's
deep blue fjords opaque. These dense
greenish blooms, by exhausting oxygen
in the waters, suffocate marine life
and leave stinking windrows of dead
fish on the beach.
L.IKE sewage outfalls, river
dams can seriously impair the nurseries
of the sea. Soviet marine biologist
G.V. Nikolsky notes in his book
"Special Ichthyology" :
"The fishing industry and ichthyo¬
logy in general are faced with new,
vast problems through the construction
of huge hydroelectric plants. Dams
built across the southern rivers of
the U.S.S.R. are liable to obstruct and
prevent valuable anadromous commer¬
cial fish, primarily the sturgeon, from
reaching their spawning grounds."
The dams, by directing river water
into irrigation diversions, also serve to
lower the level of seas such as the
Caspian, further shrinking the habitat
of the famed sturgeon. Sewage out¬
falls threaten sturgeon as well. Soviet
author Mikhail Sholokhov recently re¬
ported that almost a million sturgeon
died on one polluted stretch of river.
Today, in a critical effort to sustain its
long-established caviar industry, the
Soviet Union loads sturgeon aboard
river boats to carry them safely through
slime that covers their migration
routes.
Unprotected, the nurseries of the
sea can degenerate Into nurseries of
death that threaten human beings as
well as fish. Eleven fishing villages
and the industrial city of Minamata
line the shores of Minamata Bay in
Japan. In 1950, a nerve disease began
affecting some residents. A once
bright teenage boy could no longer
button his clothes or hold his
chopsticks. A fisherman clawed his
hands, bared his teeth at doctors
and growled at his children. Between
1953 and 1963, some 105 similar cases
occurred, most ending fatally or with
severe disability.
Perplexed by "Minamata Disease,"
doctors tried to isolate living habits
common to victims. Most victims lived
in the fishing villages rather than the
city, and these victims subsisted on
the bay's abundant supply of shellfish.
While healthy in their own right, the
bay shellfish were found to contain
unusually high concentrations of mer¬
cury, a substance highly injurious to
human nerves.
Where did the mercury come from?
Investigators, including Professor Mak-
io Uchida of Japan and Dr. Leonard
Kurland of the United States, found
that a chemical plant was dumping
mercury wastes into the bay. The
wastes were diluted, but shellfish can
filter out and concentrate dilute sub¬
stances. "Ecological magnification," a
basis of survival in the dilute solution
of sea water, had thus been perverted
and the shellfish turned into living
vials of poison. "Minamata Disease,"
according to Professor Uchida, ceased
once the chemical plant stopped dump¬
ing mercury wastes into the bay and
consumption of bay shellfish was pro¬
hibited.
RRECENTLY New York City
experienced a sharp rise in cases of
hepatitis (inflammation of the liver).
Many victims remembered consuming
oysters. The source of the oysters was
traced to a nearby bay. Oysters in
this bay were found to have an oily
taste. The oyster meat was greenish
rather than white. Oil wastes in the
bay contributed to the oily seasoning.
Copper wastes contributed to the
greenish hue. These oysters, marin¬
ated and steeped in wastes, were
inflaming the livers of New Yorkers.
Today the bay oysters Me in quarantine
just like the shellfish of Minamata Bay.
The tragic degradation of the Rhine,
Minamata Bay and San Francisco Bay
dramatizes one stark fact. If we
continue to ignore the ocean's need for
CONTINUED ON PAGE 17

On a beach in Bali. Photo © Marianne Spler-Donatl

Photo © Marianno Spler-Donatl
Gleaming piles of salt, harvested from salt-pans on the coast of Crete.

Leading the salmon by the tip of the nose
its landward nurseries, we will grad¬
ually doom our most valuable and
popular sea foods.
Not only will the livelihood of fisher¬
men, the diet of millions of people
and the favourite recipes of gourmets
be jeopardized. Nutrition experts see
in the food stocks of the ocean the
potential to satisfy the hunger of an
Increasingly congested planet. (See
article page 4.) National agencies
and International agencies like the
Food and Agriculture Organization are
attempting to cultivate this potential,
but these attempts will be seriously
jeopardized if we persist in sterilizing
the nurseries of the sea.
Efforts to reverse this trend are
intensifying but face great obstacles.
The banning of all man-made activities
on rivers and estuaries would certainly
serve to reverse such a trend. But
such a ban would be not only impos¬
sible but unnecessary. Estuaries and
rivers can act as both nurseries of the
sea and as an Industrial resource but
only in proper balance. To effect such
a balance, the stresses and tolerances
of marine life must be known and
evaluated.
IET man's study of the land
environment has traditionally (and
understandably) outstripped his study
of the marine environment, and his lag
impairs marine conservation. The dan¬
gerous plight of salmon and other ana¬
dromous fish has been known for some
time, but solutions have had to await
a better scientific acquaintance with
these fish. Only recently have investi¬
gators offered a substantial explan¬
ation of how spawning salmon find
the stream where the were born five
or six years earlier. Experiments by
Dr. Arthur Hasler at the University of
Wisconsin in the United States indicate
that salmon locate their parental
stream by sniffing out the stream's
particular odour.
The application of such knowledge
can prove as time-consuming and
rigorous as its discovery. Salmon
eggs were artificially hatched over
50 years ago. This capability was
heralded as the answer to salmon
conservation. Yet salmon hatcheries
have never been able to match
nature's former abundance.
In the final analysis, proper pro¬
tection of fish habitat determines sur¬
vival. Accordingly, on many rivers,
dams have been fitted with salmon
ladders, water quality standards im¬
posed on sewage outfalls, spawning
streams cleared of logging debris and
mine tailings, and screens placed on
irrigation canals that can divert young
salmon into fatal dead ends.
B OTH scope and cost of
such measures can rise quickly. The
Columbia River in the United States
has 21 salmon hatcheries, 22 fish
ladders and some 600 screened irrig¬
ation diversions. Some 1,700 miles
of stream bed have been cleared of
debris. To better conserve salmon
conservation funds as well as salmon,
Dr. Hasler is now considering the
possibility of diverting spawning sal¬
mon from polluted parental streams
to clean streams by duplicating stream
odours. Clean streams are being
created by draining wilderness areas
with concrete water channels and
coating these channels with gravel
suitable for salmon cribs. Through
such techniques, salmon and other
anadromous fish may be diverted to
habitat purposely maintained to per¬
petuate their abundance.
Maintaining the habitat of estuarlne
life is proving an even more demanding
task. Though seemingly a simple body
of water, an estuary is in reality a
biological engine driven by currents,
tides, wind and other mechanisms that
change from day to day. Left to its
own devices, this sophisticated engine
can sustain a natural productivity that
rivals the fertility of jungles and that
nurses millions of the ocean's young.
If disrupted, it falters as assuredly as
an automobile engine fed on salt water.
Circulatory currents serve to trap
nutrient matter in an estuary as food
for young fish. But these currents
cannot discriminate between nutrients
and toxic wastes, and research scien¬
tists now find that the waste receiving
capacity of estuaries is sharply cir¬
cumscribed by this factor. A sewage
outfall that discharges large amounts
of fresh water, or a dam that restricts
fresh water inflow can alter the critical
mixture of fresh and saline water that
estuarine inhabitants require. Thus
fresh water, or the lack of it, can
become a polluting influence.
We will never be able to conserve
the nurseries' of the sea until we can
understand such complex relationships,
understand them so well that we can
break them down in as much detail as
the components of a jet engine. The
United States is creating a hydraulic
model of the Chesapeake Bay, a
body of water nourished by 100 tribu¬
taries, the tides of the Atlantic and
numerous metropolitan sewage out¬
falls. The model will be used to predict
and balance the impact of sewage,
dredging projects and dams on the
Chesapeake biota. The aim of this
large-scale project is not only to
conserve Chesapeake Bay but to
advance the knowledge of estuarine
conservation in general.
Through extensive research, Investi¬
gator E. Foyns of Norway has evolved
technology to prevent sewage from
producing deadly slime in estuaries.
Sewage entering the Oslo Fjords is
exposed to electrolytic precipitation to
remove phosphorous, a slime-forming
catalyst.
IHE common global int¬
erest in conserving the nurseries of
the sea and preventing marine pollu¬
tion, is more and more being recogniz¬
ed. The FAO Advisory Committee on
Marine Resources Research (ACMRR)
has been questioning governments on
the fisheries aspect of marine pollution.
Working with ACMRR, the Intergovern¬
mental Océanographie Commission
(IOC) has set up a Working Group on
Marine Pollution, headed by Dr. Kor-
ringa of the Netherlands. This month,
specialists from Unesco, the Food and
Agriculture Organization, the Inter-
Governmental Maritime Consultative
Organization and the World Meteoro¬
logical Organization meet in London
to study problems of marine pollution.
Such efforts are aimed at estab¬
lishing a general scientific framework
for the conduct of research into marine *
contamination that will serve to avoid | /
duplication and expedite practical
control measures. In addition, indus-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20

FORMS OF
NATURE
"No artist could improve the beauty,
no craftsman match the perfection
of execution, of these structures that
grew in accordance with inherited
patterns going back to the beginnings
of time." Thus writes Andreas
Feininger in "The World Through My
Eyes" (Crown Publishers, New York),
where the famous American
photographer presents some of his
favourite pictures taken during the
past 30 years. Among these are
masterly close-ups from nature,
including the shells shown on these
pages. "The variety of forms of
nature Is unlimited, their number
infinite", he says. "These
photographs show different solutions
to the protective needs of certain
molluscs. Each shell evolved to
provide maximum protection in
accordance with the specific
environment and way of life of the
respective mollusc, the different
requirements being reflected in the
differences in design: corrugated,
ribbed, or spherical surface;
presence or absence of protective
spines; thinness or thickness of the
walls." Opposite, gasteropod;
right, murex, from which the
Ancients obtained purple dye; below
right, part of the spinal column
of a skate.
Photos by Andreas Feininger

-. . < V
è& Wr'
*T
WÓS&

NURSERIES OF THE SEA (Continued from page 17)
Oysters at bay
trial nations which learn how to salvage
desecrated nurseries can show deve¬
loping nations how to avoid such dese¬
cration in the first place.
Comprehending the nature of the
nurseries of the sea will not alone
guarantee their survival. An obstacle
as formidable as would be a dam
without a fish passage remains. Tra¬
ditionally, estuaries and rivers have not
been administered as complete marine
systems but as subdivisions of political
systems on land.
Thus, some 90 bayfront communities
and a host of private and government
agencies have utilized San Francisco
Bay with little reference to each
other's needs or the health of the bay
itself. (The land reclamation project
of one community now threatens to
cut off a neighbouring community's
access to the bay). The equivalent
on dry land would be the use of a
farmer's wheat fields by his neigh¬
bours as a cesspool, a dump, a play¬
ground and a highway right-of-way, or
their requisition for use as a reservoir.
Effective conservation of the nurs¬
eries of the sea will require more
comprehensive systems of manage¬
ment. In the case of San Francisco
Bay, a pioneer marine commission has
been formed. Composed of Ipcal,
state and federal officials, the commis¬
sion is empowered to view the bay
as a single system and evolve a plan
that will balance development with
conservation. A major goal of the
commission is to restore the bay as
a prime marine nursery.
0,
20
THER countries are in¬
creasingly realizing the importance of
marine nurseries and at the same time,
invoking penalities against exploiters
who ignore their true values. In
Sweden, sponsors of hydroelectric
dams must provide compensation for
any disruption of salmon runs. In
the Soviet Union, fish protection
agencies may bring suit against
industries or communities which
pollute fish habitat by dumping
excess wastes into the water. In
Japan, fishermen can claim heavily
from industrial construction enterprises
that usurp or damage marine nurseries.
In many places, protection of marine
nurseries requires international action.
The Fraser River flows through the
Canadian province of British Columbia
and empties Into Puget Sound, a Paci¬
fic coast estuary bordered by the
United States and Canada. By banding
together in an international commis¬
sion, these two countries have restored
the Fraser's great salmon runs, once
blocked by careless riverside construc¬
tion. An international commission has
now been formed to restore the Rhine
to its former biological wealth. In time,
fresh salmon may once more grace
the dinner tables of Western Europe.
IHE growing efforts to save
the nurseries of the. sea will demand
much in the way of research, tech¬
nology, money and political co-ordin¬
ation. But these nurseries will reward
such attention amply enough. In sup¬
porting a new programme to conserve
the United States' 106 anadromous
rivers, the director of the U.S. Bureau
of Commercial Fisheries declared: "In
looking at what I consider to be the
rather phenomenal success in the
Columbia River, I would say that we
could certainly justify this on the cost-
benefit ratio very well."
Yet there ¡s far greater justification,
indeed necessity, for such efforts. We
now realize that, if we deny the ocean
its nurseries, we deny ourselves a food
source regarded as crucial to human
survival. We also deny ourselves a
grand opportunity. Dr. Lionel Walford,
Director of the Sandy Hook Marine
Biology Laboratory ¡n the United States
observes: "While the estuary is the
one part of the sea that man can ruin,
it is also the part that he can control
in order to increase the production of
marine life."
Oyster and mussel cultivation pro¬
vide only a glimmer of the future bene¬
fits to be derived from ranching and
farming our estuaries. The nurseries of
the sea, with their present bounty and
great potential, demand our respect,
and our care. Leaving a heritage of
carp, gar, rat-tailed maggots and other
pollution-resistant fish to future gener¬
ations would be a grave folly indeed.
Our children will have little need of
oysters turned green and reeking of oil.
