Above, a young dancer of the Bayanlhan Philippine Dance
Company In "The Trees of Fire", a selection of dances from
the mountain province of northern Luzon.
The subli, a spirited dance of
Spanish inspiration, is usually
performed in May in honour of a
Catholic religious festival. Its
musical accompaniment Is
supplemented by bamboo castanets
carried by the dancers.
Photos © Odile Montserrat Contact
The Tinlkling (right), the most famous,
exciting and difficult of all
Philippine dances, expresses the carefree
exuberance of a rural festival on the
island of Leyte. Young couples,
barefooted, skip perilously between
rapidly clapped bamboo poles (detail
below). Their movements imitate the
longlegged tinikling birds, which inhabit
the rice fields. This dance Is often the
dramatic finale to a Bayanlhan programme.

The vivacity of
Philippine folk ballet
I HE Republic of the Philippines
is more than a meeting place for East and
West: its 7,000 islands, grouped in a rough
triangle in the Pacific Ocean, form a
crucible in which Asian and European
cultures have combined with the tradi¬
tional Philippine way of life to produce
a national heritage of infinite variety and
vitality.
Interpreting this kaleidoscopic culture
through music and dance is the mission
of the Bayanihan Philippine Dance Com¬
pany, which was established in 1956 to
stimulate interest among Filipinos in their
national folklore.
"Bayanihan" is a Tagalog word mean¬
ing the ancient custom of working to¬
gether. In fact, it is a way of life among
the rural populations, born out of the
need of a people with meagre resources
to band together to achieve their goals:
its symbol is a house being moved on
the shoulders of neighbours.
This is the spirit in which the company
was formed, in which it grew, and with
which it remains imbued today. There
are no stars, and the dancers are not
professionals.
The Bayanihan Company itself was
part of a much broader movement which
gained momentum after World War II,
when the President of the Philippines
set up a special cultural committee to
study folk customs and traditions on a
national scale.
The man who gave special impetus to
this movement was Alejandro R. Roces
(now president of the Unesco National
Commission of the Philippines) who
directed the committee and arranged for
special teams to tour the country and
record and study the traditional dances,
customs and folklore in the islands and
mountain areas.
The opportunity which catapulted the
Bayanihan Philippine Dance Company to
international prominence was provided in
1958, when these gifted young dancers
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

28
PHILIPPINE FOLK BALLET (Continued)
responded to a government appeal for
a cultural programme to represent the
Philippines at the World's Fair at Brus¬
sels, Belgium.
The artistry with which this spirited
young ensemble presented its country's
ancient and contemporary dances in
Brussels, the scope and diversity of
their repertoire embracing Philippine,
Arabic, Malayan, Spanish and American
elements their colourful costumes,
and the subtlety of their dancing were
aspects which enchanted the specta¬
tors and showed that Bayanihan was
a most effective way of projecting to
the world an impression of the past
and present facets of Philippine life.
In 1959, the company was desig¬
nated to "officially represent the Philip¬
pines as cultural mission to the Amer¬
icas and Europe for one year. . .", and
in 1960, they won the special critics
award for folk ensembles at the Fête
des Nations in Paris. Since then,
regular tours abroad have been org¬
anized; the latest, In 1968, took Bayan¬
ihan to North America, Latin America
and Europe, where their programme, '
incorporating many new dances, was
acclaimed by audiences and critics
alike.
At least as important as its Inter¬
national tours are Bayanihan's activities
at home. Through weekly recitals and
visits to the country's far-flung islands,
it is playing a major part in stimulat¬
ing renewed interest among the people
of the Philippines in their diverse folk
dances and customs.
This task was started back in the
1930s by an informal group called the
Filipiniana Folk Music and Dance Com¬
mittee, which was begun at the Philip¬
pine Women's College now a uni¬
versity to preserve and encourage
the folk music of the islands. Out of
this committee grew the Bayanihan
Folk Arts Centre, formed in Manila to
do research on Philippine culture, to
preserve the country's art forms and
promote their use in daily life, and
to organize the dance company's per¬
formances at home and abroad.
Although traditional dances are "re¬
novated" before being presented, their
authenticity is assured by the work
of a team of researchers who often
travel far through the woods of the
south Philippine islands, or over the
mountains of the northern regions in
search of ancient dances kept alive by
isolated villages.
Mrs. Lucrecia Urtula, the dance di¬
rector and choreographer of Bayanihan,
acts quickly when word comes through
that a festival is to be held In a
distant jungle or mountain clearing.
Most of the indigenous festivals are
religious in character and tied closely
to the seasons. To pass up the
chances to see one, film its dances
and tape record its music often means
an opportunity lost for at least a year.
Along with the music and the steps
of the dances, the researchers are
anxious to duplicate the original cos¬
tumes. This sometimes presents a
problem. In one of the southern
CONTINUED ON PAGE 36
THE DANCE OF RETRIBUTION
HESE photos of the Bayanihan
Philippine Dance Company recount the legend
of the Tagablli, an ill-starred tableau whose
dimensions correspond to classic tragedy.
Against a background of lightning and thun¬
der, a poet and chorus intone, and symboli¬
cally weave into a tapestry, a plot of love,
jealousy and retribution. The favourite wife
of the Datu, or chief, of the Tagabili tribe
on the island of Mindanao (centre figure in
photo above) falls in love with her husband's
younger brother. After she reveals her true
feelings during a dance with her husband
(left), the Datu engages his brother in mortal
combat (below) and slays him. As punish¬
ment, his young daughter falls ill. Accord¬
ing to Tagabili belief, she can be saved
only through marriage. Neighbouring tribes
and four noble suitors are summoned, each
of whom vies for her hand with a different
'dance. As the guests wait expectantly

¿A
*r*. T=r~
S*S
(above), the princess chooses a poet-prince
who wins her heart with a tove song of
his own composition. But before the marriage
can proceed, tragedy intervenes when the
princess falls into a death trance. The chief's
favourite wife (right) is grief-stricken by the
results of her folly, and the performance ends
with the symbolic burning of his house,
signifying the end of his lineage.
Photos © Odile Montserrat

PHILIPPINE FOLK BALLET
36
(Continued from page 28)
regions, they saw beautiful beaded
attire and, in order to guarantee the
authenticity of the costumes to be
reproduced, by Bayanihan's seam¬
stresses, they asked if they could buy
a model costume. The tribesmen
agreed, and the Philippine Women's
University footed the bill. . . six horses.
As important as the audio and visual
aspects of the dances are their his¬
tories, and the researchers from the
Folk Arts Centre closely question the
original performers about their back¬
ground and origins. These interviews
often must be conducted through in¬
terpreters, for 87 dialects are spoken
in the Philippines.
In addition to tape recordings and
films of local musicians playing in the
authentic manner, the field study trips
have yielded a full set of Philippine
musical instruments. Local masters
teach the Bayanihan musicians how to
play such unusual instruments as the
kulintangan, a set of eight graduated
gongs used by Muslim Filipinos, the
bamboo xylophone called the gabbang,
and the balingging, a bamboo flute
blown with the nostril.
After a field trip, Mrs. Urtula faces
the delicate and sometimes monu¬
mental task of choreographing local
dances so that they can be presented
on a modem stage to international
audiences, and at the same time remain
truly representative of the culture from
which they evolved.
For instance, the Pagdiwata, a rice
planting dance discovered on the
western island of Palawan, ¡s a forty-
eight hour performance that had to be
condensed, shaped and moulded into
a theatrical piece. The most important
aspects of the two day marathon were
selected and co-ordinated from the
tapes and films made in the field, and
the final result is a dramatic, seven
minute dance highlighted by the state¬
ly whirling of the high priestess and
her attendants, who bear lighted
candles on their heads and on the
backs of their hands, joined in a prayer
of thanksgiving for a bountiful harvest,
and supplication for continued protec¬
tion and favour.
Most of the dancers are in their
teens or early twenties. They are
admitted into the company only after
strict auditions, and if they marry they
must leave. To ensure a reservoir of
young talent, the Bayanihan Folk Arts
Centre has a regular programme of
training for young men and women
from whose ranks are chosen the
members of the dance company. This
may help explain the youthful and
dynamic quality of the troupe, which
has impressed spectators throughout
the world.
Providing facilities for research,
recruitment and training is the Philip¬
pine Women's University, in whose en¬
vironment Bayanihan first flourished,
and which continues to play a major
part in its success.
The panorama that Bayanihan un¬
folds to its audiences affords an oppor¬
tunity of seeing folk art which, more
than a preservation of the past, is a
functioning, essential part of the Philip¬
pines of today. The myriad styles and
techniques, ranging from fierce, primi¬
tive dances and displays of prowess,
through stately social dances or reli¬
gious ceremonials, to folk antics and
bursts of dazzling virtuosity, are all
Philippine in origin, and yet testify to
the cultural calling cards that have
been left in this nation of islands east
of the Asian land mass.
