YOUTH
IN FERMENT
'The gulf separating young people from adults
seems to be growing bigger every day... This
revolt is sweeping across virtually every part
of the world; it has taken on the form of an
open dispute, not only with the university but
with society as a whole.'
'With their need for absolutes, the young are
less than ever able to tolerate the injustices
and disorder of the world. '
RENE MAHEU
Director-General of Unesco
4
THE wave of protest and dissent from world youth has
made society sit up and look for an answer, and first of
all the reasons why. Though the ferment of youth is a univer¬
sal phenomenon, the complexity of the problems is due to the
many different categories of young people and the wide
variety of their social, economic and cultural backgrounds and
makes generalization difficult, if not impossible. Unesco has
now begun an international enquiry on youth in collaboration
with the United Nations and its Specialized Agencies and a
number of specialized research institutions. Its purpose is
to gather a maximum of data from every continent on the atti¬
tudes of youth to society, their aspirations, doubts and dissen¬
sions and their view of the future. The UNESCO COURIER
proposes to deal in future issues with the results of this vast
enquiry. This number seeks to present aspects of the ferment
of world youth in a broader canvas. The article below (pages
4 to 14) is based on a preliminary study prepared by Unesco
and shortly to be published as a booklet under the title "In
Partnership with Youth".
I HE world is getting younger
and youth accounts for an ever larger
share of the rapid rise in world
population. It is estimated that the
15-24 age group will rise from 519 mil¬
lion to 1,128 million in the four decades
between 1960 and the year 2000.
More than 75 per cent of the world's
young people today live In developing
countries: 59 million in Africa, 322 mil¬
lion in Asia, 44 million in Latin America.
This striking demographic change
was foreseen long ago, but not
everyone has prepared for it. In
many cases, new generations have
come of age in a vacuum.
Unpreparedness explains the con¬
tradictions, the tensions and the
shocks that we are now witnessing .
as youth moves en masse into present-
day society and tries to reshape it.
Wherever this urge runs counter to
existing structures, it generates a

Photo Gamma - Gilles Carón, Paris
contrary tendency towards 'anxiety,
escapism and scepticism. Through
lack of preparedness, society has left
itself open to heavy blows. Yet these
very blows have a positive effect:
they lead to awareness, they dramatize
the phenomenon and the problems of
youth, they inspire major efforts to
solve them.
In search of a common denominator.
Many people tend to look upon youth
as just one of the "age groups" of
life. And most "youth programmes"
are designed with the 15-25 age group
in mind. No one will deny that such
a classification has its practical uses,
but it can hardly serve as a common
denominator to cover the many
complex problems and the great
diversity of individuals that make up
this age group even in one country.
It is all the harder to use it as a
universal criterion s.nce the laws,
customs and institutions governing the
age of consent, the age of legal
majority, or the age of full social
responsibility vary considerably from
country to country and from continent
to continent.
Attempts have also been made to
define youth as a given "educational,
social and family situation": as those
still going to school, who have neither
started work nor set up their own
home. An adult, according to this
definition, is a person who has finished
school, holds a job and has a family.
Yet here, too, no universal formula
can be applied. Differences among
various types of societies are too
great, the. transition between, young
and adult worlds is too gradual.
There is some justification for
defining youth as "a state of mind".
Such a definition could then embrace
all those identified by "the quality of
their imagination, their preference for
boldness over timidity and their love
of adventure rather than creature
comforts." But this criterion is no
more adaptable than the others to the
plethora of situations affecting the
individuals and social group (whether
"young" or "adult" by conventional
standards) that it claims to identify.
The social, economic and psycholo¬
gical fabric of youth is too varied to
allow any pat general definitions.
Those who deal with social and human
problems of this nature would do well
to keep to a cautious open-ended
statement. That is why a compromise
definition is often a pragmatic one:
young people are those persons
society deems young.
Youth a multiple entity. We hear
a great deal of talk about "youth".
Programmes are established "for
youth", plans are drawn up "to help
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
5

YOUTH IN FERMENT (Continued)
Refusal to be manipulated
6
youth." In fact, when we talk of youth,
we are talking about a social and
psychological entity that is extremely
heterogenous and complex. Its com¬
ponents must be more clearly iden¬
tified. They overlap and their number
is legion.
From the sociological viewpoint,
the main categories are rural and city
youth, young people who have had
little or no education to speak of,
secondary school and college
students, and young workers. This is
something of an oversimplication, of
course. It ignores differences among
countries and within each category.
Youth's hopes, needs and attitudes
vary from place to place. So do the
measures required to meet them.
On a world scale, rural youth is
the biggest category of all. But its
status Is ambiguous. In the rural-type
economies of developing countries,
rural youth play an important rôle,
but traditional social structures and
effects of partial and latent unemploy¬
ment prevent them from influencing
economic development as a coherent
social group.
City youth are often underemployed
or out of work, particularly among the
urban poor whose ranks are constantly
swollen by the human drain from the
countryside. Unintegrated into the
social and cultural environment of city
life which is foreign to them, many
young people in towns lead a hand-to-
mouth existence on the fringes of
society and- borders of delinquency.
They are dissatisfied, their malaise is
profound.
Young people who have had no
schooling form another big group.
Around 1962, it was estimated that
there were 146 million young illiterates
in the world between 15 and 24 years
of age. Illiteracy rates in Africa are 46
per cent in the 10-14 age bracket; 51
per cent from 15 to 19; and 64 per cent
from 20 to 24. In Asia, there are about
50 million illiterates aged between 10
and 14; 42 million between 15 and 19
and 44 million between 20 and 24.
Deprived of schooling, theirs is a
permanent state of social, civic and
economic frustration. Small wonder
that diversified personalities do not
blossom forth from such a soil. Under
different conditions, they would be
a reservoir of strength that could
be harnessed for economic growth.
Instead, they act as a drag on develop¬
ment.
The number of young workers is
constantly going up and many feel
insecure as they see how technology
transforms their jobs. Their main
concerns are vocational guidance and
training, mobility and job security.
The number of secondary school
students in the world today is quite
impressive, having almost doubled in
the fifteen years between 1950-51 and
1965-66. Education, in certain sub¬
jects, now begins at a much earlier
age than before to the extent that
students now identify themselves with
social and civic movements in their
community or country as they have
never done in the past. Consequently,
it is not surprising to find them joining
forces with university students, and
in certain developing countries, even
playing a role similar to that of the
university students themselves.
College and university students are
a rapidly growing element in society
and, in many respects, they form the
great vanguard of youth today. From
1960 to 1965, their world total rose
from 11,174,000 to 16,015,000 persons,
a phenomenal increase of 61 per cent.
Both in terms of numbers and capa¬
bility, university students represent a
new force in society and the powerful
influence they now exercise has
particular relevance in the contem¬
porary context.
In the industrial countries, the
number of college students from low-
income families is rising steadily while
middle class enrolment continues to
go up. In developing countries, de¬
colonization and social progress are
two factors that have given great
impetus to university enrolment.
Viewed as a whole, the vast army
of the young is gradually evolving into
a determined though multi-faceted
social group, possessing its own
dynamic momentum, and making a
novel contribution to the process of
social change.
Today's youth are different. Numbers
alone do not tell the story. Many
social changes also affect youth's life,
status and rôle in the world.
First are changes in family
structures. Children split off. from
their families at earlier and earlier
ages. Youth's yearning for inde¬
pendence from their parents has been
observed in every society.
Traditional community structures are
also withering. They are poorly
adapted to the demands of technical
and economic development. Young
people are eager for change and need
emancipation from the rule of elders
to strike out on their own.
Meanwhile, institutions, customs and
economic conditions have altered and
most young people of today start
working at a later age than their
parents did. No doubt this Is an
improvement, but such a long wait
tends to isolate youth in society. It
keeps them in a situation where they
are denied the rights and responsibi¬
lities of adulthood because of the very
fact that they are unbound by its main
obligations.
But there is probably nothing that
has influenced youth more deeply than
the impact of scientific and technolo¬
gical development on society, the
crisis of our tentacular cities and the
revolution in our modern ways of life
and high speed communications.
These factors have disturbed, be¬
wildered and disrupted the lives of
the young, but at the same time they
have given youth unique opportunities
for assertion. The rôle of young
people in the modern world has thus
taken on extraordinary new dimen¬
sions. Not only because of their
sheer strength of numbers but also
because of the specific part they can
play in the changes implied by modern
development.
A new generation gap. Youth have
now achieved the status of a distinct
community. This has led to the most
basic conflict of all: it stems from
youth's determination to win from
society the status and esteem they
deem to be their right. It is endemic
in universities and schools, in factories
and villages, and certainly in institu¬
tions designed for youth but usually
run by adults.
These demands often clash with the
adult world's tendency to regard youth
as awaiting admission into society.
Until the young have crossed the
barrier, adults believe, they have no
claim on all the rights denied them
even though this does not prevent
society from demanding youth's contri¬
bution when necessary.
Then there is an intellectual, and
moral conflict that widens the gap
between youth and adults with every
passing day. Modern information
media familiarize youth with different
cultures while ignoring frontiers. On
a world scale, a sort of international
"youth culture" seems to have sprung
CONTINUED ON PAGE 8

*
Above, student demonstration in Lima, Peru. Students carry banner
reading "We Want to Study." Below, Tokyo student protests have taken on
very violent forms in past year.
r
\l
L\^
°:|
5
i
- t

YOUTH IN FERMENT (Continued)
The many forms of contestation
up. It clashes head-on with an
adult culture still fenced in by tradition.
This leads to conflicts of opinions,
customs, behaviour and ethical prin¬
ciples that affect the very foundations
of modern society. It raises problems
whose gravity is keenly felt on all
sides. These may be the hardest
problems of all to solve under present
circumstances.
Here, it is interesting to note that
the split is almost at Its widest over
the Issue of policies leading to inter¬
national solidarity. Many young people
are amazed when they see that the
most unprecedented technological
progress that the world has ever seen
does not go hand in hand with the
establishment of peace and justice on
earth. They see, too, how little it con¬
tributes to the welfare of mankind's
underdeveloped two-thirds. And a
form of youthful internationalism is
taking shape.
Everywhere in the world, more and
more young people are demonstrating
against war and injustice. It would be
worthwhile to measure the strength of
youthful Internationalism compared to
certain displays of nationalism from
which many of them are no more
immune than their elders. These are
the new facts that lend a new
dimension to the old problems of
conflicts between generations.
w
8
HILE no one denies educ¬
ation's positive contribution, various
educators and psychologists have their
doubts about certain teaching methods.
Parents are eager to see their chil¬
dren take their place in society and,
starting at an early age, use certain
methods to teach them the rules of an
adult world. Then comes school where
they undergo other forms of training
occasionally designed to prevent them
from "harming" society before they are
perfectly integrated into it.
Even when adults accept children
as personalities, they often refuse to
admit that children can exist as a
community by and among themselves.
Instead of aiding the creation of a
youthful society, adults fight it in
different ways: discipline, punishments,
competition, appeals to pride and
other methods that try to force the
child to conform to adult society.
Similar practices are prevalent In
clubs and organizations created for
youth but where attempts are often
made to force adult culture down their
throats: in the army where discipline
exists to "build character"; in youth
movements where appeals to youth's
generosity and patriotism are occa¬
sionally motivated by a need not to
serve but to use youth.
At times? youth feel they are being
"manipulated" and make no bones
about expressing resentment. This
¡s a way of reacting against attempts
not only by teachers but by social and
cultural institutions, political parties
and businessmen to direct or influence
them. It many cases, youth's suspicions
are unwarranted, but their reactions are
quite understandable in situations
where social and political corruption
and decadence prevail or where they
must confront school systems suffering
from inertia or sclerosis.
Young people may react the same
way against the occasional tendency
of authorities or the powers-that-be to
throw cold water on any adolescent
values that run against the current
grain of centralization, organization and
rationalization. Such values are
exemplified by spontaneity, deliberate
irresponsibility, idealism, refusal to
take orders and wariness of rational
solutions as soon as they are applied
to human problems.
Certain young people even see
"manipulation" in efforts to "cultivate"
them before they are old enough to
put up a fight against the prestige and
the pitfalls of a ready-made culture.
They can also rebel against other
efforts to lead them into "participa¬
tion" or "dialogues" in exchange for
reforms that they consider of no
importance.
Arbitrary manipulation of youth is
only one aspect. Then there Is the
use of the entire myth of youth for
political or business purposes. It is
typified by certain large firms that
discovered the importance of the
"youth market", then began to churn
out all sorts of products magazines,
records, clothes, shows designed for
the young market. Youth do not find
it any easier to achieve emancipation
after being brain-washed in this
manner.
Everyone agrees today that youth
seek contestation in a form that can
be more or less radical, direct or
obvious. Its purpose is to eliminate
certain anomalies or to resist certain
temptations, to display disappoint¬
ment, to emphasize non-commitment
or to speed processes of change that
have already begun.
One cannot afford to overlook any
form of youthful contestation whether
violent or peaceful, apparently justified
or useless, open or more or less
hidden. Take youth in developing
countries: there they must steer a
course somewhere between ancestral
tradition and modern ways. The great
migratory movement into cities is
certainly governed by economic fac¬
tors, but does it not also represent
a form of protest by a young genera¬
tion that refuses to work the lands
of their forefathers ?
IN a large number of coun¬
tries, deep-seated radical, social and
economic change, whether socialist or
not, has been wrought either at the
end of World War II or during the
decolonization process. Many a bright
hope for economic, social and cultural
progress and particularly change in
social structures, has come a cropper
against lack of funds or has been
dashed by slowness of execution.
Contestation by youth often reflects
this situation, particularly the tension
between those who fought for inde¬
pendence and the others. Youth try
to link promises to results and ideals
to achievements while at the same
time fighting inertia and denouncing
adults for their slowness and bureau¬
cratic ways.
In many countries, youth have moved
into a stage of more or less open
rebellion. Young people display their
disapproval of racial segregation and
linguistic discrimination, they protest
against the paternalism and the living
conditions they must endure, they have
risen up against social conformity,
they have denounced the myths of
"production for production's sake" and
"consumption for consumption's sake".
Some very spectacular forms of
protest have blossomed out almost
overnight in recent years in industrial
societies and they have slowly moved
into the big cities of the developing
world. They go by different names,
they take different shapes: songs
against war and for love, long hair,
weird clothes, pot and promiscuity,
teddy boys, vitelloni, halbstarke, hooli¬
gans, yakusan, stilyagi, anderumpter,
provos, beatniks, hippies and other
groups ' labelled by new words in
almost every language. All this
points to the alienation, isolation and
escapism felt by part of modern youth.
No matter how different they may

appear on the surface, these pheno¬
mena share a common trait: they show
how this segment of youth rejects the
values of present-day society.
The public has heard a great deal
about juvenile delinquency pver the
past fifteen years. It has been blamed
on a number of causes: underemploy¬
ment or unemployment, poor housing,
schools not adapted to their pupils, or
the influence of certain films and
publications. But .the public often
fails to recognize it for what it really
is: a collective phenomenon generated
by youth's inability to adapt and also
a symptom of the anxiety of young
people and the open violence they are
tempted to wield against society.
Student revolt is only the newest
form of contestation. Its themes and
aspects are not the same in highly-
industrialized as they are in developing
countries. They differ, too, in Asia,
Africa, Europe or Latin America as well
as in terms of each country's social
and economic structure. But the
spread of student revolt certainly
proves the great anxiety dwelling in
university youth throughout the world.
In the 1967-68 school year alone,
protest movements and
demonstrations (certainly of
seriousness) appeared in
of countries throughout the
revolts,
student
varying
dozens
world.
Alongside social and political pro¬
tests or general discontent, many
student groups have expressed their
desire to reform university curricula
and to restructure universities. They
want to participate in their education,
they demand an end to the artificial
barriers between the rôle of the
student and that of the teacher.
Everyone, they say, must take an
active part in the educational process
while everyone becomes both an
educator and an "educatee".
They insist on changes in the
content of university education to
make it pay more heed to youth's real
concerns in all fields whether cultural,
personal, social, political or pro¬
fessional. They start by criticizing the
university; in many cases, they end
with the idea of a "critical university".
Finally, they seek to change the style
of life in the universities themselves.
In other words, a growing proportion
of modern youth feels a malaise
whether they are college or secondary
school students, young workers or
rural youth. They want "freer, franker
and warmer human relations than what
they get from us." They are afraid
that "the national and international
system into which they are being
driven contains grave injustices to
which they do not want to be party."
Below, faculty members in San Francisco listen to a student spokesman. Bottom, young
Parisians try to win over a bystander to their way of thinking during last year's
"events". Above, "Monsieur Jacques", epitome of an ordered way of life and reasoning,
is a work by the sculptor L.O. Weckenbach. On his plinth in Rotterdam, he seems
to be recalling the days before "provos" and other young protesters were born.

YOUTH IN FERIV.ENT (Continued)
The crisis
Poking fun at and showing irreverence
for famous national heroes seems
to excite many young people
today though it often shocks their
parents. Mere, a hippie convention
in Chicago congregates around and
on the equestrian statue of General
Ulysses Grant, commander in chief of
the Union army in the American
Civil War, and 18th president of the
United States (from 1868 to 1875).
I ANY young people have
dropped out of society and do not
seem very interested in climbing back
in. But the great mass is eager to
gain more awareness of society's
problems and to help solve them
according to its own lights. Here,
young people display a yearning for
emancipation at an early age not
emancipation in its legal sense as
achievement of adult status but as a
way of becoming the equal of adults
in terms of rights and freedoms while
remaining true to themselves.
This trend had already been under¬
lined by the International Conference
on Youth, organized by Unesco in
Grenoble (France) in August 1964:
"Whereas it was once thought that
young people had no other function
than to prepare themselves for later
life, it is now realized that they want,
and ought, to take part in political and
social life very early and to assume
their place in the community as soon
as possible. That -is why young
people must be integrated into society
and considered as young adults, not
as growing children. They must
shoulder their responsibilities and be
helped to do so."
Many young people refuse to par¬
ticipate in public life but many more
insist on their rights to do so. This
demand derives not only from an
interest in public life but also because
they regard it as a prerequisite for
winning the rights, still the privilege
of adults, that will enable them to break
away from their status as minors.
Youth's need to participate in public
life is gaining wider recognition. In
certain cases, it is somewhat satisfied
by systems of self-government or "co-
government" within certain countries
local administrations and occasionally
even in traditional rural communities,
co-operatives, advisory bodies, etc.
Young people have mixed attitudes
about active participation in public life.
Sometimes they demand broader and
more effective participation within
existing structures, then try to render
them more efficient and democratic.
At other times, they refuse to parti
cipate even when given the chance.
They are afraid that if they "sold out"
to the Establishment they would lose
their dynamism and their influence as
a protest group.
It is true that a permanent dialogue
is needed with youth but it is also
true that such a dialogue can be
fruitful only if it influences decision¬
making bodies. Youth occasionally
feel that willingness to talk conceals a
total lack of willingness to share the
power of decision-making.
Helping to solve their own problems.
More and more often, secondary
school children above a certain age
and especially college students insist
on participating in the formulation of
curricula. Youth want to lend a hand
to the shaping of new university
structures and in devising new ways
to give examinations and select
students.
Even student extremists do not seem
to be trying to take the reins of
authority away from the teachers but
simply to find a common ground for

ht S
r
ta .
vvt ¿.
discussion, using simpler and more
human forms of communication. This
is conscious and responsible participa¬
tion: it is spreading student govern¬
ment beyond classrooms into the
lunchrooms, dormitories and general
disciplinary machinery of secondary
schools.
All this holds true for many young
workers who want to "participate" in
their own training. They must acquire
the knowledge and the attitudes they
need to be flexible enough to meet
the demands of modern industry.
They must be able to organize and
protect their jobs, as well as their
leisure.
Rural youth can participate in co¬
operatives, young farmers' clubs and
institutions that give them a dignified
role in the modernization of agriculture.
Such participation can lead to a
strengthening and rejuvenation of
rural communities.
In this respect, we find youth
organizations and institutions besieged
by their members" demands for more
responsibilities and opportunities for
direct action. More and more young
people have more and more places
where they can meet clubhouses,
centres and halls that the government
and adult organizations open for them.
But whenever they feel that these
clubs and centres really do not belong
to them, boys and girls prefer to meet
in a place a café, a dance hail-
where they feel they can talk freely
away from the adult world. Just about
everywhere, they are groping for a
way to run the centres set up for them.
Finally, young people want to lead
their own lives with the leisure to help
solve their own problems. Whether
in sports, cultural activities, holidays
or travel, they seek to express them¬
selves in activities that they have
chosen and organized on their own.
Participation in international life.
There is no denying the sad fact that
many do not care about world affairs.
In conflicts, their attitude is often "a
plague on both your houses." As for
international organizations, they ignore
their existence and some are particu¬
larly sceptical about the United Nations
and its agencies.
Nevertheless, youth on the whole are
growing more and more interested in
world affairs, perhaps because the
world is in crisis. Systems of
values are collapsing in industrialized
societies, conflicts arise between
societies with different social and eco¬
nomic systems; developing countries
face tragic problems, the entire world
is gripped in the fear of nuclear
death . . .
To a large number of young people,
all this is totally irrational. It stirs
their need to "change the world."
Apparently, they do not "adapt" nearly
as well as adults to the international
tensions, conflicts and injustices of
the modern world.
Despite the existence of certain
nationalist movements, young people
are still the world's strongest
supporters of international under¬
standing. They do not regard it as
just a theory, either. More and more
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
11

YOUTH IN FERMENT (Continued)
Towards a new partnership with youth
12
protests against wars are being made
more and more loudly. Voluntary
movements have burgeoned so rapidly
in recent years that the supply far
outstrips the demand at present.
Youth organizations are more and
more eager to co-operate vith inter¬
national institutions, bringing massive
and enthusiastic support to their
programmes. Examples can be found
in solid backing by youth of program¬
mes aimed against illiteracy and
hunger and of International rescue
campaigns after natural disasters.
Finally, it is certain that networks
offering youth a permanent exchange
system have helped usher In new
youth solidarity on an international
scale.
Youth are eager and ready to parti¬
cipate in international solidarity to
build a world where human rights,
peace and brotherhood will not be
merely words in "charters" but bases
for ways of life and action. It is true
that present-day misunderstandings,
tensions and contradictions in inter¬
national life are reflected by youth
activities at this level, but it is also true
that youth everywhere are extremely
close to those ideals and principles
that the world community keeps
proclaiming, all too often in vain.
In particular, youth organizations are
trying to participate more intensively
not only in the execution but in the
preparation of the programmes of
international organizations. They really
have not yet been given a chance to
do so. Organizations must become
aware of this trend and make room
for youth whose support and parti¬
cipation can strengthen their world
rôle.
How the situation is viewed. Some
see today's youth unrest as "nothing
new". They call it just another facet
of a problem as old as history that
will exist as long as generations clash
and youth remain ill-adapted to
society.
Others charge that youth escalate
their impulses into violence all too
readily without knowing where they
are going ... or where they would like
to go. If youth reject paternalism,
they are called presumptuous, in¬
tolerant and incompetent. If they
break a lance against technocracy,
they are accused of getting drunk on
their own words. If they turn against
conformity and the powers-that-be,
they are told they are irresponsible,
futile and unaware of things that really
matter. If they denounce the debasing
and alienating effects of commer¬
cialism as they turn their backs on the
affluent society, they are called
spoiled brats.
At one extreme of public opinion,
there is an attitude that just about
affirms that the whole youth crisis is
"artificial" and that their revolt is
simply dictated from within by their
own status and hopes.
Another attitude consists of con¬
sidering the youth movement as
isolated with its own laws and outside
our overall social context. This does
not fit the evidence of recent years
that have seen youth, like adults,
refuse to remain on the same side all
the time. They can oppose their own
social group, yet conform to it. They
can seek and find allies or strong¬
holds in another -social group, then
adopt its mode of behaviour. Youth
and adults still seem permanently
linked and, despite superficial ap¬
pearances, no one can describe the
present situation in terms of "father-
and-son struggles".
Nevertheless, many adults are
astounded by the scope of the youth
movement and the forms it has
assumed. They lock the barn door
after the horse has been stolen: they
reproach themselves for not having
paid enough attention to youth's
demands, they take genuine interest
in the causes of its dissatisfaction and
they try to meet its contestation fairly.
It is at this point that we realize how
modern youth are helping to bring out
new social and moral values. They are
right to bare the flaws, the evils and
the vileness of a civilization that they
refuse to accept as such. In many
respects, youth's new ways of action
are healthy ways. They help give new
forms of expression to the reaction
against outdated social and political
structures. In particular, the adult
world realizes that educational systems
can be reformed and renovated only
with the participation of youth.
At another extreme lie outspoken
advocates of "student power" who
regard youth as an infallible judge of
intellectual aberrations and social
iniquities. Youth can do no wrong,
they say, and praise their "absolute
progressivism". The most tangible
result of all this zeal has been to turn
many adults against all youthful
progressives and to stir unwarranted
suspicion and hostility against the true
aspects of the youth movement.
Origins and causes of the crisis.
Explanations of the origins and causes
of the present crisis can be ranked
under two main headings. Some
think all this is of no great importance
and that it will go away. Others feel
that we are confronted by a crisis
affecting society as a whole or, at
least, by a profound social problem.
One explanation under the first
heading holds that tensions are created
by the failure of outdated traditional
institutions to meet the demands of
modernization. The explosions we
are witnessing are said to be an
expression of these tensions, and a
welcome expression, too: it leads to
reforms that will remedy causes and
thereby eliminate their effects.
From this viewpoint, such pheno¬
mena as youth's alienation, refusal
or revolt are nothing more than the
fits and starts we always experience
when we move from one society to
another: in this case, from pre-
industrial to industrial societies based
on rationality.
Other snap judgements call youth's
crisis a case of temporary exasperation
that shows such typical juvenile
symptoms as turbulence, naivete and
utopianism. Or else, in an even
grosser oversimplification, the more or
less serious course of events is not
supposed to be based on the objective
existence of any problems at all but
simply on candour and ignorance
displayed by a certain sector of
modern youth.
As for serious explanations, they
agree that society is witnessing a
crisis or is in a state of crisis itself,
but they differ considerably over the
nature of its causes. We hear of the
crisis of youth's integration into
modern societies, the urgent need for
various sorts of mutations in different
types of societies, the necessity to

break away from conservatism in a
given situation, the crisis faced by the
"consumers' society"; the crisis of
ways of life, of values, of civilization
itself.
All these views imply that youth are
particularly sensitive to society's evils.
The idea of clear-sighted youth in a
blind and aging world leads to the
most dramatic hypothesis of all: the
phase we are now undergoing will
lead the world either to inevitable
agony or to rebirth.
Interpretations are split between two
basic views of the national and inter¬
national dimensions of the youth
crisis. The first holds that problems
vary so widely from one country to
another that they offer neither
similarity nor analogy nor correlation.
The second, on the contrary,
maintains that this is a general trend
whose universality is based upon
youth's feeling everywhere that man¬
kind is undergoing a crisis brought on
by chaos and threats. It is also based
on the international nature of youth
culture which makes various move¬
ments more permeable and contagious.
Differences among youth's situations
ideals, goals, demands and methods
In different countries cannot be
denied. Nor, however, can anyone
deny that there are similarities and
common denominators among activ¬
ities and events far removed from
each other and apparently distinct.
This aspect is particularly important for
international organizations.
Threefold approach to the problem.
More and more countries are trying to
take practical steps to help youth,
create facilities adapted to their needs
and develop activities organized by
youth themselves and their institutions.
However, one cannot help but wonder
under present circumstances if exist¬
ing facilities, steps and activities will
be equal to the problem. At the
current pace of events, there may
well be a gap at the practical level
between means and needs, between
efforts and problems.
Three different tendencies have
appeared at the national level. The
first is to create governmental or
quasi-governmental groups to take
care of youth problems. The second
is to develop or intensify self-govern¬
ment by youth within the institutions
that serve it. The third is to develop
ind spread the network of commer
cially-operated activities aimed at
meeting youth's leisure needs.
More and more countries are trying
to work out a "youth policy" composed
of a series of legislative, social, educ¬
ational and financial steps. While
pro-youth measures in the past were
usually unco-ordinated and dispersed,
the present tendency runs towards
overall national policies for children
and youth.
Many governments have taken both
long-term measures that must be
carried out empirically and emergency
steps that require improvisation. The
relative ineffectiveness of these
measures has several causes: ignor¬
ance of youth's hopes, insufficient
links among various camps within the
youth movement, faulty conception,
over-rigid structures or, on the con¬
trary, too much hemming and hawing.
Finally, there is the simple lack of
money which, in many cases, has been
responsible for mediocrity and lack of
continuity.
Among practical steps deserving
particular attention should be mention¬
ed school education, out-of-school
education and activities aimed at
enlisting youth into the development
of their country or community.
At the risk of repeating a truism,
one must stress that school and
university education wield the broad¬
est and deepest influence of all on
youth. It, too, is the sector that
receives by far the greatest financial
and intellectual support from govern¬
ments. In recent years, education has
enjoyed unprecedented expansion
throughout the world. Educational
investment is growing faster than
national incomes.
Both the basis and the corollary of
this development, the spread of
education offers benefits while creat¬
ing new problems. Expansion of
education has stimulated research in
pedagogy, generated administrative
reforms, brought about new relation¬
ships between the school and the
"environment," and started a move¬
ment to renovate methods. It is
encouraging to note that this trend
is growing stronger thanks to the
support it has received.
As for out-of-school activities, there
are two striking facts: the constant
increase in activities, institutions and
resources on the one hand, and, on
the other, the relative inadequacy and
inefficiency of these activities. Re
form of school education and official
teaching methods is not enough. At
the same time, youth's out-of-school
activities must help strengthen the
democratic, creative, dynamic and
living nature of education as a whole.
It is to be hoped, particularly In the
present circumstances, that out-of-
school education will help renovate
in-school education, revamp teaching
methods that have remained archaic
all too often and revise curricula
whose authoritarian, unrealistic and
encyclopaedic nature is denounced so
frequently and " so accurately by
students.
As youth feel their oats, society
becomes aware of their importance:
youth, an indispensable human re¬
source, must be mobilized if develop¬
ment is to be speeded. Countries
eager to modernize and to maintain
their economic growth rate therefore
tend to turn to young minds more
receptive to modern techniques and
more likely to spawn new ideas. In
many developing countries, special
offices have been created for this
purpose along with voluntary organiz¬
ations and the necessary legislation.
Twenty-eight countries (1), to our
knowledge, have set up national youth
services for economic and social
development which mobilize young
people for a year or two between the
end of their adolescence and the
start of their adult lives.
In other countries (2) where similar
services are performed by private
bodies, legislation has been passed
to integrate their activities Into
development plans. Official status,
for example, has been given the work
of the Company of Young Canadians
which supports and carries out pro¬
grammes aimed at social, economic
and community development. Other
examples are the Education Service
and the Health Service in Iran (both
voluntary) that try to improve rural
living conditions, or Volunteers in
Service to America (VISTA) which
offers young and old alike a chance
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
(1) Afghanistan, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Demo¬
cratic Republic of the Congo, Dahomey, Gha¬
na. Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Kenya, Liberia, Ma¬
dagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Morocco,
Niger, Senegal, Singapore, Tanzania, Togo.
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab
Republic, United States of America, Upper
Volta, Zambia. - _
(2) Argentina, Canada, Chile, Colombia, I A
Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, "
Guatemala, India, Iran, Jamaica, Nepal, Pana¬
ma, Peru, Philippines, Thailand, United States
of America, Venezuela.

YOUTH IN FERMENT (Continued)
14
to work in social programmes aimed
at urban slums, rural poverty belts
and Indian reservations.
A genuine partnership. One must
face facts, however: in its present
form, this appeal to the generosity of
the young often tends to use them,
to mobilize them as involuntary
"volunteers." Ideally, it should be
based on civic spirit or solidarity and
it certainly should give youth a say
in the process of development which,
after all, will determine their future.
It is equally obvious that youth
can play such a rôle only in a system
that enables them to take a hand both
in the preparation and the execution
of plans as full-fledged participants.
Youth will be true partners only when
they win the right to express their
opinions about plans for national
growth and development and the
methods to be used. The result will
not be just more "youth power" for
development but easier integration of
youth into society as a whole. Here,
the idea is not to try to outwit youth
but to lay new foundations for an
authentic youth policy.
Although practical approaches and
operational steps have yet to be fully
analyzed, one can already point to
some obvious flaws.
First of all, youth programmes are all
too often undertaken without any real
knowledge of youth, their problems,
behaviour and the tendencies that make
them run. Why? Because no one
strikes that Indispensable balance
between thought and action, between
practical measures and scientific study
of situations and problems.
Secondly, there Is the inflexibility
of certain social structures or the
burden of tradition weighing down
on activities intended for youth.
Occasionally, too, society acts slowly
or even fearfully when confronted by
youth's needs and The
result is that institutions cannot adapt
dynamically to situations and, instead,
remain crippled by outmoded forms.
Last and certainly not least, policies,
programmes and practical approaches
are all too often conceived and carried
out for youth, rather than by and with
youth.
The present crisis will be vanquished
only if such a state of mind is
changed. For it is not just a "youth
crisis" but, to a large extent, a crisis
in society's concern over its youth.
Photo Holmes-Lebel
The students' revolt which struck France in May, 1968 set off
a chain reaction which spread throughout Europe and to other
parts of the world. Student irregulars, like this young
demonstrator, waged pitched battles in the streets of Paris.
