GANDHI
ON STUDENTS
AND POLITICS
by Malcolm 5. Adiseshiah
Deputy Director-General of Unesco
GjANDHI's views on politics
in educational institutions are a subject
which is topical for India and all mem¬
ber countries of Unesco. It is the
burning issue today in all countries.
In one year alone, the college year
1967-1968, there were student riots
and student uprisings in 56 out of 80
of Unesco's member countries which
have universities. (The other 45 do not
as yet have universities.)
1 would summarize Gandhiji's views
on the subject of politics in educational
institutions under four slogans:
Educational institutions are political
institutions;
Educational institutions must parti¬
cipate in moments of national poli¬
tical crisis;
Educational institutions must not
participate in party politics;
Educational institutions must be¬
come educational institutions.
Educational institutions
are political institutions
The ancient aphorism, education is
that which liberates, is as true today
as it was before, wrote Gandhiji in the
March 10, 1946 issue of Harijan. This
comment possibly best summarizes his
view with regard to politics in educa¬
tional institutions. For him, educa¬
tion was training of all kinds, starting
28
MALCOLM S. ADISESHIAH is Deputy Di¬
rector-General of Unesco, which he ¡oined in
1948. Born in the State of Madras, he was
educated in India and Great Britain.
Before joining Unesco, he headed the Depart¬
ment of Economics at the University of
Madras and had been lecturer in economics
at the University of Calcutta. At Unesco he
has been especially concerned with problems
of economic development in Asia, Africa and
Latin America.
with the training of one's own charac¬
ter, with a view to serving mankind.
Equally, liberation meant freedom from
all forms and shades of servitude
internal and external.
If politics is the art of serving man¬
kind with a view to its attaining the
rights and freedoms which later came
to be enshrined in India's constitution
and in the United Nations Charter
namely, the universal respect for and
observance of human rights and funda¬
mental freedoms for all without dis¬
tinction as to race, sex, language or
religion, then educational institutions
are political institutions, in an etymo¬
logical sense.
Schools and colleges educate their
members, students and teachers, in
the science and art of liberation. Edu¬
cation is the science, liberation is the
art. Education is learning and training,
liberation is eradicating and freeing.
In educational institutions, a member
learns about himself and the world
around him and acts on liberating from
enslavement himself and all those
around him, who are similarly enslav¬
ed. In this sense, Gandhiji visualized
educational institutions as political in¬
stitutions, in the highest sense of the
political vocation.
Educational institutions
must participate in moments
of national political crisis
In the heyday of non-co-operation,
students and teachers were invited to
leave their schools and colleges. Some
professors and students who respond¬
ed to the Congress call have remained
steadfast and gained much for the
country and themselves, wrote Gan¬
dhiji in his revised issue of the con¬
structive programme which he first set
forth in 1941, and finally published
from Poona on November 13, 1945. In
the life of a nation, there are the rare
but awesome moments of national cri¬
sis, demonstrated in India when Gan¬
dhiji and the Congress called on
students and teachers to leave their
educational institutions to participate,
in the national struggle.
Occasions like the present do not
occur in everybody's and but rarely in
anybody's life, he said, addressing the
All-India Congress Committee at its
Bombay session in 1942, on the eve
of its adoption of the Quit India reso¬
lution addressed to the British. Here
is the mantra that I give you: Do or
Die. In all fights for freedom the
world over the students have made
very large contributions, he said.
At these moments of a nation's life
and death, politics becomes charged
with a sacred mission, and is the staff
of all life everywhere in society.
Educational institutions being in so¬
ciety, participate in and partake of
the politicization at these times of all
of social, public and private life. Such
participation must always conform to
the twin absolutes of Satya and Ahim¬
sa (1). There is no place for Himsa (2)
of any kind in the deep and total in¬
volvement of the student and teacher
in the national movement. When the
final heat of the struggle comes,
declared Gandhiji, students and
teachers will leave their institutions
and if need be, sacrifice themselves
for the freedom of their country. Such
sacrifice is total because it is non¬
violent.
Gandhiji expressed in the same
Poona statement his deep regret at
any form of non-participation of educa¬
tional institutions in these moments
of national political crisis. He traced
such non-response to the false and
unnatural lure offered its members by
current education. In so inviting edu¬
cational institutions to play their part
in national political crisis, Gandhiji was
in effect not denying to the students
and teachers what Harold Laski terms
the ultimate right of every citizen
the right to revolt. This ultimate and
precarious responsibility which every
individual citizen carries but carries
only as an individual citizen, not as a
teacher or a student, is for each per¬
son, in his solemn moment of solitude,
a matter of personal conscience.
And conscience is a tricky thing.
(1) Truth and non-violence. (2) Violence.

While it could gird us with courage,
it could equally make cowards of us
all. It might lead us to say, with
Gandhiji: leave me to God and chaos;
or it might equally lead us to declare
with him that we might be committing
a Himalayan blunder. On no account,
however, warned Gandhiji, may they
(the participants) use coercion against
dissenters or against the authorities.
Ahimsa is the mark of political parti¬
cipation when it emanates from the
conscience.
Educational institutions
must not participate in
party politics
Students must not take part in party
politics, Gandhi said. They are
students, searchers, not politicians.
They may not resort to political strikes,
They must have their heroes but their
devotion to them is to be shown by
copying the best in their heroes not
by going on strikes, wrote Gandhiji
in no uncertain terms in that same
constructive programme of November
1945, on the question of the involve¬
ment of educational institutions in day-
to-day politics.
This directive is quite unambiguous
and seems to speak directly to the
members of educational Institutions to¬
day who go on strike, march in pro¬
cessions, burn trams and buses, stone
railway trains and injure helpless old
men, women and children travelling
on them. These political demonstra¬
tions of students and some teachers
are said to be a protest to language,
State boundaries or other party poli¬
tical issues.
Should educational institutions and
their members be involved in this kind
of party not national political activi¬
ties, with their invariable accompani¬
ment of violence? Gandhiji's answer
is a clear and resounding NO. My
own answer when I was a member
of the University of Madras was NO,
and my answer now as a Unescan is
still NO.
Active political involvement and par¬
ticipation in day-to-day political life is
not the function of schools and col¬
leges. These institutions have not
been created for that purpose. They
have no specialized competence or
vocation in the field of political action.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo © H Cartie'-Bresson Paris

30
STUDENTS AND POLITICS (Continued)
As Gandhiji pointed out, the func¬
tions of schools and colleges are
essentially learning: their members are
seekers and searchers after truth, in
the process of learning the qualities of
tolerance, compassion, equality and
justice. How can you seek and search
for truth, when you march around in
processions shouting slogans? How
can you learn tolerance when you
carry a knife or a steel tipped stick
at demonstrations and stab your
opponent? How can you become
compassionate when you spend the
day halting trains and stoning their
helpless passengers? How can you
learn equality if your school, or college
strike formula is based on the con¬
viction that while all Indians may be
equal, you are more equal than those
who refuse to strike or are from an¬
other State, language or political
group ? Where is the concept of
justice that you are imbibing leading
you, when you set fire to other people's
property, buses, trams and houses?
I S it not precisely to enable
colleges and schools and their members
to carry on their functions as seekers
of truth and learners of the human
values that they are in this country and
in all countries endowed with special
privileges and an autonomy of thought
and action at this formative stage of
the school and college life of the
student? Is one evidence of this
truth, when it is contravened through
students participation in party politics,
not found in the fact that such parti¬
cipation is almost always marked by
violence and counter-violence?
I realize how difficult inaction is at
school and college, when one is im¬
bibing the tenets of truth and personal
integrity and sees corruption and
falsehood all around: when one's head
is filled with concepts of justice and
sees only injustice around; when the
classics on freedom are being studied
while at the same time various forms
of petty tyranny in government munici¬
palities and village councils are at
play all around; when the absolute of
non-violence which is uncompromising¬
ly proclaimed confronts what Herbert
Marcuse calls our basically totalitarian
society which employs subtle tech¬
niques of violence on "the outsiders",
among whom are the students.
For one thing party political man¬
oeuvres rarely relate to these values.
For another, there is no alternative for
the student and teacher. They are like
the astronauts and cosmonauts, only
in an even more critical position. They
must be involved in their training fully.
Gandhiji felt that this may require
an additional one year in college.
They must be soaked and fitted to
the last Inch in the process of learning
and in the ability to think for them¬
selves.
This they need in order to face all
contingencies in life, if disaster to
themselves and even more to the mil¬
lions who will come to depend on
them in the future is to be averted.
That is the price of the privileged
position of educational institutions
discipline, which is at the same time
a call for patient learning and intensive
self-education.
Let me make clear that I am not
trying to divorce education from the
community, to make colleges and edu¬
cational institutions ivory tower in¬
stitutions living apart from social and
national realities. Nor am I suggest¬
ing that all learning takes place only
at school and college. All I am saying
is that the learning process starts
where it is supposed to in education¬
al institutions.
Society today involves education In
a profound crisis both in concepts
and systems. In terms of concepts,
education is not conforming to what
you read or are taught but learning
to think for yourself which is the
basis of divergence and dialogue; not
learning to conform but learning how
to disagree and debate in a civilized
manner.
In educational institutions, we can
apply this concept of learning on a
full-time basis. In terms of systems,
its inherited assumption that life can
be divided into two stages that of
acquiring knowledge (as in filling a
storage tank) and that of giving it out
(as when the storage tank taps are
opened), is now shown to be false.
Equally false is the hope that by
emptying the taps at school and col¬
lege, we can fill them later In life.
Education is no longer preparation
for life. It is part of life. Education
is no longer the gateway to society.
It Is the centre of society. Education
cannot be grounded in national realities
only, if they are nostalgic rather than
prospective. Education and work are
no longer in conflict: work and life
no longer devour each other. All work
and no play does not make Jack
a dull boy. Education is work: it is
part of working time and production.
Education is play: it is the coming
life of leisure.
This means that we can neglect
learning at any stage of life only at
our peril. To waste the early years of
school life playing politics involves
learning which will have to be un¬
learned later. For learning ¡s a con¬
tinuous and continuing process. One
is always learning something, the three
Rs or vocational skills, human values,
or inhuman desires, self-education or
mis-education. One can be busy with
good works or idle as the Devil's
workshop.
To neglect the discipline of learning
to think and reason while at school in
favour of party political activities in
the hope of acquiring such learning in
later life is to turn adult life from
a full, rich life of learning into a vast
psychiatric ward, a sad correctional
educational Institution, a kind of moral
and spiritual jail. If such are the issues
GANDHI'S
VIEWS
ON
EDUCATION
at stake, then educational institutions
cannot afford the luxury of becoming
the playboy or plaything of party po¬
litics.
Educational institutions
must become educational
institutions
But this Gandhian prohibition of
party politics entering educational in¬
stitutions is posited on a certain and
definite view of schools and colleges
I refer now to some of his educa¬
tional obiter dicta. Education does not
mean a knowledge of letters but it
means character building it means a
knowledge of Dharma (1), he wrote
on March 25, 1939. A student means
one who is hungry for learning learn¬
ing is knowledge of what is worth
knowing about. Persistent question¬
ing and healthy inquisitiveness are
the first requisites for acquiring learn¬
ing of any kind. Education must be
a new type for the creation of a new
world. I would revolutionize college
education and relate it to national
necessities. The aim of university
(1) Duty.

In my opinion what we have reason to deplore and be
ashamed of is not so much illiteracy as ignorance. This is
not to say that I would not provide a knowledge of the
alphabet. I value it too much to despise or even belittle
its merit as a vehicle of education.
The primary need of those who are come of age and are
following an avocation, is to know how to read and write.
Mass illiteracy is India's sin and shame and must be liqui¬
dated. Of course the literacy campaign must not begin
and end with a knowledge of the alphabet. It must go
hand in hand with the spread of useful knowledge.
The old idea was to add a handicraft to the ordinary
curriculum of education followed in the schools. That is
to say, the craft was to be taken in hand wholly separate
from education. To me that seems a fatal mistake. The
teacher must learn the craft and correlate his knowledge
to the craft, so that he will impart all that knowledge to
his pupils through the medium of the particular craft that
he chooses.
Take the instance of spinning. Unless I know arithme¬
tic I cannot report how many yards of yarn I have produced
on the "takli,", or how many standard rounds it will make
or what is the count of the yarn that I have spun. I must
learn figures to be able to do so, and I also must learn
addition and subtraction and multiplication and division.
In dealing with complicated sums I shall have to use sym¬
bols and so get my algebra. Even here I would insist on
the use of Hindustani letters instead of Roman.
Take geometry next. What can be a better demonstration
of the circle than the disc of the takli? I can teach all
about the circle in this way, without even mentioning the
name of Euclid.
Again, you may ask how can I teach my child geogra¬
phy and history through spinning. Some time ago I came
across a book called "Cotton - The Story of Mankind". It
thrilled me. It read like a romance. It began with the
history of ancient times, how and when cotton was first
grown, the stages of its development, the cotton trade
between the different countries and so on.
As I mention the different countries to the child, I shall
naturally tell him something about the history and geo¬
graphy of these countries. Under whose reign the differ¬
ent commercial treaties were signed during the different
periods. Why has cotton to be imported by some coun¬
tries and cloth by others? Why can every country not
grow the cotton it requires? That will lead me into eco¬
nomics and elements of agriculture. I shall teach him to
know the different varieties of cotton, in what kind of soil
they grow, how to grow them, from where to get them,
and so on.
Thus takli spinning leads me into the whole history of
the East India Company, what brought them here, how
they destroyed our spinning industry, how the economic
motive that brought them to India led them later to enter¬
tain political aspirations, how it became a causative factor
in the downfall of the Moguls and the Marathas, in the
establishment of the English Raj, and then again in the
awakening of the masses in our times. There is thus no
end to the educative possibilities of this new scheme. And
how much quicker the child will learn all that, without putting
an unnecessary tax on his mind and memory.
I am elaborating the instance of spinning because I know
it. If I were a carpenter, I would teach my child all these
things through carpentry.
What we need is educationists with originality, fired
with true zeal, who will think out from day to day what
they are going to teach their pupils. The teacher cannot
get this knowledge through musty volumes. He has to
use his own faculties of observation and thinking and
impart his knowledge to the children through his lips,
with the help of a craft. This means a revolution in the
method of teaching, a revolution in the teacher's outlook.
Why should a child waste seven years on learning a
craft when his real profession is going to be something
else, e.g. why should a banker's son, who is expected to
take to banking later on, learn spinning for seven years?
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
education should be to turn out true
servants of the people who will live
and die for the country's freedom,
wrote Gandhiji in Harijan on July 31,
1937.
I cannot help contrasting the Gand-
hian doctrine of education with India's
educational system today. Not that
Gandhiji was unaware of the defects of
education in his day. Writing in the
Hind Swaraj in December 1939, Gand¬
hiji concludes somewhat drastically
that whether you take elementary
education or higher education, it is
not required, in so far as it does not
make men of us. It does not enable
us to do our duty, he said.
Gandhi laid repeated emphasis on
duty, on Dharma, as the purpose of
education. In fact when Unesco invit¬
ed him in 1947 to define human rights,
he replied in a letter dated May 25,
1947, written from Bhangi Colony, New
Delhi: "I learned from my illiterate but
wise mother that all rights to be
deserved and preserved come from
duty well done."
And today India's educational insti¬
tutions seem to have slipped further
down the ladder of mediocrity and
futility. Wastages, drop-outs, repeat-
ings and inefficiencies seem to be their
hallmark. Repetitious, uninspired teach¬
ing, prescriptions of predigested and
erroneous bazaar notes as texts, over¬
crowded classrooms and lack of time
for reflecting and for what Gandhi
called inquisitive questioning with the
resultant cramming as the learning
technique have become a part of In¬
dia's schools and colleges.
The examination systems inhibit
thought (one university professor told
me recently that no student who ever
tries to think in an examination hall
will ever complete his paper) and act
as superficial classification machines.
There is also the lack of relation be¬
tween what is taught and learnt in the
college and the four-fold educational
ideal repeatedly stressed by Gandhiji,
the search for truth, the doing of
one's duty, the building of character
and the meeting of the national de¬
mands for development. Here the
spectre of educated unemployment
haunts the final year student.
Add to all this the moral confusion
and material corruption which seem to
be creeping into educational adminis¬
tration crowned by an atmosphere of
terrible boredom and horrible unreality.
Is this a fair picture of educational
institutions?
If it is so even in part, then is
it surprising that schools and colleges
instead of being centres of living to
learn together and learning to live
together are becoming the seed-bed of
student revolt and student violence?
Is it surprising then that day-to-day,
partisan and party politics are now
part of educational institutions? Is it
not then time that we instantly and
urgently implement the recommenda¬
tions of the Education Commission,
which are aimed at reforming and re¬
structuring India's education system
and providing machinery for all
student grievances so that they may
be examined fairly and met fully?
And so, is not the Gandhian call
more insistent and more relevant to¬
day than ever if our life, personal
and State, social and national, uni¬
versal and International, is not to be
completely lost In chaos and destruc¬
tion so that India's schools become
once more institutions of learning and
its colleges and universities become
once again centres for the pursuit of
truth and the promotion of develop¬
ment? Is it not then time to begin?
31

GANDHIS VIEWS ON EDUCATION (Continued)
The boy under the scheme of basic education does not
go to school merely to learn a craft. He goes there to
receive his primary education to train his mind through
the craft. I claim that the boy who has gone through the
new course of primary education for seven years, will make a
better banker than the one who has gone through the seven
years of ordinary schooling. The latter when he goes to a
banking school will be ill at ease because all his faculties will
not have been trained.
Prejudices die hard. I will have done a good day's
work if I have made you realize this one central fact that
the new education scheme is not a little of literary edu¬
cation and a little of craft It is full education up to the
primary stage through the medium of a craft. Therefore,
to go back to what I began with, if the teacher takes up
the craft in a scientific spirit, he will speak to his pupils
through many channels, all of which will contribute to the
development of all his faculties.
Useful, manual labour, intelligently performed, is
the means par excellence for developing the intellect A
balanced intellect presupposes a harmonious growth of
body, mind and soul. That is why we give to manual
labour the central place in our curriculum of training here.
Character building has the first place, and that is
primary education. A building erected on that foundation
will last.
True education of the intellect can only come through
the intelligent use of the body ... for the development
of the mind and body must go hand in hand with a cor¬
responding awakening of the soul; by spiritual learning
I mean the education of the heart.
I would revolutionize college education and relate it to
national necessities. There would be degrees for mechan¬
ical and other engineers. They would be attached to the
different industries which should pay for the training of
the graduates they need.
I am a firm believer in the principle of free and com¬
pulsory primary education for India. I also hold that we
shall realize this only by teaching the children a useful
vocation and utilizing it as a means for cultivating their
mental, physical and spiritual faculties. Let no one con¬
sider these economic calculations in connexion with educ¬
ation, as sordid, or out of place.
But as a nation we are so backward in education that
we cannot hope to fulfil our obligations to the nation in this
respect in the given time during this generation, if the
programme is to depend on money. I have therefore
made bold, even at the risk of losing all reputation for con¬
structive ability, to suggest that education should be self-
supporting.
There is nothing essentially sordid about economic cal¬
culations. True economics never militates against the
highest ethical standard, just as all true ethics to be
worth its name must at the same time be also good econo¬
mics. An economics that inculcates Mamman-worship,
and enables the strong to amass wealth at the expense
of the weak, is a false and dismal science. True economics,
on the other hand, stands for social justice, it promotes
the good of all equally, including the weakest, and is
indispensable for decent life.
32
Whatever may be true of other countries, in India at
any rate where more than eighty per cent of the population
is agricultural and another ten per cent industrial, it is a
crime to make education merely literary, and to unfit
boys and girls for manual work in later life. Indeed,
I hold that as the larger part of our time is devoted to
labour for earning our bread, our children must from their
infancy be taught the dignity of such labour.
Our children should not be so taught as to despise
labour. There is no reason why a peasant's son after hav¬
ing gone to a school should become useless, as he does
become, as an agricultural labourer. It is a sad thing that
our schoolboys look upon manual labour with disfavour,
if not contempt.
What kinds of vocations are the fittest for being taught
to children in urban schools? There is no hard and fast
rule about it. But my reply is clear.
You cannot instruct the teachers in the needs of villagers
through a training school in a city. Nor can you so inter¬
est them in the condition of villages. To interest city-
dwellers in villages and make them live in them is no
easy task. I am finding daily confirmation of this.
Then as to primary education, my confirmed opinion is
that the commencement of training by teaching the alphabet
and reading and writing hampers their intellectual growth.
I would not teach them the alphabet till they have had
an elementary knowledge of history, geography, mental
arithmetic and the art (say) of spinning. Through these
three I should develop their intelligence.
The question may be asked how intelligence can be
developed through the takli or the spinning-wheel. It can
to a marvellous degree if it is not taught merely mechanical¬
ly. When you tell a child the reason for each process,
when you explain the mechanism of the takli or the wheel,
when you give him the history of cotton and its con¬
nexion with civilization itself and take him to the village
field where it is grown, and teach him to count the
rounds he spins and the method of finding the evenness
and strength of his yarn, you hold his interest and simul¬
taneously train his hands, his eyes and his mind.
This method does not exclude a knowledge of history and
geography. But I find that this is best taught by transmit¬
ting such general information by word of mouth. One
imparts ten times as much in this manner as by reading and
writing. The signs of the alphabet may be taught later
when the pupil has learnt to distinguish the wheat from
the chaff and when he has somewhat developed his or
her tastes. This is a revolutionary proposal but it saves
immense labour and enables a student to acquire in one
year what he may take much longer to learn. This means
all-round economy. Of course the pupil learns mathe¬
matics whilst he is learning his handicraft.
I am not opposed to education even of the highest
type attainable in the world.
The State must pay for it wherever it has definite use
for it.
I am opposed to all higher education being paid for from
the general revenue.
It is my firm conviction that the vast amount of the so-
called education in arts, given in our colleges, is sheer
waste and has resulted in unemployment among the educat¬
ed classes.
I claim that I am not an enemy of higher education.
But I am an enemy of higher education as it is given in this
country. Under my scheme there will be more and better
libraries, more and better laboratories, more and better
research institutes. Under it we should have an army of
chemists, engineers and other experts who would be real
servants of the nation, and answer the varied and grow¬
ing requirements of a people who are becoming increasing¬
ly conscious of their rights and wants.
