A,l BOUT a year ago I was in
London at the invitation of British psy¬
chologists and sociologists in order to
lecture on "National Stereotypes."
Throughout the preceding day, during
which I was undoubtedly made more
sensitive by my preoccupation with
this topic, I kept running into exam¬
ples of such stereotyped thinking.
In my hotel, I heard someone say,
"Oh, she has that Scottish stubborn¬
ness, you know". A book review in a
newspaper used the phrase, "With
true Gallic wit". At the theatre that
evening, during the interval, I caught
part of a conversation in which a pretty
girl said to her escort, "I know that all
Americans have a 'line'"; and in a
mystery story that I read before
retiring, there was a reference to "typi¬
cal German thoroughness".
These are all instances of those
"pictures in our heads" to which
Walter Lippman gave the name of ster¬
eotypes. They are typical of the ease
with which most of us generalize about
national or ethnic groups, usually with¬
out even stopping to think where such
"information" comes from, and whether
it represents the truth, the whole truth,
or anything like the truth.
There are certainly very few, if any,
among us who have not succumbed
to the temptation to stereotype nations.
One might almost describe the ten¬
dency as inevitable, or at least very
nearly so. We know that Englishmen
are reserved, and Irishmen pugnacious;
we have heard it all our lives; besides
most people agree with us. But if we
are asked how we know, we would
not easily find a suitable answer.
One of the earliest careful studies of
this tendency was made by Katz and
Braly, in 1932, in connexion with the
stereotypes held by Princeton Univer¬
sity students. Their technique was
simple.
Each student was given a list of
traits, and a list of nationalities; from
the first lisj: he chose the five traits
which he regarded as characteristic of
each national or racial group.
We may summarize the results by
OTTO KLINEBERG Is professor emeritus of
social psychology at Columbia University,
New York, and director of the International
Centre for Intergroup Relations, Paris.

PICTURES
IN OUR
HEADS
by Otto Klineberg
indicating the three or four characteris¬
tics most commonly ascribed to each
nationality. These included, for the
Germans: scientifically-minded, indus¬
trious, stolid; the Italians, impulsive,
artistic, passionate; Negroes, super¬
stitious, lazy, happy-go-lucky, ignorant;
the Irish, pugnacious, quick-tempered,
witty; the English, sportsmanlike, intel¬
ligent, conventional; the Jews, shrewd,
mercenary, industrious; the Americans,
industrious, intelligent, materialistic,
ambitious; the Chinese, superstitious,
sly, conservative; the Japanese, intelli¬
gent, industrious, progressive; the
Turks, cruel, religious, treacherous.
A study conducted in nine countries
under the auspices of Unesco in 1948
and 1949, showed that such stereo¬
typed thinking could easily be elicited
almost anywhere. In each country
approximately 1,000 respondents, re¬
presenting a cross-section of the popu¬
lation, were given a list of 12 traits,
and asked to choose those which they
thought were most applicable to them¬
selves, to Americans, to Russians, and
in some cases, to two or three other
national groups as well. They could
choose as many of the traits as they
wished.
The British, for example, thought of
Americans as primarily progressive,
conceited, generous, peace-loving, in¬
telligent, practical. The Americans re¬
garded the British as intelligent, hard¬
working, brave, peace-loving, conceited
and self-controlled. The Norwegians
described the Russians as hardwork¬
ing, domineering, backward, brave,
cruel and practical.
The "self-image" is also revealing.
The British saw themselves as peace-
loving, brave, hard-working, intelligent;
the French saw themselves as intelli¬
gent, peace-loving, generous, and
brave; the Americans saw themselves
as peace-loving, generous, intelligent
and progressive. All the groups
agreed on one item: their own nation
was the most peace-loving of all!
Few people realize how much the
existence of stereotypes may colour
our relations with other people, even
to the extent of seeing them differently
as a result.
What we see is determined in part ÙH
by what we expect to see. If we be¬
lieve, for example, that Italians are
noisy, we will have a tendency to
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

PICTURES IN OUR HEADS (Continued)
notice those Italians who are indeed
noisy; if we are in the presence of
some who do not fit the stereotype,
we may not even realize that they, too,
are Italian. If someone points that fact
out to us and says: "Look, those
people are Italians, and they are not
noisy", we can always dismiss them as
exceptions.
Since there is no limit to the number
of cases that can be so dismissed, we
may continue to cling to the pictures in
our heads, in spite of all the facts to
the contrary. This does not always
happen. Stereotypes do sometimes
change in the light of new experience.
If we have had them for a long time,
however, we surrender them with great
reluctance.
Some years ago Allport and Post¬
man, psychologists at Harvard Univer¬
sity (Cambridge, U.S.A.) studied some
of the phenomena associated with the
spread of rumours, making use of a
technique known as ."serial reproduc¬
tion", a very simple device which
anyone can use with a group of friends.
They showed a picture to one stu¬
dent, and he described to a second
student what he saw in the picture.
The second then told a third what the
first had told him ; the third told the
fourth, and so on, through a series of
8 to 10 reproductions. Then a compar¬
ison was made between the final
result and the original presentation.
One of the pictures showed a scene
in a subway in which, in addition to a
number of people seated, there were
two men standing, one a white man,
the other a Negro. The white man
was dressed in working clothes, with
an open razor stuck in his belt. It so
happens that the stereotype of the
Negro held by some people in the
U.S.A. included the notion that Neg¬
roes carry with them an open razor,
of which they make ready use in an
argument.
In half of the groups who served as
subjects in these experiments, before
the end of the series of reproductions
had been reached, the razor had "mov¬
ed" from the white man to the Negro.
In some instances, the Negro was even
represented as brandishing the razor
violently in the face of the white man.
This does not mean that half of the
subjects in the experiment saw the
Negro with the razor, since if only one
person in the chain made this error,
it would be repeated by those that
followed. Interestingly enough, this
did not occur when the subjects were
Negroes (who rejected the stereotype),
or young children (who had not yet
"learned" it).
If a great many people agree that a
particular trait is associated with a
particular nation, does that make it
true? There is a fairly widespread
theory to the effect that "where there's
smoke there's fire". Otherwise, the
argument runs, where does the stereo¬
type come from? How would it come
into existence?
There is, however, a good deal of
evidence that stereotypes may develop
without any kernel of truth whatsoever.
We all know how widespread is the
notion that intelligent people have high
foreheads, yet scientific investigation
in this field has failed to reveal any
such relationship.
The stereotype of the criminal as
bearing in his features the mark of his
criminality is widely accepted, but it is
equally without foundation; the famous
British criminologist, Sir Charles Gor¬
ing, was able to demonstrate that
a composite photograph, representing
criminals in British gaols, bore no
resemblance to the accepted stereo¬
type of the criminal.
Stereotypes frequently change. In
some cases it may be argued that this
corresponds to a real change in the
characteristics of the people; in others,
however, it seems much more likely to
be due to external circumstances
which have little or nothing to do with
the group concerned.
The Dutch sociologist, Den Hollan¬
der, has studied the historical changes
in the stereotype of the Hungarians in
Europe. He points out that for cen¬
turies after the migration of Hungarians
to Central Europe, they had a bad
reputation, and were regarded as cul¬
turally different, and therefore inferior
to Europeans generally. During the
15th and 16th centuries, however, when
they joined in the war against the
Turks, they were pictured as a brave,
devout, and chivalrous people.
By the second half of the 18th cen¬
tury their popularity had again de¬
clined, and they were described as
savage, lazy, egotistical, unreliable,
and tyrannous. This picture changed
again a little later, when the
Hungarians became romanticized and
idealized. Den Hollander believes that
the image followed the pattern of poli¬
tical inter-relationships; it seems unli¬
kely that there was sufficient transfor¬
mation in the character of the people
to justify the change in the national
¡mage.
IHE American sociologist,
La Piere, studied the attitudes of
residents of California towards first
and second generation Armenian im¬
migrants in Fresno County in that
State. There was almost complete
agreement that these Armenians had
more than their share of faults, and the
general attitude toward them was re¬
latively unfriendly.
La Piere proceeded to question non-
Armenians as to the reasons for their
antipathies, and he was able to classify
the answers into three stereotypes. In
the first place, it was stated that
Armenians were treacherous, lying,
deceitful. In actual fact, when measur¬
ed by the criterion of business integ¬
rity, the Armenian merchants turned
out to be equal and frequently superior
to others.
In the second place, they were alle¬
ged to be parasites, making excessive
demands upon charitable organizations,
free clinics, etc. Actually, such de¬
mands by them were less than half of
what would be expected in terms of
their proportion of the population.
Finally, it was said that they had an
inferior code of morality, and they were
always getting into trouble with the
law. In fact, police records showed
that they appeared in only 1.5 per cent
of Police Court cases, although they
were about 6 per cent of the population.
La Piere concludes that all of these
stereotypes have one factor in com¬
mon, viz. that they are definitely false.
This does not mean that stereotypes
never contain any truth. It does mean
that they can develop without any
truth whatsoever.
Stereotyped thinking may be almost
inevitable, but there is good evidence
that it can at least be reduced, if not
eliminated. Eighteen years after the
Katz and Braly study, another psycho¬
logist (Gilbert) applied the same tech¬
nique to a new generation of Princeton
students. He found that there was
some persistence of stereotypes, but
also a very important change which he
describes as "a fading effect".

'TAKE-OFF'
ON STEREOTYPES
ABOUT INDIA
These drawings are take-offs by an Indian
artist, A. M. Abraham, poking fun at some of
the stereotypes Westerners often have of
Indians and India. The cartoons were spe¬
cially drawn for the 'Unesco Courier' by
Mr Abraham and published in June 1955.
There is much less agreement
among the students in 1950 than in
1932; any specific trait is usually
checked by a much smaller proportion
of students in the later study. In 1932
for example, 84 per cent of the stu¬
dents described the Negroes as lazy;
in 1950 the percentage had dropped
to 31. The description of Italians as
artistic drops from 83 to 28.
In London, a Unesco study conduct¬
ed by H.E.O. James and Coran Teñen,
showed how specific personal
iences might affect the nature and
content of stereotypes. What they did
was to obtain from schoolchildren
their opinions of other ethnic groups,
particularly of African Negroes, and
then bring them into contact with two
able African women teachers who
spent a few weeks in the schools.
The "before and after" picture is
very striking. As an example, a child
before the experience stated that "I
do not like black people; it's the colour;
it makes me nervous; they might be
savage... they are different in nature
from us, more savage and cruel some¬
times, so you don't trust them ever."
The same child after the experience
said: "Miss V. and Miss W. were nice
people... there does not seem any dif¬
ference between them and us except
the colour. I think that Negroes are
like that just like us, except for the
colour. I like them. They are nice
people."
The authors give many examples of
similar changes that occurred. Stereo¬
types cannot always be modified so
strikingly nor so fast, but the fact that
they can be changed at all as a result
of experience is itself encouraging.
Sometimes just growing older helps.
In a study sponsored by Unesco,
Piaget and Weil report the results of a
series of interviews with Swiss children
of different ag*,s. One interview with
a little girl aged eight years ran as
follows:
"Have you heard of foreigners?
Yes, there are Germans and French.
Are there any differences between
these foreigners? Yes, the Ger¬
mans are bad, they are always
making war. The French are poor
and everything is dirty there. Then
I have heard of Russians, but they
are not at all nice. Do you have
any personal knowledge of the
French, Germans or Russians, or
have you read something about
them? No. Then how do you
know? Everyone says so."
On the other hand, a boy aged thir¬
teen years, after having mentioned a
large number of foreign countries of
which he had heard, was asked. "Are
there any differences between all
those countries?", and his answer
was, in part, "you find all types of
people everywhere." We are not all
as "mature" as this 13 year-old boy,
but perhaps we can move in that
direction. Or is it possible that the
Swiss are...? Oh nol No stereotypes!
The understanding of national char¬
acteristics represents an important
task for all of us. The difficulties in
the way are great: nations are made
up of many different kinds of indivi¬
duals, and generalizations are danger¬
ous if they do not give adequate
consideration to the range of individual
variations.
An important first step will be taken
if we treat "the pictures in our heads"
with a strong dose of scepticism, and if
we keep our minds closed to stereo¬
types and open only to facts. No one
is denying the existence of national
characteristics.
A knowledge of them can aid our
understanding of people, as well as our
enjoyment of the varieties of behaviour
and personality that are found in dif¬
ferent parts of the world. We need to _ .
make sure, however, that the "pictures K1
in our heads" correspond as closely as "'
possible to reality.
June 1955
