Photo © Bruno Barbey - Magnum, Paris

by Cian Franco Pompei
Chairman of the Unesco Executive Board
%£>J
1919 1969
w.'E are in the year 1919.
The world has just been ravaged by
a war, the like of which had never
been known before, but less than
three months after the armistice, men
we're beginning to look to the future.
On January 25, the Paris Peace
Conference decided at its first session
to appoint a Commission on Inter¬
national Labour Legislation, composed
of fifteen members, whose task was
to make a survey of labour conditions,
study the international measures
needed to ensure joint action on
questions concerning labour conditions,
and make proposals for setting up a
permanent organization to carry out
these studies and surveys in collabora¬
tion with the League of Nations and
under its supervision.
The Commission, under its chairman
Samuel Gompers, President of the
American Federation of Labour, took
as the basis for its discussions a
British project for creating a permanent
Labour Organization as part of the
League of Nations.
While it was meeting, the Com¬
mission learned that the International
Trade Union Conference meeting in
Berne, had adopted a Labour Charter
setting forth a number of general
principles on international labour
legislation.
It drew inspiration from the Charter
in preparing the text which was sub¬
mitted to the Peace Conference and
adopted on April 11, with a few minor
amendments. This text, divided into
two parts one concerning the Inter¬
national Labour Organization and the
other dealing with general principles
became part of the Treaty of Versailles.
Such were the modest beginnings
of the ILO.
It was this vision of a better, more
humane world which enabled the ILO
to survive the dark years before and
during the Second World War, and
which gave it a new lease of life
in 1944, with the adoption of the
Declaration of Philadelphia which,
President Roosevelt said, "embodies
the hopes of an era which has known
two world wars ... it may one day
exercise an influence equal to that of
the Declaration of Independence of the
United States of America."
Strengthened in its motivations and
in its principles, the ILO was thus in
a position to assist in the recon¬
struction of the post-war world. With
this end in view, in 1946 it amended
its Constitution and concluded the
Agreement which established it as a
Specialized Agency of the United
Nations.
Firstly, on the organizational level,
the ILO has played a major rôle in
the genesis of the modern concept
of balanced economic and social
development, one of the fundamental
aims of all the organizations of the
United Nations family.
This dynamic concept, radically
opposed to the static approach of the
19th century, is the basis of the
principles of social progress set forth
in the preamble to the ILO Constitution.
These principles are even more clearly
expressed in the Declaration of Phila¬
delphia, which of.ates on the one hand
that social progress is the result of
economic progress, whose fruits must
be equitably shared; and on the other
hand, that social progress must be
based on a world policy which excludes
economic advantages obtained at the
expense of the conditions of workers.
IHE ideas of the founders
of the ILO were revolutionary for, in
those early days when governments
and peoples lived in constant fear of
recessions and economic crises, which
seemed unavoidable, they were imbued
not with Utopian dreams but with the
vision of a world where steady and
continuous growth would be a reality.
Secondly, while the ultimate aim of
social justice proclaimed in the ILO
Constitution expressed the aspirations
of a world conscience sharpened by
the privations and sufferings of the
war years, it also constituted a major
innovation in international life.
Those who strove, in 1919, to
translate the ideal into reality had few
precedents on which to build: in all,
two international conventions signed in
Berne in 1906, one prohibiting the use
of white phosphorous in the manu¬
facture of matches and the other
making the employment of women for
night work illegal.
This was very little when one
compares this embryo of international
labour legislation with the impressive
legal work the ILO has since
accomplished.
But it was a great deal when one
considers the obstacles which had to
be overcome to achieve these first
steps in drawing up a truly inter¬
national code of labour legislation,
which the ILO undertook on the
initiative of its first Director-General,
Albert Thomas. With unflagging
energy, he devoted himself whole¬
heartedly to the task which was
pursued and consolidated, year by
year, at each session of the Inter¬
national Labour Conference.
From this painstaking effort, carried
out pragmatically without any striving
for spectacular results, has emerged
the modern concept of human rights,
a concept which in addition to the
political rights proclaimed by the
Declaration of the Rights of Man and
of the Citizen in 1789, affirms the
economic and social rights set forth
in 1948 in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. It is this concept
which embodies the highest aspira¬
tions of mankind today. Here again,
the ILO has broken new ground,
making possible slow but steady
progress towards the ultimate goal of
social justice.
The new approach which character¬
ized the Constitution of the ILO
contains a third aspect which is unique
of its kind. This is the tripartite
structure of the Organization (com¬
prising governments, workers and
employers) which is reflected in the
composition of the International Labour
Conference and in the Governing Body
of the International Labour Office.
The formula proposed by the
founders of the Organization seemed p
so self-evident that the only points at H
issue were how it should be applied.
Should governments have a one-third
representation and be on the same
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

ILO 50TH ANNIVERSARY (Continued)
On an equal footing: workers, employers, and governments
6
footing as workers and employers?
Or should government representation
equal the two other groups combined?
The solution finally adopted was the
second.
This structure clearly reveals the
desire to ensure what we are
accustomed to-day to call "participa¬
tion." What, indeed, is the purpose
of gathering together in the Organiza¬
tion's deliberating bodies, repre¬
sentatives of the three groups, each
with its own particular interests which
may at times coincide if not to ensure
the effective participation of all three
in the discussions and decisions which
directly affect them?
Obviously the need for communica¬
tion and dialogue, which we seem to
have rediscovered only recently, was
then considered vital for establishing
that atmosphere of confidence without
which the Organization would have
laboured in vain.
This, perhaps, is the key to the
success of the ILO in overcoming the
difficulties and crises which are
common to all young organizations.
In any case, the practice of participa¬
tion and dialogue [as an integral
feature of the organization] has by no
means exhausted all its possibilities
and is as relevant today as it was
50 years ago.
From the very beginning, the ILO
recognized that it could not accomplish
its mission within a restricted geogra¬
phical area, that the countries outside
Europe were bound to play an
increasingly important rôle in inter¬
national affairs, and consequently that
its activities and influence must be
world-wide.
The founding member states were
countries signing the Treaty of Ver¬
sailles plus the thirteen States which
were invited to join the League of
Nations Covenant. The concept of
broadening the geographical frame¬
work of the ILO as a first step towards
"universality" was given particular
emphasis by Harold Butler, who in 1932
succeeded Albert Thomas as Director-
General. And it was during his term
of office, in 1934, that the United States
of America and the U.S.S.R. became
member states. The Organization's
capacity to play a world rôle was thus
established long before the era
of international organizations which
began after the Second World War.
In pursuing its aims, the ILO has
developed new and unusual methods
of international co-operation. Firstly,
the technique of international labour
legislation, from the drawing up of ILO
conventions and recommendations to
their entry into force and control of
their application, has become a model
of its kind.
In the first place, there are elaborate
procedures for consulting member
states before the adoption of texts by
the International Labour Conference.
Even more unusual are the provisions
foreseen once texts are actually
adopted.
For example, at a period when the
sovereign rights of States were far
more jealously protected than they are
today, member states undertook to
submit any convention adopted by the
Conference, not later than one year
afterwards (or 18 months in exceptional
circumstances) to "the authority or
authorities within whose competence
the matter lies for the enactment of
legislation or other action." This pro¬
cedure applies, mutatis mutandis, to
recommendations adopted in the same
way by the Conference.
The technique for controlling the
application of conventions, reinforced
in 1946 in the light of experience,
provided for the submission of
reports by member states in clearly
defined conditions, and includes pro¬
visions for appeals, that is, the pro¬
cedure to be followed in the case of
complaints which may be made
against states which have failed to
ensure that conventions adopted have
been carried out satisfactorily.
These -rules governing international
conventions and recommendations,
which have had a profound influence
on practices adopted by other organ¬
izations, including Unesco, represent
a major innovation in the conduct of
international affairs.
There is a tendency to contrast the
ILO's legal work, which has been a
conspicuous feature of its action since
the earliest days, with its operational
activities, which sometimes appear to
take second place. Until the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance
was launched in 1949, the United
Nations Specialized Agencies indeed
lacked the means to give direct
assistance to their member states.
But before this programme was in¬
troduced, technical co-operation had
become standard practice among inter¬
national organizations. Indeed, as far
back as the 1930s the ILO began
sending technical missions to its
member states, at their request, to
advise them in drawing up social
legislation.
These first technical assistance
missions, though in no way comparable
in complexity and scope to those
carried out by technical missions we
know today, have contributed, however
modestly, to creating a new concept
of the rôle of international organiza¬
tions.
One could quote other examples of
methods utilized by the ILO which
have proved their merits and have
subsequently become general practice
in international life: the study of
specific technical problems, exchanges
of information and publications but
the ones I have described seem to me
to illustrate very clearly the pioneering
rôle played by the ILO in this field...
The above text is taken from an address
delivered before the Unesco Executive Board
on May 8, 1963 by its chairman, commemorat¬
ing the 50th anniversary of the International
Labour Organization. On this occasion, the
Executive Board welcomed Mr David A.
Morse, Director-General of the ILO.
The first session of the International Labour Conference,
opens in Washington, D.C, on October 29, 1919, four months
after the signing of the Versailles Peace Treaty.

The world has some
16 million teachers. Four
million more will be needed
by 1970, and between
34 and 44 million by the
end of the century.
Everywhere recruitment and
training pose crucial
problems. All countries
are tackling the problem of
teacher-training colleges.
Here, U.N. agencies are
playing an important part.
The ILO and Unesco have
also studied ways of
improving the status of the
teaching profession itself.
A joint world-wide survey
was carried out a few
years ago, and what
amounts to a universal
Charter for teachers was
drawn up and adopted
unanimously in 1966. The
Charter outlines teachers'
rights and duties, stressing
the need for professional
training and the general
principles of the status of
teachers, security of tenure,
hours of work, social
security, advancement.
Right, a school class In
India.
« -
Ä** À
>A*&i&
Photo © J.-L. Nou, Paris
