THE GALAPAGOS ISLANDS
LIVING LABORATORY
OF EVOLUTION
by Jean Dorst
|N 1837, after a five-year
voyage aboard the Beagle in the
waters of South America, the Pacific
Islands and Australia, Charles Darwin
wrote in his journal : "In July I opened
my first notebook on transmutation of
species. Had been greatly struck
from about month of previous March
on character of South American fossils
and species of Galapagos Archipelago.
These facts origin (especially latter) of
all my views."
Thus, the Galapagos Archipelago,
lying some 600 miles out in the Pacific
west of the coast of Ecuador, to which
it belongs, directly inspired the famous
British naturalist
Superficially, this tiny archipelago
appears to have nothing of particular
interest to the scientist. A few dots
on most maps (their total area covers
JEAN DORST is director of the ornitho¬
logical laboratory of the National Museum
of Natural History in Paris.
less than 3,000 square miles), the
13 islands of the Galapagos group
include five which are fairly large (the
largest is Albemarle Island, 60 miles
in length), numerous islets and rocks.
Of volcanic origin, they are the peaks
of a range of submarine volcanoes
thrust up from the sea by successive
eruptions.
Though close to the equator, the
Galapagos Islands are washed by fairly
cool seas from the famous Humboldt
Current which brings cold water from
the Antarctic along the coasts of Chile
and Peru, then turns west at the equa¬
tor and runs towards the Galapagos
Islands, after which it loses itself in
the ocean depths.
The fauna living in the archipelago
is limited to very few species. As
these species were isolated by large .
stretches of ocean from the dawn of
history, they form a world apart which
has followed its own evolutionary
laws shut off from the rest of our
planet. Plants and animals arrived
there from the American continent as
best they could, swimming, flying or
borne by the winds on natural rafts
composed of a tangle of tree trunks
and deadwood like those often carried
along by many big tropical rivers.
The ocean crossing must have been
a difficult enterprise and, in fact, only
a limited number of creatures made
the voyage safely. This explains the
paucity of the Galapagos fauna and
flora, especially as compared with the
luxuriance of tropical America.
It may thus seem surprising that
.biologists regard these apparently
barren islands as a scientific wonder¬
land. But the scientists are right, for
the Galapagos Islands are no less than
a natural laboratory in which the pro¬
cess of evolution can be clearly
observed. As the botanist, J.T. Howell,
so rightly said they are the workroom
and show-window of Evolution.
Being so remote, the Galapagos
Elephants' feet turned into waste-paper baskets for sale to
tourists. Elephants have been known to tear half their
trunks off in frantic efforts to escape the poacher's wire snare.
POACHING: THE SHOCKING
SLAUGHTER OF AFRICA'S WILD LIFE
Poaching today in Africa is a large-scale illegal trade in slaughtered
wild animals. It is by no means confined to killing for meat; all
too often it takes the horrible and wasteful form of merely taking
the valuable trophies such as rhino horn, wildebeest tails or elephant
ivory, and leaving the slaughtered carcasses to rot. The poacher's
methods are not only wasteful, 1>ut extremely cruel. Gangs of
bowmen with poisoned arrows wait near a waterhole or at a gap
in a prepared barrier, and shoot large numbers of animals which
then die an agonizing death. Pitfalls are worse. The large number
of animals that fall into them suffer a much more lingering death.
Wire snares are the worst of all. Animals die a slow and horrible
death, sometimes beset by vultures and hyenas. The abolition of
this shocking trade is becoming just as compelling an aim in the
Africa of the present as was the abolition of the slave trade in
the Africa of a century ago. Like the slave trade, it is profitable,
highly organized, extremely cruel and quite ruthless.
September 1961
SIR JULIAN HUXLEY

The spectacle of
iguanas basking on
the rocks of the
Galapagos is like a
flashback to the earth's
reptile age. After
visiting the islands in
1841, Herman Melville,
author of "Moby Dick"
wrote: "...Little but
reptile life is found
here; tortoises, lizards,
immense spiders,
snakes, and that
strangest anomaly of
outlandish nature,
the iguana."
Photo © Dr. I. Eibl-Elbesfeldt
Islands have served as a refuge for
animals of an archaic type and for a
biological environment which has van¬
ished everywhere else in the world.
As mammals could not reach these
islands, the reptiles developed, un¬
hindered by natural selection or pre¬
datory animals.
The scene that unfolds before one's
eyes on setting foot on these shores
recalls the prehistoric era of the age
of the reptiles. Along the beaches
live marine iguanas 3 \ feet long, the
only marine saurians still in existence.
They feed on seaweed, grazing at low
tide and bask in the sun in colonies
sometimes running into hundreds.
In the interior, land ¡guanas of a
different type live amongst the cactus
along with the giant tortoises which
are such a characteristic sight that
their Spanish name, "Galapagos", was
applied to the islands. These giants,
whose shells alone measure 3 i feet,
are now found only in the Galapagos
Islands and the Seychelles, though
fossilized remains extend over a vast
area covering North America and
Europe.
The remoteness of the archipelago
resulted in a simplification of the fauna
thus making it easier to follow the
laws of evolution here than anywhere
else in the world. Elsewhere the com¬
plexities of nature and the diversity of
forms have made it virtually impossible
to trace the lineage of many species.
The Galapagos Islands thus stand
out as Nature's great experimental
laboratory.
This is particularly true of the famous
Darwin finches, or Geospizidae, spar¬
rows indigenous to the Galapagos
Islands. The Islands' 14 species are
all derived from a common ancestor,
which obviously arrived there at a time
when there were no other birds. The
Darwin finches strikingly summarize
the whole process of the evolution of
sparrows.
Owing to the paradoxical conditions
of the natural environment mainly
due to the presence of cold currents
at the equator alongside masses of
warm water fauna of very diverse ori¬
gins have crossbred on these islands.
Here penguins, usually associated
with the Antarctic, rub shoulders with
frigate and tropic birds found near
warm tropical waters. The combined
presence of creatures having such
widely different origins and ecological
preferences is an important factor In
the evolution now taking place. These
peculiar circumstances enable us to
study at first hand the adaptation of
animals to their environment.
Yet the situation of the fauna and
flora is so precarious that this unique
biological complex is threatened with
extinction. Up till the sixteenth cen¬
tury the islands remained untouched
by man. Then came successive waves
of pirates, buccaneers and settlers
mostly mutineers or ex-prisoners.
F,ORTUNATELY the present
population is made up of law-abiding
and friendly settlers, but like many
people elsewhere they know little about
nature conservation. Furthermore, they
have introduced animals previously
unknown to the islands, most of which
are now overrun with goats, pigs, dogs
and cattle bred from domestic animals
turned wild, not to mention the rats
and mice introduced accidentally. So
in addition to the direct depredations
of man, the natural fauna has had to
face the vigorous competition of ani¬
mals better equipped for the struggle
for life than reptiles.
Everywhere in the islands the
reptiles have diminished in number
especially the tortoises. In former
times they were massacred for their
fat; now their eggs and young are
devoured by the dogs and pigs. Some
species are already extinct, while
others are in a precarious situation.
The fauna as a whole is seriously
threatened. We are in danger1 of
seeing a priceless natural heritage
disappear before our very eyes.
As early as 1934 this state of affairs
alarmed the Ecuadorian Government,
which passed laws to protect the
Galapagos fauna and flora and setting
aside most of the islands as national
parks. Unfortunately these regulations
were hardly applied. After the Sec¬
ond World War, Ecuador turned to
Unesco and the International Union
for the Conservation of Nature and
asked them to send a mission to study
the islands, and to suggest ways to
preserve the Galapagos fauna and
flora.
In 1959, Unesco founded the Charles
Darwin Foundation for the Galapagos
Islands with headquarters in Brussels,
and in 1960 began construction of a
biological station on Indefatigable
Island (Santa Cruz), both in co-opera¬
tion with the Government of Ecuador.
New legislation introduced by
Ecuador has now proved effective.
Large areas have been decreed natural
reserves, notably Narborough Island
(Fernandina), which has retained it ori¬
ginal appearance, and the western part
of Indefatigable Island (Santa Cruz),
where tortoises are still fairly numer¬
ous. The Foundation will continue to
suggest to the Ecuadorian authorities
measures aimed at protecting and
conserving a natural complex found
nowhere else in the world and is also
carrying out extensive research in
zoology, botany, soil biology and
marine life.
The combined efforts of scientists
from all over the world are In this
way making up in some measure for
the depredations committed by other
men. The Foundation stands as a
monument to Charles Darwin, whose
evolutionary theories were conceived -4 n
on the desolate shores of this tiny | JJ
volcanic archipelago.
September 1961
