For many years there has been a growing awareness everywhere
of the need to create national parks for the conservation of
wildlife. As long ago as 1872, the United States created the
world's first national park at Yellowstone, Colorado (3,400 square
miles). In 1885 Canada followed by establishing Banff National
Park, and the movement spread to Europe, Asia and Africa. East
Africa has now become a world proving ground for modern
conservation practices. This polar bear paradise on the island
of Wrangel, in the Arctic, is one of the U.S.S.R.'s national parks
and reservations, which cover 63,000 square kilometres (the
total area of Belgium and the Netherlands).

A BIOLOGIST LOOKS AT THE
ANIMAL WORLD (BEASTS AND MEN)
by Jean Dorst
|AN'S relationship with
nature has consisted to a great
extent in the irrevocable destruction
of habitats, plants and animals without
benefit to mankind in the long run.
The time has now come to take
stock of the situation and to look
ahead, for we have unquestionably
arrived at a crucial point in our
history.
It has taken at least several tens of
thousands of years for the world to
reach its present human population;
yet in only 35 years from now the
earth's population will have doubled.
There are thus more consumers, and
also many more "workers" to change
the face of the earth, and the latter
have at their disposal vast sources of
energy as well as far more powerful
tools than their predecessors ever had.
This accounts for the depressing
balance sheet of the present epoch,
all the more dismal because our
attitude toward nature has scarcely
altered from that of our ancestors':
from many points of view we have
remained at the stage of predatory
economics what German economists
call "Raubwirtschaft". We are still
trying to apply theories devised
centuries ago. We still believe in the
myth of nature's inexhaustible wealth
and in a few "formulas" for turning
it into fields, forests and artificial
pasturage everywhere on the face of
the earth.
Throughout previous centuries
certain species of animals have
vanished or become rare. The Mi¬
grating Pigeon, the Great Auk, the
JEAN DORST, professor at the zoological
laboratory of the Museum of Natural History
in Paris, is president of the Survival Commis¬
sion of the International Union for Conserva¬
tion of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN),
and president of the Charles Darwin Founda¬
tion, created In 1959 by Unesco and the
government of Ecuador to study the extra¬
ordinary wildlife of the Galapagos Islands.
A prolific author, his major work is 'Avant
Que Nature Meure' (édition Delachaux et
Niestlé, Neuchâtel, Switzerland, 1964), a re¬
markable and detailed study of the relation¬
ship between man and nature, which appears
In English this month under the title "Before
Nature Dies' (Collins, London).
Carolina Parakeet, the Quagga Zebra,
the Blue Antelope and several species
of marsupials are the best known
victims in this lamentable necrology.
Destined to become tomorrow's
fossils, many others are still holding
out with their numbers drastically
reduced, vestiges of formerly flourish¬
ing populations.
Nature conservationists, it is true,
have taken positive steps to safeguard
shrinking animal populations. Laws
protecting some species and regulat¬
ing the hunting of others have been
passed, and national parks and
reserves now exist in most countries.
But such measures no longer meet
the situation, for the problem has
taken on far greater scope and
importance. Naturally, everything
possible should be done to save
the last vestiges of wildlife. But the
major problem is to safeguard natural
resources throughout the world and
provide mankind with the means of
survival.
It is undeniable that the earth is
still being pillaged despite the efforts
of biologists and considerable tech¬
nical progress in agriculture, sylvi¬
culture, fishing and harvesting tech¬
niques. On the whole, "renewable"
resources are steadily decreasing,
despite some spectacular progress in
specialized fields.
The situation is particularly serious
in the developing tropical countries
where soils are still being ruined by
unsuitable methods of farming. In the
Indus Valley the population increases
at the rate of 10 mouths to feed
every 5 minutes, but in the same
span of time one acre of land is lost
through erosion accelerated by man's
misuse.
Throughout the world, natural forests
are receding. Fish stocks, one of
man's vital food resources, are being
depleted by overfishing. Whales are
disappearing at a catastrophic rate
from their last refuge in the Antarctic
oceans.
Naturalists understandably fear that
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

A LOOK AT THE ANIMAL WORLD (Continued)
Bank-book for animals, trees and plants
18
the flora and fauna which make up
natural communities will become rare
or even extinct. But the world at large
might well have to face the disquieting
prospect of losing its renewable
resources ever more rapidly at a time
when the number of consumers is
increasing, and individual needs are
greater because of welcome improve¬
ments in standards of living.
A complete reappraisal should thus
be made of the whole problem of
man's relationship to nature. Despite
technological progress and today's
widespread belief in a machine-
dominated civilization, man continues
to be closely dependent on natural
resources and especially on nature's
primary productivity, of which photo¬
synthesis is the first step. This basic
fact links man closely to the entire
living world.
Man himself is a single cog,
although a vital one, in a complex
mechanism composed of many work¬
ing parts. Dwarfing the individual
human being, whole populations and
even the multitude of species making
up the plant and animal kingdoms, is a
vastly greater entity the living or¬
ganism that forms the entire "bio¬
sphere" of our planet, that is, the thin
layer on which life exists on the outer
surface of the globe.
Ecology the science of relation¬
ships between living beings them¬
selves and between them and their
physical environment teaches us that
biological communities the entire
complex of various plant and animal
populations, occupying specific habi¬
tats have their own distinct ways of
life and are subject to rigid laws
that determine their evolution.
We must become one with this vast
natural complex. Up to the present
time our activities have all been aimed
at destroying or at least reducing the
size of natural habitats by channeling
their production in terms of strictly
human needs. In place of the multitude
of species found in natural forests we
have substituted one-crop fields. The
long-term overall balance sheet very
often shows a deficit, except on the
most fortunate lands, which are res¬
tricted in area.
Obviously man can be only one
of the elements in our planet's
biological equilibrium. In its virgin
state the earth is not favourable to
the growth of our species. To
satisfy our legitimate needs we have
to "manhandle" nature and radically
transform certain environments so as
to increase the proportion of prod
uctivity of immediate use to man.
We shall never again be in a position
to do without fields and man-made
prairies.
This does not mean, however, that
we should apply the same "formula"
indiscriminately: i.e. eliminate wildlife
and change the face of the whole earth
for our immediate benefit. This would
cause the irrevocable disappearance
of wildlife, but above all, would lead
to serious disturbances in the overall
productivity of the whole biosphere.
Use of natural resources and
nature conservation are two sides of
the same problem which is the quest
for maximum return from the bio
sphere for man's well-being. Even if
we are only concerned with the utili¬
tarian factor, we are forced to admit
that man has nothing to gain by
exterminating animals and plants, even
those which at first glance are either
"useless" or seem harmful.
The pursuit of optimum equilibrium
leads logically to the idea of planetary
"management" according to a plan
which takes into account the particular
use to which different types of land
are destined by their nature and the
environment's varying physical and
biotic features. We should, in particu¬
lar, create integral natural reserves,
within which every human activity

The strange bill of this
flamingo is adapted for
straining algae and tiny
organism's from the water.
A graceful bird, nearly
5 feet in height, the Lesser
Flamingo as it is called,
lives along the banks of
lakes and rivers in many
parts of the world. It is
now strictly protected in
the wildlife sanctuaries of
the Camargue region of
southern France.
A caterpillar (left) rests on
a twig after a meal. The
real head of this oleander
hawkmoth caterpillar is
curled under and what
appears to be its eye is in
fact a false eye mark on
its body. As a caterpillar
it feeds on and destroys
foliage. But as a moth it
will play an important role
in the ecological cycle, by
pollinating flowers on
which it alights.
Photos © from 'Nature's Paradise" by Jen and Des Bartlett, published by Collins, London, 1967
likely to alter or disturb the habitats
is forbidden.
Such reserves afford protection for
the flora and fauna closely linked
with a specific habitat, which is the
case of most species of small stature
which have clearly defined needs.
This also enables us to conserve
animal and plant life for which man
may find use in the future nature's
possibilities are indeed far from being
exhausted. If need be, we would be
able to draw on the reserves in these
"banks", as has already been done
with plants, trees in particular.
These integral natural reserves are
not only conservatories but also
natural laboratories for long-term
research removed from any kind of
human interference. Such basic work
in pure research is essential to applied
science if new techniques and pro¬
cedures of resource-use, truly adapted
to local conditions, are to be devised.
At the other end of the scale from
these integral natural reserves are
the areas suitable for development
by man. Man obviously needs to
cultivate a large proportion of the
earth's surface. Only by creating
artificial environments can he gain
high yields from the crops he grows.
I
But we must always bear in mind that
agriculture is the conversion of our
natural capital, particularly the soil.
It follows that only land clearly
destined for agricultural purposes
should be cultivated. Marginal land,
subject to irrevocable and rapid
deterioration from the moment that the
natural habitat is altered, should be
set aside. It is an ecological absurdity
to plunder this type of soil as well
as imprudence on man's part, for in
so doing he risks losing future benefits
from certain environments that his
present knowledge still prevents him
from putting to use.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
19

A LOOK AT THE ANIMAL WORLD (Continued)
The sad fate of the fur seal
The only way to integrate this
marginal land into the human economy
is to use its natural resources within
reason while maintaining its equilib¬
rium relatively undisturbed. Perhaps
in the future, new technical devices
will enable man to draw immediate
benefits from such land, but to
transform it at present would be
to put oneself in the position of a
financier who squanders his capital
for a quick profit instead of invest¬
ing it for greater gains in the
future.
It is in these areas that the aims
of the nature protector and the eco¬
nomist are most clearly seen to be in
harmony. Indeed, when properly used,
this land can immediately produce
sizeable returns. The first rational
use to be made of it is obviously
to maintain extensive forests, whose
existence is amply justified by the
modern world's increasing demand
for timber. Forests, whose planned
exploitation began many years ago,
effectively protect the soil, particu¬
larly on the water-drainage slopes
in mountainous regions.
Controlled and reasonable exploita¬
tion of wildlife by hunting is also
advisable, despite opposition from
certain nature conservationists inspir¬
ed by a commendable but now some¬
what outdated sentimentality. Hunting
matched to the population level of
game animals is a rational use of
this livestock and even increases
its productivity.
In North America, for instance, duck
populations are now systematically
worked over on the basis of
constant studies that reveal the
birds' numerical importance and
distribution. The lakes and marshes
where these birds reproduce, like
every wetland habitat in the world,
are endangered by drainage and
reclamation projects. But their food
yield as game reserves helps to
protect them from the development
projects of the technocrats.
Biologists have recently discovered
that large mamrnals, particularly those
of Africa can be utilized systematically
as meat providers, an important asset
in protein-poor tropical countries.
African savannas can sustain a live-
weight of gazelles, antelopes, buffaloes
and other vegetarian mammals far
superior to the domesticated livestock
man might be tempted to substitute
The sea elephant,
largest member of
the seal family,
frequently grows to
a length of 21 feet.
A native of the
southern Pacific
coasts, particularly
the Kerguelen
Islands, it has been
hunted almost to
extermination for
its oil.
for them (see "Unesco Courier", Sep¬
tember 1961, "Africa's Wildlife in
Peril").
The biomass (the total weight of
any given animal species) of wild
ungulates (hoofed animals) can reach
nearly 40 tons per square kilo¬
metre in the grass savannas of the
Congo and Uganda, whereas the
same habitat can maintain only 5è tons
of livestock per square kilometre.
Moreover, though far greater in
number, wild animals do not deplete
the soil because they pasture in a
manner far better adapted to its
regrowth. This factor makes it
feasible to slaughter a given quant¬
ity of gazelles, antelopes, and even
buffaloes and elephants, for meat,
thus ensuring sufficient returns from
these marginal areas unfit for any
direct use by man to guarantee
their protection against untimely
transformations.
The rational putting to use of
wildlife has produced encouraging
results wherever it has been tried
out. In the Soviet Union, the
Saiga antelope, which became so rare
about 1920 that it was believed to
have become extinct, is now protected
on the steppes that stretch from
the south of the U.S.S.R. to Central
Asia. As a result, these otherwise
barren lands have become a positive
economic asset. The size of the
present herds allows 300,000 head of
antelope to be cropped each year,
without endangering the future of
the species, which is protected, but
at the same time integrated into the
economy of the Soviet Union.
Protection of the Alaskan fur seal,
from the Pribiloff Islands in the
northern Pacific, which became almost
extinct about 1911, now yields annually
60,000 high quality skins which consti¬
tute the only resource of these under¬
privileged isles. This promising
achievement is in striking contrast
to the situation in the Austral
Islands and Juan Fernandez and Gala¬
pagos Islands where the fur seal
has been slaughtered to the point
where, in its present numbers, it
is unlikely to be able to re-establish
itself. By squandering this natural
capital man has short-sightedly
killed the goose that laid the
golden egg.
Such examples demonstrate that we
now have sufficient know-how and
tested techniques to discard once
and for all the naive notion that the
face of the earth must be completely
transformed, and that only the relatively

Ir í
K
. > '-taii^i
»' .
Photo © Christian Zuber - Rapho
". . . That strangest anomaly of outlandish nature," wrote American novelist Herman Melville,
of the iguana after visiting the Galapagos Islands in 1841. A living fossil, survivor of the
great saurians, which once roamed the earth, this awesome-looking reptile is completely
inoffensive. It has survived until our time in the isolation of the Galapagos archipelago,
where Charles Darwin conceived the theory of evolution. It is at Galapagos, a unique
repository of nature, with its extraordinary flora and fauna, that Unesco created the Charles
Darwin Foundation in 1959 In co-operation with the government of Ecuador. Here, three
wide-eyed iguanas seem to be posing for a family portrait.
few animals and plants domesticated
thousands of years ago should be
utilized for our benefit.
Instead of destroying wild habitats
and replacing them by artificial fields
and pasture land, we can manage the
entire earth complex. This implies
preserving the earth's diversity and
respecting the natural use of each acre.
Instead of universally applying the
same formula, we should maintain a
balance between the different kinds
of habitats. Forests, marshlands and
wild expanses should be included along
with fields and pasture land in a
single mosaic, taking into account
climate, type of soil, flora and fauna.
Such a balanced totality will certainly
guarantee a far better long-term output
than hasty transformations.
Such sensible management would
also help to protect man's living space.
The problem of the human habitat has
now become a crucial one in a world
beset by rapidly increasing popula¬
tions, tentacular towns and dis¬
figurement of so many localities by
unsightly industrial plants.
We are only just becoming aware
of the social, medical and psycho¬
logical factors involved in this problem,
but already they are revealing the
extent to which nature conservation
and management are closely linked
with the protection of man himself.
There is room for optimism because
man, having now become aware of
the dangers, is weighing the conse¬
quences. He has realized that nature
conservation is not solely the domain
of a few biologists preoccupied with
protecting some rare species of
animals, but is in fact the far greater
problem of the rational use of man¬
kind's natural capital and living space.
A well-planned management policy can
still safeguard this capital while
substantially increasing the income
from it to meet man's legitimate needs.
Such management is primarily the
business of governments and approp¬
riate authorities. It also is the
concern of the major international
organizations: the United Nations
and particularly Unesco and FAO,
have clearly shown that they are
deeply concerned with the problems
posed by the management of nature
and its utilization on rational lines.
Nature conservation, no longer the
business of a handful of devoted
naturalists, is thus entering a dynamic
phase. This renewed vigour and the
research programmes being set up on
an unprecedented scale are a sure
guarantee that our natural capital will
be safeguarded.
Though the present situation is
serious, mankind possesses the means
of solving these vital problems. In
this effort it is up to each of us to
engage his heart as well as his mind.
21
