PEOPLE
NO LONGER
MACHINES
IN LABOUR
RELATIONS
by Jean de Givry
F,
20
IFTY years ago, the Pre¬
amble to the ILO Constitution laid its
chief emphasis on the need to improve
working conditions. Twenty-five years
later, the Declaration of Philadelphia
adopted by the ILO General Confer¬
ence in 1944 reaffirmed this principle
and proclaimed that "labour is not
a commodity."
No one can deny that the situation
of workers, especially in the industrial¬
ized countries, has improved consid¬
erably in terms of wages, working
hours, safety and health and holidays
with pay. The number of international
labour conventions adopted and rati¬
fied in many countries points to the
advances made in all these fields.
But surely the principle that labour
Is not a commodity has far wider
implications than the improvement of
working conditions. Does it not also
mean that the worker is not merely
an instrument, that he refuses to be
treated like a machine or buffeted by
forces or decisions over which he has
no control.
It is clear that considerable progress
will be needed before working peo¬
ple take their place as full-fledged
members of industrial society and con¬
sider that they have an effective say in
running it instead of being caught up
in its coils and suffering the conse¬
quences of its fluctuations.
During the French student revolt of
May 1968, which sparked off an unpre¬
cedented wave of social upheaval, the
walls of university faculties were
blazoned with slogans of all kinds.
Alongside many of doubtful merit
there was one that said: "a proletarian
is someone who has no say in the
use made of his life, and knows it."
A statement that defines a prolet¬
arian not in terms of lack of wealth or
possessions, but as someone denied
the power to choose freely, should
give us cause for reflection. Doubly
so, since it shows quite clearly that
one of the basic claims of working
people in the second half of the
twentieth century may well be and
already is in certain countries for a
share in economic power, the right
to a say in running the economy
and thereby means of controlling its
repercussions on their employment.
This demand goes far beyond a mere
Improvement in living standards or
working conditions, for it affects the
motive force of the whole economic
system. It is therefore far more diffi¬
cult to meet and is not likely to lend
itself to the kind of simplified or uni¬
versal solution prescribed by certain
ideological slogans.
In the field of industrial relations, as
in others, there may be "different but
equally effective ways and means of
Photo © Willy Ronls
handling a specific problem, depending
on the historical development, the
political system, the level of economic
and social development, the concepts,
values and overall structure of labour
relations in a given country."
This was the conclusion reached
recently by an ILO meeting on the
rights of trade union representatives
and the participation of workers in
decisions in Industrial plants.
With the evolution of labour-man¬
agement relations, there is now a better
understanding of the different func¬
tions of workers' representatives, and
it is recognized that in order to carry
out these duties they are entitled to
certain safeguards and facilities.
There is also a clearer apprecia¬
tion though this is still by no means
universal of the economic and social
realities of the industrial plant itself
and of the obligations its management
must respect in order to produce more
and better quality goods at lower
prices.
The emphasis now laid on the in-

B*-"!
^^;^^X^:..V.^ UVA
AUTOMATION Row uP°n row of machines200 in allare controlled by a single woman
in this textile factory. Since 1955, the ILO has studied the social
implications of automation, created by the rise of the industrial society. As automation is
introduced in plants and factories workers face new problems; some will have to learn different
working methods or transfer to other jobs. Many young people looking for work often lack the
qualifications now demanded by industry. The need to retrain workers for the industries of tomorrow
will become a growing problem as automation develops.
dustrial plant is a distinctive feature
of modern industrial relations. The
trend in this direction was noted as
long ago as 1956 by a meeting of spe¬
cialists called by the ILO to draw up
guidelines for dealing with problems
of industrial and human relations.
Observers of the industrial scene
have also pointed out that in systems
of industrial relations as different as
those of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.,
collective agreements however dis¬
similar their content are reached in
both cases at the factory level. In
the developing countries, with few
exceptions, collective agreements are
also concluded at this level.
In certain European countries, too,
trade union action at the factory level
has been steadily re-enforced during
the past decade. The most recent
example is the recommendation by
the Royal Commission on Trade Unions
and Employers' Associations in the
U.K. that the centre of gravity of col¬
lective bargaining should be shifted
down to the plant level.
In any case, the economic and social
character of the factory has changed
radically since the First World War.
At that time an industrial plant was
nearly always a privately owned con¬
cern. But today we find a tremen¬
dous number of publicly owned indus¬
trial and commercial businesses side
by side with those in the private indus¬
trial sector.
This applies not only to the social¬
ist countries which have abolished
private ownership in industrial pro¬
duction, but also to a number of Wes¬
tern countries which have nationalized
major sectors of industry, and to the
developing countries where the State,
as the driving force behind develop¬
ment, is often the principal employer.
Reporting to the governing body of
the ILO in 1955, the Committee on
Freedom of Employers' and Workers'
Associations noted: "the fact that a
business is being run profitably or at
a loss is one of the factors on which
the efficiency of its management should
be judged. It is probable that the pro
fit motive operates more directly and
actively in a privately owned business
than one in public hands, whatever
form the public control may take.
"Yet the profit motive is not absent
in socialized industry, and it is clear
that in most countries steps are taken
to see that directors and managerial
staffs of public Industries are held
directly responsible for the efficient
running of the industry in their charge.
In doing so, they undoubtedly exper¬
ience many of the problems faced by
employers and managers In private
industry."
The number of common problems
encountered by management in social¬
ized industries and management in
private firms has been growing since
several socialist countries introduced
economic reforms designed to give
greater autonomy to industries within
the structure of the national economy.
That managements of factories
under public and private management
alike are now seen to have increasing¬
ly similar objectives is surely of great
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
21

PEOPLE NO LONGER MACHINES (Continued)
The growing separation of management from ownership
22
significance from the standpoint of
future developments in industrial rela¬
tions at the factory level. The reason
Is that it inevitably focuses attention
on the similarity of production and
development problems facing factory
managements rather than on differen¬
ces arising from forms of ownership.
One of its first effects should be to
promote a better understanding of the
specific function of the factory, without
which it would be unrealistic to hope
for any lasting improvement in rela¬
tions between staff and management.
All too often the factory is thought
of in terms of the "profit" it must
earn in order to subsist. But the
term profit is ambiguous. In some
cases it is used to indicate how much
the factory has earned, that is, the
income represented by the difference
between receipts from sales and the
cost of goods or services supplied.
In others, it may be used to designate
the returns from capital invested, and
in this case it conjures up In many
minds the image of working people
being exploited and even defrauded.
One employer recently summed up
the views of certain factory executives
on this question as follows: "To talk of
profits is sordid and debasing. It is
best left to the managing director who
has to talk in terms of 'profits' when
explaining to shareholders how his
'business' is doing."
But on the whole, executives and
still more so technicians and working
staff influenced by trade union views
do not feel so strongly about the
question. They make a distinction
between the factory where the talk is
exclusively on technical matters, and
the "business" where, unfortunately,
the only thing talked about is profit.
Yet profit, or to use a word with less
emotional overtones, viability is some¬
thing no factory can do without. One
might reasonably object to the way
it is allocated or shared out, but not to
its existence, for it is the yardstick
of efficiency and good management.
Indeed, one of the first qualifications
for the director of any factory is his
ability to make it pay.
The fact that recent economic re¬
forms in the socialist countries have
stressed the decisive importance of
profits as a criterion of output and an
incentive to production (1), may help
employees, to see more clearly that
(1) E. G. Llberman : "The role of profits
in the Industrial incentive system of the
U.S.S.R., International Labour Review,
No. 1. Jan. 1968.
profits are positive symptoms of a fac¬
tory's state of health.
But in view of the way some work¬
ing people instinctively react to the
mere mention of the word "profit", it
might be as well to revise our voca¬
bulary and, with a double advantage
of clarifying the true function of the
factory, substitute the idea of "econo¬
mic creativeness" recently proposed
by one economist. According to his
definition, "economic creativeness is
the efficient and increasing production
and distribution of goods and ser¬
vices . . . This concept comprises cur¬
rent production and future progress,
the methods used and their results,
the individual and social aspects of
entrepreneurship." (2)
A second consequence of the
changing concepts of factory manage¬
ment is acceptance of the fact that,
irrespective of the economic system,
management is now a science requir¬
ing special aptitudes and skills. Proof
of this is seen in the great number of
management schools opened in the
last 15 years in industrial and develop¬
ing countries alike.
A third consequence, which stems
directly from the second, is that man¬
agers, conscious of their position and
responsibilities, are increasingly set on
freeing themselves of excessively
strict controls exercised by the owners
of the factories they direct.
In the socialist countries, as already
mentioned, there has been a move
towards reducing State control over
certain industries, to give them In¬
creased powers of decision and
greater autonomy. In a number of
highly industrialized Western coun¬
tries, many observers have remarked
on the increasing separation of owner¬
ship from management. This has led
to the gradual emergence of a new
class of managers, who regard them¬
selves as professional directors with
a responsibility to the employees and
the public as well as to the owners.
In other Western countries, heated
discussions on industrial reforms re¬
flect a desire for the factory and its
managers to be given a status that
would make them something more
than mere tools of the owners. It is
a significant sign of the times that
shortly after last year's social upheaval
in France, the French Young Employers'
(2) Philippe de Woot: "Pour une Doctrine
de l'Entreprise" (Editions du Seuil, Paris,
1968).
Centre decided to change its name to
Young Managers' Centre, and issued
a statement declaring that "the powers
of management are not derived from
ownership alone."
In this search for a new status for
the industrial plant one thing at least
seems to be beyond dispute the need
for unity of command as a condition of
efficient management. Recognition of
this imperative has been a major fac¬
tor in the gradual evolution in recent
years from the Idea of joint manage¬
ment to that of joint supervision of
management. The real crux of the
problem seems to be not so much the
authority to be exercised by manage¬
ment as whether it has earned the
confidence of all who have a stake in
the prosperity of the factory, to whom
it should feel responsible for its ac¬
tions, and by what means it should
keep the staff informed on the way
it runs the business.
This brings me to my last point.
Until now, the paramount concern in
industrial relations has been the prob¬
lem of sharing out the benefits of
production. The organization and
IM.II I1
In technically
advanced countries,
"white collar" workers
represent more
than one-quarter of
the working population
in both the public
and private sectors of
industry and
commerce. They
participate in a great
variety of occupations
from office workers
to sales assistants,
from teachers to
waiters. Since its
foundation, the ILO
has worked for the
improvement of
their social and
professional status,
and has elaborated
various conventions
dealing with
working hours and
health conditions on the
job, to mention only
two. The ILO is
now carrying out
a special study on the
effects of automation
in offices as well
as industry (see also
photo caption page 21).

purpose of production has usually
played a minor rôle in relations bet¬
ween employers and workers.
Without overlooking the need for a
fairer distribution of benefits (a pre¬
requisite of which is full acceptance
in the factory of mechanisms to defend
the workers' interest), should we not
also seeks ways of associating all
parties more closely with the control
of production which would make
easier its adaptation to the needs of
the community and the demands of a
balanced economic and social develop¬
ment, nationally and internationally.
It is surely significant that whereas
50 years ago, in the Preamble to the
ILO Constitution, peace was defined in
terms of "justice" ("whereas univer¬
sal and lasting peace can be establish¬
ed only if it is based upon social
justice"), nowadays it is Increasingly
defined in terms of "development".
There Is nothing surprising about
this, for in most countries development
is clearly the fundamental prerequisite
of justice. As a key factor in deve¬
lopment,' industries have therefore a
new and worthwhile task to accom¬
plish: the promotion of greater jus¬
tice for all. Viewed in this perspec¬
tive, they are no longer merely the
source of profits to be shared out in
the fairest way, but also an instrument
of progress to be utilized for the bene¬
fit of the greatest number and in the
interest not of a single nation but of
the whole world.
This new rôle of industry is bound
to affect the pattern of relations bet¬
ween all those engaged in production.
It will still be necessary, of course, to
make sure that production benefits are
distributed fairly, and a key task for
labour representatives will be to see,
through labour-management agree¬
ments, that the interest of working
people as regards job security, work¬
ing conditions and wages are properly
safeguarded.
But today, international economic
relations are intensifying, common
markets are being formed, industries
are merging or forging links across
frontiers, and throughout the world the
needs of developing countries have
forced themselves on the conscience
of all men, whether statesmen, em¬
ployers or workers. At such a time
it Is surely vital for working people
to express their views through direct
participation in boards of management
where production policy is decided.
Such participation should aim not
only at protecting the interests of
workers in the factories concerned. It
U|IK! HSR
iOBBP
TT
!
;
should reflect the common Interests
of all workers so as to give a posi¬
tive orientation to economic develop¬
ment and lay the foundations for a
more just society in which the needs
of all can be satisfied.
In countries which are planning
their economic and social develop¬
ment, workers already have a voice
in the councils where national policies
are drawn up. But if this voice is to
speak with authority, it should surely
be backed up by experience acquired
in industry, and particularly in large-
scale industrial enterprises.
To put these principles into prac¬
tice will not be easy. It is clear that
new structures and systems will have
to be established, new outlooks fos¬
tered and a vast enterprise of educa¬
tion and training set in motion. But
it would not be surprising if the search
for these solutions became a key fac¬
tor in worker-employer relations bet¬
ween now and end of the century.
Passages taken from the study "Develop¬
ments in Labour-Management Relations in
the Undertaking" by lean de Givry, publish¬
ed in the lanuary 1969 (Vol. 99, No. 1) Issue
of the "International Labour Review" (Inter¬
national Labour Office, Geneva).
*s 1
m
i
N
Illlll
1
Va

Photo © Marc Riboud - Magnum
In most civilizations and throughout
history, women were considered
to be the intellectual and moral
inferior of men and laws relegated them
to the status of a perpetual minor.
They were expected to devote
themselves to having children and to
household chores and only rarely were
they given a chance to distinguish
themselves in the arts, sciences, letters
or politics. Although many new
vocations have been opened up to
them 27 out of every 100 women
work outside their homes working
women still face enormous problems to
achieve equality of treatment. Their
new rôle in society and economic
life has still to win wider recognition.
But nowadays, in families where
women work outside the home, the
husband lends a hand more willingly
than in the past. Above, a
helmeted woman engineer working in
a coal and steel complex. Right, a
young father whose wife also
has a career takes his turn at
looking after the baby.
VTIi
Photo Unesco - Dominique Roger
