DON QUIXOTE
OF THE RADIO
Father José
Salcedo's first
broadcast in
1948 from his
radio school
in Colombia.
|N 1947, a slender young
Catholic priest arrived in a forgotten
hamlet perched high in the Andes of
Colombia to take up his duties as
assistant pastor of the Parish of Suta-
tenza. Father José Joaquin Salcedo
brought to his first ministry a restless,
driving urge to improve the lot of
Colombia's campesinos who scrape
DANIEL BEHRMAN, author and journalist,
is now Unesco's science writer.
by Daniel Behrman
their livelihood from incredible farms
hugging dizzy mountain slopes. He
also brought his amateur radio trans¬
mitter.
At that time the village consisted of
eighty souls, but it was the largest
community in a parish of 9,000 whose
geography is typical of the Colombian
Andes. Sutatenza Parish grows coffee
in its warm valleys and raises sheep
on its bald, chilly peaks. Some plots
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Colombian farmers on their way to market. To bring education to the people
of Colombia's impoverished mountain communities, Father José Salcedo started
a radio school, which within a few years had become one of the world's most
successful education-by-radio programmes, with over one million "pupils"
in Colombia, Venezuela and Ecuador.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris

DON QUIXOTE OF THE RADIO (Continued)
are so steep, local legend goes, that
farmers seed them by shotgun.
Only one peasant in three could read
or write. Alcoholism was common, and
as often as not Saturday night in a
taberna ended in a brawl with the
principals finishing in the hospital.
Father Salcedo believed there was no
point in preaching sermons against the
tabernas; instead, he decided to com¬
pete with them.
In August of 1947 on the village
square of Sutatenza, he introduced the
people of the village to the motion-
picture screen. They thought they
were in another world; long after the
show ended, they huddled enchanted
around the projector to stare respect¬
fully.
Father Salcedo had gained a foot¬
hold. To consolidate it, he drew up
plans for a permanent theatre. The
village of Sutatenza offered its help,
but it was not enough and there was
no way of making a general appeal to
the parish for volunteer masons and
carpenters... not until Father Salcedo,
who had built his first radio at the age
of 13, turned to his amateur transmitter.
In May of 1948, Radio Sutatenza
made its first broadcast, which was
picked up by only three receivers.
The priest asked campesinos to help
him build the Sutatenza theatre and
promised to record the voice of every
man who aided him. Soon he was
broadcasting the campesinos' own
voices back to their amazed families
and sixty men a day were coming to
Sutatenza to work on the theatre,
bringing materials with them and
money when they could.
w
74
ITH the theatre finished,
Father Salcedo sought the help of the
campesinos in developing what was to
become the radio school. One day,
the radio announced that farmers could
make their contributions in chickens.
Father Salcedo received more than 800
and had to hire a truck to haul them
to market in Bogota. Money was also
forthcoming, and by 1949, he was able
to buy a 250-watt transmitter. There
were enough radios for fifteen schools
and the priest started broadcasting an
educational programme once a week.
Seven years later Father Salcedo's
home-made transmitter had been trans¬
formed into Acción Cultural Popular,
one of the world's biggest programmes
of adult education by radio.
Acción Cultural Popular broadcasts
its lessons six hours a day to 200,000
pupils scattered over twelve of Colom¬
bia's sixteen departments and over¬
flowing into neighbouring Venezuela
and Ecuador. The radio schools are
served by 6,000 specially built receiv¬
ers and 10,000 more are on the way.
Attendance at these remarkable
schools Is expected to rise to 1,000,000.
The programmes still go on the air
from Sutatenza, but they are now
carried by a 25-kilowatt transmitter, the
most powerful in all Colombia. The
Colombian Government backs Acción
Cultural Popular to the amount of
$800,000 a year and Unesco partici¬
pated through the United Nations tech¬
nical assistance programme.
Besides the studios and the trans¬
mitter in the transformed village of
Sutatenza, Acción Cultural Popular
now occupies most of the seventh
floor of the biggest office building in
Bogota. From an office with a pano¬
ramic view of the mountains of Gua-
delupe and Monserrate, Father Sal¬
cedo (1) continues to direct its work.
I asked Father Salcedo how
he could explain the phenomenal
growth of Acción Cultural Popular in
so short a time. "Any work which
meets a basic need of the people must
grow in direct proportion to this need,"
he replied. "Here, it is the need of
7,000,000 people in a country of
12,000,000 for literacy and general cul¬
ture. It is not surprising that the
number of pupils in the radio schools
has risen to 200,000."
"Some men in education have had
reserves about our methods," Father
Salcedo explained, "but they have now
come over to our side because we are
introducing scientifically-tested mate¬
rials In the radio school. It is exactly
for this reason that we requested
technical assistance from Unesco to
make our teaching methods more
scientific."
The receiving sets used in the radio
schoolrooms are marvels of simplicity
battery-powered short-wave recei¬
vers manufactured specially for Acción
Cultural Popular. They can be tuned
to only one station. Radio Sutatenza,
a precaution taken to preserve the life
of their batteries. Still on the theory
that culture should not be given away
for nothing, Acción Cultural Popular
sells a set and its batteries to a radio
school at cost price. Each school,
however, receives a free supply of
chalk, an eraser, textbooks and an
alarm clock so that pupils will know
when to turn on their set.
These little sets put in a hard day's
work in the radio schools, most of them
nothing more than rooms set aside in
adobe homes. The house of the most
educated campesino in a hamlet is
always chosen for this honour, and its
owner is given the title of auxiliar
inmediato. It is this "immediate auxi¬
liary" who takes attendance, turns on
the radio when school begins, and
writes lessons on the blackboard
according to instructions given him by
the unseen radio teacher.
He is one of the key men in Acción
Cultural Popular, this remote-controlled
teacher. The auxiliaries are always
the farmers with the most modern
ideas in their communities, and the
distinction of leading the radio schools
lends them even greater influence as
forces for bettering the villages.
Programmes begin at ten minutes to
six in the morning, the only time that
most men can spare from their fields.
Depending on the day of the week,
the morning programme of one hour
and twenty-five minutes consists of
classes in reading and writing, hygiene,
history, religious instruction or civics,
always followed by a news broadcast.
This programme is recorded on tape
and repeated at 3.50 p.m. for women
and again at 5 p.m. for any men who
might have missed the morning class.
In the evening, Radio Sutatenza is
on the air from 6.15 p.m. to 9 p.m., but
school is over. Then it offers music
both classical and popular news, var¬
iety shows, religious talks and a half-
hour's drama on the theme of history,
science, travel in Colombia or prob¬
lems affecting farmers.
The campesinos learn to write and
they write letters to Acción Cultural
Popular. The letters pour in at the
rate of 150 a day and they are a useful
key to the popularity of various pro¬
grammes. They also show how deeply
the radio school has penetrated the
inaccessible world of the campesino.
They write about everything. Some
thank the school for taking them out of
their solitude or for weaning husbands
away from tabernas. And some ask
practical, down-to-earth questions:
what's good for a bad grippe, how do
you cure a lame horse, how should
a common-law couple go about
marrying, what can be done about a
disobedient daughter, how can children
be educated if there is no school avail¬
able, how does a wife get money out
of a stingy husband. Every letter
receives a reply, although Acción Cul¬
tural Popular does not pretend to have
a solution to every question.
I
(1) Now Monslgnor Salcedo Editor.
HERE are only 90-odd
miles- separating the Tenza Valley
from what was once the almost-
deserted village of Belencito in the
north of Boyaca. In those 90 miles,
you pass from an oxcart agricultural
economy to one of the newest steel
mills in Latin America. At Belencito,
in the surrealistic shadows of coke
ovens, conveyor belts and a 270-foot
high blast furnace, Acción Cultural
Popular began another experiment in
radio education.
The conversion of the campesinos of
Belencito into steel workers is a dra¬
matic story. The men learned to make
the transition from the hoe to the
rolling mill, while their wives adapted
themselves to an entirely new sort of
life that of an ordinary modern
community.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 76

DON QUIXOTE OF THE RADIO (Continued from page 74)
76
To pave the way for this adaptation,
the aid of Acción Cultural Popular was
enlisted, and it assigned to Belen¬
cito its former programme director,
Father Alejandro Rodriguez, the first
collaborator of Father Salcedo in the
radio schools of Sutatenza.
Father Rodriguez first went on the
air in 1949. In 1951, he received a
Unesco international fellowship to
enable him to study the use of the
radio in adult education in Canada.
Following his stay in Canada, Father
Rodriguez travelled to Spain, France
and England, concentrating on the
organization of broadcasting and on
its technical side. Then he went back
to his microphone in Sutatenza until
early in 1954 when he left to direct
Radio Belencito. He started on a mod¬
est scale in the new mill town with a
1 -kilowatt long-wave transmitter. Radio
Belencito fits into a new network of
long-wave transmitters established by
Acción Cultural Popular at widely
scattered points in Colombia.
Although Radio Belencito retrans¬
mits certain basic programmes of
Radio Sutatenza, its objectives are not
quite the same. In Belencito, Father
Rodriguez uses the radio to help mould
a colony of campes/nos-turned-steel
workers into a living community. Be¬
sides its classes, Radio Belencito
broadcasts programmes for neighbour
hood centres in the steel town. The
radio serves the community as theatre,
orchestra and forum and, to supple¬
ment it, spare time teachers were
trained as neighbourhood leaders the
urban version of the auxiliar inmediato.
"Fifty per cent of our workers are
illiterate," an official of the Belencito
steel mill told me. "They learn quickly
and their mechanical aptitude is high,
but we want them to understand what
they are doing and why they are doing
it. This is extremely important to
them and to us. The Colombian eco¬
nomy needs this steel mill and we want
our workers to be integrated into this
new aspect of our economy."
February 1955
