GANDHI
'Generations to come will scarce
believe that such a one as this
ever walked upon the earth.'
EINSTEIN
0,
4
I nee upon a time there was
a sage and king, Sri Krishna. Of
the Yadava clan, he ruled from Dwa-
raka, the seaport on the tip of Kathia-
war, the peninsula of western India.
He ruled the country in wisdom and
splendour. And one day, as he sat
in state, his chamberlain announced
that a poor Brahmin was at the palace
gate, claiming to be an old class-fellow
of the king. Sudhama was his name.
"Please ask the guards to let him
in," proclaimed the king, and when the
Brahmin came, he himself washed the
visitor's feet with hot and cold water,
smeared them with unguents and em¬
bracing his friend, accepted with joy
a handful of puffed rice his friend
had brought as a gift. And taking
him into the inner courts, asked him
many questions and fed him and
honoured him, as one should an old
and dear friend.
RAJA RAO is a noted Indian author who
was educated in India, England and France.
He is a follower of the Advaita Vedanta
school of philosophy derived from the Vedas
(the sacred books of Hindu scriptures). He
writes in English, but his work is character¬
ized by the traditional Indian mood and style.
His publications include "Kanthapura", 'Cow
of the Barricades and Other Stories", "The
Serpent and the Rope", "The Cat and
Shakespeare" and many short stories.
by Raja Rao
Sudhama was so happy, he spent
the whole day with Sri Krishna, took
his dinner, and while he was going
in a royal carriage back home to his
small town, some distance from Dwa-
raka, Sudhama remembered what he
had come for. His wife having teased
him, exasperated him, had finally driven
him to go and seek help from his
celebrated friend, King Sri Krishna.
She had grudgingly given her hus¬
band a handful of puffed rice they
were so poor as offering to his host.
But in his joy Sudhama had forgotten
the mission on which he had been
sent. He had even forgotten he was
riding in a royal carriage back home.
But when he returned to his village
such was its magnificence, his own
house had gone up in splendour with
marble walls, and cool courtyards, and
flowering shrubs entwining around the
windows, and his wife richly attired
stood at the door, to receive him with
humility and true devotion. He had
never asked and he had been given.
Such was Sri Krishna's gift to Sudha¬
ma, the Daridranärayäna, the poor-
man-god.
And since that day the village was
called Sudhamapuri, the City of Sud¬
hama, which with the accretion of
time, became Puri, and since it was a
port (bunder) it was called Porbunder,
whose kings like their cousins from
all over India, claimed their descent
from the sun or the moon and more
recently from the families of Sri Rama
(the hero of the epic, the Ramayana)
or of Sri Krishna (the hero of the
great epiG, the Mahabharatha see
Unesco Courier, December 1967).
And it is in the Gita, a part of the
Mahabharatha, that Sri Krishna said
to Arjuna, the hero: Act, but be not
attached to the fruits of action.
Porbunder is an ancient city men¬
tioned even by the Greek and Roman
traders and, since its houses were
all in marble, white stone cut fresh
from the hills behind, that the monsoon
rains had cemented century after
century, it was called the white city,
and in one of those solid marble
houses with decorated wooden doors,
and high terrace pavilions, was Mohan¬
das Karamachand Gandhi born, on
October 2, 1869.
His father was Prime Minister of the
state of Porbunder, like his own father
was, and generations five in all had
served their princes with honesty and
with devotion. Scrupulous' in their
dealings, they would bend not even
before the King if injustices were done,
and Mohandas Gandhi's grandfather,
Ota Gandhi, had to pay for it once.
Having sheltered an honest man (the

Photo © Brian Brake - Rapho
state treasurer) against the extravagant
Queen-regent, the house was shelled
with cannon and marks of that royal
ill-temper live to this day.
Also, when Ota Gandhi left Porbun¬
der and went to his home town in the
state of Junagadh, the Prince there
asked him to be his Prime Minister.
In answer Ota gave the Prince his left
hand. "Why this?" "Because, sire,"
said Ota, "my other hand is pledged
to Porbunder." Such is the traditional
integrity of the Gandhis.
Mohandas' mother was a religious
Hindu woman who loved her fasts,
gifts to the monks and her prayers,
and taught her children obedience to
their elders, tolerance in religion, and
purity of conduct.
She used to take her children
especially Mohania her youngest to
the story-tellings (Kathas) where some
episode from the legends was chosen
for recital, like that of Prahalada who
defied his heretic father and proved
the existence of God God surging
before them from a common pillar or
of Harishchandra, the King, who gave
up his kingdom for the truth, sold his
wife as a charwoman, and himself
became guardian of a crematorium.
Young Mohandas wiping his tears
wondered why he and everybody could
not live like Harishchandra.
When he grew up and went to
school, first at Porbunder, and later at
Rajkot (whither his father had now
been invited to set the affairs of that
state in order), Mohandas was ever
eager for the truth. Having once refus¬
ed to copy from his teacher the exact
spelling of the English word "kettle"
a British inspector of education was
visiting the Alfred High School he
was despised by the teacher, and his
life made difficult.
Yet Mohania was not such a model
Hindu boy. He had class-fellows who
spoke of other things than books, and
made suggestions that the world out¬
side was very, very different. In fact,
the English ruled India because they
ate meat; there was even doggerel:
Behold the mighty Englishman,
He rules the Indian small,
Because, being a meat-eater,
He is five cubits tall.
So Mohania with his brother started
eating meat by the riverside, in hiding.
However, because of the fact that
money had to be stolen and so an
untruthful act committed, he decided
he would eat meat only when he grew
up and was Independent like his
father.
Another day, his companion took
him to a brothel, and he had such
compassion for the harlot that he ran
out a coward. This visit was even
worse for Mohania was already mar¬
ried. He had been married, when he
was thirteen, to Kasturba, who was of
the same age and had been his fiancée
since he was five years old.
The discovery of woman at such an
early age and the raging passion he
had for her made him forget his moral
and intellectual aptitudes and even to
listening to the monks and learned
men who came to visit his father, or
simply hear that great philosophical
epic, the Ramayana of Tulsidas read
out.
And, on the night his father was
very ill, Mohania left the bedside of
the invalid to find the sumptuosities
of his wife's body, and when they
called him it was too late; his father
was already dead. This shook him to
the very depths of his moral found¬
ation.
His brothers, though kind and good,
could, however, never become Prime
Ministers of Porbunder; they did not
have modern education, and now that
the British were installed in India,
unless one were at least a barrister
one would never become Prime Minis¬
ter.
Hence, much against the wishes of
his mother and wife and of his whole
community, the family decided to send
Mohania to London so that he might
become a barrister. The only condition
was that, to keep himself from the
evils of Western civilization, he had
to take a vow: never to touch meat or
wine or female of any type.
Though excommunicated by his
community for "going across the dark
waters", he sailed to London (Sept.
1888) and spent almost three years in
that extraordinary atmosphere of Vic¬
torian England where Socialists were
vying with Imperialists in sincerity,
vegetarians with anti-vivisectionists,
atheists with theosophists, and contra-
ceptionists with anti-contraceptionists.
He desperately tried to become an
English gentleman, taking lessons in
elocution and ballroom dancing and
learning that elegant speech, French,
but, having failed in the attempt, he
gave them all up and devoted himself
to economic living, Latin, and the study
of law.
IOHANDAS' vegetarianism
led him to extraordinary adventures in
which he met eccentric and compas¬
sionate Englishmen and women who
believed that this slight change in diet
would lead mankind to a new millen¬
nium, and perhaps to the true god. He
was elected to the committee of the
London Vegetarian Society, but he was
so shy that he could hardly ever make
a speech, though he attended their
meetings assiduously.
After a brief visit to Paris, where
the great exhibition was being held,
having visited the Eiffel Tower and
eaten at the restaurant there, . he
returned to London, took his degree,
and sailed back to India (1891).
But there was nobody in India to
offer him a Prime Ministership. He
could not even earn enough money as
a lawyer to look after his needs he
was too honest to employ touts and
thus, in misery and sorrow, when a
firm in Porbunder which had connex¬
ions with South Africa invited him as
legal consultant, he jumped to the
occasion and sailed off to Durban,
capital of Natal, in April 1893.
South Africa at that time was a
palimpsest of races, historical periods,
and adventurers from every nation.
The hardy, religious Boer lived, as it r
were, on the outskirts of the Zulu J
universe, while the British manipulated
the world to better business, roads
and railways, and a growing gentle-
CONTINUEO ON NEXT PAGE

GANDHI (Continued)
6
men's democracy. But as slavery was
abolished and somebody was needed
to do the hard work, indentured
labour was brought from India the
coolie and being neither white nor
black but poor and brown, nobody
knew where to place him.
Thus, travelling to Pretoria on his
legal work, Gandhi, then twenty-three
years of age, was pushed out of the
train at Pietermaritzburg the most
"creative" moment of his life. Shiver¬
ing in the cold at the station and
utterly friendless he could either go
forward and so into the unknown and
suffering, or return to India and to
some minor legal activity. He chose
to go forward, for with his faith in
the truth, he refused to be humiliated.
Travelling further on a stagecoach
toward Pretoria, he was hit by a white
bully, but he refused to answer back
in the same manner. In fact he decid¬
ed he would never appeal to a court
of law for any personal grievance.
Later, walking on a pavement in Pre¬
toria, he was kicked off by the guards,
as the pavement was reserved for the
whites, and he again refused to go
to the courts of law to defend himself.
Seeing the humiliating situation of
the Indian the coolie and being now
called a coolie barrister, he taught
English to the Indian barber and the
trader, and defended the coolie against
his white masters (the coolie was his
Daridranärayäna).
Gandhi also wrote letters to the
legislatures, sent petitions to the Im¬
perial Government in London and
created Indian political and cultural
organizations, and in very few years
made the problem of the Indian in
South Africa an imperial and an inter¬
national question.
And in the process, by a series of
spiritual understandings based on the
Sermon on the Mount and later on
the Bhagavad Gita of Sri Krishna and
of moving human adventures, he
discovered Satyagraha: that is to say,
the Force that is born of Truth and
Love, or non-violence. His final aim
was not liberation of the coolie, or of
India, but of man from his own bon¬
dage: to attain Moksha. And with this
as philosophy, and with the techniques
of non-violence, he fought for the
rights of Indians in South Africa.
Yet when the whites were in a painful
predicament during the Boer War he
organized a Red Cross team and
served in the most dangerous battle
zones. Again, when the Zulus rose in
rebellion he nursed the howling and
wounded Zulus, and whites.
He discussed Christianity with the
Christians, Islam with Muslims, and
chided the Hindus for their sloth, their
filth and their incompetence. When
he left South Africa in 1914, he had
successfully carried on his non-violent
campaign against Smuts, achieved
every specific objective he had in mind,
and thus proved to the world the
unique humanity and efficacity of
Satyagraha.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 8


GANDHI (Continued)
Like Smuts and Rhodes (and more
like Rhodes than Smuts), Gandhiji
believed in the importance and integrity
of the British Empire. It was the first
attempt man seemed to have made of
some sort of human commonwealth.
Therefore, Rhodes believed the whole
world should be painted red, whereas
for Gandhi, the Empire implied a sense
of a universal brotherhood, something
Tolstoyan that was emerging out of the
sorrow-beleaguered world.
In fact Gandhiji had already written
to Tolstoy (1909) about the experiences
of non-violence in the Transvaal, and
Tolstoy had replied, "May God help
our dear brothers and co-workers in
the Transvaal," and had sent every
encouragement to the Satyagraha
movement.
But soon Tolstoy died, and the
Germans and the British (the French
and the Russians) all quarrelled over
the body of some royal heir murdered
in Serbia, and Gandhi, true subject of
the British Empire, offered to raise a
volunteer army for the imperial needs,
despite his disbelief in war violence.
But Gandhi's health demanded his
return to India, and Gokhale, the great
leader, was pressing Gandhiji to give
his life to Indian politics at home. At
the Town Hall in Bombay, Gokhale had
declared: "Gandhi has in him the
marvellous spiritual power to turn ordi¬
nary men into heroes and martyrs."
T,
8
_ HE war came and went;
Indians fought in Flanders, in the
Middle East; great promises were
made to them by British statesmen, but
when peace came and the world was
being looked at anew, Britain had no
desire to lose India. There was unrest
and wide-spread repression. Now
violence flared up. Gandhi pleaded
again for a fairer perspective, respect
for their promises made. But the
British were unwilling to listen.
Meanwhile, during the war he had
turned to the poor Indians on the
indigo plantations of Behar who were
treated no better than the indentured
labourers in Natal (he was always for
Daridranärayäna), and with his indubit¬
able honesty and his meticulous
gathering of facts, he showed how the
poor labourers in Champaran were
more or less slaves.
The gentlemen among the English
(both in South Africa and in Great
Britain) sided with him. Truth always
had this power, Gandhiji said, and
each time he tried he found there was
no monolithic adversary. He had no
enemies, only adversaries. And the
adversary was always a system, never
a man. And each time one English¬
man took your point of view, the
adversary's case looked less self-
sustaining.
Then with the backing of the Indian
National Congress, of which he had
by now become the undoubted head,
he launched his first movement of
non-co-operation, the Hartal, when
shops closed, workers would not work,
and offices were deserted. Some¬
times violence broke out here and
there and he suddenly asked his
followers to stop and pray. We were
not yet ready for Satyagraha.
Once again Hartals and Satyagraha
would start. Such was the enthusiasm
in India that wave after wave of the
non-violent revolution shook the
country. The British were unprepared
for this, just as Smuts was. Some¬
times here and there once again vio¬
lence broke out. The country was not
yet mature for a spiritual and material
regeneration.
Now he would try Satyagraha in a
small area (Bardoli) of some 140 vil¬
lages and prepare the country with
this rigorous experiment in non-violent
non-co-operation. It began as a great
success and the country was wild with
enthusiasm. When in Chowri Chowra
some brutal policemen were killed,
against the advice of most of his
followers and with the indignation of
the majority against him, he stopped
the fight. India was not yet ready
for Swaraj independence. We would
fast and we would pray and prepare
ourselves anew.
The British however could not let
him go so simply. They arrested him,
but when the judge had to pronounce
sentence he made a statement that was
to honour the British tradition. "Even
those who differ from you in politics
look upon you as a man of high ideals
and noble and even saintly life." He
was condemned to six years imprison¬
ment. But if he were released, said
the judge, no one would be happier
than himself. Gandhiji was released
some two years later on medical
grounds.
As long as there is a single Satya-
grahi there is never a defeat. This is
the essence of Gandhism. And since
he was there the one at least, Satya¬
graha would continue. For this one
needs much austerity, integrity and
prayer. He had already established
the Ashram (hermiíage) of Sabaramathi
near Ahmedabad, and there he prepar¬
ed workers for a future fight.
He would never seek an opportunity.
The opportunity would have to seek
him. Then with truth and non-violence
he would go to his "non-violent" war.
The heart of the adversary would one
day melt, our suffering would change
him, and the commonwealth of man
could still be founded.
Meanwhile he preached for the unity
of the Hindus and the Muslims. Even
in South Africa most of the leadership
was Muslim while the rank and file
were Hindu. Here in India they would
fight like brothers.
He had now lost faith in the British
Empire. Britain had come to bleed
India; she had taken away our man¬
liness. And so when the moment came
he launched his salt-Satyagraha
(March, 1930), marching to the sea with
his closest followers, and then with
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

GANDHI (Continued)
more and more as they joined him on
his pilgrim march, he would finally sit
by the sea and break the government
monopoly on salt.
Salt was the poor man's food, the
need of Daridranärayäna, and the
government made the poor, who were
almost starving, pay for this pittance of
salt that the sea gave to man as free
as air or water. And this Satyagraha
was already a bigger movement than
the one before, spreading rapidly
through the whole of India.
Arrested again and released, he was
invited to London for discussions. He
failed to get what he asked for, and
on his return was arrested again. And
when the government wanted to give
the Untouchables a separate represent¬
ation he fasted, and as the fast was
prolonged the government became
ever so worried, for if he died there
would be a bloody revolution. The
government gave in. The Untouchable
problem was left for the Congress to
resolve.
For the moment he withdrew, as it
were, from politics to prepare himself
and the country for what was to come.
But soon Hitler was making his pre¬
parations for the war. The Jews were
being persecuted. Japan was arming
herself for an Asiatic dominion.
Gandhi wanted, at least for practical
reasons, that India should be made
free, that she too could play her part
in international affairs and maybe bring
some weight on the side of peace
among the warring nations. For he
was not fighting for Indian freedom
he was always fighting for Moksha,
liberation, of which India's freedom
and the welfare of all mankind would
be an Integral part. But the British
were in no mood for such an under¬
standing.
And when Hitler marched into
Poland, Gandhiji begged the British to
let him go to plead with Hitler, and
again when Japan attacked at Pearl
Harbour, he again pleaded with the
government to let him talk to the
Japanese. Churchill was in no mood
to listen to this "naked fakir".
But disaster after disaster shook
the British in Malaya, in Burma, and
then again in the West. Rommel was
almost at the door of India. Disaster
made the British in India evermore
arrogant. But Gandhi would not hurt
the British in their hour of need. Yet
the British would not understand,
caught as they were between the
Germans and the Japanese.
"Quit India", he told them in his
famous speech at the Congress
(August 1942), and leave India to the
anarchy of God. Churchill arrested
him and his lieutenants, Pandit Nehru
and the President of the Congress,
Maulana Azad, one of the greatest
Muslim theologians of our time. And
the news of Gandhiji's arrest and the
arrest of all the important Indian
leaders created such a revolutionary
situation in the country that for six
months there was the biggest mass
upsurge in India since the revolution
(or the "Mutiny") of 1857. Railway

lines were lifted, telegraph wires cut,
government offices sabotaged, all in a
non-violent manner, and to this day it
is difficult to know how many people
were shot in the "Quit India" move¬
ment.
But the success of the allied forces
in Europe and the new shape of things
to come suddenly turned in favour of
India. The "Quit India" movement (in
which hardly half a dozen Europeans
were killed) had sapped the integrity
of the British Government so that
when the Indian Navy mutinied against
the British, and with the British soldier
wanting to get back home (in any case
he had no quarrel with the Indians),
Britain decided to give independence
to India.
But to which India, for by now Jinnah
and the Muslim league had become
powerful. They felt that in a majority
Hindu state they would be an important
but helpless minority. Gandhiji and
Nehru pleaded with the Muslim League
leaders. The irony was that Maulana
Azad, the great Muslim theologian,
was the President of the Congress.
But politics is not reasonable ever.
Gandhiji himself was willing to give
the whole of India to Jinnah, his old
friend, if he so desired. The British
however sent Mountbatten, cousin to
the King, as Viceroy of India. India
would at last be independent. But
what India; not Gandhi's India.
Thus when independence came
Gandhiji was trying to quell the Hindu-
Muslim massacres that had started at
the time of the division of the country.
He walked among the Hindus to pro¬
tect the Muslims; he walked into
Pakistan to give courage to the Hindus.
Death was no fear to the Satyagrahi.
In fact that would be the right death.
He preached love from hamlet to
hamlet, going on foot over rickety
bamboo bridges, sleeping in poor peo¬
ples' huts and having his prayers said
morning and evening (Hindu hymns,
texts from Sri Krishna's Gita, and
Muslim prayers) and preaching the
necessity and the efficacy of love.
Finally, coming to Delhi (for the
government badly needed his pre¬
sence) he preached universal love
evening after evening from the Ram¬
lila grounds. His wife had already
died in prison. He looked a lone,
gaunt figure, misunderstood and
sorrowful.
The government heard of conspir¬
acies to kill him the Hindus were
incensed at his defence of the Mus¬
lims but he refused all form of pro¬
tection. He had just gone on a fast
for a better treatment to be given to
Muslims and to Pakistan by the govern¬
ment and the Indians. A young Hindu
intellectual who respected him but
thought his speeches were dangerous
to Hindu India, knelt one afternoon
while Gandhiji was going to his
prayers and shot him. "He Ram" (O
God), he cried; and died to his truth.
"Generations to come, it may be,"
said Albert Einstein, "will scarce be¬
lieve that such a one as this ever in
flesh and blood walked upon this
earth."
11
