wtwMHIMn
Photo Unesco - Rex Keating
Deprived of water, a camel can lose 100 kilogrammes in 8 days, but regains
the weight by drinking 100 litres in 10 minutes.
Drawings by Abraham

70
L
THE CAMEL, FACTS AND FABLES
EGEND has it that the camel can cross the most
scorching desert without water or food. Until recently, many
common questions could not be answered by science, such as:
How long can a camel go without water? Does the camel store
water in its body? What is the function of the camel's hump?
It was therefore natural that Unesco, among other institutions,
supported an expedition to find answers to many of these
problems. Our field studies were carried out in the Algerian
Sahara, at Beni Abbes, in 1953-54.
How long a camel can live without drinking water depends
on external conditions: amount of food eaten and its water con¬
tent, the load the camel carries, how far it travels, temperature,
and also the breed of the camel and its condition. One therefore
cannot say that any camel can do without water for a certain
number of days.
We soon found that camels grazing in winter were usually not
watered at all. If it rains the desert vegetation contains a good
deal of water. We examined a number of such camels. After
being without water for one of two months they showed no interest
in water whatsoever.
However, in dry winters the camels would undoubtedly have to
be watered. To find out how much water a camel needs we
fed them dry hay and dry dates for periods of up to 16 days in
January. After this, they were rather thirsty but in no serious
condition. Each camel lost weight corresponding to the amount
of water used up. After 16 days it drank an amount corresponding
to the expenditure, bringing the body weight back to normal.
In summer we kept a camel without water for eight days and
it lost 100 kg. When allowed to drink it consumed 103 litres
of water in 10 minutes. Another camel was without water for
17 days. Both animals lost their appetite, looked thin and
emaciated, the muscles were shrunken and the legs scrawny. They
would not have been fit for heavy work or long distance travel.
These two camels were exposed to the hot desert wind and
sun but they had not worked. Judging from this experiment,
even the best camels could not be used for desert travel without
water beyond a week in summer.
Many travellers have suggested that the water tolerance of
the camel is explained by a storage of water in the stomach or
other parts of the body. We observed no instance in which
a camel drank an excess of water that could be regarded as
storage. The belief comes from the fact that the camel has
a stomach divided into several compartments, the largest of
which is the rumen containing the coarsely masticated fodder.
The camel's rumen contains large quantities of fluid but so do
all ruminants. We analyzed this fluid and found that although
it is rather unappetizing it could very well be used for drinking
in an emergency. Thus the tale of the Arab who saves his life
by killing his camel to drink the water in its stomach may be
true. The mistake is in implying that the fluid is stored water.
Some people have stated that the camel's hump contains
the camel's water reservoir. But the hump is almost exclusively
fat and is an energy storage as it is in other animals. Although
the hump does not contain water, there is a grain of truth in
the belief that the camel gets water from the hump. Whenever
organic material is burned water is formed in the process.
When man is exposed to the hot desert he avoids a rise in
body temperature by sweating. The camel also regulates its
temperature by sweating but can vary this temperature and save
on the amount of water needed to keep cool. It allows its body
temperature to rise slowly until almost 41 C. without losing much
water. During the cool night it gives off heat so that its morning
temperature may be as low as 34 C.
The camel can tolerate losing as much as 30 per cent of its
body weight during water deprivation in the hot desert. A camel
that has lost 50 litres of water (20 per cent weight loss) reduces
its blood volume less than one litre. The rest of the water
comes from the tissues and tissue fluids. This places the camel
in a much better position than other mammals in which thick¬
ening of the blood is the main cause of explosive heat death.
August-September 1955
BODIL AND KNUT SCHMIDT-NIELSEN
