700 MILLION
FORGOTTEN MINDS
by René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
A,
36
iN estimated 700 million
adults or more than two-fifths of the
world's total population are illiterate.
And it is in the less developed regions
that most of these adult Illiterates live.
As for children (5 to 15 years), 47
per cent did not attend school during
1960 in the countries of Latin America,
Africa, the Middle East and Asia. If
we add to this figure those children
who are going to school now but who
will drop out before they master read¬
ing and writing and hence will grow
up illiterate, there are today 150 million
future illiterates in these countries and
there will be an additional 20 to
25 million illiterates added to the
world's adult population in the next
6 or 7 years.
What a frightful loss of mindpower
these hundreds of millions of illiterates
represent. Who can say how many
scientists, engineers and technicians
potentially existed among all these
forsaken adults as well as the children
consigned from birth to the shadows
of Ignorance?
An illiterate person never ceases
to be a human being endowed with
his own natural dignity and ability.
Nevertheless, illiteracy by the very fact
that it makes science and technology
a closed book renders active partici¬
pation in modern civilization im¬
possible.
A country with a high percentage of
illiterates does not only suffer an in¬
trinsic loss In terms of wasted man
and mindpower; the progress of the
educated segment of the population
is equally slowed down. We can no
longer afford to have, as we unfortu¬
nately do in many of the developing
countries, an enormous gulf separating
one group or generation from another,
that is, those who have had a modern
education from those who are illiterate.
This disrupts the equilibrium and
unity of a country and completely de¬
feats any effort to create a nation¬
wide positive attitude toward scientific
thinking and technology without which
there can be no real development.
Probably the greatest need for ex¬
pansion and improvement lies in the
field of technical and vocational edu¬
cation, particularly at the secondary
school level.
Here Unesco has devoted consider¬
able effort in recent years to helping
the developing countries in two differ
ent ways: by working on international
standards for technical education, and
by direct aid in the field.
As for the rôle of universities in
training senior scientific and technical
personnel, in certain countries the
problem is chiefly one of quantity.
Here the key word is shortage: a
shortage of universities, a shortage
of instructors and professors, a short¬
age of equipment, mainly laboratory
equipment, even a shortage at times
of adequately prepared students
arising from the inadequacies of
secondary education.
In other countries higher education
is poorly adapted to the needs of a
modern economy and technology.
Thus most of the university students
in these countries prepare for degrees
in traditional subjects; and those who
do major in science and technology
often do so by chance or for personal
reasons that have little to do with
the real top-priority problems of
economic and social development in
their country.
The evil of underdevelopment must
be attacked at its very root by creating
national structures for training qualified
personnel where they do not exist and
strengthening and improving them
where they do.
If a country is to build a sound foun¬
dation for its technological develop¬
ment science must be taught in the

The thirst for learning all over the world
is such that people of all ages use every
opportunity to read and study.. Right, an
assiduous reader in India. Below opposite,
youngsters spend hours studying under
the street lamps in Leopoldville.
schools at every level. The real basis
for development is a scientific civiliza¬
tion.
Merely importing techniques will
not itself equip the underdeveloped
countries for the full utilization of their
natural and human resources to
achieve their transformation.
T,_ HERE are many things
wrong with science teaching in the
developing countries. There is often
a terrible shortage of laboratory equip¬
ment for schools and universities.
In many cases, curricula are ill-
conceived, textbooks and teachers'
handbooks are not suited to local
conditions, and the training of teachers
leaves much to be desired.
In all these spheres, Unesco is
helping to promote and support the
efforts of its member states. Far
greater resources must be marshalled
by international aid for this vital
contribution to progress.
I do not believe that the educational
system, with its present organization
and methods, can meet the demands
of the growth of our civilization in the
developed countries, let alone those
in the developing areas.
Education cannot make its full and
decisive contribution to the technolo¬
gical revolution which must take place
in the less developed countries unless
it itself drastically overhauls its own
technology, which in many respects is
out of date.
We all know what a long and costly
process the training of teachers Is at
no matter what level. There can be
no question of economizing in this vital
field. But experience has shown that
for certain duties, assistants with far
less advanced training are quite
adequate. The savings made in this
way would be quite considerable.
Even the machines now being tried
out for programmed instruction reduce
the need for personal coaching by
the teacher.
The cinema, radio and television
not to overlook filmstrips and the gra¬
mophone have demonstrated over
and over again how potent they are
as means of conveying ideas, impart¬
ing knowledge, and expressing emo
tions and passions, too. Educators
should learn what the professional
entertainers and political propagandists
have already found out ¡n other fields:
that these media can play an enormous
rôle in advancing education in the
developing countries.
It is not in schools or universities
that the renewal or extension of
scientific education and technical
training must be effected. It must
take place wherever the main part of
an adult's life is spent at work and
during leisure hours.
Places of work are ideal centres for
specialized scientific and technical
education on a continuing basis.
Industry is becoming increasingly
aware of this educational responsibility
which it bears. This is a task on a
scale commensurate with modern
society as a whole.
Major Industrial and commercial
concerns are bound to assume more
and more the character of specialized
training establishments supplementing
the work of schools and universities.
The university, far from ignoring or
vying with them, should keep in close
touch in order to stimulate and guide
them, for they are its natural extension.
The considerable amount of leisure
made available by industrialization is
being increasingly taken over by the
mass communication media. It is from
these media that the vast majority
of adults and even a proportion of
those at school and university derive
the bulk of what I would term their
scientific and technical culture.
The diversity of situations which
distinguish the less-developed coun¬
tries from the industrialized ones
calls for different approaches to the
problems of development. But there
are no ways and means too novel
or modern for the less developed
countries in applying the solutions
adopted for those problems. This is
why the training of scientific and
technical personnel is so urgent a
necessity for them. For on this
personnel depends whether or not
they are to play a real part on the
contemporary scene.
July-August 1963
