AVICENNA
by Camille Aboussouan
A,l ROUND the year 1150, at
the height of the Middle Ages, the
scientific and philosophical works of
a great Persian thinker, named Avi¬
cenna, reached western Europe, in¬
troducing for the first time a complete,
organized system of natural philosophy
directly from the Orient.
This Persian scholar gave the world
a vast body of works 335 in all
dealing more with science than with
philosophy alone, which was to have
a resounding impact on the develop¬
ment of knowledge in the Western
World. For some 600 years, up until
the 18th century, Avicenna's works on
medicine remained the standard text¬
books in all the universities of Europe.
His studies on mathematics, physics,
chemistry, astronomy and botany, his
treatises on military administration
and land taxation, his epistle on love,
his correspondence with other scien¬
tists of his time, his philosophical, legal
and linguistic essays, and even his
commentaries on magic, all entitle him
to be considered as one of the most
remarkable figures of world civilization.
A thousand lunar years ago, In the
year 370 of the Hegira (980 A.D.),
Abu Ali al Husain ibn Abdallah ibn
Sina, known as Avicenna, was born at
Afsana, not far from Bokhara in Persia.
The special care and education given
him as a child permitted him to acquire
an erudition rare for his time. Though
Persian, he wrote many of his works
in Arabic, the scientific and religious
language of the Islamic world as Latin
then was in the Christian West. In his
native Persian he wrote several books
of verse, a treatise on pulsation and
a major work on the principles of
science, the Danesh-Nameh (1).
What we know about his life has
come down to us from Avicenna's own
writing, supplemented by those of his
disciple, AI Juzjani, and commentaries
of other writers.
Like all good Muslims, Avicenna
first studied the Koran; then Arabic
literature, Greek philosophy, law, theo¬
logy, medicine, geometry, physics and
mathematics. Euclid, Ptolemy and
Porphyrius were his preferred authors
until he was 16 when, more learned
than any of his teachers, he founded
his own school and had many doctors
working under him.
At the age of 18, his encyclopaedic
knowledge and reputation as a doctor
were so great that the ailing Emir
had him summoned to his bedside.
When Avicenna succeeded in curing
him, the Emir rewarded him by making
38
CAMILLE ABOUSSOUAN, of the Lebanon,
has written extensively on cultures of the
Middle East. He Is now secretary of the
Lebanese National Commission for Unesco.
him a consultant on state affairs and
gave him access to his rich, private
library where he had plenty of free
time for research and study.
When he was 21, Avicenna pub¬
lished his first book, AI Majmuh, a
collection of philosophical writings. At
that time he became deeply Interest¬
ed in politics and left Bokhara to estab¬
lish himself in different courts of the
Emirs of northern Persia and the Cas¬
pian shore. It was in northern Per¬
sia that he began writing the Qanun
or "Canon of Medicine", and his first
epistles.
He then left for Rai (the ruins of
which can still be seen not far from
Teheran) where he attended the sick
prince Majd ad Dawla, and then for
Hamadan where he cured the Emir and
was named Vizier. There, Avicenna
dealt with state affairs during the day
and worked on his own studies at
night.
Some of his greatest works date
from this period: the Al-Shifa (On
Healing) and especially the Qanun fi-
t-tibb, his masterly work on medi¬
cine which was to become the "bible"
of all doctors in the East and West for
centuries. In this latter work Avicenna
showed that the real act of seeing
begins at the retina not the crystalline
lens as was commonly believed, cor¬
rectly defined meningitis as an inflam¬
mation of the brain membrane, recog¬
nized the various types of jaundice,
postulated the theory of the transmis¬
sion of certain diseases via the pla¬
centa, first proposed tracheotemy sur¬
gery, etc.
At the death of the Emir of Hama¬
dan, his enemies imprisoned Avicenna
in the fortress of Ferdajan. This en¬
forced retirement gave him leisure to
work in peace. But it did not last
very long. On his return to Hamadan,
where he no longer felt safe, he made
plans to flee to Isfahan with the aid
of his trusted companion AI Juzjani.
They slipped out of town disguised as
Sufis and after a 13 month journey
through hostile lands reached Isfahan
where they were received in honour
by the Emir Alai Addin.
Avicenna completed the Al-Shifa in
Isfahan, but this being a very lengthy
work, he made a summary of it (start¬
ed earlier) which is now famous as the
AI Nadjat.
Avicenna's thinking until this time
had been strongly influenced by Aris¬
totle, and these two books are no
exception. But during the later years
of his life, his work and thinking were
marked by a profound change.
This is clearly evident in his Kitab
al-lsarat wal-tanbihat, or "Book of
Theorems," the last of his works to
come down to us complete (2). The
Book of Theorems is the culmination
of Avicenna's thought. In it we see
the marked influence of Iranian scien¬
tific thinking, the development of his
rationalist (as opposed to mystico-
religious) thought.
Five hundred years before Harvey,
Bacon and the Renaissance, Avicenna
established a system of natural phil¬
osophy, neither Greek nor Persian,
but based on scientific experiment.
A universalist and rationalist, he com¬
bined in his works Greek and Oriental
philosophies and Iranian science, ex¬
pressed in an Arabic literary style and
sense of composition rarely attained.
The great philosopher and scientist
died at the age of 57 in Isfahan, the
city of roses, after freeing his slaves
and bequeathing all his property and
belongings to the poor.
September 1949
(1) Published in French as Le Livre de la
Science, in the Unesco Collection of Repre¬
sentative Works, Vol. I, Logique, Métaphys¬
ique (1955); Vol. Il, Physique, Mathématiques
(1958). Editions Les Belles Lettres, Paris.
(2) Published in French in The Unesco Col¬
lection of Representative Works as Livre des
Directives et Remarques, Vrin, Paris, 1961.
