THE SPREAD OF
BUDDHIST CULTURE
by Anil de Silva
IN India, during the third
century B.C. the Emperor Asoka was
converted to Buddhism after a bloody
war against the neighbouring Kalinga
Kingdom. He then issued his famous
edict which he caused to be carved
on rock and stone throughout his
kingdom:
"One hundred and fifty thousand
people were deported, one hundred
thousand people were killed, many
times this number perished... Remorse
fills the King friend of the Gods since
he has conquered Kalinga. The con¬
quest of an independent country
means murder, death or captivity for
men. All are victims of violence and
death and separation from those who
are dear to them. These thoughts
weigh heavily on the King friend of
the Gods...
"Even if the number of victims in the
' conquest of Kalinga were a hundred
thousand times smaller, the thought
of this would afflict the King friend
of the Gods. Even if they were in the
wrong the King friend of the Gods
believes we should have been as
patient as possible. The victory that
is the best of all is the Victory of the
Good Law (Buddhism). This text of
the Law is engraved for my sons and
grandchildren so that they will not
dream of new victories. Let them
seek real victories through the exer¬
cise of patience..."
The world in which Buddhism was
born 2,500 years ago was a world
of vast movements of men and ideas,
much vaster than we generally imag¬
ine. In this world India was geogra¬
phically, the crossroads between
Western and Far Eastern civilizations.
Both the great land routes entered
22
ANIL DE SILVA has written extensively on
the art and literature of Asia, particularly
Buddhist painting and sculpture.
her northern passes from the West
through Persia and from the East
through China and Central Asia, over
the old silk caravan route.
On the maritime routes, Persian,
Greek, Roman and Alexandrian ships
scoured the ports of Gujerath and
Konkan on the west coast, and Coim-
batore, Andhra, Bengal and Ceylon in
the south. India was also the port
of call for Far Eastern ships going
westwards, and her own ships sailed
out in all directions.
Contacts between the Western
world and India were continuous.
The Persian Emperor Darius left his
great terraced palace at Persepolis to
lead an expedition into the Punjab and
the Indus valley a few years before
the death of Buddha in the 5th
century B.C.
Alexander's expedition in the fourth
century B.C., bringing with it topo¬
graphers and scientists, helped to
strengthen the land route kept up by
the couriers of the Persian monarchs.
Alexander built a port and a fleet on
the Indus and his captain, Nearque,
sailed down the Indus, forging a mari¬
time route between the Indus and the
Tigris. Alexander returned through
Afghanistan with elephants and Indian
soldiers in his army.
The whole of north-west India,
Afghanistan, Gandhara (Afghanistan
and Pakistan territory) and the
Punjab remained for centuries under
a succession of Greek princes, one of
whom, Milanda (Menander), became a
Buddhist. These Greek kingdoms
favoured the penetration of Greek,
Hellenistic and Roman culture. Greeks
intermarried with Indians and these
colonies formed centres of a new
Greco-Roman Buddhist culture. The
new culture developed rapidly under
the Kushana Empire which succeeded
the Greeks in the 1st century A.D.
(The Kushans were nomads who
CONTINUED ON PAGE 24
For eight miles along the Irrawaddy River
and for two miles inland a forest of
Buddhist pagodas and stupas extends to
the horizon at Pagan in central Burma
(above). Built In the ttth century, Pagan
once had no fewer than 4,000 pagodas
and was one of the great religious cities
of Asia until reduced by the armies of
Kublal Khan in 1287. Right, head and
shoulders of the colossal Reclining
Buddha (measuring 28 metres) that lies
amid the ruins of Ayutya, Siam's ancient
capital. The sta'.ue is thought to date
from the 16th century.
IN THE STEPS
OF THE
BUDDHA
Below, the Footprint of Buddha covered
with sacred signs and symbols, carved
at the temple city of Angkor Wat,
Cambodia, In the 12th century. The
Buddha is said to have been born with
certain Imprints on the soles of his feet
and Buddhist iconographers have made
great use of these signs.

Photo © J. Lavaud
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris

BUDDHIST CULTURE (Continued)
invaded India from China and Central
Asia and whose emperors were con¬
verted to Buddhism).
More important than wars and
conquests was the long period of
friendship between Alexander's suc¬
cessors, the Seleucid kings in Persia
and the Mauryan kings in north India,
whose palace was modelled on that
of Darius at Persepolis, Persia. Am¬
bassadors were exchanged and for¬
eign merchants thronged the capital
Pataliputra (today Patna, capital of
Bihar province, north-east India). The
Emperor Asoka married a Greek princ¬
ess and sent his missionaries both
to the East and the West. His emis¬
saries to the West, carrying the
message of Buddha, reached Persia,
Egypt, Macedonia, Cyrenaica and
north-west Greece.
The Roman historian Pliny tells us
that Rome bought 50 million sesterces
worth of merchandise from India every
year: cotton from Malwa, lacquer
and nard from Pataliputra, indigo,
spices and precious stones from Kon-
kan, jades, ivories, silk and elephants
which the Romans used in large
numbers for their army and circus.
Roman coins of gold have been found
in the north-west and along the coast
of south India at Cannanore, Coim-
batore and Mahabalipurum with effi¬
gies of Augustus, Caracalla, Claudius,
Theodore and Constantine. A Roman-
Asian artist named Titus painted Bud¬
dhist frescoes at Miran in Central
Asia. Alexandrine merchants aided
Buddhist convents at Nasik and Junnar
near Bombay.
History gives us only a glimpse of
the vast movement of men at this
time: recruits in various armies
(Indian archers excelled in the Persian
army); craftsmen, metal workers, ivory
carvers (Indian ivories have been
found in Pompeii); weavers, jewellers,
sculptors and ceramists were sought
after at any price and protected by
merchants and princes.
c
24
ENTRAL Asia had two
routes through the desert: a northern
one and a southern one. They met at
Tun Huang In north-west China. These
were the principle arteries of Buddhist
expansion in Central Asia and China
and all became powerful centres of
Buddhist culture. Thousands of grottos
were excavated and open-air construc¬
tions were built. At Kizil alone thou¬
sands of grottos were cut out, painted
and carved by artisans from the Middle
East, India and China.
Hsuan Tsang, the famous Chinese
scholar who made his pilgrimage to
India by the northern route in the
7th century A.D., has left an unfor¬
gettable account of his journey through
burning deserts and snow-clad passes.
Historians also speak of the charm
of the women of Kutsha and record
that musicians and dancers from
Kutsha were seen at the Imperial
The sanctuaries in the Horyuji monastery at Nara, near Kyoto, are renowned as
treasure houses of Buddhist art In the famous Five-Storeyed Pagoda, more than
80 clay figures made in the 8th century (the oldest dated works of clay
sculpture in Japan) present four episodes from the life of Buddha. Here, saints,
disciples and ascetics lament the passing of the Enlightened One.
Chinese festivals, dressed in crimson
silk turbans. The titles of their songs
have been preserved: "The Meeting
of the Seventh Evening," "The Woman
of Jade Takes Round the Cup," and
"The Battle of Flowers."
The frescoes of Kutsha, Kizil and
Kumtura show us the splendid caval¬
iers those who, Hsuan Tsang tells
us, escorted him on his way, for many
of these paintings were made by
contemporaries of Hsuan Tsang.
They show cavaliers wearing long
boots, riding coats of silk falling to
the knees and taken in at the waist
with metal belts. Their tunics of blue,
grey, white and olive green were
embroidered with pearls, lined and
bordered with fur. Their reddish hair
was caught up with ribbons at the
neck. They must have formed a glor¬
ious sight with their coloured and
gilded banners and standards, sculp¬
tured and painted with heraldic ani¬
mals like the tiger and the dragon.
Hsuan Tsang returned to China laden
with manuscripts and images of the
Buddha.
Bamiyan in Afghanistan was the
halting place for caravans either going
to or coming from the difficult passes
of the Hindu Kush which barred the
way into India. Into the façade of
the great cliff of Bamiyan. cave
sanctuaries with colossal Buddhas
were carved and painted, two of these
images reaching 173. and 120 feet in
height. Merchants paid craftsmen
and artists to paint and carve statues
as thank-offerings for a safe journey.
Tun Huang at the other end of the
route was developed with the help
of merchants and royal benefactors,
for the Wei, T'ang and Sung dynasties
in China all contributed to the creation
of one of the most extraordinary
monuments of Buddhist culture.
Among the hundreds of cave tem¬
ples at Tun Huang, the Cave of the
Thousand Buddhas, sealed up for
centuries, housed priceless treasures
of manuscripts and paintings on silk.
The first mention of Buddhism In
China is in 65 A.D. when the Han
prince, Tch'ou protected a small Bud¬
dhist community at Lo-yang. The
translation of Buddhist texts from
Sanskrit and Pali into Chinese was
officially encouraged by the Kushna
Empire in India (30-224 A.D.). Chi¬
nese travellers, merchants. Imperial
envoys and pilgrims came to India by
sea. In fact it is to Chinese historians
that we owe the only written accounts

of these early kingdoms in south-east
Asia.
The spread of Buddhism throughout
Asia came in several waves emanating
from India from the first century A.D.
Bronze statues of the time have been
unearthed from the jungles of Annam,
Borneo and Celebes. Buddhist cul¬
ture apparently superimposed itself
on the whole of south-east Asia.
However each region retained much of
its own personality and character.
In the 8th century A.D. Buddhist
art began to mature and flower in
these countries, gaining in movement
and vigour when local tradition domin¬
ated. We see this clearly at Boro¬
budur (Java) in whose 1,400 panels
and 504 statues of the Buddha the
Javanese pattern of composition, har¬
mony and repose are blended with the
Indian style of art. Later Javanese
art threw off this influence and assert¬
ed its own national characteristics.
Eventually there were large mona¬
steries and universities in all the
Buddhist countries of south-east Asia,
Japan and Korea. Pilgrims in their
thousands from all over Asia thronged
the great Buddhist universities of
Takila 'in Pakistan and Nalanda in
India. Hostels were built by the kings
of Ceylon and Java to house the
students and pilgrims from their coun¬
tries at Nalanda and at Bodh Gaya in
the Indian state of Bihar, where
Buddha attained enlightenment under
the Bodhi tree.
Many of the ships leaving Bengal
and the southern India ports carried
pilgrims and missionaries and, in addi¬
tion to the spices, precious stones,
muslins and silks in their holds, they
bore statues of the Buddha made in
the busy centres of Mathura and
Nalanda.
T,HE coming of Buddhism,
coinciding as it did with increased
trade and intercourse between Asian
countries, resulted in a period of
intense intellectual life. The message
of the brotherhood of men "No one
is a Brahmin or an outcast by birth,
but one becomes a Brahmin or an
outcast by one's actions" (Vasala
Sutra) was like rain falling on parched
earth. It stimulated a resurgence of
popular feeling just as Christ's mess¬
age did in Rome in early Christian
times.
The richly human content of the
Buddhist message was the spiritual
basis of an art which overrode the
frontiers of artistic expression, revital¬
ized local traditions, making them
truly Buddhist and at the same time
freed expressions of national character.
It was a message of hope. It was a
message of peace. And these two
important factors helped the develop¬
ment and maturity of a noble art that
has enriched the artistic traditions of
the world.
June 1956

