UNKNOWN TREASURES
OF HIMALAYAN ART
by Madanjeet Singh
A unique artistic heritage, still virtually unknown to the world at large, is
hidden in the fastnesses of the Himalayan ranges. Until recently no single
account of Himalayan art covering the entire region from Ladakh in the
west to Bhutan in the east had been published, chiefly because its
magnificent wall-paintings and sculptures are located mainly in remote
temples and monasteries. This omission has now been made good with
the publication of "Himalayan Art" by Madanjeet Singh, the first volume
in a new series of Unesco Art Books (published in U.K. by Macmillan and
Co. Ltd., London; in U.S.A. by the New York Graphic Society, Greenwich,
Conn.; see inside back cover). Thanks to the help of the Indian and
Nepalese governments and with the authorization of the Dalai Lama and
the local rulers of Sikkim and Bhutan, Madanjeet Singh was able to reach
the most inaccessible religious communities and to photograph works of
art whose reproduction had hitherto been forbidden. With the following
article, written specially for this issue of the "Unesco Courier" by
Madanjeet Singh, we reproduce a number of these works (some in full
colour) selected from "Himalayan Art". To collect material for this first
complete account of a significant chapter in the history of Asian and world
art, Mr. Singh undertook thirty-five expeditions by helicopter, jeep, pony
and on foot to visit mountain shrines, and made over 7,000 repro¬
ductions of manuscripts, wall-paintings and sculptures.
Photos © Madanjeet Singh

TT
// 'H
v .&
The palace of Bhatgaon,
a town near Kathmandu,
capital of Nepal, is a
masterpiece of
Hindu-Buddhist art and
architecture. It was built
and enhanced by
monarchs of the Malla
dynasty, under whose
patronage the arts and
artists of Nepal won wide
renown. Above, a statue
of the ruler, Bhupadintra
Malla (late 17th-early
18th century), a striking
portrait of whom is painted
on the wall of the Taleju
temple at Bhatgaon.
The door façade of this
temple In gilt, copper
and brass, embellished
with figures of Hindu
deities (left) is one of the
most exquisite Nepalese
works of the period.
T,
HE eminent Indian sage
Swami Vivekananda was once asked
in the United States whether India's
heat had influenced the forms of India's
spiritual heritage and religions. He
replied that India's greatest spiritual
inspirations were nourished not so
much in its tropical climate as through
the meditations of ascetics in the Hima¬
laya, which means "abodes of snow".
Among these saints the one most
revered in the Himalaya is the Indian
sage Padmasambhava (750-800 A.D.);
there is hardly a Buddhist shrine in
the mountains that does not contain
an image of this Siddha or Tantra Guru.
According to tradition, it was at
Riwalsar in the Punjab Hills that Pad¬
masambhava, who came from Uddiyana
MADANJEET SINGH is a rare combination of
scholar, painter, writer and photographer. A
long-time student of Asian art and European
art history, he became known internationally
with his first book, 'Indian Sculpture In
Bronze and Stone", published in Rome by
the Institute of the Middle and Far East in
1952. This was followed in 1954 by 'India:
Paintings from Ajanta Caves" (A Unesco
World Art Series album) published by the
New York Graphic Society. Mr. Singh
devoted a later book to the art of this famous
Indian shrine ("Ajanta', published jointly In
1964 by Thames and Hudson. London, and
The Macmillan Company of New York). A
member of the Indian Diplomatic Service,
Mr. Singh is now First Secretary at the Indian
Embassy In Madrid.
(the Swat valley in Kashmir), gave a
popular basis to the mystical elements
of Tantric philosophy and iconography.
He thus became a symbol of the spirit
of the time, in an age when Buddhist
and Hindu practices and art forms
practically lost their separate identity.
Padmasambhava is said to have
travelled several times between Tibet
and Kashmir via Riwalsar despite the
difficult journey involving three or
four months. Although his specific
routes of travel are not known, the
footpaths had been well recognized
since the time of Thonmi Sambhota,
the minister of the famous Tibetan
king Srongtsen-gampo (died 650 A.D.).
Thonmi Sambhota had journeyed to
Kashmir to learn the Sanskrit alphabet
and had also brought back to Tibet
several models of Kashmiri art.
Since his time the holiest of all
mountains, Kailasha, by the sacred
lake Manasarovara, could be approach¬
ed from the important Buddhist centre
Jalandhara by following the river
Sutlej upstream. This great river with
its source beyond the Indian frontiers
flows for nearly 800 kilometres before
descending to the Indian plains. Simi¬
larly, the routes to Kashmir, which had -i r
become a chief centre of Buddhist | Jj
learning since Emperor Ashoka's time
(273-232 B.C.), were well marked by
Buddhist pilgrims.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

HIMALAYAN ART (Continued)
16
The recent discovery of terracotta figures dating back to
300 B.C. confirms the early origins of art in Nepal, a country
whose climates and terrains (including Everest, the world's
highest peak) are as varied as the ethnic origins of its people.
For unbroken centuries, Nepal was an illustrious centre of
the arts. Masterpieces of its painting and sculpture are
preserved In the country's temples and monasteries.
This graceful 10th century limestone sculpture,
"Nativity of the Buddha", from Kathmandu, recalls the style
of paintings in the Ajanta caves, in central India.
Photo © Madanjeet Singh
These were and still are formid¬
able footpaths winding their way
through high snowy passes of great
beauty and grandeur and equally
great hardship. These ancient tracks
in the western Himalaya were among
the footpaths I was able to partly
retrace in the course of my 35 major
expeditions through the entire mountain
ranges from Kashmir in the west to
Bhutan in the east (see map page 6).
By this time I had already covered
picturesque Nepal, a journey which
was indeed stimulating because every
nook and corner in the Kathmandu
valley is studded with marvellous
pieces of art; but I did not feel before
that overwhelming impact of the envir¬
onments which apparently brought
forth Himalayan art, until I saw the
awe-inspiring peaks of mighty splen¬
dour in western Himalaya.
For example, as I crossed the diffi¬
cult Rohtang pass (4,100 metres),
where the river Beas is born, I at once
came face to face with a mass of snow-
covered peaks which like ocean waves
extend beyond the horizon. The green
luxuriance of pines and foliage of the
foothills (Siwalik) disappears and below
the brilliant ice line of mountain sum¬
mits are the deep valley bottoms of
brownish rocks which are completely
destitute of vegetation of any kind.
This area (typical of Ladakh) is like
a vast desert, and it is mostly in these
mountain belts that several of the Bud¬
dhist monasteries are situated.
Both Hinduism and Buddhism have
a strong monastic emphasis and it was
inevitable that these institutions, which
by tradition were set up in isolated
areas, but on major trade routes,
should become the basis of religious
life in the Himalaya and also the
centres of art, education and culture.
The Himalayan monasteries and tem¬
ples containing incredibly beautiful
works of art are invariably situated
along the intersections of the enormous
high valleys, which are formed by the
two great rivers, the Indus and the
Brahmaputra, flanking in the west and
in the east the valleys of rivers such
as the Sutlej, Ganges, Jamuna, Kali,
Bhagmati, Tista, Sankosh, etc., which
flow across the mountains roughly from
north to south.
This is why, except in some regions
of the western Himalaya, it is mostly
impossible to travel laterally from west
to east or vice versa. Therefore, before
embarking on each new expedition I
had to return to the "bases" i.e. Cal¬
cutta in the east and New Delhi in the
west. It is not possible even to go
from western Bhutan to the eastern
part of the country without going
through the Indian plains, unless of
course one is prepared to undertake a
journey of over a month with all the
hardships thrown in.
In these circumstances the cross
currents of history and styles of art
forms have reached these regions
slowly in time with the pace of the
trade caravans that still traverse the
CONTINUED ON PAGE 18

THE WHEEL OF EXISTENCE
Ladakh, in the lap of the majestic snow-covered
Karakoram mountains, in north-east Kashmir,
is a region of desolate valleys, almost impenetrable
gorges and vast glaciers. With an area of
about 117,000 square kilometres, Ladakh has a
population of barely 88,000. This province of
the ancient Kushan Empire (see article page 4)
is an age-old route from India to Central Asia,
linked to the great Silk Route. Buddhism
reached Ladakh in the second century B.C. Monasteries
founded down the centuries were embellished
with paintings and sculpture of great beauty.
Above, detail of a sketch depicting a 15th-16th
century mural, "The Wheel of Existence", rich
in mystic symbolism. This work decorates the
Thikse monastery, with its terrace (below) opening
on to majestic Himalayan panorama. Right,
"The Great Renunciation", a magnificent
wall painting in the Hemis monastery, Ladakh
(17th century). Gautama Buddha takes leave
of his family, cuts off his flowing hair and
renounces worldly life.
Photos © Madanjeet Singh

HIMALAYAN ART (Continued)
Portrait of a Sikkim princess, a rare work of secular art
18
deep river valleys and the tortuous
passes of Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh,
Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan. It was the
caravans and pilgrims that carried the
culture of India into the Himalaya, pre¬
dominantly from the Buddhist centres
of Kashmir and the great monastic
institutions of the Ganges basin in
Bihar and Bengal.
As Buddhism fanned out through the
Himalaya to become the religion of
all Asia, its art models carried on
painted banners by pilgrims also tra¬
versed the "silk routes" of Central
Asia and later reached Tibet, whence
they slowly turned back upon the
Himalayan kingdoms of Bhutan and
Sikkim as late as the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries a one-millennium
journey covering a linear distance of
about six hundred kilometres. It is as
if the love songs of medieval Provence
had finally reached the Hebrides last
year.
My journeys in Bhutan and particu¬
larly the western part of Sikkim were
the toughest even though the foot¬
paths in these regions are at much
lower heights than in the western Hima¬
laya. There are monasteries such as
Tak-sang or "Tiger's nest" in Bhutan
hanging at a thousand feet on a ver¬
tical rock face, and approached by
narrow footsteps cut out in the rock.
For me the frustrating part of labor¬
iously climbing up to some of these
shrines was not so much the effort and
fatigue but often the deep disappoint¬
ment of not finding any art object of
merit or data to suit my purpose. Tak-
sang monastery is a case in point.
But at other times I was fully com¬
pensated when I discovered some
lovely masterpieces of art at the most
unexpected localities. For example,
while trekking in western Bhutan from
the monastery of Wangdu Phodrang to
the famous castle-monastery of Pun-
akha, I accidentally came across the
small but most lovely shrine of Bajo
containing some of the finest earlier
examples of the Buddha figure in
Bhutan.
To give readers some idea of the
rough going in western Sikkim, I will
briefly describe one such visit to
the monastery of Sinon.
There is a fairly good jeepable road
from the Sikkimese capital Gangtok to
the Pemiangtse monastery, where the
present ruler of Sikkim once served as
a lama. About five kilometres from
Pemiangtse, however, the only access
to Tashi Dhing monastery on the way
to Sinon shrine is a narrow footpath
which winds along an almost vertical
cliff overlooking a river.
This track is not even wide enough
for mules and hence my interpreter and
the five porters carrying our baggage
had to walk about five kilometres to a
point where a messenger boy had been
sent the day before to arrange for
some mules for our ascent to the mon¬
asteries of Tashi Dhing and Sinon.
Hardly had we set out on the journey
when I slipped and fell. If it were not
for a sturdy bush three metres below,
this article would not have seen the
light of day. I then had to take off my
shoes and walk barefooted on burning
hot slates for the rest of this torment¬
ing trek. The agony was prolonged
when the mules did not show up, and
having come to a point of no return,
and because of blisters on my feet, I
wrapped jute rags around my feet to
scale a steep slope of another five
kilometres to Tashi Dhing monastery.
A kilometre indeed is a very long dis¬
tance in these regions.
Exhausted from the climb, heat and
altitude, I never felt so comforted in
my life as when I dipped my blistered
feet in a bowl of hot water with salt,
which was offered to me by the Head
Lama. Hsuan Tsang, the noted Chi¬
nese Buddhist pilgrim who visited
India in the 7th century, has described
this method of hospitality at the monas¬
teries in his famous memoirs, and it
is amazing how in the 20th century
in some parts of the world such
practices can still have their comfort¬
ing validity.
FrROM Tashi Dhing to Sinon
is another four kilometres of steeper
climb and there, against the back¬
ground of the eternal snows of Kan-
chenjunga (8,578 metres), is the
ancient monastery of Sinon contain¬
ing some of the loveliest wall-paintings
in Sikkim.
One of the most beautiful paintings
here is that of the donor princess Pedi
Wangmo (see colour photo opposite),
the half-sister of the ruler Chador
Namgyal, who was born in 1686. In a
bizarre plot, reminiscent of medieval
Europe, Pedi Wangmo had conspired
with a Tibetan doctor who assassinat¬
ed Chador Namgyal by opening one of
the ruler's arteries, thus causing him
to bleed to death. A troop of soldiers
pursued the princess to Namchi
(another important monastery which I
visited), where the doctor was execut¬
ed and.Pedi Wangmo was strangled
to death with a. silk scarf.
However,, images of secular import,
such as those of donors like Princess
Pedi Wangmo, are few. The art of
the Himalaya is largely a religious art
and from 'the time of the Indus valley
culture in the 3rd millennium B.C. to
the present day, it has been largely
devoted to the making of images of
deities.
Hinduism has many gods, and each
of these gods has many forms; but
this vast pantheon was ordered, syste¬
matized and standardized in the ancient
holy text books, mostly of the Gupta
period (4th to 6th centuries A.D.).
Every form of each of the gods is assi¬
gned a special shape, particular colours
and individual attributes, and all holy
¡mages have to be made to exact
specifications.
The three major gods at the top of
the Hindu pantheon known as the
Hindu trinity are Brahma, Shiva and
Vishnu, but in the art of the Himalaya
Shiva and Vishnu are by far the most
popular.
The philosophy of Shiva, a god of
creative energy, is particularly applic¬
able in the mountains, and in his more
terrible aspect he is frequently evoked
as a protector deity who will save the
people from their enemies and from
natural disasters.
Vishnu, on the other hand, appears
in more peaceful and joyful forms in
most of his ten incarnations. In some
of these he is half-man, half-animal,
but his best loved manifestation is that
of Krishna, the flute-playing country
boy whose love for the cowgirl, Radha,
is one of the most popular themes in
painting.
Similarly, the Buddhist faith is the
inspiration and reason for Himalayan
CONTINUED ON PAGE 23
COLOUR PAGES
Opposite
This portrait, distinguished ' by its
remarkable colours, balanced composition
and the intense, yet absent expression
on the subject's face, is of Pedi Wangmo,
half-sister of a 17th century Sikkimese ruler.
It hangs in the main chapel of the
monastery of Sinon, in western Sikkim,
which was built under Pedi Wangmo's
patronage. Sikkim's art was most
successful when its painters were able
to break through ' imposed formalism,
and portray with individuality and relative
freedom what they saw -,nd felt.
Overleaf
"The Court of Chhoikyong", a magnificent
17th century painting in Wangdu Phodrang
monastery, Bhutan, illustrates the great
freedom with which Himalayan artists used
their imagination to enlarge and enhance
the sometimes awesome figures in the
Buddhist religion. This group is part of
the Wheel of Existence, which shows
the world's unreality, to which every
living being is Inextricably bound.
Photos © Madanjeet Singh

I
ill
.<J
H
k
>JC
**
n\V
O
y
7
s
HI
,i»
*j

^-Jfc^
i \
1?
r.i s
J
«
r^'
i
~; y
1
t
<*:*-
ESS

Tri N^1
VS.
'
Ä
j-.T :.
r^
5> ,-
*^Ä
>S*|
1
. i
ft.
íC
_
*z£~ >

HIMALAYAN ART (Continued)
art but the form of Buddhism that
was carried to the mountains around
the eighth century A.D. by Padmasam¬
bhava bears scant resemblance to the
simple teachings that had been set
forth about twelve hundred years be¬
fore by the historic Buddha, Siddhar-
tha Gautama.
What the Himalayan people received
was Buddhism in the vastly elaborated
form it had taken during its long
settlement in India. By the early years
of the Christian Era the historic Buddha
was deified and elevated into an eter¬
nal, absolute, primordial principle. At
the same time Indian Buddhism not
only permitted the use of idols but
took over a vast array of deities from
the Hindu religion.
The branch of Buddhism that became
most popular in the Himalaya was
Vajrayana. Vajrayana worship relied
on magical formulas and magical cere¬
monies and on the introduction of
goddesses (Taras) and Buddhas-to-be
(Bodhisattvas) to the ever-expanding
Buddhist pantheon. Popularly known
as Lamaism, this branch of the religion
taught that the devotee could summon
up a huge number of imagined deities
by means of certain magical formulas.
Both in Hindu and in Buddhist Tan-
trie beliefs, the duality of the sexes was
developed with particular emphasis.
One of the cardinal doctrines was the
worship of the spiritual-sexual prin¬
ciple: the union of opposites. < Dhyana,
or meditation as abstract thought, was
regarded as the male principle, which
remained inert until activated by a cos¬
mic female energy (Shakti, or Prajna).
By the eighth century, when Bud¬
dhism reached Tibet, Vajrayana was
practically the only form of Buddhism
that still survived in India, its strong¬
holds located in such famous monastic
institutions as Nalanda and Vikrama-
shila. From these monasteries Gau¬
tama's ancient creed, now metamor¬
phosed into Tantric Buddhism, came to
the Himalaya, where today it still sur¬
vives, being in fact the state religion
of Sikkim and Bhutan.
In the remote monasteries of the
Himalaya, Vajrayana, - or Tantric Bud¬
dhism and its art underwent further
change, largely in spirit, when it
encountered natives who believed then,
and believe now, in demons, sorcery,
and the pervasive presence of malevo¬
lent spirits.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Opposite
In the 18th century, Himalayan painters
and sculptors abandoned the strict
rules of religious iconography, gave
free rein to their imagination and drew
inspiration from folk art. The result
has been some extraordinary works
of art fresh in modernism. In painting,
left, inspired by a popular tale,
a legendary monster, Yama, is being led
away to atone for his sins.
Photo © Madanjeet Singh
The people of Ladakh have long placed faith In protector deities.
In Tantric Buddhism, the most fearless of these deities Is Yamantaka,
often represented as an eagle (above) and a yak (below), as shown
in these striking 15th-16th century paintings in Ladakh's Thikse
monastery. Situated astride the major trade routes, the monasteries
and temples became centres of art, education, and culture. Artists
had to rely on Indian merchants for their pigments, especially carmine
and Indigo. The Tibetan polygrapher, Taranatha, records that
part of the duty which was paid by traders as transit fees in Nepal,
consisted of paints for local artists.

In a lonely corner of many of Bhutan's monasteries, a small dark room
hung with the skins, teeth and claws of animals enshrines a statue called
a "Bhayankara", the effigy of an enemy. The one seen above is in the
monastery of Wangdu Phodrang (16th-17th century). Reserved for denizens
of the demoniac world, such rooms are often decorated with paintings
of evil spirits, magicians and witches. Tradition has it that the earliest
settlers in Bhutan's valleys were nomadic tribes from eastern India, but
virtually nothing is known of Bhutan's people and history before the
15th century. At that time refugee craftsmen from Tibet arrived in
Bhutan and set up many workshops for bronze casting. Below,
an 18th century painted statue of Padmasambhava, a guru, or Hindu saint,
at the Pemiangtse monastery, in Sikkim, where this sage is deeply
venerated. Nourished by the influence of Indian, Chinese, Iranian and
Uighurlan (Chinese Turkestan) arts, that of Sikkim flowered in a wide
variety of forms.
HIMALAYAN ART (Continued)
This influence is seen in what are
called Goinkhangs, which are reserved
for the inmates of the demoniac world.
A Goinkhang is usually a small, dark
room in a lonely corner of a monastery,
in the eerie gloom of which are hung
huge skins and the teeth and nails of
animals, as well as the remains of
sacrificial victims or enemies along
with their weapons and armour. The
walls of the room are covered with
paintings of the misshapen forms of
demons, black magicians, witches, fero¬
cious animals, and vultures.
The atmosphere is typically Himal¬
ayan, for these people, after all, spend
their lives under the shadows of the
groaning and cracking sound of des¬
cending glaciers and of great avalan¬
ches tumbling from the mountains. The
paintings are typically Himalayan, too:
although Buddhist art in general had
its terrifying figures, the artists of the
Himalaya had great freedom to enlarge
and improve upon this grotesque
world. Paintings of terrifying gods are
meant to strike terror an emotion that,
temporarily at least, thrusts a man
outside of himself.
The Buddhist concept of the cycle
of births and deaths is enacted here
in all its sorrow and pain until finally
it points the path of nirvana (salvation).
In contrast to the Goinkhang is the
serene, peaceful atmosphere inside
the temple chapels that form the centre
of these monasteries. Paintings on the
walls and ceilings of the chapels depict
either Jatakas, scenes of events from
Gautama Buddha's life, or portraits of
Tantra gurus (Siddhas). The gurus
were the most eminent esoteric per¬
sonalities of medieval India, and they
provide ¡deal links between Hindu and
Buddhist Tantricism.
The wall-paintings are done either
directly on the dry plaster not, as
Western frescos are, in wet plaster
or upon canvas glued to the walls.
The temple walls are also hung with
cloth paintings and brilliant brocade
banners. The focal point of the cha¬
pels is the altar, which holds large
enthroned images of gilded stucco or
brass. Incense burns at one side, and
oil lamps provide the only light apart
from a few small windows and the
main door.
Because Tantric art is meant to serve
a religious, rather than an aesthetic
purpose, and because artists believed
that they acquired spiritual merit by
copying prototypes, the art has not
greatly changed over the centuries.
The emphasis is not on style but on
iconography.
The earliest known motif is the naked
Siva prototype, with phallus erect, who
sits in a Yoga posture. First seen in
the Indus valley civilization of the third
millennium B.C., its corollaries are the
representation of fierce deities, the
protector gods, who are often por¬
trayed with blue or black skin and set
in furious scenes suitable to the deep-
seated demonism that formed the
Himalaya's aboriginal faith.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 36

Human and animal forms of a more or less mythological nature, floating in space as
if engaged on some mysterious quest, are elements in a "Tantric Manifestation of Symbols",
a painting at the Thikse monastery, Ladakh (see page 17). A later form of Hinduism,
Tantricism gave birth to a wealth of separate symbolic elements which coalesce and then
disintegrate only to join together once more in new symbolic forms. Tantric artists
were thus increasingly able to abandon classical figurative representations and to
create an art rich in colour and line symbolism.
Photo © Mandanjeet Singh
25

HIMALAYAN ART
(Continued from page 24)
Another characteristic motif is the
ever popular Mithuna, or lovers, some¬
times in sexual embrace. Depicted in
a variety of forms, these are known
in Tibet as the "yab-yum", or mother-
father couple. A third anthropomorphic
theme is the human-animal configura¬
tion, in which the deity appears as
half-human and half-ánimal.
An ensemble of these cardinal motifs
and several other subsidiary symbols
popular in- the Himalaya is the Wheel
of Life. First seen in a Gupta period
painting at the Ajanta caves in India,
the Wheel of Life sums up both pic-
torially and philosophically the Hindu
and Buddhist view of life and the
causes of human sorrow.
Cultural influences from great civi¬
lizations have reached the Himalaya
only after a considerable time lag,
because of the hardships in the paths
of travellers, but similarly the ultimate
decline of its traditions has been delay¬
ed by geographical isolation. Even
today in the great river valleys ringed
by the gigantic mountain ranges can
be found traces of culture, which are
derived from those of northern and
central India and remain closely allied
to them.
But the isolation, the geographical
hardship and the grandeur of the area,
have given the beliefs and the cul¬
ture that expresses them a magnifi¬
cence and mystery of their own. The
masterpieces of ancient art preserved
in the Himalayan monasteries and tem¬
ples reflect great periods in the history
of Asia and the world in the same way
as the ruins of Pompeii give an insight
into the civilization of Rome at its
height.

