ILO announces
A WORLD
EMPLOYMENT
PROGRAMME
by David A. Morse
Director-General
International Labour Office
I
8
WO harsh facts of the
modern world underlie the need for a
world employment programme. These
are:
Economic progress in developing
countries though perceptible, is slow;
the gap between poor and rich gets
wider every day.
The population explosion in these
countries impedes progress, and in
most of them more than half of the
benefits of increased production is ab¬
sorbed in merely maintaining existing
levels of living, low as they are, for
ever more people.
Opportunities for work have not in¬
creased as fast as the numbers of
workers. Scores of millions are entirely
bypassed by economic development.
And the prospect for the future is
even more grim. United Nations and
ILO projections indicate that in 1970
the world's population may be about
3,600 million and the labour force some
1,510 million.
During the present decade the lab¬
our force has been increasing by
about 20 million persons per year and
during the next decade it is expected
to grow by about 28 million a year.
Between 1970 and 1980 more than
280 million people will be added to
the world's labour force, 226 million
in the less developed regions of the
world and 56 million in the more dev¬
eloped regions.
Of these 280 million and more, about
173 million will be added to the labour
force in Asia, 32 million in Africa,
29 million in Latin America, 18 million
in the Soviet Union, 17 million in North
America, 12 million in Europe and 1.3
million in Oceania. The net increase
in the world's labour force under the
age of 25 will amount to some 68 mil¬
lion workers, nearly all of whom
(64.5 million) will be added to the lab
our force of the less developed
regions of the world.
It is figures such as these that
caused one writer Manfred Halpern
to describe the situation in these
words: "For the great majority of pea¬
sants, the benefits of the modern age
can be summed up by saying that it
has become harder to die. As a result,
more peasants are probably kept alive
to suffer misery than ever before in
history. With appetites whetted by
the hope of a better life, their present
suffering seems all the harder to bear."
Happily, there is a third basic fact
which is more promising. It is that,
although the volume of international
development assistance has hardly
increased in recent years, a measure
of international solidarity exists, a
solidarity that impels the richer coun¬
tries to assume some of the burdens
of economic and social underdevelop¬
ment.
The aim of the World Employment
Programme is to reverse the trend
towards ever-growing masses of peas¬
ants and slum dwellers who have no
part in development. It will do so partly
by providing them with the skills need¬
ed for productive work and partly
through measures of rural develop¬
ment, industrialization, youth employ¬
ment schemes, investment and interna¬
tional trade. These will enable
developing countries to use more of
their human resources, and so achieve
the prime object of development, which
after all is to bring about a better life
for the people.
The World Employment Programme
will be one of the ILO's principal tasks
for the 1970s our part in what has
already come to be referred to as
the Second Development Decade.
It must be an employment pro¬
gramme because the only path to a
better life in the poorer countries is
productive work by the people them¬
selves. And it must be a world pro¬
gramme because, while the main
burden will be on the developing
countries, the Programme cannot
succeed without help from the indus¬
trialized nations individually through
bilateral programmes and collectively
through the ILO and other international
organizations.
Moreover, the industrialized nations
are themselves faced with some diffi¬
cult employment problems which may
also come within the scope of the
World Employment Programme.
A positive approach to the problems
of employment creation is not new to
the ILO. During the depression of the
1930s the International Labour Confer¬
ence adopted recommendations about
public works and other policies to
increase demand as methods of fight¬
ing unemployment, mainly in the
industrialized countries.
s,llNCE the Second World
War the problems of developing coun¬
tries have come to occupy the centre
of the stage. Training workers and
managers in modern skills has been
the principal and fastest-growing ILO
contribution to the technical assistance
and co-operation programmes of the
1950s and 1960s. Some of the ILO
technical co-operation projects have
had as their aim a direct increase in
employment.
In 1964 the Conference adopted a
convention and a recommendation
concerning employment policy, which
placed special emphasis on the prob¬
lems of poor countries. In 1966 the
Eighth Conference of American States
Members of the ILO adopted the
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

Photos International Labour Office
Hundreds of millions of new jobs must be created before world unemployment can be
brought under control. In Asia alone, it was forecast that 300 million jobs would need
to be found between 1960 and 1980 just to keep the gap from growing wider. This year,
the ILO is launching a World Employment Programme which may help change the pattern of
world employment by training unskilled workers for new types of jobs. In 1963, it created an
International Centre for Advanced Technical and Vocational Training in Turin, Italy (below
left), in which Unesco also collaborates. Geared particularly to the developing countries,
the Centre provides advanced training for workers as well as technicians and managerial
staff. Below right, engineers at the Korean Productivity Centre, Seoul, discuss plans for
developing the electronics industry in the Republic of Korea. Six hundred ILO labour
experts are at work on more than 250 technical co-operation programmes in over 90 countries.
^mm

WORLD EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMME (Continued)
Changing the global pattern of jobs and skills
10
Ottawa Plan for Human Resources
Development, on which work has
begun.
In this plan, as in a proposed Asian
Manpower Plan and a Jobs and Skills
Programme for Africa, the central
preoccupation is with providing work
and the skills needed for work. These
plans will in fact form the regional
components of the World Employment
Programme.
The World Employment Programme
itself reflects the preoccupations
expressed by the International Labour
Conference in 1967 in a resolution on
ILO technical co-operation for eco¬
nomic and social development. Propos¬
ed by the Workers' Group, that reso¬
lution calls for plans to intensify ILO
action to include "the formulation of
targets in the field of employment and
human resources development and
improvements of conditions of work
and life, as well as the periodical
publication of progress reports in order
to make international action for the
period after the Development Decade
a concerted international attack on
world poverty."
The 50th anniversary of the Interna¬
tional Labour Organization should, the
resolution says, be marked by the start
of "a world plan for employment and
human resources development, setting
forth the objectives and the concrete
measures required by the Internation¬
al Labour Organization to meet urgent
universal economic and social develop¬
ment needs and calling for intens¬
ive and co-ordinated tripartite action
to develop and employ human resour¬
ces, improve conditions of life and
work and develop social institutions."
IT is important, I think, to
stress the social as distinct from purely
economic goals of the World Employ¬
ment Programme. Productive employ¬
ment by itself is very much an econo¬
mic concept. But it leads, through a
better distribution of wealth, to a wider
sharing of the fruits of development
food, shelter, some frugal comfort.
Where poverty is widespread, these
elementary material gains are the first
and almost the only meaning of social
progress.
Methods of economic development
that bring social benefits by providing
work and income for the highest pos¬
sible number of people are infinitely
more attractive than those that do not
do so. Even if it means slower eco¬
nomic growth, employment-oriented
development is to be preferred on
social grounds so long as it does
not result in actual economic stag¬
nation. The World Employment Pro¬
gramme is to explore and exploit all
the existing possibilities of such
development.
There is no clearer and more con¬
crete form of social participation in
development than fruitful employment.
This is not to deny that social particip¬
ation should go much farther and ex¬
tend, for instance, to some form of
consultation on the direction that a
country's development should take.
But for many of the common people
in the developing countries, a chance
to work is the need of the moment.
The adoption of the World Employ¬
ment Programme as the mainspring of
action during the sixth decade of the
ILO's existence is bound to entail
some changes in habits of thought and
work. The main concern will be with
those who do not have work rather
then with those already in employment.
Questions of rural development are
likely to become far more important.
Since other international organiz¬
ations are also concerned with the
factors affecting employment, new
patterns of inter-organizational co¬
operation may be called for. If the
International Labour Conference is to
play its full part in the Programme,
special arrangements may have to be
made for the Conference regularly to
review progress and to make recom¬
mendations for implementation of the
World Employment Programme.
How are the objects of the Pro¬
gramme to be attained? First, a state¬
ment will be drawn up indicating what
is desirable and possible in the way
of employment creation and skill form¬
ation, and proposing the measures
that must be taken by individual coun¬
tries and international organizations to
achieve it.
Next, all the means available to the
ILO will be applied to see that these
measures are in fact taken. Thus,
there will be a first phase in which
a programme of action will be drawn up
and a second phase in which it will
be carried out.
The first phase will involve the sett¬
ing up of targets or, in other words,
hard figures. It will not be a mere
proclamation of the desirability of more
employment and a better qualified
labour force. Rather, it will give
provisional numbers of workers to be
gainfully engaged in specific types of
work by certain future dates from
five to 15 years from now.
Such an estimate cannot be very
precise or detailed, but that does not
mean it must be vague. Within limits,
it will show to what extent the social
evil of unemployment and under¬
employment might be contained and
eventually reduced, if not, five years
from now, then in ten or 15 years.
IHIS quantitative approach
is crucial to the concept of the Pro¬
gramme. It marks the difference bet¬
ween vague intent and firm resolution,
between international charity and true
co-operation for development. The
intention is to help in shaping a clear
and healthy future rather than in
merely relieving present burdens. It
is calculated to inspire modest confi¬
dence in place of resignation and
defeatism.
To set up targets and to develop
concrete programmes of action, many
facts and figures are needed. This
will inevitably take time and effort.
First, there must be some idea of the
trend of population growth, employ¬
ment and unemployment, training and
education, movements of workers bet¬
ween town and country and many
other aspects of the use, non-use,
underdevelopment (and occasionally
overdevelopment) of human resources.
Then comes the task of determining
what can be done to improve future
prospects. Many methods of creat¬
ing work and providing skills are
known in principle, but practical policy¬
making calls for more precise inform¬
ation. For example, certain types of
agrarian reform and of small-scale
industry development may be expect¬
ed to increase employment but ap¬
proximately how much new work are
they likely to create, by what time,
and at what cost? What will the
increase in production be, and how
likely is it that this higher output can
be marketed?
It is essential that certain forecasts
be made for a relatively distant future.
For instance, one cannot know how
to adapt primary education to the true
needs of developing countries without
some notion of what most pupils' later
working life will be like. Nor can
there be a large programme of public
works to absorb idle rural manpower
without some estimate of sales pros¬
pects for the extra output that the
programme would make possible.
How much work and bread a coun¬
try can give its people, and what skills
its workers need, depend largely on
CONTINUED ON PAGE 12

The harsh poverty of seven million Indians who live in the high Andean plateaux led the ILO to
launch the Andean Programme in 1954 in co-operation with other U.N. specialized agencies. This
far-reaching rehabilitation operation attacks the root causes of poverty through a system of
20 "action bases", each one a miniature international operation in itself: the FAO expert teaches new
methods of farming, the WHO medical teams instruct on hygiene, fight disease and improve health
conditions, UNICEF tackles the problem at the children's level, Unesco and the ILO design schools
built largely by the Indians themselves, and ILO specialists teach vocational courses. Under a formula
of "Each one teach one", the ILO trains community leaders to carry on the work after the . .
international experts leave, and gradually national experts from the six countries involved Bolivia, 1 1
Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Chile and Argentina are taking over key positions. Encouraged by the I I
positive results of the Andean Programme, the ILO in 1966 inaugurated the Ottawa Plan for Human
Resources Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, the first of a series of regional
programmes included in the World Employment Programme. Above, a Peruvian farmer.

WORLD EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMME (Continued)
ILO targets in Second Development Decade
its economic and social structure
on the investments that have been
made in years gone by in the land,
and in the transport, educational and
manufacturing systems. These things
cannot be built up quickly, and once
there they last a long time.
We know that existing structures
in the developing countries do not
enable high levels of employment to
be attained. Better structures can
only be designed in the light of a
fairly clear image of their long-term
use and functions.
The ILO is setting up teams in the
Latin American, Asian and African
regions to assemble and consolidate,
country by country, the existing data
and estimates, and to fill the numerous
gaps. When this information is com¬
plete, programmes of action will be
drawn up for each region, for a number
of sub-regions, and, if requested, for
individual countries. The regional pro¬
grammes will then be consolidated and
presented as the World Employment
Programme a programme of national,
regional and worldwide action.
O,
12
IBVIOUSLY, plans for em¬
ployment creation and skill formation
will have ramifications in the whole
area of economic and social develop¬
ment, in education, agriculture and
general rural development, industrial¬
ization, international trade.
It is for this reason that the World
Employment Programme is regarded
as part of a Second United Nations
Development Decade the ILO's con¬
tribution to the concerted attack of the
United Nations family, during the
1970s, on the problems of under¬
development. This aspect of the
Programme is well illustrated by the
composition of the team already at
work on the Ottawa Plan.
After the regional teams have been
at work for about two years, the first
proposed regional plans will be ready.
They will be crude and incomplete,
subject to continuing review, calling
for further studies. But although
imperfect they will provide something
that does not exist now signposts
showing the directions of policy lead¬
ing to the highest possible level of
employment consistent with approved
economic and social goals and present
and potential skills.
They will propose action by govern¬
ments, by employers' and workers'
organizations, by the ILO and other
international agencies in the fields of
industrialization, rural development,
youth employment, wage policy, train¬
ing and education and international
trade.
They will also indicate what further
efforts will be needed if the expected
results of the proposed programmes
are thought inadequate. And they will
try to show the tragic consequences
that may be expected if the recom¬
mendations are not followed.
It will then be for the ILO to apply
all its means of action to get the
programme carried out. First, there
is the power of the International
Labour Conference to recommend and
persuade. The 1969 anniversary
session of the Conference will be
asked, when discussing my Report, to
examine and give guidance on the
detailed aims and methods of the
World Employment Programme (1).
Next, the 1970 session will examine the
work accomplished in 1968 and 1969.
The Conference will be invited to
endorse the broad lines of the propos¬
ed action programmes. With the full
weight of its prestige, it will then
recommend implementation of these
programmes by all ILO member coun¬
tries. From that moment onwards both
the Conference and the Governing
Body will receive periodic progress
reports showing how far the Confer¬
ence's recommendations have been
followed, and with what results.
Should the targets fail to be attain¬
ed, the Conference and the Governing
Body will be invited to examine the
causes and to propose means of cor¬
rection and improvement. On the other
hand, should results go beyond expec¬
tations, the sights will be set higher
and the targets revised upwards.
Similiarly, in each region, plans and
progress reports will be submitted to
the' ILO Regional Conference and
Advisory Committee concerned. The
influence of these regional bodies can
then be brought to bear on countries
or groups of countries to secure full
and vigorous implementation.
It is obviously on the developing
countries that the main responsibility
will fall in the first instance. But much
will also depend on the industrialized
States, on their multilateral and bilater¬
al assistance programmes and their
trade and investment policies.
The programmes of recommended
action might indeed become the frame¬
work national, regional and world¬
wide into which national bilateral aid
activities could be fitted. Given the
relatively large volume of bilateral aid,
this unifying and co-ordinating function
could be of enormous importance.
The ILO's technical co-operation pro¬
gramme, supported by its research
work, will of course be available at
all times to help countries carry out
the proposed programmes of action.
A certain amount of technical co-oper¬
ation can be provided from the ILO's
own budget. But during the 1960s a
much larger volume of funds for tech¬
nical co-operation has become avail¬
able through the United Nations Devel¬
opment Programme (formed on Jan¬
uary, 1966 by the consolidation of the
Special Fund and the Expanded Pro¬
gramme of Technical Assistance).
I
(1) This issue went to press before the
opening of the Conference.
HE bulk of these latter
funds, insofar as they were available
for ILO action (i.e., currently at an
annual rate of about $20 million), has
always been devoted to training and
other activities that help in increasing
employment. In the years ahead these
funds should constitute a major aid
in the implementation of the Employ¬
ment Programme.
The practical participation of other
international organizations and bilater¬
al aid programmes might also reason¬
ably be foreseen. If other agencies
have taken part in the formulation of
the programmes of action they might
choose to use some of their resources
to help implement the proposed pro¬
grammes. And even in their own work
in the fields of education, agriculture,
investment, trade and so on these
agencies will no doubt want to take
account of the guidelines in the World
Employment Programme for employ¬
ment-oriented development.
Only on this broad front of truly
concerted action does the World
Employment Programme stand any
chance of achieving its goals. So far,
the signs are encouraging. Many
countries and international organiza¬
tions have already expressed their
willingness to join in this world venture.
At the same time, we should be
under no delusions as to the magni¬
tude of the task. The World Employ¬
ment Programme is a most ambitious
undertaking requiring prolonged and
determined effort first and above all
by the ILO and its member countries,
but also by others. Yet a less ambi¬
tious project for advancing social
justice would not have been worthy of
the Organization's 50th anniversary.
