The ancient books of the East say that when the hands of a craftsman are engaged
in his craft, the act is always a ceremonial. Tools are but an extension of the
personality of the artisan to reach beyond the range of human limitations. Here, a
Sudanese craftsman fashions an object decorated with elephant motifs.
Photo Sudanese National Commission for Unesco

THE
CRAFTS
by Kamaladevi
Chattopadhyay
L
Article copyright © Reproduction prohibited
, ET me first of all clarify
what I mean by craft as skilled labour
¡n materials, not necessarily mere
handwork that is simply manual dex¬
terity as opposed to cultivation of the
mind. Here I take craftsmanship as
referring to a total operation involving
the emotions, mind, body and the
rhythm which such a co-ordination sets
up. Nor is craft divorced from a degree
of mechanism, because from earliest
times man started evolving tools as
KAMALADEVI CHATTOPADHYAY, one of the
leaders of India's cultural renaissance move¬
ment, is chairman of the All India Handicrafts
Board and founder-president of the Indian
Co-operative Union. She was instrumental
in organizing the All India Women's Confer¬
ence, and was the first woman to stand for
parliamentary elections in India. She is a
member of the Indian National Commission
for Unesco and was one of the original orga¬
nizers of the Unesco-affiliated World Crafts
Council, of which she is senior vice-president.
Among works she has written are "Indian
Handicrafts' , "At the Cross-roads (Social
Problems of India)", and "Towards a National
Theatre".
an extension of his being and did not
rest content with the unaided skill of
his physique.
We must also recognize that craft
is as much an expression of the
human spirit in material form, which
gives delight to mankind, as any of
what are termed fine arts. In the craft
world, however, there need be no
hiatus between serviceability and
aesthetics. One may say that in good
craftsmanship the means and the ends
are identical, for while the article is
useful it will also be rich ¡n appear¬
ance and good to look at.
Craft has always been a basic
activity in human society, in fact it is
considered more cohesive and perm¬
eating in human relationships than
even language, for it can penetrate
many barriers to communication.
Particularly has this been true of the
older societies such as those in Asia,
South and Central America, Africa
and countries like Greece or Spain,
where certain aspects of the ancient
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
15

When the pot calls the kettle beautiful
handed down cultures still continue to
produce powerful impressions that
seem almost ageless.
The growth of crafts in society was
the sign of the cultivation of sensitivity
and the stirring and mellowing of
humanism. It stood for man's endeav¬
our to bring elegance and grace
into an otherwise harsh and drab
human existence. In fact, man's
elevation from the gross animal
existence ¡s marked by his yearning
for something beyond the satisfaction
of mere creature comforts and needs,
which found natural expression in
crafts.
The most primitive people began to
ornament their articles of everyday
use, later weapons, then their garments
and their own person and surround¬
ings. The rough and severe walls of
their huts became canvases on which
blossomed pictures. A death-dealing
but very strategic item like the bow
and arrow became embellished with
decorations, water pots took on pleas¬
ing shapes and alluring designs were
invented for mundane kitchen pans.
Here we see the transformation of
the mere functional into works of art,
the common becoming the cherished,
the joy giving. Gradually the wall
paintings, the ornamentation of the
floor where one worshipped, perform¬
ed ceremonies or even took food, the
decoration on the doorstep and in
front of the house, all became pur¬
poseful creations, almost ritualistic.
N,
16
I O aspect of life was too in¬
significant or humble to lay claim to
beauty or acquire sanctity as a symbol
of good omen. The use of special
articles for special occasions in the
way of clothes, jewels, vessels, etc., all
of which had to have a certain quality
to ensure a high standard even in daily
life and use, meant a continuous out¬
flow of creatlveness, a sustained
spirit of animation and freshness dis¬
pelling staleness and monotony.
We find, for instance, that in many
countries to give solemnity to certain
things a convention was established
by which they were made into cere¬
monials. The tea ceremony of Japan
is a good example. It requires a
special pavilion offering seclusion
from the bustle of everyday life, in its
own surroundings, and the use of its
own vessels or cups, involving the
manufacture of special pottery.
Though the ideals sought were relax¬
ation, contemplation of beauty and
communion with nature, these alone
were not regarded as giving complete
fulfilment unless they were made part
of one's intimate daily life, hence the
introduction of the tea ceremony.
Where the earth is dry and burns
under voluptuous rays as in deserts,
where life ¡s grim and severe and
resources poor, the people seem to
compensate with riotous colour and
exuberant forms, creating a sense of
luxuriance and plenitude through
their crafts. There is a breathless
eagerness created in the atmosphere,
rapturous vivaciousness in the articles
that are used, a springtime dazzle in
garments and even in the harness and
trappings of domestic animals.
Yet all this mingles with a sense of
repose and stillness as comes at
twilight over the weary earth. The
whirlwind of the sandstorm is temper¬
ed by a kind of midnight calm. For
what takes form in crafts are feelings
actually experienced, not just conjured
up ¡n imagination. For such depth or
vitality cannot be introduced into a
craft form unless it flows from within
as an inner reality.
Craftsmanship, it must be remem¬
bered, is not a matter of mechanical
reproduction. It ¡s creation that is not
divorced from production, where the
designer and the producer are one
unlike studio designing which is
removed from the actual object that is
to be made. In fact one of the allures
of the crafts lies in that as it were
magical involvement of the artisan's
personality with the product from its
inception to Its final application.
One may say that there is no such
thing as craft for craft's sake. It ¡s
not an exercise of the intellect, which
finds a form in a secluded studio to
become the proud possession of an
individual or institution. It arises from
the deeper hunger of humanity, its
functions are socialized for its use and
distributed through the family and even
the entire community. Craft is not
preoccupied with subjective feeling and
thought, but with objectification.
It would need a thesis by itself to
explain man's Innate need for beauty,
the why and wherefore of the pleasure
and satisfaction experienced through
stimulus and response generated by
the sight or touch of certain forms,
the emotions stirred within us by
colours and rhythmic lines that even
in concrete objects seem to flow while
they stand stolidly rooted to the
ground.
Beauty ¡n objects around us provides
visual comfort, equilibrium and relax¬
ation. In craft we have the identific¬
ation of the self with the object not
just a sentimental sympathy because
craft is really an extension of oneself,
growing out of one's physical and
psychological need.
Crafts create an instinctive apprec¬
iation of beauty rather than a self-
conscious striving after it. They call
for as subtle an understanding of
composition as any work of art; the
combined use of form and curves to
advantage; the avoidance of odd or
awkward empty spaces by filling them
up appropriately to contrast with the
more ornamental parts; subtle empha¬
sis on lesser parts to make them stand
out more clearly; and also blending
and highlighting the lustre and mellow¬
ness of light and shade.
Folk craft tries to express something
more than the visible appearance, to
bring out an element which seems to
lurk in the depths of a more significant
reality than facile reproduction. This
is a characteristic of all the old cul¬
tures, frequently dismissed as "fan¬
tasies" and attributed to a lack of
knowledge of perspective and chia¬
roscuro. The fact is overlooked that
oriental crafts, for example, were the
expression of a will, the fulfilment of
a purpose, with none of the nebulous
vagueness that comes of subservience
to a passing mood.
The craftsman seeks rhythm in his
life, colour in his composition and
harmony in his form in order to per¬
fect an object which has a function
and at the same time provides visual
pleasure. Here the material and ex¬
pression move and balance within the
magnetic field of the operation.
c RAFTS have been the indi¬
genous creation of the ordinary people,
a part of the flow of events of the com¬
mon life, not cut off from the main
stream. They grew up in the peace and
seclusion of the countryside, where the
community evolved a culture of its
own out of the steady flow of its own
life and of the nature around it.
The community acted as a single
personality because of its communal
activities, in response to common
occasions and landmarks that stood
out in the flux of time, and the change
of seasons. Out of a million coloured
strands of traditions and memories
filled with song and verse, legends
and myths, fables and local roman¬
ces, from the core and substance of
their daily existence and out of nature's
own rich storehouse, was woven a
refulgent creative and forceful culture.
This was the issue of an unhurried
rhythm of life and a spell of serenity,
as contrasted with the bustle of the
present machine age. Its products had
a vitality and character of their own
in that they were the direct expression
of the craftsman, with a careful em¬
phasis on functional beauty. Yet at
the same time a very significant factor
was the anonymity of the producer, in
striking contrast to the present age of
signatures and publicity. Evidently
the name did not add to the value of
the article and beauty was accepted
as an end ¡n itself, and service to the
community a source of complete satis¬
faction.
What was of great significance in

this context was the status assigned
to and security provided for the
craftsmen, to preserve and provide
continuity to the crafts and save them
from the gnawlngs of anxiety and the
paralysis of insecurity. A craft-orient¬
ed society was based on personal
relationships, not contracts and com¬
petition.
Crafts are Imbued with a certain
Idealism not normally associated with
an Industrial pursuit. Craft work is
not just the plying of a trade but
rather a social act. The human touch
does something to the fragments
which are brought together in a craft
where they seem to mingle and cling
together drawn by the magnetism of
love, seeking one another, to give
birth to a new life in a fresh form
unlike the tumult and pressuring
exercised by a powerful machine
where the pieces seem helpless and
lost.'- Thus traditional decorative mo¬
tifs can lend colour and mellowness
to our current existence, otherwise
stern and grim, with its many privations
and denials.
The ancient books of the East say
that when the hands of a craftsman
are engaged in his craft, the act is
always a ceremonial. Tools are but
an extension of the personality of the
craftsman to reach beyond the range
of human limitations.
The craftsman thus combines within
his being the functions of both the
concelver and the executor. He sym¬
bolizes to his society the outward
manifestation of the creative purpose
and the unbroken link in the tradition
that embraces both the producer and
the consumer within the social fabric.
IWO significant characteris¬
tics of crafts are that aesthetics and
function are integrated, and ornamenta¬
tion and decoration are not divorced
from utility. And even where crafts¬
manship is based on tradition, the dan¬
gers of stagnation are minimized by
freeing each productive act from
Imitative intention and linking it with
the stream of life, making it a dynamic
manifestation of man's endeavour to
express universal human emotions
and Interests.
Even though craftsmanship has
always been considered hereditary,
passed on from generation to gener¬
ation, inheritance of actual skills was
not assumed. The emphasis on the
contrary was on proper education and
the right environment for the growing
generation. The young craftsman
learnt in the family workshop as an
apprentice the techniques in their
entirety in direct relation to basic pro¬
duction and problems, primarily by
practice. In fact he was just as much
CONTINUED 01» PAGE 32
Young people have a
vast potential of hidden
creative talent which
with a little
encouragement
quickly develops and
produces striking
results. Here, a young
Egyptian boy in a
village workshop near
Cairo puts the
finishing touches on a
tapestry he has
designed and woven.
Before the festival of
the goddess Kali, great
preparations are made
for the celebrations
that take place all
over India. Below,
statues of the goddess
are sculpted and _
painted by local artists 5
specially trained for !j"~"
this delicate and
traditional task,
artists are not
craftsmen in the usual °|
sense of the term
which is strictly g
applied to those
whose works of art
have a primarily
functional purpose.
These s^S"

THE
CRAFTS
Continued from p. 17
engaged in learning metaphysics and
the true value of things; in short, in
acquiring a culture.
There was no isolation of the school
from the larger life. For in this setting
the child learnt little tasks as part of
the daily routine, picking up skills
even as he did other components of
his way of life. The problems were
real, not make-believe, as the aim of
education was understood to be the
unfolding of the personality to make
for fuller life.
For the quality of inspiration which
transmutes skills and competence can
hardly be taught. It has to be culti¬
vated by experience. This makes for
a very special relationship between the
teacher and the pupil, an intimacy
binding the two. The latter looks up
to the former as the source from which
knowledge is Imbibed, great truths
learnt and Interpreted.
The teacher educates the pupil as
much through his own personal
conduct as through studies, and is
expected to show the same respect
and regard for the pupil as he would
for his own progeny and family.
The sharing of problems and varied
experience is a real contribution
to the enrichment and formation of
the pupil's personality.
In a craft society the master crafts¬
man ¡s also a social leader and an
important entity in the community. The
teacher keeps nothing worthwhile
back as a trade secret from the pupil.
This form of institution makes crafts¬
manship a living thing, giving prestige
and value to sound standards. The
teacher spurs the pupil on to surpass
himself and takes genuine pride in
conceding superiority to the student.
In a society which accepts crafts
and still finds an honoured place for
them, there is a free exchange of
ideas between fine arts and the crafts,
each accepting cues from the other.
Similarly the man of taste is rated as
equally gifted and with the same sens¬
ibility as the man who creates. So

appreciation is in a sense on a par
with creation, because it is felt that
the man of sensitivity participates with
almost the same excitement and
exhilaration when he appreciates as
when he creates. This concept is an
important and Integral part of the craft
world.
Moreover, the Insistence on good
taste ensures a consistently high
standard for all arts and crafts. Even
the common terracotta shows a vigour
of muscle and at the same time a
fluidity of line as if to prove that the
earth is not static but has a dynamic
rhythm realized ¡n a flux through a
continuous process. Craft means
cultivation of an intimacy with human
life and creation, a sympathy for all
living things and the realization of the
fundamental unity of all aspectá of life
though diverse in form.
A, society dominated by me¬
chanical industrialization tends to exalt
efficiency over creative gifts, though
the' latter are rarer and more precious
from the human point of view. Thus
administrative staff enjoy better status,
higher .salaries and are generally
considered more Important than expert
craftsmen.
It must be remembered that over¬
emphasis on techniques that acceler¬
ate speed and swell the quantum of
volume, but are divorced from imagin¬
ation and intellect, can result in the
loss of that exaltation which stimulates
creative activity in craft production.
Similarly the pivotal importance accord¬
ed to facts in education may draw
away all inspiration and leave life too
flat to awaken any sense of wonder
in the young. Such overemphasis can
be just as hard to shake off as the
superstitions of the imagination.
We once believed that a full per¬
sonality is fostered by ideals in relation
to which the course of life is set and
plotted through the observance of
certain disciplines. It may be that
ideals have fewer chances of survival
in an atomic age. Moreover, the
ever-increasing invention of sensitive
machines and instruments places less
and less premium, in a way, on man.
The trend now ¡s to give pre-emin¬
ence to the machine. In a world
where life is being increasingly geared
to predominantly physical targets that
have to be achieved through highly
complicated mechanical processes, the
rôle of man must inevitably necessarily
pale and shrink. He has therefore to
be compensated by artifices.
The modern concept of the build up
of the personality flows largely from a
machine dominated age. Personality
build up today is made into a kind
of a cult. Wide publicity is given to
tips and practical hints towards this
end: wear the right kind of clothes,
have the right make-up for the com¬
plexion, use the right type of perfume
for the evening. Surely, these do not
help the blossoming of a personality.
The more frequent use of automatic
machines curtails the demands on
man. Less and less of him is called
into action. Geared to automation,
human beings must increasingly con¬
form to machines: individual oppor¬
tunities for choice and decision narrow
and, in the ultimate, leave the way
open for the replacement of man by
machine. Large units constantly ex¬
pand into larger ones and the concen¬
tration of machines becomes still
heavier. In this gigantic grind, the
human personality may well be under¬
mined if it is not balanced by an
accompanying pattern of production,
as in the crafts.
One is gradually becoming aware
of a lowering of quality standards in
the current age, compared with the
craft age. People's taste is deter¬
mined more by other opinions, called
"fashions", than by the intrinsic value
or merit of a product. Similarly the
solidity or endurance of a product
becomes a less important factor.
Craftsmanship on the other hand is
more a tribute to the high function of
the human being, who is not just a
physical frame, but is endowed with
creative talents. Society needs
constant reminders of this and of the
corrective and balancing force which
crafts so naturally provide.
The alternative, for the majority of
people, may all too easily be a form
of escapism, a flight from the mono¬
tony and the stifling pressure of mass
production. In such an atmosphere
people tend to become preoccupied
with careers rather than a sense of
mission or service. At the same time
they are readily attracted by anything
that is new and, because of its nov¬
elty, exciting, with little discrimination
or concern for proper values.
' E must not forget that while
science may open up the fourth-dimen¬
sional world, and technology the wide
firmament, the individual in technolo¬
gical society seems to get compressed
as it were into a single dimension.
The responsibility he exercises is
trivial, his power of decision nil. Only
a small part of him operates.
Craftsmanship, on the contrary,
involves the entire person, relating the
mind and the material to a certain
function for a specific purpose. While
the tempo of the craft age gave the
Illusion of timelessness, the current
age rushes on at the astronaut's
speed. It is largely against this back¬
drop that we have to view the value
of crafts and their relation to contem¬
porary society.
Crafts have a special rôle and
significance in the creation of a home
home to mean all that part of one's
environment that is personal and intim¬
ate as distinct from temporary and
utilitarian. When the machine usurps
the essentially human part of perfor-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
y i
r^ 'i
»
ti ~.,
i
)i
ESKIMO SCULPTURED MAP
19th century ethnologists discovered
that Eskimos who lived along the east
coast of Greenland had developed
their own wooden relief maps which
not only show the outline of the
coast but the contour of the land, rock
Formations, storage places, and portage
routes for carrying kayaks overland
when ice blocked access to the sea.
The hand carved map, above, shows
the peninsula between the Sermiligak
and Kangerdluarsikajik fjords. Areas
which Eskimo map makers knew well
were often enlarged and shown in
greater detail than lesser known
regions, and islands were carved on
a separate piece of wood and posi¬
tioned alongside the main map to
show offshore areas.
Drawing from 10th Annual Report, Bureau
of Ethnology, Smithsonian Institute, USA
33

Alitor Preliro Pimmai
UM NOVA-CEITA QUE
VIROU BODE
?tm CM 600
THE CRAFTS (Continued)
Throughout north-eastern
Brazil a popular imagery of
extraordinary richness and
diversity has developed
since the turn of the
century in the form of
block-engraving illustrations
for the covers of modest
booklets of poetry and folk
tales (photo 2). As
spontaneous as the
literature they are helping
to popularize in city suburbs
and villages, the engravings
are the work of anonymous
artists. They show
legendary heroes, scenes
from everyday life, or
fabulous animals such as
the werewolf (1), a
strange "Pegasus" (3),
lizards on their hind legs (4)
or a hallucinating shape,
half-devil, half-animal (5).

The soup's more delicious with a pretty spoon
34
manee, it cannot but reflect on the
intimate environment.
In the furnishing of the home a
direct association with the original and
authentic register a personal impres¬
sion on us, as with an original painting,
a manuscript, a relic, things that a
reproduction cannot equal no matter
how perfect it may be. Here one
senses all the difference between the
work of a master and a machine.
Crafts form part of the daily environ¬
ment and fit ¡n naturally and grace¬
fully in the arrangement of the home.
In upholding crafts one does not
necessarily by implication reject
machines or make an impassioned
plea for a return to hand production.
There is, ¡n fact, a basic relationship
between small tools and large mach¬
ines. Where we take the wrong turn¬
ing is in failing to make the proper
appraisal of and acceptance of the
rôle of each ¡n its own sphere, which
would still leave the community to
make a choice. There would then be
no danger of man being bullied by the
machine.
Tradition respects the natural limits
of craftsmanship and the harmony that
is established between the craftsman,
the materials he uses and his tools.
The pride the craftsman derives from
his creation and the delight in the per¬
fection of his finished product sustain
him. It is this knowledge enshrined in
the crafts that gives them an abiding
place in our social set-up.
The very fact that even in this
growing forest of machines with its
triggery tempo, far from being smoth¬
ered crafts are once more coming into
world focus, is evidence enough that
within us pulsates an innate yearning
to use our hands and to feel the
surface of individually created objects.
c.RAFTS embody certain
qualities and a depth of experience
arising out of direct expression which
¡s very different from studio work.
Craft work is an acknowledged form
of therapy for those who are mentally
unsettled and nervously upset: it is a
source of rhythm and stability in living.
Even hard labour done rhythmically
becomes more bearable.
The problem before us is therefore
not man versus machine but rather
how to promote a harmony and cohes
ion between the two, a regulating of
each in its own appropriate field.
The need for saving and developing
crafts is felt to be vital even by those
who follow or are caught up ¡n other
pursuits. For it enables them to main¬
tain contact with those aspects of our
culture that are characterized by crafts,
and to absorb some of their elegance
and grace.
Crafts are particularly important with
young people for the qualities they
help to develop. For inherent in the
craft tradition are abundant reserves
of sustenance and delight. As long
as crafts continue as living and com¬
pelling witnesses of these cultural
resources, art will remain intimately
connected with the dally usages of
man.
Crafts also have a special vitality
as a direct human answer to direct
human needs. As has been said, the
demand ¡n eating calls as much for
satisfaction from the right kind of
spoon as from the food to be eaten.
Crafts have therefore an Intimate
kinship with and understanding of the
human needs its products serve,
which Induces an intuitive sense going
with rather than against the grain of

POPULAR IMAGERY
FROM
NORTH-EAST BRAZIL
life, absent in the assembly line
pattern.
In craftsmanship man is in full control
and can make his own decision at
every point. In large machine estab¬
lishments the workman is likely to be
subjected to the deadness of outward
uniformity and the gnawing pressures
of his inner self seeking release. The
very fact that in the modern highly
sophisticated period a compelling need
is felt to reach back into the remote
past, with its naivety and simplicity, to
try to flood our being with Its springlike
freshness, is a clear demonstration of
this sustaining rôle of crafts.
Under social pressures, the essence
of things gets overlaid by more super¬
ficial layers of modes and manners. It
has been truly said that the virtue of a
plant is in its seed and its form ¡n its
first shoot. Craft is not a disinterested
extraneous function complementary to
life but divorced from the inner being
of the community. Rather it is an
intensification of life, a stirring of the
pulse, a quickening of the heart, a
releasing of the muscle, in short a com¬
pelling and natural mode of expression.
Crafts are not stylized imitations of
nature but actually help to harmonize
life with nature. In a way, they teach
us what to look for and how to see.
Craft forms have roots ¡n the soil as
well as in the imagination of the crafts¬
man. They become a direct and sin¬
cere expression of the character and
life of the people, and therefore speak
a language all their own. As the saying
goes, music is more intelligible to the
musician than speech.
|N the present age where
crafts are exposed to many dangers, a
particular responsibility devolves on
craft lovers. It is significantly said that
the disintegration of a craft-oriented
society is reflected in the disintegration
of its crafts.
Crafts need not, of course, be bound
up exclusively with tradition. For life
is on the move and patterns of living
change with habits and customs. New
relationships are evolved with the
current flow of life and new traditions
created.
But there are certain values indispen¬
sable to mankind which crafts preserve,
and those craftsmen and craft lovers
who draw on this perennial spring of in¬
spiration and experience its unchang¬
ing sense of fulfilment have a precious
charge to keep.
New exchanges are taking place in
many spheres and fresh breezes are
wafted across that touch and transform
worn-out and weary spirits. The long
centuries of political and economic
rule of some regions by others are
giving way to a growing realization of
a common brotherhood and destiny of
mankind.
The less industrially developed areas
have retained more of the craft heri¬
tage along with their other traditions.
As they emerge from the old sup¬
pressions and come to life, these
things slip into proper perspective.
The result is a growing realization of
the significance of their contribution
to the world of culture.
The people of the former ruling
countries too are waking up to a
greater discernment and appreciation
of the gifts and qualities the newly
freed have to offer. Today, much of
the old obtuseness and casualness on
the part of the more industrialized
peoples towards the less industrializ¬
ed nations is giving place to a more
intelligent and sensitive understand¬
ing of the old cultures and traditional
values, and a recognition of the need
for and significance of mutual under¬
standing and appreciation and ex¬
change.
There is also a realization that the
tissues of an older way of life are not
to be swept away like so many cob¬
webs, for to a sympathetic mankind
they reveal untold charms and subtle
and restrained overtones of abiding
value and vibrant meaning.
Anand Kumaraswamy, the great
interpreter of oriental arts and crafts,
says that "years ago, under pre-
industrlal conditions, the public had
perforce to accept good art, good
design, good colouring, because no¬
thing worse was hardly available."
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
35

THE CRAFTS (Continued)
36
Now mass production under advanc¬
ed mechanization places the ignorant
and the aesthetically untutored at the
mercy of those who seek larger mar¬
gins of profit.
The time for a choice has come.
Good taste and greater opportunity
to live in intimacy with beauty should
not be the privilege of the few, but
the common inheritance of all. This is
what the crafts have to teach and offer
us. The two paths have already cross¬
ed. Western science is no longer
regarded as just a mechanism but has
acquired also an element of philo¬
sophy.
The rôle of crafts in the economy of
a developing country has become a
subject of world-wide significance.
Economists all over the globe have
directed their vision and experience to
this study. And indeed it is clear that
a sentimental regard for traditionalism
alone will not take us very far in our
effort to give these ancient activities
a modern vitality and meaning.
The modern demand ¡s for beauty
as a supplement to usefulness. Then
again, the concept of usefulness itself
has changed because of the transform¬
ation of our modes of thought, of
living habits and environment. Nor is
there any longer the same fastidious¬
ness for the purity of material or the
authenticity of form. With the advent
of cheap alloys, even for jewellery,
artificial silk and synthetic materials
like plastic, the emphasis has definitely
shifted to cheapness. Similarly, the
insistence on durability has been
replaced by a demand for greater var¬
iety. Modern taste is restless and
prepared to renew and replace articles
more easily and more frequently.
It is therefore in the very nature of
the craft Industry that great sensitivity
and delicate handling, infinite patience
and tireless perseverance will be
needed before crafts can play an
appropriate role in contemporary so¬
ciety. The public must bear with this
great heritage of mankind in its period
of mutation, and remember that even
though its birth and flowering belonged
to another age, another atmosphere,
a totally different pattern of living and
tempo, it nevertheless has something
significant and Important to bring to
the modern context.
There is nothing spectacular about
crafts. You do not find them in Impos¬
ing structures humming with life and
lit by million candle-power lights.
They have mostly to be unearthed in
twilit corners and humble cottages.
Even though millions are engaged in
crafts all over the world, they are never
found in large concentrations. Their
tools are modest and unostentatious.
The importance of crafts cannot there¬
fore be measured through super struc¬
tures or streamlined machines. They
speak of an age when dignity lay in
silence and beauty in subtlety.
This text, taken from "The Arts and Man",
to be published shortly by Unesco, is copy¬
right. Reproduction prohibited.
