THE ANGRY
GENERATION
by Marcel Hicfer
We publish below major portions of a remarkable
study on European youth today, prepared for the Council
of Europe in Strasbourg by Marcel Hicter, Director-General
for Youth and Leisure at the Belgian Ministry of Culture.
Although it deals chiefly with youth in Western Europe,
the breadth and scope of this penetrating analysis is highly
pertinent for readers in every part of the world.
A,i DULTS can hardly be so
hypocritical as to pretend that the
present revolt of youth has come as-
a surprise or that it has caught them
unawares. The writing on the wall, in
more ways than one, has been clear
for some time.
Rare are the industrialized societies
that have not had their share of youth
violence and turmoil. Thirteen years
ago, Stockholm witnessed the tragic
events of Christmas 1956 when the
city's youth went on a rampage. Even
at that time people scratched their
heads and asked themselves how it
was possible for such a thing to happen
In the economically most advanced
country of Europe.
Many volumes have since been
written to explain that young people
are bored, attributing this variously to
the fact that they have everything they
need or want, to a lack of morality or
religion, to excessive sexual freedom,
to the abdication of parents, etc. etc.
The Stockholm events were soon
followed by other eruptions that rocked
almost every major city. There was
the night in June 1963 when 150,000
shrieking, frenzied youngsters filled
the Place de la Nation in Paris, goaded
on by their teenage idols.
Almost at the same time we saw
the birth of the new teenage gangs,
with their "teddy boys", "mods" and
"rockers" in England, their "nozum"
in the Netherlands, their "halbstarke"
in Germany (Fed. Rep.) and their
MARCEL HICTER is Consulting Expert to the
Council of Europe's Consultative Assembly,
and drew up the special report on youth for
the Assembly's debate on "The Present Crisis
in European Society." Director-General for
Youth and Leisure at the Belgian Ministry of
Culture, he was the Belgian delegate to the
International Conference on Youth, organized
by Unesco at Grenoble, France, in 1964.
"vitelloni" in Italy. These bands took
on various forms and were constantly
changing, but they all were evidence
of the rejection of a society which had
failed to integrate its youth.
This was followed by the rise of
completely new industries which
concocted a "youth culture" catering
exclusively to the younger generations
who had the money to buy the gadgets
and other products specially produced
for them. This youth culture rejected
the adult world and the adult rationale;
it stressed change and novelty in cloth¬
ing and other apparel, initiation rites,
the cult of speed and violence, the
thrill of being "with it", and the teen¬
age idols instead of the time-honoured
heroes (James Dean, West Side Story,
etc.).
Adults felt strange in this new world
of "young" music, "young" records,
"young" clothing, "young" hairstyles,
"young" cigarettes, "young" drinks,
the "young" look, etc. Radio and TV
stations were literally invaded by
advertising programmes trumpeting the
new mood. And the world was
divided between the teenage "in-
group" and the old fogey "out-group".
All this was the work of adults who
looked upon youth as just one big
potential market. And it is saddening
to reflect that the first important
surveys of youth carried out in Europe
were actually market studies.
Meanwhile, however, other move¬
ments were also taking shape. These
were more complex, more intellectual,
more artistic. There was the extra¬
ordinary movement of "Angry Young
Men" in literature and the theatre in
Britain which represented an authentic
opposition to the industrial society
rationale.
In the United States, too, university
and artistic circles saw the birth of
the Beatniks whose ranks included a
number of first-rate poets and novelists
of protest and dissent. Unfortunately
this movement was soon swamped by
a host of imitators who adopted the
Beatniks' nonconformist attire but little
else.
It was in Holland, however, that the
most interesting movement (socio¬
logically speaking) sprang up. This
was the "Provo" group and the
"Provotariat" idea which rapidly spread
to neighbouring countries but with
much of its original force and vigour
lost.
The Provos did not reject all of
society's basic premises nor did they
hesitate to advocate changes in our
industrial civilization. In fact one of
their members was even elected to
the Amsterdam Municipal Council.
Their leader was a thinker and
philosopher, and the group campaigned
(alongside adults) against air and
water pollution, the threat to historical
and artistic buildings, and for a more
social and humane rôle of the police
in society as guardians of children and
supervisors of sports fields.
But most of all they attacked the
hypocrisy of adult society which
allows millions of children to die of
hunger while the manufacture of
nuclear weapons goes on and the
Vietnam war continues.
There can be little doubt that the
war in Vietnam has been the most
important single factor contributing to
"the broad hostility of youth." The
Vietnam war has given rise to many
university seminars which, out of
opposition, then embarked on different
interpretations of Marxian thought, as
well as to mass national demonstra¬
tions (as in Belgium) where all youth
organizations joined in anti-Bomb mar¬
ches or the condemnation of the Viet¬
nam war. 1 C
On a number of recent occasions * *»
the University itself has set the
example of challenging the basic
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE ANGRY GENERATION (Continued)
Why are we pretending we don't understand?
16
tenets of society, culture and the
university rationale itself. One cannot
omit at least a mention here of the
Chinese Cultural Revolution and the
International Strasbourg Movement,
with its manifesto "On Human Misery",
which attracted considerable attention
and study at the University of Nan-
terre, which in turn sparked the great
student revolts of France in May of
last year.
But it was from the University of
California at Berkeley, with its great
intellectual tradition, that there emerged
the type of dissent that foreshadowed
the student revolts which swept the
world in 1968. Robert Kennedy, in a
speech delivered in Philadelphia on
February 24, 1967, analyzed the
situation very carefully. He quoted
the declaration of the militant student
leader of the Berkeley University
Council which heralds the events to
come and already points to the inter¬
national character of the university
revolt:
"We asked to be heard. You re¬
fused. We asked for justice. You
called it anarchy. We asked for
freedom. You called it licence.
Rather than do something about the
fear and despair you created, you
called it communism. You accused
us of not using legal channels. But
you have closed those channels.
You, not we, have built a university
founded on suspicion and dis¬
honesty."
Then came the "hippie" culture which
everyone now knows about. Again it
was California that sparked the move¬
ment. Tens of thousands of young¬
sters, challenging the affluent society
which most of them were part of,
abandoned their families to flock
together as a community. The flower,
non-violence, sex and pacifism were
their insignia as well as non-action
the refusal of all action withdrawal,
and the venture into LSD and mari¬
juana.
Over the past ten years countless
books and studies have been available
to adults on the Industrial society, the
consumer society, the affluent society,
and the civilization of leisure. And
their authors have come forward with
suggestions and proposals for meeting
the new situations we are living in.
In France there were the works of
Georges Friedmann, Raymond Aaron,
Edgar Morin, Robert Escarpit, Roland
Barthes, Michel Crozier, Jean Fouras-
tié, Jean Dumazedier, H. Lefebvre,
A. Moles. In Germany (Fed. Rep.),
those of Th. Adorno, E. Feldmann, H. M.
Enzensberger, etc. In Italy, the studies
by the Agostino Ganelli Institute. But
above all, there were the works of the
great American sociologists, who five
good years before Europe, had already
produced their agonizing appraisals.
Men such as P. Lazarsfeld, D. Ries-
man, J. Galbraith, and in more recent
years, Herbert Marcuse and the
Canadian, Marshall McLuhan.
In addition to various White Papers
and Special Reports on youth, we
adults also had access to the extensive
critical research carried out by the
universities themselves on the need
and urgency of university reforms.
The round tables at Caen and
Amiens Universities are two of the
most famous examples. Here some of
France's greatest professors set a
notable example of analysis, self-
criticism and "contestation". In
Brussels, too, it was the faculty
members and research staff who set
off the student protest movement.
And more than ten years ago it was
the Vice-Chancellor of the University
of Nancy, Jean Capelle, who launched
the now famous and oft-repeated
words "the curriculum has gone mad"
(les programmes démentiels).
Why have we failed to understand
what has happened? Or are we just
pretending we don't understand?
IF we analyze this highly
complex situation objectively we will
find that it is after all a kind of conflict
of generations, perhaps the first of the
many violent encounters between the
younger and older generations that
certain sociologists tell us will replace
the old class struggle. In any event
it is quite obvious that the student's
approach is basically forward-looking
while the reaction of adults is naturally
conservative.
We are living in an aging society
where the proportion of old people is
growing in the top echelon posts of
government, university faculties, the
civil service, management and industry,
commerce and agriculture. Often
these older people no longer have the
mental, psychological or physical drive
needed both to keep up to date today
and to gear their lives and actions
to tomorrow.
Even men in their fifties are not as
forward-looking as one may think.
During the Second World War they
were about twenty years old, and in
Europe at least, many exerted all their
energies on the battlefield or in under¬
ground activities, or else spent years
in concentration camps. Today they
are proud of the way they rebuilt
their countries, their homes, schools
and industries, and created a society
in which the standard of living and
comfort is generally very high Indeed.
They look with satisfaction at the way
these standards are steadily rising and
social justice is on the increase.
Citizens of Germany (Fed. Rep.) who
are 50 years old now are especially
proud of having built up the first really
democratic society their country has
ever known, and which has lasted a
generation. They are especially proud
of having reintegrated their country
fully into Western Europe within the
short space of 20 years. And now
what do they find? Their children
are condemning the affluent society,
condemning their democracy, the
whole social system... and the univer¬
sities which are supposed to train them
to run the society that they, their
50 years-old parents look on with such
pride.
The universalization of culture.
Let us try to understand. What is it
that has actually changed in the
space of one generation. And what
has been affected by this speed up
in change?
In 1967 I had the occasion to point
CONTINUED ON PAGE 18

tMtlt
»-
©
^Sl
1
1 ML III
Lif, "'Il
1 1 j Hi
'"««I,,
í i^w >il
'
r HM ¿Jé
1
1 (II*
.it
II*
)
0
§
1
1
» m
i* *mZ * '
'I
Bearded and dishevelled, the eccentrically garbed hippies dream of a peaceful, non-violent world
where spiritual riches triumph over materialism. Left, hippies at Katmandu, Nepal, a country remote
from the technological civilization, where they go in search of a more meaningful life. Above, the
hostility of the skyscraper metropolis in which modern cliff dwellers are piled on top of one another
and yet live in isolation, recluses above the traffic jam.
17

THE ANGRY GENERATION (Continued)
The end of 'The Gutenberg Galaxy7
out that a process of universalization
is now shaping culture and youth's
future everywhere. I recalled the
words of the Belgian sociologist,
Henri Janne:
"Any event of any importance or
considered likely to be so is now
instantly transmitted to hundreds of
millions of people in every corner of
the globe . . . There Is now no event
no matter where It occurs, that does
not touch others. Economic inter¬
dependence is a fact, and everyone is
affected directly or indirectly. Every
war, even local or marginal, every
important upheaval anywhere inhe¬
rently affects the balance, the security
and the freedom of all peoples.
"Today nothing escapes us.
Pictures, sound and the printed word
carry information about the lives of
our neighbours Into every home. We
can no longer claim ignorance about
the poverty of the developing countries
and these countries in turn, as they
view our riches, no doubt find
our problems concerning the social
distribution of wealth petty If not
shocking.
"For the first time in history the
human species has become conscious
of its unity. Today's problems have
meaning only in relation to man seen
not as some abstraction but as the
concrete, living actuality of all mankind.
The nation, however mighty it may be,
is still drawn to the scale of the
cannon, the tank and the internal
combustion engine, that is, to the so-
calJed 'conventional weapons'. But
today's scale is that of the jet engine,
the H-bomb and the rocket, i.e. the
global scale of all mankind."
Mass Communication & Mass
Culiure. The world-wide extension
of information has gone hand in hand
with the acceleration of communica¬
tions. This is the age of mass
communications and mass culture
where the youngsters of today are the
first generation that has grown up with
the TV screen from early childhood.
For most adults the chief, if not the
only, window on the world was the
classroom, but only a small fraction of
today's youngsters' experience now
originates in the school.
Since infancy the young generations
have been bombarded by a stream of
images and sounds from their tele¬
vision- sets with one piece of infor¬
mation very rapidly replaced by still
newer information, fragmented. In bits
and snippets and unconnected. There
is no opportunity for analysis or calm
reasoning on the part of the young
TV viewer.
K An important book has just been
published by A. Moles, entitled Socio-
dynamique de la Culture, which paints
an alarming picture of contemporary
man (and youth) subjected to mass
communications. Moles shows how
man has abandoned the hierarchical
structures that permitted him to
classify newly-acquired knowledge,
and sees the brain reduced to a felt¬
like substance held together only by
the compression of many loose, inter¬
locking fibres arranged in a helter-
skelter jumble of total disorder.
Since 1962 Professor Marshall
McLuhan of the University of Toronto
has thrown a bombshell into our
thinking about society with his book
on the end of The Gutenberg Galaxy,
followed in 1964 by his Understanding
Media and in 1967 by The Medium is
the Massage. McLuhan maintains that
our society, based on linear forms of
print, shaped a culture of the eye and
of reason (man saw life as he saw
print as a continuity which enabled
him to arrange his ideas and think in
isolation). But the environment that
man creates becomes his medium for
defining his rôle in it. With the
advent of the "electric technology" of
mass communication and especially
television, we are leaving the age of
reason to enter a new moral age with
the world transformed into "a global
village" of retribalized life.
From these studies it looks as if
there is not just a difference of
quality but of nature between the
mental make-up of young people and
my own mental make-up as an adult.
This would prevent any serious
dialogue through lack of a common
manner of thinking and reasoning.
I hope I am wrong about this but the
coincidence worries me.
The Industrial Conditioning of
Minds. But adults have something
else just as serious to worry about.
H. Magnus Eisenaberger's book
Culture ou mise en condition? (Culture
or conditioning?) should be read by
everyone, particularly his analysis of
the industrial shaping of minds, a
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20
Like a giant kaleidoscope, images of
every kind and from every corner of
the globe twist and tumble before
the eyes of today's youth the first
generation that has grown up in
front of the TV screen. For modern
youth the picture is worth not a
thousand but a hundred thousand
words. According to one school of
thought, the new media of mass
communication are reshaping patterns
of social interdependence and every
aspect of our personal life. They are
making us reconsider and re-evaluate
practically every thought, every
action, and every institution formerly
taken for granted.
Photo © Collage Roman Cleslewlcz - Edition
Mafia (Malme Arnodin Fayolle,
International Associés)
Wjffilt I
t.'-,m!m L


Photo © Asia Photo
THE ANGRY GENERATION (Continued)
20
phenomenon which has known an
extraordinary development in the last
hundred years. Eisensberger writes:
"While people passionately argue
about the new technical media, radio,
cinema, TV, the record industry, pro¬
paganda, advertising, and public
relations as separate entities, the
industry of mind fashioning seen as a
whole Is actually neglected .. .We do
not seem to realize that mind con¬
ditioning has not yet reached its peak
development, that it has yet to gain
control of its most important medium,
i.e. education.
"The industrialization of education is
a very recent phenomenon which has
barely begun. While we continue to
discuss such things as class sched¬
ules, school systems, the shortage of
teachers and maximum use of school
space, the new technical media which
make nonsense of any debate on
educational reform are already on our
doorstep.
"Industrial mind conditioning is as
prevalent in capitalist as in communist
countries. It makes little difference
whether it operates under State, public
or private control. Everywhere- its
aim is 'to perpetuate the existing
patterns, inculcate a certain way of
thinking, and then to manipulate and
exploit It." The exploitation of minds,
either overt or subconscious, serves
as a smoke screen for physical
exploitation, resulting in spiritual
degradation, a loss of political faculties
and the subjection of the masses to
the ever-powerful control of the few.
"The rapid development of industrial
mind-conditioning and its integration
into the very fabric of modern society
is transforming the rôle of the in¬
tellectual. The intellectual now finds
himself exposed to new dangers, and
a totally new and subtle type of
corruption and blackmail. Voluntarily
or not, consciously or unconsciously,
he is becoming the accomplice of
an industry which needs him for sur¬
vival just as he now needs it, but
whose purposes (the consolidation of
established authority) are incompatible
with his own. Here we are at the
threshold, if not at the heart, of a world
of psychological violence."
A world of violence. The violence
which surrounds us is a cause for real
alarm, for it represents a challenge
to civilization itself. Not that violence
was unknown in former times. It was
often a daily occurrence. But in the
present age of man's increasing
mastery over nature and of scientific
progress, an age where respect for
life is inculcated In us from early
childhood, violence has become an
incomprehensible anachronism.
The Centre for the Study of
Contemporary Civilization, at the
University of Nice, has just published
the proceedings of a symposium on
Violence in the Present-Day World
(Desclée de Brouwer, Publishers,
1968), the table of contents of which
makes grim reading: tensions and
distortions in contemporary humanism,
violence and immorality, terrorism and
psychological violence, violence in the
theatre, literature, cinema, television;
violence and social conflict; violence
in the Third World; violence and the
American Negro; World War II, nuclear
weapons; international violence, etc . . .
I quote a few lines from a text by
Jean Onimus who outlines some of the
newer facets of contemporary violence:
"Paradoxically, violence has reached
such a stage of shocking cynicism and
refinement during the past 30 years
that the cruelty of the most brutal
periods of history pales in comparison:
torture, scientifically organized geno¬
cide, persecutions of every kind, the

"Every civilization has had its
demons and its angels. But its
demons were not necessarily
millionaires and manufacturers
of fiction and fantasy. Sooner
or later, the dream factory
operates on its most lucrative
resources: sex and bloodshed."
André Malraux
mass deportation of populations, the
crushing of defenceless victims or
entire nations under the heel of
oppression, the revival of the most
inhuman forms of terrorism, and
finally, the threat of atomic war and
the so-called balance of terror.
"Like a giant tide, violence Is rising
and sweeping towards the horizon of
tomorrow, threatening to engulf the
benefits of progress in a wave of
destruction or total annihilation.
"In fact, as our society has moved
toward greater and greater technology,
it has given impetus to new forms of
physical and moral brutality which now
include the invasion of the right to
privacy, brain washing, the manipula¬
tion of men's minds and all kinds of
pressures that bluntly challenge and
threaten our freedoms.
"When we look at the political,
economic and racial tensions that
plague this planet of ours as it
awakens to a new consciousness, and
then consider the host of powerful new
weapons of conquest and domination
made available by modern science, we
can desperately ask ourselves whether
the circle of violence has not snapped
shut around us, finally and irrevocably,
so that no appeal to world conscience
can ever hope to break it again.
"But these savage, brutal types of
violence are not the only ones now
threatening us. More dangerous
because less obvious are those cunning
methods of indoctrination and condi¬
tioning which, with seeming gentleness
and subtle play upon our motivations,
seek to shackle us .with Invisible
bonds. The unwary person, dis¬
concerted by the complications of
modern living and overwhelmed by the
pressure of the persuaders applied at
the same time to both the nobler and
baser feelings, becomes just a pawn
who can be victimized all the more
easily in that he thinks he is gaining
freedom.
"This insidious kind of violence is
barely perceptible. Yet Its damage is
much more profound since it catches
people off guard and ensnares their
goodwill. To guard against it calls for
permanent alertness and vigilance
which is beyond the capacity of most
people.
"Here, perhaps, lies the most
ominous threat for the near future.
Overt forms of violence bring their
own immediate reaction; but the under¬
cover type wedges its way in with
the blessing of its victims. It can be
detected only in the advantages It
brings to those who manipulate it."
IHE youth population ex¬
plosion has, of course, had an imme¬
diate impact on school budgets and
equipment, but it has also profoundly
marked life and the atmosphere on the
campus. In one generation, French
university student enrolment soared
from 50,000 to 600,000, and in Belgium
from 10,000 to 60,000. Any university
that has to cope with 100,000 students
simply cannot organize student-
professor-administration relationships
on a genuinely human level.
At the University of Liège, Belgium,
where the population growth has been
average, Professor Fernand Desonay
points out that there were only five
senior year students of philosophy and
literature in 1930, but 1,384 students
took the exams in 1965 as anonymous
entities of indifference and chance.
Jean-Paul Sartre wrote recently,
"There were 25 of us in our class at
the Ecole Normale Supérieure, few
enough for us not to feel stifled. It
was an ¡deal situation; we could
discuss freely with the professor and
there was continual disagreement and
dissent, but it all took place in an
atmosphere of aristocratic leisure.
Today, things are completely different.
There are so many students that they
cannot communicate directly with the
professors as we could. Many
students never even see the professor.
His voice reaches them through a
loudspeaker, dehumanized, remote,
intoning a lecture that, as far as they
are concerned, holds absolutely no
interest for them."
The problem is rooted in the univer¬
sity population explosion, student
dissatisfaction with the present state
of education (which has spread from
the social science faculties to all the
others), and the devaluation of univer¬
sity diplomas. This has given rise to
a new proletariat-like student body,
armed with far more explosive
weapons than the working class ever
had to protect its interests and future.
Gone are the days when the univer¬
sity graduate automatically exchanged
his cap and gown for a pre-ordained
position as a leader in the community.
Student problems, acute though
they are, form only a part of an infin¬
itely more general situation which goes
beyond the university. Writing in
the French Education Nationale (20 June
1968), Robert Mandra asked whether
the traditional causes of unrest among
young people are not traditional
causes which no longer produce the
same effects because of the large
numbers of young people involved.
He compares the situation to physics
where a quantitative change results in
a qualitative change, and sees the vast
number of students challenging the
order of importance of human prob¬
lems.
In the stable society of past
centuries, it was generally accepted
that a person went into the world
with a certain amount of knowledge
which was then matured by exper¬
ience; then as the individual got older
he was given increased responsibilities.
In today's world of modern science,
medicine and technology, we have
replaced "knowledge and experience"
with "knowledge and creativity".
Invention, innovation and new attitudes
are so much more important to the
youth of today that it could almost be
said that experience handicaps the
adult who is like a smoker who "keeps
used matches to light future cigar¬
ettes".
Nowadays, when young people
between 25 and 40 are playing an
increasing rôle as trailblazers in almost
every field of human activity, we must
radically revise our thinking to enable
youth to come to the fore while
allowing those over 50 to assume
continuous, long term operations.
But this situation is tricky since
other equally important factors have
to be considered. Along with the
change in the age pattern of society
there are biological and sociological
changes and, perhaps even changes
in the mental structure of youth.
Changing social function of youth.
Paul Sivadon, professor at the Univer¬
sity of Brussels and president of the
European League for Mental Health,
who has made a highly original
contribution to the study of youth,
points out that the period of adoles¬
cence is growing longer, not shorter.
Formerly the transition from childhood ft .
to adulthood took place in a few y1
months: it now takes 10 years. While *
this prolonged adolescence may enable
youngsters to compare and experiment
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE ANGRY GENERATION (Continued)
with different and often contradictory
standards of conduct before working
out their own moral code, it also
prolongs the period of no-decision-
taking and the Inclination to live in a
dream world of unreality.
A generation or two ago, the great
majority of boys had decided on their
careers by the time they were 15; now
many "adolescents" of 25 still haven't
made up their minds.- Twenty-six per
cent of boys and 50 per cent of girls
finish secondary school not knowing
what profession to enter. This has
created the situation where more and
more young couples, even those with
children, are entirely dependent on
their parents for support.
Young people are now biologically
mature earlier than their predecessors
but it takes them longer to achieve
social independence.
"There have always been conflicts
between the generations, student
revolts and violent youth groups,"
Professor Sivadon has written, "but
the difference is that today the student
is no longer the exception, but the
rule."
When the youth population becomes
as big as the adult population, young¬
sters are no longer just potential
adults, and if grownups are not careful,
they will quickly find themselves out¬
dated and on the sidelines. It is even
possible that, in the not-too-distant
future, society will be faced with the
problem of maladjusted adults, not
maladjusted youth.
Professor Sivadon points out that a
new and fundamental mutation Is
occurring in the human species.
Neotony is a scientific term applied
to the reproductive capacity of an
Immature anthropoid in prehistoric
times. It is now used to describe the
attainment of sexual maturity In a
child.
It is now recognized that young
people today develop more rapidly
both physically and sexually, while
their emotional, moral and intellectual
development is slower and more
prolonged. The day may soon come
when most of society will be made up
of individuals possessing adult bodies
with children's heads. The youth of
today is a neotonic product already
destined for the new world of tomorrow
which will be his and which the adult
cannot understand.
The picture of such a world society
is aggravated by the fact that this
young man requires the social matrix
of the family environment, no longer
just to the age of five or six years,
but up to 15 or 20. This means that
the rôle of parents has become greater
and assumed new dimensions.
Formerly, the personality of young
people often developed by identif¬
ication with their father and mother.
It develops today by identification
with friends and comrades of the same
age group and with teenage idols,
since their former source of security
has vanished with the repeated
abdication of their parents.
According to Sivadon, "parent-
companions" have lost their signifi¬
cance and young people say, "We
might as well stick with our real friends
who are our own age."
We must therefore resume our rôle
as parents if only by acting as a lever
to test the resistance of the young,
give them impetus and help them
develop their personality and a
character of their own. This is all the
more necessary today since the grown
up youngster not only leaves his
parents but enters a new world closed
to them.
The biological changes in youth are
accompanied, as already indicated, by
changes in their social function.
Zygmunt Bauman of Poland even goes
so far as to call it "the missing social
function of adolescents" (1). He
states that the moment when young
people assume their responsibilities
and functions is postponed to much
later in life so that the time when they
share in what he calls "social profits"
(their rights) without putting their
shoulder to the wheel of "social pro¬
duction" (their duties) is becoming
longer and longer.
Having dispensed with any meaning¬
ful "rites de passage", modern society,
turns adolescents loose in what
American youth specialist August
Hollingshead calls "an ill-defined no-
man's land" to grope their way to
maturity. Without any real help from
adults, they must launch themselves
from the family "nest", become hetero¬
sexual, decide on a vocation and
create a home of their own. They still
depend on their parents for help and
financial support, and make no real
progress towards becoming adults.
They remain social and cultural
children.
Hollingshead, in his major work
Elmstown's Youth (Wiley, New York,
1945), supports Professor Bauman
when he writes, "The adolescent's
ambiguous position in the society may
be a product of the loss of function
for this age group in our culture."
(15 "Some Problems in Contemporary Edu¬
cation", The International Review of Social
Sciences, XIX, no. 3, 1967, Unesco
22
c AUGHT between contra¬
dictory cultural, educational and social
factors, especially the gap that separ¬
ates the realities of life from the
idealism in the classroom, it is no
wonder the young become neurotic
and frustrated. Their reactions ag¬
gressiveness, complete apathy and the
"tune In, turn on and drop out"
approach to unreality catch both
parents and teachers off guard.
Professor Bauman finds that Polish
students react by becoming militant
idealists, socially committed, In marked
contrast to the ego-centric defensive
attitudes of young workers who prefer
to seclude themselves in a small
private world of their own consisting
of matters and things which are
certain and which they themselves
can control.
Sivadon, Baumann, and Hollingshead
each use a different approach to arrive
at a common conclusion: that the
different situations which young people
must cope with force them to play a
variety of rôles and adopt different
attitudes and opinions.
These rôles often contradict them¬
selves, giving rise to deeper conflicts
and doubt, which in turn lead young
people to question every established
value: to them, all rules and restric¬
tions become relative. The result is a
permanent threat of the disintegration
of culture and society: the result is
dissent and rejection, fear and anxiety.
If to this we add the fact that the
number of years spent in university
is increasing, that many of the brighter
students are taking several degrees,
doing research in various fields at the
same time before joining the outside
world, there is Indeed real cause for
concern. In every big university one
can find dozens of brilliant students
between the ages of 25 and 30 who,
while not refusing to leave their youth
behind, refuse to take the plunge into
adult life.
Let us not forget that European
society has undergone a profound
change since the 1950s and especially
the 1960s. Before then, Man was
classified according to whether his
activity was productive or aesthetic.
Despite opposition from self-styled
radicals, there was a consensus'
attributing a moral value to work,
trades and other activities in addition
to their great practical importance.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 24

The technological society Is rapidly modifying our whole environment and the
pre-eminence of the machine has led many young people to ask whether we are evolving
a new subterranean labyrinth to trap the individual into becoming a mere tool of the
automated, computerized society.

'-* > ä
24
THE ANGRY GENERATION (Continued)
For many, their profession or trade
was a means of self-development;
others saw in manual labour the
origin of human dignity. This dignity
formed the basis of the workers' class
consciousness and their goal at that
time was to reorganize society,
following the principles of social
advancement and economic planning.
Admittedly these values have not
entirely disappeared but they have
become considerably weaker. A way
of thinking oriented to the consumer
and an awareness of his needs have
come to the fore. This "consumer
philosophy" is the result of a change
in man's outlook: the image projected
before his eyes is that of "man the
consumer" and no longer "man the
producer".
The industrial society. Sociologists
disagree on what to call this type of
society. Some term it the industrial
society, since it stresses the growing
predominance of industry over agri¬
culture.
This definition Is not too bad, but
we may well ask ourselves if we shall
have one industrial society or several.
Many arguments have' been advanced
forecasting the universalization of in¬
dustry; many other arguments have
been advanced predicting greater di¬
versity between countries and their
industrial patterns. We still don't know
whether the world process of indus¬
trialization will produce the same type
of society everywhere: already there
is talk of a post-industrial society.
Certainly the predominantly agricul¬
tural countries of the Third World
should not be overlooked. Exploiting
the world's potential to its maximum
could conceivably lead to the creation
of one gigantic city almost entirely in
the northern hemisphere, bordering on
a world-wide rural area in the southern
hemisphere.
The technological society. Society
has also been defined in terms of tech¬
nology. Certainly technology is play¬
ing an ever increasing rôle. We are
surrounded by technology on every
side, without always being aware of it.
This technological ideology is part of
the competition between countries
with different economic systems and
has resulted in the arms race and the
rapid outmoding of equipment.
The urban phenomenon. And yet
urbanization seems more important
than technology. It is through the city
that technology enters society, and
consequently the major technological
problems of society are in fact urban
problems. The growing importance
of technology demands a social frame¬
work, and has given rise to various
groups for whom technology is a true
ideology and who see themselves as
a class: the technocrats.
Theoreticians of leisure. Theoreti¬
cians of leisure base their ideas on
facts from which a host of arbitrary
conclusions are often derived. Cer¬
tain facts are indisputable leisure, i.e.
holidays, weekends, etc. ... is a vital
Photo © Elie Kagan - Gamma
part of society. But a careful analysis
of time shows that we must distinguish
between working time, free time
(leisure) and routinized time (travel to
and from work, the myriad formalities
demanded by the bureaucratization of
society). Routinized time is the off¬
spring of our tentacular cities, and
results from the divorce between one's
place of work, one's home and one's
leisure activities. It is astonishing to
find that while working time decreases
leisure time does not increase: the dif¬
ference is eaten up in "routinized time."
The consumer society. Can one
speak of a consumer society? Indeed
one can, but there are nuances to
consider. It is certainly not enough
to note the claims advanced in indus¬
trial countries that past production was
not adapted to needs because of igno¬
rance of these needs on the part of
manufacturers. Actually, it was be¬
cause they didn't know their market.
Today however, production is organized
in such a way that the market is care¬
fully canvassed in advance so that not
only is the expected consumer demand
precisely anticipated but also the con¬
sumer's secret wishes and desires.
Now this is a practice that has raised
many an objection. There are of
course market surveys galore, motiva¬
tion studies and similar paraphernalia,
but it is obvious that the accent is.
almost always put on individual needs
to the detriment of society's needs
which are systematically ignored. If
we look at new housing development

Student committees in many
countries are calling for a complete
revamping of the structure
of higher education. Their
criticisms of educational systems
often dating back to the
19th century are shared
by many professors.
Here teachers and students
take part in an "action committee"
discussion at the Faculty
of Medicine in Paris.
schemes, for instance, we note that
everything relating to the community's
social needs is strangely neglected.
Instead we find that needs are fabri¬
cated by those who control production,
with the aid of advertising which
moulds and stimulates the new needs
with their packaging and other gim¬
micks. We thus arrive at the logical
conclusion that those who control the
reins of production also control the
course of consumption.
As a matter of fact, there is no
direct planning of production, but only
indirect, oblique planning. All around
us now are the market study boys
feverishly preparing, predicting, pro¬
gramming the consumer market, and
so churning, dissecting and manoeuv¬
ring our daily lives for the great
hopper of production.
Henri Lefebvre has coined the fol¬
lowing definition of our contemporary
world, "a bureaucratic consumer-tail¬
ored society." Contrary to forecasts
made a dozen years ago, production
is becoming less and less related to a
sense of social awareness, or to the
activities and needs of society as a
whole. The consumer culture does
nothing to link people together; it
evolves around a solitary act.
Marcuse & the industrial society.
In his One-Dimensional Man, Professor
Herbert Marcuse makes a critical anal¬
ysis of modern industrial civilization.
He sees society dominated by techno¬
logy which he describes as a power
in itself, all the more to be feared since
it acts in and against man to make him
a mutilated, one-dimensional being.
If the purpose of the social apparatus
is "to create a humane existence on
the basis of a humanized nature," then
it defeats its purpose, Marcuse writes,
for "we live and die rationally and pro¬
ductively." It is this which mutilates
our liberties and satisfactions.
Bureaucrats, administrators, planners
and party officials are all obsessed
now by one thing: the absolute priori¬
ty they give to production. Pots are
made to put soup in and soup is made
to fill the pots, as Marcuse expresses
it. It is quantity not quality that is now
the overriding preoccupation of life and
human welfare. And what counts in
the Industrial society is to have more
rather than to be more, the standard
of living rather than the art of living.
In all systems, socialist or capitalist,
there exists, says Marcuse, the same
"collusion of modern society and
power."
Man is now only an instrument. The
administration of things has replaced
government of people, and we reach
the surrealistic limit of both rationality
and absurdity when we sell "luxury
fall-out shelters" equipped with every
modern convenience.
We must rediscover the art of living,
Marcuse asserts, and rebel against the
totalitarianism of technocratic reason¬
ing. We must rediscover flowers and
love. We must reject psycho-socio¬
logy that aims at providing treatment
for the individual so that he may con¬
tinue to function as part of a sick civili¬
zation, and which "transforms our
hysterical misery into banal unhappin-
ess," as Freud put it.
The tyranny suffered by man in our
industrial society which we call demo¬
cratic is as total, alienating and dehu¬
manizing as the worst dictatorship.
Social science students have popular¬
ized these ideas: they refuse to be
treated as things or objects, and pro¬
claim their determination not to be
integrated in a society where they
would become the massifiers and the
massifled, the manipulators and the
manipulated.
Roots of the student revolt i
I had first thought of review¬
ing the history of student revolts in
Europe country by country. But having
assembled the documentation, I realiz¬
ed the enormity and futility of such a
task, convinced as I now am that the
dissatisfaction of youth is a world-wide
phenomenon, varying only in the forms
this dissatisfaction takes in different
countries.
A comparative study of the adminis¬
tration of European universities would
be useful in interpreting present-day
events by showing the various levels
of progress and traditions reached by
different universities, in administrative,
legal and other day-to-day matters.
Thus we find that reforms now de¬
manded by students in one university
have long been achieved in another.
Students in Oslo, for instance, have for
years been managing university book¬
shops, student restaurants, hostels, the
publication of study courses, and
taking part in faculty councils. In fact,
I was recently told that the one thing
Oslo students now object to most is
the bureaucracy of student manage¬
ment!
Such a study would enable us to
look at each of the Scandinavian
countries separately instead of lumping
them together as we often do. We
would find that there has been so
much violence in Denmark that a full
scale debate was called in Parliament
on May 16, 1968.
During the debate the Minister of
Justice reported that since January
1965, 137 street demonstrations had
been organized, 85 of them held in
front of foreign embassies. In all
cases, the organizers had complied
with the regulations requiring them to
notify the authorities in advance. In
only 11 cases were the police obliged
to intervene and use force. The Mini¬
ster pointed to these figures as an
example of the moderation and good
sense on the part of demonstrators.
Most of the demonstrations at least
all those held in front of embassies
were organized by student groups.
Following the recent violent de¬
monstrations at the University of Co¬
penhagen, the Rector, Mr. Mogens
Fog, had this to say about their un¬
derlying causes:
"There is no doubt an element of
psychological 'contagion' that spreads
among emotional young minds. But I
believe that at the root of these de¬
monstrations there is a social conflict
with far deeper implications. Enmesh¬
ed in the complex web of modern so¬
ciety, the average person feels too
remote from the areas of decision mak¬
ing. This is true both of the East
and the West. At the origin of student
demonstrations one always finds some
dissatisfaction with the educational
system, and added to this is a feeling
of frustration. Street demonstrations
are one way to arouse society, but
when students have taken part in many
demonstrations without achieving any
practical result, they inevitably feel a
sense of frustration."
Universities in Great Britain have a
privileged position due to their long
established tradition of independence,
and thanks to a highly effective system
of study awards and scholarships. -_
Even though the number of students yK
entering its universities is relatively "*»
much lower than in other European
countries, the percentage of students
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE ANGRY GENERATION (Continued)
Self-government four centuries ago at Salamanca University
26
who take a degree Is very much
higher.
In France, the attitude of workers
towards students is very different from
that of workers in the Federal Republic
of Germany. In France, it is quite
clear that the student explosion of
last year would not have had its elec¬
trifying detonator effect if, despite the
opposition of trade unions and political
leaders, public opinion had not
supported the students from the very
start and had the mass of non-union
and union workers not brushed aside
the views of the trade unions to join
the movement. In the Federal Repub¬
lic of Germany, on the other hand,
public opinion, and particularly the
workers, strongly disapprove student
action.
One of the most explosive situa¬
tions is found in Italy, whose student
population has expanded more rapidly
than that of any other European coun¬
try. Italy's universities, too, are more
tradition-bound and are strictly con¬
trolled by their academic pundits.
For an objective analysis, overriding
national frontiers and showing that stu¬
dent unrest, however varied its forms,
is basically a world-wide movement, it
is worth reading a new quarterly jour¬
nal, "Dialogue" (published by the U.S.
Information Service in Washington),
the first issue of which is devoted to
"Ferment in the University."
The issue carries an important arti¬
cle entitled "The New Involvement
With Society" by Clark Kerr, and an¬
other article, "The Alienated Genera¬
tion" by Mark R. Killingsworth. The
latter writes:
"As citizens many activists see a
hypocritical society which condones
the use of napalm but not marijuana;
whose public officials seem to them
insensitive or incapable before prob¬
lems ranging from the ghetto to Viet¬
nam.
"As students they see a bureaucratic
educational system whose teachers
are remote and uninterested in them;
whose administrators never listen se¬
riously to their views on issues (hous¬
ing, academic problems, regulations,
student activities) which vitally affect
them; and in whose classrooms they
are expected not to participate but
merely to listen.
"As potential employees they see
vast corporations and unions which
cynically manipulate and depersonalize
people rather than liberate them and
provide interesting and challenging
work.
"Such a society, many activists be¬
lieve, cannot possibly fulfill the hopes
and talents of the individual. Many
seek a 'participatory democracy', in
which people participate as directly
as possible in decisions which affect
them from their education to their
work to their government's policies."
Killingsworth states that many acti¬
vist students "detest the bureaucratic
multiversity," which, they feel, turns
students into "so many depersonalized
IBM cards," and he endorses the opin¬
ion of Mayor John V. Lindsay of New
York, who pointed out in 1966 that
feelings of alienation and powerless-
ness were common elements in both
the Berkeley student revolt and the
Watts Negro riots in California.
II O me the key words of
today's student unrest are autonomy,
self-government and dissent.
The demand for autonomy in Euro¬
pean universities is directed chiefly
against the state, as a bureaucratic
machine increasingly bent on centrali¬
zation. Basically, it is a claim for a
new concept of human dignity.
During the Middle Ages many uni¬
versities had already achieved autono¬
my. A large number are autonomous
today in the United States and Great
Britain. Autonomy gives the university
a freer hand as well as greater flexi¬
bility in meeting regional and local
needs, introducing new subjects and
teaching methods, and in integrating
inter-faculty teaching of certain cour¬
ses. The rigid compartmentalization of
faculties is now out of step with the
needs of modern interdisciplinary re¬
search.
But as soon as the State is called
upon to help, the use of state funds
is involved, thus raising the problem
of some form of control being applied
to the allocation and spending of
public money.
Now we come to the important ques¬
tion. Autonomy no doubt promotes a
sense of dignity and responsibility,
but it can also lead to a dispersion of
effort. Governments should ponder
carefully the advantages of allowing
Lille, Rome or Munich, for example,
to settle the problems of their univer¬
sities with only the specific needs of
these universities in mind, against the
disadvantages and risks in seeking
solutions that are partial, diversified
and sometimes even contradictory.
Such decisions are of vital impor¬
tance when universities and young
people have everything to gain from
the international recognition of their
educational standards and university
degrees.
Self-government by students is not
a new idea. Indeed, four centuries ago
students in Salamanca, Spain, shared
with their teachers the responsibilities
of university administration. The same
principle operates today in many U.S.
universities which have a dean of stu¬
dents.
Not being an economist, I cannot
judge the merits of self-government on
the basis of production figures. But
I can evaluate its educational and cul¬
tural achievements as revealed by the
important experiments in self-govern¬
ment I have followed in Yugoslav in¬
dustry.
These experiments have stimulated
everyone since each individual feels
he has a share In the undertaking
not only to feel personally responsible,
but to do everything possible to meet
his responsibilities. Permanent re¬
fresher courses and self-improvement
are now de rigueur for workers at
every level in Yugoslavia.
Student dissent is concerned both
with today's consumer society and
with the university itself. Students see
a need for many reforms in the aca¬
demic system. They are opposed to
the traditional professorial lectures
which they feel should be replaced by
a dialogue and group discussions.
They reject the present examination
system by which, at the whim of an
anonymous examiner or a chance
question selected out of a hat, thou¬
sands of young students either gradu¬
ate or have their careers ruined.
They want more streamlined courses
and less cramming, of endless facts
and figures. They know that many of
the "truths" taught them are no longer
true, that knowledge becomes out of
date and that degrees, too, lose their
value with time.
They demand a university open to
free discussion and criticism, "parallel"
lectures on the same subject by differ¬
ent professors where opposing views
can be analyzed and debated. Many
question the concept of knowledge
itself which they view as "a collection
of established facts no longer, but an
unending, ever-changing conquest that
actually thrives with dissent."
They know their lives are no longer
divided into two parts: one in which
they stuff themselves with knowledge
and technology, the other where they
apply what they have learned. They
realize that they are entering a society
where even the most brilliant specia¬
list may quickly find himself out of
date, where one can be old hat even
at the age of 30, and where nothing
is more dangerous than to be a super
specialist In one subject and nothing
else.
They have heard the remark of Rob¬
ert Oppenheimer that the scientist of
60 can no longer carry on research
without the discoveries made after he
left the university.

	 ÉÊKÊKÊ
p^
L
1V\<m
m
if**V3P ,fa '
Photo © Jacques Windenberger - Atlas Photo
If the problems of students are acute, those of young industrial workers are often more poignant and
distressing problems of unemployment, problems of working hours and working conditions, problems of salary
and a host of others. The situation of the young agricultural worker in much of the world defies description.
They know that the university has
now taken on unparallelled impor¬
tance, undreamt of by older genera¬
tions, because no graduate will ever
really "graduate," but instead, is pre¬
destined for a lifetime of study, re¬
fresher courses, updating and exacting
readjustment.
E,VEN if the university were
only ten years behind the times it would
still fail in its task. For young people
of today who will be 50 in the year 2000,
the traditional university is like the
horse and buggy in the age of jet tra¬
vel. In its present unwieldy form, its
archaic approach and methods, and
the mistaken notion that four, five or
seven years are enough to charge up
a mental battery to last a whole car¬
eer, the university is sadly out of
step. One might even ask if it can
still be "doctored" up. What is really
called for is a heart transplant, or
better still, a brain transplant.
The renovation and reorganization of
the university is the concern and res¬
ponsibility of society at large, inas¬
much as those who are studying there
today and who will be tomorrow's
leaders are destined to return to it
periodically until they retire.
The university will not just double
its population by becoming more demo
cratic; enrolment will skyrocket as
all its alumni are forced to return. And
it will also quadruple its campuses,
laboratories, libraries, medical ser¬
vices, hostels and teaching staff. And
so will its budget.
There is one thing we should not
forget, for the society of tomorrow
demands it the only valid investment
is investment in people. Other invest¬
ments will have to take their turn.
The consumer society is being
challenged and young people are as
opposed to integration into a capi¬
talist or a socialist bureaucracy for the
sake of efficiency. Studies in the so¬
cialist countries show that young
people brought up to believe in the
principles of equality and justice are
shocked by official indifference or
stick-in-the-mud attitudes. They cannot
understand why the needs of planned
development must necessarily sacri¬
fice them on the altar of market re¬
quirements or why their ideals should
be dashed against the wall of bureau¬
cracy.
In Western countries too, as last
year's declaration by the bishops of
France made clear, young people are
no longer willing to be reduced to the
rôle of producers, consumers or mere
performers of orders. They demand
"not the means to live, but reasons
for living." They are up in arms
against a society in which men are not
their own masters, but prisoners of the
system. They see themselves as real
proletarians, if a proletarian is some¬
one "who has no say in the use
made of his life, and knows it" (to
quote one student slogan); they de¬
mand "social structures at the service
of man," and not "man at the service
of structures" (as another slogan
put it).
From now on th'e exercise of author¬
ity will require a dialogue. The French
author Gilbert Cesbron echoes the
views of the French bishops when he
writes that the young "have had the
time to pass judgement on the society
of false needs and false leisure that
degrade the West, and to shout two
simple words that may well save the
day for tomorrow: "Dialogue - Parti¬
cipation!"
Youth have raised their voice. They
now demand the right to be heard in
full. Circumstances led me to prepare
this study from the viewpoint of stu¬
dents. Had I dealt with young indus¬
trial workers and their problems of
unemployment, emigration and labour
market fluctuations, the picture would
heve been more sombre still. It might
well have made unbearable reading if
I had written it with Europe's young
agricultural workers in mind.
Let us give youth the task of build¬
ing the future. That is all they ask.
27
