Photos © Life Magazine - Grey Villet
Before Martín Luther King organized his now famous boycott
of city buses in Montgomery, Alabama in 1956, Negroes
could only occupy rear seats in public buses and had to give
up their places to white passengers when buses were
crowded. King called for the bus boycott when a Negro
woman was arrested for refusing to yield her seat For months
on end, buses ran virtually empty (above) and Negroes
walked many miles to work (ab\ve right) rather than face
discrimination. Late In 1956 the U.S. Supreme Court declared
segregation in public transport illegal. Almost overnight,
Martin Luther King, until then a virtually unknown Negro
clergyman of Montgomery, became the foremost American
fighter for civil rights. In August 1963, his movement for racial
justice held the famous Freedom March, the largest civil
rights demonstration In U.S. history, when 200,000 black and
white marchers filled the park between the Lincoln Memorial
and the Washington Monument in the U.S. capital (below).


MARTIN LUTHER KING:
WE SHALL
OVERCOME'
Photo © Life Magazine - Robert W. Kelley
""
I
äÜ5fc ;-
m
HS

L,
Martin Luther King (centre of photo above) leads a 50-mile civil rights demonstration march from Selma
to Montgomery, Alabama, in 1965. On his right is Ralph Bunche of the U.N., and Nobel Peace Prize
winner. The Rev. Ralph Abernathy, who took the place of Dr. King after his assassination at Memphis
in 1968, marches on right of Bunche. Below, a huge portrait of Martin Luther King is carried by
crowd at his funeral.
.Ike Mahatma Gandhi in India, Mar¬
tin Luther King in the United States chose the
way of non-violence in his struggle against
injustice. He too urged his followers to
eschew violence at all cost under the slogan
"We shall overcome".
Martin Luther King, winner of the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1964, accepted the dangers
of non-violent resistance in his struggle for
racial equality. "The way of non-violence
means a willingness to suffer and sacrifice,"
he said. "It may mean going to jail... It
may even mean physical death. But if phy¬
sical death is the price that a man must pay
to free his children and his white brethren
from a permanent death of the spirit, then
nothing could be more redemptive." Twenty
years after Gandhi, on April 4, 1968, he too
was cut down by an assassin's bullet.
He was deeply inspired by the example of
Gandhi and expressed his indebtedness in
these words: "Before this century, virtually
all revolutions had been based on hope and
hate. The hope was expressed in the rising
expectation of freedom and justice. The hate
was an old expression of bitterness towards
the perpetrators of the old order. It was
the hate that made revolutions bloody and
violent. What was new about Mahatma
Gandhi's movement in India was that he
mounted a revolution on hope and love, hope
and non-violence. This same new emphasis
characterized the civil rights movement in our
country dating from the Montgomery bus
boycott of 1956 to the Selma movement of
1965." (See photos above.)
Martin Luther King saw his struggle as
part of a broader, universal resistance against
injustice. "The problem is not a purely racial
one, with Negroes set against whites," he
said. "In the end it is not a struggle against
people at all, but a tension between justice
and injustice. Non-violent resistance is not
aimed against oppressors but against oppres¬
sion. Under its banner consciences, not
racial groups, are enlisted."
