LANDMARKS IN AN
EXTRAORDINARY LIFE
On the following pages we present, in the form of a picture album, some
of the memorable episodes in the life of Mahatma Gandhi. The accomp¬
anying text is by the French Orientalist, Olivier Lacombe. Professor of
Comparative Philosophy at the' Sorbonne and Director of the Institut de
Civilisation Indienne, in Paris, Olivier Lacombe has written widely on the
culture and philosophy of India, and is the author of "Gandhi, ou la Force
de l'Ame" (Gandhi, or the Power of 'Soul Force') published by Ed. Plön,
Paris, 1964.
l'A*
Gandhi In India, aged 7.. ...aged 17.
1. IN LONDON
REDISCOVERY OF HINDUISM
lOHANDAS Karamchand Gan¬
dhi was born on October 2, 1869, at
Porbandar, a port on the south-west coast
of the Kathiawar peninsula in western
India, and capital of a principality in which
several members of his family, including
his father, had held the office of Prime
Minister.
He died in New Delhi on January 30,
1948, in his 79th year, by the hand of a
Hindu extremist.
Three great periods mark the course of
his life: a period of preparation only remote¬
ly connected with his future mission, set
in India and England, which ended in 1893
when he was 24; a South African period
(1893-1914) when Gandhi forged his
"method" and tentatively practised it In
a marginal area of the Indian diaspora;
and a period of fulfilment (1915-1948) when
he perfected his method in India itself,
applying it on an increasing scale until
its message was carried beyond the front-
tiers of the vast nation he had fathered.
Like so many educated Indians, Gandhi
had first to master and reconcile the dual
cultures of East and West which disputed
possession of his heart and mind. It is
easy to imagine how closely the world
of his early childhood was bounded by
the Hindu tradition. He belonged to a
"caste" family which ranked third in the
tiers of the rigidly graded Hindu society
("Gandhi" means "spice merchant"), though
the family's status was certainly improved
by the political and administrative functions
entrusted to some of its members.
Gandhi was 16 when his father died.
Two years later he left for England, against
the orders of his caste, which excommu-

by Olivier Lacombe
Law student in London, aged 20.
Lawyer in Johannesburg (South Africa), aged 40.
nicated him. While in Britain (1888-1891)
studying to be a barrister, he not only
improved his acquaintance with Western
culture, but also rediscovered the Hindu
faith in which he had been nurtured.
He had never read the "Bhagavad Gita",
the "Song Celestial", which wais later to
become his daily solace. It was revealed
to him in the English translation by Sir
Edwin Arnold, which he read in conjunction
with the Sanskrit original. The same
English poet and writer unfolded to him,
in "The Light of Asia", the spiritual epic
of Buddha.
Gandhi's reading transfigured his quasi-
instinctive fidelity to the creed of his
forebears, but at the same time, he studied
the Bible; the Sermon on the Mount with
its precept that evil should not be resisted
by evil impressed him deeply.
2. FIGHT AGAINST RACISM
IN SOUTH AFRICA
After his return to India in 1891, Gandhi
went to South Africa as representative
of a firm of Indian lawyers, and arrived
in Natal at the end of May 1893. The
humiliation and discrimination to which he
was at once subjected, because of his
nationality and colour, was an experience
that changed the course of his life. He
resolved to champion the rights of his
fellow countrymen in South Africa, victims
of prejudice and Intolerance.
Sensing in Gandhi a peace-loving but
indomitable force, coupled with a lucid,
shrewd and inventive mind, they welcomed
him. Nor were they mistaken, for his
promotion of what he conceived to be the
public good was bold, steadfast and per¬
severing, yet always attuned to the possibi
lities of the moment. He knew that discre¬
tion was the better part of valour.
In 1894, he proposed the formation of
a permanent organization to watch over
the interests of Indians. Created the same
year, it was named the Natal Indian Con¬
gress, after the Indian National Congress.
In 1904, he helped to start a weekly
magazine, "Indian Opinion", at first contri¬
buting funds and writing articles. But later
he took complete charge and poured all
his savings into the venture.
It put a timely weapon in his hand as
the. situation worsened and the campaign
against Injustices Inflicted on the coloured
peoples was intensified.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
7

AN EXTRAORDINARY LIFE
(Continued from page 7)
3. BEGINNINGS
OF ASCETICISM
AND
NON-VIOLENCE
The centre of the conflict shifted to
Johannesburg, and Gandhi's method began
to take shape. A Sanskrit word, "Satya¬
graha" (satya: truth; agraha: firm grasp)
was coined for it.
Clashes with the authorities became more
serious. Between 1906 and 1914, Gandhi
was arrested six times, sentenced to pris¬
on four times and actually kept in jail
for more than a year. But he finally
triumphed. The principal Indian demands
were conceded and confirmed by the
Indians' Relief Act in July, 1914, shortly
before Gandhi left South Africa.
The Gandhi who had worsted the South
African government in a prolonged struggle
Gandhi in 1899, during the
Boer War in South Africa,
seen here (x) with members
of the Indian Ambulance Corps
which he organized and
trained.
Photo PIB. New Delhi

Gandhi, at 45, shortly before
leaving South Africa. For years
he had practised a strict
personal asceticism, and
had forged and successfully
applied his method of
non-violence. Imprisoned
several times in South Africa.
had meanwhile profoundly transformed his
personal and family life, his wife Kasturbai
having joined him in South Africa in 1896,
together with their two young sons and
a nephew. Gandhi's private life was now
interwoven with his public activities, to
which it gave strength and purity, draw¬
ing in return encouragement and inspiration.
His longing for a simple ascetic life and
his urge to share his existence with the
poorest of his fellows led him to forsake
the city and its artificialities for the rural
or semi-rural settlements he had founded
the Phoenix and Tolstoy farms where he
was free to practise his bent and gift for
teaching.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
9

AN EXTRAORDINARY LIFE
(Continued from page 9)
Gandhi and his wife, Kasturbai,
on their return to India in 1915.
4. FIRST CAMPAIGN
EMANCIPATION OF
The First World War broke out when
Gandhi was returning to India via London.
He landed in Bombay on January 9, 1915,
when he was 45. He was already a moder¬
ate, non-violent revolutionary, and destined
to become still more so. He was a man
of uncompromising stands and stern
ideals. His search for the absolute often
seemed to be a search for the impossible,
yet he was always ready to seize any
realistic opportunities. He wa», in his own
words, "a practical idealist".
Moreover, while eschewing strictly poli¬
tical functions of any kind, he frequently
entered the political arena. In his eyes,
religion merged Imperceptibly into ethics,
and ethics into social and political life,
and the key to the human problems he
wished to solve was often to be found in
the realm of state decisions.
After a voyage of reconnaissance across
the length and breadth of India, Gandhi
founded the Satyagraha Ashram at the
gates of Ahmedabad, on May 25, 1915.
Like the settlements he had started in
South Africa, it was to be a place of retreat
where he could teach, plan his campaign,
pray, write and study.
At first the settlement housed about 25
people, men and women of all age«. Some
came from the Phoenix and Tolstoy farms
in South Africa, others from different parts
of India. Gandhi also took in, on an equal
footing, a family of Untouchables, which
caused trouble within the ashram and rais¬
ed a storm outside. But otherwise, how
could India's foreign masters be required
to show respect for human dignity in their
dealings with Indians, if the Indians them-
IN INDIA:
THE UNTOUCHABLES
selves denied it to certain of their own
people?
Gandhi thus found himself in open conflict
with the traditional organization of Hindu
society, the caste system. He approach¬
ed the question as a moral rather than a
social problem.
Gandhi was not basically opposed to
the caste system as such. He was aware
of the services it had rendered in the past
and recognized the value of a social order
based on the respective duties of its mem¬
bers rather than on the clash between
their respective rights. But he never ceas¬
ed to denounce the abuses, aberrations and
harshness that had deformed it. He de¬
manded a radical reform of its principles
and practice.
The contempt shown to the Untouch¬
ables was particularly abhorrent to him. He
found a new name for them: Harijans
(Children of God). He desired to eman¬
cipate and rehabilitate them within the
Hindu society which had wronged them.
He would be satisfied with nothing less.
In 1915, with the world plunged into
war, Gandhi refrained from using Satyagra¬
ha as a weapon against the British Empire.
The first non-violent campaigns he launch¬
ed on Indian soil were directed against the
indigo planters at Champaran in Bihar, for
their abusive treatment of tenant farmers,
and against the owners of the Ahmedabad
spinning mills whose employees were un¬
derpaid and overworked. But Gandhi co¬
operated with the Empire. By his loyalty
and generosity, he hoped to compel the
loyalty and generosity of the British people,
whom he respected, and indeed loved.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 12
10

Gandhi refused to
enter any temple
which denied
admission to
Untouchables.
After years of
struggle and
fasting in support
of their
emancipation,
he saw the ban
lifted In hundreds
of temples.
Photo shows the
temple of Madurai
in the State
of Madras.

r
AN EXTRAORDINARY LIFE
(Continued from page 10)
5. IMPRISONMENT,
FASTING,
STRIKES,
MASS
DEMONSTRATIONS
The years 1918-1919 brought a de¬
cisive reversal of Gandhi's policy: co-opera¬
tion with the Imperial Government in
New Delhi gave place to non-co-operation.
The immediate cause of the break was the
passing of emergency laws that prolonged
certain wartime restrictions. Gandhi and
some of his followers denounced the laws
as unjustified and incompatible with the
dignity of free citizens, especially in time of
peace.
The new leader of the Indian nationalist
movement for without seeking in any way
to be its head, Gandhi was soon recognised
as such kept two aims clearly in mind:
to maintain at all costs the strictly non¬
violent nature of his campaign, despite the
wavering faith of even staunch disciples and
the indiscipline among rank and file; and
never to lose sight of the goal of political
freedom for India, which, as was now
realized, would not readily be granted.
To achieve the first aim, the most deter¬
mined "civil disobedience" refusal to bow
to injustice or to co-operate with its perpe¬
trators did not, in Gandhi's view, justify
the use of violence. The revendication
of legitimate rights through self-sacrifice
and self-purification, acceptance of blows
and imprisonment, and abstention from all
violence to people or property, he affirmed,
alone would bring about true, unblemished
national independence.
Non-violent strikes, mass demonstra¬
tions, fasts of protest took place year after
year until the ultimate goal was attained.
Between 1918 and 1948, Gandhi undertook
at least 15 long fasts: three lasted for 21
days and two he vowed to continue inde¬
finitely until his death from starvation if
his demands were not met There were
times when the situation eased, but even
then Gandhi never relaxed his vigilance.
To the Indian National Congress and the
entire nation, Gandhi had become a re¬
spected leader to whom they gave enthu¬
siastic support. But not everyone under¬
stood the absolute necessity of Satyagraha.
Gandhi had the courage to disown and
even to call a halt, on the brink of vic¬
tory, to the revolutionary élan of his fol¬
lowers, which was marred by serious vio¬
lence, in February, 1922.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 14
Arrested on many occasions,
Gandhi spent more than five
years In prison in India and
South Africa, went on hunger
strikes and led non-violent
mass movements throughout
India. Here, he visits political
prisoners in a jail near Calcutta.
Photo © Snark International

AN EXTRAORDINARY LIFE
(Continued from page 12) 6. GANDHI'S SALT MARCH
Although disappointed in his own sup¬
porters, and harshly treated by the author¬
ities, the Mahatma never lost heart. Two
periodicals, an English-language weekly,
"Young India", and "Navajivan", a Guja-
rati weekly, placed themselves at his dis¬
posal. In articles which he wrote for each
issue, he explained the true significance of
his doctrine and his action: not only to
do away with existing wrongs, but to build
with patience and devotion a truly just so¬
ciety, in which he himself gave the lead by
founding the Village Industries Association
and two new ashrams at Wardha and
Segaon.
Outstanding events not yet mentioned
were the declaration of the "War of Inde
pendence" on March 12, 1930, followed
immediately by the famous "salt march",
an inspired protest against the govern¬
ment salt monopoly, regarded as a symbol
of oppression; Gandhi's part in the Round
Table Conference (London, 1931); his ex¬
tended fasts on behalf of the Untouchables
(1932-33); and his approval of the 1937
provincial elections.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 16
HERITAGE OF NON-VIOLENCE (Continued)
14

The "Salt March" of 1930
was Gandhi's first great
battle in the struggle that
was to lead to Indian
independence. On March 12,
he left the village of
Sabarmati (left) and, for
24 days, trekked on foot
(right) the 240 miles to
the west coast at Dandi,
his followers soon swelling
to many thousands. At
Dandi, he picked up some
sea salt In a symbolic
gesture, encouraging all
Indians to defy the British
salt monopoly laws. This
action recalls the incident
in the American struggle
for Independence, when
the citizens of Boston
in 1773 protested British
taxation without
representation by throwing
whole cargoes of tea from
British ships Into the
harbour. Gandhi was once
asked by Lord Irwin,
Viceroy of India, to have
a cup of tea during a
conference. "Thank you,"
said Gandhi, taking a paper
bag from a fold in his shawl,
"I will put some of this
salt Into my tea to remind
us of the famous Boston
Tea Party."

AN EXTRAORDINARY LIFE
(Continued from page 14)
7. 'QUIT INDIA!'
During the Second World War, India
wished to share in the war effort on a
strictly equal footing with the Dominions.
Gandhi was at first inclined, as in 1914-18,
not to oppose the arming of the country,
but government policy caused him to
change his views. In October 1940, he
launched a campaign of civil, non-violent
resistance to participation in the war. On
July 14, 1942, Congress voted a resolution
calling on the British to quit India.
At the end of the war, negotiations were
resumed between the British authorities
and the Indian nationalists, with Gandhi
playing a decisive, though unofficial part.
On August 15, 1947, India acceded to full
Independence.
But the conflict between Hindus and
Moslems, often stifled but always latent,
flared up again at that moment with tragic
consequences.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 18
In 1942, Gandhi and other Indian
leaders were arrested for having
openly called on the British to quit
India. Gandhi's watchword
remained "non-violence", but
peaceful demonstrations by his
followers were broken up with
tear gas bombs (photo right).
HERITAGE OF NON-VIOLENCE (Continued)
16

AN EXTRAORDINARY LIFE (Continued from page 16)
8. AN ASSASSIN'S BULLET
The Moslem League would not accept
the idea of the powerful Islamic minority
about a quarter of the population being
governed by the Hindu majority.
Sick at heart, Gandhi and his companions
had to agree to the "vivisection" of the
country, and August 15, 1947, marked both
the liberation of India, vainly imagined to
be "indivisible", and its partition into two
separate nations: the Indian Union and
Pakistan.
These hopes and disappointments were
accompanied by a tragic sequence of riots,
violence and brutality. Gandhi, who had
always worked for understanding between
At 77, Gandhi went barefooted from
village to village in the regions ravaged
by conflict between Hindu and
Moslem (below).
The day of Indian independence,
Gandhi was in no mood for
jubilation. He fasted and worked for
peace between the two communities.
the two communities, was tormented by the
setback to his efforts. He would not stand
by while evil stalked the land and, although
aged 77, he set out on foot across the
areas ravaged by misery and hatred to
act as peacemaker, well knowing that his
life was a target for fanaticism.
On January 30, 1948, an extremist Hindu
who could not understand Gandhi's chival¬
rous attitude to the Moslems remaining In
the Indian Union, and regarded him as a
traitor, shot him dead. Thus Gandhi paid to
the cause of non-violence, which he
upheld as a universal ¡deal within the
reach of all, the supreme sacrifice of his
own life.
The division of India into two independent nations
in 1947 began perhaps the greatest migration of
peoples in modern history. Countless mi/lions of
refugees fled from violence, carrying their few
possessions in creaking bullock carts.
I
to
il
I
New Delhi,
January 30, 1948:
on the spot where
Gandhi has been
shot only a few
moments before,
his companion,
and Prime
Minister of India,
Jawaharlal Nehru
breaks the news
of his death to a
hushed crowd.

a
í¿S** í
r.v'»i
Jh*
*^ ». m -** . . _ +& -* ato
I
É
