THE NEW FOOD
REVOLUTION
by Cene Gregory
U
4
JNTIL relatively recently, all
too few practical measures had been
taken to come to grips with the prob¬
lem of producing more food of the
kind that was needed in the places it
was needed most.
Much attention has been given to
throttling, by medicinal or other arti¬
ficial means, the population explosion
ironically enough, due largely in the
first place to the Introduction of
modern medicine in less-developed
countries. But one serious estimate,
by the U.S. scientist and educator
Harrison Brown in "The Challenge of
Man's Future," holds that the earth
could with technology now within
our reach sustain a population of
50 thousand million, which even at
the uncontrolled rate of present popu¬
lation growth would not be attained
for four or five generations.
Since the evidence to date is that
birth control methods simply are not
working, and are not likely to be fully
effective for another generation or two,
more immediate solutions to the
world's food problem must be sought
elsewhere. Highest priority must be
given to the expansion of food pro¬
duction, within each of the lesser-
developed countries.
Food aid, while beneficial as a stop¬
gap measure to relieve famine caused
by drought or flood, tends to attack
the symptoms rather than the causes.
While necessary in times of distress,
even when food aid is maintained for
a few years only, it breeds an
unwholesome attitude of dependence
among the recipients and makes it
very difficult for local agriculture ever
to get properly organized in face of
competition from "free food."
GENE GREGORY has made a close study of
food manufacturing and processing, particu¬
larly in Asia. He is a chemical engineer,
business consultant and journalist and was
formerly editor-in-chief of the "Weekly Tri¬
bune", Geneva, Switzerland, and a member
of the editorial board of "Asia Magazine",
Hong Kong. He spent many years in
South-East Asia where he was a foreign
correspondent for Reuters Agency and held
several editorial posts. He has written widely
on economic and political questions.
Even where shipments of agricul¬
tural goods have been used to
generate local currencies which in
turn become part of the overall funds
available for economic aid pro¬
grammes, those funds have too often
been diverted into the development of
new non-agriculture-related Industries
rather than improving and increasing
food production.
The possession of a steel mill, a
national airline and a polyethelene
plant have been considered as symbols
of progress but were in fact monu¬
ments to the misconceived notion of
planners that somehow these invest¬
ments constituted a short cut to the
solution of underdevelopme'nt prob¬
lems.
Even though as much as 80 per cent
of the population of the less-developed
countries is engaged ¡n agricultural
pursuits, according to a recent review
of the Development Assistance Com¬
mittee of the Organization for Econo¬
mic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), only 12 per cent of the total
aid flow (including food aid) went to
agriculture. As a result of misplaced
emphasis on industrialization, agricul¬
ture was deprived of needed local
investment Inputs at all levels Irri¬
gation, manufacture of fertilizers and
pesticides, research, education, pro¬
cessing industries.
In a sense, the fearful spectre of a
world food crisis was a blessing in
disguise. There came a widespread
recognition of the truth that while
massive emergency food aid could
alleviate much of the immediate
suffering, a change of emphasis ¡n
foreign aid programmes was long
overdue.
But perhaps even more Important,
the urgency of immediate action on
the part of the governments of lesser-
developed countries provoked a
general up-grading of agricultural
priorities for investments as well as a
lifting of some of the Impedimenta
that have prevented private foreign
capital from investing in industries
for the manufacture of badly needed
agricultural inputs and the processing
of farm products for the home and
export markets.
But, as yet, in the lesser-developed
countries, all of them agricultural
countries, there has been almost no
agricultural research or higher agri¬
cultural education. Three exceptions
are examples for all governments to
imitate:
Mexico, which had for years
imported half of the wheat consumed
in the country, after an extensive
wheat research programme begun in
1944 and conducted by the Rockefeller
Foundation, was self-sufficient in this
grain by 1956, and in 1964 exported
a half million tons.
At Los Banos in the Philippines,
research sponsored jointly by the
Rockefeller and Ford Foundations
developed new varieties of rice, the
IR 5 and IR 8, which increase yields
up to 8.5 tons per acre or about
15 times the average yield of tradi¬
tional varieties. As a result, in the
short span of about three years the
Philippines has been transformed from
a rice deficit to a rice surplus country.
American aid agronomists adapted
improved varieties of Guatemalan
corns to Indonesia and Thailand which
did, in fact, produce something of an
agricultural revolution in the latter.
In eight years the crop in Thailand
increased from non-existent production
to an export of $104 million, the fourth
largest corn export ¡n the world.
Extended to other critical food
deficit areas, the results of these
research efforts, largely privately
financed, have produced a veritable
"green revolution" in the world's most
food deficient regions which just two
years ago were threatened by
widespread and seemingly continu¬
ing famine.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6
Stout though badly cracked and
patched, this grain elevator
symbol of the midwestern plains
of North America has a pattern
that might have inspired certain
works of modern abstract art.

Photo © Andreas Felnlnger, New York

6
THE NEW FOOD REVOLUTION (Continued)
In India, the area planted with
new varieties of wheat, rice, millet
and sorghum increased from about
23,000 acres in 1965-66 to nearly
4 million acres one year later. As a
result, India harvested 95.6 million
tons in 1967-68, and expects to achieve
self-sufficiency in 1970-71 (see text
opposite).
Pakistan, which imported large
quantities of Mexican wheat seed,
will harvest a record 5.5 million ton
grain crop this year; and by 1970
should be producing twice as much
food grains as in 1965, enough to meet
the country's requirements.
Particularly noteworthy results have
been obtained by development teams
of the Republic of China in African
countries where they have introduced
their Taiwan Native 1 rice species.
Extensive experiments in the Cam-
eroons, Gabon, Gambia, Malawi, Niger,
Senegal, Chad and Togo by these
teams have more than doubled
production obtained with traditional
rice strains.
As a result of these and other
developments, farming has suddenly
become both respectable and lucrative
in many countries.
In Rome, early last October, Addeke
H. Boerma, Director-General of FAO,
expressed cautious optimism that
"the long lag in food production which
plagued the past decade may be
coming to an end." And in Paris, he
told delegates to a Unesco Interna¬
tional scientific conference on the use
and conservation of the resources of
the biosphere, "I believe that the
agriculture of the developing countries
is now reaching the point of 'take-off'."
(See the "Unesco Courier," January
1969.)
But the coming agricultural revolu¬
tion is not confined to progress in
the developing countries. New but
untried ideas will displace a whole
raft of outdated notions about food
production first in the advanced
industrial countries, but eventually
profoundly affecting the developing
countries.
For the first time in history the
prospect is that there will be enough
food produced to feed, and feed well,
all mankind despite the fact that the
population will grow in the next
31 years as much as it has in the last
1,000,000 years. Predictions for the
remaining three decades of this cent¬
ury, based upon a two-year study
of U.S. agriculture just completed,
include:
Wheat harvests will jump to
300 bushels per acre, more than ten
times present yields.
Corn output will reach 500 bushels
CONTINUED ON PAGE 8


THE NEW FOOD REVOLUTION (Continued)
1,000 calves from a single cow on computerized farms
per acre, against today's average
75 bushels.
A single cow will produce as many
as 1,000 calves in its lifetime, as
compared to the present 10, through
the use of hormones which keep the
entire cycle of ovulation and pregnancy
in cows and other domestic animals
under exact control. Embryos will be
transferred from special breeder ani¬
mals to ordinary "incubator" animals
with substantial increases ¡n prolifi¬
cacy of a herd and a radical improve¬
ment in quality animal production.
Milk production will soar to
30,000 pounds per cow from today's
8,000. Synthetic milk will also be
manufactured from carrot tops and
pea pods.
Today's farm labourers will be
increasingly replaced by "farm
engineers," scientists and technicians
trained in fields ranging from elec¬
tronics to air conditioning.
Farming will become automated
and computerized, with tilling of the
soil, planting and harvesting crops
and regulating the growing process
controlled from a centre equipped
with computers, radar and remote
control devices.
Fields will be covered by huge
plastic domes, or by other means
enabling the constant control of
environment affecting crop growth.
Remote-controlled harvesters will
not only pick but also grade, package,
freeze and deliver food to wholesale
depots.
Space satellites will collect up-to-
the-minute data on soil conditions,
insect damage, crop growth patterns
throughout the world, as well as make
long range weather and production
forecasts.
B
8
UT this is just a beginning.
In the United States alone there are
presently some 30,000 research pro¬
jects under way, and spending for
agricultural research is more than $850
million annually.
While today 7,000,000 Americans
live on farms producing many times
the volume of food 31,000,000 farmers
produced a century ago, by the
year 2,000 a scant 2,000,000 of the
300,000,000 people in the U.S. will be
"farmers." The average U.S. farmer
now produces enough food to feed
40 people, four times the number he
could feed 30 years ago; in the next
30 years, productivity will increase
another four-fold based upon techno¬
logy already known and within reach.
But in agriculture, as in other fields
that are increasingly science and
technology based, half of what is
known today will be obsolete by 1980.
Or, to put it another way, at the present
rate of technological advance, half of
the agricultural technology of 1980
has not yet been discovered.
One of the most immediate effects
of the coming agricultural revolution,
both in the advanced and in the deve¬
loping countries, will be an increase in
capital intensive farming. Post World
War II increases in mechanization in
the advanced countries have already
far surpassed the "tractor stage":
airplanes are increasingly used to
spray test-tube "miracles" over crops
and pasture lands;
computers determine when and how
to breed calves by artificial insemi¬
nation;
devices such as the "autosow,"
which acts as a kind of mechanical
mother for baby pigs, are turning pig
farming into a mass production indus¬
try much like the poultry business;
the "Bacon Bin," a recently devised
total confinement production facility
complete with automatic feeding and
manure disposal systemscan raise
and fatten 1,000 hogs at once, from
birth to maturity, in record time.
Major International food companies
continue to expand their large-scale
farming activities, primarily in develop¬
ing countries. But since foreign-
owned "plantations" smack of "colon¬
ialism," and for a host of other
impedimenta common to the newly
independent countries, there have been
limited opportunities for private busi¬
ness to contribute directly to the devel¬
opment of badly needed food industries
through this kind of direct invest¬
ment.
With the change of attitudes in the
developing countries toward the deve¬
lopment of the agricultural sector, the
day may not be far off when direct
foreign investments in agricultural
enterprises may again be welcomed,
but for the moment the opportunities
for Investment in the developing
countries lie in other equally interest¬
ing sectors vital to increasing food
production.
Someone must supply the new varie¬
ties of wheat, rice, corn, millet and
sorghum in massive and continuing
quantities at relatively low prices. And
the new "miracle" seed varieties are
not enough by themselves to Insure
the fruition of a green revolution in
the developing countries. Suitable
quantities of fertilizers, insecticides,
water and farm machinery are necess¬
ary. Credit, marketing, and other ser¬
vices of modern agricultural systems
must be made available.
The way the new seed varieties
were introduced into the Philippines,
India and Pakistan had as much to do
with their success as does the quality
of the seeds themselves. Rice "kits"
consisting of the seed, fertilizer, insect¬
icides needed to grow a half-acre of
one of the seed varieties were sold
or distributed together. This novel
distribution concept presents a special
challenge to abilities of international
corporate enterprises to develop the
required joint marketing facilities.
IHE governments of devel¬
oping nations, local private business
and the farmers cannot sustain this
effort without outside help. They lack
the means to do the adaptive research,
the facilities needed to train farmers in
modern agricultural techniques, the
public finances for large-scale irriga¬
tion and rural electrification projects,
or for adequate storage and modern
transport facilities. They often lack
the required technology, capital and
managerial personnel necessary to
build new plants to produce the requir¬
ed seed, fertilizer, insecticide and other
essential inputs.
To meet these needs, governments of
OECD countries have appreciably
Increased their aid to agricultural pro¬
grammes of developing countries ¡n
recent years. The World Bank an¬
nounced in October 1968 that it would
quadruple loans to speed the develop¬
ment of world agriculture. The Inter-
American Development Bank now com¬
mits about 27 per cent of its funds for
agricultural development purposes, and
the Asian Development Bank formed
just two years ago is presently engag¬
ed in a country-by-country survey to
priority projects to be con¬
sidered for assistance by its projected
Agricultural Development Fund.
But producing food ¡s business.
And many of the resources needed
by developing countries to get the
nascent agricultural revolution off the
ground are the almost exclusive pos¬
sessions of private enterprise in west¬
ern industrial countries.
To mobilize the resources of private

FLYING
FARMER
In today's
large-scale farming
operations an
airplane is often
the best tool for
spreading
pesticides.
Photo © Life
industry for food production ¡n deve¬
loping countries, the FAO has created
the FAO/lndustry Co-operative Pro¬
gramme, a joint effort by the FAO and
International business to resolve prob¬
lems involved in the establishment
of industries in the developing coun¬
tries to manufacture fertilizers, pesti¬
cides and farm implements or to
process food and other agricultural
products. At Its March 1968 meeting,
representatives of 37 major interna¬
tional firms met at FAO headquarters
in Rome to work out a widely accept
able code of conduct for the protection
of private foreign investors in develop¬
ing countries.
The most tangible sign of the effec¬
tiveness of this programme has been
in India's crucial fertilizer industry.
Until the drought of 1965-66, adminis¬
trative and political problems had pre¬
vented an effective Involvement of in¬
ternational private business in major
new ventures ¡n India. After the crea¬
tion of the programme, the FAO active¬
ly assisted the search for ways to
eliminate obstacles to new invest
ments in critical food or food-related
industries.
As the urgency of increased agri¬
cultural production grew, the climate
for investment in India in these indus¬
tries began to change for the better.
With the 50 per cent jump ¡n fertilizer
consumption in 1967 having contribut¬
ed substantially to the rapid recovery
from near-famine conditions, top prior¬
ity has been given to the development
of 15 major fertilizer factories.
But fertilizer production is just one
field of immediate opportunity for inter-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
9

THE NEW FOOD REVOLUTION (Continued)
High-protein foods: Pride and Prejudice
national business. Almost all develop¬
ing countries have undertaken more
or less extensive agricultural training
programmes, which hold the key to the
introduction of new farming techniques
including the mechanization of farm
production. The South American Farm
Mechanization Training Centre at Buga,
Colombia, illustrates how such pro¬
grammes can be effectively developed
through co-operation among industry,
the FAO and governments.
With FAO's guidance through the
Freedom from Hunger Campaign, the
Colombian National Training Service
and a British farm machinery manufac¬
turer set up the centre to train tech¬
nicians from Colombia and other Latin
American countries as instructors in
farm machinery operation and repair
and as government extension officers.
With wide experience ¡n such train¬
ing programmes in the United King¬
dom, France, the Federal Republic of
Germany and each of the Scandina¬
vian countries, the British firm was
in a position to provide the necessary
instructional staff, as well as a broad
range of tractors, equipment for work¬
shops and teaching aid. The com¬
pany's donation to this project, which
will eventually amount to approximately
$300,000, represents a far-sighted
investment in South American agricul¬
ture development.
A.
10
iNOTHER field of potential
industry-government co-operation in¬
volves one of the most widely discuss¬
ed developments in the world food in¬
dustry, a process developed by a
British petroleum company at its French
refinery for producing protein from
crude oil. The final product, a yellow¬
ish, odourless powder, is comparable
to fishmeal in composition. But, like
fishmeal, it is not yet suitable for direct
human consumption. It is, however,
suitable for feeding to animals and
poultry, which in turn convert it to the
traditional and still most acceptable
food forms meat, milk and eggs. (See
article page 21).
While some experts say that it will
be at least ten years before we will
see human food derived directly from
protein produced from petroleum or
from natural gas, several oil and chem¬
ical companies consider the potential
demand for the product great enough
to begin their own development pro¬
grammes. India has already started
producing proteins from petroleum
hydrocarbons with pilot plants under
the direction of the Indian Institute
of Petroleum at Dehradun and the
Regional Research Laboratory at
Jorhat.
A number of high protein concen¬
trates have also been developed from
various vegetable and fish sources.
Dr. Norman W. Pirie, head of the bio¬
chemistry department at Rothamsted
Experimental Station in England, has
developed one of the most recent a
process for extracting protein from
green leaves, such as pea cannery
waste.
A Swedish company is now produc¬
ing a fish protein concentrate which,
mixed with water and cocoa powder,
has been used recently in Nigeria and
B i afra.
At the American University of Beirut,
a new supplementary called Aubina
has been developed from wheat, Egyp¬
tian chick-pea, bone-ash and skim
milk, and tests have shown that child¬
ren find it good to eat.
Both soya and cotton-seed have long
been sources of protein concentrate.
But while the day may not be far off
when meat, bread and even bacon
made from these materials will be part
of man's normal diet, so far protein-
rich foods have received an extremely
cool reception.
While there is a certain compelling
logic in the argument that protein
concentrates are "good for you,"
there still remains the problem of how
the stuff tastes. And experience shows
that unless people are really at the
starvation level, they are particular
about the taste of the food they eat.
This was the sum and substance of
a number of scientific papers present¬
ed to the combined FAO/WHO/
UNICEF Protein Advisory Board last
September. According to Dr. O. Bai¬
larín, an executive of the Brazilian sub¬
sidiary of a Swiss food company, all
efforts by private enterprise in South
America to sell and promote high-pro¬
tein produce have met with disappoint¬
ing results, and in some cases failed
completely. In Peru, production of a
high-protein fish flour produced from
anchoveta was discontinued after sales
sank to a disastrous low. Similar diffi¬
culties have been met with in Africa.
Specialists give these reasons for
consumer resistance to something
that is obviously "good for them":
Traditions regarding food are
stronger in developing countries than
in developed ones. New foods, deliver¬
ed in a new form or a new package,
are looked upon with suspicion.
Most people ignore the meaning of
the word "protein," which has no
commercial appeal.
People shun high-protein products
for social reasons, regarding them as
"the food of the poor."
IN Ethiopia, some of these
obstacles were overcome by the nutri¬
tionists, who called their product Faffa
(meaning "grow big and strong" in the
local language). Faffa was a success.
But in many other countries, where
illiteracy ranges up to 85 per cent, and
people cannot even read the name of
the product, promotion campaigns have
to be carried out through films, radio
and television.
Nevertheless, specialists such as
Dr Husain Ali Bhimjee Parpia, Director
of the Central Food Technological Re¬
search Institute in Mysore, India, are
firmly convinced that protein malnutri¬
tion can be overcome in much of the
developing world if the available
resources of oil-seed protein are utiliz¬
ed more efficiently. As soon as
acceptable products can be perfected
and attractively presented through
regular commercial channels, vegetable
protein sources will certainly make a
major contribution to solving present
nutritional problems.
Weaning foods, biscuits, ice cream,
beverages and candies are the prep¬
arations which are now under consid¬
eration by major international food pro¬
cessors. Three American companies
are now apparently convinced they are
on the brink of a major breakthrough
in this field. One is planning to manu¬
facture and sell throughout Asia a
highly popular Hong Kong soybean
drink with a satisfactory amino acid
content. A major soft drinks bottling
firm has developed a chocolate-flav¬
oured, soybean-based high-protein
beverage, fortified with vitamins; this
potent concoction has already been
launched on the Brazilian market. In
El Salvador, a third company has just
completed consumer testing on a new
high-protein soft drink made from corn
meal, cottonseed and nut meal.
But if the development of synthetic
nutrients provides the basis for an
entire new sector of the food industry,
prospects for expansion in the exploita¬
tion of the world's marine resources is
undoubtedly more immediate. The sea
is, for the foreseeable future, an al¬
most limitless source of high-protein
content food. Annual production of
plants within the oceans, according to
CONTINUED ON PAGE 12

ALGAE,
THREE TIMES
AS NOURISHING
AS STEAK
Photo © Max-Yves Brandily
Several years ago, certain communities in
the Republic of Chad were found to be
eating a blue alga called Spirulina (above
left), which grows in ponds rich in mineral
salts, and highly alkaline. After it is
harvested, women form it into pancakes
to dry in the sun (above), before taking
it to market. The ancient Aztecs consum¬
ed a similar alga which grew in Mexico's
lakes. Spirulina contains between 60 and
68 per cent protein, that is, six times as
much as in wheat and three times as much
as in beef. French and Mexican research
laboratories, excited by its large-scale
nutritional possibilities, are experimenting
with its artificial cultivation. The culture is
produced by photosynthesis in vats of luke¬
warm salt water (left), which are fed with
carbonic gas. Results show that the annual
yield of Spirulina could be 40-45 tons per
hectare with a 25 ton protein content, as
compared to only 30-40 kilogrammes of
beef protein per hectare.
11
Photos Institut Français du Petrote

Photo © Contl-Pres3 - Heinz Fremke, Hamburg
BOTTLE-FED CARP. Carp queue up for their baby bottle of fish meal, crushed soya
bean and vitamins. On this diet provided at the Max Planck Horticultural Institute
in Hamburg, Germany (Fed. Rep.) the fish grow to 14 pounds (instead of 3) in three
years. Rose flower, opposite, is extraordinary pattern, formed by sea slug
eggs on sea floor.
THE NEW FOOD REVOLUTION (Continued)
12
the FAO's Fish Stock Evaluation Branch
Chief, John Allan Gulland, is approxi¬
mately 130 thousand million tons
hardly any of which is used for human
consumption. And of the 23 thousand
million tons of fish and shellfish the
ocean grows per year, the present
world-wide catch is about 60 million
tons.
While much of the plant life the
phytoplankton is generally microscop¬
ic and neither easy to harvest nor
attractive to use, there are vast possib¬
ilities for expanding the fishing indus¬
try. At present the world catch of
fish, rising annually by from 6 to 8 per
cent is growing faster than the world's
population. World fisheries production
increased from 19 million metric tons
in 1948 to 60 million tons in 1967, or
at a rate much faster than food produc¬
tion from the land.
But present fishing methods are still
traditional and primitive. Production
might well be doubled in the next ten
years through the use of new electronic
equipment which detects the presence
of schools of fish, speeds the move¬
ment of nets, and even lures fish into
the nets.
While most of the world's fishing
grounds are being quite intensively
worked, the Indian Ocean one of
the world's least known oceans may
well be one of the richest and most
underdeveloped. Recent estimates
submitted to the FAO's Indian Ocean
Fishery Commission indicate that the
yearly catch of fish in the Indian Ocean
could be increased about ten times,
from its present level of 2 million to
20 million metric tons annually with¬
out damaging the stocks. In the more
immediate future, current production
could be raised to 10 million tons a
year, putting the ocean's fisheries on
a par with those of the North Atlantic,
which yield approximately 11 million
tons a year.
Still, if fishing remains confined to
the types of fish now exploited, experts
estimate that the world catch would
probably approach Its physical limit
within the useful working life of fish¬
ing vessels now being built. Alter¬
native sources of natural production
include both fish and other animals
more or less unfamiliar to most fish
consumers.
For instance, squid of various types
appear to be abundant in many parts
of the world, but exploiting the very
large quantities of this creature now
eaten readily only in Japan and Med¬
iterranean countries depends as
much on changing the tastes of the
consumer as on being able to catch
the animals economically.
Several developments over the past
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32

THE NEW FOOD REVOLUTION (Continued from page 12)
decade in the conversion of fish into
seafoods for indirect or direct human
consumption have been little short of
spectacular. Large quantities of fish
are now converted into meal, which is
in turn indirectly consumed in the
convenient protein form of meat, eggs
and chicken.
Fish protein concentrate (FPC), a
high protein powder made from other¬
wise inedible fish, is also highly
suitable for direct consumption by
people. FPC is dry, can be stored
indefinitely and transported convenient¬
ly without wastage. Both tasteless and
odourless it is suitable as an additive
to other foods such as breakfast
cereals. Added to animal foods, it
will lower the production cost of
meats, poultry and eggs by shortening
the growing period and improving their
quality.
I
32
«VEN more important inves¬
tigations are currently being made in
the U.S.S.R. and Japan into the possibi¬
lities of exploiting the vast quantities
of Antarctic krill, Euhausia superba.
This small shrimp, about five centi¬
metres long, is the main food of the
balloon whale. Rough calculations,
based partly on estimates of the
quantities that must have been eaten
by whales before whaling drastically
reduced their number, suggest that the
annual yield of krill could be at least
50 million tons or about the equi¬
valent of the entire world fish catch at
present.
Soviet experiments show that catch¬
ing the krill in quantities may be quite
easy and that an acceptable form of
meal for animal feeding can be produc¬
ed. A more interesting prospect is
that, if the technical problems of separ¬
ating the meat from the shell can be
resolved, krill may be used for direct
human consumption. Properly present¬
ed, in the form of imitation lobster
tails, for example, it would appeal to
the rapidly growing number of con¬
sumers of the much similar prawns,
shrimps and other crustaceans.
Much has been made these days of
advancing fishing from the primitive
stage of hunting to the stage of agri¬
culture. All the many forms of farming
pastoral, ranching, intensified gar¬
dening and factory farming have their
marine equivalents. Oysters, mussels
and shrimp have long been raised
in shoreline ocean beds and on ropes
suspended from special rafts, just as
the Japanese systematically have for
centuries raised and harvested large
quantities of nori (a highly nutritious
edible seaweed) in their bays and
inlets. And recently in Britain there
has been an increasing interest in
intensive marine farming of battery
plaice and sole.
The importance of sea farming is
primarily that fish can be raised with
relatively cheap food. Unlike chicken,
which can have no more than about
5 per cent of fish meal without tast¬
ing of fish, the diet of plaice or sole
can presumably contain much more
fish meal or other products includ¬
ing perhaps meal from krill.
Last autumn, a subsidiary of an
Anglo-Dutch food-detergents manufac¬
turer, put the first crop from its fish
farm at Loch Ailort in the western
Scottish Highlands on the U.K. market.
In its initial stage of fish-raising, the
firm is now concentrating on raising
rainbow trout but with a difference.
Trout farming in fresh water is a well-
established industry in many countries.
But Loch Ailort trout are raised in sea
water and the largest a little over
two years old tip the scales at 5.5 lbs.
each. Not only do the salt water trout
get bigger faster, but due to the careful
regulation of their diet, the trout have
delicate pink flesh resembling salmon.
Understandably, these pioneer ef¬
forts in fish farming have been concen¬
trated on the highest priced varieties,
but with a fish farm of eight square
miles able to produce more fish than
are presently caught in the entire North
Sea, the business could soon take on
massive proportions including a wide
variety of popularly priced seafoods.
This emergent aquicultural revolution
has its parallel in British agriculture,
and Britain's "convenience" food
industry has played a major role in
both. The experimental and develop¬
mental fish farming was a logical out¬
growth of the heavy investment in the
British frozen foods industry.
To meet the tight standard specifi¬
cations, the introduction of new varie¬
tal strains and improved growing tech¬
niques have also produced substantial
yield increases in all crops grown
under contract for the convenience
food industry. Pea yields, for exam¬
ple, have risen by more than 40 per
cent while other crops such as spin¬
ach and broad beans have increased
even more.
Forward planning of the industry,
with its ability to forecast sales and
plan production tonnages, has brought
a measure of stability to vegetable
growing never before known. Like¬
wise, as a result of the development
of convenience foods, average output
of poultry in Britain more than doubled
during the past ten years.
But a comparison of per capita
British consumption of frozen foods in
1967 (11.4 lbs.) with consumption in
the U.S. (68.0 lbs.) indicates that the
convenience food revolution in the
U.K. has just really got underway. And
the same conclusions can be drawn
for Sweden (22.7 lbs.), Switzerland
(15.4 lbs.), and Denmark (11.4 lbs.).
In all other European countries and
the lesser-developed countries ¡t has
hardly begun. What is true for frozen
foods, largely holds for the entire
range of convenience foods and the
catering industry.
Consider further that the U.S. is
on the threshold of still another stage
in the revolutionary development of
the convenience food industry. What
are considered convenience foods now
will be dwarfed by what will be accept¬
ed as convenience foods only a decade
from now.
In spite of the critical dimensions of
the world food situation at present,
food production is already the world's
greatest success story. Most develop¬
ed countries have solved their basic
problems with the possible exception
of the problem of mounting surpluses.
IHIS great achievement of
the past two decades can be attributed
to reliance, not on grandiose theories,
but on treating food production as a
business from the farm, to the pro¬
cessing stage and distribution all
requiring respected skills and capital
inputs which are essential to ultimate
success.
FAO Director-General Addeke H.
Boerma recently said that he saw no
intrinsic reason why yields in most
developing countries should not grow
at the same rate as those in the
advanced and largely temperate areas.
Nature has been "reasonably impar¬
tial" in distributing her riches, both
natural and human. We have the
knowledge of technology, and, hope¬
fully, the understanding of human na¬
ture necessary to assure that the world
will in the future be well fed. Through
the close co-operation of governments
and private business, of all nations,
the last three decades of the twentieth
century can go down in history as
the age of the revolution that achieved
this monumental feat.
