NEW LIGHT
ON THE
EMERGENCE OF CIVILIZATION
IN THE NEAR EAST
Excavations over several years in
the Iranian province of Khuzestan,
bordering on Iraq, have brought to
light the remains of Chogha Mish,
a city more than 5.000 years old.
On this site archaeologists have
found hundreds of clay seal
impressions showing innumerable
animals and scenes from daily life.
This one depicts men leading
double-headed ibexes.
Photo « P.P. Delougaz and H.J. Kantor

Revelations of the 5,000 year old
city of Chogha Mish, Iran
by Helene J. Kantor
and Pinhas P. Delougaz
D,lURING the course of the
current century our historical horizons
have widened immensely. No longer
are the Classical and the Biblical
worlds the primary centres of human¬
istic quest. For all their superb
achievements both have been recog¬
nized as relatively late phases in a
long cultural development in the Near
East, where modern Near Eastern and
Western civilizations have their roots.
Of cardinal importance for the un¬
derstanding of this development are
the earliest manifestations of high
civilization such as the appearance of
complex political states, elaborate
representational art, and above all, of
writing. All the available evidence in¬
dicates that writing was first invented
around the middle of the fourth mil¬
lennium' B.C. in southern Mesopo¬
tamia. Consequently, the period in
Mesopotamian history during which
this and the other fundamental traits
of high civilization first appear has
been named the Protoliterate period.
Archaeological remains dating to
this period have been excavated at a
few sites in southern Iraq, but there
they often occur deep below the sur¬
face and are hard to reach. To fur¬
ther our understanding of this crucial
phase in human development and of
how it came into being it is important
to extend our information beyond the
few individual sites in Mesopotamia.
Among the areas outside Mesopotamia
proper where solutions to numerous
problems connected with the rise of
civilization may be forthcoming the
most promising is Khuzestan, the pro¬
vince of Iran adjacent to southern
Iraq.
In Khuzestan the large mound of
Chogha Mish, silhouetted against the
Zagros Mountains rimming the north¬
ern edge of the Susiana plain bet¬
ween the Ab-i-Dez and Karun rivers,
had many shards of the Protoliterate
HELENE J. KANTOR is professor of
archaeology at the Oriental Institute, Uni¬
versity of Chicago.
PINHAS P. DELOUGAZ is professor of
archaeology, Department of Near Eastern
Languages, University of California, Los
Angeles. He is director of the Joint Iran¬
ian Expedition which is excavating the
site of Chogha Mish, Iran. Professors
Kantor and Delougaz have ¡ust returned
to Chogha Mish for their fourth season of
excavations.
The ancient skill of butter-making has solved one of the mysteries
of the pictographic writing invented in Mesopotamia some 6,000 years
ago. Until the unearthing of the clay seal design (above) showing
a woman churning butter, no explanation could be given for the
Sumerian pictographic sign GA (left) which means milk. It is now clear
that it showed the shape of the double-necked butter churn. Below,
drawing of complete seal design shows women at domestic chores.
period on the surface when first exam¬
ined. This fact, in addition to its
strategic location and size, decided
us to investigate it in the autumn of
1961. Three seasons of excavations
(1961-1966) under the auspices of the
Oriental Institute of the University of
Chicago have proven Chogha Mish to
have been indeed a city of the Proto¬
literate period, dating to about the
34th century B.C.
Old as that city was, it was far
from being the beginning of the story
of settlement at Chogha Mish. For
many centuries, even millennia, peo¬
ple had inhabited the very same spot.
Early cultures came and went, each
one leaving its own mark in distinctive
forms of attractive pottery
The earliest stage, one not known
in the area before we discovered it at
Chogha Mish, dated to around the
sixth millennium B.C. It is character¬
ized by a highly burnished pottery
frequently painted with designs sur¬
prisingly elaborate for that remote age.
The pottery of subsequent phases
is decorated with characteristically
closely spaced geometric patterns,
providing the basis for development in
later prehistoric stages when the
repertory is considerably enlarged,
notably with representational designs.
The latest prehistoric stage is well
documented by many examples of pot¬
tery types known from the discoveries
made at Susa many years ago.
During several of the prehistoric
phases the settlement at Chogha Mish
was remarkably large, spreading over
some forty acres. The population
practised agriculture, as indicated by
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

Drawing above made from a design on a cylinder, provides the earliest
evidence of music as an organized art form orchestra entertaining at
a banquet Illustration above right, sketched from a clay ball, shows
a ruler in a boat holding a rope binding two prisoners.
EMERGENCE OF CIVILIZATION (Continued)
Earliest evidence of a musical orchestra unearthed thus far
24
such tools as sickle flints, hoes, and
grinding stones. The finds, especially
the pottery of certain phases, show
similarities to those made in southern
Mesopotamia. However, the people
at Chogha Mish, though not isolated,
possessed their own indigenous cul¬
ture, typically Iranian and linked with
that of south-eastern Iran (plains of
Persepolis and Pasargadae).
Quite different from the earlier cul¬
tures is the Protoliterate civilization
brought by the people who settled on
top of the accumulated ruins of the
prehistoric towns. This civilization is
identical with that of contemporary
lower Mesopotamia. Chogha Mish
thus provides firm evidence that the
Susiana plain was an integral part of
the Protoliterate civilization, not merely
a recipient of some of its cultural
traits.
The work of the three seasons
brought to light various quarters of
the extensive city, from foundations on
the high "acropolis" to the street
drains and walls of the private house
areas on the lower part of the mound.
Although only a small part of the site
could be excavated so far, we have
already gained some insight into the
busy life once led by its citizens.
Masses of pottery of many different
sizes and types, from tiny cosmetic
vessels to immovable pithoi (large stor¬
age jars), reflect the preoccupations
of the people and the varied func¬
tions of different quarters of the city.
Glimpses of religious life are provided
by some ritual objects. For instance,
a pottery vase bears at each
of its twinned spouts representations
in relief of a large snake biting the
throat of a goat (opposite, top of
page), a motive suggesting a conflict
between chthonic (underworld) forces
and the domestic flocks so import¬
ant for human subsistence. Another
ritual vase Is incised all around with
geometric designs and represent¬
ations of paired lions, entwined
snakes, and a man. carrying a large
fish.
Among the numerous and diversi¬
fied finds of the Protoliterate period
perhaps the most significant class, the
one contributing more than any other
to the better understanding of the
Protoliterate period, is that of the
ancient clay cylinder seal impressions,
made by rolling cylinder seals over
soft clay.
These impressions vary from nearly
complete ones on large, conical seal-
ings or on hollow balls to minute frag¬
ments recovered by sifting the exca¬
vation debris. Others are on flattish
"tags", presumably attached by a
cord to packages or bales, and on
tablets with archaic numerals. These
objects are an invaluable source of
information on the economic life of the
time, while their representations con¬
tribute greatly to our knowledge of
Protoliterate art and many other
aspects of the civilization.
T.HE tasks of the preserv¬
ation of these fragments, their attrib¬
ution to individual seals, and the
reconstruction and drawing of the
original designs are among the most
delicate and difficult tasks of our
expedition for they require not only
considerable skill but also a thorough
knowledge of ancient Mesopotamian
art.
The subjects represented on the
hundreds of seal impressions dis¬
covered at Chogha Mish are greatly
varied. They contain animals, hu¬
mans, and monsters engaged in
various activities. Even the simplest
of these designs showing no more than
animals and plants frequently display
the consummate artistic achievement
of Protoliterate glyptic art. Essential
characteristics of animals are render¬
ed with subtle modeling.
Although generally based on visual
reality, the imagination of the artists
was not bound by it. Such unreal
creatures as a double-headed ibex
(photo p. 22) or a lion squatting in
human posture freely mingle with the
world of reality.
Realistically depicted is a very
wide gamut of activities. For exam¬
ple, cattle are guided by men; vessels
of various shapes appear as filling
motives and can be considered those
used by herdsmen and dairymen.
Two tag impressions made by the
same seal show two women. One ¡s
spinning, while the other is rocking a
double-necked churn. The churn pro¬
vides a new link between representa¬
tional art and primitive writing.
The churn's shape is similar to the
pictographic sign GA known to mean
"milk" in Sumerian though the con¬
nexion of that sign with milk remained
incomprehensible until our discovery
of the churning scene (photo p. 23).
Important as these examples of glyp¬
tic are from the point of view of artis¬
tic quality or as documents of contem¬
porary life, they are far surpassed by
others which may justly be considered
among the outstanding earliest docu¬
ments of human achievements of uni¬
versal import.
One example provides the earliest
evidence of music as an organized art
form a musical ensemble which may
be considered an ancestor of the
complex orchestras of later ages
(above left). On several impressions
a large upright harp is clearly recog¬
nizable, with a kneeling musician
behind it.
The entire design of this seal could
be reconstructed from the separate

fragments. Besides the harp and the
harpist, one sees a second person
with his palms outstretched above a
semicircular object; he is beating a
drum. A third musician holds two
horn-shaped objects, which we were
first inclined to interpret as clappers.
However, on one fragment it is quite
clear that the end of one of these
objects reaches to the musician's
mouth and consequently there Is little
doubt that he Is playing a wind in¬
strument, presumably a horn, while
holding another, possibly of a different
pitch.
A fourth person with his hand
against his cheek is in a well-known
attitude of a singer, an attitude which
was commonly shown in much later
Egyptian art and is still practised today
in the Near East. In short, we have
here a representation of an "orches¬
tra" with string, percussion, and wind
instruments, accompanied by or ac¬
companying a singer.
The "orchestra" is only part of the
total scene. The musicians, save for
the drummer, face a man on the right
who is comfortably seated on a
cushion'with an attendant offering him
drink, while food and drink are placed
also on a table in front of him. The
scene represents a banquet complete
with music. Such banquets undoubt¬
edly had religious connotations and
this representation is, moreover, a Pro¬
toliterate antecedent of a well-known
theme of later Mesopotamian art,
which occurs, for example, in glyptic
and relief in the Early Dynastic period
(early third millennium B.C.).
A major class of glyptic at Chogha
Mish has military activities as its sub¬
ject matter. Sealings showing con¬
flict on the battlefield have parallels
from other sites. One impression is
noteworthy for a large figure of an
archer with his equipment rendered in
detail. So far unparalleled at other
Terracotta vessel with twin spouts, discovered at Chogha Mish,
is decorated with a large snake biting a goat by the throat.
The meaning of the decoration is not certain, but it has been
associated with ancient religious rituals.
sites is a scene which shows a group
of men marching in close formation,
suggesting a well-trained and disci¬
plined army unit. Another design,
unfortunately incomplete, seems to
represent a large number of bows,
possibly the contents of an armoury.
A unique representation, which
occurred on a clay ball, depicts a per¬
sonnage well-known on Protoliterate
monuments and variously referred to
as ruler, king, or priest. Here he
appears in a hitherto unknown situa¬
tion; he is seated in a boat, returning
triumphantly from a military expedition.
This is made explicit by his weapon, a
mace, in one hand and the rope with
which two prisoners are tied in front
of him in the other (opposite, top
right).
This ruler is accompanied by a num
ber of attendants, one of whom, at
the stern of the boat, holds an emblem
or standard in the form of a crescent.
The ruler's seat is not an ordinary
stool or throne, but a bull. This and
the standard in the form of a heaven¬
ly body lend religious overtones to the
triumphant return.
Another sealing belonging to the
category of military activities is of
major historical importance. Its de¬
sign has been reconstructed from
several impressions on one clay ball.
It depicts the climax of the siege of
a fortified city with towers at various
levels (drawing below left). On some
of the towers persons, probably
women, lean forward with their hands
raised above their heads in the
universal gesture of despair and
CONTINUED ON PAGE 28
Designs on cylinder seals often show battle scenes. Drawing below
reconstructing details of several impressions on a clay ball, depicts the
siege of a fortified city. The defeated inhabitants, hands raised, plead
for mercy. Right, seal impression showing part of a battlefield.
.-' !	,"
1
11
1
i . . r\
Basas»^m\IIIIMiH
Photos © P.P. Delougaz and H.J. Kant
»
\ir:\ 1	-I
¡
i *

GOATS
Goats figure largely in the pottery designs
used by the artists of ancient Iran. Vase
(right) decorated with painted ibexes (wild
goats) was unearthed from the site of the
city of Chogha Mish, dating from 3 400 B.C.,
in south-western Iran. As seen on this
vessel and in drawings below, from other
parts of Iran, artists often depicted goats
in stylized forms.
Photo © P.P. Delougaz and H.J. Kantor

IT^ikZD ^ñ
%QGT
4*^ tl* Wfffr
"fV^ ^f
ff° ® e*
* a
MAN & BEAST
on the ancient
pottery of Iran
A,INCIENT Persian pottery displays a whole pantheon of
animal and human figures. On these pages we present a few of these
motifs, in various forms and designs, unearthed from the sites of ancient
cities in the western part of present-day Iran. They come from Bakun
(south), Susa and Chogha Mish (south-west), Musyan and Giyan
(west), Siyalk (centre), and Hissar (north). "Pottery, and especially
painted pottery, constitutes the principal artistic activity of the village
communities of ancient Iran," writes Professor Louis Vanden Berghe,
of the University of Ghent (Belgium), in a special issue devoted to
the archaeology of Iran in the international quarterly "Archaeologia
Viva" (Vol I, No I, 1968). "No other civilization has produced so many
local styles and schools, with such a wealth of decorative motifs."
The Golden Age of Iranian pottery (4500 - 3000 B.C.) is distinguished
by its expressive animal forms, abstract shapes and lines and finely
balanced designs. The ancient artists painted, impressed or engraved
into their vessels animal forms of every kind. Most often shown are
the untamed creatures of nature, ibex and wild sheep, lions, panthers
and leopards. Bulls and horses appear on many objects. These animals,
wild and domestic, were probably considered symbols and adjuncts
of gods. Originally, vessels were moulded by hand, but a decisive
step forward was made with the invention of the potter's wheel, now
known to have been used in Iran before 3500 B.C. After being burnished
and decorated, pottery was fired in the open air or in a brick kiln, in
which temperatures could reach as high as 1,000 degrees Centigrade.
Drawings, taken from "Archaeologia Viva', were ori¬
ginally published in works by Prof. Louis Vanden
Berghe (Belgium), Prof. Donald E. McCown (U.S.A.),
and Prof. Roman Ghlrshman (France). All documents
copyright ©.
^>

***** I
27

28
EMERGENCE OF CIVILIZATION
(Continued from page 25)
surrender. In front of the city two
large figures, the conquerors, appear
to be dispatching the vanquished.
Here, amazingly, is the earliest artis¬
tic expression of that climactic and
poignant moment in warfare, the mo¬
ment of victory ana1 subjugation at the
end of a. siege which was to become
a central motive for pictorial as well
as literary art in later ages. One may
recall the siege scenes of Egyptian
temple walls of the fourteenth and
thirteenth centuries B.C. and those of
Assyrian palaces of the eighth and
seventh centuries B.C., as well as the
passage of the "Iliad" where the Tro¬
jan women bewail the approaching fall
of their city as they watch from the
walls the body of Hector dragged be¬
hind the chariot of Achilles.
While the orchestra and banquet
scene enlarges our horizons with
regard to the cultural achievements
of the Protoliterate period, apparently
within a religious setting, our newly
discovered representations of military
exploits provide new insight into the
political power structure of the Proto¬
literate period.
The complexity and variety of the
military scenes place them in a differ¬
ent order than mere spontaneous
local conflicts. Expeditions by water
and sieges are by nature planned and
organized military undertakings im¬
plying centralized leadership. More¬
over, the siege scene directly attests
not only to a more complicated aspect
of warfare than a conflict on an open
battlefield, but also to the existence of
fortified cities, centres of military
power.
The siege scene leads us to a signi¬
ficant problem of the Protoliterate
period, namely the relative levels of
attainment within and without the orbit
of Protoliterate civilization. Since na¬
turally the siege would have been
engraved by the winning party, one of
two assumptions follows: either there
were already within the same cultural
area rival city states early in the Pro¬
toliterate period or else the popula¬
tions outside the Protoliterate orbit
were in their own way sufficiently
advanced to build fortified towns
which the carriers of the Protoliterate
civilization would attack and sometimes
conquer.
At present there is not enough evi¬
dence for choosing one of these altern¬
atives as the correct one. We hope
that the forthcoming seasons of excav¬
ation at Chogha Mish will cast still
more light on this and many other
aspects of the Protoliterate period,
which was Indeed one of the crucial
stages in the cultural history of
mankind.

