From the simple weaving loom
pulley the African craftsman has
evolved a world of rich artistic
variety and beauty. Guro sculptors
from the Ivory Coast embellish
pulley supports with a variety of
expressive animal figures, from
elephants, antelopes and monkeys
to domesticated birds like this
cocky rooster.
Photo © Musée de l'Homme
Dorine Destables

THE ART
OF AFRICAN
PULLEYS
by Francine N'Diaye
II HE European artists who
"discovered" African art at the turn
of this century, and collectors of
"Negro art," were for long interested
only in the main achievements of Afri¬
can plastic art sculpture and masks.
Only recently has interest been shown
in everyday and household objects
such as boxes for holding cosmetics
or jewellery, cups, different kinds of
vessels, headrests, seats, carved
shutters and doors, jars and pottery.
Such objects are today as eagerly
FRANCINE N'DIAYE, ethnologist and art his¬
torian, Is on the staff of the African Depart¬
ment at the Musée de l'Homme, Paris. A
teacher of art history at the Dakar School of
Arts (Senegal) from 1961 to 1967, she is pre¬
paring a study on weaving loom pulleys from
West Africa in the Musée de l'Homme collec¬
tion, which will appear in the Museum's review
'Objets et Mondes." The pulleys described
in her article and shown on the following
pages are from the collection of the Senegal
painter Iba N'Diaye.
sought after as masks and sculpture;
like the highly developed arts of per¬
sonal ornament in tropical Africa, they
bear witness to the elaborate artistic
refinement and taste revealed ¡n the
most commonplace activities of every¬
day life. One example of this new
taste ¡s the large number of collectors
of weaving loom pulleys.
In many West African countries, such
as Mall, the Ivory Coast, Guinea and
Dahomey, the pulleys used by weavers
all have some kind of carving. The
weaving loom pulley, consisting of the
pulley itself, which revolves on an
axle, and its support, has the important
function of alternately raising and
lowering the heddles moved by the
weaver's feet. A small iron ring, a hole
carved in the top of the support, or
a small handle, is used to attach the
pulley to a cross-piece of the loom or
to a branch of the tree that provides
shade for the weaver as he works.
Not only is the support quite un-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 23
Colour pages :
OPPOSITE (page 19): The small size of African weaving loom pulleys (10 to 20 centimetres
high) in no way handicaps craftsmen from turning them into miniature works of art. The
expressive qualities of their mini-size carvings are exemplified in this head,
a characteristic work of Senufo artisans from the north of the Ivory Coast and the
borders of Mali and the High Volta. Photo © Musée de l'Homme - Dorine Destables
CENTRE COLOUR PAGES (pages 20 and 21)
Page 20: top right, Bambara pulley from Mali crowned by a crescent representing a pair
of ram's horns; its simplicity of form is typical of the abstract motifs used by Bambara
sculptors. Baule craftsmen of the Ivory Coast -work wood or metal with equal versatility,
creating sculptures with the expressive features and finely detailed decorations seen in'
the three other pulleys on page 20 and in the full page reproduction, page 21. Pulley shown
at top left, page 20, has faces on both sides decorated with ritual incisions found on
funerary masks. Bottom right, head copied from a deity of the Baule pantheon. The horns
surmounting it (only one remains) are those of the goat, symbol of fertility.
Photos © Musée de l'Homme - Dorine Destables





THE ART OF AFRICAN PULLEYS (Continued from page 18)
A weaver: 'We cannot live without such beautiful things'
necessary the pulley, a carved fruit-
stone or adapted bobbin, could simply
be suspended by a string from the
frame of the loom but a bulky sup¬
port may be so Inconvenient that the
weaver occasionally uses the bobbin
without it. When the German anthro¬
pologist, Professor Hans Himmelheber,
of Heidelberg University, asked a Guro
weaver from the Ivory Coast why he
still preferred carved pulleys, he re¬
plied: "We cannot live without such
beautiful things."
The craftsman's reply suggests that
the pulley does not have, or no longer
has, a ritual purpose or symbolical
significance. But we know that this
is not the case with the Dogon people
of Mali, whose mythology closely asso¬
ciates weaving with speech. The Do¬
gon name for the pulley is "the hidden
word," because Its rhythmic creaking
recalls the speech of Nommo, the first
manifestation of the spoken word.
(Geneviève Calame-Griaule, in "Ethno¬
logie et Langage, la Parole Chez les
Dogon," Gallimard, Paris, 1965).
Except for one Bambara pulley from
Mali (see page 20, top right), all the
pulleys illustrated in this article come
from the Ivory Coast from the terri¬
tories of the Baule, Guro and Senufo
peoples. Consciously or unconscious¬
ly, Ivory Coast weavers look to pulleys
to provide them not only with aesthe¬
tic pleasure but also with protection.
This assumption is borne out by the
type of carved motifs, borrowed from
traditional religious designs, and by
the twofold meaning of the adjective
"beautiful" (beautiful = good) in most
African languages.
It is probable, however, that since
these humble objects had no precise
religious function, they contributed to
making the vocabulary of forms used
by sculptors relatively more secular (1).
The result is even greater freedom for
the sculptors, whose designs range
from the highly figurative motifs of the
Baule to the highly abstract motifs of
the Bambara. For the functional rea¬
sons already given, there is a clear
preference for long slender shapes in¬
side an isosceles triangle whose base
coincides with that of the support.
Although some examples in ivory are
found among the Guro of the Ivory
Coast and the Ashanti of Ghana, pul¬
ley supports are generally carved from
wood, not by smiths as among the
Dogon of Mali, but by craftsmen expert
in working wood who chiefly make
objects for everyday use such as tool-
handles, pestles, mortars, seats and
spoons.
The Belgian anthropologist, Father P.
Knops, who has studied the work of
Senufo craftsmen during several visits
to West Africa, notes however that
"the weaver has the right to make his
own loom and to decorate the shuttle,
the piece of bone used to separate
the strands, and the pulley."
I
The hornbill, a bird of the
African savannas, is
designated in Senufo
mythology as one of the
first five living creatures.
The others are the
chameleon, the tortoise, the
snake and the crocodile.
This elegant bird is often
depicted on Senufo pulleys,
sometimes decorated with
ornamental incisions (colour
page opposite), sometimes
in an austerely simple
form (right).
Photo © Musée de l'Homme
Dorine Destables
HE same technique is used
as for carving statuettes. The motif
chosen, whether a human or animal
figure or a geometrical form, is roughly
hewn with a broad axe; it is then
shaped with a short-handled adze
which has a long, thin, slightly curved
blade with its end sharpened and flat¬
tened out fanwise. A double-edged
knife is used to chisel the details, such
as fine scarifications, elaborate head¬
dresses reproduced to the last details,
and zigzag lines, that give such charm
to these small objects, which vary ¡n
size from 10 to 20 centimetres.
Rough leaves are used for polish¬
ing, after which the pulley is dyed in
a bath of boiled leaves and smeared
with palm-oil, which gives It Its warm
dark patina. Like all frequently-handled
objects, the pulleys are smooth and
agreeable to the touch, any roughness
or sharp angles having been worn away
by use.
The type of wood used, hardwoods
from the Ivory Coast forest, the quality
of the patina, and the richness of the
ornamentation are features that give
an undeniable unity to the pulleys
studied in this article. A clear dis-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
(1) The British ethnologist, William Fagg,
In "The Sculpture of Africa", Thames and
Hudson, London, writes, "No ritual purpose
is ascribed to these pulleys." This opinion
is not entirely shared by Jean Laude, who says
in his book, "Les Arts de l'Afrique Noire",
("Collection Livre de Poche", Librairie Géné¬
rale Française, Pans, 1966) ". . .these objects
are obviously secular, but an interpretation of
their carvings shows that they always have a
certain degree of religious significance."

THE ART OF AFRICAN PULLEYS (Continued)
tinction can however be drawn, if only
in respect of the motifs favoured, bet¬
ween two groups of pulleys: the
Baule and Guro, and the Senufo.
With the former, which owe their
great charm to the extremely fine detail
of the scarifications and the head¬
dresses (see pages 20 and 21), the
carved part above the support ¡s in
most cases clearly separated from it
by a long neck ending either ¡n a small
female or male head, reminiscent of the
statuettes known as waka-sona (por¬
traits made to order or images of the
dead) or sometimes in a cock's head.
The contrasting short compact Baule
pulley (see colour photo page 20, top
left), with its small head, which also
recalls an ancestral portrait and looks
as if it had been added on to the top
of the support, acts as a sculptural link
between the two groups of pulleys.
The same Insertion of the carved
motif Into the support is found in the
Senufo pulley (see page 19). Here, how¬
ever, the vertical line is accentuated
by the pair of horns ¡n the form of
a half-moon rising above the long tri¬
angular face, similar to those of the
small anthropomorphic masks, charged
with spiritual feeling, which are worn
for ritual dances.
The hornbill, symbol of male fertility,
is depicted so frequently and in such
a variety of forms that it appears to
have the same Importance in Senufo
iconography as the ancestral portrait
has for the Baule. In decorating their
pulleys, Baule sculptors also take other
forms and motifs from ritual sculpture,
for example the baboon or the buffalo;
the Guro use the antelope or the ele¬
phant. Some Senufo pulleys are carved
at the top ¡n the form of the waniugo
buffalo mask used in Initiation cere¬
monies. Other pulleys are decorated
with purely geometrical motifs.
The two pulleys which are shown on
page 22 and 23 reveal the visual Imagi¬
nation of the sculptors who have pro¬
duced .two very different versions of
a single theme. The second pulley ¡s
austerely simple, the sculptor having
admirably conveyed the elegance of
the long purely-carved beak; the first
pulley is decorated with lavish orna¬
ments which give life to the surface
without affecting in any way the flow¬
ing proportions.
It might even be argued that respect
for an imposed theme, in this case
the hornbill, and for the stylistic conven¬
tions of the group in which the sculptor
works, far from hampering him, has
given him even greater freedom to
study purely plastic problems and to
work out a strikingly successful
solution.
Weaving loom pulleys are today much
sought after collectors' pieces, but
they should be something more than
that. As profoundly significant exam¬
ples of the re-utilizatlon for purely de¬
corative purposes of motifs that were
originally magical and religious, they
should have pride of place in the
catalogue of themes and styles to be
drawn up for tropical Africa. If this
achieved nothing else, it would at
least preserve for modern craftsman¬
ship the genuine local flavour which
unfortunately is now gradually dis¬
appearing.
Below left, the traditional weaving
loom; below centre, detail of the loom
showing the decorated pulley in place.
The simplicity of the loom four
wooden poles fixed in the ground and
connected by intersecting branches
contrasts with the artistic refinement
of the carved pulley. Below right,
a Baule pulley on which
has been sculpted the head of a
woman (one leg is broken).
