THE SALERNO SCIENCE SCHOOL
OF THE NINTH CENTURY
by Riccardo Luzzato
10
%I HEN the provinces of the
Western Roman Empire were invaded
by primitive warrior tribes in the fifth
century, the great wealth of scientific
knowledge created and accumulated by
the Romans, Greeks and the older
eastern civilizations seemed irretriev¬
ably lost to Europe. Yet, during the
troubled centuries of the early Middle
Ages there was established an interna¬
tional scientific organization which was
to flourish for more than 500 years in
the face of all the violent prejudice
then prevailing in the Christian world.
During the ninth century, in the
seaside town of Salerno, in southern
Italy, a school was founded which was
to renew and preserve medical know¬
ledge for the world and provide an
example of the practicality and impor¬
tance of intercultural co-operation.
Records are incomplete about the
early days of the Civitas Hippocratica,
as the school was called in honour of
the greatest physician of Ancient
Greece. Modern historians generally
agree however, in ascribing its founda¬
tions to four scholars: Master Adela,
an Arab, Master Helinus, a Jew, Master
Pontus, a Greek and Master Salernus,
an Italian. Each taught in his language,
which meant Latin for Salernus and
Hebrew for Helinus.
The international character of the
institution is illustrated by the fact that
the nationality of many of its famous
teachers was hardly known. At the
Civitas Hippocratica, they were just
teachers, and the thousands of stu¬
dents who came from Arabia, Africa,
Spain, Britain, Palestine, northern
France and other countries knew and
cared little about the origins of their
professors. This applies to Gabrio-
pontus who died about 1050. Some
historians think he was a Greek, others
that he was a Lombard, others again
that he was a Salernitan.
One of his best known successors,
Constantinus Africanus, was born in
Carthage and made long journeys to
Syria, Egypt, Ethiopia and India, to
bring the latest achievements of Eas¬
tern science to Salerno.
The passion for science at Salerno
was strong enough to overcome more
than one form of prejudice. A pro¬
minent figure of the early period was
the woman physician Trotula, about
whose personality little is known,
although she left a number of medical
treatises which were used as textbooks
up to the sixteenth century and were
first printed by Aldus in Venice in 1547.
Other women too were admitted to the
lectures and to study.
Doctor Trotula acquired such wide
fame, that she became popular in old
English literature under the name of
"Dame Trot" and became Madame
Trotte in the 13th century medical trou¬
vère Rutebceuf (Le Dex de I'Erberie).
Further evidence of the universality
of science, even in the so-called Dark
Ages, was the long-continued collabo¬
ration of Christians, Moslems and Jews,
during the whole of Europe's "crusad¬
ing periods". To the average European
of the Middle Ages, whoever did not
belong to the orthodox Christian
Church, whether he was a Jew, a
Moslem, a Hindu, a pagan or worst of
all a heretic was hardly considered as
a human being.
Written records of the Salerno school
show the influence of the great Arabian
schools of the Orient and Mohamme¬
dan Spain. The Persian physicians
Rhazes (865-925) and Avicenna (980-
1037); and the Spanish Arabs Aven-
zoar (1113-1162) and Averroes (1126-
1 198), as well as the great Maimonides,
a Spanish Jew (1135-1204), were inten¬
sively studied at Salerno. Two of the
most celebrated Jewish physicians, the
urologist Isaac Judaeus (9th or 10th
century) and the oculist Benvenutus
Grassus (born in Jerusalem in the 11th
or 12th century) had studied and taught
at the Salerno school.
Salerno re-awakened a scientific
spirit, independent of dogmatic doc¬
trines; revived ancient texts, and
inspired its students to a calm and
critical appraisal of facts. Thus,
Salerno paved the way for the great
achievements of the universities of the
Renaissance.
Its outstanding accomplishments and
its lasting influence were possible
because, right from the beginning, it
overcame the towering barriers of
religious and national prejudice and
aimed to make knowledge available to
the greatest possible number of people
of all lands of the then known world.
July-August 1950

