GLACIERS
ON THE MOVE
Scientists from many countries
are studying the mystery of
their periodic ebb and flow
by Grigori Avsyuk
and Vladimir Koflyakov
16
GRIGORI AVSYUK is assistant director of
the Institute of Geography, U.S.S.R. Aca¬
demy of Sciences. A corresponding mem¬
ber of the Academy, he is president of the
Soviet Commission on Glaciology. Since
1956, he has directed Soviet studies on gla¬
ciology relating to the programme of the
International Geophysical Year and other
international projects. He has made a special
study of glaciation in the Tien Shan mountains
of Central Asia.
VLADIMIR KOTLYAKOV is director of glacio¬
logy studies at the Institute of Geography,
U S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. He has taken
part in numerous expeditions to the Arctic
and Antarctic, the Caucasus, and the Tien
Shan and Pamir regions of Central Asia and
is the author of several works on glaciology.
ITH the advent of the
Space Age, man has viewed his planet
from afar for the first time and has
marvelled at its beauty.
From a space capsule in orbit, the
physical features of the globe
are plainly visible. Vast plains and
mountain ranges, the variegated
patterns of deserts and steppes, taiga
and jungle contrast sharply with the
dazzling whiteness of the glaciers and
the frozen ice covers of the Arctic and
Antarctica. Even at a glance, an
astronaut sees that much of the world
is still locked in deep freeze.
Ice covers sixteen million square
kilometres of the earth's surface
(11 per cent of its total land area),
and most of this expanse is occupied
by the immense polar icecaps.
These frozen masses affect the
circulation of the atmosphere and the
ocean currents and strongly influence
their thermal balance. By their action
on the winds and waters, which give
the earth its varied climatic and
geographical zones, the giant icecaps
thus serve as global "weather
factories".
Several tens of thousands of years
ago, ice covered 45 million square
kilometres of the earth's surface. Cli¬
matic contrasts were greater and geo¬
graphical zones moved towards the
equator. But between each of the
world's periods of glaciation there

HIVERS OF ICE. About one-tenth of the earth's sur
and Antarctica lie capped by five million cubic miles
widespread, ice covers vast expanses of the pol
ground) occupies vast areas in the Northern Hem
from the polar icecaps to the rivers of ice that
only to glaciologists, but to scientists and techn
arc» laboratories for the long-term study of clima
history of our planet. Photo shows the Alibek gla
the regions in the U.S.S.R. where scientists are st
face is permanently covered by ice, Greenland
of ice and snow. Mountain glaciers are
ar seas and permafrost (permanently frozen
¡sphere. The study of the world's icebound areas,
creep down mountain slopes, is of concern not
ologists in many other fields, since the ice areas
te, the water level of oceans and the past
cier in the northern Caucasus mountains, one of
udying the mechanism of glacier fluctuation.
have been warmer ages, the inter-
glacial phases. As these have lasted
eight times longer than the ice ages,
the absence of glaciers on the earth's
surface is considered to be more
characteristic of its normal state.
The last great Ice Age began about
one million years ago during the
Quaternary period. The rise of Man
also dates from this glaciation following
the appearance of his ape-men
ancestors at the beginning of the
Quaternary.
Man's development was accelerated
by the advance of glaciers and ice
sheets, as the drop in planetary
temperatures forced him to master the
mechanics of fire-making, to garb
himself in warmer clothing and to build
homes as protection against the cold.
In our own era, glaciers are receding,
but the great icecap of Greenland and
the frozen continent of Antarctica
prove that we still live in a glacial age.
It has been said that glaciers are
a negative phenomenon of nature, a
global "malady", capable in certain
circumstances of spreading rapidly.
We do not share this view. Glaciers
are a source of health to our planet
since they help to shape climatic
contrasts and thus the rich diversity
of our global environment.
Moreover, they may eventually help
to solve a major problem the world
water shortage. This becomes more
acute each year as scientific and
technological progress increases the
need for fresh water. Scientists and
engineers in many countries are there¬
fore experimenting with ways to tap
hitherto unused water resources. In
this connexion the rational use of
glaciers vast untapped reservoirs
of fresh water deserves special
consideration.
Another feature of glaciers is the
special rôle they play in the natural
cycle of our planet because of their
ability to conserve water in solid form
for very long periods. A snowflake
which falls on a mountain glacier can
"live" for 10,000 years before melting
and becoming water again. This is
quite a short lifetime compared to that
17
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20

Bearpaw
glaciers
These twin glaciers
are planted like the
paws of a gigantic
bear in the valley of
Rhedin Fjord,
Greenland (left glacier
is featured on our
cover). As much as
four-fifths of
Greenland is buried
under an icecap that
averages 1,000 feet in
depth. Flowing from
Greenland's icy
mountains, glaciers
discharge 1,000 million
tons of ice into the
sea every year
fragments that choke
the waters with
milky rubble and
floating islands
several miles long.
18
Photo © Ernst Hofer (from "Arktische Riviera", Ed Kummerly and Frey, Berne)


GLACIERS ON THE MOVE (Continued)
THE SAME SITE
100 YEARS APART
GLACIER IN RETREAT. Observation of glaciers in many parts of the world,
particularly in the Alps and Scandinavia, shows they are receding. Between 1891 and 1965,
with the exception of three years, more than half the Swiss glaciers observed were
receding every year. In the early nineteenth century painting above, the artist was
able to depict the famous Rhône glacier in Switzerland (source of the river which
flows through France into the Mediterranean) as a mountainous wave of ice pouring
out into the valley. As photo below taken at same site shows, it has since retreated
considerably, and its mass is now trapped between two mountainside«.
of the ice mass in large glaciers. The
"core" of those in Antarctica, for
instance, is known to be 200,000 years
old.
Almost 80 per cent of the world's
fresh water between 24 and 27 million
cubic kilometres is locked up in
glaciers. The total volume is equal to
the water flow of all the world's rivers
for 700 years. Should this ice melt
completely, the result would be a rise
in the ocean level of 64 metres
enough to submerge the coastal
regions of all continents over an area
of about 15 million square kilometres.
Enough fresh water for man's
present needs could be obtained by
liquifying only a part of this enormous
mass of "solid" water. Icebergs, for
instance, could be used as water
supplies for coastal cities.
Even a relatively small iceberg (two
kilometres long, half a kilometre wide
and 150 metres thick) contains about
150 million tons of water enough to
supply each person in a city of eight
million inhabitants with 1,000 litres of
water a day for a month. Towing the
icebergs and tapping the water during
the melting of large masses of ice
would obviously present major tech¬
nical problems, but theoretically the
operation is feasible.
Similarly, glaciers in mountain
ranges are a potential source of
plentiful fresh water, particularly for
use in irrigating the fertile but often
arid plains that lie close to the foothills
of mountain systems.
The glaciers of the Tien Shan
mountains and the Pamirs in Central
Asia, which border on fertile plains,
contain about 2,000 cubic kilometres
of ice. This represents nearly twice
the amount of water currently used for
irrigation throughout the world.
The first step in tapping at least part
of our glacier water reserves is to find
an effective way of melting ice rapidly.
One solution is to cover the glacier
with a dark powdery substance which
helps to accelerate the melting process.
This technique was used over two
thousand years ago, in the time of
Alexander the Great, by farmers in the
Pamirs who spread earth and cinders
on the snow to thaw out their fields
more quickly.
Experiments on these lines in the
Soviet Union and other countries have
shown promising results, but the
method will be more difficult to apply
on a large scale because of the
vagaries of the weather and the
problem of transporting and spreading
the melting agent.
To bring down a regular and
adequate supply of water to the plains
involves, on the one hand, retaining
the snow on the mountain sides with
screens, stockpiling snow in the
foothills and producing artificial avalan¬
ches, and on the other, using techni¬
ques to melt the glaciers more quickly.
In this way a steady flow of melt-
water into the rivers could be assured.

Photo USIS
A TORPEDO
TO THE HEART
Vast Arctic ice shelves moving inexorably towards the sea "calve" giant-size icebergs
(above) which often drift southwards with the currents. Despite radar, echo-sounders
and airborne ice patrols, drifting icebergs still constitute a menace in the North Atlantic.
Attacks on icebergs by bombing and shelling have had little effect, but a French
scientist, Pierre-André Molène, proposed a method of placing an explosive in the core
of an iceberg so that it can be blown apart (see drawing below). (1) A torpedo-shaped
device is lowered by helicopter and burrows into the heart of the iceberg with the help
of a heated nose cone. (2) A delayed action mechanism detonates the torpedo at the
point where it will have the greatest effect. (3) Ship which serves as helicopter
landing platform observes the effects of the explosion visually and with underwater
shock wave detection apparatus (4).
In the spring and early summer, water
could be obtained by melting reserves
of snow, and towards the end of
summer by a more intensive melting
of glaciers. The operation would be
made more effective by the installation
of mountain reservoirs and water
control systems.
It is still too early to say, however,
whether melting operations could be
carried out each year, since glacier
water reserves are not unlimited.
With the development of technology,
man penetrates more deeply into
mountain areas. He discovers new
seams of valuable minerals and
untapped reserves of hydraulic power;
he constructs motorways, pipelines and
power lines. In the process, he
invariably comes up against the
dangers of snow and ice avalanches,
mud streams and glaciers that advance
with unexpected rapidity.
All mountainous countries in the
temperate zone are exposed to the
dangers of avalanches and sometimes
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32
^®
^»» Yfc-ii.ii.1ym ¡0*0*mmm
^¡F
m.
mm
v̂\=
F ¥&
T.LzL-
21

GLACIERS ON THE MOVE (Continued from page 17)
32
of mud streams, against which costly
protective works need to be raised.
In the Soviet Union, a new technique
was used in 1966 and 1967, when two
powerful explosive charges were set
off to create a protective barrage for
the town of Alma Ata in the northern
foothills of the Tien Shan mountains.
Equally dangerous are glaciers
which suddenly advance at several
hundred times their normal speed.
Such movements occur in numerous
regions of the globe, from Central Asia
to Spitsbergen and Alaska. They are,
indeed, so frequent that special
studies should be undertaken to
enable scientists to predict their
possible effects. These movements
are set off by processes at work
within the glacier itself.
Geological and historical studies
have revealed other features of glacier
evolution. In the 10th and 11th
centuries, large settlements grew up
on the coasts of Greenland, whose
inhabitants engaged in intensive cattle
rearing. At that time, mountain glac¬
iers in the Alps, the Caucasus,
Scandinavia and Iceland had retreated,
opening up many mountain passes.
But around the 14th and 15th
centuries, glaciation of the northern
seas increased; navigation to Green¬
land was interrupted, while in Iceland
many ancient settlements were buried
by glaciers. These "changes were
caused by glacial variations whose
cycle occurs every 200 years or -so.
Other glacial variations have shorter
cycles which occur every 100, 22 or
1 1 years, and which some scientists
attribute to periodical changes in solar
activity. There is, however, an
important mediator in the sun-glacier
link atmospheric circulation which
transforms variations in solar activity
into changes in the behaviour of
glaciers.
And though climatic variations
during several centuries are syn¬
chronized with the evolution of glaciers
over the planet as a whole, variations
over a 10 to 20 year period may be
more or less simultaneous only within
particular regions. Observations over
the last century show, for example,
that 20 year cycle variations in the
glaciers of Scandinavia occur inversely
to such variations in the glaciers of the
Alps and the Tien Shan mountains.
Variations in glacier activity affect
the flow of rivers that rise in glacial
regions as well as the reserves of
"solid" water accumulated there.
Thus, plans for economic development
in these regions need to take into
account long-term predictions of the
behaviour of glaciers. Such pre¬
dictions can be made only on the
basis of comprehensive studies of the
mechanism that causes the fluc¬
tuations of glaciers. This is a major
task of modern glaciology the
science which studies glaciers and
other types of natural ice.
Solution of this problem calls for
the elaboration of a general theory
on the fluctuations of glaciers, a task
on which scientists in many countries,
including the Soviet Union, are now
engaged. The modern approach they
are making to this problem is through
systems of equations and mathemati¬
cal modelling with the aid of compu¬
ters. Solutions have already been
found for the simpler types of glaciers,
but we are far from resolving the
problem as a whole.
Not all the laws governing the
development of glaciers are known.
It is still difficult to answer such
questions as whether former glaciers
can reappear in the present climate
or what changes in the atmospheric
circulation may be brought about by
the partial disappearance of glaciers.
Nor, at present, can we answer the
vital question, "Is the world heading
for a new Ice Age?".
I T is quite possible that in
the lifetime of the present generation
there will be a new advance of
glaciers. During the last five to ten
years, for example, glaciers in many
mountain regions (the Caucasus, the
Alps, Scandinavia, Alaska, Central
Asia) show a tendency to advance.
But we should not regard this as
a threat to the future of our planet.
It may well be that glaciers, the
natural refrigerators of the earth, will
be absolutely indispensable to man in
the future.
The climate of the earth is primarily
conditioned by solar radiation. Yet
already, the amount the energy used
by man over large areas of industrially
developed countries is almost equal
to the amount of solar energy that
reaches these areas. And if the pro¬
duction of man-made energy continues
to increase at its present rate (almost
10 per cent per year), within a century
it will exceed the energy we receive
from the sun. That is why the advance
of the glaciers could protect us from
a different threat the overheating of
the planet.
If scientists are to foresee the
effects of glaciation on the life of
our planet, joint international research
programmes need to be carried out
in a number of fields the use of
snow and ice masses as additional
sources of fresh water, forecasting
sudden movements and variations in
glaciers, the rôle of glaciers in the
partial and overall water cycle in the
world.
The first attempts to undertake such
studies began ten years ago during
the International Geophysical Year.
The research lasted only two to three
years which was clearly too short
a time, since accurate predictions can
be made only on the basis of
long-term observations of glacier
fluctuations.
That is why the study of glaciers
an important element in the water
balance of the earth has been includ¬
ed in the programme of the Interna¬
tional Hydrological Decade organized
by Unesco from 1965 to 1974. This
research will have a direct impact
on programmes for the rational utili¬
zation and conservation of natural
resources, particularly in the develop¬
ing countries of South America and
Southern Asia where glaciers can be
an important source of fresh water.
Glaciological research in the Inter¬
national Hydrological Decade relates
to three major problems: the evalua¬
tion of polar ice and snow resour¬
ces; permanent observation of the
fluctuation of glaciers; studies of the
balance of ice, water and heat in
typical mountainous glacial basins.
Soviet scientists are actively engag¬
ed in these programmes. They are
compiling the first catalogue of gla¬
ciers in the U.S.S.R., a multi-volume
work presenting data on the size,
forms and locations of all the coun¬
try's glaciers. The Soviet Union is
also collaborating in the creation of
a permanent international glacier
service to collect data on glacier
variations throughout the world. Stud¬
ies are now being made on the
mechanism of water flow from glaciers
in seven experimental basins in the
U.S.S.R. (three in the Caucasus, three
in Central Asia and one in the Altai
region).
Joint efforts by the world's glacio-
logists will enable man not only to
predict the evolution of glaciers, but
will eventually permit him to harness
and utilize them as one of the natural
resources of his planet.
Drawings © Lap
These two drawings were specially made
for the "Unesco Courier" by French
cartoonist Lap. Above, accelerating the
melting rate of glaciers by covering them
with a dark powder; below, towing an
iceberg to a water-thirsty area.
