Many of the fictional places described
in the works of the American novelist
William Faulkner were actually modelled
on localities in Lafayette County,
Mississippi, Faulkner's lifelong home.
The United States Is one of
the countries which have made the
greatest efforts In nature conservation.
Nevertheless, many of the places that
Faulkner knew, including forest areas,
have been destroyed or altered In the
continuing process of land-clearing and
modernization. These starkly-outlined
trees with their mutilated trunks are
all that remain of a once luxuriant forest
after the construction of a dam.

CAN WE KEEP
OUR PLANET
HABITABLE ?
by Michel Bâtisse
FeOR more than 40,000 years,
Homo sapiens has applied himself,
patiently, laboriously, unremittingly, to
the task of conquering his planet,
extending his dominion over all other
creatures and taming the vast forces
of nature.
From this, at the start, foolhardy
and unequal contest, he has emerged
victorious. Not a single corner of the
globe has escaped his scrutiny; no
species of animal has held out against
him. He has imposed his will on
rivers and even the seas. He has
swept away forests and replaced them
with crops. Today he rockets into
space. He seems to have achieved
total victory too total to be lasting.
Until a few decades ago the
triumphant progress of a technological
civilization based on scientific know¬
ledge seemed to confirm man's total
victory. Then, all at once, danger
signals were observed. In a brief
period of his relatively short history,
man, a "Johnny-come-lately" on earth,
4 MICHEL BATISSE, engineer and physicist,
is head of the Division of Natural Resources
of Unesco's Department of the Advance¬
ment of Science.
has so effectively conquered nature
that he is now in the process of
destroying it.
Hasty felling of forests to clear new
land for crops; swift and reckless
encroachment on the countryside to
make place for tentacular cities,
factories, highways and aerodromes;
destruction and erosion of the soil;
pollution of air and water; disappear¬
ance of wildlife; accumulation of waste
products and mounds of rubbish;
defacement of rural scenery; the
increasing poisoning of our planet
all are the bitter fruit of man's
technological skill, of the exponential
rate of increase in population and the
modern mystique of productivity.
These too are the mortal dangers
that threaten the thin layer of the earth
known as the biosphere the meeting
point of land, air and waters where
life can exist, the environment on
which man depends inescapably for
his survival.
In view of this increasingly critical
situation, Unesco, in September 1968,
called an intergovernmental conference
of specialists to study the ideas of
modern science on the rational use
and conservation of the resources of
the biosphere and to propose measures
for national and international action.
The Conference on the Biosphere
was organized in co-operation with
the United Nations, the Food and
Agriculture Organization, the World
Health Organization, the International
Biological Programme and the Inter¬
national Union for Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources. It
brought to the Paris headquarters of
Unesco, 240 delegates from 62 na¬
tions and 90 representatives from
International organizations.
It is not the first time that scientists
have taken up these problems, but
the Paris conference was the first
occasion on which representatives of
governments have met to appraise the
world situation and to initiate steps
for remedial action.
Conference discussions revealed a
striking identity of views on the causes
and gravity of problems posed by the
deterioration of our planetary environ¬
ment. The conclusions reached are
rigorous: the situation is degenerating
rapidly and far more dangerously
than most people realize, especially
city people who have- forgotten to
what extent they depend on nature
and its resources. Urgent action is
needed.
But do remedies in fact exist? On
this extremely complex question, the

conference could do no more than
formulate general principles and lay
down guidelines for action to be taken
without delay.
I.VERYTHING would be
simpler, no doubt, if there were not so
many people in the world and if their
needs were fewer. That is the view¬
point of certain "conservationists", who
yearn for a Golden Age and Paradise
on Earth.
The conference, on the contrary,
concluded that it is indeed possible
to reconcile the needs of man with the
preservation of nature, and that the
only realistic attitude is one which
endorses a "rational utilization" of
natural resources, it being understood
that rational utilization comprises all
the imperatives of conservation so as
to ensure the continuity of the world's
resources.
Protection of threatened plants and
animals, creation of national parks and
reserves, campaigns against erosion,
contamination and pollution are thus
fundamental to a policy of rational
utilization of our natural resources.
Similarly, studies of biological
productivity in natural environments
could provide a sound scientific basis
for decisions on land use, the most
fertile areas being reserved for
farming, others being earmarked for
urban development, highways, afforest¬
ation, recreation facilities and so on.
While emphasizing that the quantita¬
tive needs of productivity must be
met, the conference reaffirmed man's
own important need to preserve or
restore the quality of his environ¬
ment, by combatting pollution of every
kind and through a reconciliation with
nature.
Science, that is, clear understanding
of natural phenomena and the conse¬
quences of man's own actions, offers
solutions to the multiple problems
posed by this reconciliation. New
research will thus be needed, in which
all branches of the natural and social
sciences could collaborate.
If present knowledge and experience
were applied effectively, it would help
to solve many of our current diffi¬
culties. But a tremendous effort in
public information and education,
aimed at every level and every age
group of the population, is indis¬
pensable if we are to reverse today's
trends and find a way out of the
present impasse without losing time.
In practical terms, the conference
asked Unesco to map out a long-
term, international and interdisciplinary
programme based on its final recom¬
mendations. This programme on "Man
and the Biosphere" will deal with
scientific, technical, educational and
institutional problems relating to the
rational use of natural resources and
the improvement of the environment.
It will be submitted for approval to
Unesco's General Conference at its
next meeting in October 1970.
The success of this programme will
depend, in the final analysis, on the
determination shown by peoples and
governments of all countries. The
organization of mankind and the level
of its political maturity lag far behind
its technological potential. Never¬
theless, it is imperative, while there is
still time, for man to embark on a
rational renovation of his planet.
The Conference on the Biosphere
brought home a fundamental truth.
In freeing himself from the forces of
nature by his ingenuity and skills,
man has become his own worst enemy,
the greatest threat to his own survival.
His vainglorious power has brought
him face to face with a new and
fundamental responsibility: the future
of the human race on Planet Earth.
5
