THE STORY
II traveller approaching the
Colombian port of Barranquilla on the
Caribbean Sea sees Colombian soil
long before he sights the coast.
The tropical blue of the sea changes
to yellow as far as the eye can reach.
What gives it its yellow colour?
The port of Barranquilla lies on the
estuary of the River Magdalena, which
rises in the interior of Colombia and
flows for a thousand miles to empty
into the Caribbean Sea. The yellow
colour is soil swept away by the Mag¬
dalena River within a radius of several
miles round the port of Barranquilla.
The soil comes from the Magdalena
Valley and from the slopes of the
Andes enclosing the valley to the east
and west. It has been washed away
by rain and borne down brooks, tribu¬
taries and secondary rivers.
Part of it has been stripped by the
River Magdalena from its own banks.
Every day, every hour, even every
minute, the wealth of a nation is cast
into the sea.
Antonio Arango, whom I knew in the
Andean Cordillera, was himself an
actor in the tragedy of the vanishing
soil, without understanding it.
Antonio Arango invested his life-
savings in the purchase of a 20-hectare
GUILLERMO NANNETTI, former Minister of
National Education in Colombia, is now
embassador to Sweden.

OF ANTONIO ARANGO
parcel of land in the Cordillera. The
land was rich and fertile and covered
with "tall timber". "Where such big
trees grow", said Antonio to himself,
"the soil Is good", and he gazed with
satisfaction at the thick stratum of top-
soil which could be seen in the cutting
made by the brook. The water was
crystal-clear as it flowed through the
undergrowth of moss and parasitic
plants; so crystalline that Antonio and
his sons christened it "Diamond
Brook". The site was ideal for a house
and allowed a view over the whole
landscape.
Antonio Arango sharpened his axe
and machette. His wife and three sons
aiding him, he began felling the tall
trees. The timber could not be used
because there were no roads to trans¬
port it nor neighbouring towns to buy
it. So Antonio Arango let a few days
go by to let the sun dry the fallen
trunks and then set fire to them.
Other settlers were doing the same
in other parts of the mountain.
The blaze was enormous, and the
beasts and birds of the forest fled
before the flames as the fallen giants
crackled in the fire.
At last the ground was cleared and
Antonio Arango sowed it with maize.
On two hectares he sowed forage for
the cow, and built a house on the high
ground. As his wife had worked so
hard, Antonio gave his ranch her name,
La Isabella. The first harvest was a
big success. The maize was tall and
thick. Antonio was pleased with his
efforts. So he went on sowing maize.
But things began to change.
Diamond Brook, which had once
been crystal-clear throughout the year,
had shrunk to a thread of water in
summer. In the rainy season it was a
yellow flood tearing loose rocks and
mud and lumps of soil. The harvests
grew smaller, and Antonio Arango had
to sell the cow because the pasture
land could no longer feed the animal.
Things were not going right at all.
One day, when he was sowing maize,
his mattock struck solid rock. The
vegetable top-soil had become so thin
that rocky outcrops were appearing
everywhere. Antonio had no money,
the children had nothing to eat, and
finally Diamond Brook vanished and
only its stony channel was left. Like
so many other settlers, Antonio Arango
left to find another stretch of woodland
to start all over again.
This tragedy of Antonio Arango is
attaining national, continental and
world-wide proportions. Every year
Colombia loses the equivalent of
10,000 ranches of 20 hectares by soil
erosion. That means that every year
there are 10,000 families in the same
position as the Arangos.
Vegetation is like an umbrella pro-
Ay Guillermo Nannetti
tecting the soil. It breaks the fall of
the water and causes it to sink into
the subsoil. The forest is the mother
of the spring. The roots of the trees
are like friendly hands sustaining the
topsoil with their myriad fingers. Fallen
leaves and fruits fertilize the soil and
build up the vegetable humus. The
trees afford protection from the wind,
regulate humidity and give shelter from
heat and cold. They prevent floods.
They purify the air. They can be an
inexhaustible source of profit to one
who knows how to cultivate and utilize
them wisely.
If only someone had told Antonio
Arango to drive his furrows according
to the contour of the slope. To terrace
the steepest part of the slope. To heal
the scars of erosion with simple dams
of logs and stones.
If only someone had told Antonio
Arango that maize is not the right crop
for sloping ground and that other,
better paying crops can be rotated
instead. If only someone had taught
him to sow the ground between his
furrows with suitable bushes to check
the movement of the soil.
And if only all the Antonio Arangos,
all the N'boyas, Changs, Abdullas and
Smiths all over the world knew some¬
thing about the conservation of na¬
ture, what a different world it would be.
My 1949

