WHEN
THE EARTH SHOOK
IN
KHORASSAN
by Rex Keating
Photo Unesco - Rex Keating

Y<OU take off from Teheran
in the early morning and you fly
towards the rising sun. On your left
the snow crystals glitter on the crown
of Demavend rising in perfection to
18,000 feet, below your wings undul¬
ates the great central desert of Iran.
And so it is for 800 kilometres until
REX KEATING of Unesco's Radio Section
has specialized In the popularization of
science, and In this connexion went to
Iran last autumn to gather material for
"When the World Shook," a series of radio
programmes on the scientific investigation of
the Khorassan earthquake disaster. He has
also devoted many years of study to the
history of the archaeology of ancient Egypt, on
which he has written widely. In particular
he has been closely associated with Unesco's
international campaign to save the monu¬
ments of Nubia since it was launched in 1960.
He recently returned to Sudanese Nubia to
witness the closing phase of the campaign's
archaeological investigations on which he Is
preparing a history as a follow up to his
book, "Nubian Twilight," published in 1963 by
Rupert Hart-Davis Ltd., London, and Harcourt,
Brace and World Inc., New York.
Photo © Gamma, Paris
and minutes later we bumped to a
standstill on an improvised landing
strip.
For twenty minutes a jeep rattled
my bones over a corrugated track
and suddenly we were in the outskirts
of a dusty little town. It was Gonabad.
Here dwell some 8,000 people, in a
township which has achieved unsought
importance as headquarters for all the
rescue and relief services concentrated
in the earthquake zone; here, too, had
been set up the camp for the team of
Unesco scientists at work in the area.
A feature of this town and of villages
in the region is the brick tower atop
many of the houses. The tower is
closed on three sides; the open side,
which faces the prevailing wind, Is
divided into vertical compartments and
these extend down through the roof of
the house to form an ingenious ventil¬
ating system.
Also characteristic of Khorassan
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
The earthquake which shook the Iranian province of Khorassan on August 31, 1968
lasted perhaps ten seconds, yet it killed between 12,000 and 16,000 people and
rendered 150,000 homeless. Below left, gleaming tiled dome of a medieval mosque
stands miraculously unscathed amid shattered walls and heaped rubble in Karkhk,
one of the hardest hit townships. Below, the aftermath of the disaster. Squatting beside
the tumbled ruins of their homes, women grieve for dead relatives. In Karkhk, where
this photograph was taken, hardly a family was not bereaved.
from the horizon comes a metallic
flash. It is the golden dome of the
Shrine of the Imam Reza, and moments
later you touch down at Meshed, to
Moslems of the Shi'ite sect the most
holy of cities. It is also the capital of
the Khorassan Province of Iran. Here,
if. you are a tourist, you pause for
several days to see the sights and they
are well worth the seeing.
My destination was elsewhere. From
Meshed, an aircraft a tiny two-seater
flew me due south perilously close
to the summits of range upon range of
coloured mountains. Here the world
has been turned inside out in a chaos
of distorted rock strata. Looking down
on the tortured landscape I needed no
convincing that this was one of the
notorious seismic regions of our planet.
For 200 miles the shadow of our
wings dipped and swayed above that
devil's playground, until a speck on a
sandy level resolved itself into a tent

WHEN THE EARTH SHOOK (Continued)
As if a giant mole had burrowed beneath the surface
houses are the domed roofs. To stand
at roof level among a forest of such
towers and domes is infinitely satisfy¬
ing to the eye, yet most are built of
adobe mud-brick like the houses
beneath, and in this seismic area such
dwellings are nothing less than death
traps, destined to collapse at the first
heavy tremor.
The earthquake which shattered the
peace of a summer's afternoon on
August 31, 1968, lasted perhaps 10 sec¬
onds, yet it killed between 12,000 and
16,000 people and rendered 150,000
homeless and destitute. Some two
hundred and thirty villages were
shaken; several, like Dashti-Biaz, sim¬
ply fell to fragments so completely
that the remains had to be bulldozed
into the earth, leaving only the fruit
trees and a pattern of irrigated fields
to show that people had once lived
there.
A second shock several days later
shattered the large village of Firdos,
and it is a strange twist of fate that this
same Firdos was once a great city
called Toon until, in the year 856, an
earthquake destroyed it and, say the
old chronicles, 45,000 people perished.
I came upon the large village of
Karkhk from the hills which enfold it
and stood for a moment looking down
into a township 'celebrated throughout
Khorassan for its craftsmen 'and as a
holiday resort. I might have been on
the outskirts of an ancient city aban¬
doned centuries ago to the hawks and
jackals.
The effect was heightened by the
remains of a blue-domed mosque lean¬
ing in drunken ruin. Around 1t, window
frames and doorways stared sight¬
lessly from heaps of rubble which had
once been houses. A flutter of torn
curtain was the only indication that
people had lived, loved and worked
there less than a month before. In the
distance a cloud of dust and a low
rumbling marked the presence of a
bulldozer pounding the hulks of build¬
ings back into the earth.
I walked down into what had once
been a town renowned for its beauty.
It was my first sight of the aftermath
of an earthquake "and it took me by the
throat. Here and there men were still
digging among the rubble a month
after the disaster in the vain hope of
recovering the body of a missing rela¬
tive for proper burial, or a few prized
possessions. It was a scene of deso¬
lation. Only the school, strongly built
of baked brick over a metal frame,
stood foursquare, unharmed.
Among the tumbled ruins of a Saf-
favid mosque a donkey munched con-
Photos © Paris Match
^ .
Ns
m>
>->
V:>
i
- ij^.
Ï

This dramatic photograph shows the effect of the 1968 earthquake at Karkhk In
eastern Iran. The aerial picture taken from 5,500 feet includes an area of cultivated land
set in the hills of Khorassan. Contorted fissures can be seen spreading like tentacles
across the landscape. The original path of the main mountain stream of the town
(left of photo) has been totally obliterated. Karkhk until last year was a town renowned
for its beauty and as a holiday resort. It is now a heap of rubble and ruined
buildings, as photo opposite grimly shows.
tentedly. An old man, its owner,
pointed to the hillock of rubble. "My
wife was there when the mosque began
to vibrate horribly. She felt no fear.
Here in the house of God what harm
could come to her? Then the dome
fell and the lives of twelve women
praying directly beneath were extin¬
guished. She, being in a corner
against the wall, was dug out, unhurt."
He shook his head. "Buried under
there are carpets of great age and
beauty; they should not be forgotten
by the rescuers."
Some 8,000 persons, including many
visitors, had been in Karkhk on that
Saturday afternoon. Within seconds
3,000 were dead and hundreds injured.
The homeless survivors, some 4,000,
I found in a canvas village erected on
the edge of the ruins.
Tents stood row upon row, each sur¬
rounded with household goods rescued
from the rubble pitiful little heaps of
junk, no more. Moving among them,
volunteer workers from the Red Lion
and Sun Society (the Iranian equiva¬
lent of the Red Cross) were handing
out clothing. In the midst of a group
of devout men a mullah was reciting
prayers for the dead, while women
keened softly in the background.
Yet in the midst of tragedy, the place
was vivid with life and movement.
Children played noisily among flutter¬
ing chickens, women were preparing
the mid-day meal on portable stoves
outside each tent, others chattered
animatedly while drawing clear water
from taps placed at regular intervals.
IHIS water supply and a
sewage system vital elements in a
camp of this size if health is to be safe¬
guarded had been installed by the
Health Corps of the Iranian Army ; irri¬
gation channels, roads and bridges had
been repaired by the Extension and
Development Corps. All these young
men with others from the Education
Corps (the "Army of Knowledge") were
conscripts on National Service.
A temporary school was in full cry,
repeating the lessons aloud in the
Iranian fashion, while in a neighbouring
tent some fifty little girls worked on
carpet weaving, sewing and stitching
under the care of án instructress.
Stores were piled on all sides tents,
medical supplies, foodstuffs, cooking
utensils, clothing, much of it donated
by sympathetic countries. A bakery
and a soup kitchen for the volunteer
workers was further evidence of the
speed and efficiency with which the
Red Lion and Sun Society had moved
in on the devastated area.
I was taken to see the main fault,
where the earthquake originated. Snak¬
ing across the plain for 60 kilometres
and beyond through mountain ranges
which bounded the valley to east
and west, it was as if a giant mole had
burrowed just below the surface.
At well-defined points the earth was
thrust upwards, elsewhere it had fallen
below the original level, showing clear¬
ly where forces of compression and
expansion had been released by the
titanic shearing of rocks perhaps
10 kilometres down in the earth's crust.
That the shearing had been a scis¬
soring movement was shown by the
displacement of surface features, such
as irrigation embankments, by as much
as five metres. The ill-starred village
of Dashti-Biaz, for example, had lain
squarely astride the fault at its west¬
ern extremity.
My guide was Dr. N. Ambraseys,
geologist and earthquake engineer of
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
33

WHEN THE EAÜTH SHOOK (Continued)
Anatomy of a seismic disaster
Imperial College, London, who, to¬
gether with his colleague Dr. J. Tcha-
lenko, Dr. S. Budnov, a Yugoslav
earthquake engineer, and Professor
T. Tassios from the Technical Univer¬
sity of Athens, had been sent out to
Khorassbn by Unesco to trace and
map the ramifications of the "quake".
S
34
TANDING in that deserted
steppeland Dr. Ambraseys described
what had probably happened some six
miles below our feet. The complex
structure of the earth's crust in mount¬
ainous regions of a certain nature
gives rise to internal pressure of un¬
imaginable intensity, pressures which
generate energy on a vast scale.
The pressures build up until there
comes a moment when something gives
. way a weak point, or geological fault.
It can be likened to a stretched spring
with a flaw in its steel the spring
breaks at that point and the stored
energy is released. So with the
earth. The imprisoned energy breaks
out with cataclysmic violence, shearing
the rocks and giving rise to powerful
vibrations in the crust which travel
outwards in all directions like waves
in a pond.
It is these vibrations which shake
the foundations of buildings to the
point of collapse. A curious feature
of some earthquakes, as I saw for my¬
self in Khorassan, is that buildings
quite close to the source of the earth¬
quake, say within a kilometre or so, are
damaged but do not collapse, while
others, fifteen or twenty kilometres off,
fall into ruins.
The reason for this seeming paradox
Is that near to the source the shock is
violent but short; as the distance
increases so does the violence de¬
crease but the period of shaking length¬
ens and may last as long as 20 or
30 seconds. Only buildings designed
to be earthquake resistant can stand
up to prolonged shaking of this kind.
Hence the presence of Ambraseys
and his colleagues. Earthquake
engineers can recommend various
categories of structures which while
using local materials as far as possible
will be less vulnerable to earthquake
shock.
That crack snaking across the des
erted plain exhibited a detachment
from man and his works that I found
terrifying. It would have made no
difference had a city of two million
souls lain in its path. And far below
the surface those uncontrollable forces
were still active. Later, in a tent not
10 miles away, I was to listen to the
cracking and tearing of the earth's
crust as the vestiges of pent-up ener¬
gy sought to release the strain and
restore equilibrium.
These "micro-shocks", the invariable
aftermath of an earthquake, had been
recorded by a group of three men from
the Geophysical Laboratories of the
Institute of Geological Sciences, Edin¬
burgh: a seismologist. Dr. Stuart Cram-
pin, and two assistants. At Unesco's
instigation they had brought to this
remote corner of Asia a collection of
electronic apparatus which represent¬
ed the last word in earthquake
detection.
An R.A.F. Hercules transport had
flown them out to Teheran together
with the out-size truck bearing their
equipment. This monster had been
edged into the aircraft with less than
an inch to spare between it and the
roof of the Hercules. From Teheran
they had nursed their delicate load
of instruments across 1,000 miles of
Iran to the scene of the disaster and
there at the foot of a mountain they
had set up their camp.
0 N the slope 100 feet or so
above, a flame-coloured tent marked
the location of a group of three seismo¬
meters (earthquake detectors) and the
Ultra High Frequency and Very High
Frequency radio receivers. These lat¬
ter were tuned to two out-stations set
up by the Edinburgh men 20 and
50 kilometres away respectively, which
were detecting earth tremors and
transmitting the data by automatic
radio back to the central camp.
Analysis of the three sets of signals
made it possible to take bearings and
so to pin-point the source of the
"events", as they are termed. The
signals are recorded on magnetic tape
by a machine with no less than twenty-
one recording heads, and by speeding
up the playback of the recorded signals
some fifty-six times the earthquake
shocks become audible and one can
actually hear the rocks being torn
asunder far below the surface.
However, this spectacular device is
really no more than a convenient
method of monitoring and storing the
signals; the actual hour-by-hour record
and analysis of shocks is printed on a
continuous paper strip by an ingenious
electrical device known as a jet-pen
recorder.
Incidentally, I was startled to spot
an electric vacuum cleaner inside the
tent housing the apparatus, not to
mention a carpet on the floor. None
of this, I was assured, implied exag¬
gerated leanings towards domesticity
but was essential to keep down dust,
a grain of which could put the record¬
ers out of action.
IHE seismometers lay in a
rocky hole, deceptively simple cylin¬
ders in appearance, yet capable of de¬
tecting tremors on the far side of the
earth my footsteps on the nearby
mountain face showed up as violent
disturbances on the paper record.
Two weeks after the original shock
the scientists had recorded no less
than 400 after-shocks daily; at the
time of my visit, a month after the
disaster, 100 "events" were still being
recorded in 24 hours. This manifesta¬
tion of science at its most sophisticat¬
ed level among the wastelands of
eastern Iran was, to me, in the best
traditions of science fiction. Yet in
that camp there was nothing of fiction
or fantasy in a routine geared exclu¬
sively to scientific observation and
analysis.
The question may be asked: why go
to all this trouble and expense? If
ever it becomes possible to predict
earthquakes it can only be through
the amassing and study of a vast
amount of data in relation to the seis¬
mic regions of the world, painstakingly
collected by scientific observation and
measurement.
A great earthquake and its after¬
shocks offer an opportunity of collect¬
ing vital information in a short time,
provided you can get equipment to
the spot soon enough; on the other
hand, the engineers concerned with
the design of earthquake-resistant
buildings can also obtain from the ins-

pection of damage factual Information
on which they can test their theories
about the behaviour of different kinds
of buildings under seismic stresses.
In some places, even today, It would
be possible to forecast the likelihood
of a seismic disturbance but not, unfor¬
tunately, its time or intensity. Never¬
theless in an unstable area of that
kind and with such information avail¬
able a planning authority would be
well advised to steer clear of major
constructional works such as new
towns, nuclear power plants or hydro¬
electric stations. Or if building is
unavoidable, then it should be earth¬
quake resistant both in design and
construction.
Obviously earthquakes must be stud¬
ied on the spot, and as soon as pos¬
sible after a disaster. To locate, co¬
ordinate and organize the transport of
a team of specialists seismologists,
geologists and earthquake engineers
literally at a few hours notice is beyond
the scope of most Individual countries.
It has become an international opera¬
tion with Unesco at the centre of a
communications network which strad¬
dles the globe.
w.ITHIN an hour or so of a
major earthquake the scientist respon¬
sible at Unesco Headquarters is noti¬
fied, at any hour of the day or night. He
immediately makes contact with indivi¬
dual specialists. They form a pool, as
it were, of scientists and engineers
who stand ready to drop everything
and take off for the scene of the
disaster. They could come from as
many as half a dozen countries.
On returning to their universities or
institutes they prepare detailed reports
of their findings and conclusions which
are published by Unesco and distri¬
buted to the interested bodies in all
member states. This was the pro¬
cedure followed in the Khorassan
earthquake.
Here is an instance of science in
the service of mankind, working unob¬
trusively for the prevention of death.
And as the corpus of knowledge
grows, we may look forward to a time
when the appalling human misery of
a Khorassan, a Skopje or an Agadir
will be a thing of the past.
. * I
>"*\
''V"
ft*/;-1* ~r-v.
pPhoto Unesco - Rex Keating
Amassing and analysing vital scientific data following a major
earthquake such as the Khorassan disaster has become an
International operation co-ordinated by the earthquake emergency
service operated by Unesco from its Paris headquarters.
Within hours of a serious earth tremor this service can contact
and despatch to the stricken area a group of scientists and
engineers. The tent, above, pitched on the edge of a vast
plain in Iran is an outpost used by seismologists of a Unesco
mission carrying out a scientific Investigation of the Khorassan
earthquake. Here, and at two unmanned stations miles away,
the after-shocks that continue deep underground long after
the major shock are detected by seismometers.
35
