ROUSSEAU, FATHER
OF ANTHROPOLOGY
by Claude Lévi-Strauss
Ri OUSSEAU was more than
just a keen and subtle observer of
peasant life, an impassioned reader of
books on foreign travel, a skilful and
accomplished investigator of exotic
customs and beliefs. Without fear of
contradiction it can be stated that a
full century before anthropology was
actually born he conceived, desired
and foretold it, placing it directly in the
ranks of the natural and human
sciences then in existence.
This prophetic conception, which he
formulated both as a plea and as a
programme of action, appears in a
long footnote to the Discourse on the
Origin of Inequality. "I have difficulty
in comprehending," Rousseau wrote,
"why in an age that prides itself on
learning, two men cannot be found,
one of whom would sacrifice twenty
thousand crowns of his wealth and
the other ten years of his life, to make
a historic journey round the world,
studying not only the inevitable stones
and plants, but for once men and
customs."
And a little further on he exclaims:
"The whole of the world is a weave
of nations of which we know only the
names. And we presume to judge
mankind!
"Imagine a Montesquieu, a Buffon,
a Diderot, a d'Alembert, a Condillac,
or men of that stamp, travelling to
instruct their fellow-countrymen, ob¬
serving or describing as only they
know how, Turkey, Egypt, Barbary, the
empire of Morocco, Guinea, the land
of the Kaffirs, the interior of Africa
and its eastern coast, the Malabars,
the Mogul, the banks of the Ganges,
the kingdoms of Siam, Pegu and Ava,
China, Tartary, and above all Japan;
and in the other hemisphere, Mexico,
Peru, Chile, the Magellan lands, not
forgetting the Patagonias real or imag¬
inary, Tucuman, Paraguay, and if
possible Brazil, the Caribbean, Florida
and all the savage lands. Such a
journey would be of more importance
than all others and would have to be
made with the greatest of care.
"Imagine that these new Hercules,
on their return from those unforget¬
table travels, were to write at their
leisure a natural, moral and political
history of what they had seen, then
we would see for ourselves a new
CLAUDE LEVI-STRAUSS Is perhaps the
world's leading anthropologist today. He is
professor at the Collège de France and direc¬
tor of its Laboratory of Social Anthropology.
world arise from their pens, and we
would learn to know our own..." (Dis¬
course on the Origin of Inequality,
note 10.)
Is this not the very subject matter
as well as the working method of
modern anthropology?
But Rousseau did not just foresee
anthropology, he actually founded it.
Firstly, he did so in practice by writing
the Discourse on the Origin and Foun¬
dations of Inequality Among Men which
posed the question of the relationship
betwen nature and culture, and is per¬
haps the first treatise produced on
general anthropology. Secondly, he
founded the science in theory by
setting down with remarkable clarity
and precision the aims of the anthro¬
pologist as distinguished from those of
the moralist and the historian :
"When one wishes to study men,
one must look close at hand ; but to
study man, one must learn to look
into the distance ; one must first
observe the differences in order to
discern the properties." (Essay on the
Origin of Languages, Chapter VIII.)
This method of approach which
Rousseau assigned to anthropology
marks the birth of the new science and
helps to clarify what at first may appear
to be a double paradox: that Rous¬
seau could at one and the same time
advocate the study of men living in
the most remote corners of the earth,
but in effect devoted most of his
attention to the one man nearest to
him, namely himself; and that in all
his writings his systematic desire for
identification with others went hand in
hand with his total refusal of identi¬
fication with himself.
Now every anthropologist at some
time or other during his life work must
resolve these same two seeming
contradictions which in reality are no
more than the two interchangeable
sides of one coin.
Each time that the anthropologist
goes out into the field he plunges into
a world where everything around him
is strange and often hostile. He finds
himself alone with nothing but his own
person, his subjective self, to help
him survive and carry on his work.
Physically and mentally wracked as
he is by fatigue, hunger and hardship,
by the disruption of his normal habits,
and by the sudden revelation of pre¬
judices which he had never suspected
to exist, his self reveals itself in these
unfamiliar surroundings as it really
is battered and buffeted by all the
shocks and impacts of his personal
life, which not only affected his choice
of a career but would thereafter deeply
mark its entire course.
In the work of anthropology, there¬
fore, the observer uses himself as his
own instrument of observation. As a
result, he must learn to know himself,
to look at himself objectively and at
a distance as if he were another
person. And so the anthropologist
turns to this other person within him,
which is different from his self, in
order to arrive at an evaluation. And
this then becomes an integral part of
all the observations he carries out in
the field on groups and individuals
and the other within them. The prin¬
ciple of "confessions", written or
unacknowledged, is thus basic to the
work of every anthropologist.
For in order to rediscover one's own
image as reflected in others, which is
anthropology's single purpose in study¬
ing man, one should first reject one's
¡mage of oneself.
IT is to Rousseau that we
owe the discovery of this profound
principle and the only one on which
the sciences of man could be founded.
But it remained out of reach and grasp
and incomprehensible so long as the
accepted philosophy was base«! on
Descarte's doctrine of the Cogito
(Cog/to ergo sum) and was fettered
to the alleged logical proof of the ego
upon which the edifice of physics was
constructed though only by renouncing
that of sociology and even biology.
Descartes believed that he could
pass directly from the inferiority of
man to the external world, overlooking
that between these two extremes there
existed societies and civilizations, that
is, worlds made up of men.
Rousseau speaks eloquently of him¬
self in the third person as "he"
(sometimes even splitting this "he" into
two distinct parts as in the Dialogues)
heralding the famous formula "The me
is another" (the anthropologist does
the same thing before proceeding to
show that other people are men like
himself, or in other words, the other
is me).
Rousseau thus emerges as the great
innovator of the concept of uncondi¬
tional objectivity. In his first Promen- m^
ade, he defines his aim as "to study hi
the modifications of my soul and their
sequels", and then adds: "In a sense,
I shall perform upon myself the same
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

ROUSSEAU (Continued)
62
experiments that the physicist carries
out on the atmosphere in order to dis¬
cover its daily condition."
What Rousseau reveals to us (and
though modern psychology and anthro¬
pology have now made it more familiar,
it is nevertheless a most astonishing
revelation) is that there is a third
person "he" that thinks within me, and
at first leads me to doubt that it is
I who am thinking.
To Montaigne's question "What do
I know?" (which started the whole dis¬
cussion) Descartes thought he could
provide the reply with his "I think,
therefore I am." To this Rousseau
retorted with the query "What am I?"
which cannot be answered until an¬
other, more fundamental, question has
been resolved: "Am I?" And the an¬
swer that personal experience has
given is the "he" concept that Rous¬
seau discovered and which he pro¬
ceeded at once to explore with
consummate lucidity...
Now if we are to believe that when
first human societies appeared on earth
man achieved a triple transformation,
passing from a state of nature to cul¬
ture, from sentiment to knowledge, and
from an animal-like state to that of
humanity (which is precisely what
Rousseau set out to prove in his Dis¬
course on Inequality) we can do so
only by attributing to man in his very
earliest primitive condition some vital
faculty or quality which impelled him
to make this threefold transition.
And we must consequently assume
that from the very start this quality
latently possessed both contradictory
elements at least as attributes if not
as intrinsic parts, so that it was at
one and the same time both natural
and cultural, emotional and rational,
animal and human. We must also
assume that the transition could be
made from one to the other providing
this quality became conscious in man's
mind.
This quality, as Rousseau repeatedly
stated, is pity which issues from man's
identification with another not just a
relative or a companion or a com¬
patriot, but with any man because he
is a man; and indeed with any living
creature because it is alive.
Early man thus began by intuitively
feeling himself identical with all his
fellow beings. And he never wholly
forgot this feeling even when the rise
of population forced him to migrate
to new lands and to adapt himself to
new modes of living, and led him to
the awakening of his own identity.
But this awakening came only after
he had slowly learned to recognize
the identity of others and to distinguish
the various animals according to their
species, the human state from the ani¬
mal state, and his own individuality
from the individuality of other men.
The recognition that all men and
animals are feeling beings (which is
what identification signifies) long ante¬
dated man's awareness of their differ
ences: first with regard to the char¬
acteristics common to all living
creatures, and only later to the human
as opposed to non-human attributes.
It is with this bold conclusion that
Rousseau put an end to Descarte's
doctrine of the Cogito.
Rousseau's thought thus evolved
from two principles: identification with
another, even the most removed
"other" of all others including
creatures of the animal world; and the
rejection of identification with oneself,
that is to say the rejection of every¬
thing which might make the self seem
"worthy". These two attitudes are
complementary, the second actually
being the springboard for the first: I
am not "me" but the weakest and
humblest of "others". Herein lies the
true originality of the Confessions.
IHE Rousseauist revolution,
as a forerunner and beginning of the
anthropological revolution, lies in the
repudiation of forced identifications
either of a culture with its own culture,
or of an individual member of a culture
with a public figure or rôle which that
culture seeks to impose upon him.
In both cases the culture and the
individual assert their right to free
identification, and this can only be
achieved beyond man, i.e. with all
living and therefore suffering crea¬
tures; and also before the public figure
or rôle, i.e. with a being as such and
not one already shaped and classified.
In this way the "I" and the "he",
freed from the distinction that only
philosophy has sought to encourage,
are once again united and merged.
With their original unity thus restored
at last, they can forge together the
us against the them, that is, against
society antagonistic and inimical to
man, and which man is the more easily
prepared to reject since Rousseau, by
his own example, has taught him how
to escape the intolerable contradictions
of civilized life.
For though it is true that man has
been expelled by nature and that
society continues to oppress him, he
can at least reverse the extremes of
the dilemma to his own advantage by
seeking the society of nature in order
to meditate on the nature of society.
This, it seems to me, is the lasting
message of the Social Contract, the
Letters on Botany and the Reveries...
But it is today, for all of us who have
come to experience Rousseau's pre¬
diction to his readers of "the terror of
those unfortunates who will live after
you," that his thoughts tower to their
full height and reveal the broad sweep
of their horizons...
In this world more cruel to man
perhaps than it has ever been, charged
with extermination in every form, mas¬
sacre and torture not always dis¬
avowed no doubt but comfortably dis¬
missed by us as no longer important
since they were confined to far-off
people who we were told suffered for
our good or at any rate in our name
in this universe of ours become
smaller, more drawn together as our
members steadily augment and with no
fragment of humanity left safe from
insidious attack the anguish of living
in society weighs on us all.
It is today, I repeat, because he put
civilization on trial, pointing a finger
at its iniquities and abuses and denied
that these could possibly lead to the
exercise of virtue in man, that Rous¬
seau can help us to shatter an illusion
the deadly effects of which we are
now able alas to observe in ourselves
and on ourselves. For is it not because
of the myth of the exclusive dignity
of human nature that nature itself

QUOTE... UNQUOTE (Continued trom page 13)
suffered its first mutilation, followed
inevitably by other mutilations?
Never in the course of the past four
centuries has western man been in a
better position to realize that by
arrogating to himself the right to raise
a wall dividing mankind from the beast
in nature, and appropriating to himself
all the qualities he denied the latter,
he set in motion an infernal cycle.
For this same wall was to be pulled
steadily tighter, serving to set some
men apart from other men and to
justify in the minds of an ever-shrinking
minority their claim to being the only
civilization of men. Such a civilization,
based as it was on the principle and
notion of self-conceit, was corrupt from
the very start.
Only Rousseau raised his voice
against this type of egotism. In the
footnote to the Discourse previously
quoted, Rousseau recounts that, from
the clumsy descriptions made by
travellers, he preferred to recognize
the great apes of Africa and Asia as
men of an unknown race rather than
run the risk of denying human nature
to creatures who might possess it.
For the only hope that each of us
can have that we shall not be treated
one day as beasts by our fellow-men
is for all our fellow-men, we first
amongst them, to look upon ourselves
at once as suffering beings, nurturing
within us that faculty for pity which in
nature replaces "laws, morals and
virtue," and without which, as we are
now coming to realize, there can be no
law, no morals and no virtue in society.
|T may well be that this
teaching was already contained in the
great religions of the Far East. But in
the traditions of the West where, ever
since antiquity, it was thought that
one could play a double game and
tamper with the evidence that man
was a living and a suffering being,
no different from all other beings
before secondary factors distinguish¬
ed him from them, who else but Jean-
Jacques Rousseau has made this mes¬
sage available to us?
"I have a violent aversion," Rous¬
seau wrote in his fourth letter to
Monsieur de Malesherbes, "to social
orders that dominate others. I hate the
Great, I hate their condition." Does
not this assertion apply first to man
who has sought to dominate other
living creatures and maintain a separ¬
ate state, thereby giving the least
honourable of men freedom to do the
same to other men and to take advan¬
tage of a notion as disgraceful in this
latter instance as it was in the earlier
broad context.
In a cultivated society there can be
no excuse for the only really inexpiable
crime of man, that of considering him¬
self abidingly or momentarily superior,
or treating men as objects, be it for
reasons of race, culture, conquest,
or merely expediency.
March 1963
