THE POLLUTION
OF THE OCEAN
by Nicolai Gorsky
IJ HE amount of radioactive
substances dissolved in the waters of
the oceans and seas is infinitesimal
and the highly diversified plant and
animal life of the seas and oceans is
accustomed to a very low concentra¬
tion of radioactive substances. It is
precisely from this quarter that a grave
danger has arisen.
It is known that fishes concentrate
NICOLAI GORSKY is a member of the
U.S.S.R. Geographical Society.
phosphorus and zinc in their bodies,
while molluscs and crustaceans con¬
centrate calcium, strontium and a
number of other elements included in
radioactive fission products.
Two days after atomic bomb tests at
Bikini atoll, the radioactivity of the
upper layer of water increased a mil¬
lion times over the normal. Four
months later the radioactivity of the
water 1,500 miles away was three times
greater than the normal. In thirteen
months the contaminated water had
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
33

V
v
o
2
3
r ; "m
c
fc
/ -t~
OUR POISONED PLANET
In the name of progress, Man has opened a
20th century Pandora's Box of smoke, sewage, smog,
detergents and noise which together form one of
the great problems of our age the. pollution of our
planet. We have been dumping waste into rivers
and lakes, fouling the air we breathe, damaging the
soil, and assailing each other with noise, that
by-product of technological civilization which increases
nervous strain, deafness and other mental and physical
disorders (photo bejow). A new noise, the boom of
the supersonic jetliner, will soon be added. Map,
left, shows "boom carpets" that will be "unrolled"
over Western Europe unless restrictions are made
or muffling measures found. ju¡y jgej
Photo © Walter Studer, Berne
POLLUTION OF THE OCEAN (Continued)
spread over an area of over one million
square miles.
Due to the rapid development of the
atomic industry the problem of safely
disposing of radioactive waste-pro¬
ducts has become urgent. In Britain,
radioactive wastes are in some places
drained by pipes into the Irish Sea,
while at Oak Ridge in the United States
they are drained into the Tennessee
River system. Some wastes in the-
United States are buried in the ground
or sunk in the deep sea in special
containers.
The sea water, however, will very
quickly eat through the walls of these
containers and dissolve their danger--
ous contents. If scores, or hundreds,
of containers with their sinister con¬
tents are being thrown Into the sea
today, the number will rise to tens or
hundreds of thousands in the future.
There are deep places or trenches in
the oceans, particularly the Pacific.
The average depth of the ocean is
about two and a half miles, but in
these depressions it reaches between
four and five miles and in places up
to seven miles. Proposals are being
made to use these depressions
as dumping-grounds for radioactive
wastes.
How long will Í radioactive
substances dissolvi he water at
the ocean bottom to rise to the sur¬
face? Will the process of radioactive
decay which is always at work render
them innocuous before they reach the
surface, or will they still be sufficiently
radioactive to poison the upper, pro¬
ductive layers?
S CIENTISTS hold widely
differing views as to the time required
for the water of the ocean bottom to
be renewed. Georg Wüst (Fed. Rep.
of Germany) has calculated that the
cold, heavy Antarctic waters, after des¬
cending to the depths, reach the
equator in five years four months,
while G.E.R. Deacon (Britain) puts the
figure at eighteen years. E.B. Worth-
ington (United States) holds that the
waters at the. bottom of. the Atlantic
date back to 1810 when the .climate
became much colder, and have not
been renewed in the century and a
half that has elapsed since then.
The New Zealand oceanographers,
Brodie and Burling, have put the age
of the Antarctic waters north of Scott
Island at a depth of 8,500 feet at
2,500 years," and of the waters near
Campbell Island at a depth of 2,624 feet
at 1,900 years. The New Zealanders
used the Carbon 14 method to deter¬
mine the age of the water, but others
hold that there are a number of factors
besides time affecting Carbon 14, and
accordingly that these conclusions
must be accepted with caution.
The Danish expedition on the Galatea
and Soviet expeditions on the Vityaz
found dissolved oxygen in water from
the very deepest Pacific trenches.
Water buried at the bottom of the
ocean for hundred of years, let-alone
thousands, could contain no oxygen.
It would be consumed in a much
shorter time by various processes,
both physico-chemical (the oxidation of
mineral substances) and biochemical
(the respiration of living organisms
and the putrefaction of dead ones)
processes that are constantly at work
at the bottom of the ocean and in- the
water above.
The. Danish and Soviet expeditions
discovered various forms of animal life
at the bottom of the ocean trenches,
which had till then been thought to be
void of life. All these animals con¬
sume oxygen continually and they
would long since have exhausted the

jt-fr- ^^^J r^*^£¿
^p ^^^ ^L . *
^L "^jP
ana.P ris
iLanceau
rj 1
>
> 1
© 1 HM
O 1 ^^^^^fl B^*-.t
o 1
The. primitive notion that a river is a sewer has
caused many of the world's waterways to stagnate
and die, killing off their once-teeming plant and
fish life (above). Man's heavy hand is often most
obvious in cities and industrial complexes (right)
where pollution In all its forms creates a choking,
poisoned environment.
supply in the water round them if
there were no currents.
The water in the ocean is not homo¬
geneous; its temperature varies both
vertically and horizontally. What is
more, the water in the ocean is contin¬
ually in motion, neighbouring layers
often moving in different directions.
In this way water of different temper¬
atures is being constantly mixed and
is sinking as it becomes heavier. An
equivalent volume of lighter water is
displaced and rises to the surface.
This eternal process extends to all
the depths of the ocean, apparently
penetrating to the bottom of the
trenches.
We do not know as yet how long it
takes surface water to descend to the
ocean bottom, but evidently its move¬
ment is relatively rapid since it retains
dissolved oxygen.
Among the many depressions studied
by this year's Soviet expedition on the
Vityaz was the Tonga trench, investigat¬
ed six years ago by the Danish expedi¬
tion on the Galatea. Measurements
made this year gave a difference of
0.2o in the temperature of the water.
When one takes into consideration
the great accuracy of the deep-water
thermometers used by oceanographers.
one realizes that this is a significant
deviation indicating the existence of
what is probably a very slow but
continuous exchange of water between
the bottom, intermediate, and surface
layersvof the ocean, even in the regions
of the deepest depressions.
T HE vertical circulation ven¬
tilates the deep layers of the ocean
and also raises to the surface a layer
rich in nutrient phosphates and nitra¬
tes, forming a basis for abundant'life.
But this process will bring death if
pernicious radioactive solutionis from
the wasteproducts of the atomic indus¬
try accumulate In the ocean depths.
There is another phenomepon occur-
ing in the oceans and seas' known as
upwelling. Due to winds, currents or
the relief of the ocean bed, deep, cold
layers of water, rich in nutrient salts,
rise to the surface in some regions
along the continental slope or along
submerged banks. This occurs regu¬
larly along the Atlantic coast of North
America, the California coast and the
western coast of South America and
Africa. The regions where upwelling
occurs are exceptionally rich in plant
and animal life, including fish. If the
water rising to the surface should be
contaminated with substances dis¬
solved from radioactive wastes it will
mean the end of the highly productive
fisheries in these regions.
The oceans and seas are joined to
.form an indivisible whole the World
Ocean. No open part can be con¬
sidered isolated and cannot belong to
any one country. Radioactive sub¬
stances introduced into the ocean at
any spot will be dispersed for
thousands of miles and will con¬
taminate an area of millions of square
miles.
For that reason, all questions con¬
cerning the contamination of the ocean
by radioactive substances, irrespective
of their origin or purpose, acquire
international significance and should be
solved through friendly, concerted
international scientific co-operation.
The rate at which the atomic indus¬
try is developing shows that it is
necessary to set about the study of
this problem immediately. Uncon¬
trolled contamination of the oceans and
seas can lead to Irreparable catas¬
trophe within ten to twenty years. The
Ocean, that great and inexhaustible
source of food for man, is in danger.
July-August 1959
