IMPORTS OF MAJOR WEAPONS
BY DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
(millions of U. S. dollars)
Importers
Greece and Turkey
Middle East
(including the UAR)
North Africa
(Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia)
Sub-Saharan Africa
(the rest of Africa excluding South Africa)
South Africa
Indian Sub-continent
(Afganistan, Ceylon, India Pakistan)
Far East
(excluding Mainland China, Japan, North Viet-
Nam and the Republic of Viet-Nam)
Central America
(All countries from Panama north to the USA)
South America
TOTAL excluding North Viet-Nam and the Republic
of Viet-Nam
North Viet-Nam and the Republic of Viet-Nam
TOTAL
240 640
1.470 1,200
1,500 | 1,670
Tables taken from the SIPRI Yearbook of World Armaments and Disarmament Figures
rounded to nearest 10. or to nearest 5 when under 10. Values calculated at constant
1968 prices.
EXPORTS OF MAJOR WEAPONS
to areas in table above (North Viet-Nam and the Republic
of Viet-Nam excluded)
(millions of U.S. dollars)
Exporters 1950 1958 1968
France
Canada
Mainland China
Federal Republic of Germany
Czechoslovakia
Sweden
All other
TOTAL
30
1,470 | 1,200

Super-arms for developing countries
ILITARY expenditure in
the developing countries is only a
small fraction of the world total; but it
seems to have risen rather faster than
world military expenditure as a whole
and to have been accelerating
recently.
The spread of existing sophisticated
weapons through the Third World is a
very significant aspect of the arms
competition there. This "horizontal"
proliferation is the complement to the
technological arms race which is per¬
haps the most important feature of the
arms competition in the developed
countries. More and more developing
countries are acquiring fighters,
ground-to-air missiles, and so on. The
Third World countries do not, for the
most part, produce these sophisticated
weapons themselves; the weapons are
supplied by the industrial nations.
Some Third World countries, such as
Israel and India, are beginning to pro¬
duce more sophisticated weapons; but
these weapons are usually produced
under licence with a substantial pro¬
portion of imported components.
- The arms competition in the Third
World would be very different if it
were not for the fact that the great
powers are seeking influence there.
They may be looking for strategically
placed allies, they may be anxious to
support regimes friendly to them
against internal armed opposition, or
they may wish to protect their eco¬
nomic interests or to gain general sup¬
port for foreign policy (in the form
of votes in the United Nations, for
example). One of the main methods
of exerting influence is by supplying
arms.
There are some important qualifica¬
tions about the figures and information
discussed here and shown in the tables
opposite. The figures are, as far
as is known, the first comprehensive
quantitative estimates which show how
the trends have changed in the past
two decades. They are based on
incomplete unofficial information offi¬
cial figures are virtually non-existent.
The tables are limited to the
supply of major weapons: ships, air¬
craft, armoured fighting vehicles and
missiles. Because no support equip¬
ment and no other weapons are in¬
cluded, they represent only a part
but an important part of the arms
trade.
The figures are constructed to
represent the "real" transfer of resour¬
ces. They are based on comparable
values for comparable items, using
such criteria as speed, weight, type of
engine, date of production. They do
not take into account differing prices
or differing terms for individual trans¬
actions, such as aid, credit, loans or
subsidies. That is, they attempt to
measure the quantum of resources
represented by the weapons, not the
cost in foreign currency paid by the
recipient country.
"In drawing conclusions from these
figures," says the SIPRI report,
"we have allowed for their wide
margin of error. In dealing with the
arms trade with these countries, it
seemed right to construct the best pic¬
ture we could, using our own judge¬
ment on information from all kinds
of sources. The alternative using
official information only would have
meant that little or nothing could be
said on a matter of great international
importance.
"There is also a caution on the use
the military expenditure figures. They
cover the military expenditure of the
countries out of their own domestic
resources: military aid is included in
the budget of the donor countries."
Major weapon supplies to Third
World countries have been rising even
faster than their military expenditures.
The long-term trend from 1950 to 1968,
has been for the supply of weapons
to increase, in volume terms, by some
9 per cent a year, against 7 per cent
a year for military spending. It has
not been a smooth rise over the eigh¬
teen years: there was a high point
around 1958, when United States mili¬
tary aid was at its height, and there
has been a rapid increase since 1962.
In 1968 deliveries of major weapons
to the Third World countries, at
$1,700 million, were higher than ever
before: they were around $300 mil¬
lion, or 15 per cent, above the 1967
figure.
growing number of Third
World countries have acquired super¬
sonic fighters, anti-aircraft missiles
and helicopters for military use. The
helicopter is becoming more and more
important in the weapons inventory of
the great powers and this is also true
for Third World countries.
The two main areas responsible for
the increase in major weapon sup¬
plies since 1962 have been the Middle
East and North Viet-Nam and the
Republic of Viet-Nam. In 1968, these
two areas accounted for 70 per cent
of total major arms deliveries. In the
Middle East, it was not only the
re-equipment which followed the Six-
Day War which made up the massive
influx of weapons: there were exten¬
sive arms purchases by Saudi Arabia,
Iran and Kuwait. In addition, there
were in this period significant increa¬
ses in major arms supplies to South
Africa and the four North African
countries.
The pattern of the short-term in¬
crease from 1967 to 1968 was a little
different. Again, it was dominated by
the Middle East, but in addition there
were notable increases in arms sup¬
plies to the Indian sub-continent and
to South America: in both these areas
the trend had previously been falling.
The United States, the Soviet Union,
Britain and France dominate the mar¬
ket for major arms exports. During the
1950s these four countries accounted
for 80 per cent of major arms supplies
to the Third World. During the 1960s,
this proportion had increased to 90 per
cent, and it is still rising.
The United States share of major
arms supplies to the Third World has
fallen both absolutely and relatively
since the end of the 1950s. Since
1960, the emphasis of US military
assistance policy has shifted from the
defence of states from possible exter¬
nal attack to the defence of govern¬
ments from possible internal insurrec¬
tion: developing countries have been
encouraged to acquire counter-insur¬
gency equipment rather than sophisti¬
cated conventional equipment.
Such items include helicopters,
trainers, patrol boats, refurbished
World War II combat aircraft, which
are relatively inexpensive. The Arms
Trade Register for 1968 shows that a
large part of the equipment supplied by
the United States in 1968, particularly
in Latin America consisted of these
items.
Major arms supplies from the Soviet
Union have risen throughout the
period. In the last few years, the
Soviet Union has exported roughly the
same quantity of major weapons as
the United States. The most rapid
increase in Soviet major arms supplies
occurred in the second half of the
1950s. Between 1954-58 and 1959-
63, major arms supplies from the
Soviet Union doubled. Between
1960-64 and 1964-68, they rose by
only about 10 per cent.
The first arms agreement with Egypt
was made in 1955; it was followed
soon after by a similar agreement with
Syria. In 1958 the Soviet Union began
supplying arms to Iraq and Indonesia,
and a little later to Africa. Arms sup¬
plies to India and Cuba began in 1960.
Although major arms supplies to India
and the Middle East have increased
substantially in recent years, the total
Soviet rise has been relatively small
because of a considerable reduction in
supplies to Indonesia and Cuba, which
reached their height in 1962.
In the short term, major arms sup- .j n
plies from both the United States and I A
the Soviet Union have risen, particu¬
larly in the Middle East. The Soviet .
Union has been meeting the replace-

DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (Continued)
ment requirements of the U.A.R. and
Syria, while the United States has
been supplying sophisticated equip¬
ment to Israel, Jordan and Iran.
Britain and France together account
for approximately 20 per cent of total
major arms supplies during the period.
The British share has fallen since the
end of the 1950s. The level of sup¬
plies from France has risen throughout
the period, though not continuously;
it is now approaching equality with the
level of British supplies.
During the 1950s, a large propor¬
tion of British arms were supplied to
countries which had had traditional
military ties with Britain, or to ex-colo¬
nies. Many of these traditional reci¬
pients have turned to other sources.
The U.A.R. and Iraq turned to the Soviet
Union. Jordan is receiving more and
more weapons from the United States,
and India from the Soviet Union. An
embargo has been placed on British
arms supplies to South Africa, which
has consequently turned to France.
In the short term, there have been
rapid rises in both British and French
major arms supplies. In 1968, Britain
and France accounted for 35 per cent
of total major arms supplies. France
has determinedly expanded its markets
in South Africa and in Latin America
and South Asia. The embargo on
Israel has been accompanied by an
increase in orders from and deliveries
to the Arab countries. France conti¬
nues to supply arms to French ex-colo¬
nies A large part of the recent
increase in British major arms supplies
has consisted of deliveries to the oil
rich countries of the Middle East.
Among the other suppliers, Canada,
the Fed. Rep. of Germany and Italy
have increased their exports in the last
few years. Major arms supplies from
Italy and Canada were also high during
the 1950s, in relation to their current
level. Canada was selling Sabre
fighters, built under licence from the
. United States, during the 1950s; it is
now selling Canadian built and design¬
ed transports. Italy is selling trainers
and helicopters. During the 1950s,
Italian exports consisted primarily of
ships.
The rise in major arms supplies
from the Fed. Rep. of Germany to
countries outside Europe has consisted
of surplus equipment. Iran and
Venezuela, in particular, have pur¬
chased large quantities of ex-Luft¬
waffe F-86 fighters.
The Swedish defence industry is
comparable in sophistication to those
of Britain and France. However, Swe¬
dish exports of major weapons to the
Third World have been extremely low
and have fallen to an almost negligible
amount during the 1960s. This is prob¬
ably the result of the increasingly res¬
trictive Swedish arms trade policy.
14 The above text is abridged from the SIPRI
Yearbook of World Armaments and
Disarmament 1968-1969, published by the
Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute.

