If there is one symbol that typifies Carthage,
it is certainly the so-called "sign of Tanit",
which has received a host of interpretations
down the centuries. Originally, the sign
of Tanit was a trapezium crowned by a
horizontal line with a circle above it.
Later the trapezium became a simple isosceles
triangle. One variant is shown on right.
A crescent moon and sun were often
depicted above it. Tanit was the female
consort of Ba'al Hammon, a leading deity
of ancient Carthage. She was the
goddess of fertility and protector of the dead.
She may also be symbolized on miniature
obelisk (centre photo) of 4th century B.C.
Breasts symbolizing fertility surmount
lunar and solar emblems. Other Tanit
motifs are published on page 40. Right,
"nezem" (nose-ring) terracotta mask used
in religious ceremonies (6th-7th century
B.C.). Eye pupils and lashes were
painted black and the face bright red. In
ancient Carthage, men as well as women
wore nose-rings. Other masks with grimacing
demon faces were worn by cult dancers
(see colour photo page 24).
t,
V
Photo Georges Viol Ion© Rapho, Paris
4
Two thousand years ago the Roman
Senate rang with Marcus Porcius
Cato's fanatical cry " Delenda est
Carthago " (Carthage must be
destroyed). Not long thereafter the
Roman legions sacked the Punic
capital and razed it to the ground.
Today, on the shores of the
Mediterranean, only a few miles from
Tunis, the remains of ancient
Carthage and the lovely Medina of
Tunis itself are threatened by a new
menace : submersion and destruction
in a sea of urban concrete. Unesco
and the Tunisian Government are
facing the challenge and have just
embarked on an ambitious programme
for the safeguard and development
of the Carthage-Tunis region. It
is to the story of Carthage's glorious
past and the cultural legacy that the
Medina represents that this issue of
the " Unesco Courier "is devoted.

CARTHAGE
MUST NOT
BE DESTROYED
by Jellal El Kafi
JELLAL EL KAFI of Tunisia is co-director of the project for the development
of the Tunis-Carthage region (Unesco and U.N. Development Programme
Special Fund). A specialist in urban planning, he is director of the Asso¬
ciation for the Protection of the Tunis Medina, and has written numerous
studies and articles on the problems involved in preserving the Medina.

i
mmtmmmÊm
ho
Ji
Vh
I
N the history of Tunisia
an ancient crossroads of civilizations
in the Mediterranean world Carthage
is one of the peaks rising from a cul¬
tural landscape that stretches back
over several thousand years. Yet we
who live in Carthage have seen the
start and now watch the advance of a
process that threatens to destroy the
city and its site, so that one day
Carthage may be no more than a
memory.
The plight of Carthage is not unique.
In all parts of the world, dozens of
ancient sites and cities seem doomed
to disappear. These irreplaceable
treasures of man's cultural heritage
demand to be reprieved, to be saved
from obliteration by the tentacular
spread of cities and industries.
This is something that all of us must
have realized, whether we have stud¬
ied the problems of urban develop¬
ment or whether one day we simply
noticed that the trees in a familiar
square had been chopped down to
make way for a car park.
The damage we are doing to our
environment has become a world-wide
issue. Each day we read of new
acts of violence against nature, and
everyone who witnesses this continu
ing process of destruction, whether
scientist or layman, feels a sense
of personal injury and loss from these
depredations.
Yet the defacement of sites of natu¬
ral beauty and the blotting out of his¬
torical and archaeological remains
seems to go on unabated, until public
opinion finally comes to accept the
process of deterioration that accompa¬
nies the spread of cities. This passive
resignation leads us to hand over
archaeological sites to be exploited by
the kind of uncontrolled urban develop¬
ment that quickly covers them with a
chaotic sprawl of houses and hotels.
The effects of this destruction are
everywhere apparent, yet public opin¬
ion seems to assent to this urban and
industrial aggression, which ends by
radically modifying man's relationship
to his natural environment and effacing
the vestiges of his historic past.
Today, the city of Carthage and the
surrounding area is reduced to little
more than a handful of scattered ruins,
fast disappearing, and a countryside
marred by unattractive buildings. The
ancient Punic ports still reflect the
grandeur of the Carthage of old, but
future generations may find no trace
of the Punic and Roman towns, buried
Photos Luc Joubert © Archaeologla Viva, Paris
as they seem likely to be under the
bricks and mortar of a modern housing
complex.
Not long ago, when the temples of
Abu Simbel in Nubia were threatened
by the waters of the Nile, Unesco's
Director-General, René Maheu, declar¬
ed that it was inconceivable that the
men of today should fail to preserve,
for themselves and for posterity, the
heritage handed down by their ances¬
tors. Unesco launched an international
campaign and Abu Simbel was saved.
But what of Carthage, another trea¬
sure of man's cultural heritage, whose
importance in the history of Tunis and
to our knowledge of the early Medi¬
terranean world is recalled in this
issue of the "Unesco Courier"?
And how is Carthage to be saved?
This is a question which the Tunisian
government and Unesco, co-operating
in the Tunis-Carthage project, are
trying to answer. They have begun
by systematically surveying the pre¬
sent state of sites and monuments
prior to drawing up a plan of restorat¬
ion and conservation.
In cultural rescue operations, whe¬
ther the site is Venice threatened by
floodwaters or the Tunis Medina faced
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

CARTHAGE MUST NOT BE DESTROYED (Continued)
From Tunis to the walls of Carthage
the spectrum of concrete
with the pressures of urban expansion,
the basic problems are identical, and
the methods and scope of conserva¬
tion vary only in relation to the resour¬
ces available.
Damage to the environment seems
most often to result from rapid growth
which state or local authorities have
failed to meet with a coherent policy
of urban planning. Whatever the site,
the same problems arise: a population
explosion that sets off unchecked
urban expansion; the chaotic and
uncontrolled use of land by industry;
the relentless spread of road networks.
There are, of course, other problems
more specific to buildings and monu¬
ments such as stone decay and disea¬
ses of wood aggravated by the
effects of time and weather. But stone
can better withstand the aging pro¬
cess than the lack of planning for its
care, or even worse, laws that pros
cribe any kind of development at all,
good or bad.
Carthage is a typical example. Pho¬
tographs taken at the beginning of
the century show the Punic ports in
unspoilt surroundings flanked by
protective ramparts of land. Today, a
haphazard sprawl of roads and houses
encircles the two basins which form a
site that any promoter or hotel con¬
structor would be eager to convert
into a tourist centre.
It would be absurd to reject outright
any form of tourist development. But
it would be tragic if the remarkable
complex formed by the Punic ports
should end up as a site for tourist res¬
taurants and bungalows, especially
when due to lack of funds, archaeolo¬
gical research on the site is nowhere
near complete.
The remarkable remains of a civili¬
zation which left its imprint on the
soil of Tunisia thousands of years ago
are too important to be merely record¬
ed in books. They should be studied
scientifically and above all protected so
that future generations may continue
the research. For this, a coherent
programme of archaelogical studies is
needed together with regulations for
the work of excavation and an ade¬
quate budget.
But when it comes to deciding which
research methods to use we face a
serious problem. Isolated research,
undertaken without a methodical plan
of campaign, has often led to amateu¬
rish efforts and produced pitiful results.
It is better for a site to remain pro¬
tected by its covering of earth than
for it to undergo piecemeal dissection.
We have the example of Punic and
Roman objects found on sites in Tuni¬
sia. Some, although widely dispersed,
are safely housed in local museums or
Photo © Archaeologia Viva, Paris Photo © André Martin, Pari!

Right, ruined splendours
of Roman Carthage.
These columns, carvings
and truncated walls are
the remains of a palatial
villa built at the start of
the 3rd century A.D. in the
colony founded by Rome
after its destruction of
Carthage in 146 B.C.
in those of Europe and elsewhere.
But others have passed into the hands
of antique dealers or, worse still, of
traders to whom the tourist, as if guid¬
ed by some sixth sense, goes to buy
his "souvenirs".
In this way, objects of archaeologi¬
cal interest have acquired a commer¬
cial value to the detriment of their
importance as sources for historic and
ethnographic studies. All along the
Tunisian coast, punie stelae, tear-
bottles and Roman pottery can be had
for the asking at a price.
Here we see the failure of an out-
Master shipbuilders, the Carthaginians
were no less skilful port engineers.
To house their vast fleet of merchant
ships and the galleys that protected
them, they built two ports at Carthage.
Their military port still retains its
original circular shape (photo left).
Two hundred and twenty ships could
anchor in its waters. Connecting
it to the outer commercial port
was a narrow channel that could be
blocked by massive chains when
danger threatened. From the island at
the centre, the Carthaginian Admiralty
passed its orders to the ships by
trumpet calls or signals flashed by
mirrors reflecting the sun's rays.
Today, houses of the small town of
Le Kram cover the peninsula that
runs southwards away from the port.
At top right is the Tunis Lake, cut off
from the open sea by a long causeway
that stretches to Tunis (just out of
sight on top right). Air photo (far left)
shows entire Carthage area almost
completely covered with modern
buildings. Lagoon below circular port
at Salammbô is presumed site of
former commercial port. Left of place
name "Carthage" is the Hill of Byrsa,
the acropolis of ancient Carthage,
on which the city was born.
moded archaeological method that has
all the appearance of a treasure hunt,
concerned primarily with the search for
artefacts and often far removed from
any real interest in the ancient city
itself. Once the thesis has been pub¬
lished and the artefacts are stored in
a museum, what does it matter what
happens to the excavation site, left
unprotected and in disorder?
Despoiled of its treasures and aban¬
doned, Carthage is finding it hard to
resist the pressures of urban develop¬
ment. The conflict between the needs
of the archaeological zone and those
of urban space is everywhere apparent.
Not a month goes by without the foun¬
dations of a new building being laid
on an archaeological site that is of
essential interest to the study of the
ancient city.
By the early 1930s, Tunis was begin¬
ning to break out from its city bounda¬
ries. The spread to the coastal area
began, soon to be followed by en¬
croachment on the site of Carthage
itself which became dotted with villas
and bungalows.
It is now clear that the problem of
urban development is even more acute
than that of the archaeological sites,
although the two are closely linked,
and that If the Tunis-Carthage project
is to work effectively, the deterioration
throughout the area has to be studied
and priorities established.
Unless a plan of integrated develop¬
ment is adopted, the present encroach¬
ment on archaeological, historic and
natural sites will result in their total
destruction by about 1985. Carthage,
the Tunis Medina, the picturesque area
of Sidi bou Said and the hills, dunes
and olive groves of the Tunisian coast¬
line will have been irreparably spoilt
by an urban sprawl sparked off by
population pressure.
By 1985, the population of Tunis
will number between 1,600,000 and
2,000,000at least twice the present
figure. By that time, the coastal area
will have become a landscape of brick
and concrete in the midst of which the
archaeological site will occupy a tiny
place devoid of all interest. In that
case it would perhaps be better if it
disappeared completely.
Moreover, the disappearance of the
archaeological zone would have a
serious effect on the Tunis area. Cen¬
tralization would increase to a danger
point whilst the surrounding country
would be defaced by haphazard spread
of new suburbs, and the exhausting
daily round of commuting would be¬
come part of the Tunis way of life.
An archaeological zone or green
space would do much to maintain an
equilibrium in the city and in its envi¬
ronment. The dangers of the megalo¬
polis and the monotony of endless
rows of concrete blocks have been
described too often by town planners
for us to be excused for failing to heed
their warning. Open spaces and
archaeological sites should be preserv¬
ed and harmoniously integrated with
the Tunis urban complex, so as to
bring the values of nature and history
into its daily life.
Integration of the archaeological
zone into the urban area may, at first
sight, seem of secondary importance
to the urgent task of economic de¬
velopment. But the zone constitutes
a powerful tourist attraction and its im¬
provement can be fully justified as a
factor in economic development as
well as on purely cultural grounds.
Indeed, abandon of the Carthage
site would have the effect of hamper¬
ing economic development, since tour¬
ism, which brings the country much
needed foreign currency, would in all
probability decline.
Within this framework of integrated
development, the Tunis-Carthage pro¬
ject proposes a plan for the organi-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

The first coins made in
Carthage were struck early
in the 4th century B.C. when
a mint was set up on Byrsa Hill.
Left, a war horse, the martial
emblem of Carthage on a 3rd
century B.C. coin. Above the
horse is a solar disc with two
stylized representations of the
sacred asp. Known as a uraeus,
it often served ancient rulers
as a symbol of sovereignty.
The great Punic maritime
traditions live on in
this fragment of a mosaic
(right) decorating a
rainwater cistern in a 3rd
century Roman villa not far
from Tunis. As two fishermen
draw in their net, a third
hurls a spear at an octopus.
Mosaic and coin (left)
are both from the Bardo
Museum, Tunis.
Photo © Pierro Mele, Paris
CARTHAGE MUST NOT BE DESTROYED (Continued)
8
zation of the area which takes into
account:
The archaeological and historic
zones (Carthage and the Tunis Me¬
dina),
The hotel development required for
the promotion of cultural tourism,
Population pressure and the irre¬
versible process of rapid urban
expansion.
These three factors are inseparable;
it would be meaningless to tackle one
without the others. If we accept that
saturation of the site is likely to be
reached in 1985, we might just as
well plan for systematically structured
urban unit developments which would
include archaeological sites and open
spaces, both as an aid to economic
development and to give balance to
the area.
The Tunis-Carthage project's fore¬
cast of population distribution in 1985
is:
Tunis 1,300,000 inhabitants,
Northern coastal area220,000,
Southern coastal area 170,000,
a total capacity of 1,690,000 inha¬
bitants in 1985.
In the Tunis urban unit, a policy of
re-vitalization would restore to the
Medina its rightful role as city centre
and focus of activity. The division
between the "colonial town" and the
"Arab quarter" would disappear and
the spread of "shanty-town" dwellings
would be halted and reversed.
In the northern coastal area, the .
development of the archaeological
zone accompanied by controlled and
organized urban growth, could well
have favourable economic results pro¬
vided that the archaeological remains
can be combined with a historical evo¬
cation of Carthage in such a way as
to present a coherent whole.
The southern coastal urban area,
adjoining the industrial zone, would
stretch out towards the magnificent
beaches of Cap Bon, linking Tunis
with the vast tourist facilities the coun¬
try possesses.
In contrast to these natural tourist
attractions, Tunis itself would offer
the visitor cultural interest in an urban
setting.
Cultural resources can be looked
upon as consumer goods or as raw
materials whose development justifies
capital investment. Profits accrue
both directly, in the tourist economy
sector, and indirectly, in the side
effects on urban development.
Thus although the re-establishment
of the Tunis-Carthage heritage of
monuments is intended primarily to
encourage economic development, this
approach is the only one which can
provide an answer to the archaeolo¬
gical problem of saving Carthage and
ensuring continued research on the
Punic and Roman cities.
Even now measures can be taken
to protect the archaeological zone
while waiting for more extensive
research to begin. Some sites can
be classified as temporarily or per¬
manently barred to builders and others
listed as requiring restrictive develop¬
ment. As soon as funds become
available, a systematic, overall plan of
research relating to the various
periods of the city's history would
determine which sites were of real
archaeological value and thus allow
the others to be released for building.
This brief survey gives some idea
of the task facing the international
team of experts and their Tunisian
counterparts who are attempting to
analyse the process of deterioration of
the archaeological site, Carthage, and
the historic town, the Tunis Medina.
Their proposals for Integrated deve¬
lopment can, however, only become a
reality when an international campaign
has provided the funds required for
the work of excavation, conservation
and development.
Unesco's co-operation, at the
request of the Tunisian Government,
will be a decisive' factor in the rescue
of Carthage.
