The sane
community
a density
problem ? by Paul Leyhausen
26
AN is supposed to be the
all-round-adaptable animal. Yet in
modern times an ever-increasing num¬
ber of medical, psychological and
social workers is concerned with the
care, and if possible the cure, of an
even more rapidly growing number of
socially ill-adapted, maladjusted indi¬
viduals. According to common belief,
Man is also an essentially social
animal. However, beliefs vary widely as
to how Man as a social being should
behave. Thus it is hard to define con¬
clusively the individual's place in the
community.
In an attempt to find out something
which might also throw light on #the
fabric of human societies, no animal
species living in some sort of social
organization has been spared compa¬
rison, from ape and wolf down to bee
and ant. On such findings the value
of which cannot be doubted a variety
of theories has been based.
At present the prevailing opinion is
that there is always some kind of co¬
operation between or combination of
nature and nurture as the two possible
sources of human social behaviour,
with the emphasis heavily on nurture,
especially learning. However, the
argument continues, and as more de¬
tailed data and facts are amassed, we
seem to get further from a comprehen¬
sive understanding of the patterns and
forces underlying the social life and
development of our own species.
Under the circumstances, it may
PAUL LEYHAUSEN, of the Federal Republic
of Germany, is head of a study group at
the Max Planck Institute for Behavioral
Physiology, in Wuppertal, Fed. Rep. of
Germany and professor of Ethology at the
University of Dusseldorf. Prof. Leyhausen
is also a lecturer in comparative psycho¬
logy at the University of Bonn. He has
devoted many years to research on the
ethology and sociology of mammals, parti¬
cularly those of the cat family.
seem odd to expect any new clue to
be gained from the study of solitary
animals instead of those living in a
community. Certainly, when Dr. Rose-
marie Wolff and I, at first indepen¬
dently and not knowing about each
other, started to investigate the beha¬
viour of free-ranging domestic cats, we
did not envisage this surprising result.
First let me recall some facts about
the ranking order or dominance hierar¬
chy which the Danish psychologist
T. Schjelderup-Ebbe discovered some
forty years ago in the domestic fowl
and which, with very slight variation
only, seem to apply to almost all verte¬
brates which live in social groups.
Schjelderup-Ebbe found that the
hens of a barnyard do not by any
means have equal rights, but establish
among themselves a "peck-order" in
which each individual is allocated a
definite place on the social ladder
which it is normally unable to alter.
Usually a subordinate does not even
try to fight a superior animal even if
grossly provoked. When it does, it is
almost invariably quickly subdued.
Very rarely, and only after prolonged
and bitter fighting, does an inferior
animal succeed in improving its social
position by degrading a formerly
superior one.
The resulting ranking order is mostly
linear: hen A pecks B but is not peck¬
ed by her, B pecks C but is not peck¬
ed by her, C is thus automatically
inferior to A, and so on throughout the
whole flock. Quarrelling usually occurs
only between individuals separated by
one step of the social ladder...
The resulting social hierarchy is very
rigid, and it is absolute, meaning that
the ranking between any two given in¬
dividuals of the flock, once established,
is observed at all times, in all places,
and under all circumstances. Through¬
out this article, therefore, it will be
called "absolute social hierarchy". The
main prerequisite of its proper function-
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited.
ing is that all the members of a com¬
munity know each other individually.
This kind of social hierarchy prevails
largely in communities of animals nor¬
mally living together as adults and in
families which break up as soon as the
young are capable of looking after
themselves the parent(s) always hold¬
ing the top position(s). Since the social
habits of most, if not all, vertebrates
living in communities have evolved in
that they ceased to break up their
families after the young had reached
maturity, the evolution of absolute
social hierarchy has its roots in family
life itself.
Solitary animals would not seem to
need any kind of social order. They
occupy a piece of land, a so-called
territory, on which they will not allow
any other member of the same species
to stay, the only exception being a
mate during the reproductive season.
Within his territory the owner is
with very few exceptions which we
need not go into here superior to all
strangers, and easily wins if an Intruder
should actually choose to stay and
fight. His courage and self-assurance
diminish as the distance from the cen¬
tre of his territory increases. Thus,
neighbouring individuals soon find a
line of balance between them, and
once such a boundary has been
established neither will go beyond it.
Territories of this kind were first
observed in birds by B. Altum and
H. E. Howard independently. It is in
birds that they have since been best
and most extensively studied, with the
result that bird biology and bird beha¬
viour have largely framed the whole
concept of territory.
Professor Heini Hediger of Zurich
Zoo was the first to realize that the
original concept had to undergo cer¬
tain adaptations if it was to be of
good use when studying solitary mam¬
mals. He pointed out that a mam¬
malian territory consisted not so much

Photo Jean-François Ferré © Fotogram, Paris
Animal communities and human societies react to overcrowding in exactly the same way,
say scientists. Studying the effects of overcrowding on animals, they have found
that even so-called solitary animals such as the cat have strictly organized social
hierarchies, and that cat behaviour and social patterns too are influenced by overcrowding
in the territories they "occupy".
of a solid area as of a number of
places first and second order homes,
spots for sunbathing and resting, look¬
out posts and feeding areas connect¬
ed by a network of pathways. The
owner of the territory moves along the
paths to his various points of interest
and activity according to a more or
less fixed timetable, and the spaces
enclosed by the pathway network are
seldom or never used.
In defending their territories, most
solitary mammals are at a great disad¬
vantage as compared with birds. They
cannot lift themselves onto the highest
perch and from there survey the whole
of their territory, and most mammals
do not "mark" their presence acoust¬
ically as song-birds do. Thus they
often fail to notice trespassers. The
border areas of domestic cat territories
overlap considerably in the sense that
pathways and places of interest are
shared even if the first order homes
are well spaced out.
"Sharing" in this context does not
necessarily mean that the animals
concerned are on good terms with
each other. When they meet on disput¬
able ground they may fight. But with
territorial behaviour being dependent
on proximity to the territory centre
(first order home) the victorious cat
will not extend its pursuit of the defeat¬
ed one too far into unknown territory
and too far away' from its own home.
Thus, unlike dominance in a group
governed by absolute social hierarchy,
superiority gained through territorial
fighting is from the start more or less
confined to the locality of the fight
and, after a series of such fights at
different localities, the ranking bet¬
ween the neighbouring individuals still
applies only in the border area and
may even be reversed from one spot
to the next according to the distance
from their respective first order homes.
Nor is this the only condition limiting
the ranking order resulting from terri¬
torial fighting. The timetable of an
animal's movements about its territory
is constant enough to enable one for
merly beaten in a territorial fight over
a certain spot or path to adjust its
schedule with regard to that spot so as
to avoid the risk of an encounter with
the victorious opponent...
From all this, it will have become
apparent that, quite unlike absolute
social hierarchy, any ranking between
two individuals based on the outcome
of territorial fighting is largely subject
to locality and time. I therefore call
it "relative social hierarchy..."
Both types of social hierarchy can
be present in the same animal species.
The chaffinch for instance, as the
extensive studies of Peter Marler have
shown, changes seasonally from one
type to the other in correlation with its
reproductive cycle. In the cat, abso¬
lute ranking order is normally estab¬
lished among the siblings of a litter,
and also among the adult male cats of
a region.
Males keep less strictly than females
to a defined area surrounding their
homes, and when rutting they tend to
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

THE SANE COMMUNITY (Continued)
From battery hen to battery consumer
28
wander well beyond what may be con¬
sidered as their territory proper.
Accordingly they frequently meet at
places which none of them claims as
territory. The result, after some seri¬
ous fighting, is a fixed ranking order
between the males of quite a wide
area, and then the serious fighting
practically ceases.
Yet there is one striking difference
as compared with the absolute rank¬
ing order within a group which lives
together all the time: the torn cats,
after meeting outside their own ter¬
ritorial grounds, return to their homes
and into their territorial rights where
their supremacy is not challenged,
whatever their rank may be "outside."
Here they heal their wounds and regain
their confidence, and thus are never
as totally and utterly subdued as the
lowest-ranking in a permanent social
group.
If In a region there are several torn
cats almost evenly matched, they
have it out with each other and after¬
wards are very careful not to provoke
any more serious fighting, which might
only endanger their position. At first
this relationship resembles an armed
truce, but as the animals gradually be¬
come accustomed to each other it
leads eventually to friendship, in the
limited sense that the animals may like
being together for a while and even
keep company in their pursuit of love
and ... novice males.
Such a loose and temporary asso¬
ciation of adult males I have called a
brotherhood. Their competition for
females attains a pro-forma quality,
and it is largely the females who make
the choice. Hard and continued fight¬
ing ensues, however, when some¬
where in the brotherhood's region
there is a young torn just reaching
maturity and setting out to battle his
way into the brotherhood.
Singly or together, the "brethren"
walk up to the youngster's home and
summon him to fight. Since the adoles¬
cent will not accept defeat as any sen¬
sible adult would, he will continue to
challenge any member of the establish¬
ment until he has either won his place
among them or is finally defeated and
either driven out of the neighbourhood
or even killed.
It would, however, be entirely wrong
to deduce from the foregoing that fight¬
ing and mutual repulsiveness are the
only factors forming the basis of the
social structure of so-called solitary
mammals. It has frequently been
observed in songbirds, and even some
fish, that, after fighting initially over
the boundaries of their territories, they
eventually come to tolerate neighbours
coming close to the boundary and
occasionally even trespassing, but still
drive off all trespassing strangers.
With cats, relations between neigh¬
bours need not stop at sharing border
areas by mutually avoiding all encoun¬
ters. They may tolerate each other
within seeing distance or even greet
each other in a friendly manner before
separating again... Thus, solitary ani¬
mals are certainly not asocial and
some form of friendly neighbourliness
may develop.
It will be evident by now that relative
social hierarchy, being associated as
it is with territorial behaviour, is inse¬
parably linked to the spacing out of
the Individuals of a population, that is
to population density.
Density as a factor in the inner ma¬
chinery of absolute social hierarchy is
not so obvious at first glance. Its
importance is shown best by the fact
that species which under normal free-
ranging conditions show no recogniz¬
able signs of any ranking within the
group, for example the Brown Rat or
the Night Heron, will establish absolute
social hierarchy when crowded.
T
| HE influence of the density
factor can be easily studied by keeping
groups of animals of either social type
under conditions where density can be
manipulated. The effect of increasing
density on absolute social hierarchy is
invariably to emphasize the tyrannical
aspect of the system until life becomes
practically unbearable for everyone in
the group except the overlord, and in
time the strain and stress of having to
assert himself begins to tell even on
him, whether the species under obser¬
vation be doves, or wolves, or goats.
Hence absolute social hierarchy is also
dependent on density and room for
man if it is to work without
lasting detriment to the group.
With relative social hierarchy, results
do not seem quite so clearcut at first.
Again, cats provided us with the first
clues. Other investigators as well as
myself found that any given group of
cats kept in close confinement did not
seem to develop an unvarying rank
order, although as density increased
one animal, usually a male, might
emerge as undisputed overlord, and
one other animal or even two as
"pariahs" who eventually could not
make the slightest movement without
provoking attack from some other
animal in the group.
Since the only known kind of rank¬
ing order at that time was the one de¬
scribed here as absolute social hierar¬
chy, these observations were explain¬
ed by assuming that cats, being solit¬
ary animals by nature, simply lacked
the potentiality for forming a stable
ranking order.
Only after observation of free-rang¬
ing cats had suggested tô me the exis¬
tence of a second principle of rank¬
ing, namely relative social hierarchy,
and after I had realized that cats are
quite capable of establishing absolute
hierarchy, within the litter as well as
the torn cat brotherhood, it dawned
upon me that what we observed in the
caged cats might simply be a mixture
of the two kinds. In short with increas¬
ing density absolute hierarchy be¬
comes more and more prominent
and the manifestations of relative
hierarchy dwindle away.
Another idea arose from this: since
even in animals commonly regarded as
solitary and asocial some traces of
communal life could be found which
are governed by absolute social hie¬
rarchy, perhaps in animals normally
living in large groups ostensibly gov¬
erned by absolute social hierarchy
there were marginal parts of their
social life in which relative hierarchy
prevailed? In between these two
extremes there might be many animal
species habitually showing some signs
of both kinds of hierarchy?
There is at least some indirect
evidence pointing in that direction:
some species, like the African lion
and the grizzly bear, have a faculty for
living either as solitary, territorial
animals, or in groups more or less
determinedly defending group territo¬
ries, according to habitat or season.
Herding animals like the wapiti deer
show territorial behaviour in some re¬
gions but not in others.
These observations show that both
kinds of social organization are poten¬
tially present in these and other mam¬
malian species. Taken with the results
obtained from captive communities,
they also suggest that the proportion
of the two forms of social hierarchy
has a different optimum in each spe¬
cies. Moreover the balance is not
rigidly fixed and may be shifted within
certain limits before any distinct, out¬
ward signs of behavioural disorder
become manifest.
This point seems to be of the great¬
est importance, because it indicates
the probability, if not certainty, that
well within the apparent or obvious
limits of density tolerance there are

latent tolerance limits beyond which
damage is surreptitiously done long
before it becomes apparent-
People undoubtedly show territorial
behaviour in many forms and in many
spheres of their lives. Professor Bayr-
Klimpfinger of Vienna has shown that
it starts in the nursery. Garden walls,
no-trespassing posters, the "my home
my castle" attitude of mind, the way
people and especially children are
quick to stake out their claims on the
holiday beach and resent all "intru¬
ders," are clear examples of this all-
pervading tendency to territorial
behaviour.
There is, on the other hand, hardly
any need to point out examples of
absolute social hierarchy in human
societies, ancient or recent, primitive
or evolved: chieftains, princes, kings
and the carefully elaborate hierarchies
of their courts, armies and manage¬
ment of modern big business, as well
as' teenager gangs, are only a few...
Nearly five years in prisoner-of-war
camps taught me that overcrowded
human 'societies reflect the symptoms
of overcrowded wolf, cat, goat, mouse,
rat or rabbit communities to the last
detail and that all differences are
merely species-specific; the basic for¬
ces of social Interaction and of orga¬
nization are in principle identical and
there is true homology between Man
and Animal throughout the whole
range of vertebrates.
To recognize such an internal
balance in man between absolute and
relative social hierarchy, brought about
The clearly defined
divisions of an empty parking
lot provide an ideal area for
"territorial zoning" by
a group of children. Many
scientists believe that, like
certain animals, humans have
a strongly developed sense
of territory which reveals
itself at an early age.
Intrusion on one's "area"
is often resented.
by evolution as part of a density-con¬
trol mechanism, which limits the adap¬
tability of the individual, is not to deny
that adaptability. What it does mean,
however, is that the mental health of
the Individual is in danger and will
eventually break down if adaptability
is stretched too far beyond the limits
set by evolutionary adaptation. If this
happens to enough individuals to cons¬
titute a sizeable proportion of a com¬
munity, then that community ceases to
be stable, healthy and fit for humans to
inhabit.
Density surreptitiously creeping
beyond the tolerance limits may create
symptoms which cannot be directly and
easily traced back to it as their cause
but are often attributed to factors
which are merely contributory or symp¬
tomatic in themselves.
The resulting constant subliminal
tension will lower the individual's re¬
sistance towards other disturbing fac¬
tors. Thus I have no doubt whatever
that a great number of neuroses and
social maladjustments are partially or
totally, directly or indirectly; caused by
overcrowding.
Professor J.B. Calhoun and others
have shown that crowded conditions
seriously disturb maternal care in rats
and mice. Likewise human mothers,
according to Professor René Spitz, are
deeply influenced by population den¬
sity: they often cannot form and main¬
tain the proper emotional bonds
towards their babies; this in turn inter¬
feres with the child's "ego formation,"
with its whole character development
in which early youth and proper mater
nal care and affection are m> vastly
important. Nothing shows better than
this what far-reaching damage can be
done indirectly to future generations
by the parent generations being too
densely packed.
This is our situation now, and we
have already been in it a long while.
What every normal man wants for him¬
self and his family is a detached house
in an adequate garden, with neighbours
close enough to be found if needed or
one feels like a social call, yet far
enough away to be avoided at other
times.
What we see Instead is the cance¬
rous growth of the huge blocks of
flats of so-called satellite cities creep¬
ing out into the countryside, and very
soon we shall reach the point where
individuals simply cannot any longer
be allowed to acquire a piece of land
of their own and erect a single family
house on it: in the interest of the Com¬
mon Good the block of flats will have
to become compulsory. Our civilization
is marching with banners flying from
battery hen to battery consumer.
In recent years there has been grow¬
ing concern about the so-called popu¬
lation explosion and the measures to
be taken to avoid overcrowding. How¬
ever, this is mostly understood to
mean that an attempt should be made
only to slow down the population In¬
crease so that the production of sup¬
plies, predominantly food, can catch
up, and if this is achieved everything
will be fine or so many of those in
authority seem to think.
Reasoning on these lines makes it
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

THE SANE COMMUNITY (Continued)
look- as if controlling the population
growth were mainly a problem of the
under-developed countries. In the in¬
dustrially developed countries, our
affluence distracts from the fact that
we are already overcrowded. We
recommend birth control to the under¬
developed nations, but in our own
overpopulated countries we still encou¬
rage large families with tax relief and
even handsome allowances.
Contrary to current discussion, the
danger of overpopulation does not rest
solely on the need for food and shel¬
ter. It lies in whether the population
will exceed the limits of human toler¬
ance towards the presence of other
humans. These limits have been set
by evolutionary processes over mil¬
lions of years. They cannot, therefore,
be altered or trained differently within
a few generations, nor can they be
neglected, repressed or overstepped
without seriously disrupting the inter¬
nal harmony of the species.
It will be argued that my assertions
run contrary to almost everything
which is regarded as scientifically safe
in modern psychology and sociology.
The concept of adjustment is almost
invariably understood as pertaining to
the adjustment of Individuals to en¬
vironment, especially social environ¬
ment. Hence, where disharmony bet¬
ween Individual and social environ¬
ment Is found, this is generally explain¬
ed as failure of the individual to adjust.
True as this Is in some cases, it
overlooks the fact that in many res¬
pects the environment fails to be
adjusted to the proper needs of the
Individual. Modern psychologists have,
in many instances at least, been so
amazed and overwhelmed by the enor¬
mous range of variation found among
human personalities and behaviour pat¬
terns that they have largely forgotten
that all variations are but variations on
the one theme, the species. Nothing
can happen to or become of the indiv¬
idual which is not within the range of
the characteristics defining the species.
But today most psychologists are
so sure of the omnipotence of indiv¬
idual adaptability and learning that
they are blind to the facts which would
help to reveal exactly what is the role
of genetic that Is phylogenetic in¬
formation in all the different types of
human behaviour.
Yet our social psychologists and
sociologists are so convinced that
everything in social behaviour can,
and therefore must, be trained, learn¬
ed, institutionalized, that they fail to
see a very plain fact: traditions and
I institutions would never be stable if
they did not rest on an Innate behav¬
ioral basis.
To the student of evolutionary pro-
CONTINUED PAGE 32
E
(O
a.

Photo © Lucien Hervé, Paris
These three photographs would seem to sum up the
difference between dream and reality for the "population
exploded" city-dweller of today. "Keep this space clear"
the sign in the photograph, top left, says, but with every
inch at a premium no one pays attention.
31

THE SANE COMMUNITY (Continued)
Overcrowding and the threat to democracy
32
cesses, all changes in cultural, trad¬
itional, educational, religious, philoso¬
phical and institutional attitudes appear
to stir the surface only. The very core
of human nature and conduct has
evidently remained unchanged through¬
out known human history.
One of the age-old characteristics
of the human species is that it is
adapted to social life in a small group
where each member knows each of the
others personally, having a need for
larger social gatherings from time to
time but not too often, feeling a need
to be by himself quite often, and react¬
ing to continued oversocialization with
all sorts of frustrations, repressions,
aggressions and fears which soon
develop into genuine neuroses. As it
Is a species characteristic it does not
matter whether we like or regret the
fact. We have to live with it and find
conditions which allow us to live with
it in comparative health, wealth and
sanity.
That it is, for instance, possible to
rear and train children so that they
become habituated to oversocialized
conditions until they are unable to feel
safe and happy outside a crowd of
their own kind certainly does not
invalidate my point.
Children and even adults can be
trained or habituated to avoid every¬
thing good and healthy, to see their
only source of contentment and even
happiness in regularly over-eating all
sorts of palatable but unbalanced food,
in continually seeking unsuitable and .
demoralizing amusements, in all kinds
of perversions and addictions, and
similarly in living continuously in a
crowd. Robbed of these conditions,
the afflicted individual will feel
thoroughly dejected and miserable. Yet
this "adjustment" to mass communities
does the human species no more good
than drug-addiction or alcoholism.
As mentioned earlier, all structurally
organized vertebrate communities de¬
pend for their internal structure and
function on the Individuals being per¬
sonally acquainted with each other.
This is the most fundamental difference
between such communities, which
therefore rightly deserve to be called
societies, and the highly organized
communities of bees, ants and ter¬
mites, in which individuals in the sense
of known personalities are wholly unim¬
portant and, as a matter bf fact, not
to be found: any given Individual will
do for a certain function provided it
Is of the right "caste" or in the right
phase of its life cycle.
In a vertebrate community, however,
which is not solely governed by abso
lute social hierarchy, the individual not
only acquires personality, he also has
some place, some preserve, where he
is superior to all other members of the
community. No matter how big or
small the territory may be, and no
matter what the ranking of the indiv¬
idual in the various absolute hierar¬
chies of the community, as a territory
owner he is equal among his equals.
In this capacity, and in this capacity
alone, the human individual is able to
enter, as a responsible, participating,
co-operating, independent, self-res¬
pecting and self-supporting citizen, the
type of communal organization we call
a democracy.
^^PVERCROWDED conditions
are thus a danger to true democracy
which it is impossible to exaggerate.
Tyranny is the almost inevitable result,
whether it be exercised by personal
tyrants or by an abstract principle like
the Common Good, which is no longer
any good at all to the mass of indiv¬
iduals. For this is an unalterable law:
as long as density is tolerable, sacri¬
fices made for a common cause will,
one way or another, pay dividends to
the individual and contribute to his
own fulfilment. Beyond this point,
however, the demands of the Common
Good rise steeply, and what is taken
away from the individual is gone for
good; he cannot even see that it goes
in any sizeable amount to others, for
they are likewise robbed without
reward.
If, in accordance with V.C. Wynne-
Edwards's. theories, the innate balance
of relative and absolute social hierarchy
once served as density control mech¬
anism and thus ensured that social
life did not develop into unbearable
social pressure, why has it now
apparently ceased to function in man?
To the biologist the answer is obvious;
hardly any biological mechanism works
independently of others and faultlessly.
Thus density tolerance in humans is
adapted to a certain level of child
mortality, to a "natural" percentage of
people dying prematurely of diseases
and plagues, and so on.
Scientific and technical progress has
altered all this, but it could not and
has not altered the basis of human
social behaviour and happiness which
has been built into each individual by
at least five hundred million years
of vertebrate evolution. This cannot
be altered in harmony with the whole
except by that same, slow process of
evolution, taking countless generations,
and any attempt to force it will only
result in the destruction of our own
species.
But the density control mechanism
described . here at length can be
revived and brought into its natural
and beneficial function again if we use
our rational powers to restore the
equilibrium, and use them swiftly and
efficiently. It is no longer a question
of forestalling future overpopulation:
we must not only call a halt to further
increase, we must find ethically and
psychologically acceptable means of
slowly shrinking numbers back to less
than the present, to a sane density
level. There is no time to be lost.
At present most people seem
paralyzed by fear of The Bomb, but
the bomb in itself is no danger. The
only real danger to Man is men, too
many men. Statisticians have fore¬
cast that by 2040 the world population
will have reached 22,000 million. By
then production may possibly be capa¬
ble of feeding, clothing and battery-
keeping these numbers; but then nobo¬
dy will be able to move without being
impeded by numbers of other people
moving, and without interfering irrita-
tingly with their movements. At least
half the population will have to be
psychiatrists tending the neuroses of
the other half. To this future popu¬
lation, the bomb will no longer be a
threat but a temptation: it will appear
as the salvation from all evil.
I think we all agree that we want
neither the extinction of our species,
or at least of many future thousands
of millions through the bomb, nor the
re-establishment of the old, cruel
methods by which nature balanced our
numbers.
Thus the only way remaining is
humane density control birth control.
It can be done. Automation, if pro¬
perly used, can allow us to keep and
even enhance our living standard with
a slowly decreasing number of young
working people.
At present, under the influence of
an economic theory which regards
ever-growing expansion as the aim of
all economy and automation as a
means of stepping it up even farther
and faster, it can end only as all
unchecked positive feed-back mecha¬
nisms end: in catastrophe. The choice
is still ours: do we want rational
regulation and for some time reduc¬
tion of numbers, or unrestricted pro¬
creation and the Bomb as Ultima
Ratio?
