Cancer proliferates rapidly
from a tiny cell into a
spreading. cluster of cells
or tumour. Research
on human cells grown
outside the body In bottles
is thus a vital factor In
cancer research. Powerful
and versatile microscope
cameras enable investigators
to observe and record
behaviour of cells as they
multiply. Here, two
cancerous nerve cells
adhere to one another.
Cancerous cells shown here
send out threadlike bridges
called "neurites" when they
come in contact. Photo,
which magnifies cells
6,500 times, was taken with
a stereo-scan electron
microscope (see photo
caption page 19).

Probing the secret
of the cell
by Nicolas Odartchenko
NICOLAS ODARTCHENKO, of France, is
director of the Department of Cell Biology
at the Swiss Institute of Experimental
Research on Cancer, Lausanne. In 1969
he was awarded the Prix Suisse du Cancer
for his research. Dr Odartchenko is a mem¬
ber of the Faculty at Lausanne University.
^¡^ANCER research extends
over a much wider field than most
people realize. What science learns
about cancer may come from clinical
data in medicine and surgery or in
more highly specialized fields. It may
be based on studies of disease and
population. And, clearly, it may come
from experimental research in which
the most recent and the most varied
branches of science are represented.
Basic research Into cancer has
indeed become a speciality in its own
right, and the principal task of those
engaged in it is to decide what are
the vital questions to be answered.
But these questions are so numerous
and varied that practically all the new
technological discoveries that apply to
biology are in fact also applicable to
experimental cancer research.
The specialist in a modern, well-
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

Every minute about 3,000 million cells in the body die and are replaced by new
ones. A remarkable feature of normal cells is their orderly growth they
"know " when to stop reproducing. Malignant cells, however, continue to multiply
unrestrictedly, invading and destroying adjacent normal cells. Above left,
normal embryonic cells taken from mice and magnified 490 times. Above right,
malignant cells, magnified 123 times, proliferate (top of photo) and invade the
normal cells (bottom of photo). Below, detail of malignant cells shown above.
SPREADING FIBRES
OF NERVE CELL TUMOUR
The development a few years ago of the scanning electron microscope with its depth of focus
has made it possible to obtain striking three dimensional pictures of biological surfaces. A
useful magnification of up to 50,000 is obtained. Above, a stereoscan electron microscope
view of cancerous nerve cells, magnified 3,000 times. These cells have been grown in tissue
culture for many years. Although separated from one another, diluted and placed in new
bottles, they continue to multiply and send out threadlike growths.
19

Every minute about 3,000 million cells in the body die and are replaced by new
ones. A remarkable feature of normal cells is their orderly growth they
"know " when to stop reproducing. Malignant cells, however, continue to multiply
unrestrictedly, invading and destroying adjacent normal cells. Above left,
normal embryonic cells taken from mice and magnified 490 times. Above right,
malignant cells, magnified 123 times, proliferate (top of photo) and invade the
normal cells (bottom of photo). Below, detail of malignant cells shown above.
SPREADING FIBRES
OF NERVE CELL TUMOUR
The development a few years ago of the scanning electron microscope with its depth of focus
has made it possible to obtain striking three dimensional pictures of biological surfaces. A
useful magnification of up to 50,000 is obtained. Above, a stereoscan electron microscope
view of cancerous nerve cells, magnified 3,000 times. These cells have been grown in tissue
culture for many years. Although separated from one another, diluted and placed in new
bottles, they continue to multiply and send out threadlike growths.
19

SECRET OF THE CELL (Continued Irom page 17)
Seeking the key to the mystery of life
equipped cancer research laboratory
has an impressive array of instruments
and equipment to work with. In cen¬
trifuges that spin at ever greater
speeds, molecules, complex and fra¬
gile, are separated from biological
extracts. With automated, high preci¬
sion radiation counters, researchers
trace the movement of minute quan¬
tities of radioactive substances through
a complex molecular maze of cells or
tissues. And these are but two among
a thousand other examples of the
direct application of modern techno¬
logy.
Machines such as these are usually
run on tight schedules since there is
nearly always a waiting list of would-be
users, and scientists often have to
wait several days before their turn
comes to have access to them. Thus,
any mechanical or electronic improve¬
ment that reduces the time taken by a
machine to carry out a particular mea¬
surement or calculation represents
very real progress indeed, and such
improvements are constantly being
made by the rapidly developing indus¬
tries of today.
All this points not only to the fact
that research in an ultra-modern
laboratory is an expensive operation,
but also how difficult it is to pinpoint
neatly and precisely the field covered
by cancer research.
T.
he same is true of tradi¬
tional disciplines such as physiology,
genetics, biochemistry or pharmaco¬
logy whose boundaries are now well-
nigh Impossible to define. Thus, the
work of researchers in biology tends
to be increasingly concerned with the
particular level of organization in the
material they study: molecules, struc¬
tures forming part of the internal
anatomy and physiology of the cell,
membranes, isolated cells, cellular
aggregates or organs, populations
within the same bacterial, animal or
vegetable species, and, finally, ecolo¬
gical systems, with regard to which
one could speak of populations of
populations.
Exchange of facts and findings is
simplified for biologists working at a
similar level of organization, whether
their work is concerned with bacteria,
plants, animals or man. Before even
attempting to revise the classification
of the traditional disciplines, the
changes in the areas where fruitful
dialogue is at present possible should
be noted.
A brief description of one of the
fundamental problems of cancerology
the reproduction mechanisms of the
cells of an organism provides an
example of this overlapping between
the various branches of the biological
sciences. This problem of cell
reproduction leads on directly to the
question of the existence and nature
of factors which may have a controlling
function.
As is now known, the chemical
substance, desoxy-ribonucleic acid
(DNA) contains the code which
determines the hereditary character¬
istics not only of the organism as a
whole, but also of each of its in¬
numerable cells. DNA is contained in
the chromosomes of the cell nucleus,
and according to recent scientific
findings, it seems not to be subject
to any type of metabolic regeneration
or turnover, whereas the other types
of molecules contained in a cell are
constantly being replaced by new ones
at speeds which may be specific for
each type.
The reproduction of this "huge"
molecule (which includes about
5 million elements of information in
mammals) is therefore an essential
preliminary to any cellular division
because each cell of the organism is
known to contain a constant quantity
of DNA.
This idea of constancy is essential.
It corresponds to the fact that the
chromosome construction is practically
the same for all the cells of an
organism and for all the members of
a given species. The number and
appearance of the chromosomes de¬
fines what is called a "karyotype"
which in certain cases makes it
possible to identify differences
between living species which would
be considerably more difficult to
define by other criteria.
At the molecular level, the repro¬
duction of DNA is effected by a so-
called "semi-conservative" mechanism
(by the synthesis of a new element
superimposed on a pre-existing one),
which has been demonstrated in
bacteria and, more recently, in viruses.
This method of reproduction has
been established only at the chromo¬
some level in the case of multicellular
organisms. Such a mechanism ex¬
plains why the distribution of DNA, in
each of the two daughter-cells result¬
ing from a division, is quantitatively
and qualitatively equal (see photo
page 21).
The period between two successive
cellular divisions the interphase is
therefore by no means one of
"cellular inactivity". Vital processes
take place: the preparation for the
synthesis of DNA, the synthesis itself,
that is, the reproduction of the DNA
molecule, and the preparation for
cellular division.
Experimental research shows that
once the synthesis of DNA has begun
it becomes relatively difficult to
interrupt the chain of processes
leading to cellular division. It is as if
a critical threshold or point of no
return existed, which must be located
shortly before the start of the DNA
synthesis.
This explains why the mechanisms
which may help to trigger off the
synthesis are now being studied. In
the case of multicellular organisms,
neither the existence nor, obviously,
the nature of the precise factors
involved in this sparking-off process
are yet known.
Thus, it is obvious why all aspects
of cellular proliferation, both in normal
tissues and in malignant tumours, are
now being carefully studied. We have,
in fact, to find a way of determining
the mechanisms which control cellular
multiplication itself.
ethods available to re¬
searchers have made great progress
in the last few years, although one very
important factor concerning them needs
to be taken into account. Broadly
speaking, the simplest model, that of
a system in which all the cells double
in number (therefore showing an
exponential increase) applies for
practical purposes only to bacteria and
to cells isolated from their parent
organism and grown in laboratories.
The most elementary parameter that
can be observed in such a system the
time required for its numerical doubl¬
ing cannot be applied to organs still
functioning in the body. In their case,
apart from the phenomena of growth
and aging, an equilibrium in the
number of cells is constantly maintain¬
ed under normal circumstances, and
there can be no measurable doubling
time.
One classic experimental example
is the regeneration of the liver after
the surgical or toxic destruction of a
major part of hepatic tissues. Nor¬
mally the liver changes very little
during adult life. The total number
of hepatic cells remains approximat¬
ely constant and only a few cells are
replaced. Consequently, in sections
of normal adult liver, one sees only
one cell in around 20,000 which is in
the process of dividing.
If a part of the liver, of a rat for
example, is destroyed, an enormous
number of cellular divisions appear,
resulting in a tendency to restore the
organ to something like its original
volume. . This wave of divisions is
preceded by a wave of DNA synthesis,
itself preceded by a wave of synthesis
of other molecules essential to cellular
function, including ribonucleic acids,
enzymes and other proteins. The
cellular proliferation Is specific, that is
to say that the cells thus produced
are liver cells and not those of another
organ.
On the other hand, the proliferation
"knows" when to stop, which means

This photograph reveals the astounding
process by which nature transmits the
inherited, characteristics of all living
creatures from cell to cell. Here, a cell
in human bone marrow has divided into
two "daughter" cells, each of which has
been given an identical number of
molecules of DNA, the chemical substance
whose code determines heredity
(molecules are seen as black dots
through "tagging" with a radioactive
substance). Scientists are beginning to
break the DNA code. A complete
understanding of the nature of the code
and the methods for controlling the
release of information from the code will
make it possible to control cancer.
that it does not go beyond certain
limits. But the special point is the
idea of a "decision" which initiates
this cycle of cell multiplication, a
"decision" the nature of which is
unknown, since we do not even
know whether it involves a true
stimulus or the removal. of an inhibition.
Here again we find the idea
of initiation of the DNA synthesis
referred to above, since, before the
lesion, practically all the liver cells
contain an amount of DNA which is
the same from one cell to another
and equal to the value which
characterizes the cells before synthesis
begins.
This process of synthesis results in
an exact doubling of this quantity of
DNA, because two cells have to be
produced from a single cell. In this
example, the different stages of the
reaction to the lesion are the principal
points of investigation by researchers
in this field.
Jn addition' to various increasingly
refined biochemical techniques, possi¬
bilities of examining the ultra-structures
at the extraordinary magnifications
within the capability of modern
electronic microscopes, and our grow¬
ing knowledge in microbiology and
virology, a new and fruitful method of
investigation has, in the past few years,
assisted the study of the physiology of
cells grouped in the organs or tissues
of multi-cellular species.
DNA, the " molecule of which is
doubled at the time of the synthesis
which precedes a cellular division, and
only then, can be tagged by a
precursor which is then involved
in everything which subsequently
happens to the DNA molecule.
The heavy isotope of hydrogen,
called tritium, can be used as a
marker for this precursor. Thanks to
the radiation it emits, it can be followed
at the structural level of individual
cells by the process of auto-radio¬
graphy.
Such studies, which have been
dubbed "cellular biographies", con¬
sequently allow the comparison of the
mode of cell reproduction in normal
tissues with that of disturbed prolifera¬
tion in, for example, a malignant
tumour, and will perhaps lead to the
discovery of some of the causes of
the breakdown of the normal equili¬
brium.'
B
ut this striking example
should not cause us to overlook seve¬
ral other lines of research which are
also under active development in many
laboratories. Among these, the study
of chromosomal abnormalities in the
cells of patients with malignant
diseases has not, properly speaking,
shown up changes which are perma¬
nent and exclusively related to the
malignancy.
There is an exception to this
rule, that of chronic myeloid leukae¬
mia in Man, . in which the total
number of chromosomes is normal but
chromosome 21 (one of the smallest)
is structurally abnormal: one of the
long arms is absent (Philadelphia
chromosome). We do not yet know
very much about the relationships
between this anomaly and the mech¬
anisms which initiate leukaemia in
particular whether this anomaly is a
predisposing factor, an effect, or a
cause.
The study of metabolic anomalies in
tumour cells has made much headway
from the discovery of the so-called
"minimal deviation" tumours, which
permit the establishment of valid
comparisons between normal and
abnormal cells.
A special enzyme, asparagine-
synthetase, which acts as a synthetizer
of an amino acid, an essential
component of cell physiology, may be
absent from some cells of tumour
origin. This discovery will perhaps
lead to the development of a specific
treatment by the administration of
asparaginase, with the object of inter¬
fering with the supply of asparagine
coming from normal cells. This
procedure could then be directed
towards the selective destruction of
tumour cells which cannot themselves
produce asparagine, one of the subs¬
tances vital to them.
The changes in the cellular surfaces
of cells of tumour origin are also being
very actively studied. One of these
changes the loss of contact inhibi¬
tion is very important. That is to
say, the normal tissues which surround
the tumour cells no longer inhibit their
movements, this inhibition being
normally effected through simple
contact.
This loss of contact inhibition
is accompanied by a tendency
on the part of the tumour cells to
invade or infiltrate neighbouring normal
tissues. The electrical charges of this
membrane have been studied, but the
problem has not been solved.
Additional factors may intervene, as
for instance the secretion of lytic
enzymes, that is to say enzymes which
destroy the cells, of toxins, inflamma¬
tion phenomena, and finally problems
related to the expansion of the mass
of tumour cells, i.e. the pressure
exerted by the tumour on neighbouring
tissues.
The appearance of specific antigens
in tumours was demonstrated as early
as 1953, by the U.S. microbiologist,
Edward Foley. If tumours in mice,
induced by the carcinogenic che¬
mical substance methylcholantrene,
are surgically removed, the .mice are
found to be resistant to later grafts of
the same tumour. Specific antigens
have since been discovered in animals,
for a large number of tumours, whether
of chemical, viral, or spontaneous
origin.
Attempts have been made to
relate these findings to certain clinical
observations, as for instance the
apparently spontaneous regression of
tumours; the great length of the latent
period, on occasion, in the develop¬
ment of cancers; the regression of
metastases [cancerous growths which
have spread from one part of the body
to another] after surgical excision of
the primary tumour; and finally the
fact that the majority of the cells which
separate from the primary tumour
disappear without giving rise' to meta¬
static growths.
We cannot at present analyse pre- £ |
cisely the real rôle of these im¬
munological factors in human beings,
since the experimental methods based
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

SECRET OF THE CELL (Continued)
on tissue exchanges between selected,
genetically pure breeds of mice cannot
be used in research on humans. But
the possibilities of practical trials on
Man are being studied. These would
be designed to measure directly the
power to destroy tumour cells
possessed by the immunological
defence cells responsible for this type
of reaction.
This is an extremely important area
of research, for the possibility of using
immunological means of attack, of
perhaps increasing the organism's
natural defence mechanisms, is one of
the great hopes of those who think
that new treatment methods can be
found in this direction.
The study of the rôle of viruses in
the production of cancers is certainly
one of the major problems of current
research. Although a special form of
malignant disease fowl leukosis has
been attributed to viral infection for
more than fifty years, it is only in
recent years that the major develop¬
ment of virological research on cancer
has occurred.
A number of cancers in a wide
variety of animal species are today
recognized as clearly attributable to
viruses. The properties of the viruses
in question and their possible mode of
action are being very intensively
studied.
In fact, while it may not be
possible at present to give a
precise reply to the question "Are
human cancers caused by viruses?,"
animal experimentation is continually
providing data which will give us a
clearer conception of the mode of
interaction between the genetic
material of the virus and that of the
cell or cells Infected by it.
T
wo stages need to be
distinguished in viral infection. As
defined by André Lwoff, Nobel Prize¬
winner for Biology in 1965, they are
the introduction of genetic material
inside a cell the entry proper,
governed by surface phenomena, the
envelope of the virus, the surface of
the cell and the consequences of the
presence of the virus inside the cell,
which bring different processes into
play.
These consequences are therefore
at present being analysed in the light
of the most significant biological
concepts recently acquired, i.e. the
mechanisms by which living matter
preserves a genetic memory, how this
is transmitted to the cells resulting
from a cellular division, and how
finally the Information is transmitted to
the cell as a whole and translated to
play its part in a specific function.
In addition, the problems of virology
and those of immunology are related,
more particularly through the common
hope of developing means of treatment
by immunotherapy.' In this connexion,
the discovery of a new type of tumour
Burkitt's tumour which is a special
type of malignant tumour of the jaw
found in children in tropical Africa,
goes back only a few years and a
number of arguments suggest a viral
origin.
The relationships observed between
immunity to a herpes-type virus and
the incidence of these Burkitt's
tumours and even certain cancers of
the naso-pharynx may perhaps open
up new approaches to this important
question.
The above are a number of examples
of focal points of current cancer
research. They represent merely an
arbitrary choice from among a great
many others, but the important lesson
to be learnt is that, as far as each of
these examples, and indeed our
overall understanding of the problem,
is concerned, our basic knowledge has
not as yet given us a general key
such as other branches of science
possess.
This means, on the one hand,
that basic research should be
still more actively pursued in an
attempt to find what we may justifiably
imagine to be such a key; on the other,
that current methods of treating
malignant diseases in human beings,
are inevitably affected from the outset,
by the consequences of this imper¬
fection of our basic knowledge.
This does not by any means imply
that present-day methods of treatment
are ineffective. On the contrary, all
the well-tried methods are continually
being improved and new ones are
being rapidly developed.
As regards methods of treatment by
radiation, by surgery, or by chemo¬
therapy, statistical data show un¬
deniable progress in terms of good
therapeutic results, and even specta¬
cular successes in certain cases.
The importance of early detection
in improving the chances of effective
therapy cannot be over-emphasized.
Progress has been made with regard
to such detection, but doctors and
nurses are not the only ones who
have a responsibility in this respect.
Each individual has at least an equal
responsibility to undergo systematic
examination at regular intervals, or at
the appearance of any of the dis¬
quieting symptoms which each of us
should be able to recognize easily.
Public authorities have a clear and
even over-riding responsibility to
make facilities for proper examination
available to the public, i.e. to set up
detection centres and to equip them
completely for this kind of work.
These considerations are equally
valid for a final but essential problem:
cancer prevention. In this area, mass
measures are likely to prove not only
the most effective, but also the most
urgent.
Artificial food additives, indeed the
whole food supply, should be super¬
vised and measures taken to reduce
tobacco consumption. Steps to
reduce pollution of the human environ¬
ment, particularly by chemical or radio¬
active substances, should also be
given priority.
Chromosomes, the structures contained within the nucleus of every living cell by
which genetic Information is transmitted, are currently the subject of intense
research. Observation of cells taken from a leukaemia patient reveals the presence
of an abnormal chromosome. Right, photographs of chromosomes, taken by
an electronic microscope, are cut out and assembled in pairs for comparison.
Below arrowed, an abnormal chromosome from a patient suffering from chronic
myeloid leukaemia. Most of the long "arm" of the chromosome Is missing.
