by Raymond L. Nace
Man's
perpetual quest
for water
o
S
4
INCE the dawn of civiliza¬
tion, population growth and the expan¬
sion of human activities have depend¬
ed on man's ability to surmount the
natural restrictions of his environment,
including the amount and distribution
of water.
Water development and water poli¬
cies always have been Important, as
is evident from the many measures
taken to control its distribution and
use, beginning with the ancient Sum-
erians of Mesopotamia and becom¬
ing ever more complex with the pas¬
sage of time.
Even so, water problems are becom¬
ing Increasingly critical in many re¬
gions, including areas In developed
countries where water is relatively
abundant. The reason is that in many
regions problems are less apt to
relate to water quantity than to Its
quality.
Broadly stated, water problems are
few but basic: distribution in space
RAYMOND L. NACE, former chairman of the
U.S. National Committee for the International
Hydrological Decade, has served as U.S.
representative on the Co-ordinating Council
of the Decade. Dr Nace is research hydrolo-
gist with the Water Resources Division of the
U.S. Geological Survey, and in the U.S.A.
has worked on problems of general hydro¬
logy and on the disposal of radioactive waste.
We are now at mid-point in the International Hydrological Decade, spon¬
sored by Unesco. Since January 1, 1965 this vast programme has mobil¬
ized hydrologists the world over for man's first concerted attempt to
take stock of his diminishing fresh water resources and to co-ordinate
world-wide research on better ways of making use of them. Here,
Dr. Raymond L. Nace, the noted American hydrologist, examines the
historical and scientific background of the problem, and describes some
major areas where this international co-operation has been in action.
(too much or too little); distribution in
time (too much in some seasons or
years and not enough in others); che¬
mical quality (too highly mineralized;
lacking in desirable minerals; contain¬
ing deleterious minerals); and pollution.
Well-intentioned individuals speak
confidently of surmounting all prob¬
lems by achieving mastery of the
environment. This is an Illusory goal.
Man first must master himself. The
plain fact is that he has not done so,
and because of this he has so com¬
pletely upset the natural environmen¬
tal system in which he evolved, that
he no longer knows what his place is
in the system except as an element
of disorder.
We do know that water has a vital
role in every earth environment from
the depths of the sea to the highest
mountain; from the driest desert to
the wettest rain forest; and from the
tropics to the polar ice-caps. It also
has a role in every activity of man and
beast.
Thus far, our attempts at "mastery
of the environment" have been mere
short-sighted tinkerings with the land¬
scape. Meanwhile, other human act¬
ivity has brought on unwanted, unfore¬
seen, and poorly understood side
effects.
Human activity already has con¬
taminated the entire world ocean, the
atmosphere, and even the remote ice
caps of Greenland and Antarctica.
Most rivers are polluted to some
extent and many are nauseous open
sewers. Plant cover and soil fertility
of vast areas have been destroyed.
Parts of the story of human despo¬
liation of the earth have been told
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Even in countries where rainfall is
abundant there may be a lack of the
right kind of water where it is most
needed, especially in the large cities of
the world. To overcome this problem
river water is re-cycled and re-used
many times. Thus, before being
returned to the rivers, water from the
sewers of large towns goes through a
treatment process. It passes through
aeration tanks which supply the
oxygen needed by the micro-organisms
that break down and destroy harmful
organic matter. Here, at a sewage
treatment plant in the Paris area, treated
water is piped into the Seine. It will
probably be extracted, purified and
used again several times before finding
its way to the sea.


PERPETUAL QUEST FOR WATER (Continued)
Conflicting theories
on the last days of Mohenjo-Daro
6
many times. But the whole story can¬
not be told because not all of it is
known and the story has not yet ended.
The problem Is not mastery of the
environment. The problem is whether
nature can be preserved in some sem¬
blance of order and whether civiliza¬
tion can survive its own impact on
nature.
The facts of history vis-à-vis the
plight of most of mankind today are
sufficient evidence that the problems
of man and his environment are not
problems of the men of individual
nations. They are problems of all men
and all nations.
This is especially true of water. The
mobility of water is one of its most
useful properties, but it also gives rise
to serious problems, both practical
and scientific, international as well as
national.
IRRIGATION IN ANTIQUITY. Over
the past 7,000 years men at some
time and place have been trying to
increase the supply of fresh water,
or at least to increase the share used
before its inevitable return to the sea.
Ancient man, like modern man,
evidently loved sunshine and dry
warm weather. But in order to prosper
and multiply in dry areas, a change
was needed more profound than the
transition from nomadic hunting and
herding to sedentary farming. Crop
farming without irrigation is precarious
to impossible in dry areas.
Extensive irrigation, however, re¬
quires community effort for water
diversion, maintenance of works, and
allocation of water, and these can be
achieved only through effective social
and political organization. Civilization
may have been a result of man's
unwillingness to accept the limitations
of geography and his search for means
to circumvent these limitations.
Following the ice age, climatic con¬
ditions identical in all essential aspects
with those that prevail now were estab¬
lished at least 5,000 years ago and
perhaps 8,000. The Near East and
Middle East already were arid to semi-
arid, and it was there that the early
civilizations arose. This was no mere
coincidence, for the reason noted
above. Climate determined the locale
for the rise of civilization.
Looking at the long history of water
management, it is surprising that the
water cycle has been a mystery to man
during most of his history. Sumerian
knowledge about hydrology is proble¬
matical. Writers of their cuneiform
inscriptions were concerned with milit
ary exploits and practical matters,
rather than with intellectual adventures.
The people, however must have had
extensive practical understanding of
running water, else they could not have
operated a large and complicated irri¬
gation system on the Mesopotamian
plain. They had such a system at least
as early as 4 000 B.C., and perhaps
much earlier. They and their succes¬
sors held sway over a region of
about 20,000 square kilometres, and
much of this was irrigated, though not
all at the same time. The Sumerian
irrigation system was a marvel, not
only because of its size but also
because of its long existence.
Salinity and siltatlon plagued the
irrigated fields in varying degrees from
very early times, but the Sumerians
learned to some extent to cope with
the problems. So did their Semitic
successors, and irrigation continued
until the middle of the twelfth century.
Hulagu Khan's invasion in the thir¬
teenth century has been blamed for
devastating Mesopotamia, but the area
had been essentially abandoned a
hundred years earlier.
Judging from experience with modern
irrigation methods, it is doubtful that
any modern system will last for a
length of time even approaching that
of Mesopotamia. In the vast and fer¬
tile Indus Plain of West Pakistan live
more than 30 million people. An enor¬
mous irrigation network supplies about
9 million hectares of land (90,000 square
kilometres). More than 2 million hec¬
tares already have been lost by salin¬
ity and waterlogging, and current
annual losses are about 40,000 hec¬
tares.
The Indus Plain is only one example
of irrigation problems. Dry areas
naturally tend to have salty soil and
ground water because not enough
water moves through the local water
cycle to flush salts away. Successful
irrigation requires application of suffi¬
cient water for flushing and sufficient
movement of ground water or drainage
water to actually remove the salts from
the irrigated area. Where drainage is
inadequate, waterlogging aggravates
the problem. Many tens of thousands
of hectares annually are lost to pro¬
duction by salinity and waterlogging,
principally in Asia, Africa and North
America.
Organized large scale irrigation agri¬
culture arose in the Nile Valley around
3400 B.C., following an antecedent
period of small scale local develop¬
ments. For a variety of reasons, the
problem of irrigation there was far
simpler than in Mesopotamia. Simple
flood-basin irrigation practice was
followed, first on the left bank only.
Later, when basining spread to the
right bank also, constriction of the river
by both banks raised serious problems
during high floods.
During the twelfth Dynasty a brilliant
plan evolved to mitigate this problem
the Fayum project. This project used
the Fayum depression as an off-stream
reservoir into which excess waters
were diverted, forming Lake Moeris in
the desert 50 miles south-west of Cairo.
During years of deficient flood water,
stored lake water was led back to the
valley.
The Egyptian irrigation system was
unique. The irrigation basins were
lavishly flooded, but only once each
year. Sand and gravel beneath the
valley soil provided good subsurface
drainage. There was no need for irri¬
gation canals or drainage ditches, and
no general problem arose of salinity
or waterlogging of soils. The annual
deposit of silt obviated the need for
fertilizer. It will be interesting to
observe the future of the Nile Valley
with a modern irrigation system, includ¬
ing a large up-stream reservoir where
much of the sediment will settle out of
the impounded water.
FLOOD PLAINS AND CITIES. Mod¬
ern peoples are not the first to build
cities on river flood plains. Mohenjo
Daro and Harappa, the archaeologically
famous cities of a civilization that
flourished on the Indus Plain during
2500-1500 B.C., got into trouble be¬
cause the people did not understand
or could not cope with the interactions
of land, water, vegetation and man in
a flood-plain environment.
The civilization deteriorated during a
long period before it finally dis¬
appeared. A common supposition has
been that the Harappan culture was
based on irrigation agriculture and that
it was defeated by soil salinization.
However, some authorities say that
evidence is lacking of any irrigation
structures in Harappan times.
A recent theory is that the Harappan
towns were destroyed by repeated
flooding. Massive masonry walls
around Mahenjo-Daro failed to protect
it and it was engulfed and filled with
silt. The nature of these floods was
unusual.
A flood plain is exactly what its
name implies a land form built by the
river during flood flows. A river is in
flood when it overtops the banks of its
channel. Overtopping is a normal
recurrent event with most rivers, and
minor flooding occurs every two or
three years. Higher floods are less
frequent. Indus floods In Harappan
times, however, seem to have been
different in nature.
According to one Interpretation,
some unidentified geological event

Right, not floating
pack-ice on a Canadian
waterway, but detergent
foam polluting a river in
France. The products
that make housewives'
dishes sparkle are killing off
insect and plant life of
rivers in more and more
countries. Insecticides
and toxic chemical wastes
from factories are
destroying fish life.
interposed an obstruction on the Indus
River down stream from Mohenjo-Daro,
impounding a lake which engulfed the
town with water and silt. After the
lake's outlet eroded the obstruction and
drained the lake, the people returned
and built anew on top of the old
masonry. This happened at least five
times. A mound at the site contains
artifacts to a depth of 22.6 metres,
7.3 of which are below the present
water table and can be probed only by
core drilling.
The evidence proves that the town
was engulfed by silt and water, but
whether by a lake or by flood water
remains undetermined. The Indus Plain
Is very flat and a high flood would
have many of the characteristics of a
lake. At any rate, Mohenjo-Daro is an
ancient example of a problem that has
assumed major proportions in modern
times.
Human encroachment on flood plains
leads to ever-increasing damage to
property and, in some cases, to loss
of life. Modern man has not solved this
problem either, because large floods
cannot be controlled. They can only
be combated.
Other ancient irrigation and public
water works, as in Iran and China, are
equally interesting, but the examples
discussed illustrate that during many
centuries before classical Grecian civi¬
lization arose, men had a great deal of.
practical understanding of water and
how to manage it. They had invented
the principal types of water control
structures: diversion dams, storage
dams, sluices, canals and drainage
ditches; they used canals for irriga¬
tion, city water supply and navigation.
Their knowledge was largely or
wholly empirical, but it was immensely
useful. Ancient people learned also to
tap sources of ground water and to
promote groundwater recharge, but
the degree of antiquity of this know¬
ledge remains uncertain.
Ancient people also encountered the
same problems that beset us today:
maintenance of canals and drainage
ditches; necessity for dredging and
disposition of the spoil; public water
supply; navigation; flood-fighting ; pol¬
lution.
GREEK HYDROLOGY. Aside from
practical problems of water control, the
earliest coherent thinking about water
as a substance and about the water
cycle as a whole seems to have
occurred in classical Greece. The
Greek natural philosophers were intel¬
lectually methodical. They sought
rational causes for effects, rather than
invoking the caprices of gods as basic
causes.
Although mythology strongly in¬
fluenced their thinking, in principle they
rejected myths, substituted rational
deductions, and tried to reduce many
facts to a few principles. Commonly
they were wrong but, right or wrong,
they were generally logical.
The first of the natural philosophers
was Thaïes of Miletos (6407-546 B.C.).
Knowing the ubiquity of water in the
sea, on land, underground and in the
air, Thaïes supposed that all substan¬
ces originally came from water and
eventually would revert to that form.
This may have been man's first
attempt to reduce the bewildering
diversity of matter to a common deno¬
minator. Thaïes believed that rivers are
fed by the sea and that wind forces
water into the earth. Once inside, the
weight of overlying rocks forces the
water upward into the mountains, from
which it spills out to form rivers.
After Thaïes, the philosophers contri¬
buted little to ideas about water until
the time of Anaxagoras of Clazomene
(500-428 B.C.), a highly original thinker
who rejected the Milesian Idea of a
primordial element. He believed that
no transformations of matter could
occur and that all substances had
existed from eternity.
Anaxagoras formed a basically cor¬
rect concept of the gross hydrological
cycle: the sun raises water from the
sea into the atmosphere, from which
it falls as rain. Rain-water gathers in
underground reservoirs from which the
rivers flow. The earth generates no
new water, but the reservoirs fill during
the rainy season. Perennial streams
flow from large reservoirs and ephe¬
meral streams from small ones.
Democritus taught that the properties
of substances depend on the shapes
of their atoms. Water, for example,
might be composed of smooth spheres,
which would explain why it flows so
readily.
Plato (428 or 427-348 B.C.) led a
great advance in Greek thinking. He
assumed that the universe was created
by an organizing mind and that the
universe, therefore, is understandable.
The core of Plato's water cycle, how¬
ever, was mythical Tartarus. He sup-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

8
PERPETUAL QUEST FOR WATER
(Continued)
posed that a series of interconnecting
subterranean channels communicate
with their source, the vast reservoir of
Tartarus. Perpetual surging to and fro
of waters in the subterranean reservoir
causes the flow of springs and rivers.
All water of rivers and seas returns
eventually to Tartarus.
Aristotle of Stagira (384-322 B.C.),
pupil of Plato and tutor to Alexander,
the son of Philip of Macedonia, carried
his thinking far beyond that of his men¬
tor. His vast and omnivorous Intellect
ranged the entire scope of human
knowledge and philosophy and, inevi¬
tably, included the water cycle.
Peremptorily, Aristotle rejected the
ideas of Anaxagoras about the water
cycle and Plato's Tartarus. He recog¬
nized that some springs are fed by
meteoric water, but he believed that
the main flow of water originates in
great underground caverns where
coldness transforms air Into water. He
differed with Anaxagoras also on the
explanation of meteorological pheno¬
mena, such as hail storms.
Aristotle could not conceive that rain
was any but a minor source of water
for rivers and springs. He said that
sea water turned into air under the
heat of the sun, and that air turned
back into water (condensed) In cav¬
erns under the Influence of cold.
It happens that Anaxagoras came
closer than Aristotle to explanations
that are now generally accepted.
Aristotle, however, marshalled more
observational information than had
Anaxagoras and some of these facts
conflicted with the latter's beliefs.
Aristotle's argument, therefore, was
the more compelling and it was not
successfully challenged for nearly
2,000 years.
**
FROM IMPERIAL ROME TO THE
RENAISSANCE. Before the Romans
came under the intellectual Influence of
Greece they had learned much from
the Etruscans, who were masters in
the arts of irrigation and swamp drai¬
nage. This heritage enabled Rome to
have a well-developed sewerage sys¬
tem as early as the sixth century B.C.
Romans, in general, accepted the
science of Greece and added little to
basic concepts. Their great forte was
engineering, as is evident from the
aqueducts, bridges and other struc¬
tures which still endure.
Roman engineers also invented
delivery of domestic water through
pipes to households. Curiously, they
were quite unable to measure the flow
of water in a conduit. They assumed
that flow from a conduit depends only
on the size of the orifice, ignoring the
factor of hydraulic head.
During the Dark and Middle Ages
many fanciful notions were current
about the water cycle. One of these
ideas, an elaborated inheritance from
Greece, was that ocean water pours
into submarine caverns which conduct
it to the land areas, where it Is distilled
CONTINUED PAGE 10
Photo © Georg Gerster - Rapho, Paris
Pancake Oases
in the Desert

Each of the "pancakes" in this striking aerial photo is a victory of man over the Sahara desert.
The pancakes are tiny "oases" of palm trees made to grow by tapping zones of underground water in the Souf
region of the northern Algerian Sahara. The village can be seen at centre right of photo. The palm saplings
are planted in man-made hollows 20 to 40 feet deep (see detail next page) with palisades built to protect
them from the driving sand. It is in this region of Algeria as well as in Tunisia that Unesco is now carrying
out project "Regional 100" in co-operation with the governments of both countries and under the auspices
of the U.N. Development Programme. "Regional 100" is a survey of underground water resources in the northern
Sahara and a study of the best ways of exploiting such water for future farm development. South
of the Sahara another major hydrological study is under way in the Chad Basin which constitutes
a vast reservoir of underground water. Four countries Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria have formed
a commission to plan the development of the Basin, an area of 400,000 square kilometres. Under a
U.N. Development Programme project, Unesco, co-operating with the Chad Basin Commission, is making
a general hydrological survey of the region, while FAO is studying problems of land reclamation.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
9

10
mi i
Photo © Georg Gerster - Rapho, Paris
PANCAKE OASES (Continued). Photo
left, close-up view of
deep-hollow date-palm groves. Sand
terracing, which can be clearly seen,
prevents the trees from being
engulfed by blowing sand. Photo
centre, Lake Chad during the dry
season. The outer periphery, seen
here, has dwindled down into
a series of shallow lagoons.
Photo right, like giant mole hills
running across the desert, these
holes are shafts that mark the paths
of foggaras, or underground tunnels,
dug in ancient times for irrigation.
This foggara, near In Salah,
lies in the heart of Touareg country
in the Algerian Sahara.
PERPETUAL QUEST FOR WATER (Continued)
and rises to the surface to feed springs
and rivers. The medievalists were
correct in that the sea is the source
of water in the hydrological cycle, but
they had the cycle turning in the wrong
direction and they called upon the
wrong distillation apparatus.
Such ideas persisted because men
accepted the Greeks, especially Aris¬
totle, as final authorities, and because
of church dogma concerning a passage
in Ecclesiastes which was interpreted
to mean that continental waters origi¬
nate by underground flow from the
sea. To believe otherwise was heresy.
Neither the natural philosophers nor
the churchmen could accept precipita¬
tion as a sufficient source for water in
the land areas.
Hydrology, like other sciences and
the arts, was bound eventually to break
with dogmatism and authoritarianism.
The break came in a curious way. The
French Huguenot, Bernard Palissy
(15147-1590), was a self-taught cera¬
mist who created the naturalistic mas¬
terpieces of enamelled pottery which
he called "rustiques figulines". His
art saved his life. Arrested and
sent to Bordeaux for trial concerning
his activity in the new religion of the
Reformation, he seemed to be doomed.
But the Queen Mother, Catherine de
Medici, intervened by naming him
inventeur des rustiques figulines du roi
(that is, of Henri III). As a member of
the king's household he became im¬
mune to the parliament of Bordeaux.
Palissy boasted that he knew neither
Latin nor Greek. He knew only what

Photo © Leon Herschtritt - Rapho, Paris Photo © Georg Gerster - Rapho, Paris
he had seen during extensive travels
as a surveyor before he took up cera¬
mics. His observations were acute
and, in the context of his times, he was
an accomplished geologist, mineralo¬
gist and palaeontologist. Although
Palissy rejected theory and relied on
direct observation, he knew enough
about authoritarian doctrine to be
aware that it denied the adequacy of
rain as a source for springs and rivers.
Nevertheless, what his geological
eye saw convinced him otherwise. In
a book published in 1580 he declared
that springs and rivers take their origin
in and are fed by rain and by rain
alone. This may have been the first
such declaration ever published. This
was more important to mankind than
the creation of his celebrated ena
melled pottery, but Palissy received no
scientific recognition in his own life¬
time. The world waited nearly a cen¬
tury to awaken. Again, the catalyst
was a Frenchman.
In 1668, the French amateur scien¬
tist, Pierre Perrault, convinced of the
adequacy of rain as a source for run¬
off, set out to prove it. During three
years he measured precipitation in the
upper Seine basin, obtaining an aver¬
age of about 49 centimetres annually.
Calculation showed that this was about
six times the estimated discharge of
the Seine. He published this and other
information in 1674.
Measurements and calculations such
as these could have been made at any
time during the previous 2,000 years,
but science simply had not reached the
stage of testing hypotheses by measu¬
rement and observation. Perrault it
was, therefore, who initiated modern
scientific hydrology. Perrault correctly
accounted for the remainder of preci¬
pitation (the part that did not run off
in the Seine), five-sixths of it being
disposed of by groundwater recharge,
evaporation, and transpiration by
plants.
Perrault's findings were verified by
others within a few years and hydro¬
logy was launched toward its modern
course. The science is interdisciplin¬
ary, however, and could make no great
progress along quantitative lines until
the basic sciences of physics, chemis¬
try and biology were well advanced,
and until basic principles of geology
were established.
11

MAN'S PERPETUAL QUEST FOR WATER (Continued)
o A world approach
to the water crisis
12
D
|%. 1VERS of the world
that reach the sea discharge about
30,000 cubic kilometres of water
annually, and this is about 30 per cent
of precipitation on the continents.
However, only about 50 per cent of
river discharge has been actually
measured, the rest being estimated.
The Amazon, largest river in the
world, had never been measured until
1963-64, when a joint Brazilian-United
States expedition aboard a Brazilian
navy corvette measured it three times,
once at high-water stage, once at low-
water stage, and again at an inter¬
mediate stage.
The average flow was found to be
about 175,000 cubic metres per second,
or about 5,540 cubic kilometres per
year. This is roughly 18 per cent of
the discharge of all rivers of the world.
According to these measurements,
the Amazon is nearly twice as large
as had been estimated earlier. These
measurements alone upset earlier
calculations of the world water budget
and illustrate why large-scale measure-
mejnts are important.
Water science is handicapped by
unsatisfactory techniques and instru¬
ments for measuring many hydrological
phenomena, especially on the very
large and very small scales.
How, for example, does one measure
the rate of movement of ground water
through an aquifer underground? How
does one measure evaporation from
a whole continent or from the world
ocean? These cannot be measured
directly. They can only be estimated
by measuring related phenomena from
which computed values can be derived.
Evaporation and transpiration are
important because they dissipate a
large share of precipitation on land
areas. Because of evaporation, man-
made lakes are not unmixed blessings.
In arid areas lakes may evaporate
annually a layer of water equal to their
surface area and up to three metres
or more in thickness.
Evaporation plus transpiration are
usually computed on the basis of solar
radiation, wind speed, air humidity,
temperature and other factors. Late
in the seventeenth century, the British
astronomer Edmund Halley, based on
a brief experiment in his London
quarters, estimated that annual
evaporation from the warm Medi¬
terranean sea was three feet (about
90 centimetres). The estimate was
low and the modern estimate, averaged
for the world ocean as a whole, is
about 100 centimetres.
Measurement of precipitation has
been practised systematically over an
increasingly large part of the world
during nearly two centuries. The first
European meteorological network was
established in 1780, with its eastern¬
most station in Hungary. Europe and
part of North America are now
reasonably well covered, but precipita¬
tion on vast areas in Asia, Africa,
South America, polar regions and the
seas is virtually unknown.
The last ice age ended some
10,000 years ago, but much of the
world is still locked in deep ice.
The great ice-caps of Greenland and
Antarctica contain nearly 80 per cent
of all water outside the oceans.
Alpine, piedmont and valley glaciers
are widespread; shelf-ice and pack-ice
cover vast expanses of the polar seas;
and permafrost (permanently frozen
ground) occupies vast areas of Siberia,
northern Europe and northern North
America.
The total volume of ice-caps and
glaciers in land areas is about
26 million cubic kilometres, while all
other water in the continents amounts
to only about eight million cubic
kilometres.
Evidently, much of the world is still
in an ice age, but relatively little is
known about the frozen areas.
The great ice-caps seem to be stable,
but considerable difference of opinion
prevails about whether the ice masses
are growing, shrinking or merely being
maintained. It is important that this be
determined because the ice areas are
great weather factories and their
melting would cause a rise of sea level.
The total land area of the world is
149 million square kilometres. About
15 million square kilometres is under
permanent ice cover. Another 22 mil¬
lion square kilometres is in permafrost,
comprising 22 per cent of all the land
area In the Northern Hemisphere.
Nearly 40 million square kilometres
is extremely arid to arid. Considerable
areas are high-altitude mountain
masses.
In all, more than half the world's
land area is basically inhospitable for
human occupation. Despite man's
great adaptability, he has made
relatively little encroachment In the
inhospitable areas.
Burgeoning population, however,
inevitably will place Increasing pressure
on parts of the world that are now
relatively uninhabited but which
contain a wealth of natural resources,
including water. These are the fron¬
tiers of the future and their full use
will require pushing further the
frontiers of knowledge because the
new areas are poorly known and
experience in their occupation is small.
HBIVING standards in all
societies are closely related to water
use. High living standards require
high rates of water use for agriculture,
industry, public services and house¬
holds. The extent to which develop¬
ing countries can forge ahead is link¬
ed to their ability to develop water
resources.
In some countries per capita use of
water is only about 100 litres per day.
In some industrialized countries water
use is sixty times greater. The
disparity between living standards is
even larger.
Lessening of the disparity will
require, not only more water use, but
more use per capita. In view of
prospective population growth in
developing countries, the problem is
formidable. The developed countries
themselves have serious problems.
Doubling of population may entail
doubling of water use merely to
maintain existing standards. The
situation in the United States of
America is illustrative.
Per capita use of water for all pur¬
poses other than hydroelectric power
generation in the United States is
about 6,100 litres per day. This is a
very high rate of use compared to that
of most other countries, even those
which are highly industrialized. How¬
ever, it is only a small part of the
average total national water supply.
In some areas water is re-used many

times. On the average, however,
somewhat more than 90 per cent of the
water yield of the United States is not
subjected to withdrawal uses. It ser¬
ves as a conveyor belt to send
wastes out to the sea. The cen¬
tral problem of water resources de¬
velopment and management is, in fact,
a problem of water quality, not water
quantity.
On a continental or regional scale,
water shortage in one area may be
alleviated by interbasin transfers of
water. This will not necessarily alle¬
viate pollution, however. In the basin
from which water is exported, the
amount remaining to dilute pollution is
less. In the receiving basin it may
permit additional developments that
add to the total pollution problem.
Evidently it is necessary to establish
national, and in some cases, inter¬
national objectives and policies to
control and abate pollution, not merely
to control and distribute water itself.
The real measure of progress at
mid-point in the International Hydro-
logical Decade (IHD) is seen in the
effective international co-operation
that has developed and the importance
of the activities that have been launch¬
ed or planned. The following are a
few examples.
One of the more remarkable areas
of South America is the upper basin
of the Rio Paraguay, known as the
Pantanal, which extends along the
frontiers of Brazil, Bolivia and Para¬
guay. In this vast flood plain which
extends over an area of some 400,000
square kilometres, Unesco and the
Brazilian Government are making a
broad survey on which to base a pro¬
gramme of land reclamation and dev¬
elopment (see article page 14).
When worked out, the methods of
land drainage and development will
serve also for similar operations in the
Bolivian and Paraguayan areas of the
basin. The Pantanal study, In fact,
is one of the greatest of the hydrolo¬
gical surveys now taking place in the
world. It is part of a long-term inter¬
national programme of studies for the
basins of the Rio Parana and the Rio
de la Plata.
Brazil has also set up, within her
Hydrological Decade programme, a
Centre for Applied Hydrology at Porto
Alegre. This has been done with finan¬
cial help from the Government of
Brazil, the National Bank for Economic
Development and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).
PRE-POLLUTION ICE-CUBES
Since the end of the last ice age 10,000 years ago, 80 per cent
of all water outside the oceans has been locked up in the great ice-caps
of Greenland and Antarctica. In the far North, Eskimoes store their
drinking water in the form of blocks of solid ice piled up in the open air,
above. An enterprising Danish firm is now selling "Pre-pollution era"
ice cubes taken from icebergs. Tiny bubbles of air, trapped in
the ice thousands of years ago give a sparkling effect to drinks
in which the cubes are placed.
The Great Lakes of North America
contain one of the largest concentra¬
tions of fresh surface water in the
world. Canada and the United States
have collaborated during many years
in studies of many international water
problems. Now, for the first time, the
two countries are collaborating in an
intensified study of the lakes which
will have wide implications for navi¬
gation, power generation, industrial
and municipal development, fisheries,
and recreation.
Another remarkable area is the
Chad Basin in Africa. The basin is
much larger than Lake Chad itself,
covering 400,000 square kilometres
and extending into the four States of
Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria.
Studies in this area relate to the
soil, surface-water and ground-water
resources.
Although many excellent studies had
been made long before the advent of
the Hydrological Decade specifically
under the Arid Zone Research Project
of Unesco the Decade has made it
possible to collate a wide variety of
data.
Through Unesco and the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO), a
Commission formed by the four ripa¬
rian States obtained assistance from
the UNDP. In consultation with the
Commission, FAO administers the
reclamation studies and Unesco the
CONTINUED PAGE 32
13

A WORLD APPROACH TO THE WATER CRISIS
(Continued from page 13)
32
general hydrological survey. The
Chad Basin project, which got under
way in 1966, is an outstanding example
of practical, scientific co-operation.
Another example is the study of
ground-water resources in the Northern
Sahara, which will cover the area under¬
lain by principal artesian aquifers in
Algeria and the Saharan area of
Tunisia. The study is In progress
under the auspices of the govern¬
ments of the two States, under an
agreement with UNDP, with Unesco
serving as executing agency.
Quite a different type of project is
the establishment of a Centre for Hy¬
draulics and Applied Hydrological Re¬
search at Ezeiza, Argentina. This also
will be assisted by UNDP, with Unesco
as executing agency. The overall
purpose is to build up within the
State facilities for advanced studies
and research in water science and to
apply the results to practical develop¬
ment projects.
An establishment with a similar pur¬
pose is the Institute for Hydrosciences
and Water Resources Technolog/ in
Iran, established by the Government
of Iran, assisted by UNDP, with
Unesco as the executing agency.
A considerable number of similar
and varied activities may be cited:
co-ordinated planning of International
Hydrological Decade activities by the
council of the five Nordic countries ;
research on uses of saline water for
Irrigation in Tunisia; world-wide re¬
search on the uses of radio-nuclides In
hydrology (led by the International
Atomic Energy Agency) ; the interstate
hydrometeorological study of Lake
Victoria, administered by the World
Meteorological Organization, which
also directs the development of the
Central American hydrometeorological
network; development of a flood-warn¬
ing system for the Mekong River
Basin; establishment of a Natural
Resources Institute in Iraq; and many
other activities.
Decade activities have exposed the
glaring Inadequacy of Information about
water in many parts of the world and
the depressingly retarded state of
some aspects of hydrology, the only
science that can translate raw data
into water information that can guide
action to conserve and use water.
Developing countries are anxious
to see construction machinery in
action on water-development projects.
International organizations that provide
project funds also want to see dirt
fly. Planning studies have generally
been heavily weighted toward en¬
gineering and economic feasibility and
minimally toward hydrological or eco¬
logical aspects. Possible unwanted
side effects have received little atten¬
tion. Consequently, some projects
have been over-designed, under-
designed or wrongly designed.
Over-design entails excessive costs
for construction. Under-design results
in failure to achieve maximum use of
resources. Wrong design can cause
either or both results, and it may lead
to projects failing.
Circumstances are now changing
and scientific studies are being author¬
ized and carried out in advance of
crystallization of plans and beginning
of construction. An example, already
mentioned, is the organized interna¬
tional study of the La Plata River basin
in South America, involving five na¬
tions and one of the world's great
rivers. Advance studies can save
many millions of dollars of construc¬
tion cost and greatly improve the
benefit/cost ratio of projects.
Developing countries have recog¬
nized the necessity for cultivating their
own hydrological competence and
establishing observation networks.
During the Decade, various govern¬
ments and universities, with the colla¬
boration and assistance of Unesco,
have established advance-level semes¬
ter-length special courses in hydrology
and water resources problems. Such
courses have been established in
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Israel, Italy,
Netherlands, Spain and Venezuela.
These are for foreign nationals.
In addition, Unesco, WMO and FAO,
in collaboration with other organiza¬
tions and universities, have sponsored
many seminar-type short courses in
hydrology, chiefly in countries of
Latin America and North Africa. Fur¬
ther, various universities in developed
countries have offered many scholar¬
ship to foreign nationals to enable
them to enrol in regular university
curricula oriented toward hydrology.
The International Hydrological
Decade has created a new awareness
among the nations of the world that
water problems are large and growing.
Thus the Decade is taking its proper
place among the many international
programmes that aim to improve the
lot of all men°in all places.
