2. Spin
from
c
^PACE exploration and de¬
velopment, hardly more than a decade
since the launching of Sputnik I into
earth orbit, have brought immediate
benefits to mankind as a whole to
developing as well as advanced indus¬
trial countries with far-reaching impli¬
cations for economic progress and the
global political constellation.
Space satellites have endowed us
with a new dimension of capabilities
for coping with the overriding and dif¬
ficult tasks of management of the
earth's complex ecological system, of
which man is but one segment.
They make possible, for the first
time in human history, global solutions
to global problems. And this has in
turn increased the urgency for the
development of new global institutions
and a new global political matrix to
assure maximum benefits of these new
capabilities.
Direct telecasts from the moon,
viewed simultaneously by hundreds of
millions of people around the world,
marked a revolution in communications
hardly less spectacular than the first
moon landing itself. Satellites in earth
orbit are now capable of broad-band
transmission of all types of communi¬
cations, including voice, telegraphy,
high speed data transmission, facsimile
and television.
Voice and telegraphic communica¬
tion traffic alone has been expanding
so rapidly that international traffic

-Off
space satellites
could not possibly be handled ade¬
quately by wireless high frequency
radio facilities or underwater cable
systems. Yet traffic with the many less
developed countries of the world had
not yet become heavy enough to make
more costly cable systems economi¬
cally feasible.
Since communications satellites have
been placed in orbit, however, it has
become possible not only to meet all
these requirements, but also to reduce
tariff rates for communications gener¬
ally.
INTELSAT has operated the world¬
wide satellite communications system
since 1965, the first "Early Bird" satel¬
lite, with 240 two-way telephone chan¬
nels, doubling the capacity of the exist¬
ing four trans-Atlantic underwater
cables overnight and giving countries
in other areas of the world immediate
new international facilities.
A second satellite, "Atlantic 2", with
1,200 channels is now operating over
the mid-Atlantic off the west coast of
Africa, and "Pacific 1 and 2" over the
mid-Pacific.
The first Soviet communications
satellite of the "Molniya" class was
launched April 23, 1965 with a very
high elliptical orbit of high apogee to
provide the longest duration of com¬
munication within the territory of the
Soviet Union. Six Molniya satellites,
each of them more powerful, have
been launched since April 1965 to pro
vide the world's first domestic satellite
communications system.
Joined with a network of 20 earth
stations in the Orbita communications
system, the Molniya I satellites are
designated mainly for transmission of
TV programmes, newspaper matrices,
radio broadcasts and meteorological
maps. It is, however, also used for
telegraph and telephone communica¬
tion.
At a recent private meeting of
experts in Talloires, France, the Soviet
participant, Professor Gennady Zhukov
of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences
made it clear that his country was
prepared to co-operate with INTELSAT
to form a global telecommunications
system. Not only is technical compa¬
tibility between INTELSAT and Orbita
not difficult to obtain, the random orbit¬
ing of the Soviet Molniya satellites,
which adequately cover the northern¬
most areas of the northern hemisphere,
is complementary to the geostationary
satellites of INTELSAT.
A founding member of INTELSAT,
Canada will most likely be the next
country to establish its own domestic
multipurpose satellite communications
system, capable of handling television,
telephone, data and other signals. For
the Canadian environment the effect
of satellite communications is expected
to be as dramatic as the introduction
of telegraphy and microwave trans¬
mission combined, making it possible
8
SIX USES FOR
COMMUNICATIONS
SATELLITES
Today's use of communications satellites for
intercontinental link-ups is merely the first
step in a vast revolution in communications
technology. Drawings, right, show some
striking capabilities of a developed global
satellite communications network.
(1) Intercontinental point to point transmissions.
(2) Multiple access to communications
satellites enables many nations to "hook-up"
to transmissions, using relatively small and
inexpensive earth terminals. (3) Air and sea
navigation and traffic control satellite system
brings greater safety to crowded sea and
air lanes. (4) Relay satellites round the earth
reduce the need for a global network of
space tracking and data stations. Lunar and<
planetary orbiting relays provide continuous <
communications service. (5) Community TV 2
via satellite to schools and isolated villages, f
(6) Direct broadcasts voice and TV to |
sets in the home. A

MAPPING
OUR GLOBE
FROM
OUTER SPACE
Satellites have brought hitherto
unknown precision to the mapping
and measuring of the earth. By
1967, observations from 41 earth
stations, using the 'Pageos" satellite
in polar orbit at an altitude of 2,600
miles, enabled far distant points on earth
to be located with a margin of error of
30 feet Introduction of navigation satellite
systems for planes and ships may bring
cheaper travel. NASA estimates that a one per
cent saving in fuel and manpower through improved
navigation would save the shipping industry $150
million yearly. Here, Gemini 4 crew, Ed White and James
McDivitt use a celestial navigation aid to study locations of
constellations before their 1965 flight Photo USIS
to provide television, telephone and
data services to remote northern areas
more efficiently than by any other
means.
To obtain the many early and poten¬
tial advantages offered by satellite
communications, the Canadian govern¬
ment decided to create a special cor-
poration which would develop, own
and operate the satellites and the cor¬
responding ground stations. While the
government intends to hold an ade¬
quate degree of management control
in the Corporation, ownership is
encouraged by any private interests
desirous of participating in the new
venture.
But other large countries such as
the U.S., Brazil, India, Indonesia, Aus¬
tralia and Japan are now preparing to
establish their own domestic satellite
communications systems for commer¬
cial and educational purposes, operat¬
ing in conjunction with the INTELSAT
world-wide telecommunications system.
And regional groupings of countries in
Africa and Latin America, where great¬
er economic integration provides one
of the great hopes for more rapid
development, are currently studying
the creation of regional communica¬
tions satellite systems.
With ground stations in each coun¬
try, they will be able to receive and
send programmes over regular world¬
wide radio and TV channels, as well
as have greater and more economical
voice, telegraphic and data transmis¬
sion services with the rest of the
world.
It is now technically feasible to
expand space communications systems
to provide direct television broadcast¬
ing to receivers in homes and public
buildings all over the world. The use
of such satellites as an educational
tool by an appropriate international
organization, could lead to one of the
greatest breakthroughs in mass educa¬
tion in history, bringing vast new know¬
ledge and information to literally thou¬
sands of millions of people at much
reduced cost.
But technology of satellite educa¬
tional systems has far outrun plans
for its use. Educational satellites are
likely to be mostly television satellites,
and the use of television itself as an
effective instrument of education is
still very much in the development
stage.
Despite the fact that TV has become
a household necessity in all advanced
industrial countries during the past
twenty years, it has encountered
serious obstacles as a medium of ins¬
truction. Television education entails
costly installations, implies a great
deal of centralized control over the
educational system, required singu¬
larity of purpose and close co-ordina¬
tion among various branches of
government concerned, and, equally
important, poses serious programming
problems if the real educational needs
of a heterogeneous audience are to be
met. .
Yet, despite these sobering prob¬
lems, more than 50 countries make
some use of television for teaching.
It is widely used as an audio-visual
aid in the U.S., Western Europe and
the Soviet Union and, after their suc¬
cess in Italy with Telescuola, TV edu¬
cational programmes have evidenced
a remarkable development.
Japan is using TV not only in
schools, but also with correspondence
study the Japan Broadcasting Corpor¬
ation's "Citizen's College" to teach
young people who have been unable
to attend secondary school or univer¬
sity.
The Republic of Niger is using it in
the first years of school to make up
for an acute teacher shortage. Col¬
ombia is using it to teach nearly half a
million primary school children, and is
expanding into secondary school.
And in Brazil, where as many as
5 million children cannot find school¬
ing, television education satellite bas-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
9

SATELLITES (Continued)
Price of a weather station less than $5,000
ed may be the only answer to that
country's gigantic needs for improving
and increasing education facilities at
all levels.
Undaunted by the problems of edu¬
cational telecasts for international
audiences, the Japan Broadcasting
Corporation (NHK) is proceeding with
plans to provide educational program¬
mes for developing countries of South¬
east Asia via satellite. As a member
of the Asian Broadcasting Union, NHK
is presently developing a multi-pur¬
pose, multiple access satellite that can
be utilized by several countries.
Meanwhile, NHK has established a
library of educational films for use by
developing countries of Southeast
Asia. Japanese science programmes
are now edited and processed in the
various languages for shipping as
films or video tapes, but in the future
programmes will be transmitted to
other countries via satellites using
automatic translators or foreign lan¬
guage sound tracks.
I
10
N India, an initial study of
a Unesco expert mission shows that
a satellite system is not only the most
economical means of meeting that
country's tremendous needs for nation¬
wide telecommunications and educa¬
tional facilities; indeed such a satellite
system offers the only way national
goals in in-school and out-of-school
education, food production, community
development, health, and family plan¬
ning can be met within a decade.
Using conventional telecommunica¬
tions systems, All India Radio does not
hope to have more than six main tele¬
vision transmitters and 50 smaller relay
stations operating by 1981. These
would cover not more than 19 per cent
of the area of the country and 25 per
cent of the population.
A satellite system, with total initial
capital costs of no more than $50 mil¬
lion, would provide people all over the
country, including those in the most
remote areas, with immediate access
to television. Not only would this have
an immediate impact on the major agri¬
cultural and social problems of the
country, but it would also pierce the
isolation of individuals and communi¬
ties in rural areas and instil a sense
of participation in a wider national and
global environment.
Equally important, an Indian satel¬
lite-based TV system would stimulate
and expand industrial, technological
and managerial capabilities. Potential
benefits resulting from the electronics
industry needed to produce the broad¬
casting, relay and receiving equipment
would in themselves be significant.
Similar benefits will be forthcoming
for African and Central American
countries after the 1971-72 launching
of the Franco-German "Symphony"
telecommunications satellite. The sat¬
ellite, two flight models of which will
be launched in geostationary orbit at
approximately 15° longitude, will en¬
able the establishment of satellite com¬
munications links between countries
where the smaller ground stations
developed for the project will be locat¬
ed, particularly the Middle East, Africa
and Central America, as well as with
those countries already equipped with
INTELSAT-type stations.
The Symphony satellite programme
is expected eventually to provide a
comprehensive and permanent means
not only of interconnecting the mem¬
bers of Eurovision more economically
than the microwave links used at pre¬
sent, but also of extending it to other
regions. High on the list of priorities
for this system is the development of
regional satellite services, which, co¬
ordinated within a global system, will
include experimental work on the prob¬
lems of educational TV.
Balanced regional telecommunica¬
tions development, including the shar¬
ing of earth stations between countries,
will contribute substantially to the
development of TV distribution and
broadcasting which can become a cri¬
tically important factor in meeting a
wide variety of educational needs in
developed and developing countries
alike.
"Very often, the expenditures born
by the most advanced countries for
space activity are criticized as a luxury,
in the face of the pressing needs of
large sectors of mankind," M. Rodino,
Chairman of Italy's Telespazio, told
the United Nations Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Use of Outer
Space in Vienna. "But satellite educa¬
tional transmissions would almost ma¬
gically close a circuit through which
money spent for the most sophisticat¬
ed technology returns manifold bene¬
fits to a large number of less privileg¬
ed peoples. There can be no more
dramatic confirmation of the sometimes
obscured truth that technological pro¬
gress assures the progress of all
humankind."
This is even more dramatically evi¬
dent in the rapid development of
weather satellites. Until recently it
seemed unlikely that meteorologists
would ever have the tools they needed
to make relatively long-range weather
forecasts based on worldwide obser¬
vations. The practical difficulties and
enormous cost of obtaining such
observations which of necessity must
be three-dimensional over the vast
areas of oceans and inaccessible
regions of the globe, seemed insur¬
mountable. With the launching of
Sputnik I meteorologists for the first
time saw some hope of achieving their
long-sought goals.
Satellites are ideally suited to serve
as weather observation platforms.
Situated high above the atmosphere,
with the earth rotating beneath them,
satellites can view every area on the
globe, including those that are inac¬
cessible to man and those where
weather stations cannot be installed
on a practical basis. While surveying
the atmosphere with their own cameras
and sensors, they can collect data by
interrogation of horizontal sounding
balloons, ocean buoys and remote
land-stations, and then communicate
these data to processing centres.
Two operational weather satellite
systems, the Tiros (TOS) system of
the United States and the Meteor sys¬
tem of the U.S.S.R., have been joined
together in a worldwide meteorological
network called "World Weather
Watch" under the auspices of the
World Meteorological Organization
(WMO). Information gathered by met¬
eorological satellites and ground sta¬
tions is transmitted by high speed
facilities to the three World Meteoro¬
logical Centres (Moscow, Melbourne
and Washington), where Command
Data Acquisition Stations process and
analyze the data by computer and dis¬
seminate weather forecasts to regional
meteorological centres.
w
ITH the advent in 1967 of
automatic picture transmission (APT)
from meteorological satellites, coun¬
tries throughout the world obtained
direct access to daily observations
from space. With global coverage
performed twice a day from several
views, the system provides local wea¬
thermen with a continuous flow of
pictures of the earth and its atmo¬
sphere in both the visible and infra¬
red wave lengths (for day and night
coverage) within less than four minutes
after each individual picture has been
taken by the various satellites.
Daily surveillance of ocean areas
permits early detection of developing
storms, typhoons and hurricanes,
determination of their tracks and
estimations of storm development and
intensity. This information is passed
along automatically, on a daily basis,
to all countries likely to be affected by
a particular storm. The likelihood of
a sudden storm hitting an unwarned
and unprepared community is thus
diminishing rapidly and will soon be a
thing of the past.
Of particular import for developing
countries, direct instantaneous parti¬
cipation in meteorological satellite pro¬
grammes is relatively easy and takes
an investment of only $5,000 or so
or even less, if a ground station is
built on a "do-it-yourself" basis. And
the immediate benefits from such
participation are enormous. Advanced
CONTINUED PAGE 12

SPACEBORNE
SURVEYORS
OF EARTH'S
RESOURCES
Earth orbiting satellites have given man a highly sophisticated tool for the survey and management
of his planetary resources to help solve such major problems as water and food supply, mineral
and fuel resources, water and air pollution. Data gathered by satellites already helps hydrologists
to identify new water supplies, to locate pollution in lakes and rivers, and generally to improve
water management. Infra-red photography (as in photo above of Quinault River flowing into the
Pacific at Taholah, State of Washington) reveals the flow patterns of rivers, estuaries and tidal
regions, of value In study of silting and shoals. For the oceanographer, the location of fish shoals
in the warm waters of the Gulf Stream is simplified by plotting the daily meanderings of this
huge current, which a satellite can do within minutes. Surveys from space are also being used
for a host of other purposes, such as prospecting remote areas on earth potentially rich in
minerals (limestone deposits, photo below).

r 4 t * r f
12
SATELLITES (Continued)
warnings ot storms and accurate fore¬
casts of the beginning and end of
monsoons can help farmers to deter¬
mine more intelligently the best time
to plant, fertilize, spray and harvest
crops, and when to provide protection
for them. Accurate forecasts can
result in substantial improvements in
water management systems, and allow
transportation to be managed more
safely, more economically and more
efficiently with limited delays and
diversions. They also provide increas¬
ing assurance that fishing fleets will
not be caught off guard at sea by
sudden storms.
What this means in human and eco¬
nomic terms to a country like India
defies calculation by the most advanc¬
ed data processing system. Estimates
of the potential benefits from timely
action based on reliable long-range
weather predictions of two weeks and
a satisfactory briefing of the farmer
through a nation-wide, satellite TV
broadcast system range as high as
$1,600 million annually through preven¬
tion of losses in agricultural production
alone not to mention additional bene¬
fits such as improved flood protection,
forestry control, transportation and
communications.
For India, as for other developing
countries, weather satellites coupled
with satellite telecommunications offer
the prospects within the next decade
of controlling hunger and greatly
improving nutrition through improved
management of farm production and
food distribution.
In addition, space sensoring tech¬
niques and multispectral photography
are expected to radically improve agri¬
cultural efficiency throughout the
world.. NASA's (U.S. National Aero¬
nautics and Space Administration)
Office of Space Science and Applica¬
tions has gone on record urging that
the benefits derived from these deve¬
lopment in the U.S. alone warrant the
creation of a new management agency
with representation from NASA and the
Agricultural and Commerce Depart¬
ments.
In developing countries, the effective
use of new satellite technology to take
regular Inventory of food supplies and
indicate causes of deficiencies or crop
diseases would mean the difference
between subsistence and starvation,
between stable and unstable govern¬
ments.
Satellites can also help increase
food supplies by measuring ice move¬
ments, water temperature, and salinity
in the oceans. Recording the move¬
ment of plankton, which feed the
fishes of the sea, could do a lot for
the fishing industry. For where the
plankton go the fish go.
Estimates of economic benefits
resulting from operational satellite-
surveillance systems to air transport,
shipping and coastal engineering ran¬
ges into hundreds of millions of dol¬
lars annually. By the mid-1970s, the
world's marine and air transport com
panies will be carrying more than three
times the amount of cargo they were
carrying in 1968, and they will be doing
so faster and more efficiently to more
dispersed locations around the globe.
In order to accomplish this feat, it
will be necessary to enlarge and
improve ships, aircraft, and, in parti¬
cular, support services. Among the
required expanded support services,
navigational aids are probably the
most important, and here space will
play an important role.
Satellites will constitute a major
element in a world-wide system mak¬
ing it possible for surface ships and
aircraft to proceed to their destinations
safely and efficiently, in any part of
the world. With only four satellites
in polar orbit at any given time, it is
possible to provide exact automatic
navigational position-fixes whenever
the satellite is interrogated from nearly
any part of the globe or in the air.
Such an exact position determina¬
tion for sea-going vessels especially
when predetermined lanes in congest¬
ed areas are to be used, for transocea¬
nic air traffic where It is heavy and
increasing in density, and later for the
operation of manned spacecraft
represents an important major break¬
through for greater transport safety.
Satellites, with their remote-sensing
equipment, are also capable of making
important contributions to geological
surveying and detection of mineral and
underground water resources. These
techniques, combining aerial photo¬
graphy with electromagnetic, magnetic
and gravity measuring equipment, have
already led to spectacular discoveries
of large nickel deposits in Manitoba
and the base metal find in the Tim-
mins, Ontario, region. The extension
of airborne remote-sensing surveys to
earth-orbital space platforms is a step
currently projected in NASA program¬
mes for an earth-resources satellite.
» 4 1 .
* 4 .
0 / t t f t
**??''>
, t r f t f f
. . . i * t *
t * f
> f f f f f f f
' f / f f f f '
. * t r /
III tffffff
iMffffff f
i t » f ft f f f f
lltftftf f
tttttfff
Ittttttf f
illltttTTf
1111111 tt
« a AAAA^iUt'
I V K kè*<
« 4*<
»ft V * v
"ft * * v * s
>** ft ft » *
****** I
SPUN LIKE CLOTH from metal
thread filaments, this
honeycomb-structured
material has found a wide
range of uses outside the space
field because of its remarkable
insulating and heat-resisting
properties. Originally produced
for the re-entry heat shields
of spacecraft, it withstands
temperatures of 5,000 degrees
centigrade. Treated to seal in
its myriad pockets of air and
cut into slabs it becomes a
strong, lightweight structural
material for all types of
buildings. A perfect Insulator,
it increases efficiency of air
conditioning. Some of its
other uses: refrigerator
Insulating panels, nose cones
for aircraft and protective
screens In factories using high
temperature processes (above).
