by
Howard Brabyn
Hi
The race between
education & catastrophe
I UMAN history becomes
more and more a race between educa¬
tion and catastrophe," wrote H.G. Wells
nearly fifty years ago in his "Outline
of History". And if in 1920, when
they were written, these words were
dismissed by many as being an in¬
defensible exaggeration, today they
are widely accepted as axiomatic.
The immense growth in man's pro¬
ductive capacity during the twentieth
HOWARD BRABYN is an English writer
and journalist who has specialized in popu¬
larizing scientific and educational questions.
century, and particularly since the end
of World War II, has brought with
it the realization that ignorance, poverty
and disease can be eliminated. Now
the underprivileged two-thirds of the
world's 3,630,000,000 inhabitants are
insisting on action.
Pressure for educational opportunity,
therefore, now comes not only from
an enlightened minority who see
education as a means of producing
the highly-qualified manpower and
mentally alert citizens that national
interest demands, but increasingly
from the uneducated masses them¬
selves.
"Everyone born into this world has
a natural right to education," declared
Horace Mann, and the people of the
world are clamouring for fulfillment of
this right. The "catastrophe" of which
H.G. Wells spoke will occur if they
are denied their educational rights,
either as part of a deliberate policy
or as a result of a failure to under¬
stand the size and urgency of the
effort needed.
Comparative studies on education
have been primarily concerned with
differences in structure, content and
method. While there is a vast amount
to be learnt from such studies they
cannot tell us anything about the size
of the educational effort being made.
11

BETWEEN EDUCATION AND CATASTROPHE (Continued)
They tell us only something about the
quality of that effort-
But details of the financial effort
made between 1950 and 1965 by a
large sample of countries have been
gathered by the Unesco Office of
Statistics (1). Although it is important
to stress the need for the utmost
caution in making interpretations of
statistics such as these, they do at
least allow us to distinguish broad
trends in expenditure on education.
The dominant feature which emerges
from a study of the data collected by
Unesco Is the increase, both in ab¬
solute terms and in relation to total
national spending, in expenditure on
education. The increase was most
pronounced in the period 1960 to 1965,
with the proportion of the national in¬
comes of a group of 90 countries spent
on education rising from 3.6 per cent
in 1960 to 4.5 per cent in 1965.
Translated into human terms, this
increase represents a very consider¬
able achievement. The total world
school enrolment at the three main
levels of education primary, secon¬
dary and higher education was
estimated at 324 million pupils for
the school year 1960-61 (excluding
mainland China, North Korea and North
Vietnam for which no recent figures
are available). The corresponding
figure for 1966-67 was 428 million, an
increase of 104 million, or 32 per cent,
in six years.
Total school enrolment has increas¬
ed at an average annual rate of 4.8
per cent whereas world population has
increased annually by 1.9 per cent.
The fast growth in school enrolment
reflects the progress made in develop¬
ing countries towards generalizing
primary education. Although* a smaller
proportion of total population attends
school in Africa and Asia, these two
continents registered the highest aver¬
age annual rate of increase in enrol¬
ment during the period in question.
Great strides have been made in
granting girls and women the educa¬
tional rights they have for so many cen¬
turies been denied. It now seems in¬
credible that in ancient China it was
a commonplace that "a woman with¬
out ability is normal", that Sophie, in
Rousseau's Emile, was given a moral
rather than an intellectual education,
and that Napoleon founded a school
for girls at Ecouen in 1807 to turn out
"women who believe, not women who
think."
Recent years have seen a sweep¬
ing away of these taboos. Enrolment
of girls and women at all three educa¬
tional levels has increased from 140
million in 1960-61 to 186 million in
1966-67, a 33 per cent increase. The
percentage of girls and women out
of total enrolment was estimated at
43 per cent for 1966-67, the same level
as for 1960-61. But in Africa, the
percentage of girls and women enrol¬
led increased from 35 per cent in
1960-61 to 38 per cent in 1966-67 and
in Asia from 37 per cent to 38 per cent.
Despite George Bernard Shaw's
disparaging remark that "those who
can, do; those who can't, teach," the
extent to which the demand for educa¬
tion can be met and the quality of
the education given depends largely
upon the numbers of teachers available
and the ratio of teachers to pupils.
The use of teaching machines, tele¬
vision and other audio-visual aids has
not, as yet, become a significant
factor.
It has been estimated that there were
some 17 million teachers for 428 mil¬
lion students in primary, secondary
and higher education in 1966-67. The
world average annual growth in teach¬
ing staff since 1960-61 has been cal¬
culated at 3.9 per cent.
However, total world enrolment of
pupils has increased faster than the
number of teachers, giving slight
increases in the pupil/teacher ratio
which stood at 31 pupils to 1 teacher
at primary level in 1966-67 as compar¬
ed with 30 to 1 in 1960-61. At sec¬
ondary school level the average was
19 pupils to 1 teacher in 1966-67 as
compared with 16 to 1 in 1960-61.
E^
12
(1) "International Developments of Educa¬
tional Expenditure: 1950-1965" by Friedrich
Edding and Dieter Berstecher (Unesco Statis¬
tical Reports and Studies), 1969 ($2,00, 12/-).
.VIDENCE of the overall
educational effort being made, even in
countries where first level education is
still the prime concern, is the signi¬
ficant increase in enrolment in higher
education. In 1966-67, 73 per cent of
total world enrolment was at the
primary level, 23 per cent at the
secondary level and 4 per cent at the
higher level.
Africa has the highest rate of increase
among the continents with percentage
increases of 41 per cent, 84 per cent,
and 74 per cent for the first, second
and third levels respectively. Equally
noticeable is the development of higher
education in Asia, particularly in female
enrolment, where the highest growth
rate for any continent was registered.
Statistical tests, based on an
analysis of the main causal factors
behind the international development
of educational expenditure, show three
factors to be dominant the national
income, the size of the age group
corresponding to different levels of
education and the proportion of highly
qualified manpower in the active
population.
In most countries these factors tend
to have an increasingly strong influence
on future educational expenditure.
Other influences, in particular the de¬
mand for equal opportunities and the
drive for qualitative improvements in
formal education, are likely to give
further impetus to the expansion of
educational budgets.
Many of the forecasts of educational
expenditure, however, are based on
wrong premises. There is a tendency
to assume that all nations will have to
follow a pre-determined path of dev¬
elopment. International expenditure
comparisons tend to lead to the per¬
petuation of past expenditure pat¬
terns. At a time when great changes
in curricula, techniques and organiza¬
tion are in the offing, comparisons bet¬
ween national expenditures become
less and less meaningful.
The strong interdependence between
expenditure on education and on other
public needs suggests that education
should be planned as an integral part
of the overall national effort. Instead
of making invidious international com¬
parisons, it is more important, perhaps,
to compare the proportion of the total
national product devoted to education
with that devoted to other public needs.
When this sort of comparison is made
it appears distressingly obvious that

our values have become distorted and
that, in most countries, education is
receiving a very meagre slice of the
national cake.
In the time it takes to read this sen¬
tence eleven children will have been
born into the world. In the same
period of time five people will have
died. The terrifying demographic ex¬
plosion the world is now experiencing
gives a measure of the staggering size
of the education, food and health prob¬
lems with which we are faced.
D,'ESPITE the efforts enum¬
erated above, the number of adult
illiterates in the world has probably
increased in the last ten years from
740 million to something like 800 mil¬
lion. Unless an enormously enlarged
effort is made this progression will
continue.
Since in education lies the key to
the solution of such problems as birth
control, improved food production, bet¬
ter elementary hygiene, etc., we must
concentrate our resources upon its
furtherance. Only through education
can we de-fuse the population "bomb"
which, in the long run, may represent
a greater threat to our planet than
nuclear weapons. How far we are
failing in this task becomes evident
when we learn that the world as a
whole is spending about 40 per cent
more on military programmes than on
public education (see next page).
Not only must the world change its
expenditure priorities; in the field of
education it must re-define its objec¬
tives. At the primary level instruction
in hygiene and feeding habits must
be regarded as equally important as
instruction in reading and writing. Uni¬
versities in the developing countries
must direct students towards those
studies that bear a close relationship
to the needs of the country in its exist¬
ing state of development. It is less
important to provide a minority with
a maximum of culture than to arm the
majority with a basic minimum of
knowledge.
"Take some more tea," the March
Hare said to Alice.
"I've had nothing yet," Alice replied,
"so I can't take more."
"You mean you can't take less,"
said the Hatter: "It's very easy to take
more than nothing." (Lewis Carroll)
There is no room for complacency
about results already achieved. If the
world is to emerge from its present
"Alice-in-Wonderland" situation, we
must offer the uneducated masses
much more than the "nothing", or next
to nothing, they have been receiving
up to now. A massive, no-expenses-
spared, educational effort must be
undertaken immediately. In less than
a generation it may be too late.
13
