Originality
and tradition
in American
culture
by Charles C. Mark
W
_ _ HEN Ulysses S. Grant was
President of the United States he was
widely quoted as saying: 'I only know
two tunes. One is "Yankee Doodle"
and the other one isn't." Any discus¬
sion of cultural policy In the United
States must first come to grips with
the popularity of anti-intellectualism
and anti-culture throughout its history
that is implied by that presidential
quote.
To be sure, theatres were built and
used before the revolutionary war,
concerts were a monthly event in
many cities, travelling opera and
theatre companies found eager au¬
diences all over the American conti¬
nent. However, these events and
circumstances were almost entirely
reflections of an American need to
become part of European civilization,
to express inner appetites by feasting
on the riches of an inherited culture.
It should also be pointed out that
pockets of real creativity were active
from colonial times forward among
subculture groups. The Moravians
maintained a rich musical tradition in
the forests of Pennsylvania and North
Carolina, for instance. When events
in Europe forced political exile on
special groups as did the French
16
CHARLES C. MARK is Director of the Office
of State and Community Operations at the
National Foundation for the Arts, In the United
States. The author presents a complete
survey of this subject in " A Study of Cultur¬
al Policy in the United States '. published
last year by Unesco in the series: "Studies
and Documents on Cultural Policies'
Revolution and the German insurrection
of 1848, the United States received a
cultural injection as these people
carried on traditions of culture as part
of their new life.
However, the main stream of Ameri¬
can civilization before the twentieth
century did not value the arts, parti¬
cularly American manifestations of the
arts. Only a small percentage of the
population showed concern for artistic
quality and permanence. The majority
made new art as they pioneered a new
country and it was decades before
these novel expressions were allowed
stature.
Three points must be borne in mind
in order to view American cultural
history properly. Most important is
the fact that the United States was
entirely a nation of immigrants im¬
ported from other cultures. The only
indigenous culture was that of the
Indians who were driven from their
land and destroyed as a people. Amer¬
ican folk culture as it developed with
time (and it did develop) is a synthesis
of European, African, and to a much
lesser extent, Asian culture.
The second point relates to the
importation of other cultures and the
predominant motivation of the early
settlers. Essentially, the United States
was a nation of farmers until the mid-
nineteenth century, a nation which
colonized and exploited itself. Its
cities were trading and supply centres
for the trek west to new lands. People
came from small, soil-poor farms of
Europe directly to the endless rich
prairies where they could own as much
land as they could cultivate and
protect.
These were hardy, frugal, hard¬
working yeomen willing to struggle
against man and nature, but cultivated
music, dance, or painting were not part
of their lives. They brought their
peasant culture with them and practised
it in the settlements they built to
resemble "home". Europeans are often
astounded today to find that there are
whole areas of some states where
English is not the common language,
but rather German, Norwegian, Italian
or Basque.
The third factor influencing cultural
growth in the United States was the
Protestant religions. Beginning with
the Puritans whose beliefs allowed for
only service to God and one's occupa¬
tion, the other developing sects
added fine variants aimed at repress¬
ing instincts toward the arts. All of
the arts were expressly forbidden by
the Puritans, including bright colours
for clothing. As late as the 1870s,
the leaders of the Baptist, Methodist
and Presbyterian religions were
debating the appropriateness of family
recreation, not to mention theatre,
dancing, or popular entertainments.
In 1872, the Methodist Episcopal Con¬
vention passed by majority vote a
list of "amusements", including every
form of art, that were forbidden to
all Methodists.
With these three conditions against
American culture, how is it that the
arts managed to survive at all?
CONTINUED PAGE 20

B «*.*-^-/%
ME
i^Hp4Mto*4MM
IBM
I^H 1atamMamËamaWma*a*mmm
¡H1. * -- *
|55T t*
*" . »^»-^^^ |_
m
amam5>» .
_,, I' ""
' '* m* .
~
HM i
* 1 M » f
» t M*
»
Photos USIS

NEW YORK'S
CULTURE
IN THE ROUND
Open air concerts draw vast audiences to the
parks and concert stadiums of the United
States. Right, 70,000 New Yorkers listen to an
evening symphony concert in Central Park.
Below, part of the unusual continuous circular
gallery of New York's Guggenheim Museum
which houses an outstanding collection of
paintings, sculpture and other works of art.
Founded in 1937, the Museum was established
in its present ultra-modern home, designed by
the famous American architect, Frank Lloyd
Wright, in 1959. Below right, "Stonhenge in
Brooklyn", a new playground sited in the heart
of a low-income housing project in Brooklyn.
Sponsored by the New York City Housing Autho¬
rity, it has vaults, sliding towers and a maze to
intrigue the youngsters. Its vertical concrete
slabs recall the ancient "standing stones" at
Stonehenge, in England.
' >.
M M, Á
M
al
t. I
> I
m
ra-
j&
Photo © Bozak - James A. Ford Agency
Photo <D Etienne Hubert - Rapho, Pan;

« .
.- r-A
:v^ -^.--
: ».«!
"-^IjP"*» *^¿- >**Ä
19

AMERICAN CULTURE (Continued from page 16)
From the birth of a nation to the rhapsody in blue
20
Fortunately, the new continent poured
forth riches beyond anyone's dreams
and wealth meant travel. Sons were
sent back to England to be educated,
wives went to France on shopping
trips. European merchants, craftsmen,
and finally artists found opportunities
by serving the wealthy. One German
architect designed and built over fifty
of the most gracious plantation man¬
sions in the south, training slaves at
each place to be carpenters, wood-
carvers and joiners. And taste began
to breed taste.
H
| | OWEVER, the Industrial
Revolution is responsible for the most
influential and most debatable cultural
movement. A period of 57 years, bet¬
ween 1860 and 1917, saw the founding
of most of the United States quality
institutions of the arts. The Metropo¬
litan Opera, the Metropolitan Museum,
the New York and St. Louis orchestras,
were among the earliest, but by the
time of the First World War most of
the famous schools and institutions
were established.
This was, however, imported culture.
It was an attempt to ape the capitals
of Europe, not to develop an American
cultural life. Considerable evidence
points to the fact that many of the
wealthy who established, attended,
and carefully guarded these institutions
from any infusion of the lower classes
did not really enjoy the experience
of art.
However, at the time when the
industrial barons were buying culture
packaged in Europe, other social
changes were taking place. The
country was turning from an agricul¬
tural society into an urban one. New
waves of immigrants were arriving
from Europe, this time to stay in the
cities and find places for their lives.
Whole sections of large cities became
foreign to native Americans and some
remain so today.
In addition, rural people joined the
urban migration and began fighting for
the factory jobs. It was this phen¬
omenon that struck at the village
and family-oriented Protestant reli¬
gions. Thousands were attending the
low-priced and continuous vaudeville
shows and the leading clergy were
forced to choose between retracting
their position on entertainment or
watching the American family dis¬
integrate as the younger generation
preferred the orchestra seat to the
church pew.
This was a major debate in the
nation from 1880 until 1915, by which
time entertainment was so widely
accepted that the few remaining
"village" preachers were ignored.
As one leading clergyman after
another crossed over the box-office
threshold, the vaudeville entrepreneurs
made every effort to hold their en¬
dorsement by providing elevating and
polite acts in their theatres. It was
during this period that American taste
and humour was developed and
distilled. This was also the period
when the sexless, non-controversial
content of Hollywood films was
perfected. Vaudeville added films to
the acts presented in the early 1920s.
Since the theatre-owners prided them¬
selves on the "family entertainment"
motif of their attractions, the Holly¬
wood film-makers produced films
aimed at these major markets.
Meanwhile, indigenous culture was
growing untended and unappreciated.
Theatrical and musical performances
abounded from the early seventeenth
century and were attended by reb¬
ellious Protestants, European-orient¬
ed Americans, and members of minor¬
ity religions, but native creative talent
and ideas were not valued as compar¬
able to any work or artist of European
origin. Church opposition kept many
talented people from embracing the
artist's life, although literature and
painting were not always included on
lists of forbidden pastimes, and Amer¬
ican authors and painters sometimes
found sympathetic acceptance at home
so long as they followed European
traditions. However, through the
nineteenth century, from Benjamin
West to Mary Cassatt and Henry
James, Europe had the climate that
claimed America's most original and
talented artists.
What are the uniquely American
contributions to world culture ? Only
when the contributions had been
envied around the world did Americans
recognize them and begin to believe
that this culture could produce its own
art. Three individual art forms became
labelled as distinctly American in the
early twentieth century: jazz, a unique
form of dancing, and the musical
comedy. All three came out of con¬
ditions of suppression. All three
evolved from a folk subculture that
was expressed freely, but held un¬
acceptable by the main stream of
American society until after it was
applauded wildly In other countries.
Jazz, as is widely known, was born
of a European mother and a African
father. Slaves and freed Negroes
picked up European instruments and
melodies and added rhythms and
musical organization as they felt it.
From the funeral processions and
brothels of the south, it spread north
and east until the world danced to the
blues. It influenced European com¬
posers and then serious American
composers began legitimizing its
sounds.
A jazz dancer tapped his feet to
complex rhythms and the enthusiastic
approval of audiences all over Europe,
including Queen Victoria, about 1850.
At that time no respectable American
gentleman would have admitted having
seen Juba (William Henry Lane) or
anyone who danced in his style.
Isadora Duncan, fifty years later, was
practically driven from the country for
ideas about free movement and
rhythm. These roots led to so-called
modern dance which existed as an
underground culture until forty years
ago, and only recently attracted a
stable audience.
USICAL theatre began in
America before the revolutionary war,
and evolved steadily from the first pro¬
fessional all-American musical, The
Archers, first performed in 1796. One
reason for an almost tyrannical
preoccupation with combining plays
with music was the opposition of local
governments (church inspired) to
"straight" theatre. It was assumed that
music had a certain moral tone and
no play could be really bad if it had
songs connected with it.
Minstrel shows, showboats, tra¬
velling troupes, and even circuses
found musical plays a popular part of
their repertory with the rural and
frontiersmen audiences. Partly due to
the tradition established in the east in
the eighteenth century, but also prob¬
ably because Americans have an
inexplicable love for gay melodies, the
musical grew and flourished and
became the standard of the world.
By the second decade of the
twentieth century, when the United
States came to realize its relative
strength among nations, its people at
the same time realized that a tra¬
ditional American culture did in fact
exist, or was rapidly developing. The
years of the 1920s saw an enormous
burst of artistic energy from American

artists. As evidence, Americans had
been winning Nobel Prizes in science
and peace since the beginning of the
award in 1901 (Peace Prize, 1906;
Physics, 1907; etc.); but not until
Sinclair Lewis won the Literature Prize
in 1930 had an American artist received
such world acclaim. Since then, five
Americans and one author who was
born and educated in the United States
(T. S. Eliot) have been honoured.
T
| HE point of this capsulized
social history of the arts in America is
that to speak of cultural policy as an
extension of traditional culture is a
difficult undertaking in the United
States. Many countries have under¬
gone periods of cultural encourage¬
ment and discouragement in the
course of their history. They have
seen their folk art evolve from the first
primitive tribes to settle in their
regions at the dawn of time. Other
nations Jiave seen their cities become
established as centres of culture and
commerce and remain such centres
century after century. And they have
proudly acclaimed their mature artists
as they emerged from mature artistic
institutions and societies. All these
events and circumstances are not
applicable to the United States.
Its history began with the cultures
of many countries severed from the
traditional roots. Art was officially
discouraged by the powerful and
almost universal fundamentalist reli¬
gions. The nation was scattered in
the wilderness for its first hundred
years. Cities of sophistication in the
eighteenth century became ordinary
towns as the centre of national life
moved west. (Charleston, South
Carolina, and Savannah, Georgia, were
once extremely important national cul¬
tural capitals.) New Orleans lost its exci¬
tement to St. Louis; St. Louis lost its
place to Chicago as the railroad
replaced the riverboat. No repertory
theatre to date has managed to hold
together for 25 years, only two
orchestras can boast of 100 years of
existence.
Indigenous American culture did not
clearly become definable until the
twentieth century when American
composers, playwrights and authors
began to find the unique American beat
In their work. It came from the Indian
ceremonies and the restlessness of
the pioneer families, but its expression
as an instinctively understood inter¬
pretation had to wait until the land
was conquered.
All this not only affects the scope
of a cultural policy, but also affects
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
THE EXPANDING ARTS
IN THE U.S.A.
The United States boasts 1,200 community orchestras, 30,000 amateur
theatre groups and between 10 and 15 million amateur painters as well
as countless ceramists, weavers, lapidists, etc.
There is virtually no town in the U.S. of 5,000 population that does not
have an adequate general public library augmented by a state library
system. It is estimated that about 10 per cent (20 million) of the
population reads intensely while a larger proportion reads books only
occasionally. University publishing houses now make up an important
segment of the American book world.
In addition to commercial television the U.S. has 140 public T.V.
stations which broadcast only educational and cultural programmes.
Recent legislation provides federal funds for a quasi-public organization
to weld these educational T.V. stations into a single network.
An American Film Institute was launched in 1967 with a $5.2 million
fund made up of contributions from federal funds, private foundation
grants and commercial film corporation gifts. The Institute trains young
people for the profession and works with colleges on film-study courses
and the promotion of the film arts. Funds are provided for unusual
feature films by young directors. 150 U.S. universities offer courses
in film study and appreciation.
Resident professional theatre groups are spreading across the U.S.
By 1968, fifty cities had resident companies performing high calibre
Broadway and standard classics. Some of these companies also try
out new or controversial plays. A new emerging theatre force is the
"theatre-in-the-street" movement. The movement is concerned with
social aspects of theatre and the cultural development of lower income
groups. Standard modern works and classics, original dramas and
improvisational works are performed from mobile truck theatres, on street
corners, in churches, schools and open fields. Budgets are precarious
and support comes largely from public and private grants.
There are now 28 major symphony orchestras in the U.S. These and
an additional 40 smaller orchestras have received grants totalling
$82 million for the establishment of endowment funds.
Some 200 cultural centres have been built in the U.S. since 1950, but
a National Endowments for the Arts study estimates that $7,500 million
would be required to equip the nation with all the facilities needed for
the arts. Such centres are usually financed by contributions from local
private and public resources with occasional federal or state participation.
Some more unusual methods have been adopted: the state of New Jersey
financed the Garden Arts Center from expressway tolls; Huntsville,
Alabama is paying for its cultural centre by a municipal liquor tax; in
Tacoma, Washington, a city jail was given over for an arts centre.
About 85 per cent of all contributions to the arts in the U.S. come from
private individuals, foundations or other corporate sources. About 1,500
foundations make grants to the arts totalling about $60 million annually.
There are 350 art museums in the U.S. and about half of them have
continuing programmes in one of the art forms in addition to the
visual arts.
*
A survey of 221 U.S. cities conducted in 1967 concluded that more new
buildings for the arts have been completed in the past five years than in
any other period in U.S. history. Seventy-one cities have buildings for
the arts under way; 36 museums, 34 theatres, 23 arts centres and
7 concert halls have been built for 70 American cities in recent years. 21

^- ... ^ ~ .^ *i*nymefi*T)
Jazz is one of the uniquely American
contributions to world culture. The
driving force that was to give jazz its
impact came from the Black street musicians
of the big cities. One of the best known
of these early groups was Joe "King"
Oliver's Creole Jazz Band, pictured left
in San Francisco in 1921. Below, listening
through earphones, a fan enjoys a modern
stereophonic jazz recording.
-i
Pnoto USlS
22
AMERICAN CULTURE (Continued)
the ability to evaluate and effectively
plan long-term programmes even if a
defined political philosophy made such
planning possible. Instead, as stated
at Unesco's 1968 Round Table Meeting
on Cultural Policies, in Monaco,
"Cultural needs are evolving more
quickly; new needs are appearing, and
public taste changes. .. One must,
therefore, avoid choosing a framework
which may become too narrow and
preserve the possibility of a flexible
adaptation of resources to the require¬
ments of a rapidly evolving cultural
scene." This must be the American
position.
The events sketched lightly here are
generally the cultural heritage for
which contemporary cultural leaders of
the United States must account as
policies and programmes progress.
By all signs, the United States is well
into a most Incredible artistic naissan¬
ce. The historical maturity has caught
up with the experiences of the world
situation. The economic strength of
the nation is capable of sustaining any
artistic effort, and its international
commitments demand an ever deeper
involvement with other countries in all
enterprises, including intellectual and
artistic. In addition, far in advance of
other nations, the United States has
encountered the extreme effects of the
Industrial Revolution, the imminent
realization that man Is or may be
mechanically obsolete. It is already
glaringly evident that America cannot
control some of the situations into
which its technology has placed it.
This is a time in American history that
cries for the humanistic influence in
life. The United States seems to be
moving toward a full realization of the
importance of culture as a counter¬
weight to technocracy.
>
