Photo © The Presa Association Ltd., London

Growing to miraculous life amidst the flotsam of a great port, this sunflower
brings a moment's pleasure to a passing sailor. In the industrialized countries,
oil-fouled rivers, streams and estuaries often serve as sewers and rubbish
tips. Fish and vegetation no longer thrive in rivers whose natural course has
been modified to provide hydro-electric power. In Sweden, the government
has decided to maintain the river Vindelalven in its natural state so that
future generations will be able to marvel at the beauty of at least
one river undefiled by man.

Industrial Europe
faces the challenge
of pollution
HE effects of industry on
the environment vary considerably
from one country to another.
Countries which have long been
extensively industrialized have already
been able to see for themselves the
bad effects of the growth of industry
on the environment and are conse¬
quently seeking remedies for them.
Countries where industrialization
has come fairly recently merely
emphasize the good aspects of the
process, and deliberately play down
the ill-effects because they are not
very noticeable.
Countries which are in the process
of becoming industrialized make great
play of the good factors of techno¬
logical development and almost ignore
the unfavourable side.
This is the varied picture for Europe
that emerges from reports to the
Council of Europe from member states
for a special study on "Industry and
the Environment." The study was
examined at the European Conserv¬
ation Conference convened by the
Council of Europe in Strasbourg, ear¬
lier this year.
The situation is relatively satisfactory
in countries with low population density
and limited urban and industrial
development such as Cyprus, Malta,
Ireland and Finland; it is less satisfac¬
tory in certain areas of Switzerland
ROBERTO PASSINO is Director of the
Institute of Hydrological Research of the
National Research Council, Rome. He
participated in a conference in February
this year on European conservation prob¬
lems, convened by the Council of Europe,
at which he presented a paper on "The
Effects of Industrialization on the Environ¬
ment". The above article is condensed
from this study.
and Italy; it is critical in France,
England, Germany and Belgium which
have long been industrialized.
In England, measures have been
taken to reduce pollution and damage
to the environment. The results are
encouraging. The construction of new
electricity power stations, gasometers
and refineries and their attendant
networks of overhead power lines
and pipelines is closely controlled
by committees of specialists whose
task is to preserve the beauty of the
countryside.
Special bodies are responsible for
the control of mining areas and the
rehabilitation of regions containing
worked out pits, the prevention and
control of coastal pollution by crude
oil, and the supervision of road, rail
and air route development. Special¬
ized research laboratories are studying
air, water and soil pollution and the
problem of noise levels and are work¬
ing out suitable countermeasures.
The Federal Republic of Germany
reports that efforts to combat pollution
have been intensified since 1960.
Water purification stations have been
built and it has been made compulsory
to fit filters to reduce air pollution by
dust. So far, however, there is no
equipment for the elimination of sul¬
phur dioxide. About 130,000 acres of
forest are affected annually by these
gases causing losses amounting to
21 million DM a year. Laws have been
passed to reduce noise.
In Belgium, where industry was at
first concentrated in the south but is
now spreading to the rest of the
country, the environment is exposed to
serious damage and the situation is
becoming worse. Laws and decrees
dealing with the problem already exist,
but further legislation is needed.
The number of factories in Swit-
by Roberto Passino
zerland, mainly in the textile and
chemical industries, has quadrupled
since 1900 with a resulting increase in
noise and air and water pollution.
Most Swiss lakes are heavily polluted.
The situation of Lake Constance, for
example, is alarming. Since 1950 the
phosphate content of the lake has
increased almost tenfold and plankton
thirtyfold. Attempts are being made
at federal, regional and local levels to
find new ways of preventing this
pollution.
In finland, industrialization is con¬
fined to the south where the population
density is also greatest. Contrary to
what might be supposed, Finland has
a poor supply of drinking water, be¬
cause many lakes are shallow and are
rapidly becoming asphyxiated as a
result of the discharge of domestic
and industrial waste. Already 10 to
15 per cent of the country's Inland
waters are polluted. Helsinki's drink¬
ing water has to be brought from a
lake 160 miles away. Air pollution,
however, is slight even in the largest
centres.
There are laws on the subject and
experimental centres have been set up
for the elimination of all types of
polluting agents. Considerable dam¬
age is, however, caused by some
industries whose effluents contain
highly toxic substances such as
chlorinated hydrocarbons, mercury
derivatives, etc., and measures have
been taken to eliminate these factors.
The use of D.D.T. has been banned
from this year.
The situation is quite different in
Malta where the government is
attempting to combat unemployment
by the introduction of new industries. K1
As a result, noise and air and water ** *
pollution are increasing and good land
is being lost to farming. A shipyard
CONTINUED PAGE 62

CHALLENGE OF POLLUTION (Continued)
62
is polluting the atmosphere in the
densely populated area of Conspicua,
Senglea and Vittoriosa with serious
danger to public health. Sea water is
polluted by the discharge of large
amounts of waste matter by coastal
industries. There are no laws for the
protection of nature.
Cyprus too is faced with increased
industrial activity promoted by the
government's five year plans. The
industries concerned are mostly
connected with agriculture and use
electric power. Nevertheless, there is
a danger of pollution from the mining
of asbestos, copper and pyrite. There
are also oil refineries and gasworks
that mainly pollute the sea and have
a harmful effect on the development
of the tourist industry.
As a result of its special geogra¬
phical situation, decentralization in
Austria has brought its own problems.
The small valleys are often the most
seriously affected. Fumes, dust, noise
and smells constitute a real threat to
the environment. Although some
regional laws have been passed to
protect nature, there is no appropriate
national legislation.
The Greek industrial areas of
Athens, Salonika and Patrasso already
show symptoms of acute contamina¬
tion. The coastal region near Athens,
for example, is seriously threatened.
In Sweden, the problem of man's
impact on nature has been appreciated
for a long time. Since the end of the
last century scientists and technicians
have been concerned with the study
of ecology, of contamination and its
elimination. Using the results of this
research and by suitable legislation,
many of the problems of the conta¬
mination of the environment have been
solved.
Atmospheric pollution is a negligible
problem in Iceland where power is
normally provided by electricity or
géothermie vapour which is readily
available in this volcanic island. The
fish-packing and fish oil industries
create problems due to fumes and
odours, but natural meteorological
conditions and winds help to offset
these effects. Water pollution is
mostly thermal and laws exist which
forbid the discharge of water at tem¬
peratures exceeding 30 to 35 degrees
centigrade.
Water pollution is the chief problem
in the Netherlands and here an inter¬
national aspect is involved. In fact,
70 per cent of the water in the Dutch
river network comes from other
countries and is thus already heavily
polluted. The waters of the Rhine, for
example, now show such an increase
in chlorides that they are unsuitable
for desalting the polders. These
CONTINUED PAGE 64
Use
or
abuse?
Every year, 48,000 million cans, 28,000 million
bottles, 100 million tyres and 7 million cars
are discarded in the United States alone.
Right, like some malignant idol, this rusting
hulk stares blankly out from one of the
many car cemeteries that litter the countryside
of the industrialized world. Occasionally the
skeletal remains of bicycles, above, serve on
as makeshift barriers, and unwanted car
bodies are submerged off our coasts, acting
as artificial reefs that attract lobsters and
other marine life within easy reach of the
fisherman, below.

ii
r
à s
1 '
Jai y *JaH
J
»A
.^^Wç;
^^Uf- '
i&zF*".
f
. i
f^-T
i--iî* '
Í«
N -,1
|r*'rX.^*jti

CHALLENGE OF POLLUTION (Continued)
Photo © Roger Canessa, Toulon
64
'WOODMAN, SPARE THAT TREE.' Since the Middle Ages entire forests have been
destroyed in Europe to satisfy an insatiable demand for timber and to obtain land for farming
or pasture. In 1 962, the world market needed 1 ,000 million cubic metres of wood. By 1 985 this
figure will have doubled. But by that date wood production, if kept within non-destructive limits,
will be only 1,000 million cubic metres. Trees and vegetation protect the soil and regulate
the flow of water. In Italy, where forests have been destroyed over the centuries, erosion has
caused tremendous damage. The river Arno, for example, carries twenty-six million quintals
of earth to the sea every year. The catastrophic floods of November 1966 which devastated
northern Italy and destroyed many of Florence's priceless art treasures (see the Unesco Courier,
January 1967) brought vividly home the dangers of unplanned deforestation. Experts estimate
that 8.6 million acres of land need replanting with trees in Italy to prevent the recurrence of
such disasters. It has been shown that the flood risks are 30 to 50 percent less in completely
wooded areas than in areas where only one third of the land is wooded. Erosion of soil resulting
from deforestation in turn affects plant life. In the Swiss canton of Argovia alone nearly
400 species of plant have disappeared since the beginning of the 19th century.
chlorides are of mineral origin and are
dumped into the river in the coal
mining areas of the Ruhr, Emscher and
Lippe where saline water is pumped
from the mines.
In Italy industry is concentrated In
certain regions and, like the urban
areas, is developing chaotically since
there is virtually no planning in this
field. Household and industrial liquid
waste is dumped into waters without
any purifying treatment. As a result
streams, rivers, lakes and coastline,
and the environment in general, have
deteriorated rapidly. In the whole of
Italy there are only thirty-two purifica¬
tion plants one plant for every
thousand communities and these are
mostly too small to be effective.
Motor traffic and domestic and indus¬
trial smoke contribute to the production
of smog in certain areas.
The deterioration of the environment
concerns everybody. Its prevention
requires the arousing of public opinion
and the active participation of all
citizens as well as co-operation at the
international level.
Economic incentives can be used
to protect the environment. Tax
benefits could, for instance, be granted
to industry for the construction of
waste treatment plant. Similarly,
heavy fines could be levied on those
industries which discharge untreated
waste liable to pollute the environment.
In any case, governments must
harmonize economic measures so asto
place industry in all countries on an
equitable competitive basis.
The true solution lies, above all, in
prevention. It would be desirable, for
example, in every allocation of funds
for new industrial construction, to
require part of the capital (2 to 3 per
cent) to be set aside for conservation
of the environment.
Pollution Is part of the price we pay
for our modern society. Nobody
knows its total cost because it is
spread over the whole social structure
and has never been examined in
isolation. The damage to health, both
physical and mental, to plant and
animal life, to the aesthetic qualities
of our natural surroundings, to the
artistic value of buildings and objects,
cannot readily be estimated.
We shall soon have to face the
problem of finding room for the waste
products that result from the bad
management of our technological
society because they are about to
submerge us. In our effort to im¬
prove living conditions it will certainly
be more economical to use pre¬
ventative methods from the outset
rather than look for ways of cleaning
up the environment when pollution is
already widespread.
