On September 21, 1970, five of the six living, Nobel Peace Prize winnersLord
Boyd Orr, Lester Pearson, Philip Noel-Baker, Linus Pauling and René Cassinpre¬
sented a declaration on peace and disarmament at United Nations headquarters
in New York calling for a moratorium on the development and deployment of new
offensive and defensive strategic nuclear weapons systems as a first step towards
full disarmament. The sixth Nobel Peace Prize winner, Ralph Bunche, endorsed
the declaration though he did not sign it because of his position in the U.N. Secre¬
tariat as Under Secretary-General. The United Nations hopes to make the Seven¬
ties a "Disarmament Decade" in a renewed effort to halt and reverse the insensate
arms race in which the real cost of world military expenditure, trebled between
1949 and 1968.
In this issue, which is largely devoted to the question of armaments and peace
research, Nobel Peace Prize winner Philip Noel-Baker presents a picture of the
current arms build-up on the basis of the findings of the Stockholm International
Peace |Research Institute (SIPRI) published in its Yearbook of World Armaments
and Disarmament.
^.i.s2S#l

The Arms Race
escalation of
total madness
by Philip Noel-Baker
Nobel Peace Prize, 1959
SUS *^
LLV-5I
* <
-r" l°-
|^F WIGHT D. Eisenhower was
not only President of the United Sta¬
tes; he was also Commander-in-Chief
of the greatest army, and victor of the
greatest battle, in human history. After
four years in the White House, he
said in a press conference in 1957:
"I know of nothing that has occurred
in our time where greater optimism
must be maintained... than in this whole
business of beginning disarmament...
The alternative is so terrible that you
can merely say this: All the risks you
take in trying to advance are as noth¬
ing compared to doing nothing, to
sitting on your hands."
On an earlier occasion, Eisenhower
said:
"War in our time has become an
anachronism. Whatever the case in
the past, war in the future can serve
no useful purpose."
Since he spoke these words, almost
every president and prime minister
in the world has re-echoed them, and
has declared that a nuclear war might
exterminate mankind. Scientists, be¬
ginning with Einstein and Cockcroft,
and weapons-experts, from Oppen-
heimer and Isidor Rabi to Sir Solly
Zuckerman and Herbert York, have
ardently, even passionately endorsed
this view.
But, nevertheless, the governments
have gone on sitting on their hands.
Khruschev's and Kennedy's great
disarmament plans were destroyed by
militarist opposition. The arms race
has continued with unparalleled fury;
world military expenditure, in real
terms, has increased by more than
60 per cent since 1957; the numbers
of nuclear warheads have increased
much more perhaps they have been
multiplied by 10.
Much worse, wars have raged in
various quarters of the world, wars in
which the dead and mutilated must
be reckoned in millions and often
mutilation is more terrible than death.
No-one outside the Institutes of self-
styled "strategic analysts" really
doubts that there is a causal connexion
between the arms race and the wars;
that if a Treaty of General Disarma¬
ment had been made by a compromise
between Kennedy's and Khruschev's
Draft Treaties of 1962, the world
would now enjoy unbroken peace.
The U.N. General Assembly in
1969 declared that the 1970s must
be the Disarmament and Development
Decade. Since then the Secretary-
General has been engaged in a vigo¬
rous disarmament campaign.
' In his report to the General Assem¬
bly in 1969, U Thant said: "The world
now stands at a most critical cross¬
roads. It can pursue the arms race at
a terrible price to the security and
progress of the peoples of the world,
or it can move ahead towards the goal
of general and complete disarmament,
a goal that was set in 1959 by a
unanimous decision of the General
Assembly... If it should choose the
latter road" (i.e. general disarmament),
"the security, the economic well-being
and the progress, not only of the
developing countries, but also of the
developed countries, and of the entire
world, would be tremendously en¬
hanced."
On May 22, 1970, U Thant said to
a conference in New York: "Progress...
in the field of disarmament can be
achieved only if there is a strong
political will on all sides to undertake
the policies and measures that could
CONTINUED PAGE 8
PHILIP NOEL-BAKER, Nobel Peace Prize,
1959, has devoted many years to research
on problems of peace and disarmament and
has written widely on the subject. Readers
will recall his special study on Science and
Disarmament published in our August-Sep-
tember 1967 Issue, "War or Peace?".
5

Photo © UK Atomic Energy Authority
Photo USIS
Photo USIS

Poisonous
mushrooms
Photo © Panmage, Paris
The malignant crop of atomic mushrooms shown here is a tiny sampling of the
hundreds of nuclear test explosions that have blasted harmful radioactive
substances into the atmosphere during the past 25 years. Countries which signed
the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in Moscow, in 1963, agreed to discontinue all
nuclear tests in the atmosphere, under water and in outer space. Yet the Moscow
Treaty, " does not appear to have had much success in reducing the amount of
nuclear weapon testing," reports the SIPRI Yearbook of World Armaments
and Disarmament. "From available data," it says, "it appears that the average
annual number of tests by all nations before the treaty was 40. The annual
average since the treaty has been 46." Since they concluded the treaty, the
USA, USSR and UK have exploded no nuclear devices in the atmosphere,
although underground nuclear tests have increased in number. But certain
countries that did not sign the Moscow Agreement have carried out atmo¬
spheric tests since 1963 (top right, nuclear explosion in Mainland China;
bottom right, French nuclear explosion).

ARMS RACE ESCALATION (Continued)
For every dollar spent on arms
only 30 cents for public health
lead to agreements. If we are to
make real progress toward disarma¬
ment, governments must approach
this subject in a new spirit. They
must stop questioning the seriousness
of purpose of others and think how
they can demonstrate their own."
In the same speech, U Thant said:
"There is another aspect of the Disar¬
mament Decade which... has been
largely overlooked... I refer to the
need for greater publicity concerning
both armaments and disarmament, so
that knowledge concerning these
matters can penetrate the conscience
of the people."
"Penetrate the conscience of the
people."
Yes, foreign policy, armament policy,
has been controlled for the last tragic
decade by those in the Establish¬
ments of almost every nation who be¬
lieve that armaments can promote
national security and national great¬
ness, and who believe that disarma¬
ment and the abolition of war are not
only Utopian, but even ignoble. Only
a great tide of world opinion can des¬
troy their power.
T
| HIS is the significance of
SIPRI's (*) great "Yearbook of World
Armaments and Disarmament." SIPRI's
authority has been firmly established
by its other works; but the Yearbook
is, and will remain, its chef-d'oeuvre.
The product of a dozen first-class
brains, from a dozen countries, work¬
ing within the Institute itself, who are
re-inforced, when needed, by experts
from outside.
The sections on military expenditure,
which open the Yearbook, more than
justify this claim. Chapter 1, which
sets out the trends of military expendi¬
ture in the world at large," in ^certain
regions and among certain groups of
countries, and even of some individual
"Great" Powers, is a masterly piece
of statistical analysis. The clarity of
its exposition, re-inforced by the
charts attached to this chapter, and
by the detailed tables of expenditure
in Part II, give a wholly new picture
of the long-term history of the arms
8
* SIPRI = Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute. The Institute was found¬
ed and Is financed by the Swedish Parlia¬
ment, which set It up to celebrate the end of
a century and a half during which Sweden
had had no war. It has an International Board
of Governors, of which Mr. Gunnar Myrdal
Is the chairman.
race, and of its immediate and terrify¬
ing significance today.
The constant increase of the burden
of military budgets has been a main
plank in the argument of those who
urge disarmament. But the tables
published hitherto have mostly been
at current prices and current exchange
rates; those who opposed disarma¬
ment often claimed, without proving
what they said by doing the sums,
that increases of expenditure were due
to a rise of prices, and that, in real
resources, the burden of expenditure
remained the same.
The opponents of disarmament also
found another way of distorting the
facts. They drew up tables showing
a nation's armament expenditure as a
percentage of its gross national
product, without explaining that the
G.N.P. had much increased; thus they
showed Britain's expenditure as over
10 per cent of G.N.P. in the early
1950s, and as 6.7 per cent in 1968;
this left the casual reader with the
impression that large reductions had
been made, when in fact the burden
in real resources had increased.
SIPRI puts all these muddles right.
There are tables at current prices and
exchange rates. There are tables at
constant prices, showing the trends
in real resources over many years.
There are evaluations of the percent¬
ages of G.N.P. spent on armaments
in different years by different powers.
These tables give a true picture of
the arms race since the present
century began. It is a picture that
will surprise, and shock, most people.
For 70 years, since 1900, the average
increase in the real burden of world
armaments has been 5 per cent per
year. Since 1948, the increase has
been greater: 6 per cent per year.
This meant that, from 1949 to 1968,
the real cost was trebled.
If the increase continues at the
present rate, the cost will double
again by 1980. The world total in
1968, at 1960 prices, was: $153,498
million.
In 1980, it would be: $306,996 mil¬
lion.
If the increase continues, at 5 per
cent per annum, then, says the Year¬
book: "By the early years of the next
century the world will be devoting to
military uses a quantum of resources
which is equal to the whole world's
present (1968) output."
"This is not so preposterous as it
sounds", says the Yearbook. "The
world is now devoting to military
purposes an amount of resources
which exceeds the world's total out¬
put in the year 1900."
There are also valuable comments
on percentages of G.N.P.
In 1913, just before the First World
War, "probably no more than 3-3i per
cent of world output was going to
the military. In the early 1930s, the
percentage seems to have been about
the same. The average over the last
18 years... has been around 7-8 per
cent more than double the 1913
figure".
Moreover, the world's output of
wealth has been increased at least
fivefold since 1913, so that in real
terms the resources "going to the
military" have been multiplied by 10.
There are other dismal facts given
in the Yearbook about this world
expenditure on defence.
It is greater in amount by 40 per
cent than the total sums spent by all
nations together on Education.
It is more than three times the
expenditure of all nations together on
Public Health.
These are depressing facts, particu¬
larly to those who care about Unesco
and its mission toward mankind.
But there are worse facts still to
come.
The arms race is spreading to
continents where it was not known
before.
The figures for Africa, over the last
few years, show that military expendi¬
ture there is rising by 7-8 per cent per
year more than the average for the
world.
I| N the developing countries
of all continents, military expenditure
has risen since 1960 by an average of
7è per cent per year. The developing
countries those which are receiving
economic aid from the International
Bank, the International Development
Agency, the U.N. Development Pro¬
gramme, and other sources have
spent many billions of dollars on
importing "sophisticated" weapons
warships, aircraft, missiles, tanks,
from the arms-producing nations.
This is a new and an alarming fact.
In 1955, no developing country had
supersonic military aircraft; today no
less than 32 such nations have them.
CONTINUED PAGE 10

Final sequel
to the
'Lucky Dragon'
HIS fishing boat is a hulk lying on the mud-flats of a
garbage dump infTokyo Bay, inappropriately named "Island of Dreams" (Yumenoshima).
Still legible oni-4*~bj>w are the Japanese characters for Fukuryu Méru Lucky Dragon.
But like its re/ting place, the Lucky Dragon is ill-named. Sixteen years ago, on
March 1, 1954, the boat and its crew were hit by the fallout of a hydrogen bomb
explosion during a nuclear test in the Pacific.
At five o'clock on that March morning, the Lucky Dragon was near the Marshall

'LUCKY DRAGON' (Continued)
Islands fishing for tuna, when a huge incandescence rose above the western horizon.
The fishermen watched with awe. "The sun rises in the west," one exclaimed.
Before long, the boat was showered with a drizzle of small, white flakes which
clung to the crew's hair, eyes and nostrils. The vessel was 87 miles from an obscure
atoll named Bikini. During their two-week journey back to Japan, the crew members
were stricken with a variety of ailments.
It was not until some days after their return to port that the fishermen learned what
the flash was. They were taken to hospital in Tokyo for treatment In September 1954,
Aikichi Kuboyama, the ship's radio operator died the world's first victim of the
H-bomb. (For full story see "Unesco Courier", August-September 1967.)
In the years that followed, the Lucky Dragon was all but forgotten. After being
decontaminated several times, it was abandoned on the "Island of Dreams" garbage
dump, until someone decided it should be sold for scrap.
When this became known, committees were at once formed to save the boat, and
fund-raising campaigns were launched. Tokyo's Governor, Ryokichi Minobe, forbade
the scrapping of the Lucky Dragon, and two organizations, The Japan Congress
Against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs and the General Council of Trade Unions of
Japan, made plans to preserve the boat.
Painted and restored, the Lucky Dragon will now have Its place alongside the
atomic museums of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, as another reminder of the horror of
nuclear weapons and their destructive effects.
11.02 AM
The hands of this clock in
Nagasaki, Japan, mark the
exact instant when an atomic
bomb was dropped on the
city on the morning of August 9
1945. Three days earlier, an
atomic bomb had levelled 4i
square miles of Hiroshima.
ARMS RACE ESCALATION
(Continued from page 8)
In 1957, no developing country had
long-range surface-to-air missiles; now
19 have them.
It is this military expansion which
has swallowed up the scarce foreign
currency resources which these deve¬
loping nations should have invested as
productive capital in projects for eco¬
nomic expansion and social progress.
In my opinion it is the real reason why
the U.N. Development Decade so
largely failed.
There are interesting facts in the
Yearbook about the percentages of
G.N.P. given to the military by two
leading nations, Britain and the United
States.
The U.S. figures are these:
Percentage of G.N.P.
Year spent on Armaments
1913 	 1.4
1928 1.1
1969 	 9.0
The U.S. is fighting the Vietnam
war; nevertheless, that nearly one-
tenth of its enormously increased out¬
put of wealth should "go to the mili¬
tary" is a fantastic thought.
Britain is fighting no war. Her fig¬
ures are these:
Percentage of G.N.P.
Year spent on Armaments
1913 	 3.4
1928 3.0
1968 	 6.7
Double the percentage of a national
output which has increased only less
than that of the United States.
Nothing so demonstrates the almost
incredible momentum of the arms race,
and the profound and all-embracing
militarization of world politics, as these
last figures.
The SIPRI Yearbook expands its
picture of the arms race by a new
and fascinating account of the tech¬
nological trends and advances in the
mass-destruction "weapons-systems"
of the major powers, and of conven¬
tional armaments as well.
"New" ? Much of the material is
from already published government
sources, some from unofficial sources,
some from SIPRI's own researches.
But "new", because no-one has yet
constructed so comprehensive and so
illuminating a synthesis of what is
familiar, what ought to be familiar, and
what so far has been virtually
unknown.
The story of the nuclear competition
between the Soviet Union and the
United States is terrifying.

Humpty Dumpty sat on a first strike capability
Some authorities in the United
States have added a new dimension to
its menace. They interpret the Soviet
missile SS9, with its multiple war¬
heads, and the great increase in the
number of Soviet I.C.B.M.s, not as a
belated and desperate attempt to
catch up with the vastly superior nu¬
clear strength of the United States, but
as an attempt to take a very dange¬
rous lead.
SIPRI quotes a U.S. spokesman:
"They (the Russians) are going for a
first strike capability. There is no
question about that."
This cuts at the root of the comfor¬
table, wishful-thinking theory that the
mutual deterrence of the nuclear
bombs gives us security from war.
SIPRI gives cogent reasons why this
view of Soviet policy is not at present
credible; they say that the large U.S.
superiority in I.C.B.M.s throughout
the period since the missiles first be¬
gan to* fly must have made it appear
"from the Soviet point of view ... that
it was the United States which was
attempting to preserve a first-strike
capability." And they quote authori¬
tative sources for the fact that for ten
years the U.S. have had the means to
render a million square miles of urban
areas in the Soviet Union uninhabitable
by human beings.
B' UT what General Staffs be¬
lieve may be more important than the
facts; their beliefs decide the policy
which their governments pursue. And
no doubt it is because the U.S. Depart¬
ment of Defense believe that the Rus¬
sians "are going for a first strike capa¬
bility" (i.e. for the power to destroy all
the U.S. nuclear weapons before the
U.S. can reply), that they are em¬
barking on a new programme of
missiles with longer ranges and with
multiple warheads (MIRV). Many of
the Polaris submarines will be con¬
verted to Poseidons; instead of one
Polaris warhead of 600 kilotons yield,
the Poseidon will have ten warheads
of 50 kilotons yield (50 kilotons is
3l times as powerful as the Hiroshima
bomb). Similar "improvements" will
be made in the land-launched missiles,
the Minutemen.
Departments of defence prefer to
take no chances.
The U.S. Department of Defense
appropriated $25 million for the de¬
velopment of a new manned bombing
aircraft in 1969, and $100 million in
1970.
They are doing vigorous research to
improve the accuracy of their missiles
if the average distance from the
target is halved, "the weapon yield
needed to eliminate a specific target is
reduced by a factor not of 2, but of
10."
They are spending large sums on
research in oceanography; on so im¬
proving submarines that they can re¬
main submerged for two months or
more (what kind of human beings will
the crew be when they come up?); on
giving submarines the capacity to dive
and cruise at greater depths "the
addition of 100 feet to the maximum
operating depth of a submarine adds
millions of cubic miles to the volume
of space in which the submarine can
navigate."
All these developments can be jus¬
tified as "defensive", if you apply the
method of "worst case analysis" to
your weapon systems, i.e. if you
accept the worst possible assumptions
about the reliability of your own wea¬
pons, about the effectiveness of your
enemy's defence etc. This is a me¬
thod that would be tolerated in no
other sphere of government; but in
respect of armaments, "you must
always err on the side of safety."
But, however these U.S. program¬
mes may appear in Washington (and
the ABM was only carried by the
Chairman's vote in a Senate divided
50-50), SIPRI is surely right in think¬
ing that in Moscow they will seem
to justify the view' that it is the U.S.
which is seeking in the 1970s, as, in
Soviet eyes, they did in the 1960s, to
preserve a first strike capability.
If both sides believe that first-strike
capability is the fixed purpose of the
other, and if their military research
and weapon programmes appear to
the other to be devoted to this aim, the
"stability" alleged to result from mutual
nuclear deterrence will not be of much
practical value for the peaceful con¬
duct of world affairs. And the SALT
talks in Vienna the secret U.S.-Soviet
negotiations about the possible limi¬
tation of "strategic" arms do not
seem to give much hope that the race
in these long-range nuclear weapons
will be ended in the early future.
MIRV poses the most difficult of ins¬
pection problems; and if SIPRI is right,
the point of no return may already
have been passed.
MIRV and ABM are only the most
dangerous of the weapon develop¬
ments now under way; there are innu
merable others which are dealt with
in the Yearbook.
On chemical and biological warfare,
SIPRI's authority is already estab¬
lished in the world. The Yearbook
chapter on the subject will enhance it.
So will:
The section on the role of helicop¬
ters in "conventional" war;
The section on submarine warfare;
The extremely valuable section on
the arms trade, and the remarkable
Arms Trade Register;
The outline of the disarmament ne¬
gotiations and proposals since 1945;
The compendious information given
on the Moscow Partial Test Ban, The
Antarctic Treaty, the Outer Space
Agreement, and the Non-Proliferation
Treaty;
The revealing diaries of events in the
Nigerian civil war and the Israeli-Arab
wars; and much more besides, with
which there is no space to deal.
c
^^OMETHING must be said,
however, about the Yearbook's analy¬
sis of the post-1945 phenomenon of
Government Military Research and De¬
velopment. It has long been plain that
Military Research and Development
(R & D) is the real dynamo which dri¬
ves the arms race. It is R and D which
makes the arms race a remorselessly
self-escalating burden on the nations'
wealth. It is R and D which drives
up the cost and scale of armaments
from year to year.
It has long been known that vast
sums were being spent on R and D.
But SIPRI has brought out something
profoundly significant and new.
"Behind this extremely rapid rate
of technological improvement in
weaponry," says the Yearbook, "so
much faster than that of civil goods,
there is an enormous disparity between
the two fields in research and devel¬
opment. . . For every $100 of military
procurement (i.e. actual purchase of
arms by the Government) in the Uni¬
ted States, Britain and France, there
is over $50 of research expenditure (*).
For the general run of manufacturing,
the research input for every $100 of
output ranges from $1.9 (France) to
$7.5 (U.S.). The disparity is not so
great in other countries, but it exists
everywhere.' 11
* The actual figures are: U.K. $62.2; U.S.
$54; France $57.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

ARMS RACE ESCALATION (Continued)
Moreover, the military research figu¬
res are understated they exclude
expenditure on space research and on
atomic energy research. All in all, the
research input for weapons is at least
ten times that for civil goods and ser-
vioes. This conjures up visions of
rotting urban ghettoes which modern
engineering ought to cleanse; of starv¬
ing children who ought not to starve;
of rampant diseases which science
could wipe out.
But worse than that:
"This tremendous research and de¬
velopment drive behind the advance in
weaponry has an impetus of its own.
Once massive funds are voted for
weapons research ... it is inevitable
that further improvements will be
made, and inevitable that new fields of
warfare will be explored. . .
"Weapons research proliferates in
another way. . .: each new weapon
spurs the development of counter-
weapons."
Alas, what might science do for the
betterment of human life and hap¬
piness if the balance of R and D were
ten to one the other wayl
This Yearbook is a sine qua non for
the proper understanding of world
affairs.
Lest I have given it a colour which
others might contest, let me end by
quoting the words of SIPRI's Director,
Mr. Robert Neild:
"The Yearbook is factual: but of
course the selection of the material
and the way in which it is presented
implies a set of valuations, and we
should make them explicit. Obviously
the staff drawn as they are from
many different countries have differ¬
ing views on a wide number of ques¬
tions of world armaments and disar¬
mament. The common elements in
their approach may be summarized
thus:, that the rise in world military
spending, and more particularly the
constant technological acceleration in
weaponry, is highly dangerous, and
that the attempts so far made to slow
down, halt or reverse the process
have been incommensurate with the
danger; that arms competition, though
it is not the sole or main cause of
world tensions and conflicts, is an
important independent factor which
increases and exacerbates tensions:
and that arms limitation or disarma¬
ment could help considerably to re¬
duce these tensions."
Amen.
12
The SIPRI Yearbook of World Armaments
and Disarmament 1968-1969, prepared by the
Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, Is published by Almqvist i Wiksell,
Stockholm, Humanities Press, New York and
Gerald Duckworth & Co., Ltd., London.
(Prices, hardback and soft cover respectively:
60 and 32 Kr. ; $12.00 and $6.50; £5 and
£2.10.)
