8.
The 'Systems
Approach'
Applying the space
team method to major
problems on earth
A
whole new generation of
industries has grown up with special
expertise in blending science and
technology with advanced management
concepts.
An entirely new school of managers,
one that practices the "systems
approach", is emerging. The "sys¬
tems approach" applied to the manag¬
erial task has helped to transform prac¬
tice from a fractionalized mode of
operation to a highly integrated one.
Relying heavily on computerized
information systems, the main concern
of this school is the increasing
complexity of industrial and govern¬
ment operations. The emphasis is
on techniques for organizing and
managing the large-scale undertaking,
whether it be industry, govern¬
ment or ad hoc projects of gargantuan
proportions. It is a total rejection of
the thesis which holds that all that
is big is evil.
Implicitly it challenges Lord Acton's
dictum that all power corrupts, and
comes down solidly on the side of
Lord Radcliffe (and Lenin) who held
that "power Is good or evil according
to the vision that it serves."
It accepts the realities of modern
economic life, which clearly indicate
the necessity for global solutions to
global problems. Piecemeal actions
provide no solutions for the pressing
problems of our age, nor little hope
for harnessing technology to the
service of mankind.
On the contrary, a new Welt¬
anschauung in industry and govern¬
ment is necessary to perceive problems
and opportunities in their real dimen¬
sions. The pragmatic approach
crossing the bridges when one gets to
them, solving problems as they
arise has no place in the space age
where the dimensions of undertakings
and the stakes are simply too great
for mankind to be able to afford the
luxury of a heroic reliance on ingenuity
to carry us through come what may.
In the Apollo programme, for
example, every aspect, from the launch
pad design to the water recovery
system including men, environment
and equipment is part of a system.
All the elements must tie together and
contribute in a' specific way to the
ultimate objective. Systems analysis
is the means of making sure that they
do that nothing is overlooked or out
of place. That everything is performed
to at least 99.999 per cent perfection.
If this combination of overview and
attention to detail has been made
possible by the computer, it also stems
from a new perception of man and his
environment as a result of space age
discoveries. We now are acutely
aware of almost limitless opportunities
for man to mould and use his environ¬
ment that extends in a continuum from
the ocean floors, through the oceans
and the atmosphere on into space.
The oceans, air and space long
thought of separately are today
viewed as inseparable media for
human activity. The new technology
being developed for this activity
embraces and feeds on the entire array
of human knowledge, the physical and
social sciences as well as the
humanities.
Using systems engineering applied
with large-scale organized effort, the
experience of the Apollo programme
dramatically demonstrated that it Is
possible to meet new needs or effect
desired results on an almost fixed
time schedule, despite a myriad of
unknown factors and imponderables in
a totally unexplored sphere of action.
And all this despite a decentralization
of effort never before attained In a
single, crash programme.
The spectacular results obtained in
the Apollo project led former NASA
Administrator James E. Webb to
confidently proclaim that "We . . . have
the ability, in this concept of large-
scale, organized effort and our
experience with it, to organize our¬
selves, our knowledge and our
resources to accomplish almost any
task we may set for ourselves. But,"
he went on to qualify, "this form of
effort has its own requirements a
clear relationship to fundamentals and
a sustained support over extended
periods are two of the most important."
Operating on this general thesis, a
U.S. firm (N. Amer. Rockwell) recently
assigned its aerospace team to apply
the systems analysis technique in a
thorough study of the textile industry.
They analyzed textile processing,
textile machinery and trends in fibres,
new and old, with a view finally to
determine where technology and
capital can best advance in the textile
industry.
All this was a huge undertaking.
The first phase alone, the systems
study, took months. But before it was
over the task force had already drawn
up a proposal for the design of
computer control of eleven different
textile machines, to enable them to
monitor their own performance and
make corrective adjustments to
maintain optimum performance. The
preliminary designs were made, and
management authorized the manu¬
facture of prototypes of two of these
machines. If they are successful, the
company will extend the application to
other textile machinery.
There is a new and rising trend
throughout the world to use the
technological resources of the large
electric-electronic-aerospace corpora¬
tions to find solutions to such public
problems as poor housing, congested
mass transportation in industrialized
countries as well as infant transporta¬
tion systems of developing nations, air
pollution, stream pollution, crime
control and inadequate health, educa¬
tion and welfare.
Sweden's Professor Carl-Gören i\a
Heden carries this principle to its j I
ultimate when he advocates consider¬
ing the earth as a space ship as a
closed ecological system. "We would
CONTINUED PAGE 38

THE 'SYSTEMS APPROACH' (Continued from page 31)
then not only arrange for organic
household sewage and industrial waste
to be processed separately, but we
would also regard photosynthesis as
more precious for balancing our
gaseous environment than for provid¬
ing food," he contends.
"If we then start to consider dome-
structures for agriculture in order to
provide the elevated carbon-dioxide
concentrations probably needed for
maximal biological productivity, and for
simplifying the control of insect pests,
we enter an overlap area with a whole
range of planetary base problems.
Many of the solutions which must be
considered by the engineers charged
with providing a constant environment
for extended manned flights or in
moon or planetary bases are in fact
highly relevant to the scientists and
engineers concerned with (these) less
glamorous projects . . ."
A
38
lDVOCATES of the sys¬
tems approach are tackling these
pressing social problems with a firm
conviction that we have the technical
tools to free society of many of its
burdens and to carry It to new levels
of achievement. Recent projects in
which aerospace companies contracted
to apply to public problems what they
had learned in space is long and
impressive:
A recent AVCO Corp. programme
which had its origin In a Basic Planetary
Transportation Model developed for
lunar space problems, involves systems
analysis for national water resources
in the U.S. The programme calls for
a thorough evaluation of water
technology, benefits and costs of water
programmes, and assessment of state
and regional policies, plants and
programmes.
An American company, employing
aerospace systems engineering tech¬
niques, conducted a waste manage¬
ment study for California with projects
25 years ahead. Control and manage¬
ment of solid, liquid and gaseous
wastes generated by the State's rapidly
expanding population was assessed.
Subsequently, an intensive systematic
study was carried out of solid waste
in Fresno County, an area typical of
many other rapidly growing urban-
agricultural complexes throughout the
United States. Some nine months
before scheduled completion of the
study, environmental conditions in the
country were measurably improved by
adoption of recommendations in a
preliminary report.
California has applied aerospace
systems analysis techniques to the
solution of important social problems.
In 1965, the American space firm
Aerojet performed a systems analysis
study of the problems of crime and
delinquency In the State. Results of
the six-months effort demonstrated the
practicality of using aerospace tech¬
niques to gain new insight into crime
prevention and control procedures.
Of particular significance was the
simulation of the criminal justice
system on a computer.
This mathematical model enabled
systems engineers to determine how
well the system functioned and how
changes would affect its functioning.
Information was obtained on the
operation of a criminal justice system
that would require years to achieve in
actual practice.
Work is proceeding with the govern¬
ment of Venezuela on plans to provide
a management support programme
for the Ministry of Public Works.
A contract study has also recently
been completed for the government of
Chile on national air transportation,
with proposals for short, medium and
long-term development of both present
domestic and future international
routes.
An important aspect of the study is
evaluation of the systems approach as
a means of analyzing the socio¬
economic needs of less developed
countries. Even some of the most
fervent advocates of extended use of
the systems management approach
have serious apprehensions.
Prior to the Space Age few industries
were organized for innovation. Most
firms were created and managed to
use some existing technology to manu¬
facture and market products for which
there existed a recognizable demand.
And by the very nature of their
objectives and organization, they were
not equipped or properly motivated
to come up with anything truly new.
This static organizational provision
for innovation was found inadequate
for the rapid and radical pace of
technological change required by
space programmes and for the efficient
transfer of new space technology to
commercial uses.
Multi-functional teams involving
scientists, production engineers, sys¬
tems analysts and marketing spe¬
cialists, cutting across existinq organi¬
zational structures, working on an ad
hoc project team basis, were found to
enlist and deploy creative energies
much more effectively than compart¬
mentalized endeavour.
This relationship is not only more
flexible but it has no institutional
motives other than the task itself,
which means both that the selection
of personnel for team membership is
likely to be more commensurate with
the job to be done and that the results
of team action are much less likely
to be determined by considerations
foreign to the task at hand.
One of the really significant achieve¬
ments of the strains, traumas and
endless experimentation of the first
decade of space exploration has been
this use of ad hoc team structures to
direct the massive endeavours of
hundreds of thousands of minds in a
close-knit, synergistic combination of
government, university and industry
to tackle complex, large-scale pro¬
jects.
In the United 'States, the Apollo
Project has spawned an intimate, new
symbiosis of private and public
institutions, leaving each to perform
the tasks it knows and can do best
in co-operative effort that enhances the
abilities of both participating govern¬
mental and private organizations.
Quite deliberately NASA confined
its role to an integrating and directing
one, acting as a central fund of
experience and a point of transfer
through which painfully acquired
knowledge in managing and develop¬
ing complicated systems gets from
one contracting company to another.
This new interdependence of govern¬
ment, industry and the universities is
not primarily physical. On the
contrary, its strength and success
depends greatly on the preservation
of the intrinsic, independent character
of each party.
L
1ARGE universities such as
the Massachusetts Institute of Techno¬
logy, the California Institute of Techno¬
logy, Harvard and Columbia have
become the most prolific breeders of
private, science-based businesses in
which professors emerge as leaders of
industry. And, at the same time,
governments are increasingly inclined
to use industrial forms of organization
to run everything from post offices to
pension plans.
The late Adlai Stevenson saw the
true import of this new pluralism when
he stressed that if we are to realize
the great promise held out by our new
scientific and technological capabilities,
so greatly magnified by the venture
into space, two things are necessary:
"The first Is to recognize that in our
modern highly productive market
economy, stability and growth depend
upon a partnership between manage¬
ment, labour and government. The
second is an end to the quarrel bet¬
ween public and private purposes."
If what NASA and industry have
learned about management in space
programmes has contributed to these
objectives leading to better ways of
organizing ourselves to do the big
things we have to do to putting a
greater degree of rationality Into man's
relationships with his global environ¬
ment then in the conquest of space
we will have made our most signifi¬
cant investment in human progress
however infinite are the broad horizons
of the still known universe.
