T
JEAN
PERRIN
A PIONEER
OF MODERN
PHYSICS
by Pierre Auger
PIERRE AUGER is head of the permanent com¬
mittee for the creation of an International Scien¬
tific Foundation. The committee is being set up
with Unesco's assistance. A leading French
physicist, he was formerly Director-General of
the European Space Research Organization,
which he helped to set up, and President of the
International Computation Centre, Rome. From
1948 to 1959 Professor Auger was Director of
Unesco's Department of Natural Sciences.
Among his books is an important work published
by Unesco, "Current Trends in Scientific
Research" (3rd edition, Unesco, Paris, 331-,
$6.75, hard cover).
HE final years of the 19th century and the
first decades of the 20th were marked by tremendous advances of know¬
ledge in the world of physics. Radioactivity, the electron, energy quanta,
relativity and the atomic nucleus came upon the scene, in turn opening
up new areas of science each of which alone could have constituted a
new and distinct discipline.
Jean Perrin, the French physicist whose centenary is being commemo¬
rated this year, played a leading role in this remarkable development.
It was Perrin who, at the turn of the century, demonstrated the particle
nature of cathode rays, identifying them as the elementary carriers of
the negative charge, in other words, as the electrons that have revolu¬
tionized all branches of industry and communications.
This discovery was remarkable for two reasons; it was made by a young,
twenty-five year old scientist, who had just completed his university
studies; it settled a debate that had divided the great physicists of the
day for over ten years.
The demonstration of the particle nature of electricity, "the atoms of
the electric charge", led Jean Perrin to undertake an even more extensive
investigation, this time a study of the atoms constituting all matter.
Prior to Perrin's work physicists spoke of the atomic hypothesis and the
kinetic theory of gases; after it there remained no doubt as to the real
existence of atoms, so convincing was his demonstration.
He started from the notion, held by Boltzmann, Maxwell and Van der
Waals, that all individual particles of matter contained in a fluid must be
subject to the same laws of energy, whether they be atoms, molecules or
grains of emulsion. It was merely a question of a change of scale, but
the kinetic energies would be the same and consequently the same laws
of motion would hold good.
One particular case was that of the Brownian movement which can be
detected even with a student's microscope when observing mushroom
spores floating in water. By a vast change of scale, amounting to a
factor of sixty million, it was possible to compare the distribution of
emulsion grains over a height of a tenth of a millimetre with that of mole¬
cules of air up to an altitude of six "kilometres.
Measurements with the microscope thus made possible the calculation
of the number of molecules contained in a litre of air. In fact, what
Jean Perrin was thus to measure directly for the first time was what we
now know as Avogadro's number the number of molecules in a gramme-
molecule (for example, two grammes of hydrogen) and which has a
value of approximately six hundred thousand million million million.
Perrin turned his attention to the investigation of several other atomic
and molecular phenomena, demonstrating, for example, the existence of
layers a single molecule thick in the thin films of soap bubbles and
surface coatings on water. He published numerous papers on fluores¬
cence, surface electrification and colloids in which he repeatedly demon¬
strated his powerful imaginative capacity and his great talent as an expe¬
rimenter.
His ideas were often much ahead of his time he proposed a planetary
model of the atom as early as 1901 and, in 1921, he postulated that the
energy of the stars resulted from thermonuclear reaction.
Endowed with great personal magnetism, he was able, as professor and
laboratory director, to inspire many students to take up research careers.
Jean Perrin's brilliant scientific work earned him the Nobel Prize for
physics in 1926, but it was not his only claim to the recognition of those
concerned with pushing back the frontiers of knowledge. His vigorous
and skilful campaign led to the creation before the Second World War of
the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique which was to
serve as a model for other countries. He was also responsible for the
foundation of the Palais de la Découverte in Paris, which has become an
effective centre for the popularization of science.
Believing that science was the result of contributions from all sources,
and therefore the common property of mankind, he strove throughout his
life, with truly democratic purpose, to make science accessible to all and
to promote its advancement for the .good of all.
45
