Photo © "Mánchete". Brazil
ONE
OF THE WORLD'S
LARGEST
HYDROLOGICAL
PROJECTS

The Pantanal
400,000 sq. km. of swampland
in the Mato Grosso
by Newton Velloso Cordeiro
M
T
O the west of Brasilia,
stretching out over central Brazil and
extending into parts of Bolivia and
Paraguay, the Mato Grosso swamps
form a vast tableland, some 150 metres
(500 ft.) above sea level, in the very
heart of South America.
Known as the "Pantanal", this huge
region, covering about 400,000 sq. kms.
(150,000 sq. miles) is dotted with
lagoons and hillocks. Through it runs
the river Paraguay and its many
tributaries totalling over 1,300 kms.
(800 miles) in length. During the rainy
NEWTON VELLOSO CORDEIRO was formerly
President of the Brazilian National Committee
for the International Hydrological Decade and
Vice-Chairman of the Co-ordinating Council of
the Decade and was until recently co-director
of the bold development project which he
describes in this article. The project Is being
carried out by the Brazilian Government and
Unesco in co-operation with the United Na¬
tions Development Programme.
season rivers and lagoons merge into
one sheet of water.
In this enormous area, four-fifths
the size of France, the Brazilian
government and Unesco are carrying
out one of the world's greatest
hydrological studies under the auspices
of the United Nations Development
Programme. Begun in 1966, this
project will eventually lead to the
building of a new world capable of
providing food for millions of people
and will facilitate the migration into
the interior of the continent of a
proportion of the population now
concentrated along the coastlands of
Brazil.
The first attempts to populate the
region were made by the Spaniards in
the 16th century when they set out
from the La Plata estuary to reach
the rich mineral deposits of Peru.
But discouraged by lack of economic
resources, the vast distances and the
hostility of the local population, the
Spaniards fell an easy prey to other
colonists pushing westwards from Sao
Paulo. Not until the discovery of gold
in the 18th century was it thought
worth while to explore and settle the
region.
The decline of the gold mines in the
19th century brought the development
of the area to a standstill. The risks
involved in exploiting the plant and
mineral resources, the difficulty of
penetrating the Amazonian forests and
the lack of markets eventually led to
a sharp drop In population.
The Pantanal, however, offers
excellent conditions for cattle-breeding,
with its vast areas of grazing land over
which herds can wander unrestricted.
The exact number of cattle in the
region is not known, but is estimated
to be between 20 and 30 million head.
With its immense estates, or
fazendas, its stock-raising, hunting and
fishing, the Pantanal ¡s one of the

One of the world's biggest
hydrological studies is being
made in a swampland stretching
from central Brazil into Bolivia
and Paraguay. Covering
400,000 sq. km. (see map far left),
the Pantanal (as it is known,
from the Portuguese for
"marshland") is entirely
flooded for half the year.
The hydrological survey,
carried out by Brazil and
Unesco in co-operation with the
U.N. Development Programme,
is part of a programme
aimed at reclaiming the Pantanal
and developing its resources.
A famous cattle-raising centre,
the Pantanal has between
20 and 30 million head of cattle.
Left, herd crossing a Pantanal
water course recalls scenes found
in ancient Chinese paintings.
Right, "home on the range"
triphibious style.
Photo © Paule Bernard, Pans
richest parts of Brazil. It could also
become an immensely productive
agricultural centre.
The region also possesses con¬
siderable iron and manganese deposits
in the Urucum mountains, south of
Corumba. The main obstacle to their
exploitation is their distance from
Brazil's markets and from ports
equipped for handling minerals. The
use of modern water transport could
help to overcome this problem.
Other than air lines, the only means
of communication linking the region
with the Campo Grande and Sao Paulo
is the north-east Brazil railway line.
Plans exist for the construction of a
huge road networkto serve this cattle-
raising area, whose production is one
of the largest in the world, and also
to ensure the distribution of surplus
agricultural produce in the future.
The far-reaching hydrological studies
project for the Upper Paraguay River
Basin was adopted by the United
Nations Development Programme in
January 1966 and was launched by the
Brazilian Department of Land Re¬
clamation in co-operation with Unesco
later that year. It aims to reclaim and
develop the region, and to serve as a
testing ground for new techniques
which can subsequently be introduced
in Amazonia, Bolivia and Paraguay as
well as in areas with similar conditions
in other continents.
The Pantanal survey is one of the
most significant projects of its kind
in the world, and should serve as a
model for other regions. Its scope
and the variety of activities it covers
make it an outstanding example of the
type of research project which the
Unesco-sponsored International Hydro-
logical Decade seeks to promote.
It also comes under Brazil's own
national programme for the Decade,
which includes projects for developing
the resources of the southern region,
expanding the Institute of Hydraulics
Research at the University of Porto
Alegre and the setting up of a Centre
of Research and Training in Applied
Hydrology.
Until recently no basic information
was available about the Pantanal.
There was no data relating to hydro¬
logy, hydroclimatology or surface
hydrology and it was not until 1965
that the first aerial photogrammetric
surveys were made.
To obtain the information needed as
a basis for the regional development
plan, the current project includes the
installation of a hydrometeorological
network in the Paraguay basin and
research on the hydraulic system
governing the Mato Grosso depression
and the influence of this system on
the Paraguay river.
T
HE Pantanal project com¬
prises two phases. During the first,
which is now under completion, data
obtained will be assembled for study,
longitudinal profiles of the river Para¬
guay and some of its main tributaries
will be drawn up and a preliminary
analysis made of hydrological condi¬
tions in the basins.
In addition, a number of automatic
recording stations will be set up to
measure rainfall and other climatic
data, such as the level of surface and
ground water, and then radio this in¬
formation daily to a central station.
Data collected will be used as a
basis for installing a permanent net¬
work of automatic recording stations
during the second phase. The work
of Brazilian organizations dealing
with the Paraguay basin will be co¬
ordinated, together with measures
taken by the Paraguayan, Bolivian and
Brazilian national commissions for the
International Hydrological Decade.
During the second phase, due to
begin this year, the general survey
work begun In phase one will be
completed and studies of geomorpho-
logical, hydrogeological and ecological
conditions, including processes of
erosion and sedimentation, will be
carried out.
Hydrological data obtained will be
analysed and an experimental fore¬
casting system based on a mathemati¬
cal model will be set up. Maps will
be made of certain areas suitable for
hydraulics installations designed to
promote immediate development.
The project is due to be completed
in 1973 at a total cost of some
$2,400,000. The United Nations Devel¬
opment Programme is contributing
$1,534,500 of this sum, and Brazil will
provide the rest.
The scale of operations scheduled
for the second phase may be extended
if similar surveys are carried out in the
Bolivian and Paraguayan chacos. In
that case events in the Pantanal and
the flood areas downstream could be
forecast several months in advance.
Once data on the regime of the River
Paraguay and its main tributaries is
available, it will be possible to begin
operations to regulate their flow and
levels. A navigable waterway could
be formed covering a distance of
nearly 3,000 kms. (2,000 miles) which
would link up the centres of agri¬
cultural production and mineral
deposits with the main industrial
centres in Sao Paulo and even with
towns in Argentina.
The improvement of communications
will change today's population pattern
of small, scattered groups, and will
stimulate economic development.
Better financial prospects in agri¬
culture and other activities will lead
to improved facilities for cultural and a r
technical education. This in turn will I Q
give a great many more Brazilians a
chance to contribute directly to the
development of their country.
