THE STUDENT
"Someday, all of us will spend our lives in our
own school, the world. And education in the
sense of learning to love, to grow, to changecan
become not the woeful preparation for some Job that
makes us less than we could be but the very essence,
the joyful whole of existence itself."
(Marshall McLuhan)
0.
Photo © Dolsneau-Rapho. Perls
PUR world is falling apart,
but there is much disagreement as to
why, how and even where. For some
people the Western industrialized
world is the "sick man" of present-day
society. For the Socialist countries
of Eastern Europe no such crisis
apparently exists. In the Third World
the whole context is different. Yet,
everywhere we seem to be witnessing
a parallel process of corrosion
irrespective of the terminology used.
In the Western countries there is no
mistaking the unrest among youth.
The revolts and uproar in the uni¬
versities, the political involvement or
the total disinterest in political matters,
the hippy movements, the increasing
permissiveness and eroticism ... all
point to a deep-rooted disorder in
modern society and the yearning for
a new pattern of civilization.
Sooner or later the explosion was
bound to come from within the world
of education where the present "mal
du siècle" was first discussed among
a few individuals and then was taken
up by whole clusters of dissatisfied
youth, and finally burst out in its
violent upheavals in the universities of
Japan (Tokyo), the U.S.A. (Berkeley,
Columbia), Europe (Rome, Paris) and
elsewhere.
For the Socialist countries, no such
problem would seem to exist. But if
nothing happens in broad daylight can
we be sure that nothing is really going
on behind the scenes? The answer is
a very tricky one. As a matter of fact,
no one can deny that the Socialist
ideologies took a head start in meeting
the challenge of the 20th century.
Their concept of the world includes
both international solidarity and the
active involvement of the individual in
his community the two critical points
of the crisis experienced by other
countries.
But since political reality does not
always go hand in hand with ideology,
the idea of solidarity often comes a
cropper when it meets up with big
power strategy. Then even the best
intentions fly out the window. The
RENE HABACHI of the Lebanon Is a member
of Unesco's Division of Philosophy and was
formerly professor of philosophy at the Leb¬
anese, French and American Universities in
Beirut. He is the author of many works on
philosophy.

OF TOMORROW -
TOWARDS
A NEW GLOBAL HORIZON
by René Habachi
resulting frustation, therefore, is not
so far different from the dissatisfaction
found in Western countries.
As for the developing countries, the
crises they are going through obviously
stem from different causes, even
though outwardly they may seem the
same. Here, in a sense, the social
and economic situation is perhaps
most out of balance. Modern ways
superimposed on traditional attitudes
have had a double appeal and created
a double emotional shock.
Traditional ways though outmoded,
are struggling hard to survive in these
developing nations. The abrupt intro¬
duction of modern techniques has
brought with it echoes of the tensions
from abroad, though this inner conflict
seems to have been overlooked by
most sociologists. As a result the
impact of development aid has been
considerably reduced. The reaction
of many Africans to the modem ways
of today is psychologically different
from that of a young person in the
West, and has other shock wave
effects.
And so, for everyone, the world
around us does seem to be breaking
apart. Whatever the local scene, the
overall picture is ridiculous and hard
to fathom. All over the world young
people have a feeling of being
uprooted, of a world in disorder where
cracks are appearing in every corner
of the globe and spreading and
spreading to create a deep chasm of
demoralization.
"Something is rotten in the State of
Denmark," Hamlet said. Later, when
he looked out onto the absurdity of
the world, he exclaimedl
"The time is out of joint. O cursed
[spite
That even I was born to set it right."
A cursed spite, perhaps, but oh, how
excitingl What better time than this
to be alive.
Yes, time is out of joint. A whirl¬
wind of youth is battering at the doors
that adults have barred and barricaded.
But young people today are wasting no
time over the dilemma of "to be or
not to be". They have made their
choice and are living their lives in
ways their elders had not foreseen.
The world's population is certainly
a most important factor here. Mankind
has attained a new age. Not only
because we are on the verge of an
extraordinary transformation, as in. all
great periods of history, but also
literally, because mankind has become
younger both physically and mentally.
More than half the world's population
today is under 25. If we consider that
the other half includes many old people
whose lives have been prolonged by
modern science but who represent the
past rather than the future, one thing
strikes us: for every adult alive there
are now three young persons. Never
in history has the world known such
a youthful population.
Sons have argued with their fathers
from time immemorial, but in the past,
these arguments, while often sharp and
even bitter at times, have usually been
settled when the older generation
accepted the new ways and changed
their thinking. But today things have
taken a much more dangerous turn
and we are on the verge of a complete
break. There are even those who
claim that the break has already come,
and that barring a miracle, it can only
gain momentum.
w HAT in heaven's name has
happened? The fact is we are living
in a "paradox" world, or to put it
another way, literally a "revolting"
world, where the new society which
is overwhelming civilization has been
created by the older generation itself.
But the older generation is paralyzed
by routine and fear, and stubbornly
refuses to relinquish control. Instead
of taking advantage of what they
themselves have created, and pushing
ahead boldly on the new path they
have set, they have stopped dead in
their tracks.
What are the important features that
characterize the new society? I would
point to three: First, the shrinking of
space, second, the speed of communi¬
cations and third, the pangs of inter¬
national solidarity.
I need not dwell on the first two,
since so much has already been
written on them. From now on, the
limits of the Earth are those of outer
space where national frontiers are
meaningless. Viewed from the moon,
our planet is a tiny island lost in an
ocean of light-years.
No less extraordinary than this new
vision of space is the way electronic
communications now link us instantly
to the most distant events. The tele¬
communication satellite now brings the
furthest continent closer to us on our
TV screen than our next-door neigh¬
bours. Here we are no longer in the
realm of the abstract written word,
but in direct contact with the image
with its full colour and on the spot
sound. The "Gutenberg Galaxy", to
borrow Marshall McLuhan's phrase,
has been replaced by the "television
medium", and the whole physical
universe in its infinite variety is now
brought before our eyes and senses,
thereby making everyone of us
suddenly aware that we are all citizens
of one nation-planet Earth.
That is why the third point inter¬
national solidarity has taken on such
vital importance today. Recognizing
himself as a planetary being, man has
at the same time acquired a global
conscience, or as Jacques Berque and
other sociologists have put it a new
"worldliness". How petty all the
quarrels of rival blocs now appear.
How futile and ominous the haggling
over political frontiers. How ana¬
chronistic the grab mentality that
makes men like children clutching
their toys deny to others the riches
which belong to all mankind. But
despite all these squabblings, a wave
of feeling is sweeping across our
planet in search of world unity.
Nature is retreating before the
onslaught of industry, just as outer
space is being vanquished by modern
technology. But modern technology,
though it is merging and blending
different societies, is reducing the
individual to faceless anonymity. In
sharp contrast to this, the young
people of today are asserting their
own individuality in no uncertain terms,
claiming the right to build their own
future and the world of tomorrow.
As a group of students at Columbia
University recently told me, they
cannot accept that a society capable
of governing itself should use its
power, with cold impersonality, to
control the destiny of everyone.
One can well understand, therefore,
the reasons for the recent assault
against the education system. Certain
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20
17

Instead of burdening his memory with a mass of facts and figures, the student
of tomorrow will store these in his computer and will thus be free to analyse
the whole, make useful comparisons and draw appropriate conclusions.
Original lithograph by the French artist, Roland Topor, © Topor-Olivetti


THE STUDENT OF TOMORROW (Continued from page 17)
The mirror-image of a crumbling society
modifications and innovations have
been introduced, it is true, but even
these already appear old fashioned
and out-of-date. Education has simply
failed to adapt itself to the tempo of
our changing world. "It advances
towards the future while fixing its eyes
on the past in a rear-view mirror," as
McLuhan has aptly put it.
Today the real need is not so much
just to define the aims of education as
to find new methods to make education
more effective. Aims and methods
are so closely interdependent that if
the latter are inadequate the former
will automatically suffer. To develop
the spirit of total world-mindedness
implies education of the total man
who, as an individual, is concerned
with the fate of all his fellow men in
this world, without thereby losing
anything of his own personality or
individuality.
To conceive of education as a
broadening of horizons to encompass
the globe means extending it over the
entire life span. Education will no
longer be compressed into the early
years of life but will continue until the
day one dies. This "lifelong educa¬
tion" will mean a reduction of tra¬
ditional teaching programmes in favour
of a constant renewal of learning, for
as long as one remains mentally active.
In this new context, the relative
importance of teaching proper and the
accumulation of knowledge will no
doubt undergo a profound change.
Factual knowledge will take its seat in
the classroom, as it were, while
teaching proper will breathe the
freedom of the open air. A young
student on the one hand and an adult
worker on the other will no longer be
worlds apart when the whole of one's
life time is recognized as an integral
part of education.
I
20
HIS broadening of the idea
of education will make it much easier
for global thinking and a global
approach to develop and take root.
The school system, with its buildings
and other facilities, will then be viewed
simply as one of several "stop-overs"
in a lifetime of "extra-mural" education,
or better still, of "education abroad".
Why not? Today's so-called cultural
tourism is but a pale, distorted image
of those university caravans of
wandering scholars who each year
now travel from one land to the other,
criss-crossing one another or joining
up for large discussion or study
sessions. As they travel from country
to country they are learning about our
world at first hand instead of from the
abstract teaching of a textbook or the
limited outlook of a teacher.
But will the placing of education onto
a new orbit in itself guarantee that
our entire planet will henceforth come
into our purview? It is equally true
that the whole earth must also be
placed in the mind-orbit of each and
everyone of us. Here modern science,
with its satellites and electronic techno¬
logy, will be able to come into its own,
filling classroom TV screens (they are
rapidly- replacing the lecturer in many
schools) with live pictures, detailed
demonstrations of scientific research,
and concrete examples for the com¬
parative study of different cultures.
By making use of the scientific
method of integrating data we shall
one day be able to eliminate the
nightmare of ever-increasing informa¬
tion now choking the school curriculum.
Not by a senseless hacking and
mangling process of compression but
by producing a new coherent synthesis
of existing data.
..Rere the language of mathematics
will no doubt play a major role, at least
in those fields which lend themselves
to its precision. Those that do not
will increase their effectiveness by the
added use of the live image. In fact,
the very abstraction of mathematics
could be made less abstract and hence
more human by means of the TV screen
which will help to bring the language
of mathematics closer to the living
reality it symbolizes.
So we see that the whole process
of education is undergoing a formidable
change. In the school of tomorrow,
personal initiative will be called upon
as never before in cultural subjects
generally as well as in the choice of
a career. Instead of burdening his
memory with a mass of facts and
details, the student of tomorrow will
store these in his computer, allowing
himself the time and freedom to
analyse the whole, make useful
comparisons and draw appropriate
conclusions.
Programmed instruction permitting
each student to judge and criticize his
(or her) own work, the students of
tomorrow will be able to choose from
among different programmes those
that suit them best. Or else, from a
list of courses proposed by a new-look
type of teacher, the students them¬
selves will decide the length and
category of subjects for study which
previous self examination had indicated
as advisable.
As for vocational guidance, students
will have a clearer picture of their
possibilities through special charts
indicating future openings calculated
on the basis of a flexible plan of
future needs, as well as films showing
the advantages and disadvantages of
a particular career, and the chances
of success.
Tomorrow's younger generation will
not only have a clearer idea of their
own community's progress and its
economic and political directions, but
will be invited to prove their worth by
participating fully in the discussions
and decisions affecting world society
as a whole.
It goes without saying that the
teacher-student relationship will have
changed into one of teamwork, where
the teacher plays the role of leader
rather than that of professor, of agent
for the free circulation of culture
rather than its custodian. Teachers
will continue their research work with
students as co-members of the re¬
search team in a community enterprise.
0 F course, some of the
above may well border on science-
fiction. But we should recognize that
while highly technological societies
tend to increase the areas of anonym¬
ity and depersonalization, progress in
the application of the sciences will
allow a return to greater personal
choice and the creation of new sources
of career opportunities.
Will education thus resolve the
crisis of civilization? This has not
been its purpose. It is helping to find
ways towards a solution, but there can
never really be only one solution.
For education is the mirror-image of a
crumbling society; it can also be the
spark that prepares its reconstruction.
In this sense, it can help to create a
new world of humanism.
And is this not, in the final analysis,
our ultimate objective? We are in
search of a new type of humanism a
world in which men are rooted in their
individual society yet open to the
world, a world in which universality
and individuality are equally preserved.
Up until now, these two notions have
always seemed almost totally in¬
compatible. But perhaps this very
incompatibility is the driving force of
progress just as a difference in water
level can be a source of electric
energy. Except that instead of being
reserved for only a small portion of
the globe, this potential must be
utilized by the world as a whole so
that the world's total energy is per¬
manently released.
Are we so far from Descartes's
dream "to read in the great book of
the world"? Are we so far removed
from the fervour of the Middle Ages
and the men who carved the genesis
of their universe on the walls of their
cathedrals? Not really, except that,
today, this great book must be written
and read by all men, of all religions
and races everywhere and our world
demands that all the people of the
earth join together to forge a single
history.
Perhaps it is precisely to the extent
that we dare to be modern that we are
most faithful to tradition. This faith in
change is mankind's triumphant answer
to the challenge of time. It is the
reconciliation of man with the universe,
and of all men answering the call to
Unity. ma
