10th ANNIVERSARY OF U.N. DECLARATION
ON THE INDEPENDENCE OF COLONIAL PEOPLES
I EN years ago, the United Nations General Assembly approved the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. All peoples, it declared, had the right freely to determine their
political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development.
The importance of this historic Declaration was recalled recently by
M. René Maheu, Director-General of Unesco, on the occasion of the 25th
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. Speaking in Geneva on
behalf of 21 international organizations of the U.N. family (1), he declared :
"It was within the United Nations that the idea and the process
of decolonization took definite shape. The Trusteeship Council
and the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly, in particular,
have been largely instrumental in bringing about the emanci¬
pation of many peoples formerly under colonial rule.
"The accession of these peoples to independence, however,
has not only profoundly altered the composition of the interna¬
tional community and the relations among its members, it has
also highlighted a number of problems which had never pre¬
viously appeared in their true colours and in all their gravity.
"I refer to the problems of underdevelopment. Mankind has
suddenly realized both that development has been the privilege
of a minority instead of being, as it can be, the condition of ail,
and that most of the countries seeking to achieve it were unable
to do so by their own unaided efforts.
"In this respect, a tribute must be paid to the Economic and
Social Council, the organ of the General Assembly mainly res¬
ponsible for the development of this new awareness that has
changed the spirit of our times. The Council hammered out the
idea of integrated economic and social development and secured
acceptance of it not only as a possibility but as a duty devolving
upon each individual country and upon the international commu¬
nity as a whole...
"... The world is still dominated by too many rulers and groups
who do not suit their actions to their words, who preach peace
while waging or preparing for war, who exalt justice while tole¬
rating discrimination and flagrant inequality, who pay lip service
to progress while diverting to armaments enormous sums which
they could more usefully spend on development, both in their
own country and abroad..."
During the past year, the "Unesco Courier" has on many occasions de¬
scribed the successes and setbacks, the aims and hopes of the global
struggle for the development of the under-privileged countries. Our Feb¬
ruary and October 1970 issues were largely devoted to the problems of
development and our January issue dealt with education, an integral part of
economic and social development.
(1) The International Labour Organization the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organiza¬
tion the World Health Organization the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development and its two affiliates, the International Finance Corporation and the Interna¬
tional Development Association the International Monetary Fund the International
Civil Aviation Organization the Universal Postal Union the International Telecom¬
munication Union the World Meteorological Organization the Intergovernmental
Maritime Consultative Organization the International Atomic Energy Agency the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development the United Nations Industrial Development Organization the United
Nations Children's Fund the United Nations Development Programme the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees In the Near East the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees the United Nations Training
and Research Institute the World Food Programme.
