Photos Unesco
The "Temple of Neptune" (below) was raised in Paestum, south of present-day Naples,
in the mid-5th century B.C. Modelled on the Parthenon at Athens, ¡i is one of the few
surviving buildings of Poseidonia (the Greek name for Paestum). The city was founded at the end
of the 7th century B.C. by Greek colonists, and was captured by the Lucanians towards the end of the
5th century B.C. A vast buriaf ground has now been discovered near the Temple of Neptune,
and thousands of graves have been unearthed (bottom photo). Some 50 of these tombs
contain paintings In a remarkable state of preservation the only classical Greek frescoes ever found.

PAESTUM
discovery of the first
ancient Greek frescoes
by Michel Conil Lacoste
A
* . «SÄ**« - ML
few fragments of terra
cotta, some polychrome traces on
pieces of plaster rubble, occasional
references to Polygnotus, Zeuxis and
Euphranor are all that has come down
to us of the great flowering of Hellenic
painting, in the 5th and 4th centuries
B. C, described by Pliny the Elder.
The great painted frescoes of the
classical era were doomed to destruc¬
tion at the hand of man. The ravages
of war and Roman plundering, coupled
with the fragility of the surfaces used
by painters of classical times, combined
to deprive us of the paintings that
once adorned the walls of Propylaea
and private homes.
CONTINUED PAGE 6
MICHEL CONIL LACOSTE, French art critic
and historian, is a regular contributor to
literary and art reviews, and is the author
of "La Sculpture Européenne d'Aujourd'hui'
(European Sculpture Today) published by
Günther, Stuttgart, 1966. From 1967 to 1969
he was head of the Unesco Section of the
International Campaign for Florence and
Venice, and is co-author with L.I. Rollet-
Andriane, of "The Unesco Report on Venice"
(published in Italian by Mondadori, Milan,
1969) and shortly to appear in French
(Robert Laffont, Paris). He is now a member
of Unesco's Division of International Dis¬
semination of Culture.

One of the most surprising paintings found at Paestum Is the diver (below) decorating -
the roof slab of the oldest of the painted tombs. The scene below Is a detail of the full painting
which shows the diver silhouetted against a vast sweep of sky in a coastal setting.
The walls of the same tomb are covered with a series of beautiful paintings of a Greek funeral banquet,
showing ten young men chatting, drinking and listening to music (above). Painted about 480 B.C.,
this type of banquet painting was known to the world only through the painted vases of Athens.
it'.'
<f ' 0
f*B5

6
PAESTUM (Continued)
Without direct knowledge of the
paintings themselves, we can only have
a small idea of what they were really
like from ancient Greek vase paintings
or even more regretfully, from certain
weak copies by ancient Roman artists.
This at least was the position until
one day in the summer of 1968 the
sun of Paestum filtered into tomb No. 4
of a burial ground situated one mile
to the south of the time-worn walls of
this ancient Greek city in southern
Italy. Uncovered by a systematic
examination of the area carried out
that summer, the tomb revealed wall
paintings of extraordinary freshness,
depicting scenes of funeral banquets
and typically Greek rituals, that had
lain there untouched for two and a half
thousand years.
It was immediately evident that the
paintings were totally different from
the few Lucanian painted tombs
previously brought to light in the
vicinity. They closely resembled the
themes depicted on Greek pottery of
the classical period. On the two
longer walls of the tomb the eye saw
a double funeral banquet scene in red,
black, yellow and blue. Ten bearded
funeral guests, crowned with laurels,
were reclining on a couch evoked by
a single blue brush stroke. The
painting shows the men listening to
music and playing a game called
Kottabos (which consisted of passing
wine from one wine cup to another in
a manner that called for great
dexterity). The scene has erotic
overtones. On the shorter walls a
flutist leads the funeral cortege and a
cup bearer offers wine.
The harmony of design and the
delicate use of colour with little modu¬
lation of tone confirm the advanced
development of painting techniques of
the Greek artists of Paestum. The
frescoes are especially significant in
their portrayal of ancient Greek rites
for the living and the dead.
A most unusual scene is portrayed
on the inner face of the slab that forms
the covering of the tomb. Here,
poised between sky and sea, a young
RESURRECTED CHARIOTS
IN THE GREEK STYLE
The Lucanlans of the 4th century B.C.
decorated the walls of the tombs in the
Paestum burial ground with paintings
in the Greek style. Themes of battle and
victory are numerous: the proud warrior
on his charger (left); a four-in-hand chariot
race (below right); a winged victory In a
chariot (above right). In this work,
branches 'loaded with pomegranates
(left of painting) symbolize re-birth
and the promise of a future life.
Lucanian artists drew inspiration from the
Greek vases of Taranto in southern Italy,
but unlike their Greek counterparts,
they sought for more striking effects
by a greater use of contrasting colours.
Below, these stone coffins discovered
at Paestum are about 1.80 metres
long and 1 metre wide (about 6X3 ft.).
The 150 painted tomb walls of Paestum
are regarded as one of the most remarkable
archaeological discoveries of recent years.
Photos Unesco - J. Chevalier
W ^m
'
r- m|TB I
^v^^a «v. jr. *v mal/ m\
r^ !^B
_j ~^
JR \\
ephebe is shown executing a high dive
from a narrow platform between two
trees. Hence the name immediately
given to the find: tomba del tuffatore
("The Tomb of the Diver").
Certain precise stylistic charac¬
teristics, particularly the representa¬
tion of the athlete's eye and his
musculature, as well as the shape of
a vase found in the tomb, have enabled
Professor Mario Napoli, Superintendent
of Antiquities for the Salerno-Paestum
district, in charge of the excavations,
to date it to about 480 B. C.
At that time Paestum was still called
Poseidonia. Situated about 80 kilo¬
metres (50 miles) south of present day
Naples on the Gulf of Salerno, it was
one of the most important cities of
Magna Graecia. Its institutions, lan¬
guage, religion, art were all Greek.
The Lucanian mountain folk had not
yet come down from the surrounding
heights to drive out the Greek
colonists. The paintings from the
"Tomb of the Diver" are, therefore,
stylistically, culturally and even politi-

S83SS \y\Mjm&¡
v*
cally speaking Greek. There can be
no doubt that they were painted by a
Greek hand.
This was an unprecedented find. In
the words of Superintendent Mario
Napoli, it represents "the first and only
Greek painting of the archaic or
classical period found anywhere thus
far." The same enthusiasm is shared
by the world's leading experts on
Greek art and archaeology.
In his contribution to the volume "La
Grèce Classique" which has just
appeared in the famous collection
entitled "Univers des Formes", the
French specialist of Greek art, François
Villard, writes: "Until the most recent
discovery at Paestum ... of a painted
tomb of astounding expressive power,
dated around 480 B. C, the existence
of no original Greek painting, even by
a minor artist . . . had come to our
knowledge."
There is another surprising aspect
to this discovery: no tradition of tomb
painting was formerly known to exist
in ancient Greece. Painted tombs are
found only from the 4th century B. C.
onwards, and these only on the fringes
of Magna Graecia, at Pont-Euxin, near
Taranto and in Apulia where a much
more geometric style was dominant.
Etruscan funeral paintings had a more
esoteric, ritual inspiration, quite dif¬
ferent from the lively themes of the
"Tomb of the Diver". However, tomb
decoration seems to have been an
established tradition in Lucania.
Faced with this puzzle, Super¬
intendent Napoli and his colleagues
have yet to reach agreement on
two opposing interpretations. The
first of these is that, while Paestum
was still completely under Greek rule,
a non-Greek inhabitant of the city, no
doubt a notable, was accorded the
honour of being buried in accordance
with his native traditions. The second
interpretation explains the existence of
the tomb painting as an illustration
of the Pythagorean notion of "ritual
immersion". According to this view,
the dead man would then have been
a Greek member of a Pythagorean
school in Paestum.
But there were further surprises in
store for the Italian archaeologists.
On July 12, 1969, the Superintendent
learned that a farmer named Luigi
Franco, while ploughing his artichoke
field with an especially long blade, had
struck the stone cover of another tomb,
this time 300 metres (330 yards) north
of the city walls.
This tomb was unpainted and empty.
But, in the course of the three months'
excavations that followed, 83 under¬
ground tombs were found within the
same area. Of these, 50 were de¬
corated with frescoes, more than thirty
of which were well preserved. All but
four or five of these tombs contained
vases which were found to date from
the 4th century B. Cabout 340 B. C.
Since each tomb had four painted
walls (the roof slab in each case being
unpainted) a total of 120 to 140 wall
paintings of great antiquity were now
available to the world in addition to the
"Tomb of the Diver". Taken together
they show evidence of a particular
style which, if not strictly Greek, is at
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

WORLD OF MYTH
AND EVERYDAY LIFE
Paestum artists gave a distinctive
new style to funerary painting
by introducing scenes from country
life and themes based on fantasy.
Tomb painting, left, Illustrates this
dual originality. In the upper
triangular section, Charon, the
ferryman of the River Styx,
a Greek mythological figure,
has been transformed by a Lucanian
painter into a female form receiving
the spirits of the dead aboard
the waiting craft In the lower section
(see also front cover), a figure leads
a calf which Is to be sacrificed
in honour of the dead person.
A woman carrying a dish of
offerings on her head follows
the animal, and behind her a young
servant carries bread and
pomegranates. A mourner completes
the cortege. The figures recall
typical Lucanian country folk such
as might still be encountered In
that region of Southern Italy today.
Above right, winged griffons,
mythological creatures that figured
on 4th century B.C. Greek vases.
Below right, country scene. The
farmer's cart Is outlined against a
background of trees, a naturalistic
touch rarely found In Greek art of
the 4th century B.C.
Photos Unesco - J. Chevalier
8
PAESTUM (Continued)
least strongly marked by Hellenic
influences, spiced with a lovely touch
of local colour.
The walls of these new tombs, like
those of the "Tomb of the Diver", have
been transferred to the nearby
museum, where they are being allowed
to dry out slowly. On some of them
can still be seen the marks made in the
wet plaster by the ropes with which
they were lowered into place. And
when we are studying antique relics,
traces of handling and techniques
used, such as these, take us magically
back in time until we can almost see
the events unfolding before our eyes.
Apart from a few bones, little else
was found in these 4th century B. C.
tombs, except for some rare jewellery
and a few vases. The walls of the
tombs were pre-cut to the required
dimensions from one or two metres in
length and 90 cms in height (3 to
6 à ft. x 3 ft.). They were given a coat
of fresh plaster and decorated probably
at the last moment.
On all of them the principal figure
is surrounded by a frame motif perhaps
the work of the artist's assistant and
applied with almost slap-dash haste.
These motifs abound with streamers,
floral designs, eggs and pomegranates,
the latter a symbol of resurrection.
Sometimes this rather mechanical
ornamentation constitutes the entire
decoration one tomb has as its only
decoration an intertwined central
design of the famous roses of
Paestum.
It was in one of these latter tombs
that the only signed vase was found.
It bears the name of Python, who,
along with Asteas, was the most
famous painter of the jars with twisted
twin handles for which Paestum was
famous. It seems unlikely that one
or both of these artists worked on the
paintings themselves, but as yet there
is no proof either way.
The actual figures have often been
sketched several times as we can see
if we examine the paintings under an
oblique light. They depict a whole
range of horsemen, combats between
boxers or between Greek foot-soldiers
known as hoplites, stag-hunting scenes,
bulls, griffons and mythical birds.
Others show women combing their
hair under a canopy; even a set of
armour and two leg plates have been
considered of sufficient interest to
constitute the only theme.
Scenes from Greek mythology,
however, are the dominating theme:
Charon ferrying the dead shades
across the Styx for a fee; Hermes
harnessed to a child's cart, etc.
Archaeologists have thus far found
three successive stages in this magni¬
ficent collection of paintings. On the
one hand, the typical ancient Greek
style, on the other Greek archetypes
interpreted more or less freely in the
Greek archaic style, and thirdly, a style
obviously inspired by strong local
influences.
Many archaeologists have been
happy to devote years of their lives
to reconstructing the walls of an
ancient city, yard by yard, or in the
painstaking study of potsherds which
are important clues to the past. It is
not given to every archaeologist to
discover the undisturbed mummy of a
Pharaoh or the treasures of Troy or
Mycenae. The archaeologists of
Paestum have been most fortunate
indeed.
It will take years to complete the
scientific study of their sensational
find. They are certainly right when
they say that the 140 wall paintings of
Paestum, together with the five
paintings of the 5th century sarco¬
phagus, constitute "a great moment- in
the history of Greek painting."

