1
\
The crisis in development (Continued)
© A SECOND CHANCE
IN THE 1970s
W
W W HERE do we go from here?
As a result of the decision of the
comity of nations, we are now prepar¬
ing for the Second Development
Decade. This is to give us a second
chance to go on from where we stand
today. And the main outline of the
tasks for the developing and developed
countries, for our village world, the
world community, as one study terms
it, is emerging with startling clarity.
The developing countries are to plan
for an annual Gross Domestic Product
increase of 6 to 7 per cent, with the
resultant 3.5 to 4.5 per cent per capita
growth. This GDP Indicator must be
supported by a programme of income
distribution, structural change, land
reform and an employment and
population policy. The agricultural
sector must increase by 4 per cent to
sustain the 6 to 7 per cent rate, feed
the growing population, improve the
intake of proteins and nutritional
levels, ensure growing supplies of
raw materials for Industry, insulate
pressure on domestic prices and ease
the strains on balance of payments.
Agricultural growth must ensure the
participation of the small farmer in the
new technologies through the creation
of special institutions such as a
small farmers' development agency
which can help to convert the three to
five acre farm into a viable unit. If there
is an unavoidable short-fall In food
production, such as caused the two
famine years in India, the developed
countries must increase their food
assistance above the one per cent
target in order to avoid both bottle¬
necks to expansion and inequities In
welfare.
Industry, which is the sheet anchor
of modernization, must expand at an
annual average rate of 8 to 9 per cent.
There must be an appropriate expan¬
sion in the infrastructural network.
Consumption should rise at a slower
rate than GDP in order that a savings H -í
target of 15 to 20 per cent may be
attained. New employment opportuni¬
ties should be created through a
planned employment policy based on
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

Photos David Robison Parimage (C.P.). Paris
12
CRISIS IN DEVELOPMENT (Continued)
the surplus and scarcity status of
factor supplies and using fiscal, monet¬
ary, trade and earnings incentives.
Education in all forms, which I will
return to later, must move forward in
quantity and quality calling for a 5 to
6 per cent expenditure of GDP.
Research and development must be
promoted, involving a further one per
cent. Health conditions must be fur¬
ther improved and a well administered
population control programme ensured.
At the national level, a new institu¬
tional framework for development
should be created through changing
attitudes, motivations, legislative re¬
forms and social services, which are
both the end and the means of
development.
The developed countries, on their
side, should expand their own devel¬
opment, aiming at an annual average
of 4 (3.7-4.2) per cent of GDP growth,
involving 3 per cent per capita. This is
their first task the war against their
own poverty pockets and areas of
deprivation begins at home but it
cannot stop there.
The most important contribution of
the developed countries to the devel¬
opment of the Third World is "in the
trade field. They must follow up the
Kennedy Round by giving preferences
to Imports from the developing
countries, through eliminating, or at
least drastically reducing their tariffs
and quotas. Such a move is in their
own interest as it not only ensures
comparative cost benefits, but also
reduces the high cost agricultural pro¬
ducts, manufactures and semi-manu¬
factures which exert an inflationary
pressure on their consuming public.
All this should result in an increased
capacity of the developing countries to
expand their imports by one per cent
per annum in order to sustain the 6 to
7 per cent target.
The debt servicing burden of the
poor countries casts a pall on all devel¬
opment perspectives. It was 4,700 mil¬
lion dollars in 1967, forming 15 per cent
of their exports (in the case of India
and Brazil it will reach 30 per cent)
and will move to 9,200 million dollars
in 1971. There is need for long-term
re-scheduling and re-financing of this
intolerable millstone at the start of the
Second Decade.
I
|N the aid field, the target
of one per cent of national income has
been agreed upon by all concerned,
involving 70 to 75 per cent of the tar¬
get in official government-to-govern¬
ment or multilateral aid, taking the form
of grants and soft loans. As the Pear¬
son Commission points out, this is no
give-away programme.
Given the form and purposes for
which It is made available, I have
serious hesitation in even using the
word "aid" in this context.
In one Member State, with a popu¬
lation of four-and-a-half million, foreign
aid programmes have introduced
20 different types of tractors (with the
result that no servicing and spare parts
industry is possible). They also pro
vide 50 per cent of the country's
investment, deciding the nature, rhythm
and timing of its development in
accordance with their domestic pro¬
duction schedules and profit potential.
These problems call for better co¬
ordination of aid and Increase in the
share of official aid, in other words
an improvement in the quantity and
quality of aid. One way of doing this
is to pledge ourselves to Increase the
quantity of official aid from the present
$6,300 million to between $16,000 to
$19,000 million by 1972-1975 and Im¬
prove Its quality.
Aid is neither a bribe nor a chari¬
table handout. Fundamentally, aid
policies are based on the hard fact
that we live in one shrinking world and
that every man's welfare is the concern
of all his neighbours.
The centre-piece to the international
frame for the Second Development
Decade is Man, the resources he
represents and the education he
demands. Let us not forget that the
purpose of all development is Man and
that he is its motive force and maker.
The Unesco doctrine is that the
essential instrument of such develop¬
ment is the continuing improvement
of the resources represented by the
whole population through the supply
of men and women who have been
educated, trained and harmoniously
integrated into the development move¬
ment.
This demands a global vision of the
entire educational system and all other
institutions involved in the develop¬
ment of human resources, science,
CONTINUED PAGE 14

SCHOOL IN THE SAND. Children In most countries know sand as something to make castles out of, but for
these children in a Sudanese village it serves as a notebook on which to write out words and sentences they
have learned (photos above). Developing countries have increased their spending on education, but many millions
of children still lack classrooms, teachers and equipment. In contrast to the makeshift school above, youngsters
in this infant school classroom (below), in an industrially developed country, are introduced to "new mathematics"
concerned with theories of sets and relations which 20 years ago were reserved for research specialists.
13

CRISIS IN DEVELOPMENT (Continued)
Towards a global concept of education
technology, information and culture.
Such a vision demands breaking away
from traditional tests and evaluations
and applying a wider systems analysis
approach, examining fearlessly all
operational relationships in human
resources development and applying to
it the principles of balanced growth.
The actual educational systems, as
they have evolved during the current
decade, with their wastages, imbalan¬
ces, irrelevancies, unused capacities,
obsolescences and unemployment end-
products, are knocking heavily at the
doors of the Second Decade.
I believe it is for us now to work out
new relationships between education
and society, over and above the usual
economic constraints and manpower
budgeting that have been imposed on
us. These constraints are in truth
based on the philosophy that human
development planning should be inte¬
grated with and subordinated to eco¬
nomic development planning.
A recent economic survey contains
the suggestion that in the interests of
increased productivity, the developing
countries must postpone the education
they need in favour of training and that
in order to offset the distorting
influence of the white collar profes¬
sions on the structure of education,
heavy, almost exclusive, emphasis
should be placed on science-based
subjects, engineering and what are
called practical skills that are needed
for a mechanizing society.
The truth is the other way around.
What is needed is a more differentiated
approach and, as appropriate, econo¬
mic planning should be integrated in
and subordinated- to the development
of human resources. The cure to
educated unemployment is not less
education so that there can be just
uneducated unemployment.
A
14
LS we have seen earlier,
there are no short-term remedies In
the economy for the growing unem¬
ployment problem. If, however, the
economy were integrated into the edu¬
cational system, instead of the other
way around, then the educated person
could and would create his own
employment, with some support from
the State and the private sector. The
supply of well-educated persons is
one of the most effective instruments
for enlarging employment and combat¬
ing unemployment during the Second
Decade. There is need for mutual
development of education and econo¬
mic strategies.
To further support this plea for the
two-way integration of economic
planning and human resources devel
opment, I refer to recent studies by
J.S. Coleman in the U.S.A. and T. Hu-
sén, in Sweden, which show that the
most important influence on student
performance in the school is not the
teacher and his qualifications (which
must always be high for quite other
reasons), nor the equipment in the
laboratories (which must always be
modern in the interest of scientific
truth) but the dynamism or stagnation
of the economic and social environ¬
ment in which the school is placed.
And this brings me back to the
social rôle and social demand for
education education being woven
into the development process and the
school and the adult education centre
being dynamic agents of change when
surrounded by a moving and growing
society. But this means that the impact
of education on society depends on
non-education on the other social and
economic institutions which can use¬
fully use the educational output and
induce a development-oriented peda¬
gogy. In this context, we are missing
spectacular development-directed op¬
portunities through the poor use and
misuse of our mass media which is so
largely devoted to indoctrination and
spurious entertainment.
Education must therefore be adapted
to each local society but equally it
must transform that society. And to do
this, education should become a life¬
long learning process (instead of being,
as it is, a life-long teaching and
cramming process), involving the ac¬
quisition of learning skills, of the capa¬
city to learn, so that the specific
training for specific employment, exist¬
ing, or induced, or created, can be
acquired flexibly as one goes along in
life.
The central concept of life-long
learning will call for fundamental chan¬
ges in educational philosophy and
educational aid and we must be pre¬
pared for them. International Education
Year 1970 inaugurated at the threshold
to' the Second Development Decade,
will see the elaboration and the start
of the application of the concept in
non-formal education, strategies in
innovation, the use of new techniques,
methods, curricula, together with new
concepts in educational planning, rang¬
ing from systems analysis to pro¬
gramme budgeting.
New learning systems need to be
conceived where the content and
method of instruction are relevant to
the spirit and the needs of the 1970s.
The only way to search for educational
breakthroughs Is to experiment and
to evaluate those experiments to take
risks on speculative programmes; to
try out new learning systems in both
in-school and out-of-school institutions;
to leave aside some of the traditional
impediments of academic pedagogy,
such as examination systems which
stress rote memory instead of ability
to solve development problems; to
channel today's splendid drive for
participation into self-help and self-
renewal learning patterns. In short to
innovatel But always innovation in the
direction of the liberation of talent and
Intellect, and in the direction of social
and economic justice so as to make
all development serve man.
W
ILL this at long last usher
in that technological revolution in edu¬
cation during the Second Decade,
similar to those which have swept
through health and agriculture during
the first? I fervently hope so.
The largest and most decisive contri¬
bution of education is in widening the
horizons of youth, in giving them the
capacity to adapt to the new human
condition, and by preparing them to
share in all innovative activities. Can
education fire their imagination at a
faster rate than that at which they are
setting fire to our educational struc¬
tures? We cannot, of course, orient
our youth in certain directions or give
them a free area for participation, If
all incentives are lacking, if they
observe that we do not practise that
which we preach, that the society that
we have created and dominate is
vastly different from our verbalization
of it.
We preach peace and make or con¬
done war. We talk about equality and
enjoy the fruits of inequality. We Insist
on vocational education but send our
own sons and daughters for a uni¬
versity classics degree. We cannot
effectively plan education for a so¬
ciety that cannot be imagined by our
young generation and does not call
for their total loyalty. May not then an
increasingly heavy focus on real
equality in educational opportunities
help form young men and women who
will transform our society?
MALCOLM S. ADISESHIAH Is Deputy Direc¬
tor-General of Unesco. He joined the orga¬
nization in 1948 and will retire from Unesco
at the end of this year. After leaving Unesco,
Dr. Adiseshiah will become Director of the
Madras Institute of Development Studies,
which he is founding. The Institute will
promote the study of economic and social
development problems in Tamil Nadu and in
Southern India generally. Born in the State
of Madras, Dr. Adiseshiah was educated in
India and Great Britain. Before joining
Unesco, he headed the Department of Econo¬
mics at the Christian College, Madras and
had been lecturer in economics at the Uni¬
versity of Calcutta. He launched Unesco's
first development aid programme and has
been particularly concerned with problems of
development ever since.
