by Mstislav Keldysh
President of the Academy
of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.

Lenin
and
the development
of science
w
6
HEN the first man-made
satellite Sputnik 1 was launched
into space, on October 4, 1957, it focus¬
ed an excited world's attention on the
immense possibilities open to mankind
in an entirely new scientific era.
Yet this first space venture also
marked a watershed ¡n the develop¬
ment of science in the U.S.S.R. and
wjien we look back towards the early
days of the 1917 revolution and the
years that followed it we can distin¬
guish one hand already sowing the
seeds of this triumph of Soviet science
the hand of Vladimir Lenin.
Despite the complex problems with
which he was faced in the early days
following the revolution, Lenin, from
the first, realized the importance of
the role that science was to play in
the rebuilding of his country.
Indeed, all of Lenin's work as a
politician, statesman and public figure
is inseparable from science. As a
scientist myself, what has always
struck me in Lenin's intellectual work
is the manner in which his theoretical
conclusions were invariably based on
a scientific analysis and critical
examination of all the facts and data
available. One other special attribute
of his researches was the close
connexion he always maintained
between theoretical formulations and
their practical application.
A perfect example of the way in
which Lenin grasped the essence of
modern science is to be seen in his
analysis of the cardinal philosophical
problems raised by the progress made
in physics.
The turn of the century, as we know,
was marked bv a series of discoveries
which were to lead to a complete
revolution in physics, and eventually
to the development of the physics of
today. Thus, the advances in electro¬
dynamics opened the way to the theory
of relativity and the discovery of new
and more precise space-time relation¬
ships. Research into the theory of
opaque bodies and the photo-electric
effect made possible the formulation
of the quantum theory.
These new ideas and theories, to
which were soon to be added the
discovery of radioactivity and radium,
could no longer be fitted into the
19th century concept of physics or into
the electro-magnetic concept of the
universe that had succeeded the
mechanical concept.
Serious difficulties arose. In parti¬
cular, the conclusion of the classic
electron theory, according to which
electrons had mass and electro¬
magnetic characteristics, was inter¬
preted by many mechanistic and posi¬
tivist physicists of the time as a verit¬
able "disappearance of matter".
Research scientists spoke heatedly of
"the big crisis in physics".
In 1909, Lenin entered the scene
with his work Materialism and Empirio-
Criticism. This was his reply to the
philosophical problems raised by the
latest scientific discoveries. Lenin
pointed out that the crisis in physics
perceptible at the beginning of the
century was just the first step
challenging "the old laws and basic
principles", and that the change affect¬
ed the postulates of physics that had
been thought unalterable. The crisis,
Lenin said, marked the beginning of
a complete revolution in physics.
Our knowledge is relative, Lenin
wrote, and knowledge of nature pro
gresses by gradual Improvement ¡n
scientific thought approaching ever
closer to the truth. The great dis¬
coveries in physics at the turn of the
century prove one thing, he said,
namely, the inadequacy of the mecha¬
nistic concept. Matter does not
"disappear" but manifests itself in
new, more concrete forms, hitherto un¬
known, providing science with a
deeper understanding of the physical
properties of matter and the inter¬
relations existing between its different
states and conditions.
"To say that matter has disappear¬
ed" Lenin wrote, "is merely to state
that the limits of our knowledge of
matter have disappeared and that our
understanding has deepened. The
properties of matter that formerly
appeared absolute, unalterable and
immutable . . . have disappeared and
are now recognized as being relative
and inherent only in certain states of
matter."
He stressed that "... the one and
only 'property' of matter that philoso¬
phical materialism recognized is that
it is an objective reality, existing apart
from our consciousness". And here
he pronounced his famous philo¬
sophical dictum: "the electron is as
inexhaustible as the atom; nature is
infinite . . ."
I do not think that at that time a
single physicist anywhere suspected
that the electron had other properties
than those of possessing mass and
an electric charge. But in the half
century that has elapsed since then,
the electron has been revealed to have
such multiple properties that the thesis
put forward theoretically by Lenin is
CONTINUED PAGE 8

Photo © APN
Lenin's real name was
Vladimir llyich Ulyanov.
He was born at Simbirsk,
now Ulyanovsk, on the banks
of the Volga, on April 22, 1870.
Top right, Jthe house in which
he spent his childhood.
Right, the Ulyanov family
his mother Maria Alexandrovna
and father llya Nikolayevich
with their children. Lenin,
seated far right, was nine
years old at the time. Above,
at the age of seventeen
Lenin graduated from high
school with high honours.

Banished from the University
of Kazan, a central Volga
town, for his part in the
student movement, Lenin
settled in Samara, in 1889,
where he started to study
the works of Marx and engaged
in revolutionary activities. This
photograph, left, was taken
in 1891 and was attached
to his application for permission
to take his law examinations.
He qualified as a lawyer
at the University of
St. Petersburg the same year.
Arrested in 1895 at St Petersburg as a leader
of the League of Struggle for the Liberation
of the Working Class, Lenin was Imprisoned
in this cell, below, for 14 months. Later he was
exiled for three years to the Siberian village
of Shushenskoye, right, where he married
another political exile, Nadezhda Krupskaya.
DEVELOPMENT OF SCIENCE (Continued)
In 1917 one research centre, today 210
8
now recognized as having been widely
and brilliantly proved.
The discovery that electrons were
capable of behaving as waves opened
up a fantastic new world to physicists.
In the 1930s the positron was iden¬
tified. The electron revealed a new
property: united with a positron, it was
transformed into a photon. There
followed the discovery that the elec¬
tron is an active protagonist in the
phenomenon known as weak inter¬
actions and so is also a bearer of a
specific charge of these interactions.
Thus Lenin's thesis has shown itself
to be a great deal more than a mere
prophecy. It has become a philoso¬
phical postulate of the investigation of
the infinitely small. All the later
developments of physics have corro¬
borated the validity of this principle,
confirming the "inexhaustibility" of the
electron, and, more generally, the
inexhaustible physical properties of
matter itself.
Research carried out in the field of
nuclear physics and, later, the physics
of elementary particles has made it
possible to identify a number of these
particles, to dissect the structure of
nucléons, and to understand the nature
of their interactions in the overall
structure of matter. Viewed in this
context, Lenin's words, formulated in
1922, take on special significance:
"Natural science is progressing with
such speed and undergoing such revo¬
lutionary upheavals in every field that
the sciences cannot do without philo¬
sophical conclusions."
Thus we see that not only did Lenin
help to provide an answer to the
difficulties facing science in his day,
but he also foresaw, decades in
advance, many of the trends of pre¬
sent-day scientific development. These
have ranged from research into the
structure of matter and problems of
chemical energy to the study of biolo¬
gical agents.
In Materialism and Empirio-Criticism
Lenin proclaimed that the new dis¬
coveries in science, far from invali¬
dating dialectical materialism, strength¬
ened its philosophical tenets, and
re-affirmed that "modern physics . . .
engenders dialectical materialism."
Thus Lenin's contributions to the
philosophy of science, and the trends
in scientific development which he
clearly discerned, are as meaningful
today as they were yesterday, and
continue to have an important bearing
on the methodology of contemporary
science. The importance of Lenin's
contribution to science cannot there¬
fore be over-emphasized, and the
theories he developed have proved
to be of fundamental importance for
both the social sciences and the
natural sciences.
Lenin was inspired by the exact
sciences when he evolved his basic
idea of the theory of knowledge.
From the outline traced by Marx, he
elaborated and developed the theory
of reflexion which affirms that human
thought reflects the external world and
can in turn act upon and change it.
Thus the social sciences occupied
a predominant place in Lenin's think¬
ing, and he accorded them a primary
role in the renovation df the Soviet
State. In 1918 he worked for almost
two months on the Government's
decree to establish the Academy of
Social Sciences. This was the be¬
ginning of the social science research
institutions ¡n the U.S.S.R. which were
to flourish with the rapid development
of education and the cultural revolution
generally in the new type state.
Lenin was deeply conscious of the
tremendous importance of science for
development. He kept a permanent
eye on all matters having to do with
the organization of scientific research
in the Soviet Union, and lost no oppor¬
tunity to promote the maximum use of
science and technology to improve the
standard of living of the population.
He was convinced that under the

, WIK
new regime the social role of science
had changed too. "In the past", he
said, "the genius of man's mind was
used to provide the benefits of techno¬
logy and culture to a part of the
population, depriving the others of the
basic essentials, education and pro¬
gress. Now, all the wonders of
technology, all the conquests of
culture are to be the heritage of all
people . . ."
Lenin saw this new role of science
as part of its democratic function in
society and affirmed that the new
State had a fundamental part to play
to guarantee its development by pro¬
moting scientific research as well as
the practical uses of science.
It was with this in mind that great
impetus was given to research work.
Even in the most difficult years of the
civil war and amidst economic ruin,
scientific research centres and
research workers were encouraged by
Lenin to the maximum.
I am thinking particularly of the
decree of the Council of People's
Commissars which bears his signature
and which entrusted a special com¬
mittee headed by Maxim Gorki with
the task of "ensuring, within the
briefest possible delay, the best
conditions for the research work being
carried out by Academician Pavlov
and his collaborators."
We know that Lenin gave his per¬
sonal attention to the work of such
scientists as Constantin Timiryaziev,
P. Lazarev, I. Gubkin, and many others.
And his interest in new inventions and
discoveries never flagged. Thus, for
example, when the giant iron ore
deposits were discovered in the
"magnetic anomaly" that the Kursk
region represents, Lenin urged that
prospecting operations be undertaken
at once. He gave his support to
research efforts to perfect a system
of hydraulic extraction of peat; and
he did not fail to recognize the
far-reaching significance of the experi¬
ments being carried out at the radio-
technology laboratory of Nijni-Novgo-
rod. He saw that radio, which he
described graphically as "a newspaper
without newsprint" and "the eliminator
of distance", would rapidly become a
powerful medium of cultural diffusion.
Lenin gave his unstinted encourage¬
ment to the development of aviation
and other new technologies. During
his lifetime were created the Central
Institute of Hydro-dynamics (TSAGI)
which later played a leading role in the
development of Soviet aeronautics,
and the National Optical Institute,
which was the beginning of the Soviet
optical industry.
The activities of the U.S.S.R. Aca¬
demy of Sciences received his special
attention. For Lenin, the participation
of this scientific institution in the
economic development of the country
was of capital importance. As early
as April 1918, the Soviet government
decided to make a considerable
increase in the budget of the Academy
to enable it to launch a series of large-
scale experiments and giant prospect¬
ing campaigns.
It was at about this time that Lenin
drew up his "Outline Plan for Scientific
and Technical Undertakings" in which
he placed a number of top priority
problems before the Academy of
Sciences, including a request for a
study of the natural resources of the
U.S.S.R. with a view to their rational
utilization. From this point on the
exploitation of natural resources was
to become a dominant theme of Soviet
science.
In his "Outline Plan" Lenin put for¬
ward the notion of centralized national
planning, to be implemented for the
first time ever in the Soviet Union.
He urged "the drawing up of a plan,
with the help of scientists and techno¬
logists, for the complete electrification
of Russia". This initiative was to
take shape in 1920 as the GOELRO
Plan which was both the nation's first
economic plan and its first national
research project. It called for the
development of the Soviet economy
on the basis of a nationwide electri¬
fication programme.
In fact it was Lenin who elaborated
the principles of political economy on
which the entire structure of the Soviet
socialist state reposed. It was he
who put forward as the nation's chief
task the triple objective of industrializ-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
9

DEVELOPMENT OF SCIENCE (Continued)
Photo © APN
In January, 1905, workers in St. Petersburg,
with their wives and children, went to present
their grievances to the Czar but were shot down
in cold blood by the Imperial troops, above.
Lenin, in exile abroad, was already working
with his party for revolutionary change in Russia.
The massacre at the czarist palace marked
the beginning of the first Russian revolution.
The incredible hardship of life in czarist
Russia made it fertile for revolution.
Conditions were so harsh that there
were not only "Volga Boatmen" but also
"Volga Boatwomen" (below).
Photo © APN
ation, co-operative farming and the
cultural revolution. Lenin pointed to
the fact that Industrialization without
electrification was impossible and
announced that "all the conquests of
the human sciences, of human techno¬
logy, all the discoveries and know¬
ledge of scientists and specialists
must be pooled for the one common
objective of the united people."
His plan for co-operatives was
Lenin's answer to the complex problem
of small agricultural holdings and their
conversion under socialist reform to
communal ownership. His ideas on
the socialization of agriculture were
based on a careful study of compa¬
rative agricultural data in Russia and
other countries, including the United
States and the nations of Europe.
Lenin's view of the preponderant
role of the Academy of Sciences in
bringing about a revolutionary change
in the advancement of the country was
to mark its entire later development.
Within half a century, the little coterie
of scientists it had been composed of
before the revolution, became a scien¬
tific centre of the very highest impor¬
tance which was to direct the develop¬
ment of the natural and social sciences
throughout the nation.
In 1917 the Academy had only one
research centre which consisted of a
few laboratories and museums. Today
it controls 210 scientific establishments
including 160 research institutes all of
which are contributing to the develop¬
ment of modern science. With a
complement of some 250,000 research
workers, the Academy's personnel has
multiplied one hundredfold and its
present budget is astronomical when
compared to the meagre sum expend¬
ed in the earlier years.
O
VER the past ten years, the
U.S.S.R. has undertaken a vast pro¬
gramme of development of the huge
natural resources of Siberia. A new
branch of the Academy of Sciences
has been opened in Siberia to act as
a coordinating centre. Concerned
with fundamental research as well as
with the applied sciences, the Siberian
centre at Novosibirsk has now taken
the lead in certain branches of Soviet
research and has won world reco¬
gnition for its pioneering work. New
branches of the Academy are now
being established in the Urals, the
Far East, and other parts of the
country.
One repercussion of the national
policy instituted by Lenin was the
rapid development of training and
research at the level of the national
Republics which make up the Soviet
Union. Beginning with the foundation,
in 1919, of the Ukrainian Academy of
Sciences, new Academies have been
set up now in all the 15 Republics
of the U.S.S.R.

At first these new focal points of
scientific research had as their primary
concern problems of direct interest
to the economic development of the
Individual Republics. But this implied
a parallel extension of fundamental
research. Today these Academies of
the Republics make an important con¬
tribution to fundamental research.
The Academy of the Ukraine is
world famous for its research into
cybernetics, solid state physics, geo¬
logy and physical chemistry. Also
widely recognized is the work on astro¬
physics being undertaken at the Aca¬
demy of Armenia and research into
theoretical mechanics at the Academy
of the Georgian Republic, the research
into the chemistry of alkaloids at
the Uzbekistan Academy, the geo¬
logical research of the Kazakhstan
Academy, the petro-chemical studies
of the Azerbaijan Academy, the work
of the Academy of Latvia on organic
synthesis, etc.
The Academies of the Republics
play a large part in solving particular
regional problems. Those of Central
Asia pay special attention to the
scientific culture of cotton crops, the
study of deserts and their exploitation
and seismological problems.
One of the prevailing characteristics
of Soviet science is the close link that
has been established between funda¬
mental research and the resolution of
economic problems of a practical
nature. For their part, those scientific
organizations that serve the various
specialized sectors of the economy
participate widely in helping to solve
the great problems of science.
During Lenin's lifetime, a series of
research institutes was set up devoted
especially to the development of
industry, transport and the electrifica¬
tion of the country. Today, these same
Institutes are continuing the job on a
much broader front. Agriculture, medi¬
cine and, education have their own
Academies. The 800 or so establish¬
ments of higher education within the
U.S.S.R. also carry out research
covering a wide field.
This has made it possible to devel¬
op research work across the entire
spectrum of modern science, and has
resulted in a whole series of spec¬
tacular discoveries and scientific
achievements. This is not the place
to attempt to list them all, but I would
like to mention the brilliant successes
of Soviet mathematics, discoveries in
the field of radio-electronics, Soviet
contributions to the theory of solids,
the theory of resistance, aerodynamics
and mechanics.
In chemistry, I am thinking particu¬
larly of the development of the theory
of chain reactions, contributions to
organic chemistry, and the chemistry
of elementary organic combinations.
Soviet scientists have shown the way
towards the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and have enunciated the basic
principles for the ultimate achievement
of controlled nuclear reactions.
THE YEARS OF EXILE
Living in Russia had become too
dangerous for Lenin and he was obliged
to spend many years abroad, constantly
moving from place to place, studying hard,
writing and directing the activities of the
Bolsheviks in Russia. In May 1908,
Lenin went on a trip from Paris to the
island of Capri (Italy) to visit his close
friend Maxim Gorky to discuss political
matters. Above, Lenin (wearing bowler
hat) plays chess with Alexander Bogdanov,
the Russian philosopher and economist,
while Gorki, hand on chin, looks on.
Lenin adopted that name while in
exile in 1902. Other names he used were:
William Frey, P. Petrov, V. Ilyin,
Jakob Richter, Ivan and llyich. Before
returning to Russia to lead the revolution,
Lenin lived in Switzerland, France,
England, Sweden, Denmark and Finland.
Below left, photo of Lenin
taken in Paris in 1910.
Above, Lenin snatches a rare moment
of relaxation in the mountain village of
Zkopane in Poland during the
summer of 1914.
11
