Hunting clues
to an ancient
supercontinent
by Daniel Behrman
Recent studies in oceanic geology have
thrown new light on the theory of
continental drift, according to which
the sea floor has spread out over eons
of time pushing the continents apart.
The process continues today as undersea
volcanic activity forces lava up from
volcanic vents and fissures in the
mid-ocean ridges that girdle the world.
Photo right shows lava formations
(pillow lava) formed when the molten
substance cools rapidly into the shapes
seen here. Photo was taken on the
Mid-Atlantic ridge at a depth of
3,000 metres (10,000 ft) by the French
océanographie vessel "Calypso*.
Scientists used a camera sled capable
of operating at a depth of
8,000 metres. Far right, ocean floor
at a depth of 4,600 metres (15,000 ft)
shows bell-shaped sponge being
deflected by deep currenL In this photo,
taken by a U.S. océanographie expedition
200 miles from Bermuda, needle of
compass attached to equipment indicates
direction of the currenL
28

I
NTEREST is growing
among marine geologists and geophy-
sicists in international co-operative
research to solve the enigmas that are
now raised by the western coast of
Africa.
It is here, according to some current
theories, that the primordial supercon¬
tinent, Pangaea, began to break open
more than 100 million years ago along
a rift that was to become the Atlantic
Ocean. From "the western hump of
Africa, what is now the Atlantic sea¬
board of the United States was split
off.
And there lie the enigmas. The con¬
tinental margin of North America is
perhaps the best known in the world
to marine geologists; that of the wes¬
tern coast of Africa is certainly among
the least known.
This knowledge gap can be best
DANIEL BEHRMAN, author of 'The New
World of the Oceans" (Little, Brown and Co.,
Boston, U.S.A.) is a Unesco science writer.
closed, scientists believe, by investi¬
gations involving not only the world's
leading océanographie nations but also
the developing countries along the
African coast.
Such was the trend of opinion at a
recent symposium organized in the
United Kingdom at Cambridge Univer¬
sity by SCOR, the Scientific Committee
on Oceanic Research of the Inter¬
national Council of Scientific Unions.
SCOR serves as scientific adviser to
Unesco's Intergovernmental Océano¬
graphie Commission that has already
co-ordinated a number of co-operative
investigations at sea.
The symposium brought together no
fewer than 206 scientists from eigh¬
teen countries. They spent an inten¬
sive week of talking, working, eating
and living together under one roof in
the relative isolation of Cambridge's
new Churchill College, a long mile from
the centre of the town.
The subject of their meeting was
"The Geology of the East Atlantic Con¬
tinental Margin", taking in the coast
of the Atlantic from Novaya Zemlya,
the Soviet archipelago in the far north,
to Cape Agulhas on the southern tip
of Africa.
"Continental margin" is the term that
oceanographers use to describe not
only the continental shelf but also the
slope and the rise that separate the
shore from the floor of the deep
ocean.
The subject of the meeting was also
attractive enough to lure scientists from
thirteen companies prospecting for oil
and mineral resources and one current¬
ly mining diamonds from the conti¬
nental shelf.
The symposium showed that explora¬
tion of the northern and the southern
tips of the east Atlantic shoreline is
well under way. As for the coast of
western Europe, it is being intensively
studied under the spur of natural gas
finds in the North Sea and oil pros-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Photo Bruce Heezen

ANCIENT SUPERCONTINENT (Continued)
The Aladdin's cave under the sea
30
pects in the Bay of Biscay. But co¬
ordination is still needed so that, as
one scientist put it, geology on the
continental shelf will not become as
difficult politically as geology on the
continent.
South of the Bay of Biscay, coverage
begins to thin out. This is all the more
unfortunate because it is here that
many problems originate.
Geologists now tend to regard the
earth's surface as a number of
"plates" as many as nine. These
plates are moving, driven by the new
material that surges up from the mantle
below the earth's crust to spread out
from the mid-ocean ridges, thus form¬
ing new sea floor.
Action comes on the edges of these
plates, and the line running from
Gibralter to the Azores is one such
edge. South of this line, it is believ¬
ed that the sea floor is spreading much
"faster" (30 millimetres more a year)
than to the north. On both sides of
the line, therefore, the Atlantic conti¬
nental margin needs to be investigated
so as to determine the consequences
of such a grinding displacement.
Then, further to the south and
around the hump that starts with
Morocco, there is the Y-junction where
Europe, America and Africa may have
been joined in Pangaea. If so, then
how did they break up? The answer
could be buried under the bottom of
the Atlantic in the continental margin
off Africa.
The Cambridge meeting was told of
a proposal to send one of the world's
best-equipped research vessels, the
1,100-ton Atlantis II, operated by the
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution,
at Cape Cod on the U.S. east coast,
to work in several areas off Africa.
Details of the proposal were given
by Dr. K. O. Emery of Woods Hole,
who has been responsible for an
extensive survey of the continental
shelf on the other side of the Atlantic
off North America.
If funds are voted for U.S. participa¬
tion in the proposed International
Decade of Ocean Exploration, there is
a possibility that Atlantis II could sur¬
vey 10,000 kilometres of the African
coast, Dr. Emery stated. Every
200 kilometres, she would run a line
out from the coast, over the shelf, the
slope and the rise, using such techni¬
ques as seismic profiling, gravity and
magnetic measurements and precision
charting of the bottom.
The proposal was welcomed because
knowledge is particularly scanty about
the continental slope and rise out from
the shelf (which ends legally at the
200 -metre depth line). German and
English scientists at the meeting said
they could co-operate in such a survey
by sending scientists to join the
research team aboard the ship, or by
working up data. Dr. Emery said it
was hoped that scientists from African
countries would be able to work
aboard Atlantis II too.
O
N the western European
end of the continental margin, scien¬
tists feel that no such broad reconnais¬
sance is needed. Instead, they
consider that small symposia could
discuss specific areas such as the
Bay of Biscay or the Rockall plateau.
The Rockall plateau came in for a
share of attention too at the Cam¬
bridge symposium. It lies in the
Atlantic about 450 kilometres (300
miles) northwest of Ireland, yet is be¬
lieved to be of continental rather than
oceanic origin. Seismic refraction
surveys made by geologists aboard
the British research vessel Discovery
show the earth's crust to be 31 kilo¬
metres thick there (under the ocean, .
the crust is only about a third as
thick).
The Rockall plateau may have been
marooned far out to sea by three
separate splits of Pangaea: first,
Europe from America, then Greenland
from Europe, finally Rockall from
Greenland.
One's impression at a meeting of
marine geologists is that the ocean
bottom seems to move almost as much
as its top. It can move vertically, too:
the symposium was told that the North
Sea is subsiding under a load of sedi¬
ments 7,000 metres thick, at a rate of
one centimetre every 300 years.
Such sedimentation is a good indic¬
ation of the presence of hydrocarbons,
whether oil or gas. Along the east
Atlantic continental margin, explora¬
tion for petroleum is being carried
out by 10 countries in Europe and
twenty-three in Africa.
In the North Sea off Britain alone,
over sixty companies are working on
23 concessions. Off the west coast
of Africa, thirty-five companies have
acquired or are applying for concess¬
ions. The biggest find here has been w
the offshore Nigerian basin which, it "
was reported, would have produced °
a million barrels of oil per day last f
CONTINUED PAGE 32

BLACK GOLD
FROM
THE OCEAN BED
Man has only recently begun to exploit
the vast resources that lie on and
beneath the ocean bed. So far,
harvesting this wealth has been confined
to continental shelves in waters less
than 100 metres (350 ft) deep and
within 100 km (70 miles) of the coastline.
Currently, oil, gas and sulphur are
produced by drilling; coal and iron ore
from mines driven from land; heavy
minerals tin and diamonds by dredging;
fresh water, salt, magnesium and other
minerals from seawater. Oil and gas
represent more than 90 per cent by value
of all minerals obtained from the oceans
thus far. Left, offshore drilling platform
working through 80 metres (250 ft) of
water in the Gulf of Gascony, France.
Petroleum engineers use the diamond
studded steel drill shown below to obtain
samples from the sea bed as they
prospect for oil.
Photos Photothèque Esso
ELECTRONIC
ANCHOR
The American drilling research
vessel, "Glomar Challenger"
uses a new control system of
"dynamic anchoring" to stay on
"target" while drilling into the
ocean floor in deep water.
Diagram left shows how. Sonar
beacons placed on sea bed
send signals to hydrophones
on ship, and the signals are
fed to a computer which
automatically monitors the ship's
position and controls the
engines so that position is
maintained despite currents and
swell.' The "Glomar Challenger",
while participating in the
U.S. National Science
Foundation's deep-sea drilling
project, has established records
for the deepest water worked
in (6,140 metres) and the
deepest penetration of the
ocean bed (985 metres).
31

Geophysicists and oceanographers are becoming increasingly confident about their understanding of the
development of ocean floors. From recent research a picture has been built up of a worldwide system of
mid ocean ridges from which new oceanic crust spreads out to form the ocean floors. How these ocean
ridges may have formed and how land masses drifted apart and collided are shown in these four
drawings (1) As Mid-Atlantic ridge began to develop 120 million years ago, African and Indian land
masses separated from South America. (2) About sixty million years ago, Carlsberg Ridge developed
between Africa and India, driving the latter towards Asia. (3) Thirty million years ago, another ridge formed
in the gulf of Aden and, separated by a fracture zone to north of Carlsberg Ridge, led to East African
fractures. (4) The situation today, with East African Rift continuing to develop independently. Fold
mountains (top right of drawing) including Himalayas, were a dramatic consequence of land mass collisions
from 60 to 30 million years ago.
Drawings © courtesy Science Journal
120
million
years
ago
birth of
the Mid-
Atlantic
Ridge
"
**o»
Mid-Atlaniic Ridge starting to develop
120 MILLION YEARS AGO
East African fractures
starting to develop
Carlsberg Ridge
Mid-Atlantic Ridge
30 MILLION YEARS AGO
60 MILLION YEARS AGO
'^a
\
East African R
^ Carlsberg Ridge
Mid-Allanlic Ridge
PRESENT
32
ANCIENT SUPERCONTINENT (Continued)
year if there had been no civil war.
The North Sea is supplying 1,000
million cubic feet a day of natural gas
to Great Britain. Surprisingly enough,
the sea floor also accounts for 7 per
cent of British coal production: 1 1 mill¬
ion of the 160 million tons mined
annually comes from mines that run
three to four miles out to sea off the
coasts of Cumberland and North¬
umberland with entrances to their
shafts on land. Offshore coal reserves
are estimated at 550 million tons.
Ten per cent of British gravel also
comes from the sea floor. A total of
11 million tons was dredged up in
1969 and, according to Prof. K. C.
Dunham, director of the Institute of
Geological Sciences in London, capital
investment in this industry now
amounts to £25 million.
To the north of the East Atlantic
Continental Margin, gravel comes up
by the ton; on the far south, diamonds
come up by the carat. The symposium
heard a report by R. H. Joynt of Conso¬
lidated Diamond Mines of southwest
Africa on operations near the mouth
of the Orange River.
Exploration for diamonds is not
easy. Profiles are run out from the
shore at intervals of 100 metres,
bedrock must be contoured at one
metre intervals (to the marine geolo¬
gist, this sounds like looking at the
continental shelf through a jeweller's
eyeglass). To explore gullies, divers
must crawl through them with a visi¬
bility of only 30 cm., in water at
10 degrees C.
Undersea diamond prospecting is
hard work and expensive. Only last
year, said Mr. Joynt, did the operation
show a profit. When asked how much
it represented of his firm's total
operations, he replied: "We probably
spend as much each month on postage
stamps."
