5. The
I
F the immediate spin-offs
from bio-astronautics have been more
numerous and more dramatic than
others, the development of new ma¬
terials for space promises to have the
most far-reaching economic conse¬
quences for the future. One leading
space scientist has called the new
space materials "the greatest single
advance that has been made in the last
three thousand years" and, judging
from the facts already In, his enthu¬
siasm seems only slightly exaggerated.
A new "composite material" made
from tiny boron crystal fibres imbed¬
ded in a plastic resin is twice as strong
and two and a half times as stiff as
aluminum, yet weighs 25 per cent less
and should eventually be considerably
less expensive.
Transparent materials, strong as
steel, now provide an entirely new
concept of their use as a structural
part of buildings or vehicles, replac¬
ing normal glass insertions into the
building or product. Alternatively,
transparent materials flexible enough
to be folded, yet strong enough to
withstand the rigours of prolonged
space expedition housing, made of a
composite of silicone, ethylene-propy¬
lene, polyisoprene and polyurethane,
can be adapted wherever necessary
to maintain a difference in pressure
between the interior and exterior of
structures.

One highly versatile by-product
of space technology is a new
material known as reinforced plastic
mortar, discovered and developed
in the U.S.A. during glass fibre
rocket case research and
production. It is now widely used
to make pipes for water, sewer,
irrigation and drainage systems.
It is light (left, pipe being
transported by helicopter), highly
resistant, non-corrosive, virtually
unbreakable, and is suitable for
making thin-walled pipes which
thus have a maximum flow capacity.
With its simple, low-cost
manufacturing process and the
universal availability of its basic
raw materials, it can be produced
almost anywhere in the world.
Its light weight and high strength
permit its use in servicing remote
areas where delivery was hitherto
impossible, and it will thus be of
great use to developing countries.
new space-age
materials
In Switzerland, the Société Con-
traves has adapted a technique
developed for space application to
produce a new sandwich-material
made of aluminium and plastic foam
now being used in Europe to manufac¬
ture walls for pre-fabricated houses
as well as extremely resistant and
extra light skis.
But, more important than any one
material or the whole galaxy of new
materials spawned by the rigorous
requirements of space, is the new
materials concept itself. The design
engineer is now free to concern him¬
self primarily with the function or
shape of his product or structure
simply assuming that the manufacturer
can provide the right materials with
the correct properties.
Composite materials can be design¬
ed starting not from a particular
substance but from a specific micro-
structure of atoms and molecules to
produce an entirely new material with
specific and totally new properties.
Others such as fibre-reinforced ma¬
terials, alloys and laminates are being
produced from new combinations of
substances.
This shift of concern from materials
ready-made by nature to man-made
materials designed for specific pur¬
poses and with specific qualities has
been accompanied by a more imagin¬
ative use of the wide spectrum of
elements found in nature. Of the 90
elements known to man, until recently
all except about 20 were chemical
curiosities, and only a very few were
considered to be metals.
All basic materials in use in the first
half of our century steel, nonferrous
metals, glass, concrete, timber, cera¬
mics had existed for four or five
thousand years. Only rubber and alu¬
minium could be claimed as innovations
of the industrial revolution, before the
advent of plastics, one of the first
"spin-offs" from the discovery of radia¬
tion. Now almost all elements, except
gaseous ones, are being used in some
form for their metallic qualities.
Titanium is an outstanding example
of the development through the impe¬
tus of aerospace programmes of ma¬
terials already existing in nature for
applications at higher temperatures,
under higher stress and under expos¬
ure of radiation. The creation of a
whole titanium technology, including
sheet rollings, forging and joining, res¬
ponded to the urgent need for a light,
strong, stiff, high temperature struc¬
tural material for air and spacecraft.
Similarly, germanium and silicium
have become main constituents of
space electronic componentry; and
zirconium is important for construction
of the nuclear rocket engines that
will power manned flights to Mars and
other planets. All four are now increas¬
ingly used in consumer and industrial
applications in the civilian sector.
Aerospace Industries have also
spurred the development of a multi¬
tude of highly sensitive, ultra-thin
metal alloys such as new magnetic
steels and the titanium foils 60-mil-
lionths of an inch thick for particle
detection in satellites.
Demands for new materials have
impelled the development of new tech¬
nologies for materials-working, with
the same zero-defects standards appli¬
ed to producing the faultless materials
needed for space applications.
Since precision machine shops were
not equipped to handle this work, a
whole new industry had to be develop¬
ed. It was the watch industry which
came closest to having the right tech¬
nology and seized the opportunity that
emerged with the advent of new
materials and the requirements for
them in space.
The Precision Metals Division of
Hamilton Watch Co., with its fully
integrated thin metals production, was
the logical place for the development
of photochemical processing on a mass
production scale. In a $500,000 dust-
free, vapour-and humidity-controlled
plant, Hamilton processes more than
60 pure metals and alloys, including
its own proprietary alloys.
This new facility, expected to be a
prototype of others to follow, is attract¬
ing the attention of everyone from
computer manufacturers to auto¬
makers.
Similar breakthroughs have resulted
from space research and development,
in processing techniques such as elec-
troforming for the production of stress-
free parts, the improvement of electro¬
des for nickel-cadmium batteries, tools
and dies, and artificial limbs.
B
UT space exploration also
required bigness, especially in rocket
construction. "Build us a new kind of
rocket motor case. Make it big. Make
it strong. Make it light." That's the
kind of counterpoint NASA gives to its
requirements for the smallest, thinnest
precision componentry. Using a uni¬
que, computer-controlled filament-wind¬
ing machine and 34 million miles of
fibreglass filaments, B.F. Goodrich,
whose name was once a synonym for
rubber tyres, produced a 50-foot
assembly as strong as a steel case of
comparable size, but 30-50% lighter.
With the shift from concern with
substance to concern with structure,
woven fabrics developed for space
usage are being applied in a wide
variety of products and structures.
Heat-shedding fabric-based buildings
provide new comfort in torrid, tropical
heat. Defying the Arctic cold, woven
fabric buildings hug the Alaskan land¬
scape. Outside, it is a bitter 65 de¬
grees below zero; inside, it is a balmy,
constant 72 degrees above. Ijr
The fabric is just one of many new 2.0
products of the three-dimensional (3-D)
weaving business that has been devel¬
oped using new yarns, looms and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

26
Mountaineer's
dream blanket
Mountaineer (above) is snug and warm
inside his full sized blanket made of
aluminized plastic so compact it can be
held in the hand (right) or slipped into
the pocket. Initially produced in the
U.S. for superinsulation in space, the
plastic material is now being sold
commercially. It has unique heat
reflecting properties and is flexible,
waterproof and windproof. Though only
1 /2000th of an inch thick it is
surprisingly strong, and blankets made
of it are now used for emergency rescue
or similar purposes since they are robust
enough even to serve as stretchers,
windbreaks or water containers.
SPACE-AGE MATERIALS (Continued)
weaving techniques to produce honey-
combed-structured re-entry heat
shields for Apollo spacecraft and
radome housings for space-age radar
tracking stations.
A full range of strong, lightweight,
Insulating structural fabrics is now in
the process of being developed for
use in refrigerated boxcars, air-cargo
containers, buildings, boat decks,
sports cars, and greaseless bearings.
Made of graphite- or carbon-yarn-
reinforced artificial resins, these new
composite materials offer higher stiff¬
ness-to-density ratios than those rein¬
forced by boron fibres, and hold out
to users the lure of significantly lower
costs. Special epoxy resins, develop¬
ed by Switzerland's CIBA for the U.S.
space programme, are used as adhes-
ives and fillers in conjunction with
honeycombs and tapes in building
construction, refrigeration, ships and
automobiles. Non-inflammable solid
epoxy structural or decorative elements
are increasingly used where fireproof
materials are required.
Nothing demonstrates more drama¬
tically the international dimensions of
space age Innovation than these new
materials. Swiss epoxy resins rein¬
forced by carbon filaments developed
by British industry for aerospace appli¬
cations (particularly as metal-based
composites used in Rolls-Royce jet
engines) were combined to produce the
critical Apollo heat shields. Now, as
a result of space applications, these
materials are replacing metal and con¬
crete in a wide range of construction
applications and manufactured pro¬
ducts that will soon be commonplace
throughout the world.
Meanwhile, a Westinghouse Electric
Corp. research programme on high-
temperature plastics has produced a
new family of copolymers that have
outstanding strength at temperatures
up to 650 degrees Fahrenheit. Rein¬
forced with glass cloth and pressed
into laminates, the materials at these
temperatures are stronger than air¬
craft aluminum and compare favourably
with stainless steel and titanium alloys.
Used as adhesives, the new mater¬
ials bond together sheets of titanium
and stainless steel with hot strengths
in excess of 1,000 pounds per square
Inch. Besides use as structural mem¬
bers of aircraft and heat shields, these
new plastics have found applications
as electric motor windings, printed
electronic circuits and other electrical
and electronic elements.
B
UT these, and the many
other new materials that have been
developed for space and other uses,
are only the beginning. We now live
on the boundary between the Iron Age
and a New Materials Age in which we
will become more and more dependent
on a growing variety of materials.
These materials are increasingly inter¬
changeable, with each potentially com¬
peting for use with all others.
Not only does this "materials revo¬
lution" free the designer, the engineer
and the architect from his ancient ser¬
vitude to a relatively few materials,
but it will make countries less and less
dependent on natural resources, since
the same material requirements can be
satisfied from almost any natural re¬
source, organic or inorganic.
This will not only result In sweeping,
rapid and disturbing changes in the
industrial sector, but may radically
alter the pattern of economic relations
between the industrial and develop¬
ing nations of the world.
Knowledge, rather than specific na¬
tural resources, is becoming the de¬
terminant component in technological
advance. Without it all else is useless.
And, while both materials and energy
continue to be important, each indiv¬
idual source of both materials and
energy will be confronted with a gra¬
dual shift from a sellers' to a buyers'
market.
