T,
International
Education
HIS year, 1970, is to be International Education
Year. The decision was taken at the General Assembly
of the United Nations by a unanimous vote late in 1968,
which is to say that the world community agreed that an
International Education Year was both necessary and useful.
Responsibility for guiding the implementation at international
level was placed on Unesco.
Education is a large enterprise. It has been said that
teachers form the largest single professional group in the
world; and the process of education in schools, colleges
and less formal situations goes on all the time and occupies
a considerable part of the world's population. Why then
should a special occasion be declared and why should it
take the form of an international year? Any answer will
have to show clearly in what way 1970 would be different,
educationally speaking, from 1969 or 1971.
Increasing problems, in terms of their size and also
of their nature, are besetting the educational enterprise
throughout the world. An international conference held at
Williamsburg, Virginia, in October 1967, on the theme "The
World Crisis in Education" {1), revealed that deep-seated
maladjustments in most educational systems are bringing
us fast to the verge of a crisis. And it was at the
Williamsburg Conference that the idea of an International
Education Year was launched.
In the developing parts of the world the issues are
fairly well known and are keenly felt by the people directly
concerned. In spite of very heavy state expenditures on
education and brave efforts by those involved in the
process, the gap between goals and achievements seems
to widen steadily.
by Leo Fernig
LEO FERNIG took up his appointment as Director of the International
Bureau of Education in Geneva, on lanury 1, 1970. He was previously
Director of the Department for the Advancement of Education at
Unesco. where during the past 20 years he played a leading role in
the elaboration and execution of Unesco's education programme.
4
P UTTING this in simple terms, most of the newly
independent countries have attempted to provide a modest
level of education for all their citizens, for this is a basic
human right; they have attempted also to develop education
beyond the primary stage in order to train sufficient middle
and higher level people to speed up national development.
Yet both the humanitarian and the economic goals seem
to be no nearer now than they were a decade ago:
As populations have risen and economic structures have ,
not expanded fast enough, the belief that investment in
educational facilities is an economic investment has been
tempered by a realization that education as it now exists
is a slow and not very efficient process. The economic
returns to be gained from creating schools now will not
arrive in time for additional schools to be provided next
year or in three or four years time.
Still more striking has been evidence that the very
structures of these educational systems forms of
schooling, curricula and teaching methods based upon
patterns introduced before independence are themselves
charged with the possibility of a great deal of wastage or
inefficiency. A large number of pupils leave school
prematurely or fail their grades and therefore spend several
years in the same classroom.
From the point of view of public funds, in the majority
of developing countries it costs between two and four
times as much to put a pupil through a basic primary school
course as it would have cost had he proceeded at a normal
pace of completing one grade a year.
In the developed countries the economic situation may
(1) See Philip H. Coombs' The World Educational Crisis: a systems
analysis. Oxford University Press, 1968.

be better, but it is doubtful whether the educational crisis
is any less severe. There have been a number of
challenges to the established order of things. In some
cases the challenge has come from the students themselves,
notably at universities, who feel that the patterns of
organization and teaching, as well as the adequacy of
preparation for professional life, leave a great deal to be
desired. In other cases the challenge has come from
employers, organized professional groups, or from the
teachers themselves.
As life in the industrial societies becomes more and
more complex the relevance of existing arrangements for
educating and training young people is questioned. Or
rather, what is called into doubt is the policy of continuing
on established lines, of providing more schooling for more
students, and making it last longer. At even the lowest
level of analysis, such a policy can only result in a similar
economic burden to that already witnessed in the developing
parts of the world.
It would appear, therefore, to be a common view
throughout the world that we need to pause for a moment,
in this vast and continuing enterprise of education, and see
what we are doing, how fast we are going and where we
think we want to go.
In the course of such reflection it is likely that we will
discover that we are attempting to face a twentieth or
twenty-first century world with institutions and methods
which date back to the nineteenth and eighteenth centuries.
We will discover the need to change and we may,
collectively, achieve some understanding of the nature of
this change and therefore plan to bring it about. This
seems to be the general idea behind the International
Education Year (IEY).
HAT is the IEY? It could be described as a
combined effort by all the countries of the world to do
something extra or special about their educational problems
in order "to mobilize energies and inspire initiatives in
education and training" (the phrase used by the original pro¬
poser of the IEY in the United Nations General Assembly).
The IEY is basically a national affair for each country
to undertake. The possible types of action comprise any
or all of a natural chain of operations: study and reflection
about education or about some aspect of education across
the nation; the identification of outstanding problems;
experimental activities in order to find solutions to such
problems; full involvement of the public in the discussion
of educational issues; all of these leading finally to changes
of educational policies.
For the most part such a national exercise would be
focused on the educational provisions within the country
itself. However, there are some aspects that go beyond
national boundaries. Each country will find inevitably that
it can take account of, learn from, the experience from
other countries, and in turn make a contribution to others.
The latter aspect could even, in some cases, take the shape
of increased educational aid from developed to developing
countries.
This is of course a broad and theoretical outline. The
main point to establish is that activities undertaken with
particular reference to International Education Year should
have some special quality, should have an element of
spontaneity, should bear directly on the need for, and the
desire to, change.
As a result of the United Nations decision and of Unesco's
appeal to member states to prepare programmes for the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo © Francisco Hidalgo. Paris
5

6
INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION YEAR (Continued)
International Education Year, an increasing number of
national programmes are being sent forward. Two or three
brief examples may be given.
In France, six important journals in the field of education
will devote special issues to the IEY themes; a seminar
is to be organized on the mechanisms of the learning
process, and late in 1970 the French National Commission
for Unesco intends to arrange a research conference on
the evaluation of projects in functional literacy.
Japan is preparing an ambitious programme which may
include national events (including the issue of a special IEY
postage stamp), the creation of new institutions (a university
and an institute for in-service teacher training) and the
increase of contacts between Japanese educators and
those abroad. Aid to developing countries will form an
important part of the Japanese contribution to IEY.
In Tanzania the IEY emphasis will be placed on specially
devised new courses at a high level directed for the most
part to innovation and reform in education.
The notion that the International Education Year consists
of a large number of national programmes is easy to
accept, but it should be made clear that such national
programmes are themselves not merely a matter for a small
group of officials in a central ministry. Adequately to
achieve the objectives of the Year and to focus attention
on the direction of educational change, it will be essential
for all parts of the national community to participate in
one way or another.
Community action at the level of local authorities or
even of individual schools and colleges will be essential
in any country. The role of teachers and students is
obvious since they are the people most directly concerned
with the educational process perhaps too much so. The
other groups and institutions in the nation, parents,
employers, churches, professional associations, need also
to be engaged in study, experimentation, discussion and
proposals for policy changes.
|T is probably true that those national pro¬
grammes for International Education Year will succeed best
which achieve or even stem from widespread action by
communities, associations and institutions throughout the
country.
However, it must be recalled that this is an "Inter¬
national" Education Year and one may ask whether there
will be anything more to it than an aggregate of separate
national programmes. And indeed international bodies do
have an essential rôle. They provide the means for
communication between countries, offer a framework for
action and make it possible to add an international
dimension to a great deal of what is undertaken nationally.
The majority of international bodies, both non-govern¬
mental and intergovernmental, have been approached and
have shown great readiness to take part in this aspect of
the International Education Year. The major rôle, however,
will fall to the United Nations itself and the two Specialized

Agencies most directly concerned with education and
training, namely Unesco and the International Labour
Organization.
In preparing the IEY, the guiding principle has been that
of re-orientation: existing staff and on-going projects and
programmes are being pressed into service so that Unesco
may serve its member states by acting as a channel of
communication, and a source of information, guidance and
inspiration.

