6.
W
HILE space programmes
have yet to produce an advance in
power generation technology as revo¬
lutionary as the atomic power develop¬
ment during World War II, they have
brought about major Improvements In
existing systems which promise to
have far-reaching effects for remote
area power generation, the automotive
industry, deep ocean technology,
communications, home and commercial
power sources and air pollution.
Fuel cells, developed under NASA
sponsorship to assure life support in
the sealed environment of spacecraft,
have a wide variety of applications for
improving man's living conditions on
earth as well as for supporting life in
the ocean depths. Of most immediate
interest to the general public are
experiments now under way for their
use in powering electric automobiles.
One American company (Allis Chal¬
mers) has already demonstrated a
farm tractor and an electric passen¬
ger car powered by fuel cells using
hydrocarbons and air. The advent of
the fuel-cell powered automobile only
a matter of time is expected to make
a major contribution to an economic
elimination of air pollution.
United Aircraft Corp., which devel¬
oped the fuel cell power plants for
Project Apollo, is putting this techno¬
logy to work to produce a marketable
gas-powered fuel cell, which promises
to have far-reaching import for home
and commercial building power supply.
The goal of the project, known as
TARGET (Team to Advance Research
for Gas Energy Transformation) is a
"comfort package" for homes, apart¬
ments and businesses which will be
better than any of the methods pres¬
ently used for environmental control.
The package will provide control of
indoor temperatures and humidity
while generating electrical power for
other needs. Experimental prototypes
are being tested for seven model
installations: light industry, a multi-
unit shopping arcade, a high-rise
apartment building, a hotel, a suburban
garden apartment complex, a large
real estate development and a single
residence.

New space-age
power sources
These fuel cell powerplants, highly
efficient devices for producing elec¬
trical power directly from fuel by che¬
mical reaction, will provide control of
indoor temperatures and humidity
while generating power for other
needs. Since they are smokeless, the
fuel cells have the added advantage of
sharply reducing air pollution.
While other major U.S. corporations,
including General Electric, Monsanto
and Union Carbide dropped work on
fuel cells when their government
development grants were cut off,
Britain's Energy Conversion Ltd. (ECL)
believes it has built fuel cells that
will be suitable for a wide variety of
ground applications as well as in
space and océanographie exploration.
Just eight years ago three British
companies and the National Research
Organization formed ECL to develop
a commercial power plant for space,
industrial and eventually domestic
markets for packaged power.
In 1966, ECL's work got a major
boost from the 800-strong fuel cell
research team of Pratt and Whitney in
the U.S., which licensed patents
to develop fuel cells for the
U.S. space programmes. Some $132
million of NASA funds went to Pratt
and Whitney to finance this develop¬
ment, and in the meantime a free inter¬
change of information has continued
with ECL.
In the meantime, Sweden's large
manufacturer of power generation
equipment, has patented its own
fuel cell which it believes now to be
ready for space and civilian applica¬
tions after nearly a decade of devel¬
opment work.-
Concurrently, small, compact and
rugged nuclear-powered electric gen¬
erators are also being developed for
terrestrial and undersea commercial
applications as an outgrowth of the
work on SNAP (Systems for Nuclear
Auxiliary Power) generators for NASA
and the U.S. Atomic Energy Commis¬
sion.
The most immediate uses of this
radio-isotopic generator, which comes
in a variety of power outputs from 3
to 50 watts, are in communications
relay stations, pipelines and Instal¬
lations in remote areas where uninter¬
rupted long life is required and main¬
tenance or resupply are difficult, costly
or downright impossible.
One such 50-watt generator, having
no moving parts, is currently operating
a wellhead control system on an un¬
dersea well in the Gulf of Mexico.
Another powers navigation devices.
The French firm Alcatel has devel¬
oped isotopic batteries supplying a
power of 0.1 to 20 watts which are
now being used for underwater re¬
search, oceanography and oil-drilling
operations.
D
EVELOPING countries of
the world may soon have available
mobile, compact, high-output power
facilities which can be installed quickly
as the result of the development of a
self-contained power source conceived
for possible space applications. This
power package can Increase the nor¬
mal output of a gas turbine as much as
66 per cent by capturing the waste
heat of a gas turbine.
Solar cells, the main source of elec¬
tric power on about half of the space¬
craft launched during the first decade
of the Space Age, have now been
refined for use in certain Industrial and
communications applications. In devel¬
oping countries located in desert or
tropical areas, this innovation in power
generation has the widest applications.
Rigid, déployable solar array pro¬
duced for spacecraft is a primary
power source presently being adapt¬
ed for areas of the world endowed
with virtually unlimited supplies of
solar energy.
Specific uses to which these im¬
proved array systems might be put
include hospital and laboratory power
supply, petroleum and water pumping
systems, telephone systems. Japanese
transistor radio manufacturers have
succeeded in devising a small solar
power pack which can be attached to 0"T
the outside of the radio, to replace ¿,1
conventional battery sources.
The development of flexible thin
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

POWER SOURCES (Continued)
film solar arrays for use in high power
systems in a convenient roll-up type
of construction promises to provide a
cheap, highly mobile source of power
with wide applications in both tropical
and desert areas.
. The space programme, demanding
miniature power sources with high
energy density and reliability, has
also produced major improvements in
nickel-cadmium batteries which have
led to better products for the consu¬
mer market. Compact hearing-aid bat¬
teries are now available that operate
at a cost of about one per cent of
those previously in use.
Nickel-cadmium batteries are also
used to operate a 24-ounce television
camera not much bigger than a large
packet of cigarettes, used initially to
photograph the separation of Saturn V
rocket stages in flight for engineering
information. These cameras are now
on sale worldwide in a commercial
version for monitoring industrial pro¬
cesses. In France solar cells for spa¬
cecraft developed by Radiotechnique
Company have now been incorporated
into a commercial portable cinema
camera to recharge its battery while
in use.
Specifically designed nickel-cad¬
mium batteries are now being design¬
ed for electrical automobiles used in
city and commuter driving; nickel-
cadmium battery operated cars will
have a range of about 200 miles before
recharging is necessary.
Nickel-cadmium batteries have a
high charge capacity, are capable of
operating for tens of thousands of
recharge cycles and have a good over¬
charge capacity all qualities required
for automotive use. But they have the
disadvantage of limited power output.
Work now underway to perfect
silver-cadmium and silver-zinc cells for
space and deep submergence marine
vehicles is expected to provide a
breakthrough which will give the elec¬
tric automobile power for higher
speeds and longer single-charge
operation.
A new, versatile atomic battery that
converts heat from a radioactive iso¬
tope directly into electrical power has
opened broad, new horizons for bat¬
tery applications. The tiny ISOMITE
(Isotope Miniature Thermionic Elec¬
tric) battery, developed by the McDon¬
nell Douglas Corp., is a compact
source of lowlevel electrical power in
the microwatt to milliwatt range supply¬
ing up to 100 times as much energy as
chemical batteries of the same weight.
Developed for spacecraft systems,
other long-life applications of this
type of battery include cardiac pacers
implanted in heart patients, undersea
equipment and remote s'ite power
supply.
Also under development in the
U.S.A. is the Betacel atomic battery
which produces electric current direct¬
ly from low-level nuclear radiation
without the use of heat. Betacel bat¬
teries, made of thin semi-conducting
wafers sandwiching layers of Prome¬
thium 147 or other radioactive isotopes,
can be produced in a wide range of
current-voltage ratings by "stacking"
of wafers.
Inherently smaller than Isomite bat¬
teries, Betacel offers greater efficiency
at lower power-output levels, making
it ideal for small instrument packages,
biomedical telemetry and prosthetic
devices, wrist watches, remote-site
instrumentation, computer -circuit
standby power, as well as self-power¬
ed devices on spacecraft.
A small team at Harwell, Britain's
Atomic Energy Research Establish¬
ment, has spent some £400,000 mostly
in the past four or five years, develop¬
ing a family of isotope batteries de¬
signed specifically for situations where
the cost of maintaining any alternative
powerpack is unavoidably high. The
Soviet Union has already supplied a
chain of meteorological stations with
nuclear batteries, and the British have
powered an offshore navigational light
at Dungeness in this way for over two
years.
A promising further development in
power generation for microelectronic
equipment is taking place at General
Electric's Valley Force Space Techno¬
logy Center, where bio-scientists work¬
ing under a NASA contract have suc¬
cessfully demonstrated that usable
electric power can be drawn from
living animals. This means that in the
future such life-saving devices as the
Heart Pacer may be powered without
any batteries at all. And the day may
not be far off when transmitters im-
panted in the human body and power¬
ed by the body's own electricity will
telemeter back to a doctor's office a
continuous report on a patient's health.
