An answer to the population dilemma
N.
I O other phenomenon casts
a darker shadow over the prospects
for international development than the
staggering growth of population. It is
evident that it is a major cause of the
large discrepancy between rates of
economic improvement in rich and
poor countries. On the other hand,
the likelihood of a rapid slowing down
of population growth is not great,
although some countries are in a far
more favourable position than others
in this respect.
Twenty years ago, it was not ex¬
pected that .population growth would
become such a major problem In low-
income countries. As late as 1951, a
U.N. projection assumed that between
1950 and 1980 the populations of Africa
and Asia would grow at an annual rate
of 0.7-1.3 per cent.
The remarkable and largely unex¬
pected success in reducing mortality
brought a sharp change. The rate of
population growth in developing coun¬
tries increased steadily in the 1950s.
By the mid-1960s, it settled down at
an average level of 2.5 per cent.
Mortality is continuing its decline,
but over-all fertility rates are only now
beginning to drop. While in a number
of developing countries, fertility has
been declining for some time, in others
it is increasing as a result of improve¬
ment in health and medical services.
Even if fertility should be considerably
reduced in coming decades, the popu¬
lation of the less developed world will
double before the end of this century.
(See Table page 26.)
There has been a remarkable awak¬
ening to the acute problems posed
by this population explosion. In only
a few years, ambitious policies to
spread family planning have been intro¬
duced in countries representing over
70 per cent of the population of the
developing world. The development
of ¡ntra-uterine contraceptive devices
(lUD's) and of oral pills has amounted
to a major breakthrough in family plan¬
ning techniques.
However, many misconceptions
about the nature of the population
problem persist among policy-makers
in low-income countries and contri¬
bute to complacency and indifference.
Even countries which have adopted
official population policies do not
always accord to them the high priority
they require.
Most widespread of all is the belief
that in small or sparsely settled coun¬
tries, rapid population growth is in the
national interest or raises no problems,
as there is much empty land. This
proposition neglects the fact that large
capital expenditures are necessary for
cultivation and settlement in empty
land in the modern world, the pos¬
session of land is not enough.
Another common opinion is that birth
rates are high and families large be¬
cause parents want it that way, and
that it would be difficult or even im¬
possible to persuade them to have
smaller families.
Actually, however, many of the chil¬
dren born today are unwanted. Num¬
erous field surveys of parents in
developing countries indicate that birth
rates would be reduced by one-third
if parents had the knowledge and
means to plan the size of their families.
The incidence of illegal abortions,
and of maternal deaths from such

Photo © Lucien Clergue, Arles, France


No more unwanted children
abortions, is high enough to be a
grave social problem in Latin America
and elsewhere. As a consequence of
the sudden decline in infant mortality,
families tend to be larger than their
traditional size, and larger than parents
can afford. In short, there is in many
parts of the world a silent demand for
family planning.
All the burdens from large families
and high growth rates are not borne
by parents alone. When the popula¬
tion doubles in twenty-five years, the
task of development and moderniza¬
tion is compounded. It may even be
impossible to attain significant impro¬
vement in living conditions and inde¬
pendence of foreign aid. Some of the
direct difficulties created by very rapid
population growth are the following:
Expenditures for education, health,
housing, water supply, etc., Increase
sharply and create severe budgetary
strains.
The quality of the next generation,
on which the prospects for develop¬
ment crucially rest, is jeopardized.
There ¡s a strong inverse correlation
between child health and family size.
Rapid growth of the child population
also delays educational improvement.
Considerable resources are de¬
voted to the support of a large depen¬
dent population which would otherwise
be available to raise living standards
and increase capital formation.
Aid requirements are larger when
population rises fast, and the possi¬
bility of future financial independence
smaller than if fertility is declining.
The distribution of income is un¬
equal, and population growth tends to
make it more so by raising land values
and rents while depressing wages. As
ownership, too, is usually very un¬
equally distributed, the bulk of the
.population may fail to participate in
whatever improvement occurs.
Severe urban problems arise, partly
from natural increase and partly from
migration from the country into the
cities. Urban populations tend to
double in fifteen to eighteen years.
Housing already presents almost in¬
soluble problems in many of the de¬
veloping countries.
HETHER or not a deli¬
berate policy on population should be
adopted is a decision which each
individual country itself must face. This
is, of course, a highly controversial
matter which, until very recently,
placed family planning behind a wall of
silence in the industrialized countries
themselves. But it is clear that there
can be no serious social and economic
planning unless the ominous impli¬
cations of uncontrolled population
growth are understood and acted
upon.
Demographic conditions in the less
developed countries are extremely
diverse. In parts of Asia the density
of settlement is so high as to raise
concerns about the shortage of land.
In Africa and Latin America, on the
other hand, settlement is so sparse
that it is impossible to speak of over¬
population. But in all developing coun¬
tries the population is rising very much
faster than only two decades ago.
It is important to distinguish between
two quite different reasons for the
rapid increase in population. One is
that many parents have more children
than they wish, especially after the
recent declines in infant mortality
which have had the consequence that
family size increases sharply unless
birth rates decline. Another reason,
however, is that the number of chil¬
dren parents in developing countries
want to have is also quite large.
Family-planning policies by and
large address themselves to the prob¬
lem of preventing unwanted births.
They are based on the assumption that
parents have the right to decide on
the number and the spacing of their
children, and on the evidence that high
and unrestricted fertility is a major
social problem.
Malnutrition and mental retardation,
high infant mortality, and illiteracy are
all more probable when a new child
must compete for survival with its
elders in conditions of great poverty.
The need for responsible parenthood
is not disputed even by those who do
not yet endorse all contraceptive tech¬
niques, and we believe that the right
of individuals to knowledge and means
of family planning is fundamental to
social progress.
However, rapid population growth
may also be injurious to a society even
though individual parents desire to
have large families. This dilemma pre¬
vails in many countries, rich and poor.
A conflict between social and private
interests in a matter so intimate as
this is bound to raise delicate issues.
But no society which has learned to
control mortality can long escape the
need to control birth, and many of the
developing countries are now con¬
vinced of the need for population
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

POPULATION DILEMMA (Continued)
Family planning and economic realities
policies to bring down birth rates.
Developing countries should identify
their population problem, if they have
not already done so, and recognize the
relevance of population growth to their
social and economic planning, and
adopt appropriate programmes.
Aid-givers cannot be indifferent to
population planning and policy-making,
inadequate or otherwise, in the receiv¬
ing countries. In particular, they must
be concerned if even the magnitude of
the present population is unknown and
if trends for the future receive little
attention, as is the case in some of
the poorer countries.
B
26
ILATERAL and interna¬
tional agencies should, in their aid
négociations, press for- adequate ana¬
lysis of population problems and the
bearing of these problems on develop¬
ment programmes.
But it would be particularly unwise
for aid-givers to insist on the adoption
of population policies by other coun¬
tries as a condition for aid. Only a
genuine conviction on the part of
governments in developing countries
can produce the strong political sup¬
port and the determined leadership
which experience has shown that fami¬
ly-planning programmes and population
policy require.
In many of the rich countries, gov¬
ernments have not yet moved as far
in their own public policies as their
citizens have in the adoption of family
planning. To convey to their aid part¬
ners their awareness of population
problems, such governments must first
be in a position to preach what they
practice.
The population problem is serious
enough, even in the industrialized
countries, to call for much greater
preoccupation with population study
and research. This is also a pre¬
requisite for any serious technical ass¬
istance to developing countries. Out¬
side a very few of the largest industrial
countries, demography and population
studies still receive no more than
casual attention at universities and
research institutes.
The wealthy countries can hardly
qualify for an active discussion about
population policy in developing coun¬
tries without giving firm support to
international organizations which have
a much larger role to play in this field
than they have so far done. The pas¬
sivity and hesitancy of international
bodies has to a large extent reflected
the ambivalence and confusion of the
industrialized member countries.
It seems particularly wrong for coun¬
tries which themselves have so far
been spared the acute need for popu¬
lation policy to refuse international
organizations the right or the means
to help countries which request assis¬
tance in this field.
Since 1965, there has, in fact, been
a very pronounced tendency to enlarge
the scope for international action in
this field. UNICEF and other specia¬
lized agencies have all received man¬
dates to assist in the formulation and
execution of family-planning policies.
Both for the study of demographic
trends and their implications, and for
the initiation and extension of family-
planning programmes in countries
which have decided to pursue them,
there is an acute need for experts and
training. This is one of the most im¬
portant tasks of these organizations.
The financial requirements of family-
planning programmes are not very
large compared to other development
expenditures. Budgets in developing
countries, however, are often so
strained and foreign exchange short¬
ages so acute that programmes are
held up by bottlenecks which can be
broken by relatively modest amounts
of aid.
Such aid is now provided by some
bilateral donors, notably the United
States and Sweden, and on a modest
scale by international organizations.
For aid suppliers who hesitate to build
up specialized machinery for this kind
of assistance, the use of special trust
funds administered by international
organizations should commend itself.
In 1967, a Trust Fund for Population
Activities was established in the United
Nations, with the purpose of support
ing activities in the population field.
We believe that this fund could expect
far more generous support than it has
so far received if prospective donors
could be assured that good projects
are, in fact, available, and that U.N.
activities in the population field are
satisfactorily co-ordinated.
As things now stand, there are both
gaps and overlaps in the handling of
population problems by U.N. agencies.
Effective organization of assistance for
population programmes is needlessly
delayed.
Among the proposals for improved
co-ordination is the creation of a
United Nations Commissioner for
Population. His task should be to
obtain and maintain an over-all view of
the needs of developing countries in
the population field, to have principal
responsibility for the allocation of the
Trust Fund, and to head up machinery
to co-ordinate the population activities
of U.N. agencies.
It is necessary to take far-reaching
but practicable actions if the great
opportunities for international assis¬
tance in this area are to be utilized.
To make the knowledge and means
of family planning available to all is
an enormous task in societies where
communication and commercial distri¬
bution channels are highly imperfect.
Experience suggests that wherever
possible it is desirable to integrate
family-planning activities with public
health programmes.
Facilities for maternal and child
health programmes to instruct women
in family planning after delivery seem
Population projections for the year 2000
(In Millions)
1968 2000
Low High
Industrialized Areas 1.040 1.250 1.400
Europe 460 490 530
Soviet Union 240 320 350
North America 220 290 350
Others 120 150 170
Developing Areas 2,430 4,720 5.560
China (Mainland) 730 1,000 1,400
Other Asia 1,100 2,300 2,600
Africa 330 770 860
Latin America 270 650 700
World 3,500 6.000 7.000
* The two variants ot the projection for the year 2000 are based on assumptions about
'low" and "high" fertility. Some fertility decline is assumed in both cases, faster in the
"low" variant, slower in the "high" variant. Mortality is expected to continue its decline
until the expectation of life at birth reaches seventy-four years. The variants have been
selected from the projections in World Population Prospects as Assessed in 1963 (United
Nations, 1966), on the basis of the experience in the 1960s.

particularly valuable, as the desire to
have fewer children is closely linked
to the conviction that they now have a
better chance to survive.
In the developing world many par¬
ents want large families for good and
valid economic reasons; not because
they are ignorant or improvident. In
such cases, access to family-planning
information and facilities will not make
much difference.
When child labour makes a sig¬
nificant contribution to family income
and when parents are dependent on a
large family for protection and security
in old age, there will be few incentives
to reduce fertilily, no matter what the
social cost of a rapidly expanding
population.
T,HIS is why the population
problem is also related to a great
number of policies and institutional
changes which affect the social and
economic functions of the family in a
traditional society. In the long run,
economic growth and modernization
tend to make a large family a heavy
economic burden rather than a source
of gain and security, and thus to
discourage fertility and slow popu¬
lation growth, but this process takes
a long time if it is not deliberately
accelerated.
Education, and perhaps particularly
female education, is recognized to be
of great Importance, but only if it really
alters people's attitudes and ambitions,
which is not always the case.
The development of mass media
press, radio, and television helps to
spread new Ideas, among them the
notion that the ideal family should
have fewer but healthier and better-
educated children.
The creation of savings banks for
small savers, as well as life insurance
and pension funds, substitutes other
and more efficient ways of providing
for old age.
Most developing countries already
have policies of social security of
one sort or another, but most of them
are poorly administered and under¬
financed. As a result social policy
tends by and large to subsidize child-
rearing more effectively than it pro¬
vides social security for old age. This
means it probably encourages large
families Instead of discouraging them.
These large and important fields of
social policy which are closely related
to the problems of family size should
receive the greatest attention from de¬
veloping countries. They also deserve
wide support from all aid suppliers.
In the world today, where economic
and social change is so accelerated,
it would be a mistake to believe that
welfare policies which reduce the
CONTINUED PAGE 33
In all developing countries population is rising very much faster than only two decades
ago. But recently there has been a remarkable awakening to the acute problems
posed by the population explosion. In only a few years, ambitious policies to spread
family planning have been introduced in countries representing over 70 per cent of
the population of the developing world. Above, a newly-opened family planning clinic
in Pakistan which, with an annual population increase of 3 per cent (compared with
0.6 per cent in England and France), faces a serious threat of overpopulation.
27

NO MORE UNWANTED CHILDREN (Continued from page 27)
dependence on the family as the sole
source of security can have second
priority in development strategy.
Wherever possible all aid agencies,
bilateral and multilateral, should
encourage and support social policies
with fertility-reducing implications.
The developed countries also have
a great opportunity to make a
contribution in the development of a
better contraceptive technology. Here
the situation in the less developed
countries only dramatizes a general
demand for a genuinely effective and
acceptable contraceptive. The intra¬
uterine device (IUD) and the pill
represent great advances but are far
from perfect in acceptability, con¬
venience, or effectiveness in use.
Research in reproductive biology
was enormously stimulated by the
research for new methods of fertility
control in the 1960s. This was
particularly true of the study of the
hormonal aspects of the female repro¬
duction system which is where the
pills Intervene.
But many potentially interesting
methods of fertility control centre on
relatively unexplored aspects of the
reproduction process. There is no
shortage of suggestions and hypo¬
theses but there is a lack of funds,
of co-ordination, and of systematic
contact between researchers.
An international programme of
research in human reproduction,
enlisting existing institutions and lab
oratories in high priority work on fer¬
tility control might accelerate progress
in this field by years or decades.
The World Health Organization, which
would be the natural focus, has long
been constrained to take a limited view
of problems of family planning,
confining itself to family-planning
activities within the framework of
public health organizations. Moreover,
research on human reproduction can
absorb fairly sizable funds. We
therefore recommend that the World
Bank, in consultation with WHO,
launch Immediately a wide-ranging
international programme for the direc¬
tion, co-ordination, and financing of
research in the field of human repro¬
duction and fertility control.
33
