WAR IS NOT
IN OUR GENES
by Sally Carrighar
T
40
HERE are still men and
women living who can remember the
horror which greeted Darwin's theory
that we are "descended from apes."
That phrase probably accounted in part
for the revulsion because "descended
from" was generally used in a more
personal way "I am descended from
Scottish ancestors," that is, I am one
of them, I am like them. Darwin
meant, of course, "We have evolved
from apes," with apes standing in for
the whole range of evolved animals.
The first, grudging acceptance of
evolution was in connexion with phy¬
sical structures: it was hard for anyone
to deny such evidence as the develop¬
ment of a thinking cortex on top of
a simpler brain. The idea of the
evolution of behaviour, however, has
been slower to win support, for there
is no "fossil behaviour." From fossil
bones, guesses can be made as to
the ways that the bones were used,
but how can anyone ever reliably know
the origins of the habits of today's
animals or of our own?
Nevertheless, the evolution of beha¬
viour is now inspiring one of biology's
hottest debates.
Darwin himself laid the groundwork
for it when he wrote The Expression
of the Emotions in Man and Animals,
and showed how closely alike the
signs of emotion are. This book was
largely ignored, at least in its implic¬
ations, for the mechanical age had
arrived and there was more interest
in putting captive animals into pieces
of apparatus, in testing their reflexes,
their ability to find their way out of
SALLY CARRIGHAR has spent more than
30 years studying animals in their natural
habitats. Out of this experience she has
written a number of widely-read books,
including "One Day at Teton Marsh", 'Ice¬
bound Summer", her observations of Alas¬
kan wildlife, and 'Wild Heritage", a sum¬
mary of modern studies of animal behaviour
and the insights they shed on the behaviour
of people. Article © 1967 by the New
York Times Company.
mazes, to count, and to discriminate
between colours and forms problems
like these.
About 1950, however, a group calling
themselves ethologists broke out of
the laboratories, declaring that the
most reliable facts about animal beha¬
viour are secured by watching animals
in their natural habitats. From the
discoveries made by these thoughtful
observers, it soon became clear that
we really don't know very much about
how most animals lead their lives,
about what animals do. Dr. William
H. Thorpe of Cambridge University was
one of the first to stride boldly on to
the battlefield with the statement:
"There is hardly any aspect of the
behaviour of animals which may not
have some reference to problems in
human behaviour."
Some ethologists fell on that battle¬
field and went back to the laboratories.
The ones who stayed in the field had
to endure some ridicule; they were
called Boy Scouts and taunted with
the criticism that their work could not
be a science since most of it was done
without experimentation. Some of this
obviously stung, for few ethologists
are now simply trying to fill in the
great gaps in our knowledge about the
daily lives of wild animals. Work in
the field must now include experimen¬
tation, and some ethologists are even
confining the animals that they study
in artificial environments which they
call "semi-wild."
Meanwhile, the behaviour of animals
has fascinated the non-scientific pub¬
lic. Readers devour Joy Adamson's
Elsa books, George Schaller's reports
of his gorilla companions and those
of Jane van Lawick-Goodall about the
chimpanzees with whom she and her
husband live. An increasing number
of popular films and television pro¬
grammes about animals whet this in¬
terest. And if orthodox biologists hold
out against assuming any lines of
descent in human behaviour, from all
sides laymen are asking what we can
learn from living animals.
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited.
What about the relationship between
the sexes? What about care of the
young and their training, about the
health of animals and how they main¬
tain it, their feeding habits, how they
relax and the ways in which they play?
Above all, with war so great a threat
in our lives, what about animal
aggression?
This last has been the subject of
two recent and readable books: On
Aggression, by Konrad Lorenz (the
noted Austrian zoologist), and The
Territorial Imperative, by Robert Ardrey
(American writer and anthropologist by
avocation). Both authors declare that
fighting is an instinct which demands
expression in virtually all higher ani¬
mals and also in ourselves because,
they claim, we have inherited this
compulsion. Before examining their
arguments, however, it is first necess¬
ary to define exactly what is meant
by aggression.
Most laymen would think at once
of predatory attacks on prey for food:
the pursuit, the pounce, the kill. The
biological definition, however, excludes
this kind of slaughter because it
involves no malice. A wolf bringing
down an ill or aged caribou (a strong
caribou can outrun a wolf) is no more
angry than we are when we buy meat
at the butcher's shop. He is merely
hungry.
Nor is there any true aggression,
any malice, between members of
different species going about their
separate ways in the wilderness they
share. They seem to recognize that
each has different needs and perhaps,
in their inarticulate way, they even
recognize that other species have
rights. On a path used by many or
at a water hole or salt lick, the weaker
and smaller animals await their turn,
letting the stronger go first without
argument.
Aggressiveness in its strict biolo¬
gical sense, and in the sense that
Lorenz and Ardrey use the word, is
expressed between two members of
the same species when both want the
CONTINUED PAGE 42_

Photo Jerzy © Réalités, Paris
The Latin proverb "homo homini lupus" man is a wolf to man has
been taken over by nearly every society which derives its customs, laws
or language from ancient Rome. This is a libel on the wolf, which
is a gentle animal with other wolves. More appropriate would be
"homo homini mus rattus" man is a rat to man for, exceptionally
among carnivores, some rats kill other rats, just as man kills others of
his own species.

WAR NOT IN OUR GENES (Continued)
Rats, clans and captivity
same thing. With the great majority
of animals, this same thing will be
living space in which to raise the young
of the year an animal's home site,
also known as his territory.
Sometimes aggressiveness is arous¬
ed over possession of a desired female
or over rank in a hierarchy. Biologists
often call the space around a disputed
female a territory. It moves when she
moves and the male, going along, will
not allow another male to approach
within a certain well-understood dis¬
tance.
Lorenz and Ardrey both tie their
definition of aggressiveness in man¬
kind to home territory. They call
attention to properties marked with
"No Trespassing" signs and this is
their ominous and essential theme
they extend the concept of farms or
suburban lots to the nation, claiming
that men fight to preserve or expand
their national boundaries almost as
involuntarily as they would their homes.
They fight the soldiers of other nations
because their remote animal ancestors
once instinctively fought for nesting
site, burrow, hunting range or the
space which encircles a female.
T
42
HUS both Lorenz and Ar¬
drey are convinced that war is an
instinctive compulsion. Lorenz says
that the most important function of ani¬
mal aggression "is the spacing out of
individuals of one species over the
available habitat, in other words, the
distribution of "territories." He conclu¬
des: "There cannot be any doubt, in
the opinion of any biologically minded
scientist, that ¡ntra-specm'c aggression
is, in man, just as much of a sponta¬
neous instinctive drive as in most other
higher vertebrates."
Ardrey, for his part, says: "If we
defend the title to our land or the
sovereignty of our country, we do it
for reasons no different, no less innate,
no less ineradicable than do the lower
animals" (italics added). He also
says: "All of us will give everything
we are for a place of our own." And:
"I believe man's innumerable territorial
expressions are human responses to
an imperative lying with equal force'
on mockingbirds and men."
Now, a widespread belief that human
wars are instinctive, by which biolo¬
gists mean inevitable, would of course
tend to make them inevitable. There¬
fore it seems worthwhile to inquire
whether aggression is universal in
animals and just how insistent an urge
it is. If aggression, as these authors
insist, is a doom carried in human
genes, we are predestined to wage
wars and hopes for peace would seem
to be slim.
It must be agreed that during mating
seasons, at least, disputes over terri¬
torial boundary lines are prevalent.
Spring when most animal young are
born and many conceived, is a time
of much sparring for areas on which
to raise them and find their food. But
for some species, late summer and
fall are the rutting season, and that is
the time when the "territories" surr¬
ounding females are fought for. In
most cases, such aggressive beha¬
viour is related to reproductive needs.
To the creatures themselves, terri¬
tory probably means home in the same
way that home, for us, means more
than house. To them the need may
be temporary but it is not surprising
that they instinctively fight for it.
But how universally and how despe¬
rately? The doom of eternal war
would not seem so inescapable for us
if some animals Indeed, if any of them
can escape the compulsion.
Caribou have, no territories; neither
do elephants. Sea otters don't. They
copulate in the water and raise their
young in fronds of seaweed. Whales
are not likely to have individual home
sites, although no one knows definitely.
Lemmings live in villages, shallow
excavations in the Arctic frost mounds,
with several lemmings sleeping toge¬
ther in each nest until a gravid female
is about to give birth, when she makes
a nest of her own.
These could be called colonies.
There are numerous animals In the
temperate zone who have communal
dwellings: gophers, prairie dogs, mar¬
mots. What goes on in their hidden
worlds, at each stage of the annual
cycle, is imperfectly known for most
species. Some colonies defend the
territory shared by all; it appears that
others do~ not. Within the burrow it
is customary for an individual family
to defend its own unit.
What of cowbirds, which lay their
eggs in other bird's nests and then
are off to live on the backs of cattle
(formerly bison), feeding on the para¬
sites in their hosts' fur? It is amusing
to speculate on whether individual cow-
birds claim certain cows as their
territory. It seems unlikely.
Among primates, most monkeys live
in groups. In some there is a hierar¬
chical social organization. Usually the
dominant male has first choice when
a female is in oestrus and discord
often prevails. Other groups are
sexually promiscuous and among them
fighting often seems abhorrent. If
youngsters are too aggressive, the
adult males will separate them.
Howling monkeys claim possession
of their communal areas but defend
them generally with only vocal protests
as do gibbon families. When their
screams fail to drive away intruders,
gibbons may bite, but such occasions
are rare.
The English ethologist J.H. Crook
discussed the question of territory in
The Listener, April 6, 1967. He ex¬
plained the very flexible attitude of
some birds and animals usually thought
to defend territories. A territory
"allows an individual to develop a
close familiarity with a locality. This
increases its food-finding efficiency
and the speed of finding refuge from
enemies." But some ducks that mate
on their wintering grounds, or on
migration, will accompany a new
spouse to its home site instead of
returning to their own.
Species may change territories in
response to local conditions. In drier
years, certain marsh-dwelling weaver
birds will disperse their nests over a
large ground area; in wetter years,
they may congregate in a large tree
islanded in a flood pool. Harem
groups of the gelada baboon wander
independently in poor feeding years
but "congregate in large herds of
variable size under conditions of plen¬
ty. They have no territories, their
disposition directly reflecting the local
food availability."
Chimpanzees, says Dr. Crook, vary
the size of their parties. As a rule
individuals and small groups wander
over large home ranges and "territorial
behaviour appears to be absent." The
facts are complex he says. "The dis¬
persion pattern itself must depend
largely on learning and tradition, and
this is particularly so when we are
talking about advanced mammals such
as the monkeys. The sort of territory-
holding present is more likely to be
determined by the commodities for
which the higher mammals compete
than by any species characteristic
directly determined by the genes.
Thus in different ecologies, territorial
systems will vary or even be absent
altogether."
A
LRDREY is not a biologist,
as he himself explicitly and creditably
states in his book. In reporting the
work of professionals, he seems simply
to have misjudged the emphasis that
they put on territories and territorial
aggression.
Lorenz, of course, is an ethologist
of world repute, but his experience
with animals is limited in a different
way. He has done most of his research
with tamed animals, such as geese
induced by guard fences and food
to live in a human environment, and
with captive cichlid fishes in tanks.
All creatures so confined have their
aggressiveness heightened enorm¬
ously.
As Lorenz himself explains, these
two types of animals, fish and birds,
are among those which demand "indiv-

¡dual distance," meaning that they do
not welcome, at any time, anywhere,
the close approach of their con-speci¬
fics (the biological term for others of
one's own species). Lorenz's fish and
geese, disturbed by the enforced intim¬
ate association with their mates, have
worked out rather elaborate rituals for
"redirecting" their aggression from
mates to neighbouring males. Since
these are only symbolic attacks, the
adjacent male seldom is Injured, and
the spouse, with his aggression now
neutralized, returns to his mate trium¬
phant.
Rituals of the same sort are not
employed by our own class of animals,
mammals, for mammals are "contact"
species that is, they seek and enjoy
the touch of their own kind. This
distinction between animals who want
and those who do not want to be near
their con-specifics is only mentioned
briefly by Lorenz, but it is actually of
the most basic importance.
Lorenz sets out in detail the observ¬
ation that among all strongly aggress¬
ive 'animals there is a very powerful
inhibition against killing con-specifics.
Since they do, unavoidably, often
annoy one another, however, various
behaviour patterns have become
established to prevent fights with lethal
consequences.
L
IORENZ describes the
well-known reaction of a defeated
wolf. As soon as he recognizes that
he will lose a fight, the wolf turns his
head away, a movement that the victor
immediately understands and accepts.
When Lorenz described this wolf be¬
haviour in 1952 in King Solomon's
Ring, he spoke of it as the loser
"offering his neck" to his opponent
moving evidence of good faith bet¬
ween wolves, inasmuch as the victor
always withholds the final bite.
Since that time, Lorenz has more
firmly become a "mechanist." In On
Aggression, he describes the loser's
behaviour as one of the "submissive or
appeasing movements [which] have
evolved from juvenile expression move¬
ments persisting into adulthood. This
is not surprising to anyone who
knows how strong the inhibition against
attacking pups is in any normal dog."
But however defined, the wolf ritual
works; it prevents the killing of a con-
specific.
Another form of ritualized, harmless
fighting is the "tournament," such as
the pushing contest between two
ungulates (deer or other hoofed qua¬
drupeds) during the rut. If they really
wanted to kill each other, they would
attack with their hoofs (as they do a
predator). Instead they literally lock
horns, each trying to make the other
give way. As soon as one knows
himself to be losing ground, he disen¬
gages his antlers, turns and runs, and
the winner goes back to his females.
Perhaps from their concentration on
the subject, both Ardrey and Lorenz
seem to have exaggerated impressions
of the amount of con-specific aggress¬
ion.
When Lorenz writes of "all this
fighting," and fighting as being "such
an ever-present process" in nature, he
is describing a wilderness that would
not be recognized by those who, like
myself, have lived there for years at
a stretch.
On some mornings one finds blood
on the snow where tracks of fox and
hare collide, but that is evidence of
prédation, not the encounter of an
animal with another of its own kind.
Real aggression, usually reproductive
in its origin and purpose, concerns the
animals so briefly that most of the
several dozen species I am familiar
with spend far more than half their
time some of them as much as 11
months in the year in casual or
amiable association with their fellows.
Typical are black bears. After a
rather perfunctory but successful court¬
ship, a male returns to a drowsy life,
the daytime often spent in a copse
with four or five other males. They
do, however, show animosity toward
one of the off-shade bears, that are
a colour phase of their own species.
The forest rangers say that these
rejected bears become neurotic.
Both Lorenz and Ardrey distinguish
too briefly between offensive and
defensive fighting. Is one who def¬
ends his territory "aggressive?" If
not, if only an invader is properly so
described, how many do thus intrude?
Extremely few, except in captivity.
Among wolves, one who comes into
the territory of another's family may
be seeking companionship (a "lone
wolf" is usually an orphan). Accord¬
ing to most observers, he is not attack¬
ed; he is simply threatened and he
leaves and is not pursued to the
border.
Those who describe the wilderness
from a domestic garden like Darwin's
or Lorenz's fenced enclosure and lab¬
oratory or Ardrey's library, tend to
put the emphasis on a few, dramatic
animals like rats, wolves and lions.
Rats are contact species, and to
explain some fights he saw among rats,
Lorenz suggests that they were not
personal confrontations, that rat clans
tend to kill all outsiders. Such group
aggressiveness would seem especially
ominous because of the possible an¬
alogy with mankind's national wars.
But here, as with geese and fish, Lo¬
renz is presenting evidence provided
by captives, and captives held In con¬
ditions so unsatisfactory as to stimu¬
late fighting.
As Lorenz describes them: "Stein¬
iger put brown rats from different
localities Into a large enclosure which
provided them with completely natural
living conditions. At first the indiv¬
idual animals seemed afraid of each
other; they were not in an aggressive
mood, but they bit each other if they
met by chance, particularly if two were
driven towards each other along one
side of the enclosure, so that they
collided at speed." (Most biologists,
incidentally, would not call the condi¬
tions provided by any enclosure as
"completely natural" especially not if
it were so small that individuals collid¬
ed when racing along the fence.)
Steiniger's rats soon began to attack
one another and fought until all but
one pair were killed. The descendants
of that pair formed a clan, which sub¬
sequently slaughtered every strange
rat introduced into the habitat.
D
URING the same years
that this study was being conducted,
John B. Calhoun in Baltimore was
also investigating the behaviour of rats.
There were 15 rats in F. Steiniger's
original population; 14 in Calhoun's
also strangers to one another. But
Calhoun's enclosure was 16 times
larger than Steiniger's and more fa¬
vourable in other ways: "harborages"
were provided for rats pursued by
hostile associates (such refuges would
probably exist in the wild), and all
Calhoun's rats were identified by
distinctive markings.
For 27 months, from a tower In the
centre of the large area, the move¬
ments of all the individual rats were
recorded. After a few fights while
getting acquainted, they separated into
two clans, neither of which tried to
eliminate the other. There was a good
deal of crossing back and forth un¬
challenged so often by some Indi¬
viduals that they were finally dub¬
bed messengers.
Lorenz says that only the most
aggressive creatures ever form per¬
manent pairs, but beavers mate for
life. And although their gnawing teeth
would serve as very effective weapons,
I have never known any occasion when
they were so used against con-spe¬
cifics. In their cleverly built houses,
behind the dams and network of
canals they have constructed, they
live in notable harmony with one
another and with the muskrats, for
whom they provide ponds and who
may be welcomed Into beaver houses
as badgers will receive, and make
friends with, coyotes and foxes.
How would such animals have time
for continual fighting? What the
absent biologists do not seem to
realize is that a wilderness is a com¬
munity of workers. Simply finding
enough to eat every day is a chancy
and tiring task.
It may be a surprise to know that
many animals also spend a great deal
of time keeping themselves clean and,
if possible, free of parasites. Primates
groom one another for hours every
day. One year, one of the small pretty
deer-mice came in to share my cabin, IA
and sometimes I wished she would L\Q
stop washing her fur; she did it so
incessantly it was tiring to watch.
(When I bathed, sponging water' over
CONTINUED PAGE 45

Ot«U*«r,ft«r..»»vO
Photo © Psychology Today magazine
Communications, Research, Machines, Inc.

WAR NOT IN OUR GENES (Continued)
Road to madness or road to reason?
myself from the basin in which I stood,
she always took up a position in front
of me and went through her own
bathing routine.
Such mammals as these, in rising
strata of complexity these are our
ancestors, more recent than the primi¬
tive, sexually antagonistic fish and
geese. Many mammals have never
even developed rituals to prevent' the
death of con-specifics, because they
don't need them. Except when attack¬
ed by a predator, they quite simply
do not fight.
Our immediate forebears, the apes,
seem to have reached something like
a summit in non-aggressiveness, since
Left, how an American
artist, Philip Kirkland,
sees our aggressive
society.
Below, how the young
generation sees
tomorrow's
non-aggressive society.
they do not fight either not as indi¬
viduals or as clans. Lorenz suggests
that they do not attack their associates
because they do not have such effec¬
tive weapons as the teeth of wolves
or the paws of lions, but would not
the arm of a full-grown male gorilla
be as strong as a lion's paw?
We do not know which mammals
were the nearest ancestors of pri¬
mates, but there are sufficient numbers
of non-aggressive creatures living today
to suggest that co-operation was
becoming the habit of evolving mam¬
mals even before the primates deve¬
loped. What, therefore, has happened?
Man obviously is an aggressive animal.
We have lost both the peacefulness
and the inhibition against killing others
of our own kind. Is there an expla¬
nation?
As Lorenz points out, aggressive¬
ness can be taught. It is also in¬
tensified when it is exercised (and
atrophies when it is not). When men
began to settle in communities, they
learned the irritations of being crowd¬
ed. By then they had probably learned
the use of weapons, originally for the
purpose of killing game. And since
they had already acquired at least a
rudimentary speech, they could absorb
from one another, and preach, animo¬
sity. With words, they could incite
hatred against neighbouring tribes. A
leader, coveting power or property,
could, with propaganda, instill in his
subjects admiration for warlike atti¬
tudes.
Perhaps that is the way culturally
rather than genetically that human
aggressiveness arose. As for sadism,
something no animal displays, it is my
belief that the trait is psychotic.
Nothing could more effectively
prolong man's fighting behaviour than
a belief that aggression is in our genes.
An unwelcome cultural inheritance can
be eradicated fairly quickly and easily,
but the incentive to do it is lacking
while people believe that aggression is
innate and instinctive with us, as both
Ardrey and Lorenz declare.
More than 100 years ago, the philo¬
sopher William Whewell wrote: "There
is a mask of theory over the whole face
of nature." Anyone writing about the
wilderness has a great responsibility
not to accept too readily a belief that
the mask is nature's true face. In a
chaotic and perfidious world, nature
is all we have that is infallibly real.
If writers assert their own, unproven
hypotheses as the truth, civilized
people, so isolated from the wilderness
that they cannot recognize a fallacy
when they hear one, will be deprived
of their one lifeline of what may be felt
intuitively as sane and good. Then,
even the intuition will be lost what is
there left for anybody but madness?
Photo Roger Malloch © Magnum Photos, Paris
