by
Lauri A. Posti
Professor at the Faculty
of Philosophy, University
of Helsinki (Finland)

Lenin
and cultural rights
of minorities
I
16
|N the early days of the
Soviet Union, nationalities policy ques¬
tions were vitally important, since
national minorities comprised over
50 per cent of the entire population.
In Czarist times, these minorities were
subdued and oppressed in many ways.
As many of them had never had a
literary language, it was most difficult
to make just arrangements and help
to raise their cultural standards. The
scattered examples of literature written
in certain native languages consisted
mainly of religious books. The minor¬
ity nationalities were mostly illiterate.
Under the Czars, only about 26 per
cent of the whole population was
literate; among some nationalities, not
even 1 per cent were literate.
As a schoolboy, Lenin was already
familiar with this problem. He was
born in Simbirsk (modern Ulyanovsk)
on the Volga, and always had a warm
sympathy for the Chuvashes, Mordvi-
nians, Tatars and Votyaks (Udmurts),
oppressed nationalities who lived in
the area.
The many years Lenin spent in exile,
often far from his native land, no doubt
helped to confirm his conviction of the
importance of the nationalities ques¬
tion. . He mastered several foreign
languages, and, deeply attached as he
was to the Russian language and
culture, it is obvious that his long stay
in foreign surroundings emphasized
for him the importance of native
tongues.
In his extensive literary output Lenin
repeatedly returned to the nationalities
question and the importance of native
languages and cultures, always stress¬
ing that all should have equal impor¬
tance, even going so far as to suggest
that there was no need for an obli¬
gatory official language.
In "Is an obligatory official language
necessary?", published in Proletars-
kaja Pravda on January 18, 1914,
arguing against the views expressed
by the Russian Liberal Party on the
language question, Lenin concludes as
follows: "Hence, Russian Marxists
consider that it is necessary not to
have an obligatory official language;
that the population must be provided
with schools and instruction in all the
regional languages; and that a basic
provision must be included in the
Constitution declaring all privileges
whatsoever null and void of any par¬
ticular nation, this annulment also to
concern all infringements whatsoever
of the rights of national minorities".
Lenin has given his detailed reasons
in "Critical Remarks on the National
Question" and "The Right of Nations
to Self-Determination", books written
in 1913 and 1914, which provided the
theoretical national programme of the
coming revolution.
Soon after the October Revolution
in which the Bolsheviks seized power,
the Council of the People's Commis¬
sars, issued the "Declaration of Rights
of the Peoples of Russia", signed by
Lenin, declaring its intention of basing
Russian nationalities policy on the
following principles:
The equality and sovereignty of .
the peoples of Russia.
The right of the peoples of Russia
to free self-determination, up to and
including secession and the formation
of an independent State.
The abolition of all national and
national-religious privileges and res¬
trictions.
The free development of the
national minorities and ethnographical
groups inhabiting the territory of
Russia.
In accordance with the second of
these principles Lenin, as Chairman
of the Council of the People's Com¬
missars, signed the decision at the
end of December 1917 acknowledg¬
ing the independence of Finland, on
the proposal of the Government of
Finland. This was an act of states¬
manship which the whole Finnish
nation gratefully recognizes.
In many earlier statements Lenin,
who. was well acquainted with con¬
ditions in Finland where he had taken
refuge several times from Czarist
persecution, had expressed the view
that Finland was entitled to indepen¬
dence if the Finnish people so wanted.
w
HEN conditions finally be¬
came settled in the Soviet Union,
energetic efforts were made to develop
the languages and cultures of national
minorities, in accordance with a
decision of the tenth Communist Party
Congress in 1921, with Lenin as Chair¬
man.
Alphabets and principles of ortho¬
graphy had to be created for languages
that had never been written before.
Experts had to decide which dialect
or dialects should provide the basis of
the literary language. This often
demanded extensive research.
The sound system of the language
had to be scrutinized, and what seem¬
ed to be the vital dialect or dialects
identified. Specialized terminologies
had to be created since they were
naturally lacking in languages that had
been used only as regional spoken
languages.
In devising new alphabets, the Latin
alphabet, considered to be the most
international, was taken as a basis. A
centre was set up to handle the
general and theoretical problems,
with local committees for the various
languages. As many nationalities had
no specialists of their own, Russian
experts often had to do the basic
research. In the interests of unifor-

miry, the Latin alphabet was Introduc¬
ed- even in languages that already had
some literature published in Russian
or Arabic? letters.
Towards the end of the nineteen-
thirties, the young literary languages
changed over to alphabets based on
Russian letters. This change was
prompted by the close political, eco¬
nomic, and cultural relations with the
Russians and, of course, many non-
Russians knew Russian or wanted to
learn it. Russian has become by far
the most important means of commu¬
nications between the different parts
of the Soviet Union and the different
nationalities.
The Russian alphabet has more
letters than the Latin but not enough
for the needs of all the languages.
The accepted principle is that each
phoneme, I.e. functionally distinctive
sound, has its own character in the
orthography.
In some of the languages, the pho¬
nemes are unusually many. Thus
Lezgian (belonging to the Caucasian
group of languages) has 60 phonemes,
6 vowels and as many as 54 con-
, sonants. Russian has 33 letters;
obviously, more characters were need¬
ed. They were created by combining
additional characters with the basic
Russian letters or by borrowing from
other alphabets. Some phonemes are
indicated by a combination of two
characters.
All in all, these new alphabets
comprise, in addition to the 33 Russian
letters, 55 other characters, i.e. a total
of 88 letters made necessary by the
desire to keep the phonetic value of
each letter about the same in different
languages, with new letters for such
phonemes as differ phonetically from
those of the Russian language.
Accordingly, the same characters
generally indicate similar sounds in
different languages.
In deciding which dialect should be
CONTINUED PAGE 20
Ravaged by the effects of World War I and the civil war, Russia in 1919
was in chaos. Moscow railwaymen decided to work voluntarily
in their free time on Saturday (in Russian "Subbota") to speed up the
clearing and repair of the Moscow-Kazan railway line. Lenin welcomed
this initiative which he described as "the great beginning". The
railwaymen's lead was followed all over the country. Voluntary work
of this kind came to be known as "Subbotnik" and each spring up
until today the whole population of the U.S.S.R. participates in days
of unpaid labour. Above, Lenin (arrow) taking part in the All-Russia
Subbotnik in the grounds of the Kremlin in May 1920.
Lenin encouraged scientific and technological advances of every kind.
Below, he watches trials of a new type of electric plough, near
Moscow, in October 1921.

For Lenin, any place could serve as an office
and any spare moment was an opportunity for
work. Above, Lenin takes notes on the steps of
the rostrum at a conference in 1921. While not
an educationalist himself, Lenin recognized
how vital education was to the country's
social transformation.
In old Russia over 80 per cent of the
population was illiterate and in
the outlying districts literacy was
practically nil. On December 26,
1919 the Soviet government passed
the decree on the elimination of illiteracy
and the great educational and
cultural drive began. Below left,
a city girl explains the mysteries of
the alphabet to a Russian peasant.
Below centre, a lunchtime lesson In
a factory. Below right, Tajiks from
the mountainous Pamir region and,
right, Turkmenian women from the
deserts of central Asia, attend
literacy classes. Before the revolution,
literacy among Tajiks was 0,5 per
cent and among Turkmenians 0.7
per cent. Today illiteracy has been
virtually wiped out In the Soviet Union.
SO
If you can read
teach your neighbour'
18

2
O.
< Il

CULTURAL RIGHTS (Continued)
Photo © APN
Above, winter at the country house at Gorki, a village
just outside Moscow, where Lenin, his health broken by
overwork, lived from 1923 until his death on January 21,
1924. Against his doctor's orders Lenin continued working
right to the end. During this period he wrote several
Important works including "Better Fewer, But Better" and
"On Co-operation". Below, Lenin seated beside his wife
Nadezhda Krupskaya with his sister Anna, his nephew Victor,
and a neighbour's daughter Vera, in the grounds of
the "dacha" at Gorki in summer 1922.
Photo © APN
made the basis of literary language,
the experts took account of the num¬
bers who spoke each dialect and their
weight ¡n economic and cultural terms.
Phonetic, morphological, and' lexical
characteristics were next considered,
and earlier literature ¡f any. In some
cases, where differences in dialects
were very considerable, and popula¬
tions scattered, two literary languages
were created.
When creating a new literary lan¬
guage, great attention must be paid
to the development of the specialized
terminologies lacking in languages
hitherto used only as local spoken
languages. It was often necessary to
resort to loan words mostly of Russian
origin, or international words acquired
via Russian. Part, however, were
native, either borrowed from dialects
or derived by the word formation
typical of the language. The special
committees set up for this work in¬
clude philologists and experts in the
subject matter concerned.
Over fifty nationalities which pre¬
viously had no literature in their native
languages now have literary languages
of their own. With many of them,
development has been very rapid.
Books and newspapers are published
in relatively large numbers, and origi¬
nal literature in the native language
has made noteworthy progress. Na¬
tive language schools allow the
different nations to produce their own
educated classes. The Soviet Union
is divided up administratively in such
a way as to pay due account to the
existence and needs of different
nationalities, and this has encouraged
the growth of the national cultures.
In some cases all the preparations
for developing a literary language were
made, but the project was later drop¬
ped. This happened when too few
people were really involved or inter¬
ested or else were too scattered, the
differences between dialects were too
great, or when the people had a good
command of Russian or some other
important neighbouring language. The
incentives to developing or using a
literary language of their own were
therefore lacking.
All the new literary languages have
not been equally popular or equally
successful. Obviously, those of small
nationalities have not played the same
role as those spoken by large numbers
of people. The languages used ¡n the
administration, in higher institutes, and
in research have developed most ; the
languages of minor nationalities are
often used only in primary education.
Even so, they have been of great
Importance to the lives of the peoples
concerned.
Learning to read and write is much
easier if done in one's own language
and, of course, greatly facilitates the
spread of literacy. Here the Soviet
Union can, with justified pride, refer
to really magnificent achievements.
In Tadzhikistan, for instance, in
Czarist times, only 2.3 per cent of
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

Photo © APN
The scene in Red Square on January 27,
1924, the day of Lenin's funeral. At four
o'clock on that day all activity ceased
for five minutes throughout the Soviet
Union and the occasion was also
observed in many other countries.
those between 9 and 49 years old were
literate; as late as 1926, only 3.8 per
cent. The corresponding figures for
1939 were 82.8, for 1959, 96.2 per cent.
In Uzbekistan, the percentage in
Czarist times was 3.6, in 1926 11.6, in
1939, 78.7 and in 1959, 98.1. Literacy
has gone hand in hand with rising
standards of education and cultural
life, which in turn have afforded access
to the science, technology and culture
of other nations.
Lenin himself saw only the very
beginning of this great process of
development. As the whole world is
now celebrating the centenary of his
birth, it can confidently be said, that
the principle of the equality of all
nations and languages, which was
embodied in his nationalities policy,
and which has allowed different
nationalities active educational and
cultural participation, has had a most
significant Influence on the enormous
development that has taken place ¡n
both these sectors in the Soviet Union
since the October Revolution.
Above, the provincial Russian town of Simbirsk, now Ulyanovsk,
as it was in Lenin's boyhood. Below, the Ulyanovsk
of today; part of the memorial centre containing libraries,
lecture-rooms, museums, etc., built to commemorate Lenin's
hundredth anniversary, and inaugurated on April 16, 1970,
by Leonid Brezhnev. The original Ulyanov family home
is housed within this modern building.
