A false notion
cancer = incurable
by Eric C. Easson
56 /3.V.
CHRONIC MVELO\0
u i
41 ItC It >
T
HOSE of us who are
concerned every day with the clinical
care of patients with cancer are often
asked why we are so obsessed with
early diagnosis. The reason is that
every day of every week we are faced
with the patient whose malignant
tumour is no longer amenable to cura¬
tive treatment, though that same
patient could have been cured by
readily available and well-tested
methods of treatment if only he
had reached hospital when the tumour
was less extensive.
Commonly accepted five-year sur¬
vival rates following appropriate treat¬
ment for a number of common cancers
show that the early localized tumour
is readily controllable, but when the
cancer has become more extensive
cure is virtually impossible.
In the field of tumour pathology it
Is axiomatic that with the passage of
time a malignant tumour grows larger.
It is equally axiomatic that the risk of
widespread metastasis [the establish¬
ment of secondary tumours in other
parts of the body] also increases with
the passage of time.
Though it is undoubtedly true that a
very small proportion of tumours have
a capacity for widespread metastasis
whilst the primary tumour still remains
relatively small, in the majority of cases
this prognostically unfavourable situa¬
tion is a late development in the natural
history of the tumour.
The very wide difference In the
response to treatment is such that
even a modest reduction in the time-
interval between the patient's first
symptom and effective treatment could
not fail to create substantially better
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
ERIC EASSON 'is Director of Radiotherapy
at the Christie Hospital and Holt Radium
Institute, Manchester, England. An inter¬
nationally recognized authority In his field,
he is Chairman of the Commission on
Cancer Control of the International Union
Against Cancer.
23

CANCER IS CURABLE (Continued)
Early detection saves lives
tive-year survival rates. Indeed, a
modest shortening of this delay period
and consequently diminished extent of
disease would doubtless save more
lives, more quickly, than any foresee¬
able advances in fundamental research.
Nevertheless, there are still those
who adopt the attitude that cancer is
inevitably fatal and that earlier treat¬
ment only increases the time interval
between death and the date of treat¬
ment. Though it may have been difficult
to refute this plausible armchair philo¬
sophy when the only yardstick of
treatment was the five-year or ten-year
survival rate, it is now possible to
define cure in statistically valid terms.
We can speak of cure of cancer when,
some years after treatment, there
remains a group of patients whose
annual death rate from all causes is
similar to that of a normal population
group of the same sex and age dis¬
tribution.
In the case of cancer of the larynx,
at about four years after treatment (in
this case by X-Rays) the two survival
curves begin to run parallel to one
another. In other words, from about
the fourth after-treatment year the
surviving cancer patients are dying
of the same general causes and
at the same rate as members of the
general population around them of the
same sex and age. Today we can
claim that for early cancer of the
larynx some 80 per cent are entirely
curable. 	
As a second example cancer of
the uterine cervix the survival curve
for cancer patients begins to run
parallel to that of the normal popula¬
tion (in this case, of course, all women)
about six years after treatment. Cure
for early cervical cancer today can
be expected in some 75 per cent of
patients.
Even with Hodgkin's disease [in
which the lymph glands become
enlarged], for many decades regarded
as incurable, we can now see that
under favourable circumstances more
than 40 per cent are alive and well ten
years after treatment with a calculably
normal expectation of life.
Cancer of the breast has been
described as incurable by a number of
sceptics over the years and again only
recently in some British medical jour¬
nals. Survival curves, however, show
that from the 12th year onwards the
expectation of life of a woman treated
for early breast cancer is identical to
that of a normal woman of the same
age. The definitive cure rate for this
series of patients with localised breast
cancer is, in fact, 52 per cent.
Some of the patients in this series,
however, had substantial tumours
measuring 5 to 10 cms in diameter
though still conforming to our defi¬
nition of stage I cancer. Considerable
improvement in this situation should
therefore not be difficult and tumours
of more modest dimensions might well
be as curable as cervical or laryngeal
cancers. Curability not simple sur¬
vival is influenced by the extent of
the tumour at the time of treatment.
In short, time is the vital factor in
curability.
It is fair to ask, however, whether
early diagnosis is possible with all
types- of malignant tumours. The short
answer to this is "No."
Where the site of the tumour is
favourable including those to which
I have already referred early diagno¬
sis is undoubtedly possible, because
of a palpable lump, visible ulceration,
or some clamant symptom such as
hoarseness in laryngeal cancers or
bleeding with cancer of the uterine
1,500,000 AMERICANS CURED OF CANCER
I here are more than 20,000,000 ex-smokers in the
United States today. Among these are 100,000 physicians,
or half of all members of the medical profession in the U.S.A.
who ever smoked cigarettes.
Uterine cancer was once the leading cancer killer of
American women. In 1935, the death rate per 100,000 women
was 26.8; as a result of unremitting educational efforts and
great improvements in detection and treatment it is now down
to about 11 per 100,000.
Both these achievements are in large part due to the
efforts of the American Cancer Society. Yet when it was
founded in 1913, under its earlier name of the American
Society for the Control of Cancer, by a group of 10 physicians
and 5 laymen, for the purpose of "educating the public at
large in the absolute necessity of treatment at the first sign
of cancerous growth," the word "cancer" had roughly the
same social acceptance as the word "syphilis." Mention of
cancer in polite society was taboo.
The Society's initial aim, therefore, was to inform both
doctors and the lay public. Doctors themselves were scep¬
tical about any possibility of curing the disease and the
general public viewed it through a cloud of superstitious fear
rooted in ignorance.
For some 30 years the education of both doctors and the
general public remained the essential goal of the Society.
In 1945, the Society was reorganized. It became The Ameri¬
can Cancer Society and instituted a national research pro¬
gramme, in which it had invested more than $200,000,000 up
to 1968, whilst retaining its educational function.
The Society also broadened the range of its volunteer
activity. Half the National Board of Directors are now
laymen and more than 3,000 local Cancer Society Units
have been established throughout the United States.
A broad communications approach is adopted to motivate
a population of over 200,000,000. It tries to reach people
where they live or work, where they study, worship or relax,
when they read newspapers, watch television, listen to radio
or go to meetings. It devotes much energy to encouraging
an immediate person-to-person approach; the advice of a
friend or acquaintance can play a vital role.
This approach is essentially optimistic and the message of
hope is bolstered by statistics. The use of factual stories
of cured patients has been an important element. Cured
Cancer Congresses make real the existence of more than
1,500,000 Americans who once had the disease and are
cured;
At the same time the Society enlists the support of all
physicians and helps them to keep their knowledge of cancer
up to date. Medical policies are candidly discussed and
debated at professional meetings sponsored by the Society
and there is a continuous effort to bring the latest thera¬
peutic advances to the attention of doctors.
The Society's 2,300,000 volunteers have a number of specific
achievements to their credit. For example, 68,000 volunteers
provided the manpower for a massive public health survey
in which over a million adults' medical histories were followed
over a period of 6 years. In 1969, volunteers raised over
$50,000,000 for the Society. Largely due to their propaganda
campaigns about two-thirds of American women over 21 have
taken the "Pap" test for cervical cancer at least once.
Progress against cancer has been slow but sure. In 1937,
the cure rate of cancer in the United States was one in five
cases; today it is one in three. This is the result of many
factors, but not the least is that the great majority of Americans
are now aware that, with treatment, the disease is curable
and take steps to protect themselves and their families.

Cancer is not one
disease but a family
of diseases the
incidence of which
varies from one
region to another.
Right, a breakdown of
the various types of
cancer in men and
women in the United
States drawn up by
the American Cancer
Society. It is
noticeable that the
incidence of lung
cancer is much higher
in men than in
women. A WHO
committee of experts
recently stated that
more than 50 per cent
of all cancer patients
could be cured if
the disease were
diagnosed In its
earlier stages and that,
in many countries,
three out of four
cancers occur in parts
of the body that are
easily accessible for
diagnosis and
treatment
SKIN
ORAL
LUNG
COLON AND
RECTUM
OTHER
DIGESTIVE
PROSTATE
URINARY
LEUKAEMIA
AND LYMPHOMAS
ALL OTHERS
COLON AND
RECTUM
OTHER
DIGESTIVE
UTERUS
URINARY
LEUKAEMIA
AND LYMPHOMAS
ALL OTHERS
Drawing : American Cancer Society
cervix or the bladder. On the other
hand, early diagnosis of malignant
tumours in such sites as the lung, the
brain, the pancreas, the liver, etc., is
only very rarely realized. By the time
these tumours declare themselves
clinically they are too often, beyond
cure. How to improve this situation is
one of the pressing problems for
cancer research.
How can earlier diagnosis be
achieved? Efforts are needed in
three general fields: firstly, public
education; secondly, professional edu¬
cation ; and thirdly, the need to con¬
centrate on high risk groups.
Public education on cancer is not a
field for well-meaning amateurs. In a
study of patients' reasons for delay,
carried out in Manchester, England,
some 15 years ago, it became clear
that a patient with a lump in the breast
was more likely to suspect cancer (and
72 per cent did so) than patients with
other symptoms which were not
associated .in the patient's mind with
a potentially malignant cause (23 per
cent of cervix cancers and 15 per cent
of cancers of the mouth or skin).
Patients with troublesome bleeding
from the womb or an ulcer of the
mouth or skin tend to seek early advice
because of the nuisance of the
symptoms. The patient with a lump in
the breast, on the other hand, pro¬
crastinates in spite of her suspicions.
This delay is largely an expression
of fear coupled with a deep conviction
that, if cancer is diagnosed, no effec¬
tive treatment is possible. This pes
simism leads to delay and delay leads
to extension of the tumour with, as we
have seen, a- rapidly worsening prog¬
nosis.
This finding might lead to the
erroneous idea that to publicize, for
example, what have been called the
"Seven Danger Signals of Cancer,"
might lead to more delay and not less.
The important lesson learned here was
that an essential ingredient of any
public education programme must be
an Improvement of the image of cancer
and the dissemination of optimistic
attitudes to this disease. The public
at large must be given encouraging
information as to the prospects of cure.
There is no need for me to go into
details on how best to educate the
public about cancer, but clearly there
are some very wrong ways to go about
it. The International Union against
Cancer (U.I.C.C.) has established a
Committee on Public Education (un¬
der the chairmanship of John Wake¬
field) which for many years has been
concerned with the subtleties and prob¬
lems of education and has published
many reports on psychological, socio¬
economic and methodological research
in this field.
What, it may be asked, is the prob¬
able outcome of a consultation bet¬
ween a pessimistic patient and an
equally pessimistic physician? Exper¬
ience and carefully designed invest¬
igations have shown, unhappily, that
there is a very considerable degree of
pessimism about malignant disease
within the medical profession itself. I
have already mentioned the attitude
of some workers in this field who have
continued to express the view that
malignant disease is inevitably fatal.
Hodgkin's disease was long regarded
as fatal without any adequate evid¬
ence to support this pessimistic view.
Too many radiotherapists my own
field of work seem to regard radia¬
tion therapy as serving only a pallia¬
tive function in the management of
patients with malignant disease. Cur¬
ative treatment is regarded by many
throughout the world as a faint pos¬
sibility at best.
Pessimism within the nursing pro¬
fession is no less than in the medical
profession and, indeed, doctors and
nurses on the whole are probably
almost as pessimistic about cancer as
the general public. To try to correct
this unawareness of the favourable
aspects of malignant disease the
U.I.C.C. has a committee concerned
with Professional Education, under
the chairmanship of Professor Umberto
Veronesi.
In certain industrial processes,
groups of workers are know to have
been exposed to carcinogens of one
kind or another and are properly des¬
cribed as high risk groups. Another
typical high risk group are heavy
cigarette smokers who have a much
higher than normal risk of developing
cancer of the lung.
A high risk group may be confined
to one specific socio-economic group
of a community, and certain national
groups seem likewise to carry special
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CANCER IS CURABLE (Continued)
Fear versus proper education
26
risks. The need to Identify high risk
groups in any population arises
from (1) the need for earlier diagnosis,
and (2) the limitations of the rather
coarse physical methods so far avail¬
able for achieving earlier diagnosis.
It is important to distinguish between
early diagnosis, on the one hand, and,
on the other, a screening programme
to detect pre-cancerous lesions the
removal of which achieves true can¬
cer prevention.
Where earlier diagnosis of establish¬
ed cancer is required we are con¬
cerned (a) with symptoms and (b) with
physical examination of one kind or
another.
When we are concerned with a com¬
mon cancer, such as a breast cancer in
England or gastric cancer in Japan, we
begin to think in terms of some physi¬
cal means of detection on a population
basis.
So far as breast cancer is con¬
cerned we have already seen that cure
is possible by correct methods of
treatment, but that much higher cure
rates are achieved with smaller tu¬
mours. How feasible are screening
programmes for the detection of small
tumours?
Some workers urge regular self-ex¬
amination of the breasts. This is at least
inexpensive' and requires no help from
others apart from initial instruction. But
is it effective? Can one really expect
a widely acceptable programme of
self-examination to produce a demon¬
strable impact on breast cancer death
rates? Personally I am sceptical.
But what of other physical screen¬
ing methods such as mammography
(X-Ray examination), thermography
and ultrasonic scanning? These three
methods are under careful study in a
number of reliable centres and we
await, with impatient interest, the out¬
come of the final analyses.
But even If they prove potentially
effective can these techniques be
applied to whole communities often
enough to create the impact we re¬
quire on the breast cancer problem?
What of the economics of such a pro¬
gramme, not only in terms of cost to
the patient, but in terms of manpower
to carry out the examinations and,
equally vital, to maintain clinical
records and follow-up?
Here then is where it might be
essential to concentrate on the relev¬
ant high risk groups. But do we know
the high risk groups so far as breast
cancer is concerned? A lot is indeed
known about this. Nevertheless,
breast cancer detection programmes
will have to be very carefully designed
if they are to show any success.
What of gastric cancer? In Japan,
where this is the commonest of all
malignant tumours, great efforts are
being made to carry out fibre-optic
gastric photography on a large scale.
But again we are faced with the eco¬
nomics of the problem, in the widest
sense of the term. Once more the
need must surely be to determine the
truly high risk group and to concen¬
trate first on that section of the
population.
In the United States a yearly exami¬
nation of the intestines is recom¬
mended in the hope of detecting either
pre-cancerous or early malignant
lesions. So far as I can judge, how¬
ever, this is an expensive procedure
and, if widely based population screen¬
ing is to be done, some economic
direction of effort is essential.
In short, every country and indeed
every region and socio-economic
group within each country has its own
high risk groups who represent the
primary problem in cancer control.
Each country must therefore work out
its own approach to its own problem.
The U.I.C.C. has a special Com¬
mission concerned with Cancer Epi¬
demiology under the chairmanship of
John Higginson. This Commission
has already carried out extremely
important work in mapping out the
sometimes wide variations in cancer
incidence throughout the world. This
is one of the first steps in establishing
the existence of high risk groups,
providing guide-lines for national
cancer control programmes.
R
, ESEARCH is a much
abused word. To many people
research means test tubes, guinea
pigs and mice, and some organizations
will only finance this type of research.
In fact the U.I.C.C. Committee on
Public Education is vitally concerned
with research in educational method¬
ology and the evaluation of different
techniques of persuasion. The Com¬
mittee on Professional Education is
likewise concerned with educational
psychology and techniques. The
problem of how to combat pessimism
on the one hand and how to translate
knowledge into action on the other, are
very considerable problems indeed.
Epidemiological studies are vital to
the identification of high risk groups,
and research must further be carried
out into different techniques for the
detection of early cancers in all anato¬
mical sites.
I have already mentioned a number
of sites in which early detection is
rarely achieved and new techniques
for preventing and or detecting cancer
in these sites must be sought with a
proper sense of urgency. At this
point we begin to look to those
concerned with fundamental research
in cancer In the hope that some test,
similar perhaps to the Wasserman test
for syphilis, or other serological tests
for various infections might yet be ap¬
plied to the field of malignant disease.
Even if it should ultimately prove
possible, it would, of course, be of
little value to present the clinician with
a test indicating only that cancer exists
somewhere in the body. What we
require is some specific test which
Indicates the probable presence of
cancer at some specific anatomical
site. Such a test, I fear, seems a very
long way from realization.
To sum up, we must continue to
accept the challenge of cancer as it
is today. We must not be dismayed
by our present failures; failure to cure
attracts attention success goes un¬
noticed.
We must increase our already
considerable successes for all those
cancers for which current therapeutic
measures can already offer high
prospects of permanent cure provided
we can get them to hospital earlier
than we do at present.
The percentage of early stage can¬
cers of. the uterine cervix diagnosed
have increased about 15 per cent over
the past four decades in my own cen¬
tre. It would be nice to explain this
on the basis of public education and/or
on cervical cytology. It Is not, unfor¬
tunately, possible to attribute this
improvement to any one activity and
it seems to me most likely that it is the
result both of local and national chan¬
ges in the climate of opinion concern¬
ing cancer in general and cervical can¬
cer in particular. Whatever the reason,
this change must undoubtedly lead to
the saving of many many more lives.
This kind of improvement in prognosis
must be. sought with cancers in all
anatomical sites and by all available
methods.
The International Union against
Cancer is already active in all the
relevant fields of work and, with
continued international support, we
can confidently expect each type of
cancer, one by one, to yield to
increasing therapeutic pressures.
