Non-scientists
dissect science
A
32
LT a time when space research has been hotly
criticized as an excessive, even wasteful expenditure of
vast sums of public money, it is of special interest to note
that in the latest issue of "Impact of Science on Society",
Unesco's science quarterly (1), many people from developing
countries feel that space research including moon shots
is highly worthwhile. This point of view, admittedly based
on a small sampling, gives an additional dimension to last
month's issue of the "Unesco Courier" on "Spin-off, the
fruit of space research" (March 1970).
The views favouring space research and moon travel are
among the numerous comments on science and technology
in all their aspects published by "Impact" in a significant
issue entirely devoted to the theme "Non-scientists dissect
science".
The "Impact" survey presents the opinions of "the
average citizen" and of notable "non-scientists", including
novelist-poet Robert Graves, painter Joan Miró, Kenyan
leader, the late Tom M'boya, and philosopher-statesman
Charles Habib Malik of the Lebanon.
On the question of space research, Mochtar Lubis,
publisher of the Djakarta daily, "Indonesia Raya", declares:
"I cannot agree with the criticisms that have been levelled
against the great sums now being spent on space and
nuclear research 	For the first time in his long history,
man is within reach of the stars . . . This newly-gained
freedom, this vast extension of our horizons, is bound to
have great effects on our old habits of thinking, on our old
attitudes and on the familiar relations between nations."
Mrs. Gerónima T. Pecson, Philippine civic leader, agrees
with him. "Much has already been accomplished in the
exploration of space," she says. "The recent fantastic
flights to the moon prove the range of the power of science
and its promise of wonderful new things in the future. Let
the exploration of outer space go on."
The survey suggests that feelings against the moon
landings are strongest in industrially-developed countries.
For example, Robert Graves sharply disagrees about the
value of the moon flights and lumps them into a category
he calls "show-off science".
He says: "It reminds me of a man who leaves his wife
and family to starve while he goes out and fights battles
against strange foes. Until we have got this world in
some sort of order, we should abstain from such expensive
and dangerous nonsense."
The famous novelist hits out strongly at science and
technology. Science, he says, is now dominated by base
motives, such as making money. It "has gradually fallen
into the hands of the traders" ... "Men of broad vision,
the true creators and innovators, have long ceased to
control the evolution or uses made of science."
Robert Graves decries the destruction by technology of
human dignity and individuality and of the warmth of the
home, with people now condemned to live in unnatural
"little life-boxes". Technology, he maintains, is responsible
for the enormous flood of populations into cities: "Science
and technology have themselves created the problem that
science and technology have been vainly trying to solve."
Tom Mboya, in what was perhaps the last article he wrote
before his assassination in July 1969, comments that little
has been done and has often been wrongly done in
bringing the benefits of science and technology to African
peoples. He pleads for technology designed to meet the
needs of African peoples, not just , merely exported to
them. "Importation of technology without appropriate local
research and development," he says, "can lead to a painful
lopsided society, where there is concentration of modernity
in a few cities while the rural areas remain practically as
they have always been."
Humanists have an important say in this issue of
"Impact."
Miguel Angel Asturias, 1967 winner of the Nobel Prize
for literature, calls for a closing of the gap between the
sciences and the humanities, through a re-encounter
between scientists and non-scientists, intellectuals and
technicians which, he says, would offer a brighter prospect
for the settlement of the problems of the Third World.
Charles Habib Malik, former president of the U.N. Gene¬
ral Assembly and now professor of philosophy at the Ame¬
rican University of Beirut, considers that "the great danger
today is that the enormous and absolutely merited prestige
of science and technology might delude scientists into
believing. . . that they are the absolute masters of the uni¬
verse."
Professor Malik sees three areas of danger in the pro¬
gress of science: "the possibility of scientific development
abolishing privacy altogether, so that not only where I am
and what I am doing, but even what I am thinking and feel¬
ing can be penetrated and known at any time; the possibility
of interfering with the genetic development of man; and the
possibility of upsetting whole equilibria of nature, with great
damage to our environment."
ANY of our readers in particular, our scientific
readers" says the editorial in this issue of "Impact", "may
feel that some of the criticisms of science and technology
expressed by the non-scientists are unjust, illogical or
manifest a lack of understanding of how science works,
what it seeks to do and what it is capable of doing."
However, "the significant point," says the editorial, "is that
these stances exist, for whatever reasons, however justly
and with whatever rational validity and that the majority
of them have a definite validity cannot be doubted."
The "non-scientists'" issue of "Impact" is the second of
a trilogy of numbers devoted to exploring the alienation of
science from society. "Impact's" previous number, "The
Science of Humour, The Humour of Science" (No. 3, 1969)
emphasized the humanizing role of humour in science its
role in helping to re-establish science in the mainstream
of cultural life.
Scientists will reply to criticisms of non-scientists in the
third number of the trilogy which will appear shortly (N° 2,
1970). In this issue, nine eminent scientists, among them
the Nobel Prizewinner. Alfred Kastler, rebut and some¬
times endorse the opinions expressed by non-scientists,
and also state their own views on the impact of technology
on human life. This trilogy of "Impact" studies should help
to clarify and give perspective to the troubled relationship
between science and society one of the critical questions
of our time.
