46
by U Thant
Secretary-General of the United Nations
M OR most of the time that
man has been on earth, his numbers
have been small and his power limited.
Damage to his environment was at
worst local, and usually subject to
repair by the regenerative powers of
nature.
Only a few centuries ago, in
1600 A.D., human beings numbered an
estimated 500 million, and much of the
world was uninhabited or unaffected
by man's activities. In the past few
centuries, however, the world's popula¬
tion has increased sevenfold and all
areas of the earth's surface have been
to some degree modified by man.
With the prospect of another
doubling of the world's population in
less than half a century, the need to
provide food, water, minerals, fuel and
other necessities for such increasing
numbers of people will place pressure
on virtually all areas of the earth and
demand the most careful planning and
management of natural resources.
Accompanying the growth of popula¬
tions in recent decades has been the
spread of urbanization. Forty per cent
of the world's people now live in
urban areas. In somewhat more than
half a century, if present trends
continue, urbanization will have reach¬
ed its maximum and the great majority
of people will live in towns and cities.
The rate of urbanization is more
rapid in the developing nations. In
1920, the urban population was 100 mil¬
lion in these countries. By the year
2000, it may well have increased
twentyfold. In the developed nations,
the urban population in the same
period will have increased fourfold.
Urbanization is not in principle
destructive to the environment. With .
proper planning and control, and if it
were proceeding at a slower rate, it
should enhance and not detract from
environmental quality by relieving
pressure on rural lands, by providing
goods and services in quantity and
diversity, by providing new and attrac¬
tive habitats and ways of life.
However, in most areas, govern¬
ments have neither prepared for, nor
have they been able to cope with, the
mass migration into urban areas. In


MAN THE KILLER
OF NATURE
large cities, slums of the most wretch¬
ed nature often become the environ¬
ment of people who once lived in
greater dignity and better health in the
countryside.
Pollution of air, water, and land in
urban areas have become universal
problems. Diseases associated with
urban living in developing nations have
increased. Noise and congestion add
to physical and mental distress.
Accompanying population growth
and urbanization is the accelerated
impact of industrialization, and of an
advanced technology that is often
poorly integrated with the needs of
man and the environment. The
production of crude petroleum was
negligible a century ago. By 1966,
however, it amounted to 1,641 million
metric tons per year. Between 1937
and 1966, annual production increased
sixfold. In the same period, the motor
car, scarcely known at the start of
this century, was produced at a rate
that grew from 5 million to 19 million
per year.
In the most recent decade, the total
value of all industrial production has
doubled. Industrialization is of vital
importance to nations which seek to
raise their living standards, but the side
effects of poorly planned or un¬
controlled industrialization and of the
one-sided application of technology
have been a direct cause of many
serious environmental problems.
The reliance of modern technology
upon the combustion of fossil fuels has
brought a 10 per cent increase in
atmospheric carbon dioxide over the
past century. This could rise to 25 per
cent by the year 2000. The conse¬
quences of such an increase upon
world weather and climate are un¬
certain, but could eventually be
catastrophic.
The increased use of modern
technology has brought major in¬
creases in the amount of waste pro¬
ducts which pollute the environment.
In the United States alone, this
amounts each year to 142 million tons
of smoke and noxious fumes, 7 million
automobiles, 20 million tons of paper,
48,000 million cans, 26,000 million
bottles and jars, 3,000 million tons of
waste rock and mill tailings and
50 million million gallons of hot water,
along with a variety of other wastes.
Other industrialized nations make
their comparable contributions of
debris and toxic materials, and while
technology is adequate to cope with
these problems of pollution, the
planning and application of pollution .
control lags far behind what is
required, often because of the cost.
' The spread of the urban-industrial
network with its transport systems is
consuming open space at a very high
rate. In the United Kingdom, for
instance, such expansion will consume
one-sixth of the farming land in the
next three decades. The spread of
an urban-industrial-transport complex
could enhance the human habitat, but
too often uncontrolled urban sprawl
destroys valuable resources, land¬
scapes and living things.
E
¡XPANDING populations
bring increasing demands upon the
productivity of agricultural lands for
food and fibre. Application of tech¬
nology to these lands has brought
greatly increased production but it is
vital that such gains should not be
offset by damage to the environment.
Increased use of fertilizers and. new
varieties of pesticides have raised food
crop yields, but some of these agri¬
cultural chemicals have side effects on
the environment that we are only
beginning to comprehend.
The maintenance of both atmo¬
spheric oxygen and the productivity of
marine environments, for example,
depends on photosynthesis by marine
plants, mostly the floating algae of
microscopic size. Minute amounts of
pesticides such as D.D.T. have been
found to inhibit photosynthesis in these
plants by 75 per cent. Yet we have
dumped an estimated 1,000 million
pounds of D.D.T. into our environment
and are adding some 100 million
pounds per year.
In the case of pesticides, world
CONTINUED PAGE 48

X
Photo © Y. Ivanov, Minsk. U.S. S R.
\
\
\
This was once a thickly forested woodland in Europe. All the
trees have been cleared and the swamps drained to make
way for a modern industrial complex. Man is now capable of
grandiose schemes of development where the economic and
technical factors are all carefully worked out, but the long term
impact on the environment is often overlooked.
47

KILLER OF NATURE (Continued)
48 Turning his back on the garbage of our technological "civilization" this angler waits
hopefully for a "bite". Soon this simple pleasure may be a thing of the past as industrial
pollution poisons the world's inland waters. The once beautiful lakes of Switzerland
are dying and pollution is affecting thousands of Finnish lakes. In North America it is
estimated that it would cost over $40,000 million to clean up Lake Erie.
production now exceeds 1,300 million
pounds. The U.S.A. alone exports
over 400 million pounds per year.
Apart from their potential effects upon
the productivity of the oceans, many
of these pesticides are known to have
harmful effects upon fish, wildlife and
human health, which have been of
serious consequence in many areas.
The land upon which man depends
for his food has been seriously
impaired by man's own misuse. Five
hundred million hectares (1,235 million
acres) of arable land have already been
lost through erosion and salinization,
two thirds of the world's forests have
been lost to production and 150 kinds
of birds and animals have become
extinct because of man. Approxim¬
ately 1,000 species or races of wild
animals are now rare or in peril.
Erosion, soil deterioration, deforesta¬
tion, watershed damage and the
destruction of animal and plant life
continue and in some areas are
increasing.
The environment of human settle¬
ments differs from all others in the
degree to which it is created and
controlled by man. It would be
expected that man, being presumably
rational, would at least have construct¬
ed for himself urban centres ideally
suited to his occupancy. In fact, the
opposite often appears to be true, and
it is within cities that some of the most
acute problems of the environment are
found.
In most developing countries, it has
rarely been possible to provide in
advance the urban planning and design
that would ensure a rational arrange¬
ment of space for living, working,
transport and recreation, nor has it
been possible to keep pace with the
demands for housing, water supply,
sewage disposal, education and the
other amenities of urban life. Rapid
urban development tends to overload
every kind of public service, including
transport and education.
The stress that often accompanies
accelerated change results in emotional
tension and a feeling of insecurity.
These in turn may lead to mental
breakdowns, psychosomatic illness,
suicide attempts and an increase of
crime, drug dependence and anti¬
social behaviour.
The deterioration of the physical
environment, the natural as well as its
man-made component, has social
implications which can hardly be sepa¬
rated from the problem as a whole.
Areas of natural beauty with an
abundant wildlife within reach of urban
areas have a social function of provid¬
ing recreation facilities for city-
CONTINUED PAGE 50

frd»nâ
1 S^c<
OPERATION
NOAH'S ARK
Photos Dominique Roger - Unesco
Photo P. Jones Griffiths © Magnum
Named European Conservation Year by the Council
of Europe, 1970 has seen campaigns launched in many
countries against man's abuse of nature and the increasing
pollution of the environment. In France, "Operation
Noah's Ark" mobilized young people for a nature
protection campaign in which they formed teams to clear
woodland, create small nature reserves and save wounded
birds and animals. Right, two works from their exhibition
of drawings and paintings on nature protection, held
at Unesco, Paris in June. Above, on "Earth Day", April 22,
1970, gas-masked American students invaded the streets
of New York to show their concern over pollution. Their
warning "you are the endangered species" is timely,
following a recent estimate that man is filling the air with
more than 800 million tons of polluants per year.

KILLER OF NATURE (Continued)
100 million pounds of DDT dumped into the environment each year
dwellers, beside their intrinsic value
as part of a common heritage.
Historic sites and monuments form
a part of the man-made human envi¬
ronment, the value of which cannot be
overestimated. Their cultural and
social values for the individuals living
close to them as well as for mankind
as a whole are evident, and their
conservation, along with that of the
natural environment, merits the atten¬
tion of the international community.
T
50
HE magnitude of the prob¬
lem in some developing nations
appears to defy solution by anything
less than a massive national and
international effort. A first require¬
ment is that of urban planning and
design in which adequate considera¬
tion is given to the social needs of
the population, Including services. A
second is for a major programme of
construction and reconstruction. In
some places the establishment of
complete new towns and cities with
their own industries and other sources
of employment may be called for.
There is great need to explore new
patterns and frameworks for urban
living based on greater understanding
of human biology and behaviour and
consideration of social and cultural
factors.
The cost of such major programmes
of planning and construction far
exceeds any amount that has been
expended on cities at any period in
history. The need is for new facilities
to accommodate urban populations
that will have increased twentyfold
over a period of only eighty years,
from 1920 to 2000 A.D. The alter¬
native to such a programme is acceler¬
ating human misery and mortality.
In developed regions the urban
environment is afflicted with many of
the same difficulties encountered in
developing regions. Urban planning
and design lag far behind urban
growth. Where plans have been
made they are often pushed aside by
political, economic or social pressures.
Unplanned or poorly planned suburbs
spread over the countryside surround¬
ing formerly well-defined urban cen¬
tres, merging indistinguishably with
those spreading out from other
centres. The result is an urban con¬
urbation, a poorly defined and little
differentiated mass of urban tissue
within which the individual has diffi¬
culty identifying with a community and
Is beset with problems of transport¬
ation, congestion and pollution. It is
impossible to describe such areas as
cities, but only as urbanized regions.
Most developing nations lack
specialists qualified to deal with the
problems of urban planning and
development. Educational program¬
mes should thus be drawn up with
this need in mind. In the meantime,
international agencies and bilateral
assistance programmes will need to
provide technical and financial aid to
these areas.
Many national and international
programmes are under way, but all
fall short of existing needs. Brazil
has built an entire new city for its
capital, but. Brasilia is already plagued
with urban slums. Pakistan has taken
a lead in the planning and design of
Islamabad, but its overall urban
problems are Incredibly complex.
Over $9 million are being provided
to construct an experimental housing
project in Lima, Peru, but hundreds of
millions will need to be spent before
the problems of the barriadas (shanty
towns) can be solved. An idea of the
cost of planning and building modern
cities is given by the estimate from the
United States that a new city for
250,000 will cost $1,000 million.
One of the striking demographic
features of today is the rural exodus
set off by the stagnant economic
and cultural life of the villages in many
regions and the magnet of the city.
It is clearly impossible to provide the
smallest villages with all the equipment
and amenities of modern urban life.
Nevertheless, if rural life can be
made more attractive and living
standards raised, fewer people will
rush to the cities and more satisfactory
patterns of land use can be developed.
Many problems have arisen from the
large-scale construction of dams, re¬
servoirs, canals, power stations and
other works for the movement and
control of water in major river basins
or the transfer of water between
basins to provide for power, irrigation,
transport or city water supplies.
Such large scale development pro¬
grammes have been carried out on the
Nile, Niger, Volta, Colorado, Columbia,
Missouri, Volga, Rhone, Indus and
many other river systems. Major Inter-
basin transfers of water have been
discussed for Canada and Siberia.
Schemes to modify the entire Amazon
River basin and to open a sea-level
canal across the Panama Isthmus are
under consideration.
Economic and engineering factors
are given full weight in most of these
plans, but the broader impact on the
environment is inadequately consider¬
ed. Often little or no attention is
given to proper management of lands
in the watersheds developed by
engineering techniques. Among the
harmful effects that occur are silting
up of reservoirs, loss of delta lands,
salinization, spread of waterborne
diseases and the displacement of
peoples.
In the marine environment there Is
an obvious need, already considered
by the United Nations, for international
control over the exploitation of marine
resources and a system for making
rational use of these resources, which,
in the absence of effective control and
management, have been and continue
to be destroyed or depleted.
The decline of certain species of
whales and seals, of sea turtles, of the
Pacific sardine and the Atlantic salmon
fisheries, as well as the continuing
over-exploitation of the Eastern Pacific
anchoveta fishery are examples. The
growing dependence of man upon
the sea as a source of protein
requires that its resources be properly
managed.
P
OLLUTION of the sea is a
continuing threat to its future produc¬
tivity. Although the International Con¬
vention for the Prevention of Pollution
of the Sea by Oil has been in existence
since 1954, oil pollution is still a major
hazard, and other forms of equally
damaging pollution, over which little
or no control is exercised, continue.
Research on the problems of the
human environment is in progress in
most industrialized countries. At the
international level, such programmes
as the International Geophysical Year,
the International Biological Programme,
the International Hydrological Decade,
and the work of the Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission have given
a significant boost to research in
important sectors of the environment.
Nevertheless, more emphasis has
been placed so far on research In the
physical and earth sciences than in
the biological and social sciences, and
even in the most industrially advanced

countries an ecological and Integrated
approach to research has rarely been
followed.
Nor, as underlined by the Unesco
Conference on the Resources of the
Biosphere in 1968, is education at all
levels and in all countries as yet
designed to promote a proper under¬
standing and appreciation of the nature
of the problems of the environment.
Only scattered efforts are being made
in this respect in certain countries,
mostly the developed ones, through
an increased emphasis on ecology at
the university level.
Very little educational material
suited to the needs of developing
countries Is as yet available, although
Unesco and the International Union for
the 'Conservation of Nature are now
working on the production of such
material.
The training of specialists and
technicians at all levels to handle
problems of the environment is clearly
a major need in the developing
countries, where efforts are now being
made to provide such instruction in
national institutions. Similar educa¬
tion, appropriate to national conditions,
is also given on a regional basis in
institutions such as the Middle East
Technical University at Ankara, the
Training Centre for Sanitary Engineer¬
ing In Morocco, the Turrialba Inter-
American Institute for Agricultural
Sciences in Costa Rica, or the Inter-
American Housing and Planning Center
at Bogota.
But all the efforts made thus far to
house population, to integrate technol¬
ogy into complex environments, to plan
and control Industrialization and urban
development and to manage land and
resources effectively have fallen far
short of global needs. Today, there¬
fore, all nations face dangers of
critical proportions that call for action
at the local, regional, national and
international levels.
There are so many problems that
choices must be made and priorities
established. It Is to analyse these
problems and to provide a focus for
world action that the United Nations
has called an international conference
on the Problems of the Human Environ¬
ment, which will meet in Stockholm
in 1972.
This text is based on a study, "Problems
of the Human Environment", presented to
the U.N. Economic and Social Council in
luly 1969 by U Thant, Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
This curious beast, the "long-snouted fog-eater", Is a tiny answer to fogs
caused by polluted air. Extended to its full height of 100 feet, the plastic tube
rotates in a vertical arc spraying out chemicals to disperse fog vapour
over a limited area.
Designs for a floating "vacuum cleaner" that sucks up oil spilt on the ocean
have been drawn up by the French Technocean Company. The rear twin hulls
of the vessel produce a funnel effect and the oil and water mixture is
sucked up through an intake valve at the V of the twin hulls. The mixture Is
filtered and the sea water jettisoned while the oil goes into the ship's
storage tanks. The ship is designed to treat some 13,000 cubic feet of water
per hour and to store the same volume of filtered oil.
51

52°
I Éá AÎ.r
il-*
- t
:.
î*.-A

The mansions
and the
shanty towns
It is just ten years since Brazil's capital was transferred from Rio de Janeiro to Brasilia,
a skyscraper city built in five years on a desert plateau in the heart of the world's
fifth largest country. Left, twin skyscrapers, serving as Congressional offices, rise
above Brasilia's dome-shaped Senate building. Yet already Brasilia is plagued with its
own "favellas", or urban slums, the outgrowth of a massive influx of people. Some
of these immigrants camp where they can, (above) while others swell the population of
new shanty towns, (below). The rush to the cities has created similar problems
in all parts of the world.
