
CARTHAGE
through the eyes
of Greece
and Rome
by Mhamed Fantar
P
HANNIBAL TROPHY? This bronze
breastplate may be a trophy brought
back to Carthage from Italy by a
veteran of one of Hannibal's
campaigns towards the close of
the 3rd century B.C. It represents
a typical piece of workmanship of
the Campania region not far from
present day Naples. It is decorated
with the head of Minerva, the
Roman version of the Greek goddess
Pallas Athena. The object was
uncovered in a wooden coffin near
Sousse in Tunisia.
Bardo Museum, Tunis
Photo Luc Joubert © Archaeologla Viva
HILO of Byblos, a Greek
historian of the 2nd century A.D., tells
us the legend of the first Phoenician
seafarer.
Caught in a forest fire, Usos stripp¬
ed a tree of its branches, straddled
the trunk and pushed off into the sea
to escape the flames. This was the
first Phoenician venture into Mediterra¬
nean waters.
The Iliad, the Odyssey, the Torah,
the Tablets of Ugarit and many other
equally famous writings have pre¬
served for us a record of the Phoen¬
ician navigators, their remarkable
voyages and the riches they gained
from their trading ventures, particularly
in the country known as Tarshish,
located, in all probability, in southern
Spain.
Tarshish, with its plentiful supplies of
copper, silver, lead and tin became the
MHAMED FANTAR is a Tunisian specialist
in Punic archaeology and epigraphy. He is
secretary-general of the Archaeological and
Historical Research Commission of the Na¬
tional Institute of Archaeology and the Arts,
Tunis, and professor of Archaeology at
the Faculty of Literature and the Social
Sciences of the University of Tunis. He
has written many studies on archaeological
discoveries in Tunisia. His most recent
publications are. "Carthage, la prestigieuse
cité d'Elissa" (Carthage, the illustrious city
of Elissa), Tunis, 1970; "Eschatologie Phéni¬
cienne-Punique" (Phoenician-Punic Eschato-
logy), Tunis, 1970; and "lugurtha", in Arabic
(Maison Tunisienne d'Edition, 1970).
goal of Phoenician maritime expedi¬
tions from Tyre and Sidon. Describ¬
ing its vast mineral wealth, the Greek
historian Diodorus Siculus writes:
"The country of the Iberians has the
most plentiful and the richest silver
mines that are known. The Iberians
were ignorant of the value of silver,
and the Phoenician traders were able
to buy it in exchange for a very small
quantity of merchandise; they took it to
Greece, Asia and other countries, and
thus amassed great wealth. This
trade, which they plied for many years,
brought them power and enabled them
to establish numerous colonies in
Sicily and the neighbouring islands, in
Libya, Sardinia and Iberia."
On their voyages westward to Tars¬
hish, the Phoenicians became familiar
with the North African coastline. Soon
they set up small trading stations
where their ships could put in to rest
the crews and take on supplies. Car¬
thage was undoubtedly the largest and
most important of these Phoenician
outposts in the west. A legend that
appears to explain the reasons and
events that led to its foundation is
recorded by the writers of Antiquity.
According to this version, Carthage
was founded by Elissa, sister of Pyg¬
malion, King of Tyre, who was married
to Acerbas, the high-priest of Melqart.
Acerbas was murdered by Pygmalion
who coveted his wealth. The grief-
stricken princess decided to flee from
Tyre, and with skill and diplomacy
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

SEEN BY GREECE AND ROME (Continued)
A city open to all men and gods
30
The finely -engraved decoration on this
sacred razor, with its handle in the form
of the head and neck of a bird,
shows the Egyptian influence that
affected Punic art. The Carthaginians
inherited a long tradition of
craftsmanship in metal from their
Phoenician ancestors and many Punic
inscriptions testify that metalworkers
and jewellers flourished in Carthage.
Talismans of eternity, the sacred
razors were placed in the tombs
together with necklaces and glass
pendant masks.
succeeded in deceiving her brother
and lulling his suspicions. Accompa¬
nied by a group of Tyrian nobles, she
went to Cyprus where she was wel¬
comed by the high-priest of Jupiter.
She and her followers then sailed for
Africa and disembarked at the site of
the future Carthage.
It would be difficult to accept this as
an authentic record but the facts it
relates fit to some extent into the pic¬
ture of the Phoenician world, and thus
may shed some light on the history of
Carthage and the Carthaginian civili¬
zation.
The date most commonly accepted
for the foundation of Carthage is 814
B.C. But some historians believe that
this is too early: archaeological
remains recovered from excavations at
Carthage do not appear to be older
than the 7th century B.C., which far
from confirms the ancient texts.
Yet can we be sure that we have
reached the oldest level of the city?
Who knows what surprises may await
us during future excavations! Per¬
haps we shall find remains even more
ancient than the terracotta vases
unearthed in the little "Cintas Chapel".
These are in the sub-geometric style
of the Cyclades and cannot be older
than 750 B.C.
T
HE archaeologist, as we
know, needs to be patient, scrupulous
and cautious. The historian, for his
part, should not regard data on far-off
times handed down by tradition as
infallible, nor should he systematically
distrust them. Archaeology often
confirms the writings of the Ancients.
Indeed, in the case of Carthage,
archaeological studies and literary
tradition can perhaps be reconciled.
The Phoenicians, in 814 B.C., may
have founded a small outpost similar
to the many others they established
along both shores of the Mediter¬
ranean, where they replenished their
stores and perhaps traded with the
local population. But their principal
objective seems to have been the
mineral wealth of Tarshish.
In the 8th century B.C., two dangers
threatened the seafarers of Tyre.
This was the period of expanding
Greek colonization in the western
Mediterranean. In 750 B.C. Greek
colonists founded Cumae in the Bay of
Naples, through which was sent the
copper ore from the mines of Etruria
and Campania. Seventeen years later,
the Greeks founded Syracuse. The
Phoenicians must have realized the
danger from these new Greek settle¬
ments which threatened their shipp¬
ing and trade routes. Something had
to be done to check and contain the
Greek expansion.
The second danger to the Phoenician
merchants came from Assyria. The
wealth of the Tyrian cities quickly
roused the greed and envy of the
Assyrian rulers. Assurnasirpal II
(883-856 B.C.) speaks of "the tribute
of the kings of the sea coasts the
country of the Tyrians, the country
of the Sidonians, the country of the
Gibilites. . . and the town of Arvas in
the midst of the sea. . .silver, gold,
lead, bronze, vases of bronze, gar¬
ments of many colours, linen tunics. . .
I received their tribute and they kissed
my feet. . ."
The Assyrian greed was insatiable
and the Phoenicians lived in fear of
seeing their wealth seized by these
powerful and unscrupulous overlords.
A Phoenician colony in the western
Mediterranean, they felt, would check
Greek expansion and also provide
shelter from the Assyrian danger.
Such considerations probably explain
the spectacular rise of the "new town"
in the middle of the eighth century B.C.
At all events, the foundation of
Carthage is an established fact, so let
us see what is known about it by ex¬
amining sources that throw some light
on Carthage, its history and culture.
Firstly, what can we learn from the
writers of Antiquity? The Greeks and
the Romans were both well acquainted
with Carthage and its people. They
met as enemies on the battlefield and
as rival traders in the ports of the
Mediterranean, which has seen the rise
and fall of so many civilizations. It
would take too long to enumerate here
all the classical writers who tell us
about Carthage, but we may quote a
few of them.
There is, for instance, the famous
passage in Herodotus, which describes
the trading ritual used by Carthaginian
merchants seeking gold in Africa.
"The Carthaginians spread out their
merchandise on the beach," writes the
Father of History, "return to their
ships and make smoke to attract the
Negroes. The Negroes come down to
the sea, place their gold beside the
merchandise and withdraw. The Car¬
thaginians then return and if they find

a sufficient quantity of gold, they take
it. If not, they return to their ships
and wait, and in this case the Negroes
add more gold until the traders are
satisfied. They do each other no
wrong: the Carthaginians do not touch
the gold until the quantity seems to
correspond to the value of their wares;
the Negroes do not touch the goods
until the traders have taken the gold."
Another Greek historian, Polybius of
Megalopolis, wrote a great deal about
Carthage. He watched the army of
Scipio destroy the city of Elissa, and
as an observer of the Third Punic
War he had a special interest in the
relations between Rome and Carthage.
Two treaties were signed between
these 0ueens of tne Mediterranean,
and Polybius records their dates and
terms. To the same historian we owe
the story of Hannibal's oath at the
time of his alliance with Philip of
Macedonia.
D
IODORUS SICULUS is an¬
other historian who should be mention¬
ed. He was born in Sicily and de¬
scribes the wars between the Greeks
and the Carthaginians for the conquest
of the island.
From his pen comes an account of
human sacrifices, a practice that was
known among all Canaanites. Caught
unprepared by the invasion and
shattering victories of Agathocles
(310 B.C.), says Diodorus, writing in
the Ist century B.C., "the Carthaginians
hastened to repair their errors and
decreed the public sacrifice of 200
children from noble families. Some
citizens facing accusations voluntarily
offered their own children, numbering
no fewer than 300."
Of the Roman historians, three in
particular come to mind: Livy, who
wrote a vivid account of the Second
Punic War, with a striking pen-portrait
of Hannibal; Sallust, whose "Bellum
Jugurthinum" tells of the Phoenicians
and the Carthaginians; and Justin,
whose story of the fabulous adventure
of the Tyrian princess Elissa has
already been quoted.
Greek and Latin literature thus
abounds in references to Carthage.
But the history of Carthage was not
the primary concern of the classical
authors; they were obliged to deal
with it because it was an integral part
of the events they described, namely
the Greek and Roman wars against
Carthage.
Classical sources thus give us a
portrait of Carthage painted by her
enemies, and what they wrote should
be interpreted with the greatest
caution. This is not to say that we
should be systematically sceptical;
objectivity, in any case, is a very
modern concept for the historian. But
as they failed to understand certain
aspects of Punic civilization, the
ancient historians may give us a
distorted picture.
The ¡deal, of course, would be to
have the viewpoint of the Phoenicians
themselves, but most of Punic
literature Is lost. The Library of Car¬
thage was famous and was referred
to by classical writers, some of whom
appear to have consulted Punic works;
Sallust, Servius and Festus Avenius,
to name three, refer to Punic books
(libri Punici) and the Punic records.
According to Pliny the Elder, the
library was handed over to the Numid-
ian princes and disappeared without
trace. Only fragments of some very
famous Punic writings were saved,
such as the agricultural treatise of
Mago. "Our Senate," says Pliny,
"did him great honour. After the fall
of Carthage, it presented the libraries
of the city to the African princes; but
it decreed that exceptionally the
28 books of Mago would be translated
into Latin, although Cato had already
written a similar treatise. The task was
entrusted to persons familiar with the
Punic tongue, the principal translator
being D. Silanus, of noble birth."
The north African climate is
probably to blame to a large extent
for the disappearance of the Punic
manuscripts; the humidity of Tunisia
does not favour the preservation of
papyrus.
But there is a Semitic source which
can help us to trace some elements
of Punic civilization, namely the Torah.
Carthage was the daughter of Tyre
and Tyre seems to have had a
profound influence on the history and
civilization of the Beni Israel.
The Book of Kings tells us of Hiram,
King of Tyre, and Solomon, son of
David, King of Israel. We read in
Chapter V: "And Hiram king of Tyre
sent his servants unto Solomon; for
he had heard that they had anointed
him king in the room of his father;
for Hiram was ever a lover of David.
"And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,
Thou knowest how that David my
father could not build an house unto
the name of the Lord his God for the
wars which were about him on every
side, until the Lord put them under
the soles of his feet. But now the Lord
my God hath given me rest on every
side, so that there is neither adversary
nor evil occurrent. And, behold, I
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

But where is the Carthage of yesteryear?
PHOENICIAN
1 2th- 1 Oth
cent. B.C.
PUNIC
7th-5th
cent. B.C.
GREEK LATIN
K < A A
i 3 B B
* 0 r 6
¿2 A A J>
3 3 E E
y Y V
L ¡n A L
<* *H tA M
1 ^ IV N
O o O 0
7 7 7\ P
? °? <P Q
1 <\ P R
w w Z S
+ f T T
From "Les Phé
(Robert Laffont,
niciens' by
Pans)
Jean Mazel
THE ALPHABET
REVOLUTION
We owe to the Phoenicians, some
33 centuries ago, one of the most
revolutionary achievements in the
history of human civilization: the
invention of an alphabet of 22 signs.
Table above shows how 15 Phoenician
alphabetic signs evolved down the
centuries. In second column, Punic
signs (Punic was a Phoenician dialect
spoken in Carthage) have been slightly
modified. Further changes are shown in
Greek version, column 3, and familiar
Latin alphabetic symbols in last column.
32
purpose to build an house unto the
name of the Lord my God. . . Now
therefore command thou that they hew
me cedar trees out of Lebanon. . ."
The Bible contains many references
to Phoenician civilization which un¬
doubtedly help us to penetrate into
the world of Carthage.
But literary sources are quite in¬
adequate to answer all the questions
about Carthage. We have to seek
elsewhere, and turn naturally to the
archaeologists.
At the end of the Third Punic War,
the Roman Senate decreed the des¬
truction of Carthage and the order was
carried out by the army of Scipio
Aemilianus in 146 B.C. After their
pillaging and destruction, the Roman
soldiers ploughed salt into the soil of
Carthage to destroy all fertility and all
growth.
But for the archaeologist a much
greater calamity was the later decision
of the Senate to rebuild. The first
attempt was made in the second
century B.C. when the Senate ratified
the Lex Rubria founding a "colonia
Junonia Carthago", which was to have
6,000 colonists. This was a false
start a year later the Lex Minucia
repealed the previous law as a series
of unfavourable circumstances had
made them drop the project.
Under the Caesars, however par¬
ticularly Augustus a complete Roman
town was built on the site of the
ancient colony of Tyre. This was the
real disaster for Punic archaeology.
Whatever had escaped the ravagers
was demolished by the builders. La¬
bourers, surveyors and architects all
contributed to the final destruction of
the ruins of the great city. Materials
from Punic buildings were used in the
first Roman constructions, which were
to disappear in turn in the fire that
ravaged Carthage in the second
century.
A few fragments survive. . . Excava¬
tions in a villa of the late Roman
period on the road from the sea to
La Malga revealed a fine Punic
inscription unfortunately incomplete.
About one-third is missing, so that it
is difficult to read and understand the
text. But this in no way detracts from
the exceptional value of the find.
These are the sort of difficulties
with which archaeologists have to
contend when seeking Punic remains.
In 1857 Flaubert visited the site,
seeking traces of the principal monu¬
ments palace walls, temples, etc.
but was bitterly disappointed. Other
archaeologists have followed each
other to Carthage and have discovered
very fine Roman monuments but
where is Punic Carthage?
O
N April 7, 1878, Father
Alfred Delattre discovered the necro¬
polis of Carthage. The tombs contain¬
ed rich funerary objects ceramics,
jewels, amulets, masks, etc. In some,
incriptions were found. Historians
stress the inadequacy of such data,
not without reason. "But we must
not claim," writes the French archaeo¬
logist, Stéphane Gsell, "to reconstruct
the economic history [of Carthage]
solely from the pottery buried in these
tombs."
Pottery is nevertheless of great
value, even when reduced to mere
shards, which were ignored in the days
of such 19th century historians as
Ernest Renan. "And yet," writes the
French orientalist, Georges Contenau,
"these humble shards buried in the
ruins often tell us the precise dates
of the monuments where they are
found."
Burial furnishings, of course, bear
witness to belief in life after death.
The Carthaginians, like most ancient
peoples, placed beside the body or
human ashes, ceramics, pitchers,
dishes, bowls, lamps, gems, earrings,
rings, buckles, etc. Women's tombs
often contain necklaces and bronze
mirrors, but unfortunately with no
ornamentation.
Traces of two small chapels have
been found, one at Salammbô and the
other near Amilcar. Although not
extensive, these remains, together
with the plentiful material (stelae, urns,
etc.) found in the sanctuary, give us
some insight into the Carthaginian
religion.
Domestic architecture is less well
known. Some ancient writers speak
of houses with several storeys in the
Punic capital. Recent excavations in
the Byrsa hillside and on the shore
at Gammarth have revealed traces of
Carthaginian dwellings similar to those
we have explored at Kerkouane, the
famous Punic site on the Cap Bon
peninsula.
And so with the aid of these literary,
archaeological and epigraphic sources
the historian seeks to reconstruct the
Carthaginian past.

MAGIC SQUARE
Seven times seven motifs figure on this tiny Carthaginian
tablet (4 cm. square) discovered in a tomb, and dating
from the 3-4th century B.C. Made of limestone paste
coated with green enamel, it is divided into
49 squares, with the same motif repeated seven times
on each row. These are (from top): Ptah (Egyptian
artisan god assimilated by Carthage); fish; Bes
(Egyptian god of recreation, wearing a crown of feathers,
also adopted by Carthage); water lily; frog; antelope,
crocodile. Belief in the magic properties of the figure
seven and its absolute multiple symbols of harmony
is affirmed in the religions and theologies of many
ancient peoples. Like the Punic masks, the square
may have served as a talisman or amulet to protect the
dead. A unique relic, it is now in the Carthage museum. 'V*-
TANIT THE MYSTERIOUS
Below, the sanctuary of Tanit (4-5th century B.C.) at
Salammbô, Carthage. The chief female deity of
Carthage, Tanit is sometimes named "Oum" (the mother)
but her origins are mysterious. She did not belong
to the Phoenician pantheon, but may have been an
African deity or foreign goddess assimilated by the
Carthaginians. She became the Punic "Mother-goddess"
"She who gives". The stone carving in the
foreground is a model of a temple, reduced to a
flight of steps leading to an altar. The stele immediately
behind is engraved with the "bottle sign" which
is associated with Tanit. The goddess herself is
always depicted in abstract form (see pages 5 and 40).
Below right, a minor female deity and guardian of the
sanctuary of Tanit, with lion's head and costume
imitating a bird's plumage (1st century B.C.). The deity
figures on Roman coins of the time on which she is
described as "Spirit of the Lands of Africa".
* ff*
Photo Georges Viollon © Rapho, Paris
S x
* ?
*^ mTJr*&
Photos Luc Joubert Ö Archaeologia Viva
