The
Green
Revolution
yINTIL quite recently it
seemed that the hopes for rapid
economic progress in many of the
poorest countries were doomed by
very slow growth of the huge agri¬
cultural sector. Agricultural production
barely kept pace with population
growth," and In many areas fell behind.
The less developed countries, which
had been net exporters of 14 million
tons of cereal grains each year in the
1930s, became net importers of
10 million tons per year in the 1960s.
Imports rose even further fh 1966 and
1967 after the monsoon rains in South
Asia had failed two years in succes¬
sion. There was widespread pre¬
diction of imminent famine.
These dire forecasts could not take
into account the progress that has now
been made in seed research, in
irrigation practices, in extension work,
and in agricultural education. They
also ignored the impact price incentives
could have on agricultural practices
and production. As controls over
production were relaxed and prices
for farm products were made remu¬
nerative, farmers proved willing to
adopt a new technology with amazing
rapidity.
The situation today is radically
different from earlier pessimistic
forecasts. A good part of the develop¬
ing world is now experiencing a
major breakthrough in food production,
widely characterized as the Green
Revolution.
In 1968-69, India's food output was
about 8 million tons larger than the
previous record of 89 million tons in
1964-65. Pakistan increased its wheat
production by 50 per cent in two years.
Ceylon's rice production has gone up
by 34 per cent between 1966 and 1968,
and in the Philippines two bumper rice
harvests seem to have ended half a
century of dependence on imported
rice. The most dramatic advances
have been concentrated in Asia.
These dramatic increases are well
illustrated by experience in India and
Pakistan. Indian agriculture employs
70 per cent of the population and
contributes 46 per cent of the national
product. Yet, before the mid-1960s,
agriculture received only about 15 per
cent of the Indian public development
expenditures and was not regarded as
a potential growth sector.
Little attention was paid to price
incentives for farmers, to the provision
of such agricultural inputs as fertilizer,
improved seeds, and farm machinery,
or to problems of farm credit.
IHE droughts which struck
large parts of India in 1965 and 1966
made it necessary to raise the level of
food imports to 10 million tons per
year. This highlighted the necessity
of a drastic revision of agricultural
policy
Almost simultaneously, new high-
yield varieties of wheat and rice
became available. These "dwarf"
varieties had been developed In
Mexico and the Philippines under the
sponsorship of the Ford and Rocke¬
feller Foundations. They permit pro¬
fitable application of up to three or
four times as much fertilizer as
traditional varieties, which combined
with irrigation and pesticides makes
possible a doubling or tripling of yields.
These improved strains were quickly
adopted in India, investment in agri¬
culture was expanded, and support
prices were raised. Together, these
steps represented substantial new
incentives, leading to improved yields.
In West Pakistan, lack of drainage
had by the 1950s raised the ground¬
water level, which put large areas
of farmland out of production by
increasing salinity in the soil. However,
the threat of disaster was turned into
a blessing.
The solution to the salinization
problem was the sinking of deep
tubewells to lower the water level by
intensive pumping, which permitted
the saline soil to be reclaimed. The
tubewells also produced large supplies
of irrigation water.
Originally, it was assumed that
massive public programmes would
be required, but individual farmers
adopted this innovation spontaneously
because of the tremendous use in
yields made possible by the increased
groundwater supply.
The surge in private tubewell
development became one of the most
spectacular elements of agricultural
modernization in West Pakistan. In
1959-60, about 1,300 of these wells
were installed by private farmers. By
1963-64, the annual rate of installation
had accelerated to 6,600, and by
1967-68, to about 9,500.
Although, from a technical point of
view, these wells were not very
efficient, they were extremely profit¬
able. Private and public tubewell
irrigation accounted for nearly half of
the expanded agricultural output during
the period 1959-60 to 1965-66.
As in India, the introduction of the
new varieties was swift. The acreage
under the new wheat seeds rose from
200,000 acres in 1966-67 to 2.3 million
acres the following year.
The new rice variety called IR-8 was
planted on 9,000 acres in 1967, which
produced the seed for almost 900,000
acres in 1968. Fertilizer supplies,
largely financed by foreign credits, 01
were rapidly expanded, and dramatic W I
increases in grain production did in
fact occur.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

GREEN REVOLUTION (Continued)
New advances in seed research and irrigation
32
The Green Revolution has been a
matter of both new technology and
new policy. Although it is too early
to say how deep and how rapid the
impact will be and whether similar
breakthroughs will be repeated In
other parts of the world, prospects for
growth obviously look far brighter.
Above all, it has been demonstrated
that the peasant farmer, contrary to
many expectations, is not hopelessly
fettered by custom and tradition and
that he is not insensitive to costs and
prices. Given the reasonably secure
expectation of large returns, he is
likely to respond. The lessons of this
experience for development policy
extend beyond the sphere of agri¬
culture.
In the fertilizer field, which is
essential to the new agricultural
technology, progress has been striking.
There have been substantial cost
reductions in the postwar period and
further improvement is in prospect.
The capital cost of new nitrogen plants
Is almost 50 per cent lower than for
"old" (pre-1963) plants. Consumption
has risen rapidly.
IN India, fertilizer supplies
were increased by almost 80 per cent
in 1966-67 over the previous year, and
by another 50 per cent the following
year. Domestic fertilizer production
more than doubled between 1965 and
1968; imports of fertilizer and fertilizer
raw materials now equal over one-fifth
of India's total export earnings.
In Pakistan, fertilizer use has
doubled every two years since 1960.
Increases ¡n other developing countries
have been equally dramatic. Compared
to the average for the five years
ending in 1956-57, total consumption
of nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilizer
in 1967-68 was five times as great and
potash use had increased sixfold.
The growth of several non-food
crops, though not as dramatic as that
in wheat and rice, has also been
substantial. Between 1953 and 1967,
cotton production in Asia and Africa
rose by 40 per cent and this has been
the basis for rapid growth of the textile
industry in these areas.
Coffee production In Africa has
almost tripled from 393,000 tons to
1,145,000 tons in the same period so
that Africa now produces about 30 per
cent of the world's coffee. This
rapid growth of coffee exports from
Africa has created marketing problems,
but it does illustrate the potential of
tropical agriculture for diversification
and higher productivity.
If the Green Revolution signals a
major breakthrough in food grain
production, ¡t also brings with It an
array of new problems.
For one thing, continued heavy
expenditures on agricultural research
are necessary, as one seed variety Is
likely to last only for a few years and
must be replaced by new varieties as
new diseases evolve.
Moreover, accelerated agricultural
extension and massive investments In
irrigation and fertilizer production are
needed. Increasing production also
raises the demand for better marketing
and distribution facilities and for more
farm credit.
It will also be difficult to maintain
a set of incentives for farmers which
is adequate to elicit the necessary
production, stimulate the continued
adoption of new technology, and
support diversification into other crops.
Increased tax revenue will be
needed, but to tax agricultural income
directly is difficult In most developing
countries for the good reasons that
most farmers are very poor, that such
a tax would be politically explosive,
and that the cost of collecting the tax
might well exceed the yield.
However, the new technology is
raising some rural incomes sharply.
If large increases in income are to
arise In agriculture, some of the
increased revenue must come from
these incomes. Agricultural taxation
and the general division of the fruits
of increased agricultural productivity
among urban consumers, rural pro¬
ducers, and landowners will present
thorny policy issues which have grave
political implications and will also
affect future development.
A,l REAS untouched by the
Green Revolution, such as most of
Africa and Latin America, face a more
difficult task in stimulating technolog¬
ical change in the countryside. Many
of them still seriously neglect rural
development. For all countries it is
important to achieve new technical
breakthroughs in crops other than
foodgrains, especially in exportable
ones, not only to increase the food
supply but also to improve its quality.
Land reform and consolidation of
fragmented holdings will be needed In
many developing countries not only to
accelerate technological change and
stimulate production in the long run,
but also to generate rural employment.
History teaches us that land reform
is seldom a tidy affair and is always
time-consuming. However, most gov¬
ernments now have at their disposal
the means to minimize the short-run
disruptions and conflicts arising from
a programme of structural change in
land ownership.
THE JACKSON REPORT
An appraisal of U.N. development operations
A mammoth, 6,000-page report just published presents the findings of a far-ranging
study of the operating capacity of the U.N. development system. "The Capacity of
the U.N. Development System," as the study is called*, was commissioned by the
Governing Council of the U.N. Development Programme, which appointed Sir Robert
Jackson of Australia as commissioner in charge. His report may be considered as
complimentary to the Pearson Report ("Partners in Development"), but whereas
the latter dealt with the broad perspective of problems of development aid, the
Jackson Report tackles the more specific question of the actual and potential
capacity of the U.N. system to make an effective contribution to world and economic
and social development. Its proposals are conceived as the first steps in a
long-term process of consolidation, co-ordination and rationalization of the U.N.
bodies and specialized agencies dealing with economic and social development.
They will be studied by the Governing Council of the U.N. Development Programme
whose recommendations will be submitted to the U.N. Economic and Social Council
later this year. "(From Sales Section. United Nations. New York or Geneva: Vol. I.
$1.00; Vol. II. $6.50).
