by
Gilbert-Charles Picard

EIGHT CENTURIES
OF CARTHAGINIAN
CIVILIZATION
GILBERT-CHARLES PICARD Is head of the
French archaeological mission at Mactar (Tu¬
nisia). He Is professor of Roman Archaeo¬
logy at the Sorbonne, Paris and director of
Historic Antiquities for central France. From
1941 to 1955 he was director of Antiquities
in Tunisia, where he supervised the exca¬
vations at Carthage, In particular at the
Antonine Baths. He Is the author of several
studies on the history and archaeology of
Carthage. Two of these have been published
In English: "The Life and Death of Carthage"
(in .co-authorship with Colette Picard), Sidg-
wick and Jackson Ltd., London, 1968; and
"Carthage", Elek Books, London, 1964, and
F. Ungar Publishing Co., New York, 1965.
^^^ARTHAGE occupies a uni¬
que place in history. It was a colony
established in the western Medi¬
terranean by a Semitic people from
Asia, in itself an unusual circumstance,
although colonization of the East by
Europeans has been a frequent
occurrence throughout the ages. A
few similar cases of westward coloniza¬
tion did occur in historical times the
most remarkable example being the
Moslem colonization of Spain and
there may have been other cases in
pre-history though there is no clear
evidence of this.
But though in Spain the Caliphate of
Cordova and the Kingdom of Granada
were largely instrumental in bringing
elements of Islamic civilization to the
West, they did not become a part of
the life of medieval Europe, remaining
alien enclaves on its southern fringe.
The peoples of Europe never accepted
their presence and, concentrating all
their energies into the struggle, finally
expelled them.
Carthage, however, lived for five or
six centuries in close and constant
contact with the inhabitants of
northern Africa, with peoples of Italy
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Photos Luc Joubert © Archaeologia Viva

CARTHAGINIAN CIVILIZATION (Continued)
The legendary voyage of Princess Elissa
of diverse origins and civilizations,
with Iberians and with Celts. Its
destruction was not the outcome of a
century-old crusade; it was a purely
political event in which racial or
cultural hatreds played no part.
Contrary to what happened in
16th century Spain, the destruction of
Carthage was not followed by a
systematic uprooting of its civilization;
Punic culture died out slowly and
without violence, merging gradually
with that of Rome.
T
18
HE very special role that
Carthage was to play had clearly not
been foreseen by its founders. It re¬
sulted from a historical evolution ex¬
tending over at least six centuries in
the course of which the very basis of
the city's existence underwent several
fundamental transformations.
During the first phase, of which
very little is known, Carthage appears
to have been no more than one of
many Phoenician trading-posts scatter¬
ed along the tin route. The invention
of bronze, an alloy of copper and tin,
had forced the men of the second
millenium B.C. to establish trading
links that were astonishingly far-
ranging considering their limited means
of communications.
Copper was to be found in fairly
large quantities in the countries of
western Asia which, with Egypt, were
then the centres of Mediterranean
civilization. But there was virtually
no tin in the countries bordering the
eastern Mediterranean. It was mined
in western and north-western Europe,
in Spain, in Brittany and the British
Isles. In these regions bordering the
Atlantic had grown up the far-famed,
mysterious Megalithic civilization
which maintained trading and even
cultural ties with peoples of the East.
The chief point of contact was
situated in the kingdom of Tartessos,
(present-day Andalusia,) whose mineral
wealth was still a source of wonder to
the Greeks of the 6th century B.C.
There the traders met, some having
come from the north along the coasts,
others having travelled from the
Aegean and from Asia.
At the end of the second millenium
B.C., this trade, long controlled by the
Mycenaeans, was taken over by the
Phoenicians. They began to establish
small trading settlements at their
regular stopping places.
The dates of the establishment of
the chief settlements have been
handed down by tradition.
Surprisingly enough, the most
remote, Gadès, present-day Cadiz,
was reputedly the most ancient, being
founded in about 1200 B.C. Utica, on
the northern coast of. Tunisia near the
mouth of the Medjerda, was a close
contemporary (1178 B.C.), while Car¬
thage appeared later, in 814 B.C.
Unfortunately, these dates have not
been confirmed by modern archaeo¬
logical research. Whereas the objects
discovered on the sites of the Greek
colonies can be dated to about the
time the Greeks were traditionally said
to have established their settlements,
those unearthed at the sites of
Phoenician towns are clearly of a later
origin than the date of founding given
by texts.
At Carthage, for example, leading
specialists have dated the oldest
ceramics found in sanctuaries and
tombs to around 750 B.C. at the ear¬
liest more than sixty years after the
date given by the writers of antiquity
for the arrival in Africa of Dido (the
Phoenician princess Elissa, reputed
founder of Carthage). In the case of
Utica and Gadès the gap is wider
still, amounting to three or four cen¬
turies at least.
This conflict in dates raises a thorny
problem which has long been debated
by archaeologists and to which no
satisfactory solution has as yet been
found. Are the texts incorrect?
Should more exhaustive archaeological
explorations be made? Should the dat¬
ing of the "fossil remains" be
revised? In all honesty it must be
admitted that the issue remains prob¬
lematical.
Fragmentary information has been
handed down by a literary tradition of
dubious worth, in which ancient reli¬
gious myths, rationalized to some
extent, inventions of writers and possi¬
bly a few authentic historical facts are
inextricably entwined. It suggests
that Carthage, unlike other settlements,
was not founded for primarily eco¬
nomic reasons. It appears to have
been established by a banished prin¬
cess as a refuge for political exiles.
But according to the same "Dido
myth", the colonists' resources failed
to match the scale of their ambitions.
Much hard bargaining seems to have
taken place before the Libyans would
concede them sufficient space to
establish the "new town" the
meaning of the Phoenician words
"Qart Hadasht", deformed by the
Romans into "Carthage" and this only
on payment of a tribute.
In fact, the few archaeological re¬
mains recovered from diggings in the
sanctuaries and tombs of the first
Carthage of the 7th and 8th centuries
B.C., give no indication that the settle¬
ment could act as an independent
state, let alone as an imperial power.
Its economy remained dependent
upon the parent city, although beautiful
jewellery and fine ivory carvings bear
witness to a fairly high standard of
living. Geographical factors, however,
gave Carthage greater opportunities
for expansion than the other Phoeni¬
cian colonies. The latter were
generally established on small islands
near the coast or at the extremities of
rocky promontories, sites which gua¬
ranteed their security but not their
livelihood which continued to depend
almost exclusively upon the sea.
Carthage, however, had been built
on the eastern shore of a peninsula
whose "head" embraced an area of
about twenty square kilometres of
small, fertile, well-watered plains on
either side of a curving chain of hills.
Control of the sandy isthmus linking it
to the mainland between the Lake of
Tunis and the Ariana lagoon was all
that was required for full command
over this little, self-sufficient world.
Although no precise date is known,
it seems likely that the Carthaginians
achieved this essential control fairly
quickly, thus acquiring liberty of action
vis-à-vis both the local population and
their parent city.
This explains how Carthage was
able to take over the role played by
Tyre when, weakened by its unending
struggle against the kings of Assyria
and Babylon, it was no longer strong
enough to protect the Phoenicians of
the west effectively against the grow¬
ing pressure of Greek competition,
then making itself felt on all sides.
Tyre itself had taken advantage of
the collapse of Mycenaean power, des¬
troyed around 1200 B.C. by the Dorian
invasion, to build its maritime empire.
But the poets kept alive among the
Greeks, throughout their centuries-
long "Middle Ages", the memory of
the bold maritime exploits of their
heroes.
I
N about 800 B.C., the
Achaeans, the Euboeans, the men of
Rhodes, soon followed by the Corin¬
thians and the lonians of Anatolia, had
undertaken the re-discovery and the
re-occupation of the ports of call once
visited by Ulysses and the Argonauts.
At first they were content to settle on
shores that the Phoenicians had recon¬
noitred without establishing firm
bases: the coasts of Cyrenaica, of
southern Italy and, above all, Sicily.
But large scale emigration soon
caused these colonies to be cramped
for space and newcomers were forced
to move farther and farther on to
the coasts of Gaul, where Marseilles
was founded in 600 B.C., to Catalonia
and farther south on the Spanish coast
towards the kingdom of Tartessos with
its fabulous riches. Friction grew at
all the points of contact between the
Greek and Phoenician possessions
the Gulf of Syrte, western Sicily, Cor¬
sica the Iberian Levant leading to
limited but repeated conflicts.

This striking bronze bust of Hannibal, the great Carthaginian
general and statesman (247-183 B.C.) was discovered in 1944
in the Roman ruins of Volubilis, north of Meknès, Morocco.
Hannibal's portrait has also come down to us on coins struck between
221 and 219 B.C., and two marble busts of him
have been identified. When the Second Punic War
with Rome broke out in 218 B.C., Hannibal and his army crossed
the Alps and Invaded the Italian peninsula. After winning numerous
victories, he was called home to Carthage where he was finally
defeated by the Roman general Scipio at Zama in 202 B.C.
To hold their own, the Phoenicians
of the west had to unite, to create a
military force and seek alliances with
peoples who, like themselves, were
threatened by Hellenic imperialism.
This involved a complete revision of a
traditional trading policy which, apart
from a few piratical raids, had been
largely pacific. The transformation
was undertaken under the guidance of
the first of the Carthaginian political
leaders of whose personality history
has some notion king Mago, who
reigned from about 550 to 530 B.C.
Mago created an army consisting
essentially of mercenaries the Car¬
thaginians themselves were too few in
number to do more than man an élite
regiment and provide officers backed
up by a large and well-trained fleet.
He set out to gain control of bases at
carefully selected points which would
be entirely dependent, both politically
and militarily, upon Carthage.
One of these bases had long been
established (in 654 B.C. according to
tradition) at Ibiza in the Balearics.
Mago established others, at Motya on
the western tip of Sicily, and espe¬
cially in Sardinia where Phoenician
colonists had gained a foothold as
early as the 9th century B.C.
In the diplomatic field he strengthen¬
ed the existing treaty with the Etrus¬
cans. This people, perhaps originally
from Asia Minor, and at any rate
strongly influenced by oriental trad¬
ition, were themselves disturbed by the
Greek incursion. The first result of
this collaboration between the Etrus¬
cans and the Carthaginians was to
deny the Greeks of Phocaea, in Asia
Minor, a foothold in Corsica.
Mago's actions also had important
repercussions on internal political and
cultural affairs. Very little is known
of the nature of the government of Car¬
thage at this period. The head of state
was a king with essentially religious
powers perhaps, yet among a people
whose gods dominated every aspect
of their lives, these powers were con¬
siderable. But the king had to pay
regard to the aristocracy, and the
assembly of citizens could be called
upon to decide any dispute arising
between these two authorities. Hav¬
ing become the military as well as the
spiritual leader, the king gained in¬
creased power.
Without in principle being hereditary
or even held for life, the kingship was
in practice reserved for the members of
a single family, and during this period
there was no instance of any holder of
the office being deposed during his
lifetime. Mago and his successors had,
in effect, managed to surround their
power with a mystic aura by skilfully
playing upon nationalism and religious
fanaticism.
Carthage had inherited from Tyre a
religion which was a mixture of often
uncivilized and bloody naturalistic rites,
designed to ensure the fruitfulness of
nature, and the highly refined theolo¬
gical speculations of a learned and
intelligent priesthood. The priests
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CARTHAGINIAN CIVILIZATION (Continued)
20
from different towns and temples form¬
ed schools which held widely varying
views as to the powers and the rela¬
tionships between the gods of an ela¬
borate pantheon.
Thus the theologians of Tyre stres¬
sed the importance of the city's patron
god Melqart, a vigorous and much
travelled deity whom the Greeks saw
as the counterpart of Herakles.
Other sects, however, worshipped
transcendental divinities such as El,
the king and father of all gods. The
majority of the priests of Carthage
tended to follow the latter belief.
Although Melqart was honoured in
Dido's city, the god El held pride of
place. In keeping with a custom
common among Semitic peoples, the
god's real name, too charged with
sacred power, was not spoken. In¬
stead the name Ba'al Hammon, mean¬
ing "Lord of the Furnace", was used,
according to an interpretation by the
French scholar James G. Février.
This name recalls that Ba'al Hammon
presided over the sacrifices which have
cloaked the name of Carthage with a
sinister reputation. In his honour
young children, their throats having
probably first been cut, were thrown
into a furnace at the foot of his statue.
The efficacy of a sacrifice being in
direct proportion to the victim's worth,
it is not to be wondered at that all
ancient peoples, from the Greeks and
Romans onwards, should have practis¬
ed human sacrifice.
Indeed, many peoples had a ritual
which consisted in the king, whose
function it was to link the human with
the supernatural world, being put to
death when his powers began to fail
him. In this way this energy could
pass on to a successor.
The Phoenicians in general and the
Carthaginians in particular were not,
therefore, alone in the practice of hu¬
man sacrifice and the immolation of
their kings. But at Carthage these
practices long remained widespread
whereas among other nations, except
among the Gauls who practised human
sacrifice for so long as they remain¬
ed independent, they became rare and
virtually died out. Moreover, the sacri¬
fice of adults was avoided by substitut¬
ing as victims their infant children.
The ashes of the victims were buried
in holy precincts known as tophets,
and stone monuments were erected
commemorating the sacrifice. The dis¬
covery of these tophets at Carthage
itself, in the port area today called Sal¬
ammbô, and in all the other Punic cities
of Africa and Sardinia, leaves no doubt
that such holocausts did take place
and that they continued up to the fall
of Carthage, though towards the end
the priests would sometimes accept
a sacrificial lamb in place of a child.
The Magonid period, which extends
from the middle of the 6th to the be¬
ginning of the 4th century B.C. marks
the apogee of the Ba'al Hammon cult.
CONTINUED PAGE 42

EIGHT CENTURIES OF CARTHAGINIAN CIVILIZATION
(Continued from page 20)
The tophet filled up with monuments
which were miniature reproductions
of some of the buildings (all now
vanished) of .the city as it existed
then small Egyptian-style temples,
chapels rising above a high stairway
before which stood altars on which
perfumes were placed.
The kings set an example of piety,
indeed even of fanaticism. Two of
them, Hamilcar in 480 B.C. and Himil¬
co in 396 B.C. made ritual sacrifices
of themselves to expiate defeats. Dur¬
ing the Sicilian wars, many human
victims, especially prisoners, were
sacrificed to Ba'al Hammon and other
gods. Some of these princes, like
Hannibal, the son of Gisco, who reign¬
ed in 409 B.C., were animated by a
racial and religious hatred of the
Greeks.
But these hard, intolerant men pos
sessed savage energy and were driven
by a patriotic fervour. They made their
country the greatest power in the wes¬
tern Mediterranean and mistress of an
empire as extensive and as rich as
the empire being built at the same time
by Athens in the Aegean.
Fortune did not always favour them.
During an initial phase, between 550
and 480 B.C., Carthage gained mastery
of Sardinia, destroying in the process
the local civilization to which we owe
the nuraghs and some fine small
bronzes (see "Unesco Courier", Sep¬
tember 1966). The Phoenician cities
of Sicily and Spain accepted its hege¬
mony. A Punic colony established
in the Etruscan city of Caere (Cervetri,
60 kilometres north of Rome) and in
the port of Pyrgi played a leading role
in local political affairs. When Rome
freed itself from the Etruscans, in
509 B.C., its first concern was to con
clude a treaty of alliance with Car¬
thage.
In both the east and the west, how¬
ever, the dynamic expansion of Hel¬
lenism was in evidence. At the begin¬
ning of the 5th century the great kings
of Persia, Darius and Xerxes, resolved
to crush it. It is quite probable that
Hamilcar, the Magonid ruler of Car¬
thage, concerted his action with theirs.
But the Persian and Punic armadas
were both annihilated, the latter at
Himera, Sicily, according to tradition
on the same day as the Persian defeat
at Salamis.
Carthage then turned away from the
world and retired within itself for
seventy years but only to renew its
strength by once more altering the
bases of its power. King Hanno the
Great first wrested from the Libyans a
territory vaster than that held by any
other Mediterranean city: the north¬
eastern half of present-day Tunisia as
far as a line drawn from Sfax to Ta-
barga.
This task scarcely completed, he
launched ambitious maritime exped¬
itions to ensure control over the trade
with the far west which had given
birth to Carthage, but whose most
effective guardians until then had been
the Phoenicians of Spain.
While Carthage was growing ever
stronger Greece was being torn by
the Peloponnesian war, and in 409 B.C.
Hanno's successors judged the time
ripe to take revenge for Himera. A
savage lightning attack destroyed Seli-
nonte and Agrigento, but the Punic
offensive ground to a halt before Syra¬
cuse. A bloody and exhausting strug¬
gle ensued with neither side able to
seize a decisive advantage. War-weari¬
ness spread in Carthage and a grow¬
ing faction began to oppose the war
and the dynasty that was conducting it.
In about 370 B.C. this faction finally
wrested control from the last of the
Magonids.
The aristocratic regime that was to
rule Carthage until the end of the first
war against Rome gradually became
established, although not without some
setbacks. The nature of this regime
is known to us thanks to an analysis of
it made by Aristotle in about 330 B.C.
Real power was in the hands of com-
This mask Is more than 2,500
years old. It dates from
the Magonid dynasty of
Carthaginian history
(6th-5th centuries B.C.)
which marks the zenith of
the manufacture of pottery masks.
Masks like this one,
with lips drawn back in
a sardonic grin, were used
in many religious ceremonies
in Carthage.
(See also colour photo, p. 24)

WESTWARD HO! These slender little terracotta figures wearing high peaked bonnets depict
the ancestors of the Carthaginians. Dating from the 12th century B.C.,
the statuettes were unearthed from the ruins of a temple at Byblos,
the chief city of Phoenicia until about 1200 B.C., when its prosperity as a trading
centre declined and passed to the Phoenician port of Tyre.
Thus, at the time when a. sculptor of Byblos was modelling these figures
of his contemporaries, the navigators of Tyre were setting out westwards
to explore the whole of the Mediterranean as far as the Iberian
peninsula and the western tip of North Africa.
mittees of nobles and above all lay
with the notorious Tribunal of the One
Hundred and Four which mercilessly
eliminated anyone suspected of wish¬
ing to re-establish personal rule as
well as those accused of treachery or
incompetence.
So close were the links between re¬
ligion and royalty that the revolution
was inevitably accompanied by reli¬
gious reform. From the end of the 5th
century a hitherto obscure goddess
began to appear at the side of Ba'al
Hammon. She was to become the
"Lady of Carthage" and even took pre¬
cedence over her fellow deity. Tanit
reigned over the heavens and espe¬
cially over the moon. She granted the
gift of fertility and watched over the
sleep of the dead. Less cruel than
Ba'al Hammon, she may be likened to
the Greek Hera or the Roman Juno.
One of the reasons for her climb
to ascendancy was undoubtedly the
desire of many Carthaginians to bring
their religion more into line with those
practised in Sicily and southern Italy
where Mother Goddesses played an
important role. In 396 B.C. they even
introduced officially into Carthage the
Greek corn goddesses Demeter and
Kore, who in their mysteries taught
their worshippers how to avoid the
snares of the next world.
The decorations found on the stelae
in the tophet give some idea of the
intensity and complexity of religious
activity in Carthage during the 4th
century B.C. The most frequently re¬
curring symbols, such as the "sign of
Tanit", a triangle surmounted by a bar
and a circle, express with geometric
austerity the ineffable power of the
divinity.
Carthage reached the height of its
prosperity around the year 300 B.C.
Greek influence was on the decline in
Sicily and Italy. In the east, Alexan¬
der's successors, who had planned to
add all Africa to his empire, wasted
their energies by quarrelling among
themselves.
The Carthaginians managed to esta¬
blish friendly relations with one of the
Diadochi (the generals who succeeded
Alexander) the Lagide dynasty which
ruled in Egypt and in old Phoenicia,
now almost completely hellenized.
Whilst retaining their own language
and culture, they readily accepted the
new thought and art forms born of
the marriage of Greek culture and the
old civilizations of the Nile, of Syria
and Asia Minor, and propagated them
in the west.
Meanwhile, during the second half
of the 4th century B.C., Italy had wit¬
nessed an extraordinary political de¬
velopment. Within a few decades, a
43
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CARTHAGINIAN CIVILIZATION (Continued)
The death of two cities
city hitherto of scant importance, back¬
ward in its economic and cultural life,
had subjugated both the ancient civiliz¬
ed peoples of Etruria, Campania and
Graecia Magna and the half-savage
tribes of the Apennines.
The Punic government had not con¬
sidered that the sudden rise of Rome
constituted a danger; nor can it be
accused of lack of foresight. The new
agricultural and military state had no
apparent reason to quarrel with the
great trading and maritime republic
with which, indeed, it was linked by
a long tradition of friendship sanction¬
ed by many treaties.
But the Italian confederation includ¬
ed associates, more advanced than
Rome itself, who sought compensation
for the restriction of their indepen¬
dence in the profits their trade and
industry might gain from their asso¬
ciation with the most redoubtable
military power of the age.
These were the Campanians whose
chief city was Capua. They belonged
to the Osean nation, related to the
Latins, a few of whose tribes had tried
to infiltrate into Sicily as far back as
the 4th century. B.C.
The Campanians had inveigled some
of the more adventurous of the Roman
senatorial families, such as the Claudii,
into joining them in their enterprise.
This Romano-Campanian party sided
with a band of Campanian pillagers
who had treacherously seized Messina
and whom the Greeks and Cartha¬
ginians sought by common consent to
neutralize. It was thus that, in 264 B.C.,
a few intriguers and the interplay of
somewhat shady interests sparked off
a conflict which was to decide the fate
of the entire Mediterranean and bring
Carthage to ruin.
T
44
HE war, which like the Ro¬
mans, we term the First Punic War,
was to show that the Punic oligarchy,
similar in many respects to the parlia¬
mentary regimes of the 19th century,
was incapable of sustaining a long
struggle.
During the very first years the Ro¬
man legions easily proved themselves
superior to the Carthaginian merce¬
naries by conquering almost all of
Sicily. The Roman fleet also soon
showed itself to be a match for its
rival. At first sight this appears aston¬
ishing; but although the Romans had
no naval tradition, they had at their
disposal the shipyards and the sea¬
men of the Greek cities in Italy.
However, the Campanian Regulus'
attempt to gain a foothold in Africa
ended in complete disaster and most
of the Punic strongholds held out, even
in Sicily. What really decided the
defeat of Carthage after more than
twenty years of war (241 B.C.) was
the breakdown of its economy, the
timidity of its diplomacy and the im¬
potence of a command paralyzed by
the terror that the One Hundred and
Four held for the generals.
The ruling class was responsible
and it paid dearly for its errors. It
was nearly swept away by a social
revolution led by the under-paid de¬
mobilized mercenaries who carried
with them the Libyan peasant prole¬
tariat, for long ruthlessly exploited by
the great landowners.
The republic owed its salvation to
Hamilcar Barca, a young general who
had distinguished himself as a com¬
mando leader during the war in Sicily.
But he had no intention of restoring a
regime which he rightly held respon¬
sible for the defeat. Instead, Hamilcar
built, up an independent power in
Spain, sufficiently far away as not to
be hampered, at least in the early sta¬
ges, by the surveillance of the Roman
Senate.
When he perished in 228 B.C., he
left his son-in-law Hasdrubal and his
sons a kingdom of which the Barcids
became the sovereigns, a treasury
supplied by the inexhaustible mines of
the sierras and a seasoned army ent¬
irely loyal to its leaders.
Hannibal, who was to inherit these
resources less than ten years later,
after the murder of his brother-in-law,
had perfected his father's plan which
really aimed at taking revenge on
Rome.
He was extremely well informed
about internal politics in Italy. He
knew that the Greeks and Campa¬
nians, after benefiting handsomely
from the victory that had opened up
for them the markets of the entire
western Mediterranean, were becom¬
ing apprehensive about Latium's eco¬
nomic progress and the greed of
Roman businessmen. They would
gladly have withdrawn from the part¬
nership if they had been able to do so
without risk. Their defection would
deprive Rome of its naval strength and
render it powerless outside Italy.
The legions had to be neutralized if
this defection was to be brought
about. This Hannibal proposed to do
by using the formidable manpower
resources of the Celtic world as a
battering ram. Every part of the plan
fitted logically into place, including the
seemingly romantic escapade that was
to lead the young Barcid with his
Spanish-African army and his elephants
through the Pyrenees, across the
Rhone and beyond the Alps (219 B.C.).
Why the great plan failed after
coming so close to realization within
a bare three years cannot be explained
here. After his victory at Cannae,
Capua opened its gates to him (216
B.C.), but the Italian confederation held
together. Meanwhile Spain, which had
been quickly conquered by the Bar¬
cids, fell just as quickly into the
hands of the Scipios.
Perhaps the situation could have
been saved with the assistance of the
Greeks if the kings of Macedonia and
Syria had been more far-seeing and
decisive. Once these opportunities
were missed the outcome was inevit¬
able Rome's patient re-conquest of
Italy, Scipio's successful landing in
Africa, and Carthage compelled to
accept the victor's terms after the
battle of Zama (202 B.C.).
Contrary to what is often believed,
these terms were relatively mild.
Scipio and the majority of the Senate
wanted to confine Carthage to Africa
and to make it, once and for all, sub¬
ject to Rome; they did not want to
destroy Carthage. It was not until
about 170 B.C. that Cato and his party
managed to impose the idea that the
destruction of Carthage was essential
to Roman policy.
ANY explanations for this
sudden change of attitude have been
advanced. In my opinion it was due
to the internal political situation in
Carthage. Ever since Hamilcar Barca
had restored power to the people, the
city had moved steadily towards a
more and more progressive form of
democracy.
Hannibal himself had contributed to
this evolution when, after Zama, he
attempted to govern his country for a
while. But at this stage in its history,
Rome could not tolerate the emergence
anywhere of popular regimes capable
of disturbing the very harsh social
system which, directly or indirectly,
produced enormous profits for its
ruling classes. The Senate destroyed
Corinth and Carthage in the same year
(146 B.C.) because they had become
hotbeds of revolution.
Such is the picture that we have of
the often obscure and sometimes
paradoxical destiny of this Asiatic city
clinging to the shores of Africa. So
much tenacity, such extraordinary
capacity for adaptation; were they
expended for nothing? It could easily
be shown that Carthage, whose
language and civilization did not finally
die out until the 4th century A.D.,
continued to play an important role in
the Roman empire that destroyed it.
Its heritage has been passed on
elsewhere too to the Berbers who
had been pupils as well as subjects
and, through them, some part has
doubtless been handed down to
present-day Tunisia, now more than
ever confirmed in its role as bridge
between the Moslem east and the
Christian west.
