At the fast session of the Unesco General
Conference held in Paris in November, 1968, the
Director-General was authorized to "take certain

steps to commemorate the hundredth anniversary
of the birth of Lenin and, in particular, to organize
a Symposium with the theme 'Lenin and the
development of science, education and culture'."
(Resolution 3.112).
Arranged in collaboration with the National
Commissions of Finland and the U.S.S.R., the
symposium was held at Tampere, in Fin/and,
from 6th to 10th April. Specialists from twenty
countries were invited to take part on a personal
basis.
This issue of the "Unesco Courier", which is
largely devoted to Lenin and his contribution tú
science, education and culture, has been prepared
within the framework of the same resolution of the
Unesco General Conference.
In the following article, Madame Marie-Pierre
Herzog, Director of the Unesco Division of
Philosophy, who organized the symposium at
Tampere, analyzes the differing points of view
expressed by the participants in the course of
their debate.
4
The commemorative
stamp Issued by the
Finnish government
to mark Lenin's
centenary and the
Tampere Symposium
organized by Unesco.
Commemorative stamps
have also been issued
in Cameroon, India
and the Soviet Union.
by Marie-Pierre Herzog
Director, Division of Philosophy, Unesco
T
HE Symposium held at Tampere from 6th
to 10th April, 1970, brought into relief various aspects
of the thought and action of Vladimir llyich Lenin in
the fields of science,, education and culture.
Everyone at the Symposium found the choice of
subject both interesting and novel. Discussions began
with a general recognition of the importance attached
personally by Lenin to the continual quest for know¬
ledge and his desire to combine theory with practice
in his activities.
From here the Symposium took up the subject in
greater detail. The participants noted that Lenin's
early works already reflected his keen desire to apply
marxist theory to Russia as it actually was in those
days. He wanted to apply it with equal cogency to
the ambiguous attitude of the intelligentsia, the lot
of the peasants, the situation of the workers, support¬
ed by all the statistics, facts and figures he, could
marshal. In this he showed himself to be far removed
from the effusions of the populists and the general
confusion of thought of the time.
Many speakers praised, first, his discernment when
faced with the problems of the science of his day
(the foundations of which had been rudely shaken
by the discovery of radioactivity and the workings
of the electron), second, his broad view, expressed
in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism in 1909, of the
possible future evolution of physics as demonstrated
by his famous dictum: "the electron is as inexhausti¬
ble as the atom", and, thirdly, the distinction he made
between the content of the different, changing scien¬
tific theories concerning the nature of matter, and
the materialist theory, as such, which could itself
never change. (See article page 6.)
A dialectic theory of matter, elaborated by the Japa¬
nese scientist Professor Shoichi Sakata, was pre¬
sented in this connexion by Professor Yoichi Fujlmoto,
Professor of Physics at the Science and Engineering
Laboratories of Waseda University, Japan, in relation
to recent work on elementary particles, in particular
mesons.
It was shown that, while not properly speaking an
educationalist, Lenin gave immense importance to
education, not only in the fight for literacy instituted
by the, famous decree, but also under its second form
in which knowledge, assimilated into the very

LENIN
and education
science
culture
substance of life, becomes synonymous with culture.
Some participants, however, recognized in Lenin,
above all, his ability as a man of action, but cautioned
against attributing qualities that he did not possess
to this most modest of men.
"His genius lay in his talent for decision-making as
well as in his acute understanding of political
situations and his eye for the opportune moment and
the practical possibilities they opened up," said Pro¬
fessor Alfred G. Meyer, Director of the Center for
Russian and East European Studies of the University
of Michigan, U.S.A.
Professor Meyer stressed Lenin's unsentimentality
and matter-of-factness and his resolve, despite all
need for polemics, always to look the truth straight
in the face, to face what he called "living life" (zhivaya
zhizn).
"Lenin", Professor Meyer said, "is indeed the one
who would be my first choice if I had to select that
person who has had the most profound impact on
our century. There is no doubt that the revolution he
accomplished and the society he started to build have
had repercussions in all areas of life, including
science, education and culture. My own appraisal
would be that these have not always been positive
repercussions..."
After speaking at length of the great simplicity
and modesty of Lenin, Professor Meyer expressed
his doubts about the manner in which Lenin's perso¬
nality and accomplishments were portrayed in certain
quarters.
Other participants at the Symposium recalled
Lenin's attitude towards problems of minority groups
and languages and stressed his actions in this respect
(see article by Professor Posti of the Faculty of
Philosophy of the University of Helsinki, Finland,
page 16). Finally, Professor Cheikh Anta Diop, Direc¬
tor of the. Radiocarbon Laboratory of the Fundamental
Institute of Black Africa in Dakar (Senegal), examined
the relationship between the history of African
societies and dialectical materialism.
But the focal point of the debate was Lenin and
culture. A discussion began among the participants
to define more clparly the reservations Lenin had
made about "proletarian culture" as conceived by
Bogdanov and the Protelkult, that is, a culture arising
entirely from the. proletariat and wholly created by it.
It was carefully pointed out that Lenin had never
subscribed to such views, not for reasons of personal
taste which, in any event, he would not have intro¬
duced into the debate,, but for general reasons. It
was emphasized .that Lenin considered of capital im¬
portance for the new culture what he described as
"the assimilation of the bourgeois legacy", in other
words, open acceptance of the great cultural trea¬
sures in mankind's cultural past.
"After coming to power", said Professor Alexis
Rumyantsev, Vice-President of the Academy of Scien¬
ces of the U.S.S.R., Moscow, "it is in the field of
culture that the real revolutionary problem lies." In
a study prepared for the Symposium, Professor Ru¬
myantsev had stated: "By culture Lenin meant the
fundamental principles of human behaviour, deeply
rooted in thinking, in the mind. He saw in culture the
organic basis of human actions, their social, psycho¬
logical and intellectual mechanism. That is why, for
Lenin, the social quality of the economy, of the, appa¬
ratus of state, depended necessarily on culture."
Here it is clear that the word culture is taken in a
sense which goes far beyond its usually accepted
meaning and in this context has much broader and
wider connotations and implications.
As Jean-Jacques Marie, Professor of the Lycée.
Voltaire in Paris, stated: "Lenin did not defend culture
as a precious object or as a relic to be admired, but
as a living means to awareness, that is to say, as
a factor in the proletariat's struggle for emancipation
destined ultimately to produce a culture superior to
the existing bourgeois culture, which it would not
destroy but outstrip by integrating it into a world
from which would have vanished the exploitation of
man by man, opposing classes and their struggle,
the division between manual and intellectual work,
all of which have left their mark on the finest pro¬
ducts of bourgeois culture."
Professor Roque Gonzalez Salazar, of the Inter¬
national Studies Centre, College of Mexico City,
Mexico, added that one of Lenin's great merits was
to "have seen clearly that man must base his creative
power on the efforts of his fellows and even on those
of preceding generations."
5
