Grandeur & decline
of the Punic city-state
by Hedi Slim
T
HE rise of Carthage as a
maritime power is the most illustrious
episode of Phoenicia's imperial ven¬
ture in the western Mediterranean.
By the end of the second millenium
B.C., the Phoenicians had already won
a place in history by their invention of
the alphabet and their vigorous promo¬
tion of navigation and international
trade. They then began to explore the
North African coastline, and pressed
on to the heart of the legendary realm
of Tartessos, of fabulous wealth, in
southern Spain. Before long the route
followed by these intrepid explorers
was studded with trading posts.
Utica was the first Phoenician settle¬
ment in Tunisia, founded in 1101 B.C.:
Carthage came into being three
centuries later, in 814 B.C. Its royal
origin, the events that led to its
creation, and the very meaning of its
name (new town or capital) all seemed
to point towards a glorious future.
For many years, it is true, Carthage
acknowledged the prior claims of Tyre
and Utica, only to supplant them when
the time was ripe. It owed its
ascendancy to its own vigorous expan¬
sion, aided by the disasters that rocked
Phoenicia and the East.
Tyre eluded the grasp of Babylon
only to fall under the sway of Persia,
and Carthage then took the place of
its ill-fated parent city as capital of
the empire.
Carthage occupied a privileged
situation at the heart of the Medi¬
terranean world, and had inherited the
Tyrian sea-going and trading traditions,
backed by a vast empire with a chain
of trading posts. It was thus able to
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
HEDI SLIM Is a noted Tunisian archaeologist.
He is assistant-director of the National Insti¬
tute of Archaeology and the Arts, Tunis,
and director of archaeological studies at
the Roman site of El Jem in Tunisia. He
has written a number of studies on exca¬
vations at this site and has published many
articles on Tunisia and its civilization. He
is the author of "La Tunisie, des origines
à la conquête romaine" (Tunisia, from the
origins to the Roman conquest) in "L'Anti¬
quité", volume I of a history of Tunisia
published in 1969 by the Société Tunisienne
de Diffusion, Tunis.
9

GRANDEUR AND DECLINE (Continued)
A flourishing trade across the Mediterranean
10
give fresh impetus to Phoenician
expansion in the western Medi¬
terranean, and itself evolved into a
formidable power able to play a
leading part on the political stage, and
even to influence the destiny of the
world.
Carthage's first concern was to
organize the considerable empire
bequeathed to it. It seems to have
had no great difficulty in getting its
leadership accepted by the various
Phoenician cities of the West, which
agreed to surrender a large part of
their sovereignty in return for the
capital's vital protection from the
avaricious designs of its many Medi¬
terranean rivals.
The second step was to enlarge the
bounds of the empire, after consolid¬
ating its position in Sicily.
From Motya, the Carthaginian forces
moved north under the command of
General Malchus to subdue the local
population of Mount Eryx and occupy
the sites of Segesta, Palermo and
Solonto. They reached Himera and
Selinus, on the border of Greek Sicily.
Carthage then turned its attention to
Sardinia, where it obtained a foothold
in the 6th century B.C.; the cities of
Nora Tharros and Caralis formed the
bridgeheads for a victorious expedition
inland. The island still retains many
vestiges of the Punic civilization which
flourished for centuries on its soil.
About the same period, Carthage
set about consolidating its position
farther to the West. Two Phoenician
cities already existed at Lixus in
Morocco and Gadès (now Cadiz) in
Spain; a new colony was established
at Ibiza in the Balearics.
Thus, towards the end of the
6th century B.C., Carthage had suzer¬
ainty over all the Phoenician colonies
in North Africa, from Tripohtania to
the Atlantic, and over sizeable areas
of Sicily, Sardinia, Spain and the
Balearic Isles.
Thanks to its empire, Carthage
became the wealthiest city-state in the
western Mediterranean. A treaty of
alliance with the Etruscans, then a
powerful nation, consolidated its posi¬
tion. When their common enemy the
Greeks came on the scene, the ties
between the two allies were further
strengthened.
The Phocaeans, founders of Massalia
(Marseilles) about 600 B.C., had soon
become a force to be reckoned with;
they had won the goodwill of the
renowned King of Tartessos, lord of
the silver mines, and contemplated
forming another Phocaean colony in
that part of Spain (now Andalusia);
they had also obtained a foothold in
Corsica, and thus constituted a serious
threat to Carthage.
A combined Punic and Etruscan fleet
succeeded in halting the Phocaean
advance after the Battle of Alalia
(Aleria in Corsica) in 535 B.C. The
Greeks were expelled from Corsica
and Spain; only the Gulf of Lions
remained in their possession. From
that time onwards, Carthaginians and
Etruscans were constantly bound by
trade and military treaties to protect
their common interests.
However, the subsequent decline of
Etruria induced Carthage to seek a
closer alliance with Rome, and three
treaties were negotiated, the first
dating back to 509 B.C. Yet even
while the two powers were ostensibly
allies, Carthage distrusted any attempt
by Rome, in any form, to penetrate its
spheres of influence. Coming events
cast their shadows before, and it is
not surprising that later on, the two
powers were to confront each other
in what was perhaps the most ruthless
and bloody struggle of Antiquity.
The first treaty granted the Romans
trading concessions in Sardinia, Sicily
and Africa, but barred their ships from
skirting the traditionally fertile areas
of central and southern Tunisia. In
the second, the Carthaginians imposed
stiffer terms, expressly forbidding the
Romans to land in Sardinia, Africa or
Andalusia, unless compelled to do so
by circumstances beyond their control.
Carthage was thus unsparing in its
military and diplomatic efforts to
consolidate its position and extend the
bounds of its empire.
T
HE rise of Carthage was
next to be challenged by the power
of Greece, which was at its height in
the 5th century B.C. Greece inflicted
a crushing defeat on the Punic forces
in 480 B.C., near Himera in Sicily; this
marked the turning-point of Carthage's
supremacy as a sea power.
The Greeks' mounting domination of
the eastern and western Mediterranean
led to many changes in the Car¬
thaginians' way of life, which was
thenceforth marked by severe austerity.
Archaeologists have been struck by
the scarcity of imported objects such
as Corinthian and Attic pottery and
Egyptian grave furnishings in the tombs
of that period.
At the same time, Carthage's isola¬
tion and depleted trade raised supply
problems for various commodities
which were by no means luxuries. To
solve its difficulties, renew its fighting
forces and be capable of resisting
any attacks from Greece, Carthage
resolved to conquer a hinterland in
North Africa, roughly corresponding to
the present territory of Tunisia.
The conquest, effected at the cost
of bitter fighting with the local
population, turned the Carthaginians
"from Tynans into Africans." At the
same time, it made a considerable
contribution to the Punic economy,
mainly in the shape of a copious agri¬
cultural output, and to the army, which
had a large contingent of tried warriors
at its command.
The conquest also marked the
beginning of a new era for the Tunisia
of Antiquity, which began to enjoy a
bigger share of the benefits of Punic
civilization. The common inheritance
and national identity of present-day
Tunisia are indelibly stamped with the
Carthaginian influence.
The development of Tunisia, the new
markets opened up in the African
continent, the flourishing trade rela¬
tions formed with the eastern states
emerging from Alexander's conquests,
and the dogged will to recovery,
restored Carthage to its former vigour
at the very time when the Greek cities,
weakened by interminable civil strife,
showed signs of irreparable decline.
Carthage seized every opportunity
to retrieve all it had lost in Sicily. In
vain did Agathocles, Tyrant of Syra¬
cuse try to bar the way, though he
invaded North Africa and reached the
ramparts of Carthage; in vain did
Pyrrhus, King of Epirus and champion
of a rapidly waning Western Hellenism,
fly to the help of the Greek cities of
Sicily; the cause was hopeless, and
Carthage succeeded in extending its
influence to practically the whole
island.
With added effort, it could have
dominated the situation well before
the middle of the 3rd century B.C.;
but it dallied too long, and did not
invest Messina until 269 B.C. to find
itself face to face with Rome, now a
great Mediterranean power. The two
giants were soon locked in mortal
combat; the three phases of the
CONTINUED PAGE 13
MINIATURE MASKS
A funeral necklace pendant, this tiny
mask wrought in glass paste
(3rd century B.C.) measures only
2.5 by 3 centimetres. Carthaginian
glassmakers became masters at the art
of miniaturizing these expressive
multicoloured masks which were
placed in tombs to protect the dead
from evil spirits. (See also colour
photos page 12.)
Bardo Museum, Tunis
Photo Luc Joubert © Archaeologia Viva

\

**%
m
1
r5
Jflp
.
" TT
T* ^JL

GRANDEUR AND DECLINE (Continued)
One of the great fleets of Antiquity
MASTER GLASSMAKERS
OF CARTHAGE
Three examples of the glass paste
amulet masks "mass produced" in
ancient Carthage. The predominating
colours of these tiny pendants are
white, dark blue and yellow. The oldest
(top), of Syrian inspiration, is white
and brown, and dates from the end
of the 4th century B.C. The man's
beard is suggested by a roughening
of the surface, but in most cases
the chin is covered by skilfully worked
corkscrew curls. The master
glassmakers of Carthage also worked
with pearls and wrought delicate
perfume flasks, bibelots and
jewellery of elegant craftsmanship.
Bardo Museum, Tunis
Photo Luc Joubert © Archaeologia Viva
protracted struggle assumed the
dimension of world wars, measured
by the scale of antiquity.
The last phase of Carthage's
development as a Mediterranean
power occurred between the first and
second Punic Wars. After losing the
first war, Carthage was compelled
to withdraw from Sicily completely.
Some germs of weakness were
already sapping its strength; its ruling
caste was often blinkered by self-
interest, and morbidly hostile to true
greatness or reforming zeal.
o
NE Carthaginian general,
Hamilcar Barca, was clear-sighted
enough to detect the causes of his
country's ills, and draw a lesson from
all its recent misfortunes. To him
belongs the credit for the renewed
expansion of the Carthaginian empire
in the Mediterranean. The measures
he adopted were revolutionary by
comparison with the Carthaginians'
conception of their imperial role.
He borrowed his remedies from the
Hellenist kings, who combined regal
power with military authority; but a
monarchy at Carthage was unthinkable.
It was not, therefore, at home that
Hamilcar was to found his kingdom,
but in Spain, where the Phoenicians
and Carthaginians had already made
their fortunes; it was at once far
enough from Rome and Carthage to
allay their suspicions, and wealthy
enough to offset the isolation of the
Punic economy in case of war.
Hamilcar realized that in Spain he
could lay the foundations of a strong
monarchic and military power, while
finding at hand all the economic and
human resources he needed. He
promptly set about the conquest of
the country, and soon subdued a part
of it.
He modelled his approach on such
empire-builders "as Alexander, and
based his rule on military power,
fostering the legend of the inspired
and invincible leader. At the same
time, he enlisted defeated troops
and encouraged mixed marriages to
assimilate the local population.
His successor Hasdrubal followed in
his footsteps, and founded a second
"new capital", Carthagena, which
robbed Carthage of the distinction of
being the one and only "new Tyre";
he built a palace there and assumed
the title of king.
The benefits of the Spanish conquest
were soon felt throughout the Punic
world. In less than twenty years
Hamilcar, Hasdrubal and Hannibal (all
of the Barcid family) had succeeded
in replenishing the coffers and renovat¬
ing the economic and military strength
of Carthage. Vast horizons were
re-opening before the Carthaginian
empire when Rome, fearful of the
inevitable developments that lay ahead,
hastened to declare war on Carthage.
Hannibal's defeat on African soil in
202 B.C. sounded the knell of Carthage
as a Mediterranean power. Thence¬
forth, until its destruction in 146 B.C.,
the unfortunate city could barely claim
a measure of autonomy in the conduct
of its internal affairs.
The chief credit for the long and
successful expansion of the empire
naturally belongs to the Carthaginian
navy, which was heir to the seamanship
of the Phoenicians, and used it to
some purpose.
The Punic fleet consisted of heavy
vessels with rounded hulls, mainly
used as merchant shipping, and long,
narrow, fast galleys, easy to handle
when manoeuvring in face of an
enemy fleet.
Polybius describes these as being
"so constructed as to move in every
direction with the greatest of ease;
their oars were manned by experts . . .
If any of the vessels were hard-pressed
by the enemy, they fell back without
running any risk; it was easy for such
light craft to make for the open sea.
If the enemy advanced in pursuit, they
turned about, hovered around them or
approached them on the flank and
repeatedly rammed them . . ." Galleys
were used for the battle fleet; the
merchant vessels were usually less
manoeuvrable sailing craft.
T.
HE several thousand
vessels of the Carthaginian fleet were
built by skilful and experienced
craftsmen; the dockyards were among
the most celebrated in the ancient
world. The mariners had a profound
knowledge of the sea, and although
the compass was unknown to them,
steered with unerring sureness. In
wartime the State requisitioned mer¬
chant vessels, fully manned, to carry
troops and stores; in peacetime, the
naval vessels protected merchant
convoys from pirates, or guarded the
approaches to Carthage's exclusive
trading areas.
Carthage was heir to a long tradition
of seafaring and exploration. The
Phoenicians had distinguished them¬
selves by sailing round Africa, at the
behest of Nechao Pharaoh of the
26th dynasty. Setting out from the
Red Sea, they negotiated what is now
the Cape of Good Hope, and returned
to Egypt through the Straits of 1 9
Gibraltar (or "Pillars of Hercules"). lu
Little information can be gleaned
from Carthaginian sources except
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

THE ADVENTURES
OF HANNO
THE NAVIGATOR
Few records of voyages made by Phoenician and Car¬
thaginian navigators have survived. The most famous is
the Odyssey of Hanno the Navigator, King of Carthage,
who sailed beyond the Pillars of Hercules out into the
At/antic and down the west coast of Africa. The
narrative of this epic journey comes from a 3rd century
B.C. Greek translation of the Punic record of Hanno's
voyage engraved in the Temple of Chronos at Carthage.
Pliny's mention of the expedition as belonging to the
period "while the power of Carthage was at its height"
suggests, but does not prove, that it took place in the
5th century B.C. Below we publish the highly readable
adventure story of the Periplus of Hanno, as told by
the ancient navigator himself.
The routes shown on this map are more or less
hypothetical and based on the writings of Antiquity
and archaeological remains.
3rd MILLENIUM B.C.
Between Troy and Crete, the gold route; from
Byblos to the Nile, the cedar route; to India via the
Persian Gulf, the luxury trade route (Mesopotamian
metals, Indian ivory, etc.); via the Red Sea, the
frankincense route between Egypt, Arabia, Somalia.
2nd MILLENIUM B.C.
	 to 4th CENTURY B.C.
From Greek mainland, the emigration routes; route
to Troy of heroes of Homer's Iliad; route of Argonauts
to the Black Sea; Ulysses' routes to Sicily, Italy;
Greek routes to Corsica, Marseille, Spain, Gibraltar,
northern Europe; branch of amber route via Adriatic.
+ + + + + VOYAGE OF HANNO
Hanno the Carthaginian (5th Century B.C.), route via
Straits of Gibraltar to west coast of Africa.
3rd CENTURY B.C.
O O O O O to 2nd CENTURY A.D.
New maritime routes in central Mediterranean;
western routes from Carthage to Sicily, Sardinia,
Corsica, Balearic Islands, Gibraltar, Atlantic seaboard.
Map by Willem van Malsen © Archives Robert Laffont, Pans
I HE Carthaginians decided that Hanno should go
past the Pillars of Hercules and found Carthaginian cities.
He set sail with sixty ships carrying thirty thousand men
and women with provisions and other necessities.
After passing the Pillars of Hercules and sailing for two
days beyond them we founded the first city, which was
named Thyrrsaterion. Around it was a large plain.
Next we went on in a westerly direction and arrived at
the Libyan promontory of Soloeis, which is covered with
trees; having set up a shrine to Poseidon, we set sail again
towards the rising sun for half a day, after which we arrived
at a lagoon close to the sea covered with many tall reeds.
Elephants and large numbers of other animals were feeding
on them. Leaving this lagoon and sailing for another day,
we founded the coastal cities named Carian Wall, Gytte,
Acra, Melitta and Arambys.
Leaving this place we arrived at the great river Lixos
which comes from Libya. On the banks nomads, the Lixites,
were feeding their flocks. We stayed for some time with
these people and made friends with them. Upstream from
them lived the unfriendly Ethiopians whose land is full of
wild beasts and broken up by high mountains where they
say the Lixos rises. They also say that about these
mountains dwell the strange-looking Troglodytes. The
Lixites claim that they can run faster than horses.
Taking Lixite interpreters with us we sailed alongside the
desert in a southerly direction for two days, then towards
the rising sun for one more day. We then found at the far
end of an inlet a little island five stades in circumference.
We named it Cerne and left settlers there. Judging by our
journey we reckoned that it must be opposite Carthage,
since we had to sail the same distance from Carthage to the
Pillars of Hercules as from the Pillars of Hercules to Cerne.
From there, sailing up a big river named the Chretes, we
arrived at a lake in which there were three islands, all larger
than Cerne. Leaving these islands, we sailed for one day
and came to the end of the ¡ake, which was overshadowed
by high mountains full of savages dressed in animal skins
who threw stones at us and thus prevented us from landing.
From there we entered another river, which was broad and
14
GRANDEUR AND DECLINE (Continued)
about the two coasting voyages carried
out in the 5th century B.C. along the
Atlantic seaboard. An account of the
first voyage, under the command of
Hanno, has been handed down by the
Greeks. Its purpose was twofold:
first, to visit and reinforce the Punic
cities on the Moroccan coast, and
found new colonies; the second stage
appears to have been a voyage of
discovery, far along the shores of
western Africa (see story aoove).
The account of Hanno's voyage is an
endless source of speculation; many
attempts have been made, with little
success, to identify the places des¬
cribed. The most generally accepted
opinion is that the "Chariot of the
Gods" was Mount Cameroun, and that
the farthest point reached lay in the
Gulf of Guinea.
But some historians are inclined to
think the distance covered was much
shorter. The difficulties of identifica¬
tion have also given rise to the
suggestion that Hanno may himself
have enbroidered the truth, to avoid
giving away any precise information
about an itinerary which opened the
road to the gold trade.
Our knowledge of the second
voyage, under the command of Himilco,
is even more uncertain. We only
know that he explored the Atlantic
coast of western Europe in search of
silver and tin, and perhaps went as
far north as the British Isles.
The Carthaginians, those indefatiga¬
ble "sea hauliers", aimed to improve
their trade by these expeditions. They
long enjoyed a virtual monopoly of the
Atlantic traffic, which mainly led them
in two directions: first, to the shores
of tropical Africa and secondly to the
coasts of Europe, especially Brittany,
England and Ireland. Himilco and the
Carthaginian traders pressed on to
these far shores mainly in search of
silver and tin.
Yet Carthage had far more sustained
dealings with the Mediterranean
countries, especially with Greece.
Although trading relations were almost
completely broken off in the 5th

wide, full of crocodiles and hippopotamuses. Then we
retraced our journey back to Cerne.
From there we sailed south along a coast entirely
inhabited by Ethiopians, who fled at our approach. Their
language was incomprehensible even to the Lixites, whom
we had with us. On the last day we disembarked by some
high mountains covered with trees with sweet-smelling
multicoloured wood. We sailed round these mountains for
two days and arrived in a huge bay on the other side of
which was a plain; there we saw fires breaking out at
intervals on all sides at night, both great and small.
Having renewed our water supplies, we continued our
voyage along the coast for five days, after which we arrived
at a huge inlet which the interpreters called the Horn of the
West. There was a big island in this gulf and in the island
was a lagoon with another island. Having disembarked
there, we could see nothing but forest by day; but at night
many fires were seen and we heard the sound of flutes
and the beating of drums and tambourines, which made
a great noise. We were struck with terror and our sooth¬
sayers bade us leave the island.
We left in haste and sailed along by a burning land full
of perfumes. Streams of fire rose from it and plunged into
the sea. The land was unapproachable because of the heat.
Terror-stricken, we hastened away. During four days'
sailing we saw at night that the land was covered with fire.
In the middle was a high flame, higher than the others, which
seemed to reach the stars. By day we realised that it was
a very high mountain, named the Chariot of the Gods.
Leaving this place, we sailed along the burning coast for
three days and came to the gulf named the Horn of the
South. At the end of it was an island like the first one,
with a lake in which was another island full of savages.
The greater part of these were women. They had hairy
bodies and the interpreters called them Gorillas.
We pursued some of the males but we could not catch
a single one because they were good climbers and they
defended themselves fiercely. However, we managed to
take three women. They bit and scratched their captors,
whom they did not want to follow. We killed them and
removed the skins to take back to Carthage. We sailed
no further, being short of supplies.
and 4th centuries B.C., they were
resumed more briskly than ever after
Alexander's victorious campaign. This
fact is attested by numerous Alexand¬
rian objects and Rhodian amphorae
found in Punic burial-grounds.
A steady trade was also carried on
with other areas such as Campania,
Etruria, Spain, Sicily, Delos. Carthage
exchanged raw materials, artefacts
and agricultural produce with these
countries.
The prosperity of Carthage mainly
rested on its trade; consequently the
State watched jealously over the
safety of the routes followed by its
ships, and surrounded the itineraries
to certain "trading preserves" with
mystery to confound their rivals.
As we have seen, Carthage some¬
times took diplomatic or military action
to protect the interests of its citizens,
and the Carthaginian seamen went to
great lengths to shake off pursuers,
or scare them off by spreading horrific
rumours about the sea roads leading
to certain areas where trade was in
effect a Punic monopoly.
A striking example of the vigilance
exercised is to be found in an anecdote
recorded in the classics; a Carthagin¬
ian vessel, tracked by Roman rivals
seeking to spy out Carthage's trading
preserves, was grounded by the cap¬
tain without hesitation, as he saw no
other way of shaking off his persistent
followers. In doing so, he lured the
Roman ship on to the sandbank.
Thus, the Carthaginian Empire, with
its many colonies scattered around the
western Mediterranean and on the
shores of the Atlantic, exercised a
strong influence on events in the
ancient world. The Punic cities of
North Africa and elsewhere were
centres of fruitful contact and exchange
with the different Mediterranean
cultures. The Carthaginian merchant,
a familiar figure in towns of the east
and west alike, made his own contri¬
bution to this interchange.
Carthage, the great metropolis of
antiquity, nurtured on Oriental, African
and Mediterranean traditions, was a
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
15

Carthage was known
in the world of Antiquity
as a centre par excellence
for the importation and
exportation of cultural as well
as commercial enterprise.
Left, a mask painted on a
fragment of ostrich egg shell.
Many such masks to protect
the dead have been found
in Carthaginian tombs in Sicily,
Sardinia and Spain. Below left,
a 3rd century B.C. Iberian statue
closely Influenced by the Punic
art style. (Prado Museum, Madrid.)
It is named the "Lady of Elche"
from the site where it was found
in Spain. Centre and right,
two terracotta statuettes from
Punic sites in Tunisia:
an Egypto-Phoenician sphinx
(6th century B.C.) and a
mother-goddess figure
in the Ionian (Greek)
style of the same period.
These works were either imported
or copied by artists in Carthage.
(Carthage National Museum)
16
GRANDEUR AND DECLINE (Continued)
powerful civilizing force in the ancient
world. Its contribution, long under¬
estimated, is beginning to be better
appreciated, thanks to the widespread
development of archaeological excava¬
tion and historical research.
In 146 B.C., the Roman general
Scipio Aemilianus, allotted the task of
destroying Carthage, it would appear,
unwillingly, could not restrain his tears.
He recited aloud the well-known lines
of Homer: "A day will come when Ilium,
the sacred city, will perish; when Priam
and the subjects of Priam, skilful in
handling the spear, will perish . . ."
He must have been equally distressed
by the tragic spectacle of the burning
city and by the disappearance of a
great and influential metropolis.
Few vestiges of Carthage escaped
the destructive fury of its enemies.
Today they adorn a peaceful residential
district, greatly appreciated for its
tranquillity and the subtle charm which
surrounds it. The site is one of the
most beautiful in the world, located on
a promontory at the far end of the
Gulf of Tunis, with white houses set
in vast gardens stretching towards
the sea.
At the foot of the promontory are
remnants of the Punic ports with their
two harbours, one enclosing an islet
which seems to have held the Admiralty
buildings. Here one of the greatest
fleets of the ancient world rode at
anchor; here was the starting point
for the intrepid Punic navigators and
empire builders.
The ports are silted up, and now
give only a remote and hazy idea of
their historical importance. If they and
the other remains of Carthage were
worthily restored, this shrine of history
might regain a semblance of its former
glory.
Photo © Roger-Viollet. Paria
