Homo sapiens, it would seem, is man's deadliest enemy. No
vertebrate, not even the most ferocious of the carnivores,
habitually kills members of its own specieswith two
exceptions... rats and men. Can it be that man is no better
than the rat? That, as Konrad Lorenz and a number of his
followers maintain, man is by instinct an aggressive creature,
a born killer, and that it is this innate propensity to violence
that accounts for individual and group aggression in man ?
Last May, Unesco brought together at its headquarters in
Paris a group of distinguished biologists, zoologists and
other scientists from more than a dozen countries to face
this question. Their answer: a unanimous and resounding
"No!" Man is no killer by nature. Man does not possess an
"aggressive instinct." What went on during this debate
and some of the startling conclusions of recent scientific
research in the field are the subject of the first part of this
issue.
But there is another domain where the depredations ofman
have reached the hot danger point: the aggression of
technological, industrial and urban man against his natural
environment, against that thin layer of our planet that has
come to be known as the Biosphere. But here too man has
the answer within himself. For if we so will it, by our
single and Joint acts, there is still time to save our planet
and life upon it from irreparable ruin.
UNDERSTANDING
MAN'S
AGGRESSIVENESS
by Dan Behrman
4
DAN BEHRMAN, author of "The New World
of the Oceans' (Little, Brown and Co., Bos¬
ton, U.S.A.) is a Unesco science writer.

1.
Instinct
or learned
misbehaviour?

«
I
S man chained to the wheel of instinct,
condemned to fight tooth and nail, rocket and bomb until the end (easily
foreseeable, if this is so) of his stay on earth? Or can his brain be taught
to modify the violent behaviour that he needed as a hunting animal in a
now-forgotten world?
The answer to the first question is No; to the second a hesitant qualified
Yes. The questions and their answers came recently at one of the most
unusual conferences that Unesco has ever held. Its purpose was to learn
how far science has got towards understanding human aggressiveness
and along what lines of research it should strike out in the future.
The conference was unusual in that
it bore so little resemblance to a
formal conference. At times, it was
a conversation; at other times, a
philosophical dialogue. . It took on a
life of its own, a rhythmic pace of give-
and-take where any person at any
time could be expected to come up
with the unexpected. Those fortunate
enough to watch it could not help but
tell themselves that such an event gets
right to the raison d'être of an organi¬
zation like Unesco.
Eighteen scientists from fourteen
countries spent a week together
in one of Unesco's conference rooms.
They talked about how to achieve
peace of mind and, subsequently,
the peace of nations on a site
that represented a glimmer of hope
in itself. As one of them remarked,
Unesco coexists peacefully with the
French Ecole Militaire across the way
and it occupies land that once housed
a cavalry barracks.
Their meeting was international,
intercultural, interdisciplinary. They
talked of mice and men, of how both
behave under stress such as the strain
of overcrowding. They talked of
violent crime among new migrants to
Baghdad, of police-stoning by students
in Berkeley. They could speak at
first hand of life on an Indonesian is¬
land, in an African valley peopled by
chimpanzees, in the quiet old city of
Budapest, in the turmoil of New York.
They could talk of correcting mis¬
behaviour in a child by spanking it,
in a monkey by transmitting a signal
to a radio set implanted in its brain.
The men and the one woman at this
meeting were of bents so different and
interests so diverse that none was
preaching to the converted, yet all
were close enough to find common
ground for discussion.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

UNDERSTANDING MAN'S AGGRESSIVENESS (Continued)
The first matter to discuss and settle
was the biological basis of aggres¬
siveness. If it was innate, then not
much could be done about it, least of
all by an international meeting. The
view that aggressiveness is not only
an instinct in man but that it is a good
one because it makes the world go
round has been put forth in popular
writings that have acquired a huge
following.
Even prime ministers these days
talk of the "territorial imperative",
one scientist observed sadly, as
he expressed the wish that biologists
who go more deeply into the behaviour
of man and animals could write more
clearly.
The consensus of the meeting was
that aggressiveness is not instinctive.
Ht may once have been useful, but in
circumstances far different than those
we experience today. On this issue,,
the most outspoken member of the
meeting was Dr. Robert A. Hinde,
director of animal behaviour study at
the University of Cambridge, England.
He attacked the notion that aggressive
behaviour is "valuable" for the survival
of man as a species.
"Man's cultural evolution takes place
today in circumstances quite different
from those of natural selection," said
Dr. Hinde. "Is it the most aggressive
individuals that our society wishes to
perpetuate? Do we think that there
is a correlation between strength and
wisdom in man? It is certainly absent
in monkeys...
"It has also been said that aggress¬
iveness is needed ' to establish a
hierarchical order in society. In this
view, the presence of untouchables is
needed as a release for aggress¬
iveness. But has anyone asked the
untouchables about this?"
A number of subtle distinctions had
to be drawn, some along semantic
lines. Aggressiveness may not be an
"instinct", agreed Dr. Sherwood
Washburn, professor of anthropology
at the University of California at
Berkeley, but it is very readily learnt.
"Give a boy a rifle and he'll go out and
hunt," he remarked. "This is built
into us. Crowds are violent, armies
are violent. Look at the Congo, look
at Vietnam. It is easy for man
to be extremely violent." Dr. Ali
Kemal, professor of psychiatry at the
University of Mustansiriah in Baghdad,
disagreed: "I cannot agree that ag¬
gressiveness is learnt; it's as old as
original sin."
On this issue, as on a number of
others, the chairman of the meeting;
Dr. David Hamburg, head of the
psychiatry department of the Stanford
University School of Medicine, in
California, was able to bring apparently
conflicting views together without
necessarily watering them down to
a' lowest common denominator.
Dr. Hamburg, a thoughtful man who
could make very incisive statements
very unaggressively, wondered aloud
if much of man's biological equip¬
ment and the violent behaviour that
it generates is not obsolete.
Several other speakers, beginning
with Prof. Richard Hoggart, Unesco
Assistant Director-General for Social
Sciences, Human Sciences and
Culture, who opened the meeting,
pointed out that the world has changed,
but man has not. He has not yet had
time to evolve physically from man the
hunter; yet hunting as a way of life
has vanished from the face of the
earth except in a few remote pockets.
Dr. Hamburg put a time scale on this
change to show how human evolution
has been unable to keep up with the
change from caveman to cityman.
Mammals appeared on earth 50 mil¬
lion years ago, hominids some
4 million years ago. Our own species
is 40,000 years old, agriculture began
about 8,000 years ago and the
industrial revolution responsible for the
shape of the modern world Is but two
centuries old, "only a moment in
evolutionary time." Small wonder that
man the hunter who needed ten
square miles of elbow-room per capita
according to conclusions based on
distribution of fossil remains has so
much trouble squeezing into factories,
office buildings and cities.
Left, a pitched battle between
police and students, a shot
from a recent American film,
"The Strawberry Statement",
which dramatises the
world-wide problem of
today's conflict between
youth and authority on the
campus.
The photograph on the right
is no Hollywood film shot.
It was taken in a forest in
Tanzania and shows a
young male chimpanzee who
has seized a club and Is
beating an insect on the
ground. For the rest of this
remarkable photo story see
following pages.
