The crisis in development
o THE HARSH FACTS
OF THE 1960s
October 24, 1970 marks the 25th
anniversary of the United Na¬
tions. As the world commemor¬
ates this event, international
co-operation for economic and
social development in the Third
World is approaching a criti¬
cal juncture. Dr. Malcom S.
Adiseshiah, Deputy Director-
General of Unesco, sets forth
in the following pages his analy¬
sis of the situation as this
year sees the close of the U.N.
Development Decade of the
1960s and the start of the
Second Development Decade of
the 1970s. Dr. Adiseshiah, who
has just completed a major
study on the role of education,
science and culture in develop¬
ment entitled "Let My Country
Awake," published last month
by Unesco (see inside back
cover), presents here his frank
views regarding the successes
and setbacks of the past Decade
and the action he feels is ur¬
gently called for to meet the
problems of tomorrow.
by
Malcolm S. Adiseshiah
Deputy Director-General of Unesco
T
4
HE simplest and most
awesome expression of today's deep-
rooted crisis In development is the
fact that the gap in the standards of
living of the rich one-third and the
poor two-thirds of our world is grow-'
¡ng wider every day and in every way.
Let us take just the dollar expression
of this living differential. The rich
countries have during the Develop¬
ment Decade of the 1960s Increas¬
ed their per capita income by four
per cent annually ($292), while the
poor countries have increased theirs
by two per cent ($12). But these
aggregates do not tell the real story.
If these trends persist, a person in the
United States will earn $10,000 annually
by the year 2000, while an African,
Indian and Pakistani will double his
income from $100 to $200 by 2119,
and an Argentinian or Uruguayan will
double his Income from $500 to $1,000
by 2009.
Our normal working tools do not
seem to be able to explain and resolve
this paradox. The abstract economic
models are unable to guide policy as
between injecting mere physical
capital or improving human resources,
CONTINUED PAGE 7

Photo © Harvey Shaman, Kew Gardens, N.Y.

t)M|
ä^S

CRISIS IN DEVELOPMENT (Continued)
Galbraith's air-conditioned nightmare
between balanced development or
Induced growth, between, commodity
agreements or competition In the open
market.
The gap we have always had. "The
poor are always with us." With our
current dedication to development, it
has become a crisis point. But the
nature and dimension of the crisis have
further changed. The daily widening
of the gap transforms a factor of ine¬
quality into a judgement of iniquity,
a crisis of development into a crisis
of the conscience.
Another simple expression of the
crisis is what has happened to the one
per cent target that rich countries
should contribute at least 1 per cent
of their national income to develop¬
ment in the poor countries recom¬
mended by the World Council of
Churches in 1958 and later endorsed
by all Intergovernmental bodies
United Nations, Unesco, the U.N.
Conferences on Trade and Develop¬
ment and the Organization for Eco¬
nomic Co-operation and Development.
The tragedy is that before this
decision was solemnly made, the
transfer of resources to the poor
countries had reached the one per
cent target ($8,000 million in 1961). It
became stagnant In 1967 at 0.68 per
cent and has declined to 0.64 per cent
in 1968. If interest and amortization
payments from the poor to the rich
countries are deducted, the public aid
is $6,300 million or 0.4 per cent.
In fact, if all net interest and
dividend payments to the rich countries
are allowed for, the flow becomes
negative in the case of Latin America.
This means that of some $600,000 mil¬
lion by which incomes have increased
in the rich countries during the decade,
not a dollar has gone to aid the poor
countries. The present transfer has
been compared to the annual expen¬
ditures by the rich countries of $35,000
million on liquor and $15,000 million
on cigarettes, and the mad $200,000
million on armaments.
T
HE development crisis is
world wide, and its tentacles reach out
to all lands, rich and poor. The rôle of
the family as the basic unit of society
is disintegrating everywhere, the youth
revolt being but one expression of it.
Urban slums, the pollution of the air
and water and the use and misuse of
science and technology are universal.
John Kenneth Galbraith whimsically
presents another side of this haunting
crisis in his book "The Affluent
Society":
The family which takes its mauve
and cerise air-conditioned, power-
steered and power-braked auto
mobile out for a tour passes through
cities that are badly paved, made
hideous by litter, blighted buildings,
billboards, posts for wires that
should long since have been put
underground. They pass on into
a countryside that has been render¬
ed invisible by commercial art.
They picnic on exquisitely packaged
food from a portable ice-box by a
polluted stream and go on to spend
the night at a park which is a
menace to public health and
morals. Just before dozing off on
an air mattress beneath a nylon
tent, amid the stench of decaying
refuse, they may reflect vaguely
on the curious unevenness of their
blessings.
Similarly, the family and other
valuable institutions in the poor
countries are being damaged by the
process of development which is
essentially an unhappy form of mimi¬
cry, called westernization, since air-
conditioners, power-steered cars, ice¬
boxes and nylon tents on which
Western nations rank high have a ten¬
dency to be picked up as development
indicators in those countries.
A
LT the social level, the de¬
velopment picture presents equally
disturbing features, which are hidden
by the statistical aggregates that we
employ 6 per cent G.N. P., 10 phy¬
sicians per 10,000, 2 cinema seats for
100 people. If we look behind these
averages, we will find that in many
countries what little growth has been
registered is at the cost of distribu¬
tional justice. In fact the countries
with the highest growth rate have had
an unequal sharing of the benefits
among their people.
In some of the poor countries,
therefore, a kind of fatalistic social
philosophy Is spreading that the price
of economic growth is disparities In
incomes and that such concentration
of incomes In a few hands is needed
for increased savings. In actual fact,
large and growing income disparities
have not stimulated growth. They
have on the contrary acted as a
powerful disincentive to growth and
have channelled investments in luxury
goods production, corruption, tax
evasion and expatriate capital flows.
At the back of these social problems
is the lack of public participation in
policymaking and development plann¬
ing. A general norm of modern
government policies should surely be
to decrease correlations between
ascribed characteristics such as race,
sex, caste, class, religion and region
and achieved characteristics such as
position, income, power and education,
preferably to zero.
The most serious aspect of the
crisis Is the failure of the developing
countries to create meaningful employ¬
ment. That is the most tragic failure
of the world development situation.
It has been computed that in the
nineteen seventies there will be
300 million young people entering the
labour market of the poor countries,
for two-thirds of whom jobs do not
exist and will have to be created.
The equivalent in the developed
countries will be merely replacing
those retiring.
Today, 20 per cent of the entire
male labour force in the developing
world is unemployed. This fast
growing unemployment trend is due
to the rate of population growth and
the economic growth policies followed
by the poor countries In the fifties and
sixties. Increased child survival and
longevity have increased labour
supply.
High Gross National Product growth
rates have not helped create adequate
employment in countries like Pakistan,
Rep. of Korea and Venezuela. In
fact the tragedy is that higher growth
rates achieved through expanding the
industrial sector, increasing labour
productivity and using capital intensive
and labour saving techniques, made
falsely attractive by low interest and
exchange rates, cheap machine imports
and unrealistically high wages, have
not expanded job opportunities ade¬
quately.
These wage rates attract labour
from the rural sector and in the
absence of labour intensive, export-
oriented occupations result in massive
urban unemployment. The scarcity of
middle-level skills makes for large-
scale unemployment of unskilled or
semi-skilled labour in the ratio of 1: 10
or 12. As has been pointed out, the
irony of the unemployment crisis is
that there is no need for it. There is
enough unfinished business to keep
everyone employed.
Y
ET the crisis I have tried
to portray arises out of a historic and
positive situation. One hundred coun¬
tries, constituting two-thirds of the
people of the world, have made their
choice for development. Included in
this one hundred are 65 new nations of
Africa and Asia. "You have helped us
win our political liberation," said a
Chief of State to me, "now you must
walk along with us on the long, weary
but exhilarating path of economic libe¬
ration." The work of development has
begun: it will not be finished in a day "7
or a year. This is work for this cent- /
ury and beyond.
In opting in favour of development,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CRISIS IN DEVELOPMENT (Continued)
The growing spectre of unemployment
did the poor countries have a real
choice? I have constantly faced this
question when visiting Member States,
working on their rural programmes,
helping them in the planning of a train¬
ing activity or in designing a research
project.
On one such occasion, at the end
of a long and weary day, when the
people and the United Nations team
had worked on the modalities of a
tightly scheduled renovation pro¬
gramme, the village leader asked me
how he could help explain and re¬
concile this proposed action vis-à-vis
his fairly happy and contented fellow
villagers, whose culture, in conse¬
quence, included the wisdom: "If ever
the feeling to work hard begins to
overcome you, just lie down, and the
feeling will pass away."
In India, Gandhiji expressed this
thought even more brutally: "Our
peasant earns his bread honestly," he
wrote. "He knows fairly well how he
should behave towards his parents,
his children and his fellow villagers.
He understands the rules of morality.
But he cannot write his own name.
What do you propose to do by giving
him a knowledge of letters? Will you
add one inch to his happiness?"
A
8
Lshort time ago I was again
involved in a discussion of this fun¬
damental option in an Arab country,
whose people have maintained their
basic features of fierce pride and
passionate loyalty, unforgettlng hostil¬
ity and confident trust, wide ine¬
qualities and an abiding religious faith.
We were drawing up a detailed plan
to train their own geologists to take
over responsibility for exploiting the
mineral-laden countryside.
The social change and cultural dis¬
ruption being brought about by this
and other programmes were fully and
freely debated and the conclusion to
which all In the group agreed was:
"Development is here to stay; it is
on us and around us; we have to live
with it and accept the changes in our
society and culture that it brings; we
have no choice in the matter." This
conclusion is a representative sample
of what is common to the development
option by the underdeveloped world:
namely the resigned and passive
acceptance of change, whereas de¬
velopment demands planned and
induced change.
This development option of the poor
countries has come to be expressed
through planning, which as a social
technique has gained universal accept¬
ance. Such planning has often times
been no more than a set of mathema¬
tical targets or accounting techniques.
It has not comprehended the larger
social, human and Institutional prere¬
quisites for development, which can
only be dealt with by development
policy. It has been weak on the
implementation and project preparation
side and has barely covered the dy¬
namic private sector.
Even so, the record shows that the
growth rates it generated represent
a break from stagnation and inertia,
an increase in the productive capacity
of the poor countries and a tool to
initiate wider and more complex pro¬
grammes. Above all, it raised savings
and investments to levels unknown in
earlier times. Eighty-five per cent of
all their investments was from domestic
savings. Given the low income level
of the poor countries and how near
the margin its people live, this is a
proud and heroic record.
T
HE most spectacular
achievements have been in the field of
education. Free and universal educa¬
tion has been accepted in all poor
countries. The initial reluctance of
parents in rural communities to forego
earnings of child labour, itself a back¬
wash of poverty and exploitation, has
yielded to the social prestige and
economic value of education. Recent¬
ly, I was in five countries where the
net growth of the population had fallen
to 1 to 2 per cent in three years and
where the reason given was universal
primary education and the absence of
illiteracy.
On a world scale, enrolments in
schools and universities have tripled
between 1950 and 1965. Two hundred
million adults were made literate
during the period. The annual rate of
growth of educational expenditures
between 1960 and 1965 has been
13 per cent in Asia, 16 per cent in
Africa and over 20 per cent in Latin
America. National plans for- science
and technology are under preparation.
The poor countries are devoting 5 per
cent of their national income to educa¬
tion, compared to 7 per cent by the
rich countries.
But this quantitative expansion of
education has been accompanied
by a sad qualitative deterioration.
Schools and university facilities are
used only for 25 per cent of the day,
educational drop-outs and repetition
leading to wastage average 50 per cent
of those enrolled, and the curricula,
techniques and streams of specializa¬
tions have little relation to personal
development, the environment and the
employment profile of the country.
In the health field, the achievements
amount to a miracle. Epidemics and
disease vectors have been controlled.
Mortality from plague was reduced
from 17,000 In 1951 to 47 in 1966,
cholera from 63,300 to 4,400 and small¬
pox from 226,000 to 12,200. Here
there has been a direct benefit to the
individual in the poor country. Life
expectancy at birth has been raised
very fast.
In the five countries that I have
referred to earlier, the mortality rate
from 0 to 5 years of age was less than
two per thousand. In human terms
this is the most convincing demonstra¬
tion of the power of applied science.
All would benefit if the lawlessness of
the world were reduced and man's
energies turned from the preparation
for war to the works of peace.
In agriculture, production barely
kept pace with population growth and
in many areas fell alarmingly behind.
The most Important lesson that we
have learned In this decade is that
agricultural expansion and renovation
are vital to the entire development
process and that there is nothing
automatic in achieving such adjust¬
ment.
Instead of being a net exporter of
14 million tons of cereals as it was
in the thirties, the developing world
became a net importer of 11 million
tons in the sixties. This led most
countries to revise their agricultural
policies for it was realized that there
were not enough foodstuffs for their
industrial workers, that there was less
employment, less Income, less savings
and less foreign exchange earnings.
E
I VEN more serious was the
human aspect; there were 500 million
hungry people and in a decade there
would be 600 million more, all living on
subhuman nutritional and protein intake
levels with all their consequences on
body, mind and soul. A change was
urgently needed. Following, therefore,
the focus on revised policies, a good
part of the developing world is now
experiencing a major breakthrough in
food production, called the "Green
Revolution".
This leap forward has been possible
through inputs of improved varieties
of rice and wheat strains, fertilizers,
irrigation, agricultural extension and
education. In 1968-1969, India's food
output was about 8 million tons above
the previous record of 89 million tons
in 1964-1965. Pakistan increased its
wheat production by 50 per cent in
two years. In non-cereal production,
similar advances have been registered
in sugar, coffee, tea, etc. Prospects
for growth, therefore, look much
brighter now that It has been demons¬
trated that the peasant is like all of
us, who laughs when he is tickled,

r*tx*
*r
A
-'
-. r-
j^Bnrrr"
Photo © Parlmage (C.P.), Paris
V
äPIfaSr^T
^
Some countries tend to measure development in terms of air-conditioners, automobiles,
refrigerators and other consumer goods considered as "prestige" objects.
cries when he is hurt and responds in
a normal way to costs, prices and
credit.
This agricultural breakthrough is
therefore not the result of magic. It is
one part of the total technology which
includes water management, land
reform and development, fertilizers,
pesticides, rural roads, regional centres
for storage, marketing facilities and
credit resources, all of which must
now move ruthlessly forward.
Further, it is important to ensure
that we do not get lost in the clouds
of the new agricultural technology and
allow them to push out the small
farmer and so Increase income dis¬
parities and create a new class of
landless city proletariat. In India, out
of 50 million farms, 30 million are
below 2 hectares covering, however,
only 1/6 of the total farming area of
130 million hectares. The small
farmer who Is caught in the vicious
circle of .fragmented holdings, in¬
security of tenure, lack of credit
facilities, unsatisfactory marketing and
untimely supply of inputs, has no profit
margin to share in the new technology.
Case studies in India show that
such technology requires him to spend
four times more than he does on
manures, one-and-a-half times more on
irrigation charges, six times on im¬
proved seeds and twelve times on
pesticides. So the new technology is
pushing up land values and the tragic
biblical drama of Ahab the King going
down to the vineyard of Naboth the
Jezreelite "to take possession of it"
Is being repeated.
A further valuable lesson which has
been gradually learned during the
decade Is that there is no opposition
between agriculture and industry.
Their complementary and supplement¬
ary rôle was, during this period,
brought out by the fact that where
the parents work at yokes for their
oxen, gather manure, carry water,
winnow grain and weave their cloth
and baskets all by their hands, their
children work in industry producing
tractors, fertilizers, pumps and pipes,
meal and flour, cement and silos.
The industrial growth in the poor
countries has registered an overall
rate of 7 per cent compared to 6 per
cent for the world as a whole. This
gain has been registered despite
numerous handicaps such as shortage
of foreign exchange and domestic
skills, the small scale of the domestic
markets and the trade barriers erected
by the developed countries.
But now Industrial policy in the poor
countries has come to the end of the
line and needs recasting. The possi¬
bilities of import substitution have been
largely exhausted and the countries
face a very real danger of producing
high cost, inefficient goods behind
their high tariff walls. Protection in
these countries today Is simply a
contribution to high-cost domestic
structures.
The infamous illustration of this
trend is that In 1965, the poor countries
spent $2,100 million of their domestic
resources to manufacture cars and
automative products, which had an
international valuation of only $800 mil¬
lion. This one-year waste of $1,300
million, which is more than the World
Bank's 23-year total of investments in
industry, is a drastic reminder, if
reminder there must be, of the need
for a revised industrial policy based
on careful choice of technology,
export-oriented manufactures and
exploration of all available outlets.
The most Important external factor
which has determined (undermined in
fact) the development of the poor
countries has been their share in world
trade. And here the share of these
countries has declined steadily from
27 per cent in 1953 to 19 per cent in
1967, and even In primary products
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
9

CRISIS IN DEVELOPMENT (Continued)
The dilemma of birth rates
and economic growth
10
in which they have an absolute and
comparative advantage there was a
decline from 54 to 42 per cent. In fact
in 1967, the developing countries did
not increase their trade by even 2 per
cent of the total.
The ratio of their exports to Gross
Domestic Product (G.D.P.) is around
25 per cent, a good indicator of their
heavy reliance on world trade for their
development. Their trade and exports
have fallen steadily because of internal
causes such as reliance on single
export items and production lags, but
even more because of falling inter¬
national prices for their products and
the trade policies of the developed
countries.
In the developed countries the pre¬
ference patterns of consumers, tech¬
nological Innovations and official
production and trade policies have all
meant that while the price of the
exports of the developing countries
continue to fall, thus reducing their
share of world trade and their export
earnings, the prices of capital goods
the latter import rise, thus worsening
their terms of trade. Hence, the trade
policy of the developed countries is
far more decisive than their aid policy
for the development of the poor
countries.
And so it is a pity that while U.N.
Conferences for Trade and Develop¬
ment (UNCTAD) have laid down
very good general principles, they
have not worked out a programme of
action by the developed countries to
promote duty-free, non-reciprocal pre¬
ferential imports of primary products,
manufactures and semi-manufactures
from the poor countries, the building
up of buffer stocks and the develop¬
ment of compensatory finance. At
UNCTAD II in New Delhi the
developed countries were instead
preoccupied with their domestic prob¬
lems of liquidity, budgetary resources
and balance of payments. A buoyant
world trade is surely the real answer
to these real concerns.
The world development situation
presents overtones of tragedy in
regard to population. No other facet
casts a darker shadow over the pros¬
pects for international development
than this question of the number of
men, women and babies. And let me
make it quite clear that I approach
this urgent and complex issue from
the point of view of the sanctity of the
human person, the dignity of man and
the rights to life, liberty and well-being
vested in him.
Control over disease vectors, as we
have seen, has diminished death rates,
and for this great humanistic achieve¬
ment we should all lift our hearts and
minds In thanks. The birth rates being
unchanged, the result is an unprece¬
dented upsurge of the population of
the developing countries which is In¬
creasing twice as fast as that of the
developed countries.
The annual Increase of the poor
countries, which was 15 million in
1930 to 1950, rose to 28 million in 1950
to 1960 and 37 million in 1960 to 1965.
The resulting demographic trends are
staggering, the world population in¬
creasing from 3,600 million in 1970 to
4,400 million In 1980 and 5,000 million
in 1985.
T
HE development results of
this astounding phenomenon will be
seen during the decade we have just
entered. They are simple facts: in¬
jurious Incomes distribution, rising
land values, increasing unemployment,
further lowering of low nutrition levels
and the depression of wages. All
these will add to the crying problems
of our youth, education and the cities.
Policies to spread family planning
have been introduced in countries
representing 70 per cent of the popu¬
lation of the developing world. But
these programmes to bring fertility
rates into more tolerable balance with
new mortality experience, face a time
problem as well as the physical prob¬
lem of availabilities and the psycho¬
social resistance to make the program¬
mes acceptable in rural areas.
In the meanwhile, two further demo¬
graphic factors demand our attention.
The first is the effect on the cities of
the "poor world which are rapidly
spawning a culture of poverty. In the
1950s, urban population increased by
50 per cent, it is now doubling and
by 2000 will increase bythe impossible
percentage of 500. One Indian city
will have over 30 million living in
its slums. Given the political attention
aroused by urban slums and the
neglect of rural poverty, is it more
than mere cynicism to conclude that
poverty seems to attract more atten¬
tion not only when it Is extreme but
also when it is visible?
The other is the increasing juvenes-
cence of the age structure of the
population. Generally, over 60 per
cent of the population of the develop¬
ing world is under 25. In one country
where I was recently, over 50 per
cent of the population was 18 years
and under. The minority which must
feed, clothe, educate and provide
moral care for the majority is shrinking.
It Is the quality, the spiritual life of the
next generation which is at stake.
A serious imbalance
in world trade is
compromising economic
progress in the
Third World. Poor
countries pay
increasingly higher
prices for much-needed
goods and capital
equipment while their
share of international
trade and the price of
their exports continue
to fall. Photo shows
a construction site
in Latin America.
Photo © Ian Berry
Magnum, Paris
