by Sir George Godber
Cigarettes
and cancer
T
10
OBACCO has been in use
in Europe for less than 400 years. It
has been smoked in pipes, cigars and
cigarettes and it has been taken as
snuff. It has been praised by many
and, until the last twenty years, con¬
demned by relatively few. Factory-
made cigarettes have come to be by
far the commonest means of smoking
tobacco only during the twentieth cen¬
tury. But during this century the pro¬
duction and smoking of cigarettes so
greatly increased that their ill effects
have been most forcibly brought to
medical and then to public notice,
especially in the last twenty years.
The first serious contributions to
medical literature about the dangers
of smoking were made twenty years
ago in Britain and the United States.
Since the early 1930s, cancer of the
lung had been increasing rapidly
amongst the causes of death and two
enquiries demonstrated that most
patients with cancer of the lung had
been cigarette smokers.
Those first two enquiries made a
prima facie case but they were follow¬
ed by much more detailed studies
which, over the next ten years, proved
up to the hilt the causal relationship
between cigarette smoking and lung
cancer. In those ten years, the num¬
ber of deaths from lung cancer in
men in Britain went up again by 74 per
cent and the number of deaths from
the same cause In women began to
increase.
It takes a long time to produce a
cancer and that Is why it took so long
for us to realize that the increase in
the use of cigarettes twenty or thirty
years earlier was the cause of death
from cancer so many years later.
SIR GEORGE GODBER Is Chief Medical
Officer to three government departments
or ministries in the United Kingdom: Dept.
of Health and Social Security; Dept. of
Education and Science; the Home Office.
He has represented the U.K. as chief dele¬
gate to every World Health Assembly since
1961, and has written widely on medicine
and public health. This article appeared
in the Feb-March 1970 issue of "World
Health".
Cancer of the lung can occur in peo¬
ple who have not smoked but, among
heavy smokers, those who smoke per¬
haps 40 cigarettes a day or more, it
occurs twenty times as often.
In some people, like uranium miners
or workers exposed to asbestos dust,
lung cancer occurs more commonly
still, but almost entirely amongst those
who are cigarette smokers. It occurs
more often in people living in big
cities than those- who live in the coun¬
try, but again the increase is in the
cigarette smokers ; also, the city dwel¬
ler often smokes more cigarettes than
the man who lives in the country.
The studies of lung cancer in
smokers naturally lead to consider¬
ation of other causes of death, and
this has shown that two common
causes, bronchitis and coronary
thrombosis in younger men, are
also much more common in ciga¬
rette smokers. Probably a lot more
people die each year from these
conditions brought on or aggravated
by cigarette smoking than from lung
cancer. There are other less common
cancers, of the mouth, throat and gul¬
let and even of the bladder and liver,
which are all more frequent in ciga¬
rette smokers than in non-smokers.
In fact, thexman who smokes twenty
or more cigarettes a day from the age
* \9 J

of twenty onwards is likely to live five
years less than the non-smoker of the
same age, and if he smokes forty or
more he is likely to live eight years
less. The man of fifty smoking twenty
cigarette a day has double the chance
of dying in the next ten years than the
non-smoker.
In Britain, probably more than
50,000 people die each year from
diseases brought on by smoking ciga¬
rettes. Of course a lot of them are
older men, but it has been calculated
that at least 150,000 years of working
life before the age of 65 are lost each
year in Britain for this reason. Simi¬
lar calculations In the United States
give much the same answer, as do
enquiries in Canada, Denmark, Hol¬
land, Sweden and Norway.
At this time Britain probably suffers
more than most of the other countries.
That may be due to a longer history
of heavy cigarette smoking, to the
fact. that British men smoke more of
each cigarette than do Americans, and
perhaps because more of Britain's po¬
pulation live in crowded cities.
Most of the attention has been
given in the past to lung cancer but
the less dramatic diseases, chronic
bronchitis and emphysema, are a great
deal more damaging to health gener
ally because they cause long periods of
invalidism before they kill. Coronary
thrombosis, too, may cause long
periods of invalidism if it does not
cause sudden death. Furthermore,
the chronic bronchitic dying after years
of increasing disability may have had
a miserable life and the man who
survives a coronary thrombosis may
suffer severe limitation of his activity
for his remaining years.
T
HE United States Public
Health Services have given us a lot
more detailed information about the
effect of smoking in causing ill health,
apart from a fatal end result. Surveys
there show that the cigarette smoker
has twenty per cent more days of
sickness absence from work a year
than the non-smoker and the more he
smokes the greater the discrepancy.
We have no comparable figures for
Britain but we know that chronic
bronchitis causes a tenth of all Britain's
sickness absence from work each
year, and it seems highly probable that
the total loss of working time due to
smoking is at least of the order found
in the American enquiry.
The ill effects of cigarette smoking
are not just limited to older people.
An enquiry amongst schoolboys in'
Britain showed that those who smoked
suffered more from coughs and ill
health generally than those who
did not; it is easy to show that even
one cigarette produces at least a
short period of reduced respiratory
efficiency.
In those countries where the evil
effects of cigarette smoking have been
fully investigated there is by now
almost universal acceptance that the
ill effects are real. It probably isn't
true however that they are fully
understood. Except in Italy, cigarettes
are still advertised widely. Most
of the advertisements are cleverly
designed to display smoking as an
adult activity helping in social contacts,
even associated with virility and, in
every way, a social benefit.
Advertising experts are certain to
use those arguments that they
think are most persuasive with the
group that needs to be persuaded.
Since adults who already smoke are
likely to go on, it is young people
who most need persuasion. Conse¬
quently, almost all the advertisements
one sees are much more likely to
attract the young than the old.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Photo WHO - American Cancer Society

CIGARETTES AND CANCER (Continued)
'Cigarette smoking responsible for a tenth of all deaths in Britain'
More than half of the American men,
and probably three fifths of British
men, smoke cigarettes. Every one
who does acts as a persuader of the
non-smoker just as every parent,
schoolteacher or favourite athlete who
smokes In public influences young
people, however unconsciously.
It has been shown that parents and
schoolteachers have a great Influence
in inculcating the habit in children.
That sort of example leads young boys
to smoke as a way of demonstrating
they are grown up, especially if
smoking is prohibited for them. Alto¬
gether, in most of the countries with
a high level of social organization and
a high standard of living, smoking is
the norm and it is the non-smoker
who is unusual.
Yet some groups especially
conscious of the ill effects have
clearly responded to the facts. In
Britain nearly two-thirds of doctors
used to smoke cigarettes, now less
than one-third do, in the United States
not much more than a fifth. British
doctors may have started reducing
their smoking earlier; they certainly
benefited from it more than their
fellow citizens because in the period
when the lung cancer death rate went
up by 25 per cent it fell among doctors
by 30 per cent. That was just the
period when the proportion of doctors
smoking was sharply reduced.
w
12
ITH all this evidence, the
reasonable man may well ask why
anyone goes on smoking cigarettes.
Especially why do they go on when,
on present evidence, if they must
smoke, a pipe or cigar is so much less
dangerous. To understand that, one
has to look at the reasons why people
smoke.
Few people like smoking imme¬
diately and yet they will go on until
they do get the pleasurable effects.
In a society where smoking is the
rule and non-smoking the exception,
one can well understand the adoles¬
cent persevering with something that
makes him appear an adult. There is
also a strong urge to conform to his
contemporaries and, nowadays, an
equally strong urge for girls to copy
the males of the same generation.
For most young people there is
little to deter them except the cost,
and few of the arguments against
smoking are ever put with anything
like the force, repetition or continuity
of the pressure in favour of smoking.
The threat of an earlier death, at what
then seems a remote age, simply
doesn't concern them.
Everyone knows that only a minority,
of smokers suffer lethal consequences
and that kind of threat could hardly
be expected to have any effect at all
on the very young. What few of them
realize is that cigarette smoking brings
an almost certainly greater frequency
of illness even from the earliest age
and a loss of physical capacity in
some degree.
One British study of attitudes
towards smoking shows that about
half the smokers habitually use ciga¬
rettes in some social situations rather
than because of any craving for them.
These are the people who like to
smoke, and who use the cigarette to
ease their position by conformity with
the behaviour of the group; it has
become a habit in certain situations
in order to have something to do, to
have something in the mouth or just
to relax.
These are the people who are
habit smokers. They are not driven
by the necessity that affects some
addicted smokers and they could
probably stop quite easily if they were
really convinced that it was worth the
inconvenience of unlearning the habit.
There is temporary strain on the
individual in changing his pattern of
" Tobacco is not a direct
cause of lung cancer, but the
habit of smoking contributes to
the development of pre-can-
cerous . conditions and subse¬
quently of malignant tumours.
Cigarettes are also an aggravating
factor in cardiovascular illnesses,
which are the commonest cause
of death in a great many coun¬
tries. To go back to lung cancer
associated with the use of toba¬
cco, we combat it in the
U.S.S.R., as in other countries,
with a vast propaganda cam¬
paign against cigarettes. We are
also trying to eliminate other
cancer-producing agents from
man's environment."
NIKOLAI BLOKHIN
President of the International Union
against Cancer
Director of the Moscow Institute of
Experimental and Clinical Oncology
From an interview in ''World Health"
February- March 1970
behaviour and probably half the
smokers simply won't face that.
The other half are really much more
dependent upon smoking and fre¬
quently these are just the people who
know that they should stop. Very
often they have tried and failed; in a
society predominantly of smokers
everything is against them because it
simply isn't possible to get away from
the things that might stimulate them to
start again. Others smoking, ashtrays
and an ample supply of cigarettes
deepen their own feelings about de¬
privation in addition to exposure to
advertisement on every hand. Some
people call this addiction, some habi¬
tuation, but it doesn't really matter
what we call it if the man who has this
feeling about smoking simply cannot
break away.
I
F this rough division is
right, and half the smokers could stop
if they were really persuaded, perhaps
we need most of all to work on this
group. We need to get the message
across to them that there are enormous
benefits to be had in terms of then-
own health, and that of the health of
their children or pupils, who would
no longer have the example of a
smoking parent or teacher. There are
even economic benefits, since, in
Britain, the cost of buying 20 cigarettes
a day could feed a member of the
family.
Perhaps our society hasn't faced
the brutal truth that we really want to
get rid of the cigarette. With so much
involved in commerce and agriculture
and so much government Income from
taxation, it isn't surprising that the
voice of reason opposing cigarette
smoking is indeed a still, small voice
in a babble of advertising and social
behaviour, all encouraging use of the
cigarette.
Some things have been done to
change this pattern. In Britain, ciga¬
rette advertising has been withdrawn
from commercial television. In Italy,
advertising of cigarettes has been
stopped altogether. In Norway, the
depiction of smoking in television
programmes has been materially
reduced. In the United States, tele¬
vision programmes that carry advertis¬
ing for cigarettes have to provide
opportunity for the counter arguments
and a lot of useful film material has
been produced there and in Canada
for just that purpose.

If you feel you can't stop smoking cigarettes and
want to cut down,
remember it's the
last third of the
cigarette that does
the most damage
The first few draws on a cigarette are relatively harmless
since most of the tar and nicotine is absorbed
by the tobacco and filter.
Soon, nicotine and other chemicals start to irritate
and coat the delicate tubes of the lungs with an oily tar,
forcing them to produce a thick phlegm. The mixture
of tar and phlegm slithers deep into the lungs where
it congeals and festers.
Tobacco smoke now being inhaled is so saturated
with nicotine and chemicals that it coats lungs
with more liquid tar, causes more irritation and produces
more phlegm than the other two parts of
the cigarette put together.
Photo WHO
Some progress has been made. At
least a million fewer people are
smoking in Britain; in the United States
the consumption of cigarettes per head
is just beginning to fall. But nothing
has been achieved so far to seriously
affect the mortality and morbidity
statistics with which this article-began.
Somehow we have to do much more
and, if we could get the public to
realize what the benefits would be,
perhaps we would get it done much
sooner.
If cigarette smoking could be
stopped there would be some imme¬
diate benefit for the smoker and even
more for the adolescent who was
prevented from starting. Cough and
bronchitis would certainly be reduced.
The occurrence of coronary thrombosis
in middle age, and especially sudden
death in young men from this cause
would begin to go down and the
patient who already had bronchitis
would cease to deteriorate so rapidly.
Even the risk of lung cancer would
begin to fall away. The man who has
beeh smoking for twenty years is
already at substantially greater risk of
lung cancer than his contemporary
who hasn't but, as soon as he stops
smoking, that risk ceases to rise with
age as it would otherwise do. If he
maintains his resolution not to smoke,
in perhaps twenty years or at
most twenty-five he will be at no
greater risk than his non smoking
contemporary.
Cigarette smoking is responsible for
about a tenth of all deaths in Britain
each year. If everyone stopped ciga¬
rette smoking they would still have to
die sometime, but the chance that
death would be premature would be
much less and sickness absence from
work might come down by as much
as a fifth.
There is no other single avoidable
cause of so much premature death
and disability in Britain today as the
smoking of cigarettes. There is no
greater benefit that could be conferred
on the health of its people than the
abolition of cigarette smoking and that
must be true of every other country
with as long and as heavy a history of
using the cigarette.
13
