I
2. Should we ape
the chimpanzee?
I F man is not born Instinct¬
ively aggressive, then why does he
get that way? This question was the
crux of the meeting and it was appro¬
ached first from the viewpoint of etho¬
logy, the science of animal behaviour
that seems to fall halfway between the
stools of the social and the natural
sciences. Let's say it's a social
science of non-humans.
The most complete account of how
animals act in their natural surround¬
ings as compared to the artificial en¬
vironment of a zoo or a laboratory
came from Dr. Jane van Lawick-Goodall
who has spent ten years observing
chimpanzees at the Gombe Stream
Research Centre in Tanzania. The
chimps, she remarked, now take no
more notice of her than they would of
a stone, a tree ... or a baboon. She
can watch them from no more than
a room's length away as they run the
gamut of aggressive behaviour. This
takes patience because chimpanzees
can go for days without creating a
single aggressive incident.
The repertory starts with a "low-
intensity threat", a mere jerk of the
head and a little cough, and extends
right up to a big male hunching his
shoulders, bristling his hair, stamping
his feet, drumming on the buttresses
of a tree, brandishing a branch or
throwing stones. It was pointed out
at the meeting that the mild range of
animal threats may correspond to
verbal aggression in humans.
Chimpanzees are masters of the art
of brinkmanship, seldom going to the
point of actual physical violence.
Even when they do, said Dr. van
Lawick-Goodall, they don't seem to
come out with more than a few
scratches or some lost handfuls of
hair. Immediately after a clash that
may see two animals rolling furiously
down a slope, the antagonists are at
peace. The victim can extend its hand,
the aggressor will pat its head, and
then they start to groom each other.
Dr. van Lawick-Goodall said that
she had never seen chimpanzees fight
to the death. Nor has she ever
observed these lower animals form¬
ing groups to make war on each other.
The world that she observes is so
civilized that its ruler rose to the top
without even laying a hand on his
subjects. She has watched the career
of this leader, Mike, since 1964 when
he was somewhat of a chump as a
chimp, the butt of attacks by nearly
all the other adult males. Then he
picked up an empty paraffin can and
began to drag it around. Soon he was
rolling three cans through the area at
full speed, making more noise than
an express train, sending every other
chimpanzee scurrying in frightful flight
to the treetops. Mike has been the-
champ chimp ever since.
Aggressiveness appears in chim¬
panzees first of all if they are attacked.
They rarely fight over food and then
only if a much-liked item is in short
supply. Frustration is another cause
and it leads to redirected aggression:
a young animal will attack an animal
lower down on the dominance scale
if it has been attacked by a higher-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

8
UNDERSTANDING MAN'S
AGGRESSIVENESS (Continued)
ranking member of the group. A male
will attack a female in oestrus if she
does not respond to his courtship.
An individual that is different from the
others will arouse enmity. Such was
the case, Dr. van Lawick-Goodall
remarked, of infants that had lost their
mothers and of one young chimp that
had been stricken with polio and could
not use its legs.
The female of the species is less
aggressive than the male but perhaps
more dangerous after all. Dr. van
Lawick-Goodall explained that male
chimpanzees will fight and immediately
forgive. A female may give way if
attacked by a male, then go up to
another male half an hour later and
convince him to settle the score.
Dr. van Lawick-Goodall remarked:
"It's not fair to say that women do not
play a role in the aggressive side of
society. Throughout history, they have
egged their men on."
Another parallel with human be¬
haviour might be drawn from the way
chimpanzees acted when the experi¬
menters were feeding them. Under
natural conditions, they will take fruit
from a tree quietly, the higher-ranking
animals leaving enough for the others.
Then bananas were introduced into
this Eden. They were kept in locked
boxes; the animals knew that they
could not get them all at once. So at
feeding time, the chimpanzees would
fight.
A dominant animal might corner the
market with fifty bananas in his arms
and with no intention of letting anyone
else get as much as a peel. Some of
the wily youngsters found the screws
that opened the locked boxes. They
would sit blithely covering them with
their feet until the adults went away,
then they got into the banana business
themselves. After a year of these
handouts, the practice was stopped
because it led to too much aggression.
One would expect scientists to have
a great many reservations about
applying lessons learnt from watching
chimpanzees to the behaviour of
human beings. Surprisingly, they did
not. Dr. Washburn stated flatly that
man and the chimpanzee are closer
biochemically than the dog and the fox
or the cat and the lion. From this
standpoint, the gorilla and the chimp
are as different as man and the chimp.
He cited research in Japan and the
United States which shows that, for
example, in the sequence of amino
acids in hemoglobin, there are 52 diffe¬
rences between man and the horse,
two between the chimp and the
gorilla and none between man and
the chimpanzee.
Dr. Washburn predicted that within
the next five years, science will have
produced a "biochemical clock" to date
the separation of the major groups of
primates (among them monkeys, apes
and humans) with an accuracy of about
one million years.
CONTINUED PAGE 16
é

The private life
of the wild
chimpanzee
A remarkable achievement in scientif¬
ic research on animal life In the wild is
that of Dr. Jane van Lawick-Goodall.
a young English woman zoologist. For
the 'past ten years she has lived in the
African forest, studying a colony of
chimpanzees in Tanzania's Gombe Na¬
tional Park on the eastern shore of
Lake Tanganyika. Wild chimpanzees
are" extremely shy, but Dr. van Lawick-
Goodall patiently and doggedly won
their' confidence until she was able to
sit among them and observe details
of their lives never recorded before.
She studied every aspect of their
hierarchy and complex social behaviour
and the tremendous variety of calls
and gestures which serve them as a
language. Her most astonishing discov¬
ery was that chimps make and use
tools. In particular to extract tasty
termites from their mounds. Man has
long been considered the only primate
with a tool-making talent, which has
been a key factor in his evolution.
Dr. van Lawick-Goodall's adventurous
life among the chimps, which she shared
with her husband (who took many of
the photos reproduced on these pages)
has often obliged her to stay out alone
all night to observe chimpanzee sleep¬
ing habits and to crouch for hours
behind a screen of leaves when photo¬
graphing an exceptionally wary animal.
She says she cannot remember the
time when she did not want to go to
Africa to study animals. Her sense of
vocation has produced a unique and
engrossing scientific record of the
private life of the wild chimpanzee,
some startling aspects of which are
presented here.
Left, chimp holding a stone in left
hand prepares to hurl it at
photographer. Chimpanzees
frequently throw objects (well
aimed) during aggressive
encounters with baboons (and
occasionally each other).
Chimpanzees learned to accept
the presence of the zoologist,
Dr. van Lawick-Goodall, among
them, and one, David Greybeard,
became a firm friend, often
popping into camp to visit her.
The Gombe National Park, set aside especially for chimpanzees, spreads across
30 square miles of forested valleys and treeless ridges of Kigoma, Tanzania.
Above, a group of chimps in the park, resting in a tree after feeding on the leaf buds.
The group comprises fully a-ow males and females, juveniles and infants.
9

10
THE PRIVATE LIFE
OF THE CHIMPANZEE
(Continued)
Photos right, Mike the chimp was meek and submissive until the day he picked up an
empty kerosene can and found that it made a satisfactorily terrifying noise. He found that, if
he did not win friends, he could at least influence other chimpanzees and send them scurrying
to the safety of the treetops when he went into his "charging display" equipped with one or
more of these clattering cans. Mike has been lording it over his fellow chimps ever since.
Above, Faben a young male,' relies on his mean and moody look to impress his companions
as he charges, lips compressed and shoulders hunched, across a clearing. In captivity
chimpanzees become irritable, bad-tempered creatures, but in the wild they rarely fight or harm
each other. They achieve their ends by virtuoso pantomime displays of aggressiveness.

MIKE
THE KEROSENE
CAN KING
Photos Baron Hugo van Lawick © National Geographic Society
¡N
i
^x \
*
>.
*<*
11

W ^^ ^aaaaaaaaaaaw .^ataiaafl L ' .áafl
fc ?» J
Ikfn^
* i ri *
%. J n w
ml
. il
teat
AT'» Wr* 1 1 1 "'w
K »a '.affi
lM>il>IHMSM&MaHHBHr^BMCE9nahi.llllMElHMIfc
Photo Baron Hugo van Lawick © National Geographic Society
THE PRIVATE LIFE
OF THE CHIMPANZEE
(Continued)
PANDORA'S
BOX
-A BASKET
OF BANANAS
12

Photo Jane van Lawick-Goodal © National Geographic Society
During most'of the year chimpanzees
move about In groups of from 3 to
6 animals, but there Is no rivalry between
groups and they often come together
for a few days at a time when
a favourite fruit is plentiful. Top left,
adolescent male and a mature female
with infant giving "pant hoots" in
answer to calls from another group. Slightly
nervous, the female reaches out a hand
to touch her male companion for
reassurance. Chimpanzees and
baboons live together in comparative
peace, but there is occasional rivalry for
special delicacies. Left, a basket of
bananas placed in a clearing causes
dissension. An adult baboon threatens
chimpanzee David who screams and
runs for help to the more powerful, dominant
male Goliath. Together they face
the baboon and force him to retire.
At night chimpanzees construct simple
sleeping platforms. A suitable fork in a
tree is chosen and smaller branches and
twigs are bent over to rest across the
thicker branches of the fork. An extra
handful of leafy twigs is often plucked
to form a pillow. Above, mature male
William blissfully asleep in his nest.
Right, mature male Leakey clamps in his
teeth the remains of a baboon caught
earlier by a younger chimpanzee. Behind
him Mike, the "top chimp", looks on.
Contrary to general belief, chimpanzees
in the wild are occasionally carnivorous.

.THE PRIVATE LIFE
OF THE CHIMPANZEE
(Continued)
SIMIAN
ETIQUETTE
When two chimpanzees meet after a separation of hours or days their
relative social ranking is immediately established. Top left,
Mr Worzle, a mature male raises his arms and hunches his shoulders
slightly as Flo, an old female approaches him in a submissive, crouching
posture. Left, after mildly threatening a female who forgot her place at
feeding time, a mature male reassures her with a friendly chuck under
the chin. The female has an infant clinging to her ventrally and two
fingers of its hand can just be seen emerging from under the mother's
right arm. Below, Fifi, a young female, begs food from brother Figan,
putting her hands to his mouth. He will respond by spitting into her
hand a well-chewed wad of fruit skin, seeds, etc., which she will in turn
chew. Right, two adult females*. Flo and Passion greet each other with
a friendly embrace. Each of them carries a bunch of bananas.

^a^ Jf*. ^ >r ^«w ^f ^0
J^
u +
- ' «
~n*
Photo Baron Hugo van Lawick © National Geographic Society

UNDERSTANDING MAN'S AGGRESSIVENESS (Continued Irom page 8)
Up against the stone wall
Extreme Isolation, like extreme overcrowding,
can give rise to either apathy or sharp
outbursts of violence in both men and
animals. How poignant such neuroses can
become is shown in this pathetic photograph
of a red-haired orang-outang bashing his head
against his cage wall out of deep despair.
Scientists believe that such emotional stresses
can cause physical damage and even death.
Several voices were raised at the
meeting to insist on the importance
of considering man as an animal so
that ethology could be applied to
human situations. Then the problem
was approached from another angle
when Dr. Lionel Tiger, a Canadian
anthropologist now at Rutgers Uni¬
versity in New Jersey, recalled how
men tend to consider wartime enemies
as subhuman.
Much lower down than the primates
on the tree of evolution, mice also
have much to teach us. Dr. Philip
Ropartz, of the Psychophysiology
Laboratory of the Science Faculty at
Strasbourg in France, has done a great
deal of work on the role that smell
plays in transmitting information to
animals and in touching off aggress¬
iveness.
He reminded his listeners that the
human observer cannot ~ hope to
imagine what animals learn from
smell, which is almost their equivalent
of language. Experiments have shown
that dogs can tell from their sense
of smell if their master has been in
the city or the country and even if he
is in a good or a bad mood.
Working with mice, researchers
have found that the males lose their
combativity if their sense of smell is
eliminated by surgery. Aggress¬
iveness was also braked when mice
with normal noses were sprayed with
feminine perfume. Like surgery, It
masked the mouse's sense of smell,
preventing it from distinguishing foes
from friends. "Perfume has been
used by humans since antiquity," said
Dr. Ropartz half-jokingly, "perhaps it
also reduces the 'aggressiveness' that
the human male feels towards the
female."
Dr. Ropartz also remarked that mice
become more violent when they live
in a state of either extreme isolation
or overpopulation. Similar behaviour
has been found in monkeys reared in
isolation or plunged into crowded zoos.
Confined to cages, the animals lower
on the social scale are always in
contact with their dominators. They
constantly eye each other, creating a
vicious circular interaction of threats
generating aggression that generates
more threats. Gang wars have been
known to occur in zoos among animals
that display no such tendencies in the
wild.
Reflecting on these findings, Dr. Ro¬
partz wondered If another vicious
circle did not exist In big cities where
violent crime is on the rise. One
could perhaps say that the violent
criminal produced by crowding Is
isolated in a prison cell, an opposite
extreme that possibly renders him
even more aggressive.
This speculation brought a reaction
from Dr. Miklos Kun, professor of
psychology at Eotvos Lorand College
in Budapest. Throughout the meeting.
Dr. Kun drew on personal experience
in making his comments. Here, he

told of two patients of his who had
spent more than five years in solitary
confinement.
"They were persons of high moral
standards who had been rejected by
society," he said. "When they were
in prison, they told me, they were
happiest when they could go to
sleep. They had vivid dreams, they
saw many images, they relived their
past. Following their liberation, they
suffered recurrent depressions, but
their aggressiveness did not go up."
Dr. Kun also bridled at some of the
suggestions that Dr. José Delgado
made about the need to plan man
biologically in the future. "I am not
optimistic about planning a new man"
he said. "I am optimistic about plan¬
ning a new world."
D
R. Delgado's ideas were
certainly among those that stirred the
most comment at the meeting. A Span¬
ish born physiologist, he has taken
literally the words that he quoted from
the preamble to Unesco's Constitution:
"Since wars begin in the minds of
men, it is in the minds of men that
the defences of peace must be
constructed." One might say that he
has already started constructing them
in the minds of monkeys.
He first appeared in the public eye
when he stepped into a ring with a
charging bull which he was able to
turn aside not with the flip of a cape
but a flick of a switch. The bull
carried a two-way radio implanted in
its brain so that its behaviour could
be changed by an electrical impulse.
Since then, Dr. Delgado has gone
much farther. He told his listeners
that "in the next five years, we shall
see a revolution in the medical treat¬
ment of aggressive behaviour as
important as the appearance of anti¬
biotics in the treatment of infectious
diseases." The basis for this pre¬
diction, he said, lies in research now
being conducted on the "intracerebral
mechanisms" that govern such be¬
haviour. "We are no longer outsiders
looking on, but insiders investigating
what goes on in the depth of the brain
when a subject feels aggression or
rage."
Starting with animals, Dr. Delgado
has been particularly concerned with
learning what happens inside their
brains when they are free in a near-
normal social environment and not in
a laboratory situation. He told of two
techniques.
The first involves implanting very
fine tubing inside the brain which is
connected to two sacs under the skin.
This enables the scientist to inject
drugs into the brain that can serve
to block the functions of specific parts,
a substitute for surgery in treating
certain disorders. Labelled substances
can also be introduced into the animal's
brain and later analyzed to see if
"neurochemical structures differ in
different behaviour" which they do.
The second technique is the "stimo-
ceiver" a two-way radio which is
both a "stimulator" and a "receiver".
As many as 3,000 different points in
the brain of a monkey have been
studied by this method.
In its latest form, the "stimoceiver"
has been hooked up to a computer to
monitor the behaviour of a colony of
chimpanzees on an artificial island
at Holloman, New Mexico, in the
western United States. Their spon¬
taneous activities send signals that
are analyzed and recognized by the
computer. In the event of a special
form of behaviour aggression, for
instance the computer triggers sti¬
mulation to a different part of the
brain to eliminate such behaviour.
"In this way the brain learns to modify
its own activity," Dr. Delgado
explained.
He went on to report on his work
with six human patients who have had
"stimoceivers" planted in their heads.
"If a person is behaving anti-socially,"
he explained, "there are chemical and
electrical mechanisms that we can
identify and modify."
Needless to say, this work brought
some strong comments from his
colleagues at the Paris meeting.
Dr. Hector M. Capello, head of the
department of social psychology at the
National University of Mexico, put their
fears into focus when he remarked:
"It is plausible to control behaviour by
these methods, but it is not plausible
that these methods can determine what
sort of behaviour should be controlled."
Dr. Delgado was not at all taken
aback for he must be well accustomed
by now to such criticism that, in some
cases, can go so far as to hint that
he is creating an Orwellian world of
"1984". He replied, first, that he had
begun to introduce electrodes into
brains because of his own reluctance
to use lobotomy [severing nerve fibres
in the brain], a technique that produces
irreversible change, in treating such
disorders as Parkinson's disease,
epilepsy or intractable pain.
"Is it dangerous to go on with this
work before we have much more
thorough knowledge?" Dr. Delgado
asked, then answered: "Our patients
cannot wait. If a man is in intractable
pain, one cannot wait ten years before
treating him."
Then he reassured Dr. Capello and
some of his other critics. "This tech¬
nique cannot be used to control hu¬
man behaviour. It is, first, a medical
tool for research and therapy and,
secondly, a new approach to learn¬
ing what man really is inside his brain.
I certainly do not claim that we are
going to start implanting electrodes
into the brains of our children and
politicians to change their behaviour."
Dr. Delgado showed colour slides
of his experiments that demonstrated
how the stimoceiver can make a
monkey walk, then run. One set of
slides brought the answer to the dream
of the timid soul who quakes before
crossing the threshold of his boss's
office.
A timid monkey had been placed in
the same cage with a dominant animal
equipped with a stimoceiver. In the
cage, too, was a lever that sent a signal
into the boss's brain, changing him
from a lion to lamb. The timid soul
soon learned how to work the lever
and the results were startling. One
slide showed the "top dog" (that is,
the top monkey) making the "under
dog" miserable, the next showed the
boss cowering after the magic button
had been pressed.
Dr. Delgado is convinced that the
brain learns aggressiveness. "Is there
a killing instinct in man ? No, man
is totally shaped by culture. The
difference between man and the
animals is that his brain is so immature
at birth that, in the absence of sensory
input, his mind cannot work. His
genes are only modulators, the brain's
source of information is cultural, not
genetic."
From this premise, he went on to
advocate education of the child aimed
at "mentalization" rather than mechani¬
zation of society. "We are now at
a crucial moment in civilization. Nature
once controlled man, man now controls
nature, soon we can establish intelli¬
gent control of man. We can correct
the imbalance between the material
powers of man and his mental direction
for we are now as wild as we were
many centuries ago."
T,
HE source of aggressive¬
ness was taken up from still another
angle by Dr. David Hamburg, the
chairman of the meeting. He reported
on research that has already linked
the presence of abnormally high
amounts of testosterone, the male sex
hormone, in mothers to aggressiveness
in children.
While there is not enough knowledge
at present to enable these findings to
be applied practically, Dr. Hamburg
foresaw that "decades from now", the
physician and his patient might choose
therapeutic abortion to prevent the
birth of an "extremely aggressive
individual", a potential Hitler or
Genghis Khan.
Presence of the male sex hormone
at a somewhat lower level could lead
in this same distant future to treatment
of the pregnant mother with substances
to counteract the effects of male hor- -i
mones. Such substances could be I /
administered just as fluoride is added
to drinking water to prevent dental
caries.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

UNDERSTANDING MAN'S
AGGRESSIVENESS (Continued)
Dr. Hamburg remarked that political
problems no doubt would arise as they
have with fluoridation. Nations would
not wish to lose the qualities of self-
assertion, vigour and determination
that many feel are linked to an
aggressive personality. Therefore,
Dr. Hamburg said, biochemical treat¬
ment of high-risk aggressiveness
"would probably require a system of
international agreements an idea that
is almost science fiction today."
Here it might be appropriate to
mention a theory referred to at the
meeting by Dr. Lionel Tiger. He is
convinced that "corporate aggress¬
iveness" such as war is a male
function. Discounting tales of the
Amazons, Dr. Tiger said he has been
unable to find a well-documented case
of a culture where women were the
warriors or the hunters of large
animals. War is for men only, it's not
a universally human activity. As for
female aggressiveness, he maintained
that it is not "corporate".
Dr. Capello observed that the meek¬
ness of women in Latin American
cultures may not lie in their hormones
as much as in the fact that they have
been trained "to express a reduced
motor response".
Dr. Hamburg explained that labor¬
atory work with animals shows that
an abnormally high amount of male
sex hormone seems to have the
greatest effect at an early age. It
makes it easier for the subject to
"learn" aggression and to learn it for
good even when its hormonal balance
goes back to normal.
T
18
HIS brought the meeting
to a theme that it seldom left: educa¬
tion. Experiments cited by Dr. Ham¬
burg with monkeys showed that very
young animals exposed to threatening
images for only a short time will react
to them six months later. Immediately,
a correlation with television comes to
mind. It is estimated that, in a
country such as the United States,
children spend as much time in front
of the TV set as they do in school.
In fact, before they start going to
classes at the age of six, television is
the biggest factor in their education.
As a school of violence, it can be
very effective. Surveys in the United
States of programmes offered by the
three major networks have shown,
Dr. Hamburg said, that a murder
occurs once an hour on the screen,
and once every half an hour during
peak viewing time, the early evening
hours. Every eight minutes, there is
a violent incident to be watched. To
make matters worse, Dr. Hamburg
went on, this violence is "sanitized".
There is no blood, there is no un¬
pleasantness. It is shown as a neat
way to solve problems.
VISIONS OF OUR TIME
The arresting works of Spanish painter luan Gegpves are an indictment of violence
in all its forms, from oppression and brutality to war, murder and the senseless
destruction of living things at the hand of man. His variations on these themes
denounce man's inhumanity to man and his increasing capacity for self-destruction.
In some paintings, Genoves shows men hunted down by war machines (top
right, framed in the sights of a weapon, terrified crowds seek vainly to escape);
in others (right) he depicts them fleeing from some nameless threat. In the
chilling six-scene painting above, two tiny figures run helplessly across a featureless
desert but are finally cut down. Soon the footprints of the assassins and then
the bodies of the victims are effaced. Murder, without leaving a trace, has
been committed. The grey and black colours of Genoves' paintings and their
slightly blurred effect recall scenes from newspaper and newsreel photographs and
on-the-scene television coverage. But with their anonymous figures and no
identification of time or place the paintings speak in the present tense. Their
message is that helpless, faceless victims, individual figures or scurrying masses
(see also front cover) are being harassed and hounded down here and now.
Works by Juan Genoves. born in Valencia, Spain, 40 years ago, are displayed in
galleries of North and South America, Africa and Europe. An exhibition of his
works in London was the occasion for the shooting of a film, "A Test of Violence",
in which live action and special effects gave another dimension to Genoves'
paintings on the screen.

