THAT CHART
ON THE
LABORATORY
WALL
by Ghenrikh Teterin
and Claire Terlon
24
c
^^OME of the basic sub¬
stances In nature, which we call
elements, have been known since
early antiquity. But it is only during
the past century that man has learned
that there are about a hundred ele¬
ments, and begun to understand how
these are similar or different.
The work of Copernicus and Galileo
had earlier brought order out of chaos
in astronomy, Newton did much the
same for mechanics, then Darwin and
Pavlov for biology, while much later
Bohr and Einstein were to make
significant contributions to the physics
of the atom. In chemistry, one of the
great moments came in 1869 when the
Russian researcher Dmitri Ivanovich
GHENRIKH TETERIN of the U.S.S.R., is head
of the Scientific Laboratory at Odessa State
University, in the Ukraine, where he has
worked in the fields of physical and electro¬
chemistry. He has also carried out research
at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, in the
U.S.A., under the U.S.S.R.-U.S.A. scientific
exchange programme. Dr. Teterin is at
present working with Unesco's Division of
Science Teaching. He has written widely on
physical chemistry and is the author of many
popular science articles.
CLAIRE TERLON, of France, is a specialist
in physics as well as psychology. As a
member of the Institut Pédagogique National
in Paris, she is responsible for the preparation
of special television refresher courses for
chemistry and physics teachers in French
lycées. She is a regular contributor to the
French science magazine "La Recherche-
Atomes".
Mendeleyev formulated the periodic
law of the chemical elements.
The formulation of the periodic law
marked the passing of the study of
chemistry from almost medieval trial-
and-error methods to a modern
science capable of predicting elements
not yet seen, heard, touched or
smelled by man. The coherent
arrangement of the elements by
Mendeleyev crowned the efforts of
men of science in many countries to
discover a meaningful system in the
properties of these basic substances.
Mendeleyev's idea was to be
virtually a quantum jump from the
simple table laid out In the eighteenth
century by the French chemist Antoine
Lavoisier who had Included, besides
physical elements, what he called
"imponderable fluids," such as light
and the energy derived from heat.
Although a far cry from Mendel¬
eyev's rigorously logical approach,
Lavoisier's effort succeeded in con¬
ditioning other scientists to reject the
theory of phlogiston. This was the
ancient chemical concept, dating from
early Greek civilization, that fire in its
various forms was a physical or
material component of nature.
Lavoisier's analysis was improved
upon in 1803 by the British chemist
John Dalton and his atomic theory
which attributed a distinctive atomic
"weight" to each of the 23 elements
admitted by Lavoisier. Characteristics
CONTINUED PAGE 26
aai
1AJJL
v:/x
This Soviet stamp, issued in
1934 to mark the centenary
of Mendeleyev's birth, shows
him seated in front of his now
familiar Periodic Table of
Elements.

CTOAETME nEPMOAMHECKOrO 3AKOHA
AM.MEHAEAEEBA
nOHTACCCPI969 0K
In 1969, several countries commemorated the centenary
of the Periodic Table of Elements by issuing a series of
stamps in honour of its creator Dmitri Mendeleyev.
The discovery by this Russian chemist that a natural order
existed among the elements was one of the greatest and
most patiently won achievements in the history of scientific
research. The U.S.S.R. stamp, below, is printed on a
fascimile of an early version of the Periodic Table in
Mendeleyev's own handwriting, dated 17.2.1869. Above
the table he has written, "Draft of a table of elements
according to their atomic weights and chemical properties
by D. Mendeleyev." Left, another Soviet stamp shows
the bearded figure of the scientist at his desk working
out preliminary atomic weights.
Dmitri Mendeleyev
the man who brought
law and order
to chemistry
\j MITRI ivanovich Mendeleyev
was born in the Siberian provincial town of Tobolsk in
February 1834. The youngest of 17 children, "Mityanka"
as he was known to his friends, showed an early aptitude
for physics, mathematics and history but disliked Latin.
When he was 13 his father died, yet despite the hardship
this brought to the family, young Dmitri was able to com¬
plete his studies in mathematics and physics at the Central
Pedagogical Institute in St. Peterburg (now Leningrad).
Even before being awarded the Institute's Gold Medal,
Mendeleyev had become fascinated by the possible relation¬
ships between the chemical properties of the elements and
their physical structure.
After several years in Odessa and St. Petersburg, Men¬
deleyev worked from 1859 to 1861 in Paris with the French
chemist and physicist Henri Victor Regnault, and also with
the German chemist Robert Bunsen, in Heidelberg.
It was during his stay in Germany in a laboratory he had
arranged in his own home that the young chemist esta¬
blished the concept of critical temperature (above which a
gas cannot be turned into liquid by pressure alone). And
in nearby Karlsruhe he met the Italian chemist Stanislao
Cannizzaro.
Mendeleyev called Cannizzaro "my real predecessor...
I observed immediately that the changes in the atomic
weights which he proposed lent a new harmony to the
groups suggested by Dumas," (professor of chemistry at the
Sorbonne). "The idea of a possible periodicity in the prop¬
erties of elements in relation to their ascending atomic
weight occurred to me as of that moment."
By the age of thirty-three, Mendeleyev had been named
professor of general chemistry at the University of St.
Petersburg, at that time Russia's most important chair in
chemistry.
It was during this period that Mendeleyev began com-
àéy >/&'
-£¿ a 90 : Z*»
£.^/#ttn %[*/%;*
fb=A%t .''' /f4.
Ù-//Z T*.
iii^/76 <
y. /¿z ,
nOHTACCCPOU*
piling one of his major works, "The Principles of Chemistry"
(published in 1868). In writing this book he squarely faced
the problem of how to present the elements and their rela¬
tionships. Again and again he compared their properties
in the hope of finding a key to the solution.
Describing his discovery, Mendeleyev later said that in
comparing elements and atomic weights, as he had noted
them down on cards pinned to his laboratory wall, he had
concluded that "the properties of elements depend in ;
periodic fashion on their atomic weights."
He added: "Even if I had some doubt concerning many
obscure points, I had no doubt at all concerning the general
character of the conclusion, since to admit that the rela¬
tionships were purely coincidental was out of the ques¬
tion."
Mendeleyev finally outlined his new thesis in a paper
which he presented to a meeting of the Russian Chemical
Society on March 1, 1869. Today his triumph is attested in
every chemistry laboratory in the world: hanging in colour
on the wall is his enduring handiwork the periodic Table
of Elements.

CHART ON THE WALL (Continued)
PLEXIGLAS SPIDER
Below, "plexiglas spider" enables nuclear physicists to see atomic
particles as infinitely brief flashes of light The apparatus is part of the
detection equipment at the receiving end of a giant particle accelerator
at CERN (the European Organization for Nuclear Research) near Geneva
(See "Unesco Courier", March, 1966). Above, a simplified view of an
atom, In this case of uranium. Negatively charged electrons orbit in
planetary fashion around the nucleus composed of protons (positively
charged) and neutrons (electrically neutral particles). Though physicists
nowadays view atomic structures as more complex arrangements
(resembling balls of energetic and uncertain "fluff") the image of the
atom as a minute solar system is still a useful one for the non-specialist.
a^aWmäHE
H^^P^^^I ^kW JH ^k\W MmmmwÊ MÉmWË Ml. 1
^KV fluKM EH ililH
^B VI ^LM
'Chance favours only
the prepared mind7
Pasteur
such as this and the "equivalent
weight" concept of another English
scientist, William Wollaston, were to
pave the way for chemists later to
perceive a cohesive order among all
the elements found in nature. But
until Mendeleyev's time, even the
notions of what constituted an element
were vague and subject to individual
Interpretation.
By 1850, an additional thirty elements
had been recognized, bringing the
total known to somewhat more than
sixty. Tables of chemical order were
offered by scientific thinkers such as
Johann Döbereiner, Leopold Gmelin,
E. Lennsen, Max von Pettenkofer, Jean-
Baptiste Dumas, Willard Gibbs and
John Gladstone to name but a few.
In 1817 Döbereiner's "triads," or
groups of three, had been an attempt
to correlate trios of elements accord¬
ing to neighbouring atomic weights.
By 1852, Gmelin had adapted the
triads to four-and five-element series
(tetrads and pentads), ranged accord¬
ing to their atomic weights, in increas¬
ing order.
Among the researchers whom
Dimitri Mendeleyev was later to single
out as most influential on his work
were the French scientists Dumas and
Lennsen. Dumas' contribution had
been a method to calculate the atomic
weight of elements within a given
group, whereas Lennsen's was a first
attempt to interpolate the atomic
weights of elements yet to be discov¬
ered.
During the 1860s, novel forms of
classifying the elements were propos¬
ed. One of these was Alexandre
Beguyer de Chancourtois' "telluric
screw," a spiral arrangement wound
round an imaginary cylinder. It strikes
today's reader as curiously parallel to
the "double helix" in modern genetic
chemistry.
In another view held at that time by
John Newlands of England, every
eighth element in the ascending order
of atomic weights repeated certain
characteristics. This was called the
theory of octaves, after the layout of
the diatonic scale in western musical
forms.
Probably the most provocative of
the new ideas was that advanced by
a German scientist, Lothar Meyer. In
1864 Meyer published a table listing
forty-four of the sixty-two known
elements, arranged according to their
"valency" instead of atomic weight.

No longer of significance today,
valence refers to the combining power
of one atom of an element: in water,
or H20, the valence of oxygen is two
because one of its atoms can join
with two others (in this case, two
atoms of hydrogen). And the valence
of hydrogen was the point of departure
in Meyer's first table. A later table
proposed by Meyer was to be based
on atomic weights.
These endeavours and those of
three scientists, William Odling, Gus-
tavus Hinrichs and H. Baumhauer, were
all steps in the right direction, even
though a few men of learning con¬
sidered them as little better than men¬
tal games. Some chemists viewed the
correlation of properties of the ele¬
ments grouped in triads, octaves or
along a telluric spiral as nothing more
than happenstance and therefore little
better than superficial analogy. Even
as Newlands was presenting a paper
before Britain's prestigious Chemical
Society he was asked, ironically, if it
would not be possible to obtain the
same results by arranging the ele¬
ments in their alphabetical orderl
What, then, was Mendeleyev's
theory all about? Briefly, he proposed
arranging the elements in lines and
columns (also called "periods" and
"groups") inside a rectangle, with
their atomic weights rising in number
from left to right along the same line,
one line following the other down the
page.
The columns were determined by
elements possessing analogous pro¬
perties the same kind of combining
oxide, for example. The fewest atoms
of an element (R) combining with the
fewest of oxygen (O) would appear in
the first column, augmenting in combin¬
ing proportions toward the seventh
column.
c
^^FlNCE only some sixty ele¬
ments were then known, eight columns
sufficed then and still do today. In
fact, the lay-out of an entire system
still in use was prescribed by Men¬
deleyev when only slightly more than
half its components were known.
Mendeleyev knew from the outset
that he had developed a scientific
device to lay out the chemical elements
in a convenient system. More than
that, he realized he had discovered an
objective, natural law. Yet just as
Newton had been popularly said to
understand universal gravitation when
struck on the head by a falling apple
(or Watt realized that a boiling kettle
could be transformed into the steam
engine), there were still those who
thought that Mendeleyev had come
upon the periodic law... as the result
of a dream.
Man tends to overlook that while
scientific truth may suddenly strike
one man's mind as a flash of lightning,
that same scientist may have spent
' years of arduous research on his sub¬
ject. Indeed, it was Pasteur who later
commented that "chance favours only
the prepared mind." If we take a look
at Mendeleyev's activities before
1869, it becomes fairly clear that the
emergence of the periodic table was
no mere accident.
Although Mendeleyev's table was
considered by some scientists as
simply another in an endless series
of dubious hypotheses, one of its
great merits was its boldness. The
progress made in chemistry during the
past century has proved Mendeleyev's
theory to be correct on two additional
counts. He said that new elements
would be discovered to help fill the
holes in the system he had devised,
and that the atomic weights of some
elements which did not fit into his
table had been calculated erroneously.
In the latter case (concerning the
atomic weights of the elements cerium,
indium, titanium, uranium, yttrium and
others), Mendeleyev was soon to be
proved right as new research helped
rectify weights which were incorrect.
Where an element did not seem to fit
(such as uranium with an atomic
weight of 116), he speculated on the
true value. He arbitrarily doubled, for
instance, the weight of uranium to 232;
today we know the actual weight of
that element to be 238.04.
In the other and more important
case the gaps in the periodic table
Mendeleyev was to see three new ele¬
ments identified and described within
sixteen years of his epoch-making
declaration before the assembly of
Russian chemists. Among the ele¬
ments he had foreseen are those at
first called eka-aluminium, eka-boron
and eka-silicon ("eka" means "one"
in Sanskrit); they were later renamed
to honour the countries where their
discoveries had occurred.
Eka-aluminium, identified scientific¬
ally in 1875 by the Frenchman Paul-
Emile Lecoq de Boisbaudran, became
known as gallium (atomic weight 69.72).
Gallium thus filled the "hole" in the
table between aluminium and indium.
Eka-boron, which Mendeleyev had
predicted would have. an atomic weight
midway between those of calcium and
titanium (40 and 48), emerged in 1879
as scandium, honouring its Swedish
discoverer Lars Frederick Nilson. The
CONTINUED PAGE 32

THAT CHART ON THE
LABORATORY WALL (Continued from page 27)
32
definitive atomic weight of this element,
44.956, was not established until 1955.
The third element, the so-called eka-
silicon, became germanium on its
discovery in 1886. Possessing an
atomic weight of 72.59 and properties
very close to those predicted by
Mendeleyev, germanium was identified
by Clemens Alexander Winkler, pro¬
fessor of chemistry at the Freiburg
School of Mines, in Germany.
Besides being an excellent theorist,
Mendeleyev proved to be a practical
man. Before his death in 1907, he
was to make chemical investigations
of the oil fields at Baku in his native
Russia and in Pennsylvania, U.S.A., as
well as of the Caucasian springs of
naphtha, a paraffin-like hydrocarbon
mixture. (Hydrocarbons are chemical
compounds consisting of carbon and
hydrogen only.)
Long after his death, two more chem¬
ical elements whose existence was
foretold by Mendeleyev were to be
clearly identified. In 1925 the German
husband-wife team of Walter and Ida
Noddack isolated rhenium, which
Mendeleyev had called bi-manganese.
A hard, grey metal often used in
thermocouples, rhenium has an atomic
weight of 186.20. Then, seventy years
after Mendeleyev's discovery, Prof.
Marguerite Perey, the distinguished
French woman scientist, identified
eka-cesium (renamed francium), at the
Institut du Radium in Paris. Francium's
atomic number is 87.
^^J N the heels of the discov¬
ery of the periodic law of the elements
came one of the scientifically sensa¬
tional findings of the late 19th century,
that of the "inert" gas argon. This was
the work of both Sir William Ramsay
and Lord Rayleigh. The former had
suggested to Rayleigh in 1894, after
careful experimentation, that "...there
is room for gaseous elements at the
end of the first column of the periodic
table." The two chemists announced
the new gas later at a meeting In
Oxford. We now know .that argon and
similar gases are not inert, but can
combine with other elements.
Mendeleyev had not foreseen the
inert gases simply because of their
predominant "quality" of inactivity.
Two years later (1896) Ramsay in
England, and the Swedish chemist Per
Theodor Cleve, working independently,
discovered helium. The behaviour of
helium (from the Greek word for "sun")
had been observed spectroscopically
for several years as one of the com¬
ponents of the solar atmosphere.
Based on Mendeleyev's reasoning,
Ramsay was convinced that other
similar gases existed. In 1898 he and
Morris Travers identified three ad¬
ditional "Inert" gases neon, xenon
and krypton. This family of elements
came to form the "O" column of the
periodic table.
I
N that same year, 1898,
Pierre Curie and his Polish wife Maria
Sklodowska identified the phenomenon
of radioactivity, which shattered one
of the foundations of Mendeleyev's law
the invariability of the atom. Yet
Mendeleyev could see no anomaly be¬
tween his law and the existence of
radioactive elements when he visited
the Curies' Parisian laboratory in 1902.
Ten years later and after Mendel¬
eyev's death, however, when the
number of radioactive elements had
risen to 37, scientists had some doubts
about the adaptability of the periodic
system. They wondered if Mende¬
leyev's arrangement could be con¬
sidered valid if, as it appeared, there
were no room on his table for the
newly discovered elements.
It was in 1913, on the eve of the
world's eruption into general war, that
another modification clearly became
necessary in the relationship between
an element's structure and its position
on the periodic table. Henry Moseley,
a 25-years-old British physicist, had
analyzed the X-ray spectra of fifty-one
elements. He observed that there
was a relation between an element's
atomic number and the frequency of
the X-rays it emits if bombarded by
cathode rays. (An element's atomic
number refers to how many electrons
rotate about the nucleus of one of its
atoms.)
As a result of the work of this
brilliant young man (killed while on
active service at the Dardanelles in
1915), seven more unfilled spaces on
the periodic table were to gain new
occupants. Besides the rhenium and
francium already cited, these new ele¬
ments were technetium, promethium,
hafnium, astatine and protactinium.
The uncovering of these new elements,
found in effect by a technique which
Mendeleyev could not have known,
in no way disrupted the original dis¬
position of the elements on his table.
Shortly after Moseley's discovery,
another Englishman, Frederick Soddy,
introduced the notion of isotopes (from
the Greek for "same places"). The
isotopes of an element possess all the
same chemical properties. Their
physical properties are identical In
every respect except that of the weight
or "mass" of the atom. Most of the
mass is situated in the atom's nucleus,
consisting of the proton carrying a
positive electrical charge and the
electrically neutral neutron. (The
negatively charged "cloud" of plan¬
etary electrons consists of particles
each having a mass of about 1/1,836
the mass of the proton.)
c
^^ODDY demonstrated, as
did the Polish chemist Kasimir Fajans
in that same year, 1913, that as an ele¬
ment disintegrates through radioactiv¬
ity, the new position it occupies on the
periodic chart depends on the kind of
radiation it gives off. Alpha-disinteg¬
ration (decay through the loss of
alpha-particles) moves an element
two spaces to the left on the table,
whereas beta-disintegration of elec¬
tron emission moves the element one
space to the right.
It is true that there were some ano¬
malies in the method of aligning the
elements as at first suggested by
Mendeleyev. In a few cases he had
listed slightly heavier elements before
somewhat lighter ones. Tellurium
(127.6) was placed before iodine
(126.9), cobalt (58.9) ahead of nickel
(58.7), and thorium (232.0) came before
protactinium (231.0).
After the standard of atomic numbers
had been adopted, it was observed
that if the elements were classified
according to their nuclear electrical
charges, their positions on the periodic
table were just as Mendeleyev had
predicted. It is In this form that chem¬
istry students today are familiar with
"that chart on the laboratory wall."
