WHAT FUTURE
FOR
FUTUROLOGY ?
by François Le Lionnais
4
FRANÇOIS LE LIONNAIS, French science consultant, mathematician and
engineer, is president of the French Science Writers' Association. A member
of the Advisory Committee on Scientific Language of the Académie
des Sciences, in Pans, he is scientific adviser to the French Institute of
Advanced Scientific Studies, the Institute of Cell Pathology, the French
Radio and Television Network, and the French National Commission for
Unesco. A former head of Unesco's Division of Teaching and Dissemination
of Science, he is known as a speaker and writer on scientific matters,
particularly of science popularization. Among his books on science are
'Les Grands Courants de la Pensée Mathématique" (Main Trends in Mathe¬
matical Thought), Blanchard, Paris 1962; "La Science au XX' Siècle" (Science
In the 20th Century), Editions du Seuil, Pans 1951. and "Le Temps", Delpire,
Paris, 1959, published in English as "Time", by Orion Press, New York, 1960.
Mr. Le Lionnais acted as scientific consultant in the preparation of this issue.
^^ cybernetics and the
computer, the population explosion
and pollution of our planet, futurology
is a topic everyone is talking about.
The notion each of us forms of futu¬
rology, and especially what we expect
It to be able to do, may well indicate
whether our thinking still contains tra¬
ces of a belief in magic, or whether, on
the contrary, we are fully aware of the
powers as well as the limitations of
the methods of science.
On the one hand futurology acts as
an irresistible fascination and allure¬
ment for all those who still cling to
moth-eaten yet hard-to-kill superstitions
and beliefs. On the other hand futur¬
ology invites us to cast off our
superstitions and to replace them with
less ambitious but far more reliable
methods of solving specific problems.
Strictly speaking, there can be no
such thing as forecasting if our reason¬
ing and calculations are not applied
in a clearly defined domain, that is if
they do not operate in accordance with
the natural laws of the universe. This
is what the scientist refers to as scien¬
tific determinism which states that
everything occurs in the universe ac¬
cording to natural laws and not as a
result of pure chance; that every phen-
omanon has a cause, and that the
same causes produce the same effect.
Nor can one speak of carrying out
true forecasting if one does not have
the required data and information, or
if one does not know how the laws in
a particular domain actually operate.
From this it is clear that the possibi¬
lities of futurology as a science are
subject to three limitations:
First, if a problpm studied by futuro¬
logy deals only partially with predict-

cons
From somewhat haphazard beginnings, exploration of the future, or
futurology, has become a world-wide research movement that reflects
a broad range of scholarly and scientific interests and disciplines. Its
practitioners offer their anticipations not as certainties, but merely as
possibilities or, in some cases, probabilities. And such assessments are
usually based on studies of technological and social trends and an imagin¬
ative speculation on the results of scientific and technological develop¬
ment. Yet even today, many of the realities of futurology are obscured
by a lack of public understanding of its aims and methods. The U.S. futuro-
logist Daniel Bell, chairman of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences'
"Commission on the Year 2000," has pointed out that a good deal of today's
public interest in the future arises from the bewitchment of technology.
"What is bad," he writes, "is that a serious and necessary effort is in danger
of being turned into a fad, and any fad trivializes a subject and quickly
wears it out. A second evil is that many more expectations are aroused
than can be fulfilled." To the question, "What future for futurology?,"
this issue of the "Unesco Courier" seeks to offer some answers that examine
with equal impartiality the possibilities 'and the limitations of this new
branch of human endeavour.
able events, that is, if the element of
chance plays a certain part, it is self-
evident that the reliability of any fore¬
cast will be proportional to the degree
of chance or uncertainty involved.
Second, even assuming that chance
plays absolutely no part in the ques¬
tion under examination, there is still no
guarantee that the futurologist's pre¬
diction will be right. One has to
make sure that all the relevant infor¬
mation and data or at least the most
important data have been secured
and taken into account.
Third, even if chance plays no part
and all the relevant data have been
secured, it is still not enough. The
futurologist must also be familiar with
the laws that govern the relationship
between the various factors involved in
the problem. While he need not ne¬
cessarily know every single law he
must at least know the most Impor¬
tant ones and be sure that if any law is
neglected It is only a secondary one.
If these three conditions are met, the
futurologist will be able to make fore¬
casts and predictions that are valid,
for despite certain unknowns, they will
have an excellent chance of coming
true.
But can such severe limitations as
the three indicated above all be met in
a reliable manner? This is the real
crux of the problem of the validity of
futurology. I think one can say,
however, that science has already
given us the answer, and that answer
is a definite "Yes," even if only in
certain cases.
The classic example of this is cer¬
tainly celestial mechanics. The Heav¬
ens do, in fact, offer us many testi
monies of the achievements of "astro¬
nomical futurology" with predictions of
the exact duration of each day of the
year at every point on the globe, the
movements of the tides, the eclipses
of the sun and the moon, the move¬
ments of the stars and other heavenly
bodies such as the comets (1).
But the Heavens are also a good
example for reminding us not to lose
sight of the important rules referred
to above.
The movements of the planet Uranus
can be predicted correctly only with
a knowledge of the existence and cha¬
racteristics of a more distant planet,
namely, Neptune. The movements of
the planet Mercury can be predicted
properly and precisely only by replac¬
ing Newton's law of gravitation by the
Einstein-Schwarzschild law of gravita¬
tion. Neptune was discovered by Le-
verrier when,- in connexion with Ura¬
nus, he observed the difference be¬
tween prediction, and fact while trying
not to call into question Newton's law
of gravitation.
In the case of Mercury, it was, on
the contrary, Newton's law which had
to be called into question and replaced
by a universal law In order to explain
the difference between prediction and
fact without having to postulate the
existence of another planet. Beyond
the solar system the predictions which
(1) Halley's Comet Is perhaps the most
famous historical example. In 1682 the En¬
glish astronomer, Edmund Halley, observed
the comet and after calculating its orbit was
able to predict its return with an accuracy
that astounded his contemporaries. The
comet did In fact return as he foretold at the
beginning of 1759, seventeen years after Hal-
ley's death.
one can make regarding stars other
than the sun and concerning galaxies
other than our Milky Way may be
fruitful, but they are nonetheless at
the mercy of the discovery of hitherto
unknown phenomena; in recent years,
astronomy has been rich in discoveries
of this kind, among which may be men¬
tioned radio sources, quasars, pulsars
and neutron stars.
What we have just said in connexion
with astronomy could and must be ex¬
tended to the whole future of funda¬
mental research In physics. Scientists
have known, for several centuries, of
the existence of gravitational forces,
both electrical and magnetic (particu¬
larly In their earthly form, gravity) and
they have succeeded In understanding
their ' mechanisms sufficiently to be
able to apply them in any number of
ways.
Nuclear forces came to light at the
end of the 19th century and other
forces (curiously named, of weak inter¬
action) in the middle of the 20th cen¬
tury. Before their discovery, who
would have been able to forecast the
appearance of these forces in the field
of physics and on what evidence
would such a prediction have been
based? Moreover, how could anyone
have predicted not merely the exis¬
tence of these forces but the technical
uses to which they could be put and
the economic, social and political
consequences of such uses?
A few years ago, scientists thought
they had discovered a fifth force, dif¬
ferent from the other four. This now p
lies in the graveyard of stillborn theo- n
ries and hypotheses. But who can
say that another "fifth force" will not
see the light of day in the more or
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

WHAT FUTURE FOR FUTUROLOGY? (Continued)
The future of the past is in the future
The future of the present is in the past
The future of the future is in the present
less distant future ? Not a single
reliable futurologist would dare to
make such an assertion. But should
such a day arrive, mankind's whole
enonomic, social, political and cultural
future might perhaps be completely
upset, as it is beginning to be by the
use of nuclear forces.
In short, futurology must give up
absolutely any pretensions at predic¬
tions as soon as it ¡s a question of
fundamental research aimed at cross¬
ing a frontier beyond which stretches
completely unknown territory. One
cannot, at the same time, know and
not know. The illusion to the contrary
comes (and we should not be led as¬
tray by the error of those who are
victims of it) from the application of a
philosophy, or intuition, or unscien¬
tific convictions, to a field which
science regards as uncharted whe¬
ther temporarily or for all time and
which it is trying, or perhaps will try,
to explore. Such intuitions and con¬
victions may merit our respect, but any
futurology worthy of the name should
not take them into account.
I
8
T is perhaps permissible
to tone down the severity of this judg¬
ment when an enclave of scientific
ignorance is surrounded on all sides by
well charted territory. This is the case,
for example, in biological research
aimed at filling the gap separating our
knowledge of living beings and of
living cells from our knowledge of
the biochemistry and biophysics of the
molecules of which living matter is
formed. It is permissible to suppose
that this gap will be filled fairly soon.
But here again, it should be carefully
noted that:
this is only a working hypothesis
it could be described as a "hopeful"
hypothesis because
there is no guarantee that the appa¬
rently small distance still to be cover¬
ed does not, in fact, conceal enormous
difficulties, and consequently
the estimate of the time needed is
more of a guess than an accurate fore¬
cast.
If we move on from considerations
of pure research to applied research
and techniques, and then to their prac¬
tical consequences, we come up
against difficulties that are sometimes
comparable, but which are also some¬
times easier to overcome. In general,
the more fundamental the discovery,
the more profound and radical it is, the
more it is abstract and the less its
consequences are immediately fore¬
seeable.
How could Apollonius of Perga and
his contemporaries have imagined, in
the third century B.C., that geometric
study of the ellipse would enable
Kepler, in the 17th century, to provide
a model of the movements of the
planets, a model which would be used
to guide navigators at night and would
transform the character of trans¬
atlantic trade in the following century?
How could the British mathematician
P.A. MacMahon have foreseen that an
amusing arithmetical problem which
fascinated him at the beginning of the
20th century the study of the so-
called Greco-Latin squares, that is to
say, squares containing numbers ar¬
ranged in a certain way would pro¬
vide agriculture with a means of
increasing the production of cereals
by having recourse to the laws of
probability? (applying these laws in¬
telligently to all the factors that
determine the growth of crops
humidity, winds, rainfall, sunshine, the
nature of soils, plant genetics, botany,
the chemical make-up of fertilizers,
etc.)
It would, of course, be easy to sup¬
ply many more examples of this kind.
But many others could equally be
found which would show how intelli¬
gent and imaginative persons (often
after having rid themselves of a para¬
lyzing conformism) have been able to
anticipate the use to which a discov¬
ery of pure science would be put.
This brings us now, somewhat
abruptly perhaps, to the sector of
human affairs where, if we discount
elements of chance, the prospects of
futurology are indeed enormous.
The obstacles to be overcome are
admittedly very great but they are of a
far less radical nature. The number
of factors that must be taken into
account is often discouragingly high,
and many of these factors are very dif¬
ficult to measure accurately. In addi¬
tion they are difficult to measure fast
enough to be able to forecast events...
before they actually occur.
Furthermore, although in many cases
we already know the economic,
sociological and psychological laws
that govern human behaviour, this
knowledge is still quite primitive and
can lead to monumental errors.
There is no shortage of historians
to show (after the event of course)
that it would have been possible to
predict the French Revolution of 1789
(though not the taking of the Bastille
on July 14), or the economic and finan¬
cial crash of 1929 which began in the
United States and then spread all
over the world, or the student protests
of May 1968. But supposing that, as
Pascal wrote, if Cleopatra's nose
had not been so long, the entire
history of the world would have been
changed, who, at that time (or even
to-day) would have had at his disposal
methods sophisticated enough to fore¬
cast what would have happened?
There is, finally, one other obstacle
to the effectiveness of futurology in
this field where it should theoretically
be particularly effective. This is the
fact, which weighs like original sin on
all the human sciences, that it is car¬
ried out by men and is very largely
concerned with human activities. The
futurologist is both judge and jury.
Even if he succeeds in. eliminating any
ulterior motives or bad faith, it is well
nigh impossible for him to rid himself
of the convictions, opinions and pre¬
judices inculcated in him by his edu¬
cation, the social milieu from which
he sprang or which he frequents, his
experience and his reading, not all of
which recessarily tend to foster his
objectivity. These are so many gar¬
ments of Nessus that he is hard put to
leave In the cloakroom.
F
OR proof of this, it is
enough to read all the books and
articles which have been written on
the subject in the last twenty years.
There is scarcely one that does not
reveal in some way or other the poli¬
tical or religious ideas of its author,
his nationality, or at least his adher¬
ence to a group of countries living
under the same form of government
or with the same ideology, what
type of school or university education
he had, in short, a certain view of the
world which is very likely to colour his
thinking.
In the natural sciences, it is virtually
impossible to make such deductions
about an author. It is true, the optimist
can be distinguished from the pessi¬
mist, the timorous mind from the bold,
but this has no repercussions on the
objectivity of results obtained and is
soon obliterated by the evidence of the
facts.
Can a change in futurology which
would immunize it from these imper¬
fections be foreseen? Is it possible to
forecast the future of a science and
technique of the future? Provided that
no time limit is set it seems reasonable
to reply in the affirmative. For confir¬
mation of this, we have only to note
the studies made in the space of a few
years by all those old branches of
philosophy which now claim, and jus¬
tifiably so, the title of the "Human
Sciences" and which every day are
approaching the status of "exact
sciences".
It is only if we renounce all attempts
at predicting discoveries ensuing from
absolutely fundamental research, and
only if we systematically ban all mis¬
representations engendered by super¬
stitions, passions or special interests,
that the chrysalis will one day emerge
as a beautiful butterfly.

ARCOLOGY
OR DIGGING UP
THE FUTURE
The brainchild of American architect Paolo Soleri is this gleaming model of a town of the future.
Like a double pyramid it would stand 3,500 feet (over half a mile) high and house
170,000 people. Utility inlets, sewers and elevators would be installed in the giant pillars.
Each living unit would be about 22 feet high, 35 feet wide and 40 to 60 feet deep, and within
it each individual would be free to design the sort of home he wanted. Soleri calls his style
"arcology", a word coined from the marriage of architecture and ecology, since his aim is
to compact rather than expand the city and leave most of the countryside for man's enjoyment.
He believes the future will provide the new materials that would make his giant structures
technologically feasible.
7
