Photo Paul Almasy - Unesco Courier
44
FROM THE PEN OF HAFIZ. Above, the tomb of Hafiz, Iran's
most admired lyric poet, at Shiraz also his birthplace is a
centre of pilgrimage for the Iranian people. Shams ud Din
Mohammed, whose poetic name in Arabic, "Hafiz", means "One
who knows the Koran by heart", was born sometime between
1317 and 1326 A.D. He was often called by Iranians "The
Tongue of the Hidden" because of the sweetness and beauty
of his lyrics. The poetic form which Hafiz brought to perfection
was the ghazal, a work of 6 to 15 couplets linked by unity of
thought and symbolism rather than by a logical sequence of
ideas. The extraordinary popularity of his poetry in all Persian-
speaking lands is to be found in his simple and often colloquial
language, free from artificial virtuosity and his use of homely
images and proverbial expressions. His wide appeal in the
western world is shown by the fact that apart from several
complete translations of his works, numerous translations of
selections from his poems have been published (including 30 in
England alone). Perhaps to Persian taste the best, and in its
position the most apposite, of the poet's ghazals is that inscrib¬
ed on his tomb. Its reads, in part, "Beside my tomb with wine
and music seat yourself, /that sensing your fragrance I may rise
from within the grave. /Arise, O figure sweetly moving, let me
behold your stateliness, /that casting life and world aside I too
may rise."

AGELESS
VOICES
OF POETS
& WRITERS
Persia has a literary tradition reaching
back into the mists of early time. Yet
Persian literature, as the term is generally
understood, relates to works written in
modern Persian, the language that emerg¬
ed in the 9th century A.D. two centuries
after the Moslem invasion of Persia.
From then on, geographical, political and
religious forces influenced the develop¬
ment and trends of Persian literature over
the next centuries.
The earliest and most numerous examples
of literary Persian are in verse, possibly
because much of the early literature was
improvised and the elements of meter
and rhyme were aids to composition.
Prose developed later, from the back¬
ground of Arabic and pre-lslamic Persian
writings, and ranged from early transla¬
tions and narratives to books of counsel
for court residents and historical works
such as Juvaini's "History of the World
Conqueror", one of two notable works
produced during the Mongol period,
the other being Rashid al-Dini's "Com¬
pendium of Histories".
However, the writers whom Iranians hold
to be masters in the literary field are,
with few exceptions, not historians or
other authors of prose, but their classic
poets : the epic writers, Ferdowsi (author
of the "Shah-nama" see page 32) and
Nizami; the mystics, Sana'i and Attar;
and the lyric writers, Sa'di and Hafiz
of Shiraz. These are the names most
often on their lips along with those
of Maulavi Jalal al-Din Rumi and
Mulla Jami.
Down the centuries Iran has left its lite¬
rary and linguistic mark on an immense
area, a map of which would take in the
sub-continent of India and Pakistan, go
far into China and south-east Asia and
cover the western half of Asia. Today
a rapidly developing country, Iran is
meeting the thirst for knowledge with
strenuous efforts to spread education.
Yet the more modern side of education,
with its emphasis on science, has by no
means dulled the Iranian taste for poetry
and belles lettres which are being pro¬
duced as abundantly and read, or listened
to, as eagerly as ever.
(See page 46, Unesco Translations
Persian Heritage Series.)
