The independence
of Africa
and cultural
decolonization
^^^ULTURE, In Its broadest
sense, is a way of life fashioned by a
people in their collective endeavour
to live and come to terms with their
total environment. It is the sum of
their art, their science and all their
social institutions, including their sys¬
tem of beliefs and rituals.
In the course of this creative
struggle and progress through history,
there evolves a body of material and
spiritual values which endow that
society with a unique ethos. Such
values are often expressed through the
people's songs, dances, folklore,
drawing, sculpture, their rites and
ceremonies.
Over the years these varieties of
artistic activity have come to symbo¬
lize the meaning of the word culture.
Any discussion of culture inevitably
centres around these activities, but we
must bear in mind that they are deriv¬
ed from a people's way of life- and
will change as that way of life is alter¬
ed, modified or developed through the
ages. In our present situation we
must, in fact, try to see how new
aspects of life can be clarified or given
expression through new art forms or
a renewal of the old.
We need to see Africa's cultural
history in three broad phases: Africa
before white conquest, Africa under
colonial domination, and today's Africa
striving to find its true self-image. To
do this is to indicate the obvious: that
the pressures, inside and outside, at
the different stages of her growingTup,
have changed Africa's cultural <needs
and outlook.
JAMES NGUGI of Kenya contributes regu¬
larly to the most important newspapers and
periodicals of East Africa. He has written
widely on questions of African culture and
traditions, and was formerly professor of
English Literature at the University of
Nairobi, Kenya.
by James Ngugi
Yesterday, for instance, there were
many ethnic groups, each with a dis¬
tinct, cohesive culture; today, these
groups are trying to form nations
within wider, more inclusive boundaries
of geography and politics. Hence we
should examine the role of culture in
our time within the new horizons, them¬
selves made hazy by the often conflict¬
ing calls of the tribe, the nation, Pan-
Africa and even the Third World.
Yet too often we talk of African
culture as if it were a static commodity
which can and should be rescued from
the ruins and shrines of yesterday and
brought onto a modern stage to be
eaten by Africa's children, who, long
lost in the labyrinth of foreign paths
in an unknown forest, are now thirsty
and hungry for the wholesome food of
their forefathers.
No living culture is ever static.
Collectively, human beings struggle to
master their physical environment and
in the process create a social one. A
change in the physical environment, or
more accurately, a change in the
nature of their struggle, will alter their
institutions and hence their mode of
life and thought Their new mode of
life and thought may in turn affect their
institutions and general environment.
It is a dialectical process.
A profound change in a people's
economy or In their dwelling-place
through trade and migration, will make
people organize themselves differently
to meet the new set of circumstances.
Their ¡deals and their values, over a
period, are also likely to alter. We
know that trade across the Sahara
brought new ideas and technological
innovations with marked effects on
some west African societies. The
southward movement of the people
along the Nile turned some hitherto
pastoral groups into tillers of the soil
demanding a new mode of life and
system of values.
Contrary to the myth and fiction of
our conquerors, Africa was always in
a turmoil of change with empires rising
and falling. African traditional struc¬
tures and cultures then were neither
static nor uniform. There were as
many cultures as there were peoples,
although we can recognize broad affi¬
nities that'enable us to talk meaning¬
fully of African values or civilizations.
Bearing this in mind, we can rightly
ask ourselves about the attitude to
artistic activities in traditional Africa.
For convenience we should distinguish
between the two categories of societies
identified in "African Political systems"
by M. Fortes and E.E. Evans-Pritchard:
"One group consists of those so¬
cieties which have centralized autho¬
rity, administrative machinery and judi¬
cial institutions in short, a govern¬
ment and in which cleavages of
wealth, privilege and status correspond
to the distribution of power and autho¬
rity... The other group consists of
those societies which lack centralized
authority, administrative machinery and
constituted judicial institutions in
short, which lack government and in
which there are no sharp divisions of
rank, status or wealth."
In the first group, for instance the
Yoruba of Nigeria and the Baganda of
Uganda, there was a more sharply
defined hierarchy with a degree of
specialization of functions. The sur¬
plus from the farmers fed professional
priests and priestesses (or political
office holders) tending the shrines of
the people's gods, and professional
sculptors and artisans in the courts of
the great.
In the other group, for instance the
Ibo of Nigeria and the Agikuyu of A_
Kenya, the rather loose, more egalita- yh
rian political set-up did not allow the
same degree of specialization of func¬
tions. Political office did not carry
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CULTURAL DECOLONIZATION (Continued)
26
economic privileges; it certainly did not
confer on the holder power over the
community's surplus or over the loot
from war to give him the ability to hire
special followers and specialized skills
to entertain him at leisure and to fur¬
ther enhance his stature.
Among the Agikuyu, for instance,
only a very tiny group of workers in
metal lived by their skill, exchanging
their wares for food and clothes.
Otherwise, the farmer also played
music, officiated in ceremonial dances,
recited poetry and stories around the
fireside and became a warrior in time
of conflict.
However, in both types of societies
art was functional; it was never, as in
modern Europe, severed from the phy¬
sical, social and religious needs of the
community. Discussing African art
(in "African Mythology"), Geoffrey
Parrinder makes a pertinent comment:
"Since African art was the only
'writing' known in the whole of tropical
Africa, it was used to interpret life in
every aspect. It was employed in reli¬
gious life, which was not separated
from other parts of life, to give spiri¬
tual meaning and function ,to objects
used in ceremonies of individual and
community... so African art provides a
sacred literature, giving beauty and
solemnity to the face of man."
Song, dance and music were similar¬
ly an Integral part of a community's
wrestling with its environment, part and
parcel of the needs and aspirations of
the ordinary man. There was never,
in any African society, the cult of the
artist with its bohemian priests and
high church around the banks of the
Seine or Thames. Today the artist in
Europe sees himself as an outsider,
living in a kind of individual culture, and
obeying only the laws of his imagina¬
tion. This Is the position of James
Joyce's hero in "Portrait of the Artist
as a Young Man":
"I will tell you what I will do and
what I will not do. I will not serve that
in which I no longer believe, whether
it call Itself my home, my fatherland
or my church; and I will try to express
myself in some mode of life or art as
freely as I can and as wholly as I can,
using for my defence the only arms I
allow myself to use silence, exile and
cunning."
Such an art ministers to a culture of
the mind. It is the culture of Matthew
Arnold who urged the English middle
classes to strive for sweetness and
light by knowing the best that had been
thought and written in the world.
Then this individual man of culture,
as Arnold put it, could "carry others
along in his march towards perfec¬
tion, to be continually doing all he can
to enlarge and increase the volume of
CONTINUED PAGE 28
PRESTIGE OF THE SPOKEN WORD

In all parts of Africa, an
inexhaustible fund of popular
tales, poems, stories and
proverbs with a rich vein
of folk philosophy or a moral
to propose has been handed
down by word of mouth
from generation to generation.
Drawing inspiration from this
broad tradition of oral literature,
writers of modern Africa
have developed a uniquely
African style of writing
compounded of humour,
lyricism and eloquence. In
recent years, Unesco has
collected and published
transcripts of these ancient
oral traditions and, in
1971-1972, will publish three
books on African thought
based on oral examples.
Left, village elder in Senegal
reports on the educational
problems of his community.
Right, a meeting of village
leaders in Guinea. In Chad,
photos below, a village
council discusses local affairs
under the "palaver tree" (left),
while youngsters attend
school under the "tree
of knowledge".
Photo © Hoa-Qul. Paris

CULTURAL DECOLONIZATION (Continued)
Peoples without culture à myth hard to kill
28
A water jug made by an African craftsman of Mangbetu in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The hair style depicted
recalls those of the queens of ancient Egypt. Fashioned in
clay and painted yellow, it stands 32 centimetres high.
It is now in the collection of the Tartu Ethnographic
Museum in Estonia.
the human stream sweeping thither¬
wards." With Arnold, culture becomes
an intellectual activity of the individual.
Ours used to be oriented to the com¬
munity. And because of its public
nature, culture, in its broad as well as
In its narrow sense, helped to weld
society together. The Integrative func¬
tion of culture as described by W.E.
Abraham in "The Mind of Africa",
holds particularly true of traditional
societies:
"Culture is an instrument for making
(mutual) sufferance and co-operation
natural. Its success depends upon
the extent to which it is allowed to be
self-authenticating. Though it allows
for internal discussion, and Is indeed
nourished thereby, the principles of
decision In such discussions are
themselves provided by culture.
"By uniting the people in common
beliefs, actions and values, culture fills
with order that portion of life which
lies beyond the pale of State Interven¬
tion... It fills it in such a way as at
the same time to integrate its society,
on the basis of common attitudes,
common values. It creates the basis
of the formulation of a common destiny
and co-operation in pursuing it."
Jomo Kenyatta's powerful book,
"Facing Mount Kenya", is a living
example of this integrative function of
culture at work. To read it is at once
to witness a world with an inner, dyna¬
mic spirit; it Is also an authentic refu¬
tation of the missionary condemnation
of what they, the semi-gods, thought
was savage and dark. Above all, It
shows very well the political and eco¬
nomic basis of culture. After discuss¬
ing all the aspects of Agikuyu life,
Kenyatta concludes with an aggressive
assertion of the basic role of culture In
a people's discovery of their identity:
"It Is all these aspects of life, "writes
Kenyatta", that make up a social cul¬
ture. And it is the culture which he
inherits that gives a man his human
dignity as well as his material pros¬
perity. It teaches him mental and moral
values and makes him feel it worth¬
while to work and fight for liberty."
It was these "mental and moral"
values that the European colonizer
was bent on destroying in the classical
tradition of Prospero. In the story of
Prospero and Caliban, Shakespeare,
in "The Tempest", had dramatized the
practice and psychology of colonization
years before It became a global phe¬
nomenon. It is worth quoting the
well-known scene in which Caliban
tells Prospero:
"...When thou cam'st first,

Thou strok'st me and made much
[of me, wouldst give me
Water with berries in't, and teach
[me how
To name the bigger light, and how
[the less,
That burn by day and night; and then
[I lov'd thee
And show'd thee all the qualities
[o' th' Isle,
The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren
[place, and fertile.
Curs'd be I that did so . All the
[charms
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats light
[on you I
For I am all the subjects that you
[have,
Which first was mine own king; and
[here you sty me
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep
[from me
The rest o' th' Island."
A number of things and attitudes
emerge from the play. Prospero, the
stranger on the island, comes with the
soft voice of the serpent. He is at first
friendly to Caliban, flatters him, but all
the time learning the secrets of the
island. To him Caliban has no culture
or meaningful past. He even gives
his language to Caliban.
And before Caliban knows it, Pros¬
pero has taken his land, has set up
a one-man government, and turns
Caliban into a slave-labourer. Ariel,
formerly Caliban's subject, is released
from bondage into a new one: he will
only be finally freed if he remains
Prospero's faithful servant and spy.
L
IIKE Prospero, the Euro¬
pean colonizer instinctively knew the
supreme importance of culture, knew
and feared the threat posed by men
with confidence in their own past and
heritage. Else why did he concentrate
his military might, his religious fervour,
and his intellectual energy in denying
that the African had true gods, had a
culture, had a significant past? The
missionary attacked the primitive rites,
the dances, the graven images, recoil¬
ing from their suggestion of satanic
sensuality. Some of the best minds
of Europe abetted this grand deception.
But what was of far-reaching effect
was the fact that, again like Prospero,
the European took away the material
base, and systematically dismantled
the political and economic institutions
on which the African had built his way
of life. In the egalitarian societies for
instance he imposed a chief, a central
visible focus of authority, where none
existed before. In the other category,
he removed the bases on which the
central authority had rested: the source
of political authority of the king was
no longer the people from whom he
demanded allegiance but to whom he
also owed duties.
In both cases, the traditional institu¬
tions were allowed to remain where
they further facilitated the thorough
exploitation of land in the settler colo¬
nies of east and central Africa, or the
exploitation of raw materials and mar¬
kets in the more commercial colonies
of west Africa. By Introducing an
aggressive money economy and new
educational and religious systems,
while denying the African the econo¬
mic and political power by which he
could control them, the European colo¬
nialist "put a knife on the things that
held us together and we have fallen
apart"
The effect of the colonial presence
was to create an élite who took on
the tongue and adopted the style of
the conquerors. They it was who
hearkened to the voice of the missio¬
nary's God, cried Halleluiah, and
raised their eyes to Heaven. They
derided the old gods and recoiled with
studied or a genuinely acquired horror
from the primitive rites of their people.
The rest, for the colonial system by
its very nature has room only for a
few, were often deprived of their land
and then herded into the settler's
farms or to urban centres to become
hewers and carriers of wood.
The first group lost contact with
their roots. They despised anything
that smelt of the primitive past. It is
this group mostly whom the Nigerian
writer Chinua Achebe must have had
in mind when he cried: "If I were god,
I would regard as the very worst our
acceptance for whatever reason of
racial inferiority."
The other group remained close to
the soil and never completely lost
contact with their traditions. The resi¬
lience of African culture was somehow
able to withstand a certain amount of
battering and propaganda. It is diffi¬
cult as Prospero finds out for colonial
domination to completely crush thé
human spirit.
In the struggle for independence,
the peasants and often the urban
workers invoked their ancestral gods
for strength to fight the foe. They
adapted traditional rhythms, songs and
dances to the new needs of the
struggle.
The intellectuals, the élite, the
middle-classes also found themselves
not quite accepted in the world of the
conquerors. Rejected by their coun¬
terparts in the white structure, their
humanity sometimes denied in the
name of race, they were as it were
thrown back onto the masses. They
started to reclaim their past, often
with bitter nostalgia.
Declared Alioune Diop, of Senegal,
at the first World Conference of Negro
Writers and Artists In Paris:
"There is this scandalous allegation of
peoples without culture. While it is
true that those who were really res¬
ponsible for colonization knowingly
fabricated this myth, it is nonetheless
surprising that generations of cultural
and spiritual authorities have conced¬
ed that men could live In a community
without culture."
B
ECAUSE he knew that this
"scandalous allegation" was also em¬
bodied in European books, especially
fiction, on Africa, the African writer
tried to answer by asserting in the
books he wrote that Africa had a cul¬
ture as good as any. The négritude
movement was a cultural phenomenon
playing a political role. It was gener¬
ally realized that a community depriv¬
ed of its political liberty would find
it difficult to recreate an ¡mage of its
past and confidently look at the future.
The realization was general, at times
vague, The belief has persisted,
among most African intellectuals,
artists and politicians that "cultural
liberation is an essential condition for
political liberation". And since they
think of culture only in terms of
dances, the jungle drums and folklore,
they think it enough if they assert the
need for their revival.
But it is wrong to think of culture
as prior to politics. Political and
economic liberation is the essential
condition for cultural liberation, for the
true release of a people's creative
spirit and imagination. It is when peo¬
ple are involved in the active work
of destroying an inhibitive social
structure and building a new one, that
they begin to see themselves. They
are born again.
Today, after regaining their independ¬
ence, most African countries are
committed to developing a distinctive
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

CULTURAL DECOLONIZATION (Continued)
A pernicious pyramid based on race
30
national culture. In some cases, they
have even set up agencies to promote
it. Yet little has been done to trans¬
late this commitment into action.
This, in part, is due to the wrong
attitudes towards culture. There are
people, honest people, who confuse
culture with an irrelevant traditio¬
nalism; it is surely not possible to lift
traditional structures and cultures
intact into modern Africa. A mean¬
ingful culture is the one born out of
the present hopes and especially the
hopes of an impoverished peasantry,
and that of the growing body of urban
workers most of whom have lost
contact with the soil.
There are still other people who
believe that you can somehow main¬
tain colonial economic and other
social institutions and graft on them
an African culture. We have seen
that colonial institutions can only pro¬
duce a colonial mentality. The trouble,
of course, is that many African middle
classes helped to smother the revolu¬
tionary demands of the majority of
peasants and workers and negotiated
a treaty of mutual trust with the colo¬
nial white power structure.
In fighting for independence, most
of the African intelligentsia only
wanted that which was forbidden to
them, or rather they saw the struggle
in terms of their immediate needs
nurtured in any case by the social
position they had attained under the
colonial system, but whose fulfilment
was frustrated by the racism inherent
in the system. They wanted to wear
the same clothes and shoes, get the
same salary, live in the same kind of
mansions as their white counterparts
of similar qualifications.
After independence, the racial bar¬
rier to their needs was broken. The
gold-rush for the style of living of
their former conquerors had started.
Skin lighteners, straightened hair, irre¬
levant drawing-room parties, cons¬
picuous consumption in the form of
large estates, country villas, Mercedes
and Bentley cars became the order of
the day. Yet some of these will
verbally, tenaciously cling and sing
hymns of praise to a mythical past.
If we are to achieve true national
cultures we must recognize our situa¬
tion. That means we must thoroughly
examine our social and economic
structures and see if they are truly
geared to meeting the real needs, and
to releasing the energy of the masses.
Any ideal, any vision, is nothing unless
it is given Institutional forms.
This recognition is at the heart of
the now famous Arusha declaration
in Tanzania. The declaration shows
that Tanzanians are aware that most
African countries, though independent
in name, are still in a semi-colonial
state. In the words of the President of
Tanzania, Julius Nyerere: "We have
been oppressed a great deal, we have
been exploited a great deal and we
have been degraded a great deal. It
is our weakness that has led to our
being oppressed, exploited, disregard¬
ed. Now we want a revolution a
revolution which brings to an end our
weakness so that we are never again
exploited, oppressed and humiliated."
w
HILE ultimately the devel¬
opment of a meaningful self-image is
dependent on the complete reorgani¬
zation of social structures (this is abso¬
lutely basic) we must also create prac¬
tical, specific policies to facilitate the
emergence of new attitudes and art
forms.
In this the role of education is vital.
The colonial system produced the kind
of education which nurtured subser¬
vience, self-hatred, and mutual suspi¬
cion. It produced a people without
true roots in any culture. Often there
was racial discrimination in the allo¬
cation of school, of teachers, of teach¬
ing facilities.
In the whole of east, central and
south Africa, for instance, there were
schools for Europeans, for Asians and
for Africans. There were toilets for
Europeans, for Asians and then for
Africans. Society was a racial pyra¬
mid: the European minority at the top,
the Asian in the middle, and the Afri¬
can forming the base.
The educational system reflected
this inequality. It encouraged a slave
mentality, with a reverent awe for the
achievements of Europe. Europe was
the centre of the universe. Africa was
discovered by Europe: it was an exten¬
sion of Europe. So in history, people
learnt about the rise of the Anglo-
Saxon "race" as if they were the true
ancestors of the human race. Even
the geography of the rocks of Europe
had to be studied first before coming
to Africa.
Today, the more blatant racial
aspects of our education have been
removed. But the actual educational
system which aimed at producing
subservient minds, which at the same
time looked down upon the rural pea¬
santry and the urban workers, has not
been radically altered. In our schools,
in our universities, Europe tends to
be at the centre. And the shift of
emphasis has been on producing men
born to rule!
Only recently a very important
controversy broke at the University
College, Nairobi, when a group of
lecturers questioned the validity of an
English Department, the only depart¬
ment concerned with literary studies,
which continued teaching British
literature in the heart of indepen¬
dent Africa.
This chauvinistic, basically colonial
approach to the study of humanities
was justified on the grounds that
people needed to study the historic
continuity of a single culturel Under¬
lying this was an assumption that the
British traditions and the emergence
of the modern West were the central
root of our consciousness and cultural
heritage. It was the contention of the
lecturers that:
"If there is need for a study of
the historic continuity of a single
culture, why can't this be African?
Why can't African Literature be at
the centre so that we can view other
cultures in relationship to it?"
Towards this end, they demanded
the abolition of the English department
and the setting up, in its place, of
a department devoted mainly to Afri¬
can literature and languages. The
Department of Literature would teach
modern African writing in English and
French, Afro-American and Caribbean
literature and a selected course in
European literary tradition. But at the
core of such a department would be
the study of oral tradition in African
literature.
The importance of the oral tradition
in African schools and universities
can never be too over-emphasized.
Such a study would be important both
in rehabilitating our minds, a recourse
to the roots, but also in helping Afri¬
can writers to innovate and break
away from the European literary main¬
stream. As Abiola Inde, of Nigeria, has
stated: "(Already) one may note that
African literature in the European lan¬
guages lays claim to being differentiat¬
ed from the metropolitan literatures not
only In Its content but also to some
extent In its form. Its originality comes
from the recourse made by our writers
not only to African themes and sub¬
jects, and to elements of folklore, but
also to stylistic innovations derived
from the formal features of traditional
African literature.
To make all this possible funds
should be available to enable a

thorough collection and codifying of a
country's folklore. This is an area in
which international bodies, by provid¬
ing money, could really help.
Equally important for our cultural
renaissance, is the teaching and
study of African languages. We have
already seen what any colonial system
does: impose its tongue on the subject
races, and then downgrade the ver¬
nacular tongues of the people. By
so doing they make the acquisition
of their tongue a status symbol;
anyone who learns it begins to despise
the peasant majority and their barbaric
tongues. By acquiring the thought
process and the values of his adopted
tongue, he becomes alienated from
the value-system of his mother tongue.
Language after all is a carrier of
values fashioned by a people over a
period of time. It seems to me that
in a country where ninety per cent
speak African languages, it is very
unwise not to teach these in schools
and colleges. We need to develop a
national language but not at the dire
expense of the regional languages.
That a study of our own languages
is important for a meaningful self-
image is increasingly being realized.
Increased study of African languages
will inevitably make more Africans
want to write in their mother tongues
and thus open new avenues for our
creative imagination.
c
^^CHOOLS of drama and
music should also be set up in African
universities, and not as mere focuses
for the academic study of African
music and drama but as nerve-controls
for experiments in new forms and
structures. Orchestras and drama
companies resident at the university
must go out to the villages and urban
areas.
The university should also be
accessible to regional music and
drama groups to ensure a healthy
mutual exchange of ideas and skills.
In connexion with this, travelling
theatre companies can be encourag¬
ed. The Makerere College students
have been running one for three
years. They play in remote towns,
and villages; in this way, they have
aroused wide interest in drama in
Uganda's countryside.
This is something which could be
organized on a national and more
regular basis. As in the case of
folklore, we need a library of African
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Photo Bruno Suter © Editions Hermann, Paris
This wooden figure stood at the entrance to the Ivory Coast
pavilion at Expo' 70. The pavilion consisted of three cylindrical
buildings in shapes reminiscent of elephant tusks. Thousands
of photographs and illustrations lined the walls of these
buildings giving a vivid picture of the working life and cultural
traditions of this young nation of five million people.
31

CULTURAL DECOLONIZATION (Continued)
A society founded on co-operation
not on ruthless grab-and-take
recorded music and a good collection
of various types of musical instru¬
ments in the country.
Most African universities and
schools have departments of Fine Art
where students go to learn sculpture,
drawing, and design. This approach
to art in most such departments is
too academic, and their products, too
abstract. The subject matter and the
execution being so abstract in the
Western mainstream, and the prices
being so high, only tourists can buy
them. Often our artists paint or sculpt
with one eye on these patrons.
This ought to change. First, the
academic criterion for entering a
school of fine art should be removed
or radically modified to make It
possible for village artists to use the
facilities. Even the selection of
teachers should not be on mere aca¬
demic qualification.
After all, those African sculptors
who influenced Picasso and Henry
Moore had not been trained in
Western academic institutions. They
moulded from a need arising out of
the total religious involvement with
the community. If a radical approach
to art centres were adopted, we would
be able to tap the artistic resources
and skills In each country.
And we must set up national galler¬
ies to collect any available traditional
sculpture and crafts and to prevent
the most talented of our contemporary
output from going to another country.
This would have the further advantage
of rescuing our artists from their
present dependence on the patronage
of the tourist.
T,
32
HE above suggestions in¬
dicate how important the educational
institutions are in the creation of a
people's self-image. A radical re¬
structuring of our facilities should not
be confined to the arts alone but to
science, medicine, geography, in fact
every aspect of learning so that Africa
becomes the centre. The universities
and our schools should go to the
countryside, there must be total invol¬
vement with the creative struggle of
the peasants if we are to find oursel¬
ves. Country and universities will be
revitalized.
One of the most popular and readily
accepted things in Africa is the need
to revive and develop our ethnic
dances. Towards this end dance
ensembles like The Heartbeat of Africa
in Uganda have been formed. There
are many more in west Africa. Yet
two attitudes to these companies pre¬
vail. For one, they are mostly seen
as a means of exporting African
culture to the outside world. While
this has helped to popularize African
dances In Europe and America, yet it
reveals the same tourist dependence
complex.
Dance and our other artistic pro¬
ducts are primarily for home con¬
sumption. This way there will be a
mutual nourishing effect between the
audience and the performing artists.
The national ensembles should be
such that they would stimulate commu¬
nal dance activities all over the coun¬
try. The Heartbeat of Africa is having
this effect in Uganda where small dance
teams keep on mushrooming even In
the remote villages.
Another attitude is that which sees
our job as mere revival of old dances
without much attempt at innovation or
transformation to make them more
relevant to the present. A dance,
like any other art, should reflect
a people's experience and needs.
Otherwise such dances will become
mere curiosity pieces like Scottish
country dancing, for the tourist in
search of the real primitive thing.
My view is that national dancing
troupes should be selected from
among the best dancers all over the
country; this should be a professional
group willing to learn as many differ¬
ent dances as possible. They should
also be willing to experiment espe¬
cially with the possibilities offered by
marrying dance to music and drama.
At the same time, village or regional
groups should be encouraged. After
all, it is from these villagers that the
national troupe will be getting its
nourishment.
I believe that all these activities,
important as they are, would be mean¬
ingless unless seen in the context of
the kind of society we want. Our
activities should not be aimed at
enhancing reactionary traditionalism
and irrelevant tribal solidarity. After
all, traditional tribal or ethnic unities
are irrelevant and reactionary now
that the economic bases on which
they rested have been removed.
In an interview with the Cuban ma¬
gazine "Tricontinental", the leader of
the Liberation Movement in Guinea and
Cape Verde, Amilcar Cabrai, tackled
this question as far as it affected his
guerilla forces against Portuguese
colonialism:
"We believe that when the colonia¬
lists arrived in Africa the tribal struc¬
ture was already in a state of disinte¬
gration due to the evolution of the
economy and historical events on the
African scene. Today it cannot be
said that Africa is tribal. Africa still
has some remnants of tribalism, in
particular as far as the mentality of
the people is concerned, but not in
the economic structure itself. More¬
over, if colonialism, through its action,
did anything positive at all, it was
precisely to destroy a large part of
the existing remnants of tribalism in
certain parts of the country."
w
E want to create a revolu¬
tionary culture which is not narrowly
confined by the limitations of tribal
traditions or national boundaries, but is
outward looking to Pan-Africa and the
Third World.
Having decided on this, then we
can utilize all the resources at our
disposal the radio, the television,
the film, schools, universities, youth
movements, farmers' co-operatives
to create such a society (the film
especially has great possibilities in
Africa where many people are still
illiterate. But the film industry in
Africa is practically non-existent). This
way we shall find new strength and
a new dynamic.
Talking to teachers at Dar es
Salaam last year, Julius Nyerere urged
them to teach to produce strength In
the context of the revolutionary aims
of the Arusha Declaration:
"Otherwise you will teach to pro¬
duce clerks as the colonialists did.
You will not be teaching fighters but
a bunch of slaves or semi-slaves. Get
your pupils out of the colonial menta¬
lity. You have to produce tough
people; stubborn youths who can do
something, not hopeless youths."
Any true national culture which
can produce such healthy "stubborn
youth", a culture that nurtures a so¬
ciety based on co-operation and not
ruthless exploitation, ruthless grab-
and-take, a culture that is born of a
people's collective labour; such a
culture will be best placed to contri¬
bute something truly positive and
original to the modern world.
