The Piazzetta of St Mark in Venice, leading from the celebrated Square of St Mark
to the sea. On left is a facade of the Palace of the Doges. Because of its cultural
significance, Venice was chosen as the site of the world's first conference on cultural
policy organized by Unesco last year. Venice is sinking into the lagoon, and Unesco
recently launched an international campaign to save it from destruction.

CULTURAL POLICY
A MODERN DILEMMA
At an unprecedented
Unesco conference
in Venice, 88 nations
debate the problems
of cultural policy in
the post-colonial world
by Frank McDermott
i.
T
HE four bronze horses that
for centuries have watched over the
fluctuating fortunes of the Serene
Republic with the same Impassive stare
may be forgiven if, on August 24 last
year, they greeted the arrival of the
delegates to Unesco's Intergovern¬
mental Conference on Administrative,
Institutional and Financial Aspects
of Cultural Policies; with collective
bewilderment.
Themselves the magnificent fruit of
a Greek artist's inspiration, they had in
the past been acquired successively
by Nero, Trajan, Constantine, the Doge
of Venice and Napoleon to glorify per¬
sonal military achievements. Could the
men of today be expected to under¬
stand the purpose of the creative artist
and the meaning of a work of art any
better than their predecessors?
Horses don't bet on people, and in this
case they would have found no takers.
Yet when this first international
conference on cultural policies was
over it had tolled the knell of the self-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
FRANK C. McDERMOTT fias worked for the
International Committee of the Red Cross, _
the United Nations and most of its Specializ- It
ed Agencies. He ¡olned Unesco In 1963, V
serving first as a translator and, since 1969,
as editor of the Social Sciences, Human
Services and Culture Sector.

PROBLEMS OF CULTURAL POLICY (Continued)
From the right to culture
to the duties of governments A great work of art in every age stands as a
chronicle and summary of human experience.
The huge Nahua (Aztec) calendar, (below), being
examined by teenagers in the National Museum
of Mexico City, is a synthesis of art and
science, a record in delicately carved stone of
the chronology and astronomy of an ancient
American people. In striking contrast, but equally
expressive of its time, is the painting "Broadway
Boogie Woogie" by the Dutch artist, Piet Mondrian
(1872-1944), a pioneer of modern painting,
particularly in the abstract geometrical style.
6
confessed philistine and the "culture
vulture" alike.
Delegates from almost ninety coun¬
tries, including 39 Ministers, perhaps
inspired by the magnificent backdrop
that Venice provided for their delib¬
erations, publicly and unreservedly re¬
affirmed that "Everyone has the right
freely to participate in the cultural life
of the community, to enjoy the arts and
to share in scientific advancement and
its benefits". But more than this, they
showed, once and for all, their resolve
to make this extract from the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights a reality
of modern life.
Differences as to the means to
achieve this became evident as the
conference progressed, but never once
did these differences blunt the edge of
determination and faith or deteriorate
into a destructive negativism Instead
they offered a foundation on which to
go on building.
There was, for example, general
agreement with the basic proposition
that every country should in fact have
a cultural policy. As Unesco's Direc¬
tor-General, René Maheu, pointed out
with unassailable logic, "If everyone, as
an essential part of his dignity as a
man, has a right to share in the cultural
heritage and cultural activities of the
community, ... it follows that the autho¬
rities responsible for these communi¬
ties have a duty, so far as their
resources permit, to provide him with
the means for such participation."
Many countries already have clearly
defined cultural policies and machinery
for carrying them out. Some have
appointed Ministers of Culture or
allotted responsibility for cultural policy
to government departments with
complementary duties.
In certain countries, the danger
of stifling artistic creativity under a
bureaucratic blanket was felt to out¬
weigh the advantages of direct govern¬
ment intervention. This is not to say
that such countries reject the idea of a
cultural policy. On the contrary, it is
often a deliberate policy to encourage
non-governmental bodies and indivi¬
duals to provide the motivating force.

> -
The crux of the argument then was
about the degree of government inter¬
vention that was desirable.
The Moroccan Minister of Culture,
Mr. M. El Fasi, explained how govern¬
mental intervention was viewed in his
country by quoting from a speech
made by King Hassan II in 1969:
"We wish to bring together activities
which were formerly dispersed and
co-ordinate them. We have accordingly
set up a Ministry to deal especially
with them, to get our people to realize
how valuable this knowledge is, how
its originality is constantly renewed,
and how valuable a national heritage it
represents."
The Soviet Minister of Culture,
Madame Ekaterina Furtseva, explained
that culture was inextricably bound up
with all the other activities of a nation.
"The' cultural development of a nation,"
said Madame Furtseva, "depends upon
the socio-economic basis of society, on
people's material welfare; at the same
time, the cultural development of the
masses is an essential condition of
social and spiritual progress."
This is the principle upon which
Soviet cultural policy has been based
since the Revolution in 1917, when
three-quarters of the population was
illiterate and over forty nationalities
inhabiting outlying areas did not even
have a written language. From the
outset, the State assumed responsi¬
bility for all organizational, material and
financial aspects of the development of
culture and art.
Long-term planning was essential.
"To realize the importance of long-term
planning," said Madame Furtseva, "one
has only to think how life is likely to
have changed, not only in 15 to
20 years, but even in 10."
The dangers of concentrating patro¬
nage "in the hands of a limited circle
of politicians, bureaucrats and artists'
union bosses" were pointed out by
the Norwegian delegate, Minister of
Education Mr. Kjell Bondevik, who
recalled the old adage that "he who
pays the piper calls the tune."
Clearly this was an aspect of the
problem that worried a number of dele¬
gates. A cultural policy requires a
fine balance, but must enhance rather
than encroach upon the artist's crea¬
tive freedom.
As the Yugoslav Minister of Culture,
Mr. V. Micunovic, pointed out, "The
freedom to create cannot be granted or
withheld by decree, but a State can
provide the social and legal conditions
which allow an artist to express himself
fully and to express the whole com¬
plexity of his personality."
In a frank statement Mr. Micunovic
declared that "State interference in
aesthetic matters, characteristic of the
first post-war years, impoverished cult¬
ure and weakened creative criticism."
Cultural policy should be concerned
with the social and legal security of the
artist, with providing the material condi¬
tions which allow cultural and artistic
institutions to operate, with satisfying
the needs of art and the need for art.
The Yugoslav constitution safeguards
CONTINUED PAGE 10
7

; j*K
»3 »Ii ; À -^
IsáH. wrvj^y*»
WzJáLWi i*IK
!""T73£^
C'" t_^^9 H jbi^E^_"
Photo Rijne Hassner - Tiophoto, Stockholm © G. Bern, Paris

WHIRLWINDS OF FANTASY
Visitors to Japan's Expo' 70 last year had an opportunity to witness an extraordinary
array of original designs, works of art and cultural exhibits assembled In the 90 pavilions
at Osaka under the central theme "Progress and Harmony for Mankind". Many of the
illustration in this issue have been specially selected from Expo' 70, showing the cultural
contribution of different nations. Above, "The Cloud", a monument of blown glass
fantasy in the Czechoslovak pavilion. The work of a Czech artist, René Roubicek, it was
one of the main attractions of the pavilion. The artist who produced the explosion of
metal rods, bells, feathers and other paraphernalia in the awe-inspiring photo, opposite, is
unknown. The costume was worn during a carnival procession in Port-of-Spain,
capital of Trinidad and Tobago.
9

** %r
A JOY
AND A HALF
TO BEHOLD
The traditional skills of
artisans and folk craftsmen
often result in a happy
victory of mind over
matter. Right, traditional
American weather vanes
show changes in styles
and techniques as well as
In wind direction. Left,
one of the famous
"Matryoshka" dolls,
handmade by villagers
from the Gorki district of
northern Russia.
Below right, the
lapanese potter-craftsman
has here produced a
delightful fantasy half-
pussy-cat, half-sun-flare,
half-sea-urchin to make
a one and a half
joy to behold.
PROBLEMS OF CULTURAL POLICY (Continued from page 7)
10
the independence and autonomy of
artists and scientists, limits the say of
public authorities in deciding what shall
be accepted as culture and eliminates
the State's right of arbitrary judgment
on the artistic value or otherwise of
what artists produce.
"Contrary to what Is happening in
other countries," said Mr. Micunovic,
"the role of the State and of govern¬
mental bodies In the direction of cultur¬
al affairs ¡n Yugoslavia Is likely to
decrease; to an increasing extent, It
will become merely supervisory. The
decisions will be taken where decision¬
making properly belongs, if democracy
is to be taken in its literal sense, by the
people actually doing the work or those
they choose to represent them; by
those who create forms of culture and
by those for whom it is intended."
Recent moves by governments to
recognize on a national, public basis
the importance of the arts and huma¬
nities to the future of their societies
were recalled by Miss Nancy Hanks,
Chairman of the U.S. National Council
for the Arts. In the United States
cultural matters have traditionally been
considered to be of solely private
concern. "Public money spent on
cultural matters other than education,"
said Miss Hanks, "will perhaps always
be relatively small as compared in
absolute terms with funds for health,
welfare, economic development or the
sciences; but now we have a commit¬
ment to an idea."
Mr. Edmond Michelet, the French
Minister of Culture (who died shortly
after the conference), pointed out that
it has taken a long time for the idea to
grow that culture, regardless of how it
may be defined, is the private property
of no one; and once it was recognized
as essential to man's dignity, all the
barriers had to come down. "But,"
said Mr. Michelet, "it is beyond the
power of individuals or groups, how¬
ever generous, to handle problems that
involve millions of people."
The conference, therefore, whilst
admitting the importance of govern¬
mental cultural policies, was less
united on the question of the extent of
State action required and the Institu¬
tions and machinery needed. "The
degree of direct governmental involve¬
ment," states its final report, "depends
upon the socio-economic system, the
ideological character and the degree of
economic and technological develop¬
ment of the country concerned. It is,
therefore, not possible to recommend
any standard structure applicable in
all countries."
CONTINUED PAGE 13


THE EGGCENTRICITIES OF PROGRESS
Enclosed in soundproofed, egg-shaped cabins of transparent plastic,
visitors to Expo' 70 call their friends on radio-telephones equipped with
push-button dials. New technical discoveries and the use of new
materials lead to new forms and designs that are gradually becoming
integrated into the cultural background of the modern world.

2.
PROBLEMS OF CULTURAL POLICY (Continued)
Changing ways of life
and the struggle
for cultural identity
L
,KE alchemists seeking the
philosopher's stone, a number of
delegates at Unesco's Venice confer¬
ence made brave and elegant attempts
to define culture. Others obliquely
skirted the issue, and Lord Eccles, the
United Kingdom Minister responsible
for the Arts, admitted unashamedly,
"In my country we have no clear
idea what culture means. Indeed, the
English I dare not speak for the Scots
or the Welsh are reluctant to admit
that they have any such thing as a
national culture."
The conference refrained from the
time-consuming effort of finding a defi¬
nition that would satisfy all viewpoints.
It kept resolutely to Its task of dis¬
cussing the problems involved in
creating cultural policies, yet from the
fire of debate a surprisingly clear pic¬
ture emerged of what culture meant to
the delegates, even if this defied formal
expression.
This was particularly noticeable in
the statements of delegates from the
developing countries. Again and again
culture was referred to as a unifying
force, a democratizing Influence and
the expression of personal and national
identity.
The Zambian delegate, Mr. J.L.M.
Mulenga, summed up the feeling about
the search for a national identity when
he quoted a message from President
Kaunda addressed to the 1969 National
Arts Festival: "We can never hope to
build a nation if we are not united by a
common culture. Citizens of any
country cannot all think alike, even
members of the same family can have
violently diversive views, but there Is
always something that unites them,
and that is, that they share a common
culture."
Mr. Mehrdad Pahlbod, Minister of
Culture and the Arts of Iran, declared
culture to be "the only element cap¬
able of imparting to men the sense of
personal identity without which all
communities are laid open to alienation
and disintegration. Long considered a
luxury, culture Is generally understood
today as being essential for social and
economic development."
Although emphasis in the States
emerging from long periods of colonial
rule has been primarily on grappling
with the basic material needs of the
people, hunger of another kind has
also been demanding attention. As
Mr. C. Cherif of Guinea put it, there
is "nothing retrograde about reviving
a national culture. It gives a country
back its soul and Its moral equilibrium
and prepares It to absorb what pro¬
gress can contribute without being
absorbed by it."
The dilemma facing many newly inde¬
pendent States was neatly explained
by Minister of State, Mr. Hector Wyn-
ter of Jamaica. As a result of the colo¬
nial educational structure, "it Is natural
to find that, to the bétter-off and better
educated, culture means only European
culture with its treasures of music,
painting and the arts. Increasing
acceös will therefore dare I say it
amount to cultural colonization.
"We have had to engage In an
aggressive policy of discovery and
identification of our cultural heritage
and an equally aggressive policy of
conservation, creation and dissemin¬
ation to avoid having to seek an
identity elsewhere. It Is right to pro¬
vide access to the admittedly great
European culture which is part of our
heritage, but it is equally necessary to
seek out the great culture patterns of
the African and Asian heritage which
are a part of our patrimony."
The problem does not present Itself
in the same way In all the developing
countries. Too rich an inheritance
from the past can be a crushing burden
on limited resources and be stultifying
for new cultural development.
Mr. Habib Boulares, Tunisian Min-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
13

PROBLEMS OF CULTURAL POLICY (Continued)
14
ister for Culture and Information, drew
a vivid picture of his country faced
with the dilemma of preserving and
restoring an embarrassingly rich legacy
from the past whilst striving to catch
up with and enter the mainstream of
modern life. This indeed is a delicate
task for the government which must
make choices, provide finance, en¬
courage and promote.
""But," continued Mr. Boulares, "the
public authorities must know what they
are trying to do. In a country like
Tunisia it is difficult even to say what
the expression "national culture"
means, since it includes Berber, Punic,
Roman, Oriental, Arab, Berber-Arab,
Ottoman-Turk, Moslem.
"In a country which has successively
seen seven languages and seven
different cultures, and in which a score
of political regimes have done their
utmost to reduce the indigenous
population to the rank of second-class
inhabitants and destroy even the
memory of their predecessors, "natio¬
nal culture" is scarcely an adequate
term to use.
"Assuming that it were possible at
all, what an effort it would take to
bring all the elements of this heritage
to light and introduce them into
curricula and other cultural activities
so as to make them available to all."
Mr. Boulares pointed to the Tunis-
Carthage project, being undertaken in
collaboration with Unesco, with its
twin cultural and economic aims as
being a prototype which might well
provide a new approach during the
next Development Decade. (See the
December 1970 Issue of the "Unesco
Courier" which was entirely devoted
to the Tunis-Carthage Project.)
Speaking to the press after the
conference, the Secretary-General of
the meeting and Director of Unesco's
Department of Culture, Mr. Amadou
Seydou of the Niger, showed how
closely his finger had been on the
pulse of the discussion in an admirably
concise analysis of the many state¬
ments given from the viewpoint of the
developing nations.
The biggest and most immediate
problem for the developing countries,
Mr. Seydou pointed out, was that
many of them, particularly in Africa,
had almost entirely oral cultures and
traditions.
Preserving and developing their
cultures was a matter of urgent action
today. In Niger, for example, a centre
had been set up, with Unesco's help,
with the task of making tape-recordings
of traditional songs, myths and fables,
religious rites, and so on, before the
older human repositories of the
ancient traditions died out. Material
assistance in the form of tape-
recorders and film-making equipment
and human assistance in the form of
technicians to operate this equipment
was wanted desperately and was
wanted now. "The crisis in the
advanced countries," said Mr. Seydou,
"is to decide what is the meaning and
purpose of culture. Their problem is
how to make proper use of the mass
media; for the developing countries
the problem is to get hold of them."
It was natural that the developing
countries should wish to protect their
national cultures from being swamped
by Western ideas and traditions.
"Cultures are ethnocentric," said
Mr. Seydou, but they must not become
totally isolated. The developing
countries had to avoid the error of
allowing cultural protection to develop
into cultural protectionism.
tFor the developing nations then,
cultural policy must provide the thread
by means of which their peoples can
find their way through the labyrinth of
history towards national consciousness
and identity. To quote Mr. Boulares
of Tunisia once more, "To live only on
borrowed culture is like living some¬
one else's lifel To live on a culture
borrowed from the past is like cutting
oneself off from life. A synthesis is
necessary. It must be made in an
atmosphere of freedom and, in the last
analysis, it is a matter for each
individual."
In the words of the English writer
Thomas Carlyle: "The great law of
culture is: Let each become all that
he was created capable of becoming."
This is clearly what the delegates hope
to see made possible for their peoples
both as nations and as individuals.

3. Mass media
and mass culture
T
HE Venice Conference,
while unanimous in accepting the
principle of each man's right to culture
and on the need for at least some
government action to ensure this right,
was far from reaching agreement on
how to deal with the powerful new
force that mass culture represents.
A new urgency, tinged with a certain
acrimony, marked this stage of the
discussions.
What was this danger that seemed
to be threatening not only the confer¬
ence but also a culture-hungry world?
The delegates were certainly not
afraid of the effects of mass culture
itself. They would have shouted down
Epicurus who, many centuries ago in
a letter to Pythocles, wrote: "Hoist
all sail, my dear boy, and steer clear
of culture."
Some delegates saw the principal
SPIRAL CITYAN
ANTI-MEGALOPOLIS
The present conurbation a
nightmare of overcrowding and
pollution problems was visualized
very differently a half century ago.
At that time, architects, artists
and designers at the famous
Bauhaus arts academy-crafts school
in Weimar, Germany (founded
by the German architect Walter
Gropius) depicted the tentacular
cities of the future in lyric terms.
Photo-montage, left, made in 1923,
shows how Paul Citroen, of the
Netherlands, and an associate
of Gropius, saw such a metropolis.
Today, as the metropolis tends
more and more to become
a megalopolis, architects and city
planners give top priority in their
designs to light, space and a
diversity of forms. Right, an airy
spiral-shaped city designed by Alexis
Gotnof a model shown at Expo' 70
in Osaka, in which futuristic
homes, cities, tools and machines
offered a preview of life tomorrow.
danger in excessive government inter¬
ference, whilst for others the mass
media were cast as the villain of the
piece. In other words the risks lay
with the means and methods used to
make the world's inheritance of culture
available to its three and a half
thousand million heirs. The problem
was to steer a safe course between
the Scylla of propaganda and the
Charybdis of triviality.
For the Soviet Minister of Culture,
Madame Ekaterina Furtseva, the battle
had already been brought to a largely
successful conclusion in the U.S.S.R.
For her, governmental Intervention was
no threat but a sine qua non of an
effective cultural policy.
Madame Furtseva pointed an accus¬
ing finger at commercialism and its
distorting effect on art for the masses.
"I think the time has come," said
Madame Furtseva, "to make use of
the social rights and duties of Unesco
and its Executive Board, and to ban
the dissemination by the modern mass
media of so-called commercial art,
which runs counter to the principles
of humanism and helps foster a cult
of war, violence and racialism, crime,
pornography and brutality. We must
not let the pseudo-heroes of this
ersatz culture replace for our young
contemporaries the eternal beauty of
art dignified by such glorious names
as Raphael, Shakespeare, Beethoven
and Tolstoy."
Some echoes of this fear of com¬
mercialism were evident in the speech
of the chief delegate from Sudan,
Mr. H.A. Yousif, although the problems
for his country are vastly different
from those of the Soviet Union:
"In a society which is more and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

PROBLEMS OF CULTURAL POLICY (Continued)
Photo Björn Rodhe © Galon AB, Götesberg
Published In "Fllosofl for Gymnaslet" by P. Erlcson, H. Hof, A. Jeffr.er (Almqvist and Wiksell, Stockholm)
^-^ V.^*r*
16
BLIND MAN'S BLUFF
This photograph, suggesting a bizarre game of blind-man's-buff, illustrates the
moral of an Indian fable, well-known throughout Asia, that a part should not
be mistaken for the whole. The photograph was taken in Sweden to illustrate
a Swedish textbook on philosophy, using five men wearing blindfolds.
The story goes that a traveller one day brought to an Indian village an elephant
which he placed for the night in a barn which had no windows nor any other
source of light. The curious villagers entered the bam and, since they could
not see, began to feel the strange beast to find out what it was like. As they
came out of the barn they each described the animal.
"It is a large pipe," said the man who had felt the trunk.
"Nonsense," said the one who had felt a leg, "it's a tree."
"It's a giant leaf," said another who had touched an ear.
"It's a massive wall," said the villager who had passed his hands over
the animal's flanks.
"No, it's a hard rope," said the man who had gripped the tail.
Each man thought he was right, but Just a little light would have changed
the picture and revealed the true figure of the elephant
more divorced from rural life, increas¬
ingly oriented towards urban life, mov¬
ing from a purely ascetic towards a
more secular life, from an agricultural
economy towards an industrial one,
many cultural problems arise; and
family disintegration, social and moral
irresponsibility, crude tastes In hu¬
mour, a more liberal view of sex, and
an acquaintance with the superficial
aspects of Western civilization, all tend
to create a cultural vacuum. There is
a danger of rejecting old roads without
discovering new ones."
S
UCH a notion of a "cultu¬
ral vacuum" and the danger that it
would be filled by an inferior, pseudo
culture born of a marriage of conve¬
nience between technology and com¬
mercialism seemed to be a nagging
anxiety that lay at the back of many
delegates' minds.
The chief Mexican delegate, Dr. J.L.
Martinez, summed up this feeling.
"Culture," he said, "has recently
acquired a completely new role; that
of providing a shock-absorber in a
technological world, and particularly in
cities. . . Industry and technology are
already producing a lethal smog in
cities. A complete lack of balance ¡n
education is producing students, study¬
ing for technical careers, who do not
even know the rudiments of their own
language and have no interest In or
knowledge of anything outside their
subjects. From that point of view,
technology is responsible for a mental
smog that could be similarly lethal to
any kind of worthwhile civilization."
Dr. Martinez was well aware, how¬
ever, that technology, or the ill-use that
men made of this potent weapon, was
not the only menace. In Interventions
in cultural affairs governments had to
walk a tightrope.
"It Is sometimes difficult," said
Dr. Martinez, "for the State to maintain
the freedom to think and create and
at the same time ensure the partici¬
pation of writers and artists in eco¬
nomic and social life. Nevertheless,
criticism and contestation are a necess¬
ary ferment for the health of peoples
and indispensable to social change
and even to progress. It should never
be forgotten that many of our patriots
and great cultural figures were dissi¬
dents or revolutionaries in their day."
The impact of the scientific revolu¬
tion of the post-war years and its
effect on cultural development was
never far from the delegates' thoughts.
How great an effect for good the
advances in telecommunications can
have becomes clear when we realize
that a single televised broadcast of
say Mozart's opera "The Magic Flute"

Freedom of the artist a ferment of progress
probably reaches a greater audience
than the sum of all previous per¬
formances in opera houses throughout
the world since the work was written.
The counterbalancing evil effect is
that, with a transistor or a television
set in almost every home, the demand
for programmes of quality has become
enormous and the gaps are too often
filled with endless outpourings of a
kind of "musical chewing-gum" liable
to turn us all into undiscerning
ruminants.
As Lord Eccles pointed out we are
now all exposed to a much more
powerful distribution of art than any
preceding generation. "No small body
of professionals and experts," he said,
"now has the privilege of making the
occasional effort to bring art to the
deprived masses. They have art
brought to them in their homes, they
listen to the radio in their automobiles,
and while they are at work soporific
music is relayed to them by loud¬
speakers.
"This is an entirely new world of
communications In which the urgent
task is to raise the quality of the art
which is being provided, day in and
day out, for everybody. We have
little time to lose because, before long,
the mass media may have blanketed
whole populations either with the
trivialities of the consumer society or
with political propaganda, and I do not
know which is worse for the character
of the individuals who make up these
vast audiences." If Lord Eccles was
aware of the dangers that lined the
way towards the establishment of
effective cultural policies, he was far
from pessimistic about the future and
had the air of a man convinced that if
the dangers were squarely faced they
could be overcome.
He recommended that national
cultures should be made available in
such a way as to add to the enjoyment
and instruction of populations as a
whole; that governments should be
asked to give artists the greatest
possible help, both by direct govern¬
ment subsidies and by the encourage¬
ment of private patronage; that an
intensive study should be made of the
relations between the live arts and
the mass media and that co-operation
between them should be increased,
remembering that "the mass media
are now the most powerful instruments
for raising or debasing the cultures
of tomorrow."
Throughout the conference there
was an evident desire to avoid useless
ideological confrontations and at the
same time a desire to hear and
interpret constructively the other
man's point of view. Debate left the
conference united on a wide range of
things to be done rather than
fragmented into angry factions that
expostulated but did nothing.
Dare we hope that this is a sign that
the cultured man is the constructive
man, that this conference marks
the beginning of a new age of
reasonableness and constructive co¬
operation? Clearly the delegates felt
that it did and even the most cynical
of observers could not help but catch
a little of their infectious optimism.
T
HE closing stages of the
Conference found the delegates "full
of great aims and bent on bold em¬
prise." A flood of draft resolutions,
80 in all, bore witness to the urgent
wish for words to be translated into
actions.
Some measure of the agreement
reached during debate became evident
when these 80 draft resolutions were
whittled down to 24 recommendations.
A striking feature of these recom¬
mendations was that fully half of them
were addressed to the Member
States of Unesco themselves. The
conference was clearly anxious to
underline the fact that culture Is not
a "spectator sport" to be left to
professionals and international orga¬
nizations while the world as a whole
looks on ready to cheer or boo, but a
"do It yourself" activity in which
everyone should take part.
This does not mean that the confer¬
ence underestimated the role that
the Secretariat of Unesco might play.
Indeed it placed heavy emphasis on
the need for international co-operation,
co-ordinated by Unesco.
Without attempting to give a com¬
plete list, some of the conference's
major recommendations on which
action can be expected within the next
few years must be mentioned.
The delegates called for: the
creation of a centre for the exchange
of information on cultural policies
which would work, not only in collabo¬
ration with governments, but also with
foundations interested in the arts;
the preparation of cultural statistics
models; research on the cultural con¬
tent of formal and lifelong education;
research into the cultural effects of
the new audio-visual methods; co¬
operation with other United Nations
organizations in drawing up inter
national agreements to ensure that, In
the use of telecommunications satell¬
ites and other new media, the equality
of cultures and non-interference in the
internal affairs of States will be
respected.
The delegates were aware that
cultural activities require advisers,
"animateurs" and other organizers and
administrators, and called on Unesco
to make provision for their training.
Recognizing that cultural develop¬
ment is part and parcel of develop¬
ment generally, the conference re¬
commended that Unesco make a study
of the relationship between cultural
and general development and the
possibility of creating an international
fund for cultural development.
Finally, encouraged perhaps by the
success of their own deliberations, the
delegates called for a further succes¬
sion of intergovernmental conferences
and meetings in Europe, in 1972, Asia,
in 1973, and Africa, In 1975, and an
international symposium of creative
artists and men of culture on the
contribution of culture to humanism
and peace.
Underlying all these recommenda¬
tions was the firm, unquestioned
assumption that culture will be a major
issue of the 1970s and that, in one way
or another, government involvement is
an established fact.
I
N presenting his report on
the Venice Conference to the General
Conference of Unesco, the Director-
General stressed the importance of
the delegates' findings. He proposed
certain possible re-arrangements in
the draft budget for 1971/72 to permit
immediate action on at least some of
the recommendations from Venice.
The Venice Conference has attempt¬
ed to remind the world of the basic
needs of human existence. Man has
been trying for years to live by bread
alone and has found it an exceedingly
indigestible diet.
If it is a little unfair to cast Science
and Education as the Ugly Sisters,
Culture has certainly been for too long
the Cinderella of development. Like
so many fairy-godmothers, the dele¬
gates at the Venice Conference tried
to work their magic. Will the rags-to-
riches story have a happy ending? . _
We shall have to wait to see whether 1 f
that fickle Prince Charming, world
opinion, has the courage to claim the
prize.
