w,IDELY separated though we are geographically,
with very different cultures, languages, attitudes, political
and religious loyalties, we are united in our time by an
unprecedented common danger. This danger, of a nature
and magnitude never before faced by man, is born of a
confluence of several phenomena. Each of them would
present us with almost unmanageable problems; together
they present not only the probability of vast increases in
human suffering in the immediate future, but the possibility
of the extinction, or virtual extinction, of human life on
Earth.
As biological and other environmental scientists, we do
not speak to the feasibility of particular solutions to these
problems, but out of our conviction that the problems exist,
are global and interrelated, and that solutions can be found
only if we abandon limited selfish interests to the realization
of a common need.
A message signed by 2,200 scientists from
23 countries, addressed to their "three and a half
billion neighbours on planet earth", warning of the
"unprecedented common danger" facing mankind,
was handed to United Nations Secretary-General
U Thant at a simple ceremony in New York on
May 11, 1971.
To the six distinguished scientists who presented
the message, (reproduced in full on these pages)
the Secretary-General declared:
"I believe that mankind is at last aware of the fact
that there is a delicate equilibrium of physical and
biological phenomena on and around the earth
which cannot be thoughtlessly disturbed as we race
along the road of technological development... This
global concern in the face of a grave common dan¬
ger, which carries the seeds of extinction for the
human species, may well prove to be the elusive
force which can bind men together. The battle for
human survival can only be won by all nations
joining together in a concerted drive to preserve
life on this planet."
Since it was originally drafted, at a meeting at
Menton, in France, the "Menton Message" as it has
come to be known, has been circulated among bio¬
logists and environmental scientists in Europe
North America, Africa, Asia and South America.
The meeting was convened by a new, voluntary,
non-governmental, transnational peace movement
known as "Dai Dong". Literally the name means
"a world of the great togetherness", a concept
which originated in pre-Confucian China more than
2,500 years ago.
Among the 2,200 signatories of the Menton Mes¬
sage are four Nobel Prize laureates (Salvador
Luria, Jacques Monod, Albert Szent-Gyorgyi and'
George Wald), and such famous names from the
world of science as Jean Rostand, Sir Julian Huxley,
Thor Heyerdahl, Paul Ehrlich, Margaret Mead, René
Dumont, Lord Ritchie-Calder, Shutaro Yamamoto,
Gerardo Budowski, Enrique Beltran and Mohamed
Zaki Barakat.
THE PROBLEMS
Environmental Deterioration. The quality of our environ¬
ment is deteriorating at an unprecedented rate. It is more
obvious in some parts of the world than in others, and in
those areas public alarm has begun to express itself, while
in other areas environmental deterioration seems a remote
and irrelevant phenomenon.
But there is only one environment; what happens to a part
affects the whole. The most widely recognized example
of this process is the penetration into food-chains all over
the world of poisonous substances such as mercury, lead,
cadmium, DDT, and other chlorinated organic compounds,
which have been found in the tissues of birds and other
animals far removed from the origin of the poisons.
Oil spills, industrial refuse, and effluents of various kinds
have adversely affected nearly all fresh and inshore waters
around the world as have sewage and organic wastes
released in amounts too great to be taken care of by the
normal recycling processes of nature. Cities are overhung
with heavy clouds of smog, and air-borne pollutants have
killed trees hundreds of miles from their source.
Even more alarming are our continued and reckless ven¬
tures into new technological processes and projects (e.g.,
the supersonic transport and the planned proliferation of
nuclear power plants) without a pause to consider their
possible long-term effects on the environment.
Depletion of Natural Resources. Although Earth and its
resources are finite and in part exhaustible; industrial
society is using up many of its non-renewable resources
and mismanaging potentially renewable ones, and it exploits
the resources of other countries without regard for the
deprivation of present populations or the needs of future
generations.
The Earth is already beginning to run short of some
materials of critical importance to a technological society,
and plans are being made to mine minerals from beneath
the oceans. But such efforts not only will require vast
expenditures of money and energy (and our energy-pro¬
ducing fuels are limited), but should not be undertaken
before careful studies have been made of their probable
effects on marine animal and plant life, also part of our
natural resources and a source of high-protein food.
Almost all of the world's well-watered, fertile farmland is
already in use. Yet each year, especially in industrialized
nations, millions of acres of this land aré iak^n out of
cultivation for use as industrial sites, roads, parking lots, etc.
Deforestation, damming of rivers, one-crop farming, un¬
controlled use of pesticides and defoliants, strip-mining and
other short-sighted or unproductive practices have contri¬
buted to an ecological imbalance that has already had
catastrophic effects in some areas and over a long term
may adversely affect the productivity of large sections of
the world.

Even under the best of circumstances, the Earth could
not provide resources in amounts sufficient to enable all
people to live at the level of consumption enjoyed by the
majority in the industrial societies, and the contrast between
life styles dictated by extreme poverty and those permitted
by affluence will continue to be a source of conflict and
revolution.
Population, Overcrowding and Hunger. The present
population of Earth is estimated at 3,500 million people, and
calculations, based on success of present population
control programmes, put it at 6,500 million by the year 2000.
There have been some optimistic predictions that techno¬
logical and natural resources can be developed to feed,
clothe and house far larger populations than this.
The immediate fact is, however, that as many as two-
thirds of the world's present population are suffering from
malnutrition and that the threat of large-scale famine is still
with us despite some nutritional advances. Pollution and
ecological disruption are already affecting some food
sources, and frequently efforts to raise nutritional standards
are themselves polluting.
Moreover, population figures are misleading, since they
do not take into consideration the factor of consumption.
It has been estimated that a child born in the United States
today will consume during his lifetime at least twenty times
as much as one born in India, and contribute about fifty
times as much pollution to the environment. In terms of
environmental impact, therefore, the most industrialized
countries are also the most densely populated.
Man's ".need for space and a degree of solitude, though
difficult to state in precise terms, is real and observable.
We do not live by bread alone. Even if technology could
produce enough synthetic food for all, overcrowding pro¬
duced by ever-rising populations is likely to have disastrous
social and ecological consequences.
War. Throughout history there has been no human
activity so universally condemned and so universally prac¬
tised as war, and research on ever more destructive
weaponry and methods of warfare has been unremitting.
Now that we have achieved the ultimate weapon and
seen its potential, we have recoiled from its further use,
but our fear has not kept us from filling our arsenals with
enough nuclear warheads to wipe out all life on earth
several times over, or from blind and heedless experiments,
both in the laboratory and in the battlefield, with biological
and chemical weapons. Nor has it kept us from engaging
in "small" wars or aggressive actions that may lead to
nuclear war.
Even if a final, major war is avoided, preparation for it
uses up physical and human resources that ought to be
spent in an effort to find ways of feeding and housing the
world's deprived people and of saving and improving the
environment.
It is clear that it is insufficient to attribute war to the
natural belligerence of mankind when men have in fact
succeeded in establishing at some points stable and rel¬
atively peaceful societies in limited geographical areas. In
our time it is apparent that the dangers of global war focus
at two points:
the inequality that exists between industrialized and
non-industrialized parts of the world, and the determina¬
tion of millions of impoverished human beings to improve
their lot;
the competition for power and economic advantage
among anarchic nation-states unwilling to relinquish self¬
ish interests in order to create a more equable society.
Stated thus, the problem seems almost insoluble. Yet
mankind has demonstrated improbable resources of adap¬
tability and resiliency in the past and perhaps facing what
may well be the ultimate challenge to its survival, it will
confound our fears once again.
WHAT CAN BE DONE?
The preceding is only a partial listing of the problems
that confront us and makes scarcely any attempt to describe
their causes. We really do not know the full dimensions
of either our problems or their solutions. We do know that
Earth and all of its inhabitants are in trouble and that our
problems will multiply if we do not attend to them.
In the 1940s, when it was decided to develop the atomic
bomb, the United States appropriated 2,000 million dollars
and brought experts from all over the world to do the job
in two years. In the 1960s, preoccupied with the race to
the moon, the United States spent between 20,000 and
40,000 million dollars to win the race, and both the Soviet
Union and the U.S. continue to spend thousands of millions
of dollars in space exploration.
Certainly massive research into the problems that
threaten the survival of mankind deserves a higher priority
than atomic or space research. It should be begun at
once on a similar scale and with an even greater sense of
urgency. Such research should be paid for by the industrial
nations, which are not only financially best able to carry
that burden, but themselves are the principal users of
resources and the major polluters, but it should be carried
out by qualified men from all countries and various pro¬
fessions, unfettered by restrictive nationalistic policies.
Because the crisis is so pressing, however, we urge that
the following actions be taken even while research is going
on. We do not offer these as panaceas, but as holding
actions to keep our situation from deteriorating past the
point of no return:
A moratorium on technological innovations the effects of
which we cannot foretell and which are not essential to
human survival. This would include new weapons systems,
luxury transport, new and untested pesticides, the manu¬
facture of new plastics, the establishment of vast new
nuclear power projects, etc. It would also include eco¬
logically unresearched engineering projects the damming
of great rivers, "reclamation" of jungle land, undersea
mining projects, etc.
' The application of existing pollution-control technology
to the generation of energy and to industry generally, large-
scale recycling of materials in order to slow down the
exhaustion of resources, and the rapid establishment of
international agreements on environmental quality, subject to
review as environmental needs become more fully known.
Intensified programmes in all regions of the world to curb
population growth, with full regard for the necessity of
accomplishing this without abrogation of civil rights. It is
important that these programmes should be accompanied
by a decrease in the level of consumption by privileged
classes, and that a more equitable distribution of food and
other goods among all people be developed.
Regardless of the difficulty of achieving agreements,
nations must find a way to abolish war, to defuse their
nuclear armaments, and to destroy their chemical and bio¬
logical weapons. The consequences of a global war would
be immediate and irreversible, and it is therefore also the
responsibility of individuals and groups to refuse to parti¬
cipate in research or processes that might, if used, result in
the extermination of the human species.
Earth, which has seemed so large, must now be seen
in its smallness. We live in a closed system, absolutely
dependent on Earth and on each other for our lives and
those of succeeding generations. The many things that
divide us are therefore of infinitely less importance than
the interdependence and danger that unite us.
We believe that it is literally true that only by transcending
our divisions will men be able to keep Earth as their home.
Solutions to the actual problems of pollution, hunger, over¬
population and war may be simpler to find than the formula
for the common effort through which the search for solutions
must occur, but we must make a beginning. '
