28
forgotten city
cleared from the jungle
profound beauties of Khmer art quite
clearly utterly escaped him.
This was not the case with the natu¬
ralist Mouhot, who visited Angkor in
1860. He died shortly after, but his
notes were published after his death.
If not the "discoverer of Angkor", at
least he appreciated the extraordinary
artistic value of these ruins. He
imparted his enthusiasm to the readers
of a variety of publications, including
the mass-circulation "Tour du Monde",
and from then on visitors to Angkor
began to increase in numbers.
A permanent Mission to Indochina,
later to become the Ecole Française
de, l'Extrême Orient, was founded on
December 15th, 1898, under the
patronage of the Académie des In¬
scriptions et Belles lettres. Its aim was
to study not only the monuments, but
also the history, the languages and
the civilizations of south-east Asia
and neighbouring countries. When
the treaty of 1907, concluded with
Siam, returned the province of Siem
Reap to Cambodia, the Conservation
d'Angkor was set up to clear and
restore the monuments.
From its foundation, the Conserva¬
tion was entrusted to J. Commaille.
When, in 1916, Commaille was mur¬
dered by pirates while delivering the
workmen's pay, his place was taken
by H. Marchai who remained there
till 1932. H. Marchai was subsequently
to return to the Conservation twice:
in 1935, and, in 1947, in order to
restore the South Gallery at Angkor
Wat. Since 1960 the Conservation
has been directed by B. Groslier.
Commaille's first task was to open
up the monuments, to clear away the
forest which had engulfed them, keep
the ever threatening undergrowth at
bay, remove the accumulated earth
and the piled up debris, and prevent
their further degradation. Only very
simple equipment was available to the
first curators. Nonetheless this was
sufficient to deal with the most urgent
problems.
The most important innovation in the
restoration of the temples was the
adoption of anastylosis, a process
which consists in restoring a monu¬
ment with its own materials and
according to the original construction
methods.
In 1930, H. Marchai was sent to
Java, where archaeologists had already
used this method. On his return,
Marchai applied the method to the
restoration of the temple of Banteay
Srei. Anastylosis was subsequently
used in the restoration of the greatest
monuments, and it has remained the
basic process for work carried out
since that time.
The piety of the Cambodians, and
the establishment of two monasteries
within the enclosure had saved Angkor
Wat from invasion by the undergrowth;
but ground subsidence and the poor
state of the stonework had led to
widespread decay. Long years of
effort have gone into the restoration
of Angkor Wat; the tireless work of
restoring collapsed elements, of con¬
solidating and reconstructing the gal¬
leries has begun; finally research has
produced good results in dealing with
stone decay.
The Bayon temple was cleared
between 1911 and 1913, and anasty¬
losis of the towers with faces was
carried out between 1939 and 1946.
After 1960, research was undertaken
aimed at removing the lichen which
covers the stone reliefs, giving the
monuments a leprous appearance.
w<ORK was begun on the
Great Palace of Angkor Thorn and its
approaches in 1911. Bas-reliefs in
the interior of the Elephants' Terrace
and the Terrace of the Leprous King
were discovered at that time.
Just before the events of 1970,
excavations had revealed a prolonga¬
tion of the Terraces to the north of the
Terrace of the Leprous King. Close
to the Great Palace of Angkor Thorn,
the Temple of Baphuon, built on an
artificial hill of light soil, had been
dislocated in ancient times by sub¬
sidences. The many attempts to con¬
solidate the monument had brought
only temporary relief and so, in 1958,
it was decided to reconstruct the
temple completely. This considerable
undertaking the base of Baphuon
measures 120 m. x 100 metres was
partially carried out in 1970.
Restoration work has been carried
out both within the enclosure and m
the surroundings of Angkor Thorn.
Three of the roads, lined by stone
giants, which give access to the city,
have been restored, each road leading
to a monumental gate surmounted by
a tower with four faces. The temples
of Ta Keo, Ta Prohm, Preah Khan,
Banteay Kdei, Ta Nei and many others
have been excavated and partially
restored. Following the restoration of
Banteay Srei, Banteay Samre, Neak
Pean and the central sanctuary of
Bakong were restored by anastylosis.
While the excavation and the resto¬
ration of the temples was going on,
researchers were studying the con¬
siderable documentation afforded by
these monuments.
Those who were beginning to take
an interest in Khmer art could linger
lovingly over the romantically exotic
drawings that illustrated Louis Dela-
porte's "Voyage to Cambodia" and
examine the first photographic docu¬
mentation in John Thomson's book.
Publication of the works of H. Dufour
and G. Carpeaux has meant that full
details of the bas-reliefs of the Bayon
are available to researchers. Car¬
peaux, the son of the famous French
sculptor, was to die at this task.
At the same time Commandant
Lunet de la Jonquière produced a
"Descriptive Inventory of the Monu¬
ments of Cambodia", a basic work
still of great value 60 years later.
The abstracts and architectural studies
of the monuments were primarily the
work of Henri Parmentier, head of
the Archaeological Department of the
Ecole Française d'Extrême Orient.
To pinpoint the vestiges of monu¬
ments, of successive town walls and
the traces of roads and hydraulic
works, Victor Goloubev directed an
aerial survey lasting from 1931 to
1934. This survey was resumed by
Bernard Groslier in 1951.
The sites of Angkor have yielded
a large number of inscriptions. Fol¬
lowing the work of the German epi¬
graphist Adolf Bastian, the Dutch
scholar Hendrik Kern became inte¬
rested in Khmer epigraphy. He in
turn was followed by the German
August Barth and the Frenchman
Abel Bergaigne who translated the
first collection of inscriptions. Finally
Georges Coedès published eight
volumes of these inscriptions and suc¬
ceeded in re-constituting the history
of Angkorian Cambodia and in bring¬
ing to life again great kings who had
long been forgotten.
Thus we learnt which kings and
dignitaries had constructed temples
and the nature of their religious foun¬
dations was revealed. Like Bernard
Groslier, Laurence Briggs, who publish¬
ed a history of Angkor, followed the
fortunes of the city after the removal
of the capital to the east. Finally,
Jean Filliozat, Director of the Ecole
Française d'Extrême Orient, began a
study of the temples as seen in
Indian texts.
An important step forward in our
knowledge of Khmer art was due to
Philippe Stern who established the
chronological order of the monuments
on the basis of the evolution of their
decorative motifs. ftft
Now, after a century of research /H
and effort, Angkor is as well known to
the general public as to the scholar
and the art-lover.
