By Ignacy Sachs
Industrialization
without pollution:
a challenge to the
developing world
T
| HE relationship of man with
his natural environment and the arti¬
ficial environment he has created by
his domination of and aggression
against nature has to be examined as
a whole. It must be looked at in a
historic perspective, at all relevant
levels, starting with technology and
ending with psychology and aesthetics,
and taking into account the interplay
between all these factors.
It is not enough to look at nature
and the man-made environment from
the standpoint of economics, that is,
to consider nature in terms of con¬
servation of resources and artificial
environment in terms of externalities
and costs.
Nor am I pleading for a return to
the romantic conception of the com¬
munion of man with nature. Economics
must be reintegrated with ethics,
politics and even aesthetics, at least
at the level of global long-term
planning.
The 1969 report of the United
Nations Secretary-General on Prob¬
lems of the Human Environment
rightly stresses:
"In planning and management of the
human environment, emphasis is
generally placed on economic criteria
and on physical and quantitative
aspects of the problems more than
on qualitative and socio-cultural
aspects. This results in many large-
scale developments, particularly in
housing, which do not fully respond
30
IGNACY SACHS (Brazil) is an economist
and specialist in problems of development.
He is at present director of studies (Civi¬
lization, Environment and Long-Term
Planning) at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes,
in Paris. Former head of the Centre for
Research on Economic Underdevelopment,
in Warsaw, Poland (his country of birth), he
has been an adviser on development
questions to Unesco, the U.N. and other
international organizations.
to legitimate human aspirations and
social needs."
Moreover, "alternative development
projects having different environmental
consequences are rarely studied and
economic choices are made with little
reference to environmental con¬
sequences, particularly those of an
ecological nature. This applies particu¬
larly to large-scale development
projects in less developed countries."
The reasons for this highly unsatis¬
factory state of affairs are threefold.
Firstly, the progress of economics
as a scientific discipline is closely
related to its ability to find a common
denominator for all sorts of goods and
activities in what the economist terms
exchange value.
But the price paid for this is a heavy
one: considerations of use value as
such are excluded. True, Marxian
economics recognizes that the exis¬
tence of use value is a prerequisite
for exchange value, but it does not
need for the purposes of further ana¬
lysis any concrete insight into this use
value.
As for the theories based on
marginal utility, for all practical
purposes, they also leave aside quali¬
tative analysis, trying, at best, to find
another kind of common denominator
based on subjective appreciation of
an abstract utility.
Thus liberated from qualitative
analysis, economics succeeded in
designing some quite sophisticated
quantitative methods to deal with
them. One of the consequences of
this development is that economists
are often tempted to discard as
irrelevant those factors which they do
not succeed in quantifying.
Secondly, we should recall here the
individualistic origins of economic
thinking, centered on the individual
economic agent or the individual
enterprise.
To clarify this point, let me give
an example. Let us suppose that we
are analyzing a big capital-intensive
agricultural project and that applica¬
tion of advanced mechanized tech¬
niques is likely to increase the stream
of rural migrants to urban areas.
Cases, of course, can be thought of
where mechanization ends up by
creating more agricultural employment
than it releases, by making possible
a change in production functions and
in the intensity of cropping.
Are we supposed to quantify this
social cost in order to include it in
the cost-benefit analysis of our agri¬
cultural project? And if so, should
we consider the cost of urban develop¬
ments made necessary to resorb the
shantytowns likely to be created by
the rural migrants? Would this be a
sufficient approximation of the social
cost of such a migration, or should
we also deal with the social disruption
involved, on the one hand, and the
difference between the investment
cost of additional jobs in towns as
compared to rural areas, on the
other?
_ _ 	 OREOVER, confusion may
arise between what it a goal and
what is a means, not to speak of the
fact that for many countries and for
quite a time, speedy economic growth
may still be a major goal.
I believe that it is necessary to
change the whole approach by re¬
versing the procedure: instead of
studying the impact of the individual
actions on the global system, it would
be advisable to work out the implic¬
ations of alternative sets of goals
chosen for the system as a whole and
take them as the start point of an
exercise in global strategy framing and
genuine long-term planning.

r ;
Photo Bernard Rouget, © Rapho, Paris
WHERE IS THE MAGIC CARPET? Anyone who has ever had the good fortune to
partake of the traditional tea ceremony in a Moroccan town or village, can only
wince at this extraordinary photo. Where, indeed, is that magic carpet?
But the theory of planning in its
present form is not at all designed
for this task. For historical reasons,
it originated with an almost exclusive
preoccupation with growth, and long-
term planning was merely an offshoot
of short and medium-term planning.
Nor is present-day futurology a
good substitute for, or a complement
of, traditional long-term planning
because of its excessive preoccup¬
ation with projections of wealth as well
as of scientific and technological
progress and its lack of sociological
and historical imagination.
In my view, there could be no
better model for long-term global
planning than urbanism. This is a
discipline which at least in principle
if not always in practice unifies social
vision, and a good deal of utopism,
in the best sense of the word, with
an interdisciplinary analysis of forces
at work and of goals and means.
This calls for an entirely new ration¬
ality, different both from that of the
industrial enterprise and of the tra¬
ditional State. Such global long-term
planning should be based on urbanism
and ecology, but also on an ensemble
of moral and philosophical values. In
this approach, considerations of
environment would have, of course,
a permanent and prominent place.
The problem has two distinct levels.
The first is that of appropriate planning
and decision-making machinery. The
second is related to the impact of
social and economic regimes on the
possibilities of implementing long-term
global planning in general, and of a
rational action on the environment in
particular.
Global planning and selection of
society's goals imply, on the one hand,
a thorough exploration of the pos¬
sibilities open both from the socio¬
logical and economic points of view
and on the other, choosing a set of
ethical and aesthetic values. Quite
obviously, the choices are limited by
certain unchanging factors in human
society the impact of tradition, the
burden of slowly changing structures
(that of the family, for example) etc.
Nor are all the goals feasible in
terms of available economic resources,
though these, to some extent, will
depend on the choice of society's
goals and institutions. A happy choice
of such goals should add to the
efficiency of the economic per¬
formance (and inversely, an unhappy
choice and the ensuing frustration and
alienation are likely to hamper the
working of the economic system).
It may be useful to point out here
that, in a sense, all societies invariably
set out to accomplish a number of
goals, even though the choices may
not have been identified, made
explicit and taken consciously. Up
to now, long-term goals have seldom
been identified, even in centrally
planned economies, and fundamental
choices (such as increased material
wealth against more leisure, the
denrée of egalitarianism in incomes
distribution, the ratio of individual to
collective consumption, etc.) have
been made by short or medium-term
decisions.
To my knowledge, alternative
projects of civilization have never
been explicity compared as a founda¬
tion for variants of long-term strategy
and planning, although they may have
been discussed here and there by
philosophers and social thinkers. We
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

INDUSTRIALIZATION WITHOUT POLLUTION (Continued)
A third way for the Third World
32
shall need to start almost from rock
bottom in order to reach a more ope¬
rative stage in applying "systems-think¬
ing" to actual long-term planning.
In particular, we need more know¬
ledge about the types, scope, degree
of flexibility, time-scheduling and inter¬
connexions of the decisions which must
be taken in order to implement a
coherent set of goals for society.
More reflection is also necessary on
the type of political institutions capable
of organizing and channelling the dis¬
cussion on the long-term prospects of
a particular society and of getting the
consensus of public opinion.
Let us turn now to the imple¬
mentation of a global strategy of
development and of environmental
control embodied in it. Undoubtedly,
the very nature of environmental dis¬
ruption as we know it is the result
of a specific process of indus¬
trialization. The case of Japan is a
striking example. (See article page 6.)
To quote a specific example of how
the institutions of a society can limit
rational control of the environment,
most specialists in urban problems
would agree that private ownership
of land makes it more difficult to apply
modern concepts of town planning.
Similarly, private industralists argue
that prevention of air and water
pollution at factory level will be
impossible unless all competitors,
whether domestic or foreign, are
compelled to install the same type of
preventive equipment and thus incur
similar extra costs.
In other words, effective pollution
control would need a very elaborate
and cumbersome system of inter¬
national regulation (so long as we are
thinking in terms of a free-trade world
economy). The alternative is, of
course, for the taxpayer to bear the
burden of environmental control costs,
in accordance with the capitalistic
principle that, wherever possible, costs
should be socialized and profits
individualized.
Thus, hidden behind the supposedly
technical problems of environmental
control lie fundamental social contra¬
dictions. Far from distracting attention
from political struggles, the environ¬
ment issue may well, on the contrary,
provide new arguments to radical
movements of protest against the
global irrationality of the capitalist
system.
Many developing countries suffer
from the same institutional limitations
which, in most industrialized countries,
hamper global planning in general and
environmental control in particular. In
others, however, a fair measure of
state intervention is being accepted
and the absence of private control
over a substantial range of resources
should make things easier.
But the difficulties of setting up
appropriate machinery for planning
and policy-making are enormous.
Moreover, many people are inclined
to believe that the pressure of im¬
mediate problems is so overwhelming
as to demand the postponement of
long-term considerations. Since en¬
vironmental disruption is associated
with a high level of industrial develop¬
ment, developing countries may be
less concerned with this issue which
is often presented as the reverse side
of material advancement and progress.
In my opinion both these views
are wrong for a variety of reasons.
First of all, the lack of a long-term,
system-planned, global strategy makes
it more difficult, if not virtually im¬
possible, to find reasonable medium-
term solutions (the short-term being
to a great extent pre-determined by
existing circumstances).
In any case, consideration of long-
term prospects must start sometime
and the pressure of immediate prob¬
lems will always be there. The less
developed a country is, the more it
should look for short cuts towards
development and, therefore, the less
it can afford costly mistakes arising
from lack of a global strategy.
Secondly, highly industrialized pock¬
ets and over-populated towns exist
in almost all developing countries and
in these areas pollution phenomena
often appear with unparalleled in¬
tensity. Furthermore, the predatory
exploitation of natural resources so
common in many former colonies
and dependent countries, was often
accompanied by severe environmental
disruption.
To this must be added the influence
of the example of the consumption
pattern and way of life in the highly
industrialized countries which is likely
to push several developing countries
along a line of development marked by
extensive environmental disruption, not
to mention the internal pressures of
the rural exodus and the consequent
rapid growth of shanty towns.
Thus, the belief that less devel¬
oped countries are affected to a lesser
degree by disruption of the environ¬
ment is unfounded. On the contrary,
it is tempting to say that pollution is a
symptom of modernity that comes well
in advance of other more desirable
features of industrialization. Never¬
theless, the developing countries still
have, on the whole, more opportunity
to operate on a preventive basis than
the developed ones, and they should
seize this opportunity one of the very
few advantages reserved for the late¬
comers.
At first sight, prevention of environ¬
mental disruption may appear far too
expensive for countries in which abso¬
lute priority continues to be given to
accelerated economic growth, measur
ed by increase in the national income,
and social progress, achieved through
a more equitable distribution of the
growing national cake.
But further consideration leads to a
more qualified attitude. If, other things
being equal, the relative cost of
measures taken against environmental
disruption is much higher for a poor
than a rich country, it might also be
true that the social price of pollution
and the disruptive social effects involv¬
ed are correspondingly higher in a
poor country whose inhabitants are
more vulnerable to its devastating
action on physical and mental health
and who are less prepared to take
corrective measures. This is a subject
about which very little is known and
which certainly merits careful inves¬
tigation.
Furthermore, there is no proof that,
for a given country, the cost of rational
and carefully planned use of the
environment will ultimately be higher
than the outlays on curative measures
made necessary by a period of preda¬
tory economics.
Several developing countries should
be able to implement major environ¬
mental control works by using labour-
intensive methods, thus combining
long-term social goals with short-term
employment targets. The only limita¬
tions to such activities are the avail¬
ability of food and the organizational
problems involved. The example of
Mainland China with respect to water
conservancy works and reforestation
is very instructive.
| INALLY, prevention of evil
should always be preferred to thera¬
peutic action on ethical grounds.
But it may prove impossible to
obtain substantial results if only piece¬
meal, defensive action is envisaged
when industrial and urban projects are
being implemented. At best certain
causes of pollution will be eliminated
in new industrial and town units while
others may be added (e.g. pollution
of air as a consequence of an increase
in the number of motor cars in use).
This leads us back to our initial
considerations. Rational use of the
environment is but one aspect of a
broader design linking man to his
natural and artificial environment. The
opportunity still, perhaps, open to
some developing countries is that of
conceiving original projects of civiliza¬
tion differing in many respects from
those now being implemented by the
industrialized countries, whether capi¬
talistic or socialistic.
The road to effective, global, long-
term planning and environmental
control leads, at least for a time,
through Utopian systems thinking.
