Angkor is in danger. The shadow of war threatens this great architectural
complex, steeped in history and breathtaking in its beauty. Angkor, along
with a large number of other Khmer sites of ancient Cambodia, makes up
an irreplaceable cultural heritage which Unesco, dedicated to the protec¬
tion of the world's great cultural monuments, is seeking to safeguard. The
Unesco Courier dedicates this issue to the Khmer artists who, from the
ninth to the thirteenth century and later, succeeded in creating one of the
most extraordinary examples of the marriage between architecture and space.
I
4
I N the classic civilizations
of ancient Greece and Rome creative
thought and work were recognized
and appreciated. Outstanding monu¬
ments and works of art were visited
then just as tourists today include
famous sites and monuments in their
itinerary.
Of the hundreds which existed,
seven were considered to be outstand¬
ing and called the "Seven Wonders
of the World". Of these a few traces
have survived to the present, but the
fame of those which have disappeared
still lingers.
Today, more than seven would be
recognized throughout the world, and
surely within that limited group would
be found Angkor Wat. The news that
it had been damaged made headlines
in the world press and aroused de¬
mands that it should be protected from
further Injury.
Angkor Wat Is but one of many sites
and monuments surrounding the Tonlé
Sap, the great natural flood reservoir
of the lower Mekong and its tributa¬
ries, in the Khmer Republic. Annual
monsoon rains result in a great expan¬
sion of the lake, and as it recedes in
the dry season fertile silt is deposited
and the land becomes ready for the
cultivation of rice and other crops.
Fish abound and contribute protein to
the diet. Even today 2,000 square miles
of farm land are flooded annually.
This easily exploited wealth was
the foundation for the growth of an
urban civilization, and major empires
rose and fell, to be succeeded by
others. Each left traces of its exist¬
ence. Ancient cities, temples and
palaces (some still buried under dense
tropical vegetation), bear mute witness
to former glories of the Khmer people.
Bas-reliefs carved on walls of stone
depict a triumphant procession, cap¬
tives taken in war, the pomp and cere¬
mony of royal courts. Statues of Siva,
Vishnu and other deities of the Hindu
pantheon, and of Bodhisattvas, or
future Buddhas, record the images of
long dead kings, queens, princes and
dignitaries apotheosized as gods.
Frequently the sculptors succeeded
HIROSHI DAIFUKU Is head of Unesco's
Sect/on for the Development of the Cultural
Heritage. He is the author of many studies
on anthropology, conservation and museo-
graphy.
"in merging man with god", in giving
their creations a transcendent quality
which contemporary visitors respond
to though they may be ignorant of
Khmer history and of the religious and
cultural traditions from which these
monuments were created. Of all the
complex of monuments known collect¬
ively as Angkor, the masterwork is
Angkor Wat. It was built in the 12th
century A.D. during the lifetime of
King Suryavarman II and eventually
became his mortuary temple.
French archaeologists, historians
and architects have worked for years
in Cambodia (today the Khmer Repu¬
blic). Part of the legacy of the Ecole
Française d'Extrême-Orient rests in
the monuments which have been exca¬
vated, studied and restored. Khmers
have also been trained and now staff
the national and provincial, museums
and services responsible for the pro¬
tection of sites and monuments.
Several thousand sites have been
identified and thousands have still
to be discovered.
lUCH remains to be done;
before the recent outbreak of con¬
flict, Unesco sent an architect-restorer
to begin work on a group of sites
150 kilometres east of Angkor, which
ranged in time from the seventh cen¬
tury to about the end of the thirteenth.
Other experts were sent to assess
the expenditure required for the deve¬
lopment of such sites.
Cultural tourism was already an
important factor in the economy of the
country. Siem Reap now has a modern
airport which can receive jets, and new
hotels have been built or were under
construction in 1970. The develop¬
ment of sites away from Angkor would
have encouraged visitors to stay
longer in the country and the resultant
increase in income would have helped
to justify the budget required for
research and restoration. The outbreak
of armed conflict has, of course, put
all of these plans in abeyance.
This is not the first time that Angkor
has been menaced by armed conflict.
A period of unrest followed the death
of Suryavarman II, the weakened king¬
dom fell to the Chams and Angkor
was pillaged in 1177. Successive
kings restored Khmer rule. New
by Hiroshi Daifuku
construction and changes to the old
took place, enriching the monumental
heritage of the Khmer people.
Once again the threat of armed
conflict menaces not only the people
but their past heritage. Nowhere else
is there greater anxiety about the pre¬
servation of Angkor. Whatever the
cause of recent damage, the Govern¬
ment, recognizing the need for effect¬
ive measures to ensure Angkor's pre¬
servation, has suggested that a neutral
zone be established surrounding the
monuments so that further damage
will not occur as a result of military
operations.
This move to protect Angkor is but
one attempt in the long and turbulent
history of man to preserve links with
the past so that people may share a
common history and tradition. The
loss of such identification and conti¬
nuity could lead to the eventual disap¬
pearance of an entire people.
This factor was recognized from
very early times. Conquerors or
would-be conquerors, in order to
assure their posterity and the pride of
future generations, have built monu¬
ments or destroyed those of their
enemies. Rome, for example, adopted
Cato's slogan "Delenda est Carthago"
(Carthage must be destroyed) after the
second Punic War.
The third Punic War, provoked by
the Romans, resulted in the sack of the
city. The site was dedicated to the
infernal gods, no stone left standing,
and all habitation in the ruined area
forbidden. Carthage, as a city, even¬
tually rose again, but it was no longer
Punic. The survivors had been absorb¬
ed and their identity had gone forever.
(See "Unesco Courier", December
1970).
During World War II, for example,
after an uprising by the inhabitants of
Warsaw had been repressed, Hitler
ordered the complete evacuation of
the city. The ancient royal castle, the
old medieval section (the central
market place known as the "Stare
Miasto"), palaces and churches were
destroyed, and much of the rest of the
city was dynamited and gutted by fire.
The decision taken by the people of
Poland to restore most of the monu¬
ments of Warsaw, including the "Stare
Miasto", expressed their desire to re¬
create the fabric of the city and main¬
tain the continuity of Polish history.
(See "Unesco Courier", March 1961.)

The lessons learned from World
War II eventually led to the preparation
by Unesco of an "International Con¬
vention on the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Con¬
flict" which was adopted at The
Hague in 1954. As in all examples of
legislation it represents a compromise
between the ideal and the adoption of
rules which the majority of States who
took part in its preparation believe that
forces engaged in armed combat could
be expected to observe.
The Hague Convention (1954) is now
in force and over fifty States have
ratified it, including the Khmer Repu¬
blic. One of the provisions (Article 23)
states that Unesco can be called upon
for technical assistance in organizing
the protection of cultural property.
At the request of the Khmer Govern¬
ment, Unesco sent an expert to help
negotiate a cease fire to protect Ang¬
kor and permit the transfer of movable
bronzes and sculptures to Phnom Penh
for shelter. Later, additional experts
were sent to aid and advise in the
packing, transport and storage of
these works of art, and the most
valuable items are now' adequately
protected in the National Museum in
Phnom Penh.
But whereas the Khmer Government
has ratified the Convention the other
belligerents have not. One solution
would be the negotiation of special
agreements so that the provisions of
the Hague Convention can be applied.
Should this be done, centres contain¬
ing monuments of great importance
could be placed under special protec¬
tion (Article II). It would represent a
triumph demonstrating the goodwill of
all concerned.
The threat of destruction by armed
conflict is immediate and dramatic.
But in heavily populated centres, the
pressures of population growth and
short-sighted projects for economic
development have resulted in far great¬
er destruction to man's cultural heri¬
tage than that caused by either of the
two World Wars and the many smaller
conflicts of the past 50 years.
This too is a challenge to be met
by the present generation in order that
future generations shall not be depriv¬
ed of cultural links with the past nor
live in an environment polluted through
man's excesses, whether against the
atmosphere, rivers, lakes and seas or
the cultural heritage of our planet.
Head of a buddha, damaged over the centuries,
from the Elephant Terrace at Angkor Thorn.
