MODERN PAINTING
The public
puts its cards
on the table
by Duncan F. Cameron
T
HE New Consciousness,
or, if you prefer, social conscience,
is the fact of the 1970s. It is no
longer a movement to be observed
in any one society or even hemisphere.
It is a reality of world society, varying
from place to place only in its
expression and degree of sophis¬
tication. And universally the artist is
to be found In the vanguard in alliance
with the intellectuals, the political
reformers, radicalized youth and the
factions of protest.
Historically this is no new rôle for
the artist any more than a reforma¬
tion or revolution is an invention of
our time. But the global dimension
is unprecedented as is the volume
and speed of communication and the
rate of change.
Thus it can be argued that it was
never more important that the artist
be not only heard but also be under¬
stood. Surely the evidence of the
recent past suggests that the artist
has been most often the harbinger of
social change and most rarely a mere
bell-wether.
In Western European and North
American society at least, there is
cause for concern that the contemp¬
orary artist is unlikely to be heard
and most unlikely to be understood
DUNCAN F. CAMERON was one of the
leaders of the group of Canadian art spe¬
cialists which carried out the Toronto
inquiry on The Public and Modern Art. He
is National Director of the Canadian Con¬
ference of the Arts, a national association
of Canada's major organizations in the arts,
and co-ordinator of the International Sub-
Committee on The Public and Modern Art,
of the International Council of Museums.
He has been active in promoting a better
and broader use of art and cultural faci¬
lities for the public, especially museums,
and has written extensively on these sub¬
jects. Readers will recall his article "Mu¬
seums for Moderns", in our Oct. f970 issue.
by anything approaching a mass
audience. Popular culture, with the
momentous force of commercializa¬
tion behind it, experiences wave after
wave of folk art heroes. Some of
the content is strong, visceral, born
of the desire for change. Much is
shoddy, commercial exploitation of
this same desire.
And amidst the clamour of elec¬
tronic mass media and in the great
snowdrifts of mass circulation news¬
papers and periodicals, the voice of
the artist seems to be lost, smother¬
ed. This is true if he speaks through
the art gallery or museum, the con¬
cert hall or legitimate theatre, or the
literary press, be they the institutions
of the establishment or of the under¬
ground.
In either case he speaks to an élite.
His language as well as his state¬
ments remain unknown to the mass
audience including those who may
fervently follow the directions of one
élite or the other.
In the visual arts, and specifically
painting with which we are concern¬
ed here, it is not good enough to say
that the artist is not heard because
contemporary artists who are exhibit¬
ed in art galleries are bourgeois or
that art gallery visitors are members
of a bourgeois élite. It would quickly
be denied by the evidence of audience
studies and a review of gallery cata¬
logues.
Admittedly it appears that there is
a positive correlation between educa¬
tion and art gallery visiting, but
directors of museums exhibiting mod¬
ern and contemporary art report every¬
thing from apathy to open hostility
towards such art from their general
public. As a means to establishing
a rapport and effective communication p
between the visual artists of the | Q
20th century (and especially of the
present day) and the general public,
the art gallery seems to fail.
CONTINUED PAGE 18

THE PUBLIC PUTS ITS CARDS ON THE TABLE (Continued)
18
Is the public art gallery in Western
society an establishment enclave to
such a degree that the mass audience
is either intimidated or stays away in
protest? Art galleries of all sizes and
types have been reporting dramatic
attendance increases since the late
1940s.
Is special .education necessary to
an understanding of modern and con¬
temporary art so that only those who
have learned the language can break
the code? In my experience, children,
who have not been muddled with art
education, respond to education
through art, happily interpret in their
own way even the most contemporary
innovations, and do not suffer the
visual inhibitions which afflict their
educated elders. Regrettably, as they
grow older youngsters seem to lose
this ability and adopt the prejudices
of their elders.
Is the long-held hypothesis true
that there is a generational or fifty-
year gap between creative innovation
and general acceptance? If so, and
we accept the idea that what this
decade's artists have to say will not
be comprehensible until the year 2020,
we might well ask if there will be
anyone around to comprehend.
In considering this dilemma it does
not matter whether we are radical or
reactionary, concerned with political
change to the left or right, preoccupied
with racism, the destruction of the
biosphere, or women's liberation. If
we are concerned with the nature of
man, the quality of life and the altern¬
atives for tomorrow, then the artist,
and not least of these the visual
artist, must be heard. We know from
the past that what he is saying will
be Important to us.
The Toronto inquiry into public
attitudes to modern art is one of the
small beginnings being made to
bridge the gap between the artist and
his public. The frustration is. that the
problem is so vast, so complex and
the need so immediate. In evaluating
research in areas such as this, I am
haunted by a fragment of a contempo¬
rary folk lyric which I heard a school¬
boy singing to himself as he waited
in line for a bus. . . "tomorrow is today
that was."
To describe the beginnings of the
Toronto research project in its
simplest form, it appears that some
directors of museums of modern art
expressed a concern at the 1965
International Council of Museums
(ICOM) Congress in Washington and
New York that they had difficulty
getting through to large segments of
their potential audience.
They felt that an inquiry should be
made into the reasons for public
resistance to exhibitions of modern or
contemporary art, and those who
would not admit that they had met
resistance agreed that there should
at least be an inquiry into the
difficulties which some members of
the public seemed to have in under¬
standing the art of the 20th century
and of their own time.
Mrs. Ayala Zacks of Toronto, a
member of the ICOM Committee for
Museums of Modern Art, volunteered
to organize a committee to make such
enquiries. Subsequently, in 1966, a
committee was organized in Toronto
including a psychologist, Dr. David
S. Abbey, an art historian and former
museum director, Dr. Theodore Allen
Heinrich, an art gallery director,
William Withrow, a professor of
fine arts, Dr. Robert Welsh, a repre¬
sentative of the Canadian National
Committee for ICOM, Donald Crowdis
and the writer.
A variety of possible inquiries
were discussed and some of these
were explored to the point of prelim¬
inary research designs. It was finally
decided that it would be most useful
to develop a methodology for the
definition of public attitudes toward
modern art which could be applied in
any city regardless of the language
spoken, the dominant cultural patterns
or the kinds of art museums available
to the public under investigation.
It was accepted that the Toronto
study would not attempt to answer
any questions at all about the attitudes
of the public in Toronto. The com¬
mittee set out to do nothing more than
develop a methodology and test it to
the point where it could be said to
be capable of producing valid results
provided that certain conditions in the
research were met.
The results of the survey have been
described in Unesco's quarterly. "Mu¬
seum", and the study was reported at
ICOM meetings in Cologne and Munich
in 1968.
The study depended first of all on
the careful selection of a sample of
CONTINUED PAGE 30

THE PUBLIC PUTS ITS CARDS
ON THE TABLE
(Continued from page 18)
respondents. A high quality proba¬
bility sample of Metropolitan Toronto
residents was chosen and by this is
meant that each resident of Metropo¬
litan Toronto had an equal chance of
being chosen to be interviewed in the
poll. The one limitation was that
only those over 15 years of age were
eligible.
The interviewing was conducted
face-to-face in the homes of the per¬
sons polled, using the best professional
interviewers available.
The first part of the Interview was
designed to collect an abundance of
information about the individual's
background, family, ethnic origin and
education and included questions
about any particular education in the
visual arts. Information was also
gathered about the education of each
person's parents.
The body of the interview, however,
was concerned with the evaluation by
the interviewee of postcard reproduc¬
tions of 20th century works of art.
By far the most difficult and
demanding part of the entire project
was the selection of a representative
sample of postcard reproductions.
The fact that we had to rely on
available postcards was a limiting
factor in itself, but even at that the
preliminary selection produced some
two thousand possibilities. These had
to be reduced to a workable number.
The selection was made by Mrs. Zacks,
Drs. Welsh and Heinrich and Mr. Wi¬
th row.
As a sideline observer I can only
say that there could have been no
greater concern for care and the
exercise of expert judgement in
reducing the two thousand cards to
the 220 that were finally used. The
220 cards were organized into
23 decks of ten, each deck being
based on some formal quality of the
works of art common to those includ¬
ed. Several of the cards were used
in more than one deck.
Each person interviewed was asked
first of all to make a number of
decisions about the cards in one of
the decks. He, or she, ranked them
according to liking and, as the results
showed, according to hating as well.
Each person was asked to indicate
likes and dislikes and why he thought
the ten pictures presented should have
been put together in a set; to decide
which of the pictures, if any, did not
belong in the set and to explain why;
to discuss which of the pictures he
would like to have for himself and, if
he had it, what he would do with it.
Following the rather lengthy viewing
and manipulation of what we refer to
as the Major Deck, those interviewed
made shorter studies, of three Minor
Decks and for each of these they
also made specific preference ratings
(the most liked and the least liked

The double generation gap between public and artist
painting) and they were also asked
why they thought the paintings had
been grouped together.
To give the results of the Toronto
study, it is perhaps simplest to say
that the data it produced imply certain
hypotheses that demand further study.
The most striking of these comes from
the fact that the 500 persons involved
in the study gave evidence by their
preference ratings that first of all, they
tended to agree with each other on
what they liked and did not like. One
can carry this so far as to hypothesize
that the so called aesthetically illiterate
do have taste even if it is not what
some might call educated taste.
People also showed that they could
explain their reactions, could give
reasons for their likes .and dislikes,
and that they were prepared to take
a definite stand and to argue in its
defence. They possessed a vernacular
language of art.
The second hypothesis comes from
evidence in support of the long esta¬
blished 'belief that there is a lag of
about 50 years between creative inno¬
vation and its general acceptance. The
decks of cards included, as controls,
a small number of examples of 19th
century realism and works of the
Impressionists. These pictures obtained
such high scores by comparison with
the low scores accorded even the
most inoffensive works of the avant-
garde of the early 20th century that
it is difficult to interpret these data
other than in terms of lag.
Dr. Abbey stated the hypothesis as
"familiarity breeds content", and
demonstrated that there were positive
correlations between those pictures
which people said they had seen
before and those which they liked.
Since some of the pictures which a
large number of persons said they
had seen before were ones which had
rarely been published or never exhi¬
bited locally, Dr. Heinrich countered
by saying that the genre may have
been familiar but the picture was not
and so once again we are back to the
lag hypothesis.
T
HESE findings were not, of
course, the primary objective of the
Toronto group. We were concerned
with knowing whether or not the me¬
thodology which we had tested could
produce statistically valid results.
The answer is that the methodology
works, that is, given a high quality
probability sample of adequate size
and using the interview techniques
and interview materials of the Toronto
pilot study, statistically valid measures
of public attitudes can be expected.
The task now is to have the Toronto
pilot study repeated in a number of
other centres so that we can accumu¬
late comparative data. David Bartlett,
Commissioner General of the Cana¬
dian Commission for Unesco, which
provided the financial support for the
study, has pointed out that the most
important result of repeating the
Toronto study elsewhere may be to
provide an opportunity to make cross-
cultural comparisons in public atti¬
tudes.
But to come back to the original
questions put by the directors of
museums of modern art at the interna¬
tional meetings in Mew York and Wash¬
ington, what are they going to do
with the results? How can they apply
them to their day-to-day problems in
the museum of modern art?
It has never been suggested that the
Toronto study and its duplication
elsewhere would provide a formula
which could be used for the pro¬
gramming of an art gallery. Nor
has it been suggested that the sta¬
tistical results of these studies should
be used as the basis for art museum
programming where the objective was
to give the public what it liked, now
that its likes were known.
Rather, it is felt that results of
studies such as the Toronto inquiry
can be helpful to the art museum
director by giving him greater insight
into the problems which members of
his audience face as they strive to
relate their own life experience to
modern art.
In my view these problems appear
to be related, not so much to the non¬
verbal language of art as to the verbal
and semantic gulf between the in-
group jargon of the artist, critic and
curator and the vernacular of the lay¬
man who "doesn't know anything
about art but knows what he likes."
With the successful testing of the
research instrument, its presentation
to ICOM and subsequent publication
in "Museum", the Toronto group could
have decided its job was finished. But
there were disturbing questions that
demanded answers. In 1971 the group,
now working in co-operation with York
University, Toronto, is attempting to
explore at least two of these.
First, is it true that the general public
shares an art vernacular and also
shares what might be called public
taste. In other words is there an élite
aesthetic (and we seem to assume
that there is when we speak of "good
taste") paralleled by a popular aesthe¬
tic which can be clearly expressed and
¡s much more a cultural legacy than the
often assumed attributes of ignorance,
vulgarity, apathy, conservatism, insen-
sitivity or the lack of ability to discri¬
minate?
Second, is the theory of lag in
general acceptance of creative innov
ation valid for the young (15-25 years
of age) as it appears to be for the
population in general. The Toronto
pilot study showed no difference
among age groups in this regard but
the sample size (500) was small, so
that the responses from the sub-
sample of the young hardly justifies a
conclusion.
There are many who argue that the
rate of assimilation of new ideas, new
values, and new modes of expression
is accelerating inversely as to age and
in sympathy if not at the same rate as
social and technological change. Why
should the new forms of the visual arts
be an exception if that is so?
N
O attempt will be made ¡n
the present programme to answer
either of these complex questions. It
is hoped only that hypotheses can
be developed which are sufficiently
precise to permit the design of a
quantitative study of the problems.
For the purposes of the current
research, 24 of the postcard repro¬
ductions used in the pilot study have
been chosen as working tools. These
cards are those which obtained very
high (liked) and very low (disliked)
scores. Tape-recorded interviews with
groups of 8-12 persons will be
conducted and the tapes will subse¬
quently be analyzed using a variety of
criteria. The results of the group inter¬
views, of course, may indicate other
methods of enquiry.
What is important here is that the
study of the problem is continuing.
What is regrettable is that there is so
much time lost between initiation of
these projects and the publication of
results.
In '1965 when the Toronto project
began, for example, it seemed reason¬
able to use 1960 as a cut-off date for
works of art included In the study.
Today the absence of the paintings of
the 1960s may be seen by some as a
serious handicap in using the research
design (1).
Only a concerted effort by Unesco,
ICOM and museums ¿f modern and
contemporary art can accelerate these
research programmes so that they
keep pace with the urgency of our
need.
(1) On this point, Dr Theodore Heinrich,
of the Toronto inquiry working committee,
comments: "We all know what changes
have taken place in the paintings of the
1960s, and for a time we felt that our
results through this omission might be 01
improperly weighted and misleading. We 0 1
are now of the opinion that the inclusion of
radically avant garde material would not
significantly have altered the results."
