SCIENCES HUNT
FOR THE MISSING
LINKS OF NATURE
by Vitali Goldanski
T
28
VITALI GOLDANSKI Is corresponding member
of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and
head of the Nuclear and Radiation Chemistry
Laboratory of the Academy's Institute of
Chemical Physics. A collaborator of Nicolai
Semyonov, the 1956 Nobel prizewinner for
physics, he is editor-in-chief of the journal
'High Energy Chemistry', published in Mos¬
cow. Dr. Goldanski, 48 years of age, has
written widely In the fields of physics and
chemistry and his studies and articles have
been published in many countries.
HE discovery of the Peri¬
odic Law, one of the fundamental
laws of nature, by Dmitri Ivanovich
Mendeleyev, has changed chemistry
from a vast, chaotic conglomeration of
facts into a strictly systematic and
orderly science.
Today it would be unthinkable to
try to teach or understand chemistry
without the Periodic Law. The peri¬
odic change of chemical properties
of elements and their classification in
groups and periods has become the
scientific basis of all analytical chem¬
istry and is widely used in chemical
technology. Mendeleyev's I?m is the
basis of modern structural chemistry.
One example of the profound effect
of the laws discovered by Mendeleyev
on physical chemistry is the use of the
Periodic System to select the most
effective catalysts for chemical pro¬
cesses. For a long time, organic chem¬
istry, based on the classic works of
Alexander Butlerov in Russia and
August Kekule in Germany, remained
the least affected by Mendeleyev's
discovery. However, the fundamental
role of the Periodic Law became fully
apparent in the formation and devel¬
opment of the chemistry of organo-
metallic compounds, a new discipline
on the boundaries of organic and inor¬
ganic chemistry.
The importance of Mendeleyev's
discovery, however, is not restrict¬
ed to chemistry; it has extended far
beyond it to many allied sciences and
primarily to physics. It can be claimed
with full justification that, when inter¬
preted and applied to physics, Men¬
deleyev's system became a succinct,
clear cut, physico-chemical encyclo¬
paedia, the quintessence of contem
porary notions of the structure of
matter.
The link between modern 20th cen¬
tury physics and chemistry, along the
road mapped out by the Periodic Law,
is mor.e than simply the blurring of the
division between the two disciplines;
each reinforces and enhances the
other. Their inter-relationship provides
a specially striking feedback effect.
On the one hand, Medeleyev's
discovery and the way in which he
moved towards it contributed to the
discovery of the complexity of the
atom, to the emergence and advance¬
ment of nuclear physics, the systema¬
tic classification of the properties of
nuclei and elementary particles and to
other important achievements of
physics.
On the other hand, the discovery
and study of radioactivity, the success¬
es of atomic and later nuclear
physics led to an understanding of the
meaning of an element's number in
the System, to an understanding of
the causes of the periodicity of the
chemical properties of elements, to the
filling in of the blank spaces in the
Periodic Table and its extension far
beyond uranium.
By proving the periodic alternation
of the properties of elements depend¬
ing on their atomic weights, Mendel¬
eyev's law revealed the inter-relation¬
ship of all the atoms on our planet.
It enabled scientists to tackle the ques¬
tion of atomic structure and eventually
to approach the discovery of the ato¬
mic nucleus.
Mendeleyev himself thought that
atoms would Inevitably be proved to
be complex structures. "One can
readily assume, though as yet there
CONTINUED PAGE 30

Photo © APN, Moscow
"Atom smashers", or particle accelerators as they are known to the scientist, are
today an indispensable tool for nuclear physicists everywhere in studying the world
of the infinitely small. Photo shows giant accelerator at Serpukov, U.S.S.R.

MISSING LINKS (Continued)
Curium (96), Einsteinium (99), Fermium (100).
30
is no means of proving it," he wrote,
"that the atoms of simple bodies are
themselves complex entities formed
by the compounding of certain smal¬
ler parts; that what we call indivisible,
the atom, is merely indivisible by
conventional chemical means, just as
particles are indivisible in normal con¬
ditions by physical means... The peri¬
odic dependency between properties
and weight I have suggested evident¬
ly confirms such a presentiment."
Scientists worked for many years to
discover the nature of the particles of
which atoms are constructed. By the
turn of the century it became appar¬
ent that the atoms of all elements
contain electrons negatively charged
particles whose mass Is about
1/1 840th that of the lightest atom,
hydrogen.
For a long time nothing was known
about the carriers of positive atomic
electricity, and the first atomic model,
suggested by the English physicist,
Sir Joseph Thompson, assumed that
the whole volume of the atom was
uniformly filled with a positive charge.
In 1911, another British physicist,
Lord Rutherford proved that the whole
positive charge of the atom, and
almost all of its mass, was concentra¬
ted In the nucleus, the diameter of
which was approximately 10,000 times
smaller than that of the whole atom.
This discovery, and the subsequent
investigations of the X-Ray spectra
by Rutherford's young collaborator,
Henry Moseley, led to the discovery
of the physical meaning of an ele¬
ment's atomic number as denoting the
magnitude of the positive charge of
the nucleus of its atom. Thus, the
carrier of the unit charge is the proton,
nucleus of the lightest element,
hydrogen. The number of protons in
the nuclei of the atom of any other
element equals the number of the
square occupied by that element in
the Mendeleyev system.
With the discovery of the nucleus,
prominence was given to the planetary
model of the atom according to which
the nucleus is at the centre, like the
sun in a planetary system, with the
electrons revolving around it like
planets; in a neutral atom the number
of electrons is equal to the number of
protons in the nucleus.
Niels Bohr, the Danish physicist,
developed this concept of atomic
structure and linked it with the
quantum theory which had introduced
Into physics, at the turn of the century,
the concept that a body does not
radiate energy continuously but rather
intermittently. After analyzing the
structure of the Mendeleyev System,
Bohr concluded, In particular, that the
Sixth Period of the System must
comprise 32 elements and that element
No 72, then unknown, must be an
analogue of zirconium.
Sure enough, a search for this
element, carred out at Bohr's sugges¬
tion in zirconium ores, led to the dis¬
covery of hafnium (the missing element
72). Application of Bohr's theory to
the Periodic System also led to the
discovery of the 75th element, rhenium.
Again and again the Periodic Law
enabled scientists to - describe the
properties of undiscovered elements
and to suggest ways of searching for
them.
Perhaps the most important con¬
sequence of combining the Periodic
System with the quantum theory was
Wolfgang Pauli's "exclusion principle,"
advanced in 1925. After analyzing the
Periodic Law in terms of quantum
mechanics, Pauli concluded that an
atom cannot contain two or more
electrons in the same energy states.
Subsequently, the principle became
the basis for a host of hypotheses and
theories including those of atomic and
nuclear structure, metals and semi¬
conductors, super-conductivity, super¬
fluidity and weak nuclear interactions,
and for predicting the existence of
anti-particles.
T
HE Mendeleyev System
played a decisive part in the Isolation
and identification of the transuranium
elements (those having an atomic num¬
ber greater than that of uranium). The
greatest contribution towards the pro¬
duction and study of these elements
was made by the team of American
scientists from the Lawrence Radiation
Laboratory at Berkeley, California,
headed by Glenn Seaborg. In par¬
ticular they were the first to produce
element 94, plutonium, whose pro¬
perties are better known today than
those of many "older" elements.
The achievement of the California
team has resulted in the perpetuation
in the Periodic Table of the great names
of Marie and Pierre Curie (element 96,
curium), Albert Einstein (element 99,
einsteinium), Enrico Fermi (element
100, fermium). The Berkeley scien¬
tists gave the first element of the
second hundred the name of Dmitri
Mendeleyev (element 101, mendelev-
ium), "In recognition of the pioneering
rôle of the great Russian chemist, who
was the first to use the periodic
system of the elements to predict the
chemical properties of undiscovered
elements, a principle which has been
the key to the discovery of many new
elements."
In recent years, the laboratory
directed by U.S.S.R. Academician
Georgi Flerov at the Joint Nuclear
Research Institute in Dubna has
become a major centre of work on
transuranium elements. In particular,
the Institute has produced many
Isotopes of the later actinides (actini-
des are the group of elements with
atomic numbers from 89 to 103), and
has pioneered the synthesis of trans-
actinide elements. The first element
in the transactinide series, No. 104,
was named kurchatovium in honour of
Academician Igor Kurchatov, founder
of the Soviet school of nuclear science.
For a long time the question of the
chemical properties of elements lying
farther away from uranium in the
Periodic Table seemed to be a purely
academic one since their isotopes
decay very rapidly. Lately, however,
more promising prospects of synthes¬
izing very heavy elements have emerg¬
ed. There is reason to hope that
atomic nuclei containing about 114 or
about 126 protons and approximately
184 neutrons will be found to possess
greater stability.
The task of producing these ele¬
ments artificially or searching for them
in nature has become very relevant.
Scientists at the Dubna Institute and
elsewhere are at present hunting for
element No. 114 which, according to
the Periodic Law, should be eka-lead.
As for element 126, this should logic¬
ally belong to the 8th period of the
System.
In our view, based on the work of
the Soviet scientist V. M. Klechkovski,
this period should theoretically contain
50 elements (though they may not all
necessarily be synthesized), including
a group of 18 hitherto unknown chem¬
ical twins, the octadecanides (elements
121 to 138). Their closest chemical
analogue among known elements
should logically be actinium.
Whereas the heavy elements men¬
tioned above are almost 300 times
heavier than hydrogen, examples of
"new atoms" that are many times
lighter than hydrogen are already
known. In various "new atoms" the
component particles of conventional
atoms protons and electrons are
replaced by other similarly charged
elementary particles; today the number

YIN
YANG
Following the discovery in 1932
by Dr. Carl Anderson of a posi¬
tively charged electron, known
as a positron, scientists have
speculated that, in conformity
with the essential symmetry of
nuclear physics, every particle
has its equivalent anti-particle.
For reasons as yet not under¬
stood, when a positron meets
an electron both particles are
annihilated and energy is re¬
leased. If anti-matter, compos¬
ed of anti-particles, exists, phy¬
sicists presume that were such
anti-matter to encounter a piece
of ordinary matter a catastro¬
phic mutual annihilation would
result. It is interesting to note
that in 1957 (he Nobel prize
for research in this field of
physics went to Tsung Dao Lee
and Chen Ning Yang from Chi¬
na where the Yin Yang theory
of complementarity has existed
for thousands of years. Right,
an example of the symmetrical
paintings of the Dutch artist
M.C. Escher seems curiously
to symbolize the physicists'
hypotheses.
Photo © Escher Foundation. Haags Gemeentemuseum. The Hague
of known elementary particles runs
into dozens. Various combinations of
them can, in principle, yield hundreds
of different new atoms.
This, of course, does not mean that
the Periodic System is in need of
enlargement or modification, since the
substitution of some other negative
particles for the electron does not
change the charge of the nucleus,
which determines an element's place
in the Periodic Table, and the sub¬
stitution of other positive particles for
the proton yields atoms which in the
chemical sense can be regarded as
isotopes of hydrogen.
A... ...... -
chemistry of new atoms could begin
with such newcomers to the first square
in the Periodic Table as positronium
and muonium. Positronium, which was
discovered in 1951 by Martin Deutsch
of the United States, marked the
beginning of the history of new atoms.
The difference between positronium
and an ordinary hydrogen atom is that
the proton is replaced by a positron,
the anti-particle of an electron. Muon¬
ium is an atom of hydrogen in which
the place of the proton is taken by a
positively charged mu-meson particle.
Practically all the classes of chem¬
ical reactions of positronium have
been studied in the last few years at
the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences'
Institute of Chemical Physics.
A comparison of the various reac¬
tions of atoms of positronium and
hydrogen suggests that, although they
have certain common chemical pro¬
perties, their behaviour differs due to
their great disparity in mass or atomic
weight, in line with Mendeleyev's initial
approach to the periodicity of chem¬
ical properties. It is this link with the
Periodic System that gives special
interest to investigations of the phy¬
sical chemistry of the positron and
positronium.
Mendeleyev's systematic ordering
of known data and use of them to
establish the existence of new, as yet
unknown, entities and to predict their
properties, recently found new expres¬
sion in the system of elementary par¬
ticles proposed by the American
physicist, 1969 Nobel prizewinner
Murray Gell-Mann. This system was
brilliantly confirmed by the discovery
of new particles whose properties
agreed completely with his predictions.
The examples given amply demon¬
strate the fundamental role played by
the Periodic Law even in entirely new
spheres of science, which appeared
decades after It was discovered.
There can be no doubt that many new
and striking pages of science of the
future will be firmly linked with
the great creation of Dmitri Men¬
deleyev.
31
