Hewn from a solid block of stone,
this tomb is a typical example of 14th
and 15th century Bogomil funerary art.
It is made in the form of a house
of the period. Some thirty thousand
of these tombs or "Stetchaks" are still
to be seen in present day Yugoslavia,
decorated with engravings which
are both realistic and symbolic.
The stags on the side of this tomb stood
for justice and purity in the religious art
of the Bogomils (a heretical Christian
sect which first appeared in the Balkans
in the 10th century). Front of tomb
bears stylized cross and vine motif
Christian symbol of knowledge.

THE FUNERARY ART OF THE BOGOMILS
THE STONES
WITH THE
RAISED HANDS
by Miroslav Krleza
C
^^CATTERED throughout
Yugoslavia, from the Adriatic to the
rivers Una and Morava, are some
30,000 ancient tombstones or "stet¬
chaks" (from the Croato-Serbian word
"stécak", meaning "standing stone").
Massive monolithic blocks weathered
MIROSLAV KRLEZA is Director of the
Yugoslav Encyclopaedia. Author, poet,
playwright and essayist, he is a leading
figure of Yugoslav letters. He has organ¬
ized several international exhibitions of
Yugoslav medieval art and has written a
number of books on the southern Slav
civilization.
by the centuries and weighing anything
from two to thirty-two tons, they are
also known as Bogomil "marbles", or
simply "Bogomils", from the name of
an ancient religious cult which found
refuge in the Balkans In medieval
times.
Twelve of the numerous tombstones
of this type found in Bosnia-Herce-
govina figured in a recent exhibition
on "Yugoslav Art from Prehistory to
Today", held in Paris. It was the first
time that such tombstones had left
Yugoslavia for an exhibition abroad.
What is known about these tomb¬
stones with their wealth of carved
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

e«*M
Hands in revolt
Engravings and sculpture carved on the Bogomil tombs of Bosnia
and Hercegovina proclaim the faith that inspired this medieval
heretical sect in its struggle against a merciless repression by the Inquisition.
Many of the Bogomil stone communities of the dead (like the one
in Hercegovina, below) have survived, with carvings that record
ancient rites and symbols whose meanings are often difficult to decipher.
On the upper half of the tombstone, right, figures dance the "kolo"
a folk dance still popular in the Balkans but here the linked hands
of the dancers clasp a cross. The lower frieze depicts a line
of stags (see photo page 17). Below right, a cross symbolically entwined
with vines decorates the end of this tomb (see also page 17). On the side,
the sculptor has carved the effigy of the dead person, with hands upraised,
and flanked by two mourners. Far right, a tomb bearing the most recurrent
feature of Bogomil tomb decoration: a figure with raised hands.
This may be a symbol of revolt, a challenge, an allusion to the Crucifixion,
or even a combination of all three. The human figure is surmounted
by a crescent moon, a pagan symbol, and by floral designs
that are still embroidered on traditional local costumes today.


BOGOMIL ART (Continued Irom page 17)
30,000 sculptured monoliths
designs, often grouped in vast ceme¬
teries, in remote forest or mountain
areas, and about those who raised and
decorated them?
One of the first writers to describe
the monoliths In these ancient grave¬
yards in some detail was an early 19th
century traveller, - Prince Alexander
Sapleha, who sought to understand
the meaning of the carved figurative
reliefs and symbolical designs that
decorate these standing stones.
In 1802-1803 he travelled through
the republic of Dubrovnik and in the
diary of his journey, published in
Warsaw in 1811, he noted the strange
characteristic shape of the stones that
recalled, as he put it, "the roof of a
funeral vault." Prince Sapieha sugg¬
ested that the carved decorations were
meant to symbolize the eternity of life
triumphant over the destructive power
of death.
But until comparatively recent times,
no one had systematically studied the
gravestones or the artistic value of
their carvings. Dating from the middle
ages, and certainly from before the
Turkish invasion in the 15th century,
they are all hewn from single blocks,
often so roughly that their simplicity
gives an Impression of force.
About one-third of the gravestones
are richly decorated in relief with
figurative compositions whose meaning
often remains obscure. A recurrent
motif, for instance, is the upraised
human hand, but whether It symbolizes
a command or a threat, a greeting or
a challenge, is still not known.
As a feature of burial decoration,
carvings of the human hand are known
to date back to the prehistoric cave
dwellings of the Dordogne in France.
The hands depicted on medieval
tombstones, peacefully joined in
prayer, have survived from Gothic
art to the present day; they are a
familiar sign by which we recognize
the human form, a detail which is often
more important than any other feature
of a human effigy.
But the knightly, gauntleted hands of
the Bosnian barons and boyars who
take leave of us to cross the Acheron,
the Greek river of the Underworld, and
who seem to hail us from the opposite
bank, appear to have an entirely
different meaning. These Bogomil
monuments have few recumbent figures
with their hands folded in prayer at
the approach of death.
By contrast with traditional effigies
of the dead, the massive, dispropor¬
tionately large hands on the "stet-
chaks", solemnly and firmly upraised,
seem to proclaim across the centuries
that these were hands of iron, hands
in revolt, symbols of a sturdy breed
of men who refused to submit to the
will of the Inquisition as it waged its
combat against the heretics of Bosnia.
Sculpted on armour, on shields,
bearing swords and lances, these
hands recall the symbolism with which
the Middle Ages invested the gauntlet
the sign of a challenge to a duel.
In this case it was a challenge to
ecclesiastical authority, a defiance far
more radical than that of John Wycliffe,
Jan Huss or Martin Luther, centuries
later.
T
HE first printed reference
to the Bogomil cemeteries is found in
the Itinerarium, published in 1531, the
earliest known account of travels in
the Balkans. Its author, Benedikt
Kuripesic, a Slovene, acted as inter¬
preter for a diplomatic mission sent
to Constantinople by the Holy Roman
Emperor Ferdinand I, ruler of Austria,
to conclude a peace treaty between
Austria and Turkey.
Instead of taking the customary
"imperial route" via Belgrade and
Sofia, the travellers went through
Croatia and Bosnia. Kuripesic noticed
20 Ufi

these mysterious monuments, and
copied some of their epitaphs; but
unfamiliar with the Cyrillic alphabet,
or else misled by local interpreters, he
published them in a very free rendering.
A year later a second Austrian diplo¬
matic mission, following the same
route, also noted the curious monu¬
ments to be seen "in the valleys and
on the mountains of Bosnia."
But it was not until two centuries
later that travellers halted before these
stones and tried to fathom their secret.
A Dalmatian Franciscan friar, Gaspard
Vinjalic, in a book published in Venice,
referred to the Bogomil stone "funeral
vaults"; and at almost the same time,
in 1775 a Venetian, Father Alberto
Fortis, published his famous "Dal¬
matian Journey". One of the most
remarkable passages in this account
describes the graveyard located near
the source of the Cetina, near the
Church of the Holy Saviour.
When.Dalmatia became a colony of
Venice great interest was aroused by
this largely unknown and apparently
"wild" country. Many years after its
publication, Father Fortis' book provid¬
ed Prosper Mérimée with a major
source of inspiration for his famous
literary hoax "La Guzla", which was
supposed to be a collection of Dal¬
matian poetry. All western Europe
was taken in by this picturesque and
highly romanticized work, which pre¬
sented an oversimplified picture of the
Morlachs as a chivalrous people who
lived on the frontiers of Venice, Turkey
and Austria, who believed in vampires,
fought endless battles, carried on
bloody feuds against their enemies and
chanted Homeric poems . . .
Great figures such as Byron, Goethe,
Pushkin and Mickiewicz gave credence
to these flights of poetic fancy. Thus
Mérimée's work created the legend of
a barely civilized people, primitive,
poor and backward, whose silver-
decorated weapons, splendid national
costumes, blind bards and local
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
A number of stylized motifs, taken
from 14th and 15th century
Bogomil sculptures, frame page 20
opposite. The vertical column
shows the similarity in designs used
to represent the cross
and a man with upraised arms.
In the horizontal strip the cross
becomes convoluted and mingled
with the tendrils of the vine.
Above, on the front of the tomb
an elaborately worked floral frieze,
repeated on the base, sets
off a carving of a man and a woman
holding hands. Right, another
funerary carving representing
a figure carrying a cross
beside a vine.

22
BOGOMIL ART (Continued)
customs seemed to make them as
strikingly picturesque as the wax
figures in an ethnographical museum.
Unfortunately, while the works of
Mérimée and Fortis are' well-known,
the other side of the picture, presented
by a doctor of medicine from Padua,
Giovanni Lovrlch, Is not. Lovrich, who
died young, published ¡n 1777 his
"Comments on the Dalmatian Journey
by Alberto Fortis," in which he accused
Fortis of completely misinterpreting
even the most elementary facts.
It is Lovrich who should be given
credit for being one of the first to
throw light on the problem of the
relationship between the Morlachs and
the Haiduks, political outlaws and
guerilla champions of freedom, who
for centuries waged warfare against
the Turks as the spearhead of
resistance by the southern Slavonic
peoples. And it was Lovrich who
drew the attention of the western world
to the rich historical and artistic past
of these peoples.
For six centuries the southern Slavs
were unceasingly harried and "hunted
like wolves" by the Turks. They
nevertheless raised historical and
cultural monuments and created literary
traditions, particularly the Adriatic
Slavs, who from the 16th and 17th
centuries onwards produced many
works of lyric and epic poetry, drama,
history, politics and science.
Here, in fact, was a vigorous civiliza¬
tion that had been engulfed by wars,
though this was naturally not so
evident to an 18th century observer
as it is to us today. We now know
that this is the graveyard of an art and
culture which, between the 9th and
16th centuries, bequeathed to us, over
and above the Bogomil cemeteries,
innumerable frescoes, countless pala¬
ces, castles, villas, fortresses, chur¬
ches, monasteries, towns, and other
monuments, embellished with a wealth
of artistic decoration.
This unbroken vein of creativeness
in architecture, sculpture and painting,
extended from the Lombardo-Raven-
nine and Carolingian period, through
the neo-Hellenlc and Byzantine fres¬
coes of the 12th to the 14th centuries,
up to the Ragusan, Dalmatian and
Slovene painters, sculptors and archi¬
tects of the humanist period and the
Renaissance.
It is within the thousand-year span
of this tradition, but particularly in the
period between the 11th century and
the Turkish conquest of Bosnia In
1463, that the graveyards of "stet-
chaks" were raised in Bosnia-Herce-
govlna, which had become a refuge
for heretics from every point of the
compass.
Bosnia was for centuries a Patarene,
Cathar, Manichaean and Bogomil
country, but it was mainly to Bogoml-
llsm, a purely Balkan heresy which
grew up in Bulgaria in the tenth century
and which was violently repressed in
the twelfth century throughout the
Balkans, that the mountainous and
freedom-loving country of Bosnia
offered an ideal place of refuge.
The nature of this heresy is reflected
¡n the "stetchaks", which exalt with
defiant paganism the earthly pleasures,
dancing, the joys of the chase, and
which depict animals and plants
P
| RINCE Sapieha, in the
diary of his travels already referred to,
guessed at the secret inspiration of
these great white monoliths from their
decoration: birds resembling the divine
Ibis, visions of fabulous animals, rivers
flowing beneath the stars, knights in
arms, gazelles in flight, bears, hounds
and wolves seen against a backdrop
of endless forests.
He described the graveyards of
Stolac and Radimlje, and noted the
problem they presented for the archae¬
ologist. He explained the heraldic
significance of certain details; and he
compared their unusual forms with
artistic motifs from the north, on the
shores of the Baltic, also drawing a
comparison with certain decorations
on Egyptian and Parthian tombs.
Other scholars studied the mystery
of the "stetchaks", among them a
Yugoslav, Katalinic, a Frenchman, Ami
Boue (1794-1881) and an Italian, Fran¬
cesco Cusani. It was, however, a
famous Egyptologist, Sir John Gardener
Wilkinson, who first dated the tomb¬
stones as preceding the Turkish inva¬
sion, and who has given us the most
complete account of these cemeteries.
In 1884, starting at the source of the
Cetina river and continuing Into Herce¬
govina, Wilkinson described in detail
thé shape and sculptural decoration of
the "stetchaks". Significantly, he
noted that their themes were still
closely linked with local folk tales
and stories of marriages, the deaths
of heroes, of conflicts between suitors.
From Wilkinson onwards up to con¬
temporary writers, comparative studies
have enriched the body of writing on
the "stetchaks". According to one
convincing thesis, the gravestones re¬
produce features of a very ancient
type of wood-engraving brought by the
Slavs when they settled in the Balkans.
The stylistic motifs of this art form a
whole, and are linked with both the
sculpture of the Baltic and the Cau¬
casus, and traditional Scythian and
Sarmatian art.
