Below, the arresting "towers with faces" of the Bayon temple,
miracles of 12th and 13th century monumental art, situated within
the Angkor Thorn complex. This is what the French writer
Pierre Loti wrote after visiting Angkor in 1901: "From on high,
the four faces on each tower looked out towards the four points
of the compass, beneath lowered eyelids, with identical expressions,
each wearing the same smile. They affirmed and reiterated with
obsessive power the all-pervading presence of God at Angkor."
Photo © Luc Ionesco, Paris

THE KHMER SMILE
OF THE BAYON
by Philippe Stern
W,HAT a strange yet wonder¬
ful monument we have in the Bayon
at Angkor.
The Bayon is the last of the great
Khmer monuments in stone. Khmer
art' began in the 6th century A.D.
on territory very roughly correspond¬
ing to the Cambodia of today; but dur¬
ing about the first half of its evolution,
its monuments, which frequently
contained very beautiful statues and
were remarkable for their decoration
(especially on the lintels), were only
small buildings made up of separate
elements.
It was not till later, after the found¬
ation of Angkor in the late 9th or
early 10th century A.D., that large
temples began to appear, with con¬
centric enclosures, and constructed
in stone instead of brick.
At Angkor, some thirty monuments
were still standing until very recently
and, apart from a brief period in the
10th century, Angkor remained a
capital until the decline of the splen¬
dour of the Khmers with Jayavar¬
man VII and even for some time
thereafter.
At the Bayon two outstanding points
of interest compel our attention. One
is the outer gallery which, though in
ruins, still has intact walls covered
with bas-reliefs. From one point in their
PHILIPPE STERN, of France, Is one of the
great names connected with the study of
Khmer art. He is the originator of a now
widely adopted research method which
enabled him to explain the evolution and
establish the chronology of Khmer art. His
book "Les Monuments Khmers du Style du
Bayon et layavarman VII" Is an internation¬
ally accepted source book for scholars.
At present he is working on a book on aes¬
thetics the central theme of which, 'the
smile", is discussed in the article published
here. Another of Philippe Stem's works is
currently in press: "Colonnes Indiennes
d'Ajanta et d'É/lora: Evolution et Repercus¬
sions" (Publications du Musée Guimet,
Presses Universitaires de France). Honorary
curator-in-chlef of the Musées de France
(Arts Asiatiques), he contributed greatly to
the development and renovation of the
Musée Guimet of Paris, which Is famous for
Its Oriental collections. Philippe Stern was
also one of the first scholars to take a
serious interest In the music of Asia and
Africa. For his various books on Angkor see
bibliography page 42.
development, the great Khmer temples
were generally made up of concentric
galleries encircling a central sanctuary,
and from the 12th century A.D.
onwards, the outer galleries were
covered with bas-reliefs, such as those
seen at Angkor Wat, Banteay Chmar
and the Bayon.
At the Bayon we find an interesting
innovation on the bas-reliefs. Along
the base of one of them a series of
little scenes of daily life unfolds before
our eyes. (Photos pages 30-38.)
These bas-reliefs give us a remark¬
able insight into the crafts and occup¬
ations and the homely details of the
life of the people of the time. Khmer
art is a religious art, and these scenes
are remarkable, not only in themselves,
but because nowhere else in Khmer
architecture are similar works of a
non-religious nature to be found.
But far more striking is the upper
part of the monument. The Bayon is
a "temple-mountain" of the type
usually constructed by each of the
great Khmer kings in the form ' of a
tiered pyramid. The temple-mountain
was considered to be the centre of
the world of men just as the divine
mountain was the centre of the world
of the gods.
The tower-sanctuaries of the Bayon
are striking in that on each of their
four sides there is a gigantic face
representing the divinity and the deifi¬
ed king merged into one, with all the
faces irradiating royal benevolence to
the four points of the compass, "look¬
ing everywhere", as the texts say.
This was an innovation of the great
Buddhist king . Jayavarman VII (who
reigned from approximately 1181 to
1219 A.D.), which corresponded to his
major religious reform undertaken,
according to my findings (1), some ten
years after his reign began. Since
there are more than fifty of these
towers, the Bayon constitutes a most
extraordinary architectural and sculp¬
tural complex.
During the construction of the upper
part of the Bayon it was decided to
enlarge the building as originally plan¬
ned. As a result earlier sculptures
(1) See my book 'Les Monuments khmers
du style du Bayon et Jayavarman VII",
published by Presses Universitaires de
France, which contains translations and quo¬
tations from philological studies by G. Coe-
dès and other writers on the great historical
figure Jayavarman VII.
were hidden and the general effect
was one of near chaos. Yet on reach¬
ing the upper section the visitor is
stupefied by the astounding sight it
offers from every viewpoint. He is
greeted on all sides and from every
height and angle by faces which echo
and reflect each other. And many of
these faces are smiling.
Later Buddhism, or mahayana (Bud¬
dhism of the Great Vehicle), differed
markedly from early Buddhism. And
the Buddhist smile, found on the later
statues such as those at the Bayon,
is the height of perfection and beauty.
(Photos, cover and page 17.) Here
the face is shown carved with closed
eyes.
What does this smile really mean?
For me it is a concrete example of the
notion basic to our aesthetic concep¬
tions which, when expressed in
words, could be translated as a union
of opposites, but which, in reality, are
opposites that have not yet emerged
as distinct entities. In other words a
notion which transcends language and
concepts.
The closed eyes thus express an
inwardness, set apart from everyday
things, the search in one's innermost
depths for a transcendental detach¬
ment and a supra-human peace, the
way to nirvana; whereas the smile, ris¬
ing also from the innermost depths,
represents the almost tender Buddhist
charity of communication and com¬
munion with all creatures, imparted by
the smiling expression to the face as
a whole.
The style at the Bayon thus has a
unity of expression which is that of
the masculine bodhisattvas (heads sur¬
mounted by a cylinder with a small
statuette) or the corresponding femi¬
nine prajnaparamita (where the stat¬
uette is placed on a cone above the
head. (Photo page 16.)
The bodhisattvas of the Great Vehi¬
cle are the miraculous, almost divine
beings who, after countless lives of
detachment and charity (perhaps also
of cognition) have succeeded in trans¬
migrating to the very threshold of
nirvana, where they could be freed
from all suffering by losing their indi¬
viduality and merging into the Ineffa¬
ble, which no words can adequately a r
describe. But they refuse to be set I rl
free, in order to devote themselves
compassionately to the salvation of
others, and until such time as all
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

THE KHMER SMILE (Continued)
THE SMILE
OF DEEP
CONTEMPLATION
Few Eastern forms of artistic expression
surpass in beauty the deep smile of the
statues of Angkor (right, a deified queen or
princess; centre. King Jayavarman VII).
Compare this smile with the ghost of a
smile on the lips of the pharaoh and reli¬
gious reformer, Amenophis IV or Akhenaton
(extreme right) who reigned In Egypt
during the 14th century B.C. It reveals a
world of humanity and sweet serenity
which was expressed to perfection in
Khmer art. The smile shines out from the
vast countenances of the "towers with
faces" at the Bayon, signifying the bene¬
volent contemplation of the Buddha encom¬
passing the whole universe. (Below, aerial
view of the Bayon.)
men shall be saved along with them.
Jayavarman VII was so strongly
imbued with this Buddhist charity that
the stele inscriptions near the hospitals
(see below) bear the words "He suffer¬
ed from the ills of his subjects more
than from his own: for it is the grief of
the people that causes the grief of
kings, and not their own grief".
In the Khmer heads of this period
(Photos opposite) the closed eyes and
the lips drawn out in a deep smile
draw us irresistibly into an inner world
of surpassing peace and tender com¬
passion for all creatures.
I have in my possession a cast of
one of the finest of the heads with
this expression. Even though I see it
every day, it is an unceasing and
inexhaustible source of inspiration to
me, as are all forms of beauty which
have attained their greatest depth.
I referred earlier to deified kings.
But except in the case of Jayavar¬
man VII, at the end of the period of
Khmer splendour, what the statue
represents is the divinity portrayed
according to the contemporary canons
of beauty, completely idealized and
devoid of any individual resemblance
(this Is perhaps where its value lies).
This is true whether the statues are
Hindu (the supreme gods Siva or Vish¬
nu) or Buddhist. Only the inscription
indicates that particular human beings
(to begin with, only kings, then grad¬
ually members of the royal family and
even high dignitaries) were consider¬
ed after death to have been merged
into the divine, the deity represented
by the statue. It is with Jayavar¬
man VII, presumably identified with
Buddha himself (the "Enlightened")
that we first see the expression of
spirituality combined with the portrait
of the individual. (Photos cover and
page 17).
This brings to our attention a curious
and moving fact. The representations
of the "deep smile" are very rare in
the history of art (to my belief there
are only four periods). The reigns of
two great kings who were also reli¬
gious reformers, Amenophis IV-Akhe-
naton of ancient Egypt (14th century
B.C.) and the Khmer king Jayavar¬
man VII (late 12th and early 13th cen¬
turies A.D.), both coincide with such
a period (Photos page 17). It is cer¬
tainly not by chance, for the smile
is linked with communication, under¬
standing communion, compassion and
even tenderness.
A still more astonishing coincidence
Is the fact that in both cases, heads
of statues representing spiritualized
portraits have come down to us. The
colossal head of Amenophis IV, at
Karnak, reveals one of the most extra¬
ordinary faces found on a work of
sculpture, with its elongated profile,
high cheekbones and long chin.
The head of Jayavarman VII, on
the other hand, though also extremely
individualized so that one can immed¬
iately recognize it in other portraits
of the king, is broad-featured and
slightly puffed up. Nevertheless it
retains all its spirituality (G. Coedès
has proved that the portrait is indeed
that of Jayavarman VII).
In Egypt, Amenophis IV, who took
the name of Akhenaton at El Amarna,
was perhaps the first monotheist ruler,
and his hymn to the sun is compared
in Daniel Rops' "Le Roi ivre de Dieu"
with the biblical psalm 104, with which
it is identical, verse for verse. In view
of the approximate date of the Exodus
and the possibly legendary history of
Moses, this in all likelihood indicates
the influence of Akhenaton on the
Bible.
Jayavarman VII showed throughout
his life the intense charity of Buddhism
("the grief of the people causes the
grief of kings" is only one of many
apposite quotations), and was, as we
shall see in a moment, a great religious
reformer. At El Amarna there is also
the feeling for family life, emphasized
by Boisselier, in the same way as in
the bas-reliefs of the Bayon to which
we have already referred (Photos
pages 30-38).
Thus a comparison may be drawn
between Amenophis IV and Jayavar¬
man VII for their leaning towards the
same kind of humanism; but there is
no possibility of the one having
influenced the other, separated as they
CONTINUED PAGE 18

e v«
*2
lo
Ice
17
BSP¿t<.

THE KHMER SMILE (Continued)
were by geography and above all by
25 centuries of history.
Another striking particularity of Jaya¬
varman VII is that he appears to have
built up a highly complex and statistic¬
ally-minded civil service. With aston¬
ishing accuracy, he indicates almost
to a man the number of temple staff
and the objects attributed to the tem¬
ples. Thus there is a record of how
many tower-sanctuaries there are to
each monument, how many dwellings
(probably sections of galleries), the
length of the enclosing walls and of
the moats that flanked them.
The Bayon was not only the royal
temple of Jayavarman VII, perhaps
intended as his tomb (the two were
frequently combined), but also a pan¬
theon containing statues of many of
the gods of the kingdom; though not
all apparently, since we know from
inscriptions that there were 24,400 of
them. There were 8,176 villages
dedicated to the temples and 208,532
men and women, including 1,622 danc¬
ing girls.
One example of Jayavarman Vll's
attention to minute detail is the hos¬
pitals. His Buddhist charity had its
practical aspect, and at intervals along
the roads he had resting-places ("hou¬
ses with hearths") erected, 121 of
which were in existence 10 years after
he acceded to the throne; also hos¬
pitals, 102 of which were already in
operation five years after his acces¬
sion.
The specifications for each hospital
were meticulously precise. "All four
castes may be treated here. There are
two doctors, each having one male and
two female assistants entitled to free
accommodation, two storekeepers res¬
ponsible for the distribution of medica¬
ments. . . two cooks entitled to free
fuel and water, responsible for remov¬
ing dead flowers and cleaning the
temple (a chapel annexed to the hos¬
pitals). . . fourteen hospital attendants
responsible for administering the medi¬
caments. . . two women to pound
rice. . . a total staff of 32, 98 if one
includes those who pay for their own
accommodation." The various lists are
never-ending.
It is not possible to list all the
numerous symbolic elements linked to
Jayavarman Vll's major religious
reform, such as the corner decora¬
tions, apparently of cosmic signifi¬
cance, in which the lion is placed
above the elephant and the garuda, a
fabulous bird, above the lion.
To take only the specific example of
the Bayon, there is the multiplication
of the tower-sanctuaries with faces,
as we have seen. Another of Jaya¬
varman Vll's innovations were the
stone town walls, several miles long,
which like those at Bayon have gates
at the four points of the compass,
together with a fifth leading to the
royal palace. The gates are surmount¬
ed by similar faces, and in front of
them, flanking the causeway, are the
minor gods (deva) and their enemies
CONTINUED PAGE 39

THE KHMER SMILE OF THE BAYON (continued from page 18)
(the asura) holding out the mythical
serpent above the waters of the moats.
According to Paul Mus and to
G. Coedès, this is all intended to
symbolize the rainbow, linking the
world of men to that of the gods, and
also the Churning of the Sea of Milk,
a cosmic myth related to the grandeur
of the kings frequently found in Khmer
bas-reliefs, in this case sculptured in
the round and on a gigantic scale.
The story goes that in one of his
incarnations, or avatars (the Hindu
belief in avatars was retained by the
Buddhist Jayavarman VII by syncretism
between the two religions) the Hindu
god Vishnu, in the form of a tortoise,
upholds the Sacred Mount while
deva on one side and asura on the
other, grasping the mythical serpent,
with the Sacred Mount serving as a
churn, make many wondrous things
gush forth from the Sea of Milk,
culminating with the ambrosia of im¬
mortality (amrita).
Paul Mus suggests that the deva
at each gate probably have their corres¬
ponding asura at the gate on the oppo¬
site side of the town; and that since
the Bayon was situated at the centre
of these walls and gates, it was preci¬
sely a symbol of the Sacred Mount,
used for the Churning of the Sea of
Milk on a gigantic scale.
I HE fact that the Bayon was
considered to be the centre of the
town both gave rise to, and later dissi¬
pated, a serious error in research. An
inscription which is of a late period, but
lengthy and detailed, indicates that the
king who founded Angkor (Yasovar-
man) had the royal hnga or "God-
King", the phallic emblem of Siva,
erected on the central hill, and since
the temple-mountain of the Bayon was
at the centre of these stone walls, it
was assumed that the Bayon was the
first great Khmer monument. . . when
in fact it was the last.
When I began to study the Khmers,
this was the key used in dating all the
other temples, with the result that the
chronological sequence of the monu¬
ments of Angkor was the wrong way
round.
My whole career as an archaeologist
has been based on a method which
lays no claim to replace other methods,
but merely to complement them. It
consists in attempting to establish the
chronological order of monuments and
of the evolution of types of art, motifs
or styles, by making comparisons with
the development of a certain number
of motifs chosen on the basis of
experiments devised for this purpose.
When applied to Khmer art, this me¬
thod proved that the date attributed
to the Bayon was impossible and must
be considerably later.
I thus had the honour and the good
fortune, together possibly with some
insight, of proposing a complete
change which put research on the right
lines. I did not however go far enough
in either direction, and it was
G. Coedès, on examining the inscrip¬
tions after I had published the results
of my work, who situated the exact
date of the Bayon during the reign of
Jayavarman VII. At the same time, the
centre of the original town was iden¬
tified from the air by V. Goloubev as
being even more different than I had
thought.
The original error, as indicated in
my first book, derived from the fact
that the Bayon is the centre of an
enclosure whose gates are of the
same style as the Bayon and accord¬
ingly of the same period. Previously,
the successive centres of Angkor had
been located elsewhere.
Thus the establishment of the entire
chronology of the Khmer monuments
hinged on the Bayon.
At the close of my career, it was
again the Bayon, with the constructions
added by Jayavarman VII to monu¬
ments built during his own reign to
house new gods (this was a time of
great enthusiasm for deifying human
beings), which enabled me to cross¬
check the method employed.
To take a single example, the female
figures on the walls (devata or apsara)
differed considerably according to
whether they belonged to the first, or
the third and last period of the style.
Where these two different types, indic¬
ating the beginning and the end of the
style, are to be found side by side on
the same gallery in the same monu¬
ment, there is always between them a
vestige on the wall of the architectural
addition separating the new part from
the older one, providing objective proof
of the accuracy with which the
development of the motifs has been
studied.
This is demonstrated in my book
"Les monuments khmers du style du
Bayon et Jayavarman VII" which
includes the essential parts of the
texts concerning Jayavarman VII written
by G. Coedès, with whom I collaborat¬
ed throughout, constantly exchanging
archaeological and philological observ¬
ations. It also contains texts by
Paul Mus. To both these scholars, who
died recently, I wish to pay particular
tribute for their outstanding work.
While the Bayon of Angkor was the
temple-mountain of Jayavarman VII, it
is only one of a great number of build¬
ings in the same style. Examples are
the two great groups of buildings
dating from the beginning of his reign
(the date was estimated using the
method indicated above, and sub¬
sequently confirmed by an inscription):
the first, Ta Prohm, dedicated by the
king to his mother and his guru, and
the second, still larger, Preah Khan at
Angkor, to his father (the head of Ta
Som colour photo page 24 comes
from the enclosure added by Jaya¬
varman VII to one of his own, smaller,
monuments). But monuments in the
Bayon style are very numerous at
Angkor and even outside the Angkor
complex.
B Y far the most remarkable
site of all, Angkor itself contains
more than 30 temples; but scattered
throughout the country there are an
enormous number of Khmer monu¬
ments, many of which are remarkable
and some unique in style. Representa¬
tive examples of pre-Angkorian Khmer
art are the astonishing 7th century
group of Sambor Prei Kuk and, perhaps
the most perfect Khmer temple of all,
the small, delicately detailed, 10th cen¬
tury temple of Banteay Srei. It is a
constant source of anxiety to us to
think of the dangers to which they
are daily exposed, particularly the
temples at Angkor and the Phnom Penh
museum, with its unique collection of
Khmer sculptures, other Khmer temples
and the Cham monuments in what is
today Viet-Nam. Many difficulties have
been surmounted and much patient
effort devoted to the reconstruction of
seriously dilapidated monuments, some
of which have even been restored to
their original state, yet a monument,
and the work done on it, could be redu¬
ced in an instant to a heap of rubble.
These buildings which we have
studied for so long have become for
us almost like living friends.
We implore those involved in the
present hostilities, whatever their
convictions, to spare these monuments.
Most of them were the work of their
ancestors, a valuable treasure house
of beauty enriching mankind as a
whole, which is entrusted to their care.
They are also a tourist attraction from
which everyone stands to gain. It is
our fervent hope that once peace is
restored (which we all hope for, and
which must come one day), all these
beautiful monuments, all these totally
irreplaceable groups of buildings OQ
which we love so intensely, will emerge ^*»
unscathed.
Philippe Stern
