THE ROMANCE
OF VARGHE
AND GOLSHAH
by A.S. Melikian-Chirvani
T
Article © Copyright Reproduction prohibited
EN years ago, a 13th cen¬
tury Persian manuscript, the only sur¬
viving copy of a romance written short¬
ly after 1000 A.D., was discovered in
the store rooms of the Topkapi Saray
Museum in Istanbul.
The 71 miniatures of great beauty
that accompany the text constitute the
only known complete set of illustra¬
tions to a Persian romance painted
before the 14th century.
The discovery was clearly of great
significance to art historians and to
specialists in Persian literature. But
more than this, the manuscript of
Varghe va Golshah such is the name
of this love story written by one Ayyu-
ghi of whom nothing more is known
provides a unique specimen through
the pages of which a profound analy¬
sis of the very nature of Iranian art can
be made.
From earliest times, Iranian art, and
for that matter Oriental art In general,
has reflected attitudes to the world
that are sharply opposed to Western
concepts. In handling figurative
themes, the Eastern painter or sculptor
eliminates anything that might situate
his work in time or space.
The king subduing a lion, on the
golden plaques found at Zivle, and the
procession of winged bulls, on the
sides of the golden beakers from the
ASSADULLAH SOUREN MELIKIAN-CHIRVANI
is a member of the National Centre for
Scientific Research, and the Centre for
Higher and Islamic Comparative Studies, in
Paris. An art historian of Iranian origin
specializing In the Middle East, and
a noted art critic, he is the author
of an essay on the relationship be¬
tween literary and plastic aesthetics in
Iran, based on his studies of the illuminated
manuscript. "Varghe and Golshah", which
he also translated Into French. He has
published many articles in specialized journ¬
als on Iranian and Arab metalwork and is
currently preparing the catalogue raisonné
for an international exhibition on Iranian Art
in 1973 for the Museum of Decorative Arts
in Paris.
9th-8th century B.C. Marlik hoard, are
not representations of a specific story
or event. The postures are stylized
and the figures in bas-relief are
smoothly modelled and cast no shad¬
ows. There Is not the slightest sug¬
gestion of a landscape or even a
realistically drawn plant to remind us
of the world as we see it.
At Persepolis, two hundred years
later, Iranian sculptors followed much
the same rules. Built in the 6th and
5th centuries B.C., this palace repre¬
sents the ultimate stage of north¬
western Iranian art from Marlik and
other sites reproduced on a monumen¬
tal scale.
The winged bulls and lions, all iden¬
tical, never depart from the idealized
model that the sculptors had in mind.
Their skill in rendering subtle shades
of relief was unsurpassed, yet they
applied it not to realistic representa¬
tion, but to almost calligraphic styliza-
tion.
The muscles of the lions' thighs, in¬
stead of having that life-like quality so
strenously sought after by the Greek
sculptors of Pericles' day, are Inter¬
preted as idealized double curves.
There is no attempt to convey the idea
of the wind blowing through the dra¬
peries of the royal guards and ser¬
vants; they are reduced to abstract,
geometric patterns.
An almost imperceptible, motionless
smile curls the lips of the faces, seen
in profile, and the almond-shaped eyes
seem to be looking into some far-
distant "beyond". Not one wrinkle
stirs their brow, not one stray hair
disturbs the symmetry of their head¬
dress, not one distinctive feature
separates one face from another.
They are not individuals but arche¬
types from another world.
It would be hard to imagine a more
vivid contrast to trie principles of
Western art, as established in the
Greece of Pericles' day, which sought
out and stressed the individuality of
every man.
The art of the East produced arche¬
types, that of the West produced
portraits, and Greek art sought to
portray traits of psychological make¬
up and character. The quality of ana¬
tomical observation, the skill in render¬
ing depth and space, in creating the
optical illusion of perspective, in
bringing life to subject matter were its
criteria the exact opposite, in short,
of all that Eastern art was aiming at.
The conquest of Iran by Alexander,
the advent of a Greek dynasty and the
subsequent influx of Westerners might
have deflected Iran from her course
and converted her to the naturalistic
branch of art favoured by Europe.
This was not to be. Hellenistic art
did appear, presumably under the
Seleucid rulers, and still flourished in
early Parthian times, but it barely rose
above the level of third rate provincial
production. The adoption of these
Western principles of art ended in
total failure, as if attitudes so utterly
alien to the Oriental perception of the
world were an artificial graft which
failed to "take".
With the advent of the Sassanian
dynasty, in 224 A.D., Iran returned to
Oriental sources and principles for
good. The horsemen carved in relief
on the rocks of Fars or executed in
repoussé on silver bowls move in a
spaceless and timeless world. Many
more styles were to be evolved in
Iran, but throughout history the per¬
manent attitudes underlying all artis¬
tic creativity were to remain un¬
changed.
An art form such as this, which
strives to eliminate the Inessential
from every scene and the fortuitous »IT
individuality from every face so as to ¿.I
reduce the "apparent world" to arche¬
types and idealized models, must
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

28
VARGHE AND GOLSHAH (Continued)
necessarily be an art of signs and
symbols. It is an art of writing in three
dimensions, just as calligraphy Is In
two dimensions.
Little is left to us of Sassanian calli¬
graphy except for some rather special
lapidary Inscriptions. But we know
that from the earliest times, Iran was
to attach ever-Increasing importance
to that supreme form of abstraction.
There Is the pure calligraphy of 9th
and 10th century pottery from Susa in
the south-west to Neyshabur In Kho-
rassan. There are the monumental
Inscriptions woven, as It were, into the
very texture of 14th century mosques
and mausoleums by laying the bricks
to given patterns.
The divine name of Allah is to be
seen in alternately orientated direc¬
tions as if the architect had set out to
translate into his brick Idiom the ver¬
tiginous mysticism of the Sufi calling
out the ninety-nine names of God.
Nowhere else in the world and at no
other time has the call to the divinity
been so wedded to the very structure
of a building.
If we turn to literature, we find that
these attitudes, so striking in plastic
art, are directly paralleled in Its writ¬
ten forms. Both express the same
perception of the world.
The great importance of the Varghe
va Golshah is that It provides us with
the earliest surviving work in which we
can perceive the full measure of this
parallelism. It shows clearly that Per¬
sian literature Is a literature of themes,
just as Persian art is an art of stereo¬
type images.
The author of Varghe va Golshah
tells us that he borrowed his story
from "the books of the Arabs". In
fact, a brief analysis shows that he
has woven Into his book themes taken
from the Iranian repertoire. The same
themes also occur in the second
earliest Persian romance, Vis u Ramin,
written by Gorgani about the middle
of the 11th century.
The two stories both tell of young
children brought up together who fall
in love. In both cases, the girl is
given in a marriage of convenience to
a prince she does not love, but she
manages to avoid the nuptial act. Gor¬
gani relates the same story of the
king to whom she was denied and who
takes her by force, just as in Ayyu-
ghi's romance, and of the young lover
who sets out in search of his beloved
and reaches the castle in which she is
Imprisoned.
The analogies between the two
stories extend to the secondary
characters the confidante, the two
mysterious riders who cross the
lovers' path and the magician met by
chance. This is all the more remark¬
able as the two works could be
expected to be entirely different.
Gorgani says that he translated his
work from a Pahlavi original, not from
an Arab romance, and the society he
describes Is that of feudal Iran in pre-
lslamic times. Ayyughi purports to
depict bedouin nomads roaming the
deserts of Arabia in the times of the
prophet Mohammed. Yet the similar¬
ities between many of the central
themes bear witness to the compelling
attraction of a traditional repertoire.
Indeed, invention and innovation are
not the primary aim of the sculptor,
the painter or the writer. Their atti¬
tude is rather the reverse; they take
up themes that have been handled by
others before them and fit them Into
a pattern that pleases them.
This attitude is closely related to
other fundamental attitudes that can be
only briefly mentioned that of the dis¬
ciple striving to follow his spiritual
guide's teaching in order to master it
fully before pursuing his own medita¬
tion; that of the poet for whom art Is
above all a form of knowledge, or
rather a way of transmitting know¬
ledge.
Spiritual enlightenment is not a
story that is invented; it is a discipline
into which one is initiated, a model
to be followed, a language to be
mastered.
These are the concepts underlying
all forms of creativity In Iran. And this
is why strict parallels can be found
between the rules of literary and plas¬
tic composition. The story of Varghe
va Golshah is the most ancient work
in which this analogy is apparent.
A comparison between the illustra¬
tions and the episodes they depict
reveals that the painter's first concern
was to take up existing motifs and then
adapt them to the story.
The pretext for the image may be
very slight and on occasion the painter
Is in contradiction with the author. He
shows us two men fighting where the
author tells of two armies engaged
in pitched battle. He opens his cycle
of illustrations with an arcaded
bazaar typical of a medieval town,
which in turn is symbolized by four
professional men, whereas the author
speaks of Bedouins camping in the
desert.
These discrepancies reveal the
existence of an ancient and powerful
pictorial tradition which in part ante¬
dates the literary tradition to which it
is allied in these tales.
Even more than the choice of
recurring themes, the way in which
both writer and artist treat them
reveals the basic similarity of their
artistic approach. The author never
attempts to characterize an episode
by specific detail. His descriptions of
events invariably follow set patterns
much as the painter's ¡mages follow
set schemes. The psychology of the
individual does not concern him any
more than the rendering of individual¬
ized features does the painter. He is
interested in fundamental, almost
conceptual attitudes.
We are told that the two adolescents
are in love, that armies fight, but no
background details are supplied. Liter-

'Romeo and
Juliette'
in ancient
Persia
OT Two more miniatures from the remarkable 13th century Persian
manuscript referred to in caption p. 27. The manuscript
relates the ill-starred romance of Varghe and Golshah, a love
story different yet similar to that of Romeo and Juliette, and
told to this day in all Moslem lands. Opposite page, Golshah
swoons on learning that she is to be given in a marriage of
convenience to a prince she does not love. Below, Varghe
and Golshah meet in a garden and embrace for the last time
before their separation.
vw: x5T
\
mi
ziir
ary description reveals a stylization
of thought that matches plastic styliza¬
tion to a nicety.
Two lovers talking to each other
speak in turn, according to a regular
rhythm, using the same words and
ideas, much as the miniatures show
them leaning symmetrically towards
each other in identical garb. Ref¬
erences to nature are expressed in
metaphors as abstract, as remote from
individual experience as the painter's
mythical, symmetric plants, standing
out against a monochrome or scroll-
covered background.
One of the strangest aspects of this
stylized perception is revealed in the
use of certain numbers. Quantities
are never selected haphazardly and
are limited by the author to the figures:
2, 3, 4, 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, 100 and
1,000; to which should be added: 6, 7,
12, 14, 16, 32, 36, 48, 72 and a few
others to be found in other works.
The same quantities, oddly enough,
appear to have been used by painters;
a house has twelve or thirty crenellat¬
ed battlements; a plant has twelve
leaves. In the first illustration, in
which the painter depicts the baker
in his shop, an irresistible instinct
compels him to portray 14 loaves
hanging from the ceiling. We must,
however, beware of reading a sym¬
bolic meaning into these numbers any
more than in the fact that Varghe
encountered 40 thieves along his way.
It is simply an extreme form of styli
zation which It would not be an
exaggeration to term the aesthetics
of numbers.
Just as events follow idealized
patterns, so do faces correspond to
an archetype described at length by
Ayyughi and other Persian poets.
This is a face rounded like the full
moon, pink as a rose, with a tiny,
cornelian mouth, arched eyebrows,
almond-shaped eyes and with two pig¬
tails framing it. A face of pure beauty,
it is to be seen among the ruins of
the llth century palace at Ghazni and
in eastern Iranian Buddhist art. The
face is both male and female, although
occasionally the poets spoke of the
downy beard of a young man or the
full white beard of an elder.
An art such as this could only
evolve slowly through gradual modi¬
fication of the rules of art and not
as the result of the inventiveness of
individual artists. Historically speaking
it was rich .and diversified, but
because it followed a canon, it is diffi¬
cult to identify its authors when the
colophons or the signatures are lost.
In fact, this is of very little impor¬
tance since the criteria by which we
judge Iranian or Oriental art are not
those we use for assessing the art
of the West. Indeed, they are dia¬
metrically opposed. In Europe the
artist is admired for his inventive
ability, in Iran he is praised for having
equalled or even surpassed his
master, but always with reference to
the model. The West admires a feel¬
ing of real life instilled into beings and
nature and the artist's ability to
capture visual impressions, even if
only impressions of light.
Iran glorifies the perfection of a
calligraphic stroke, the penmanship,
the order and rhythm of structure.
To create a physical impression of
relief, light and shade, to suggest
a personal feeling in painting or poetry
is meaningless, . almost absurd, In a
world aiming for the Absolute and
therefore devoted to abstraction in
the real sense.
Significantly, Iran was to turn to
Individualistic portrayals only on the
eve of decadence, when her culture,
its content drained of life, was under¬
going a process of westernization.
And what was true of Iran was valid
for the whole of the Eastern world.
The story is told of a Jesuit painter
who had been commissioned to pro¬
duce a portrait of the Emperor Chien-
Lung. At last came the day when
the portrait was unveiled before the
Emperor. For a time he remained
absorbed in silence. At long last he
asked: "What do those black strokes
on the cheek signify?" "Sire, they
are shadow", the Reverend Father
explained. "There is no shadow on
the Emperor's face", came the reply.
Nor was any shadow ever to be seen
on the full moon faces of traditional
Iranian art.
29
