by Joseph L. Sax
The 'pollution' fight
before the U.S. courts
D
%J URGEONING public con¬
cern in the United States about envi¬
ronmental quality has, inevitably, had
its impact on the legal system. Laws
are being enacted setting quality
standards, appropriating money to
purchase park lands, subsidizing treat¬
ment of pollution, and creating new
government regulatory agencies. It is
even being recommended by a number
of serious legislators that the U.S.
Federal Constitution be amended to
add a provision guaranteeing to the
people an inalienable right to a decent
environment.
In all the stir of legislative and
political activity, insufficient attention
may be given to the courts, where very
significant developments are taking
place. Environmental problems are
not a novelty in American courtrooms.
Judges have traditionally abated pollu¬
tion as a nuisance, at the behest of
nearby property owners; and it is quite
common for government agencies to
obtain judicial enforcement of their
orders regulating the use of land,
water and air.
During the last few years, however,
a rather novel kind of court action has
been developing which has important
implications not only for legal institu¬
tions, but for our whole way of think¬
ing about how to deal with environ¬
mental problems.
These new lawsuits are particularly
characterized by three facts: First, the
plaintiffs are private citizens, not public
agencies. Second, they sue not as
property owners nor as protectors of
any conventional private interest, but
as members of the general public
asserting rights they claim simply as
members of the public. And finally,
the defendants in these cases are
frequently the very governmental
agencies which are themselves sup¬
posed to be protecting the public
interest.
Such cases arise in many contexts.
They may be brought against a high-
20
JOSEPH L SAX is professor of Adminis¬
trative law at the University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor (U.S.A.). A specialist In legal
questions relating to the environment,
Prof. Sax is the author of "Water Law",
"Water and Water Rights" "Law,
Planning and Policy".
way department to challenge the loca¬
tion of a new road; or against a
pollution control agency on the ground
that it is not enforcing the law ade¬
quately. A private industry or utility
company may be sued to enjoin its
plans for locating a new plant or
transmission line right of way.
The subject matter of such cases
covers the whole range of environ¬
mental issues, from urban air pollution
to wilderness management in the high
country, from drilling oil under the sea
to the location and operations of air¬
ports.
The real significance of such cases,
however, lies in the disillusionment
they betoken with the efforts and
accomplishments of government agen¬
cies which are supposed to be protect¬
ing the quality of the environment.
For in every situation where lawsuits
such as those just described are
instituted, there is almost always at
least one government agency which
is officially charged with preventing
unreasonable environmental disruption.
Such lawsuits are thus indicators of a
citizens' revolt against official protec¬
tors of the publjc interest.
In the past, reliance on professional
regulators went so far that private
citizens were excluded even from the
opportunity to participate in the
process; a whole panoply of legal
rules held that the job of protecting
the public interest was to be left
exclusively to governmental adminis¬
trators. When a citizen did try to
intervene, he was promptly excluded
as an interloper, a busybody who
should leave the job of regulation to
the experts.
In the last few years, however, these
restraints have begun to fall away;
even the most traditional-minded
judges have come to recognize that
the private citizen has a legitimate, and
at times essential, role to play in the
determination and implementation of
the public interest.
The following quotation is taken from
an opinion of the present Chief Justice
of the United States, Warren Burger.
The case itself involved an application
for a renewal of its licence by a radio
station. Local citizens and organiza¬
tions sought to intervene in the
proceeding to object to the renewal,
and the regulatory agency which
handles such matters attempted to
exclude the citizens as meddlers.
To this Judge Burger replied:
"The theory that the Commission
can always effectively represent the
listener interests . . . without the aid
and participation of legitimate listener
representatives fulfilling the role of
private attorneys-general is one of
those assumptions we collectively try
to work with so long as they are
reasonably adequate.
"When it becomes clear . . . that it
is no longer a valid assumption which
stands up under the realities of actual
experience, neither we nor the Com¬
mission can continue to rely on it . . .
"We cannot fail to note that the
long history of complaints . . . had left
the Commission virtually unmoved . . .
the renewal application might well
have been routinely granted except
for the determined and sustained
efforts of the complaining citizens: at
no small expense to themselves."
A
_ ADMINISTRATIVE agencies
recoil in shock at the prospect of being
taken to court by "mere" citizens.
They will be subject to delay, they say,
to interference with long established
plans, and will have to spend valu¬
able time justifying themselves in a
courtroom. Litigation is indeed incon¬
venient for them; but it is at the same
time very revealing.
Why, for example, do administrative
orders against air and water pollution
so often go unenforced for years?
Why do public agencies dispose of
valuable wetlands for filling by
housing developers, when other less
ecologically significant uplands are
available? Why do road building
agencies so often w.-int to take park
lands and preserves for their high¬
ways? How do industries get permis¬
sion to take risks which lead to occur¬
rences such as the deplorable oil
leakage at Santa Barbara, California ?
The answer, often, is that regulatory
agencies see these issues from a
peculiar perspective all their own. The
decision to lease submerged lands for
oil drilling off the California coast at
Santa Barbara illustrates this problem

'The daisy's for simplicity and unaffected air"
Robert Burns
in a most instructive manner. When
the question was raised whether fed¬
eral lands should be leased, local
citizens despite the great difficulty
of obtaining information were most
dubious about the project.
As to the problem of spillage, as
one Santa Barbara official later recall¬
ed, the problem "was discussed many
times, but always Interior Department
and oil industry officials led us to be¬
lieve we had nothing to fear. They
said they had perfected shutoff de¬
vices that were foolproof even in such
disasters as a ship running into the
platform or an earthquake."
Later events at Santa Barbara dem¬
onstrated just how misplaced that
confidence was. The distressing part
of the story, however, is not merely
that those who ought to have known
better were wrong but rather that
every effort to open such issues in
inquiry was brushed aside or ridiculed
because other more powerful forces
had already predetermined the leasing
question.
When questions were raised about
the proposal by concerned citizens,
federal officials replied publicly with
a letter saying "we feel maximum pro¬
vision has been made for the local
environment and that further delay in
lease sale would not be consistent
with the national interest."
Privately, though, an interagency
memorandum was circulated comment¬
ing that "the 'heat' has not died down
but we can keep trying to alleviate
the fears of the people" and noting
that pressures were being applied by
the oil companies whose equipment
"costing millions of dollars" was being
held "in anticipation."
The eagerness of Interior Depart¬
ment officials to get the leasing over
with quickly and quietly was made
clear in a memorandum written when it
was learned that another federal
agency was considering holding public
hearings at Santa Barbara prior to the
leasing. Here is the text of an Interior
Department memorandum circulated
privately in response to that sugges¬
tion:
"Discussion centered around 'public
interest' aspects in our offshore opera¬
tions. Outlined what we had done in
Santa Barbara and how it appeared to
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Photo © Jean-Ed. Robert, Milan

U.S. COURTS (Continued)
Little John Citizen versus the Administration Colossus
conflict with Corps public hearing...
Of course, how they handled the pub¬
lic was their business, but we did not
have to participate... I pointed out that
we had chosen not to go the public
hearing route... That we had tried to
warn the... District Engineer of the
Corps what he faced and we preferred
not to stir the natives up any more
than possible."
The reason for the eagerness of the
Interior Department to go forward with
the leasing was made quite clear later,
after the oil spill, when responsible
officials were called upon to testify
about the decision.
The former Secretary of the Interior
explained it all quite succinctly. The
Bureau of the Budget was "hungry
for revenue" and "a Presidential deci¬
sion had been made about getting
more money to help balance the nation¬
al budget... Communications from the
budget bureau were indicating to us
that we should have a maximum leas¬
ing programme."
N
22
O doubt these consider¬
ations were reason enough to per¬
suade the Interior Department. And
from their perspective, the choice could
hardly have been different. It is not
the Secretary of the Interior's job to
undermine the President's program¬
mes; he is as we are so often told a
member of the President's team. The
question, however, is who was repre¬
senting the interests of the citizens of
Santa Barbara and of the general pu¬
blic who have a stake in that environ¬
ment?
The Santa Barbara case is not un¬
usual; indeed it is typical of a most
pervasive and central fact about the
administrative process. Regulatory
agencies have an interest and pers¬
pective of their own which is frequent¬
ly at odds with that of significant seg¬
ments of the public whose interest the
agency is supposed to be protecting.
These difficulties are not unique to
the problems of the environment, but
they are being most dramatically illus¬
trated in this area because environ¬
mental problems pre-eminently reflect
the demand that the governmental pro¬
cess bring a variety of perspectives to
bear upon the resolution of problems.
Thus, the elements which peculiarly
characterize the administrative pro¬
cess narrow technical expertise, ma¬
nagerial rather than policy orientation,
historical association with particular
interests, and concern for its own bud¬
get and its own programmes tend to
lock it into a limited "inside perspect¬
ive." We need to provide a fresh
point of view, an outside perspective.
In a recent case, for example,
private citizens challenged a govern¬
ment sale of timber on national forest
lands to a private lumber company.
The plaintiffs alleged that the area in
question should have been reserved
as an addition to the national wilder¬
ness system.
The defendant U.S. Forest Service
was adamant in insisting that the tract
be committed to timber harvesting
and was unwilling to delay its decision,
until the U.S. Congress would within
the next year have a chance to
review the entire area to deter¬
mine whether a nearby wilderness
area should be enlarged to include this
tract.
Local citizens brought suit in fed¬
eral court, and the judge asked the
questions which any reasonable out¬
sider would find a matter of puzzle¬
ment. What was the hurry about
cutting in this area, end why could
there not be a delay until congres¬
sional review was completed?
The case went to trial and it was
revealed that the original decision to
harvest timber on this tract had been
made as early as 1962, several years
before the wilderness system was even'
created by legislation. In pursuance
of this decision also before the wil¬
derness law came into force the
Forest Service had built a road into the
area. Roads of this kind are neces¬
sary for timber harvesting.
Once the investment in a road had
been made, the Forest Service was
essentially locked into the decision to
harvest timber there. Other areas
nearby, not alleged by anyone to be
suitable for wilderness designation,
were appropriate for timber harvesting,
but there was no road built elsewhere
and the Forest Service was obviously
reluctant to "waste" a road it had al¬
ready built.
Citizens have been turning increas¬
ingly to the courts because the judicia¬
ry offers an opportunity to bring a fresh
and uncommitted perspective, an out¬
sider's perspective, to environmental
problems; and judges are asking ques¬
tions which all too often are not asked
by the agencies charged with the rou¬
tine job of regulation.
Why wouldn't it have been reason¬
able to wait a little longer, until Con¬
gress had a chance to look at this area
as wilderness, before depriving it of
asserted wilderness qualities by cut¬
ting the timber? Why was it necessary
to take park land for this highway
interchange? Why is an air or water
pollution control order not being more
rigorously enforced?
Plainly the rise of citizen-initiated
litigation is not attributable to any
belief that judges are wiser than other
officials, or that they should finally
determine our environmental policies.
Rather, litigation represents an attempt
to bring concerned citizens into the
decision-making process by opening a
forum in which there is relative equa¬
lity of access and an opportunity to
get issues out into the open where
they can be considered on merit.
Frequently, the relief sought from the
courts is in essence a "remand" to the
legislative process so that controver¬
sial decisions, and unresolved conflicts
of policy, can be put openly before
elected representatives for decision.
This technique is pointedly illustrated
by a series of recent cases which have
arisen in the state of Massachusetts.
Citizens challenged the highway
department's decision to take park land
for its own use, and the court noted
a disturbing insensitivity on the part of
the highway agency to the state's con¬
cern for the maintenance of public
parks. The defendant highway depart¬
ment claimed it had ample authority
under a broad statute which autho¬
rized it to "improve" the lands of the
commonwealth; thus, it said, it could
take park land at will, and its decision
to do so must be respected by the
judiciary.
This was too much for the Supreme
Judicial Court of Massachusetts.
Plainly annoyed by such arrogance,
the court responded:
"...the improvement of public lands
contemplated by this section does not
include the widening of a State high¬
way. It seems rather that the improve¬
ment of public lands which the legis¬
lature provided for... is to preserve
such lands so that they may be enjoy¬
ed by the public for recreational pur¬
poses."
T
HE court held that before
the highway department could take
park land it had to go to the legislature
and obtain specific authorization.
The goal was to deprive the highway
agency of ultimate authority over the
policy question involved and to force
the legislature openly to consider and
resolve the issue presented by the
suit. Technically, the court ruled that
the highway department lacked ade¬
quate authority to seize park land at
will. Essentially however the purpose
of the lawsuit was to put the issue
before the legislature where it would
have to be confronted and resolved in
the full light of public attention.
The court thus ruled:
"It is essential to the expression of
plain and explicit authority to divert
park lands. . . to new and inconsistent
uses that there appear in the legis¬
lation not only a statement of the new
use but also a statement or recital
showing in some way legislative
awareness of the existing public use.
In short, the legislation should express

not merely the public will for the new
use but its willingness to surrender or
forego the existing use."
It is with holdings such as this that
courts respond to citizen pressures to
democratize the decision-making pro¬
cess as it affects issues of environ¬
mental quality.
To be sure, such litigation does not
assure that the advocates of any given
position will triumph, or that the legis¬
lature will necessarily produce a wise
resolution. It does, however, help
to move questionable environmental
decision-making into a forum where
issues of policy must be made and
articulated openly, and where legisla¬
tors must assess the political conse¬
quences of one position or another.
Measured against a system which
has been characterized by its respon¬
siveness to particular and limited pers¬
pectives, and by its penchant for quiet
resolution of potential conflict (often
revealed in the attitude that the less
the public knows, the less trouble there
will be), judicial intervention of the
type described above is a significant
step forward.
In an area such as environmental
quality, where we struggle so much to
determine what our goals should be,
it is instructive to recall from time to
time the enormous difficulties encoun¬
tered in getting public agencies to res¬
pond to those situations in which there
is a substantial consensus about goals;
and in which narrow interest groups
have learned to manipulate the
governmental process to their own
advantage, to the dismay and detri¬
ment of the dominant community. All
too often the public is simply presented
with a fait accompli.
Plainly the deep problems of environ¬
mental quality go beyond the ability of
any court to manage within the con¬
fines of a particular case. No court
decision will resolve the issues of
population, of the automobile versus
intelligent mass transit, or the trend
toward uncontained economic growth.
What judicial decisions do, however,
is to bring home the costs which these
problems impose as they come to rest
upon particular communities in spe¬
cific contexts. The difficulties we have
in pricing and managing external
effects take on sharply visible con¬
tours when a highway location is chal¬
lenged in each town through which it
passes, or when a polluting industry is
challenged to justify its conduct.
Each such case, then, thrusts back
upon the policymakers the requirement
that they face up to the cumulative
effects of their decisions, and gives
those upon whom such external costs
are imposed a chance to put a price
tag on them in terms of their own dis¬
comfort and inconvenience.
We are asked to have faith that
%
Jl
administrative agencies will cure them¬
selves of their traditional narrowness,
and hope that legislative mandates
ordering them to undertake broader
perspectives will bring significant
changes. Perhaps these changes will
occur; thus far the process has been
so slow as to be almost imperceptible.
We have a great deal of rethinking
to do about our laissez-faire attitudes
Photo © Gene Brownell, Karma Productions, California
and assumptions about the process of
government. It may seem ironic that
courts are needed to help make the
legislative process work effectively;
that citizens must come to the least
democratic of the branches of govern¬
ment to make democracy work. But
that is one of the intriguing questions
now being explored under the label of
environmental litigation.
23
