Sacred art in
by Seyyed Hossein Nasr
T
HROUGHOUT Persian his¬
tory an especially intimate relation has
always existed between art and the
spiritual discipline of the dominant
religion of the day. For this reason
it is sometimes difficult in Persian
culture to distinguish sacred art from
traditional art of which it forms a part.
However, the term "sacred art" can
be taken as being limited to those
traditional artistic expressions directly
connected with spiritual principles,
with religious and initiatory rites, with
sacred subjects and with symbolism of
a spiritual character.
Since sacred art Is the bridge bet¬
ween the material and the spiritual
worlds, it is inseparable from the par¬
ticular religion with which it is connect¬
ed. We can speak logically of Hindu,
Buddhist and Moslem sacred .art, but
not, for example, of Indian sacred art,
if by India we mean a land and a
people.
Certain forms and artistic symbols, it
is true, are sometimes borrowed from
one religion by another, but the spirit
behind them is transformed in the pro¬
cess. Both Islam and Byzantine Chris¬
tianity adopted Sassanid techniques of
dome construction, producing domed
buildings which, however, reflect two
different types of art.
Islamic art adopted many art motifs
of pre-lslamic Persia as well as of
central Asia, but they became trans¬
formed by the spirit of Islam and
served as building blocks in structures
whose design was completely Islamic.
Most of the important remnants of
the art of the pre-lslamic period in
16
SEYYED HOSSEIN NASR is Vice-Chancellor
of Teheran University, and professor of the
history of science and philosophy as well
as dean of the Faculty of Arts and Letters.
A member of Iran's Supreme Council for
Culture and National Council for Higher
Education, he has written 12 books and over
100 articles in English, French, Persian and
Arabic. His books in English Include: "Three
Muslim Sages", "An Introduction to Islamic
Cosmological Doctrines", 'Science and Civi¬
lization in Islam", "The Encounter of Man
and Nature' and "Iran" (Unesco, 1968). His
latest book, "Sufi Essays" was published
recently by Allen and Unwin, London. Prof.
Nasr Is at work on a major research project
on Sacred Art In Persian Culture from which
the above text is inspired.

Persian culture
The sacred art of Persia attains a pinnacle of
expression in the Royal Mosque at Isfahan, once
the capital of Persia. Its palaces, mosques,
squares and gardens rose as if by magic in less
than 18 years during the reign of Shah Abbas I
(1587-1629). Here the rich elegance of the
architectural forms has been captured by the
photographer at a propitious moment of the day
when the play of light and shadow accentuates
every line and form.
Persia are either religious or royal In
character. And since the monarchy
was quasi-religious in nature, the
royal art was in turn closely identified
with the Zoroastrlan view of the world.
An American specialist on Iranian
art, A.U. Pope, has suggested that
Persepolis was constructed as a palace
for religious ceremonies as much as
for the purposes of political rule, the
architectural forms and the layout of
the gardens being a form of mándala
[a graphic mystic symbol of the uni¬
verse] closing upon an inner centre
and serving as a "reminder" of para¬
dise. The word paradise itself, as well
as the word firdaws in Arabic, derives
from the Avestan pairi-daeza meaning
garden.
In pre-lslamic Persia, we can include
under Zoroastrian forms of sacred art
the architecture of the fire-temples,
the music and poetry that accompanied
Zoroastrian rites, and the sacerdotal
dress of which some ¡mages have
remained.
Also certainly of traditional charac¬
ter and associated with royal initiation
and the "lesser mysteries" are the
heraldic symbols found in many differ¬
ent forms and shapes and resem¬
bling in character and significance the
heraldic art of other oriental civiliza¬
tions and the medieval West.
Like its successor Islam, Zoroastri-
anism possessed none of the religious
idols found in other Indo-European
religions or the religion of ancient
Greece. Hence there is no sacred art
in the form of sculpture to be found
in Zoroastrian Persia. To find sacred
¡mages in the form of statues we have
to go back to the pre-Zoroastrian reli¬
gions of Iran.
Even Mithraism, which arose from
a Zoroastrian background and left
many statues outside Persia, did not
leave any statues In Persia itself. The
image of Ahura-Mazda, represented
by two wings, is the closest we can
get to a sacred image in Zoroastri-
anism. But even these images were
carved on large pieces of stone or
on the sides of mountains; separate
statues were not made of them.
The Zoroastrian angels, which would
correspond to the divinities or gods of
other Indo-European religions, were
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
17

>*'£
The mosques of Isfahan are world-famous for their gracefulness and the extraordinary
interplay of geometric design, calligraphic form, architectural line and light and shadow.
The view of the dome of the Royal mosque, photo opposite, with its decoration of brilliant
enamel tiles and Arabic calligraphy symbolizes the Persian notion of "Jamal" or Divine
Beauty. Below, interior of Royal mosque dome. Here a soft ray of light filters gently
onto the exquisite decoration and openwork windows. Above, the dome of the Lutfullah
mosque (early 17th century). Photographed from directly underneath, the gracefully curving
arch of the dome, as if by magic, is transformed into a straight line. Depending on the
hour of the day, the colours of the vaulted ceiling change from cream to rose.
SACRED ART (Continued)
spiritualized entities whose represen¬
tation in concrete forms and images
corresponded much more closely to
the Christian icons of Christ and the
Virgin Mary than to the statues of
divinities in ancient religions.
During the Islamic period the con¬
nexion between art and religion has
become even more firmly established.
The craft guilds created early on
in Islamic cities were closely connect¬
ed with Sufism, the name by which
Islamic mysticism came to be known
from the 8th or 9th century A.D. on¬
wards, This link still survives in cer¬
tain places and the masters of the
guilds become initiated into the mys¬
teries of Sufism, learning the meta¬
physical and cosmological doctrines
which underlie the symbolism of
Islamic art.
Before industrialization relegated art
to galleries and museums there was no
such artificial concept as the "fine
arts". The daily utensils of ancient

.7 "
	 "».-
civilizations, which for us today are
objets d'art to be preserved in
museums, are evidence of the organic
link that existed between art and life.
In Persian culture the very words
used for art fann, hunar, and some¬
times san'at reveal its universality
and its bond with all aspects of life.
A Persian says that everything has its
fann, that is, the correct manner of
doing it; or that to do a particular act
needs hunar, that is, requires a parti¬
cular skill or art. San'at, which now¬
adays is also used to mean tech¬
nology, refers to the crafts which are
identical with the plastic arts.
It is wrong to speak of arts "and"
crafts; the two are one and the same
thing. To make a beautiful plate or
pot is as much art as to paint a minia¬
ture. This unity is particularly evident
among the traditional Persians be¬
cause they are one of the most crea¬
tive and artistic of peoples, the deli¬
cacy of their artistic taste running
through every aspect of traditional
Persian life, from architecture and
gardening to cooking and even to
smoking the water pipe.
In Persian culture, during the Islamic
period, the Hermetic sciences and
particularly alchemy played an inter¬
mediary role between the purely meta¬
physical' and cosmological doctrines
of Islam and the making of things.
To the Islamic mind, the aim of art is
to ennoble matter. Similarly, alchemy
is a symbolic science of material
objects which demonstrates the con¬
nexion between minerals and metals
and the spiritual and psychic worlds.
Basically, alchemy is a science of
the transformation of the soul based
on the symbolism of the mineral king¬
dom, rather than, as many have sup¬
posed, a form of pre-chemistry. For
this reason it is concerned with the
ennobling of matter, with the trans¬
mutation of base metal into gold.
The relation between alchemy and
art in Persia, as in Islamic art in gen¬
eral, has been profound. The colours
used in many works of art, far from
being dependent merely upon artistic
whim, are related to their alchemical
symbolism.
Through alchemy and similar cosmo¬
logical sciences, Islam created an
ambience that was Islamic in both
form and content, in which religious and
spiritual principles were embodied in
matter, in the world that surrounds
man in his everyday life, with a con¬
sequently deep influence upon his
whole attitude of mind.
The sacred art of Islam is related
in both form and spirit to the Divine
Word as revealed in the Koran. The
Word having been revealed as a book,
rather than as a human being as in
Christianity, sacred art Is concerned
with the letters and the-sounds of the
Holy Book.
Islamic sacred art is above all
expressed in mosque architecture and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
10

SACRED ART (Continued)
20
calligraphy which are inextricably relat¬
ed to the meaning and form of the
Koran and may be said to "flow" from
It.
The space created inside a mosque,
far from being arbitrary and acciden¬
tal, Is deliberately planned to remove
those blocks and tensions that might
prevent the Word from spreading in
a limitless and harmonious space, a
space filled with peace and equili¬
brium in which the Spirit is every¬
where and not localized in a particular
icon or statue.
Mosque architecture, therefore,
derives from the spirit of the Koran,
regardless of the fact that certain
building techniques were borrowed
from Sassanid, Byzantine and other
sources. The outer shapes of
mosques reflect symbolically the
different Divine Names and Qualities
(asmâ' wa sifât), the dome correspond¬
ing to the Divine Beauty (Jamal) and
minarets to the Divine Majesty (¡alai).
Many varied architectural styles
were developed according to the
ethnic genius of the people involved,
but a profound relationship exists
between these styles; such widely
separated buildings as the mosque of
Cordova, the Jâmi' mosque of Isfahan
and the Delhi mosque are united
within a single spiritual universe.
Calligraphy is similarly very closely
related to the Koran in, its forms and
symbolism. In Islamic art calligraphy
has made possible a powerful decor¬
ative art form which also represents a
spiritual style. In the typical tiled
mosque architecture of Persia the two
basic forms of sacred art, architecture
and calligraphy, are reunited.
A remarkable feature of Islamic
architecture, almost unique In the his¬
tory of art, is that, early on, it reached
a peak at which it has remained to
our own day. Despite certain varia¬
tions a permanence and continuity link
the Damghan mosque, in north-east
Iran, with traditional contemporary
mosques.
The traditional Persian home is a
kind of extension of the mosque in
the sense that it perpetuates its purity
and simplicity. The ritual cleanliness
of the carpets on which one can pray
and on which one goes barefoot, the
"emptiness" of the traditional furni-
tureless rooms, and other elements,
relate house to mosque in spirit.
The minor arts too have their impor¬
tance because they put the "seal of
the sacred" upon even the most com¬
mon of everyday objects that surround
man in his daily life. Rugs are a recap¬
itulation of paradise, enclosed in a
frame and looking inward towards the
centre like the courtyard and the Per¬
sian garden.
Miniatures, so closely linked with
book illustrations, are an extension of
calligraphy and again recall the states
of paradise. Even traditional dress
in all its forms Is designed to facilitate
the performance of Islamic rites.
The spiritual force behind the poetry
and music of all Islamic peoples is the
chanting and recitation of the Koran,
an audible form of sacred art par excel¬
lence. The Persian language as we
know it today was a creation of the
early Islamic, period and thus was
more affected, especially in its poetry,
by the spirit and form of the Koran
than even Arabic whose poetic tradi¬
tion was already formed at the time
of the Koranic revelation.
Coupled with the poetic genius of
the Persians, this fact explains the
extraordinary richness of religious and
mystical poetry in the Persian lang¬
uage. Though not sacred art in the
direct sense, Persian poetry, espe¬
cially Persian Sufi poetry, is intimately
connected with the Koran. If Arabic
is the language of the Word the lang¬
uage of God as He spoke through
Gabriel to the Prophet of Islam then
It could be said that Persian is the
language of the angels, the language
of. paradise. The rhythm and rhyme
of Persian poetry reflect the echo of
the Koran in the minds of the men
who created this poetry.
Persian music finds its origins in the
music of the ancient Aryan peoples and
is akin to the Greek music of Pythag¬
oras' day. The banning of the social
side of music during the Islamic period
meant that it turned inwards to be¬
come a contemplative art. In its
purely musical content, as well as in
relation to Sufi poetry with which it
has always been intimately linked,
Persian music is a powerful aid to the
achievement of the contemplative
states of Sufism. It is no accident
that, over the centuries, most Persian
musicians have been associated with
Sufism.
The Persian- art form that comes
nearest to the liturgical and sacred
theatre of other traditions is the ta'
ziyah or passion play, peculiar to the
Shi'ite school. Usually these plays
depict scenes and events of the tra¬
gedy of Karbela [the martyrdom of
Husain, son of Fatimah, the daughter
of Mohammed] although other themes
have been treated.
An essential characteristic of the
ta'ziyah is that the audience is as
much a part of the play as the actors,
and both participate with all their body
and soul in the events of sacred
history recounted on the stage.
The same holds true of the sarna,
the spiritual concert of the Sufis. To
be simply a spectator without the
spiritual preparation at a session of
samâ would alter the whole nature
and meaning of the performance.
Persian art in general and sacred art
in particular have left a heritage of
incredible richness. With their great
artistic talent and taste the Persians
have succeeded In creating an art that
is both, spiritual and sensuous, that
reveals the beauty of this world as
well as its fleeting nature. This heri¬
tage is still a living reality for the vast
majority of Perèians and is of inestim¬
able value for the whole world.
Photo © Giraudon, Paris

Mohammed, mounted on his human-headed steed, Burak, observes the
flames of Hell. According to Islamic tradition, Mohammed ascended
to the Seven Heavens where he viewed the Pleasures of Paradise
and the Punishments of Hell. This 15th century Persian miniature
by an unknown artist is from the "Mi'raj Nama" (Book of the Ascension)
now In the Bibliothèque Nationale, in Paris.
Persian symbol for the slender grace and beauty of
youth, the cypress often figures, as here. In miniatures
that depict young lovers. Executed about 1575, this
painting Is by Mohammedi, the most gifted artist of
the Safavi court at the end of Shah Tahmasp's reign.
The work is preserved In the Boston Museum of
Fine Arts.
Garden carpets
and carpet gardens
Carpets and miniatures are two forms of traditional Persian art which
often depict an earthly image of Paradise as a verdant garden where
the chosen recline on beautiful carpets. In painting left, "Presentation
of Khosrow's Portrait to Shirln" (a story told in the "Book of Kings"),
the garden of paradise is graced with pools, flowers and a carpet
Itself the woven image of a garden. The painting is by Ruhallah Mirak, an artist from Khorassan, famous too
in his day as an athlete and wrestler. Right, 17th century carpet with its garden of trees, lilies and streams with
fish provides another image of the paradise promised by the Prophet. This carpet is now In the Museum of
Decorative Arts In Paris.
21
