Where the Dead Sea
Scrolls left off
EARLY CHRISTIAN MANUSCRIPTS
FROM THE SANDS OF THE NILE
by James M. Robinson
S'ometime around 400 A. D., thirteen
books were buried in Upper Egypt, to be dug up by
pure chance a generation ago. This invaluable little
library is now to be published in a facsimile edition
by the United Arab Republic in co-operation with
Unesco. Nothing is directly known about who buried
the library. In fact, very little is known about who
discovered it. But the generally accepted assumptions
run somewhat as follows:
4
Jean Doresse, then a member of
the Institute of Oriental Archaeological
Studies (today a noted French histo¬
rian of religion and specialist on
Ethiopia), had Initiative enough to
track down the site of the find, some
twenty years ago, when the library had
only recently surfaced on the anti¬
quities market of Cairo. After their
purchase in 1951 by the Egyptian
Government, the manuscripts were
placed In the Coptic Museum In
Cairo, and Jean Doresse was com¬
missioned by the Museum to Investi¬
gate the discovery.
He equipped himself out for a minor
desert safari, and after various adven-
JAMES M. ROBINSON is head of the
Institute of Antiquity and Christianity at
Claremont Graduate School in California
(U.S.A.). He served as secretary of the
U.A.R.-Unesco International Committee for
the Nag Hammadi Codices which met in
Cairo last December. Under his direction,
an international team of scholars is work¬
ing on the English language publication
of the Nag Hammadi codices with the help
of grants from the National Endowment for
the Humanities.
tures, including being hospitalized from
the bite of a wild dog, he reached what
seems to have been the place of
burial: a cemetery from Roman times
near the modern town of Nag Hammadi
(about two-thirds the way upstream
from Cairo to Luxor), quite close to
the small village of Hamra Dom.
This cemetery was located in a strip
of desert only some one hundred
metres wide, running between the
green vegetation nurtured by the
Nile and a vertical cliff. At the foot
of the cliff are masses of fallen stones,
forming an irregular inclined plane
which one can scramble up from the
desert floor to the face of the cliff
some ten metres above the flat sand
below.
At this accessible height on the face
of the cliff artificial caves had been
cut about the time of the Sixth
Dynasty. Some were never complet¬
ed, others were used for burials, and
one contains the kind of relief sculp¬
ture and painting typical of Pharaonic
tombs. But all had been looted in
antiquity, so that by the fourth century
A.D. they were merely a row of cool
caves, ideal for hermit habitation.
Evidence that they must have in fact
functioned as the cells of monks is
supplied in the form of rather crude
red painting on the walls. Some caves
have large crosses. One has a long
text, listing by number and opening
lines a series of Old Testament
psalms, perhaps to remind the monk
which psalm came next as he mumbled
them in his devotions. One cave
contained an ascription of praise to
Zeus Sarapis, Indicative of a non-
Christian (or at least a not-just-Chris¬
tian) holy man.
Monks inhabiting these caves would
look out over the cemetery in the sand
below, where their own burial might
some day take place. There are
instances of venerated persons being
buried with a book, just as possessions
were more customarily buried with the
owner in antiquity than today. One
might also think, in analogy to the
situation with the Dead Sea Scrolls,
that the books may have been burled
for safe keeping, when persecution
descended upon the monks and extinc¬
tion became imminent.
As a matter of fact several referen¬
ces in the books themselves could
have suggested such an idea, for
several of the documents purport to
be antediluvian revelations inscribed
on stone or hid in a high mountain 'jo

"-^ V , ^^^t^r^ iBBBL w . H . _ jB aaaV 1
^Iti^-» A]
^ V>
^- »
iBBk vBb*mhJ
It *
tf Lc"<~y j
ml 1
^1
ft au*4
Lwee»«
» ^ ^E*
r* ^1*4^ * *&< |m^ß
< w ^ f^
that In the latter days the chosen race
would gain access to that primal reve¬
lation which was in effect a literary
fiction for legitimizing the speculations
the "revelations" contained.
Such a time of persecution may have
taken place late in the fourth century.
By this time the Roman Empire was
officially Christian, and this meant
orthodoxically Christian. Bishops
could and did have condemnations of
heretical views read in all churches
and monasteries, and the efficiency of
Roman provincial government could
put teeth in such denunciations.
It so happens that precisely the
same little bend in the Nile that makes
of the Nag Hammadi district a bigger
arable area than usual was the place
where, toward the middle of the fourth
century, the whole monastic move¬
ment of Christianity was first launched.
Pachomlus was a young monk who
first brought individual hermit monks
together into a communal life or
monastery.
With the passing of time these
monasteries, built in the lush green
habitable area, might seem all too
comfortable, too "worldly", compared
to the more austere solitary-confine¬
ment life of the venerated saints of
yesteryear. Such an idea might be
triggered by evidence that the big-city
clergy was getting control over the
monks, and even branding as heretical
The 13 volumes of Coptic texts, found
near the town of Nag Hammadi in Egypt,
in 1945, contain about 1,000 pages of which
nearly 800 are intact For four years,
an international committee of scholars,
appointed by Unesco and the United Arab
Republic, sifted painstakingly through
the jumbled fragments of the damaged
pages (left). Worms had eaten '"inlets"
and "bays" into the papyrus so that
it was a matter of placing "peninsulas"
and "islands" in the correct relation to
each other. Identification was usually
based on translation, and the conjectural
filling in of the letters in an "inlet"
or "lake" of missing papyrus.
Photo Unesco
some of the more spiritualistic of them
for the library does represent a more
spiritualistic, other-wordly religiosity
than was typical of orthodox Christian¬
ity.
What would be more natural, under
such circumstances, than to withdraw
voluntarily or involuntarily and go
back to the desert cliff's caves, distant
from the "flesh pots of Egypt". And
such "heretical" monks might well
have taken with them the all-too-
spiritualistic, "heretical" books which
inspired them.
Such a mock-up of the situation in
which the library was buried is mere
conje'cture, but does seem more prob¬
able than other hypotheses, for
example that the library was brought
together not by a heretical group, but
by an orthodox heresy-hunter both
seeking documentation for his pole¬
mics and seeking to get the dangerous
literature out of circulation. The stan¬
dard way of getting rid of banned
books was to burn them whereas
burying in a jar was in antiquity usually
a form of preservation.
One reason we know so little
directly about who buried the library is
that whoever used and ultimately
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

Left, this forbidding cliff face, near
Nag Hammadi on a bend in the
Nile, housed a community of
cave-dwelling monks during the 4th
century A.D. In the ancient
cemetery at the foot of the cliffs
Arab workmen unearthed a jar
in which a library of bound
manuscripts had lain for some 16
centuries. Eleven volumes still
retain their original form, their pages
being clipped together and enclosed
in soft leather bindings with
triangular flaps and secured with
leather thongs, below left
With the exception of one codex
(right of photo) which is longer
and narrower, the books measure
25 to 27 cms by 15 cms.
Right, the Codex which begins with
a text entitled "The Acts of Peter".
The feather between these pages
is one of several found in the
work. These "bookmarks" show that
this was evidently the volume most
often referred to by the monks.
6
COPTIC MANUSCRIPTS (Continued)
buried it was not the same as those
who wrote it. Five or ten different
scribes were involved In copying out
the surviving thirteen books. Only
rarely did more than one scribe work
on one book. So we need not assume
all thirteen books were copied by one
and the same group.
In fact, there is reason to think the
library was not originally conceived
of as a set, but rather was originally
a series of independent volumes or
smaller clusters of volumes. For two
different dialects occur, suggesting a
few of the thirteen books came from
a different region from the others.
And the fact that multiple copies of
the same work occur in different books
suggests they were not originally in
the same library.
For example, the Bible has only one
copy of each work. No one book in
the Nag Hammadi library has more
than one copy of a document, which
suggests a similar reticence to produce
duplicates. In fact, one scribal note
expresses anxiety lest the scribe copy
something that would be a duplicate.
Furthermore, all the Instances of
duplicates are quite different in their
wording, so that it is clear one did not
copy from the other, nor did two copy
from a same non-surviving copy. They
worked independently. Apparently a
series of individual books were handed
down to a single individual or group,
only then becoming a library.
Each book is actually a volume of
collected essays, which do not come
from the same author or even the
same time or place. Actually, the
library, now in the Coptic language,
seems to have been all translated from
Greek (Coptic is the language derived
from the ancient Egyptian language,
using Greek letters).
The translators seem even less uni¬
fied than the scribes. For if a single
scribe usually copied out a whole
book, the individual essays in a given
book seem to have been translated
usually by different persons. Thus
behind the thirteen books copied by
a handful of scribes usually working
independently we light upon over fifty
essays usually translated by a still
larger number of individuals.
When one then moves a step still
further back, to the Greek originals,
we have to do with almost fifty inde¬
pendent essays (when one substracts
doublets). To be sure, one can Identify
clusters that share a common point of
view, and even seek to identify such
a cluster with a heretical group such
as the Valentinians or Sethians about
whom we know from other sources.
But what we know from such other
sources is so scant that it is almost
like clarifying light by darkness, to
use them to explain the library. It is
more likely to turn out the other way
around: the Nag Hammadi library will
be the light helping us understand the
out-of-context quotes, wilful carica¬
tures and defamations, and veiled allu¬
sions found in orthodox polemics.

^-
,<
r
rrx'ií»*»t' **'*'»'"' ' '
TMrf iïi*^>-»r'-»»*'''»J',,,~'' ** *
Mâ>Lll«<U«9MC» tw rN
i , m.-,-.%r>"- "* ***** '
-tr.AfXV,, 1
l r.iu1KH»>'-t"'1''"' ' '
h>400"i t7TC» »
Xl «A' *'f "*| * ' \l ' *» ' ' « '
»*IO*'-«fl'V*-l.*** >*»
vt.j. i O'ivrciM *l" JV *
i« k. r*!**» »'» ' ' ' '
* * |HC< Otk« ' " **' *» '
M f rmAfcXlLcAM -. X-»
1 "in < (.AM'i«f1x'
K'||»M: KVtyA , . > - 4 »in
'-»-; |[ .»» » H r . .V i >1 »'< .
-r*4il
I Jtaf *K**>f»*.p,-.
V-.-* ,, . , ^rJkl,
'rr*,i»n,.|, ,,-if , ,
'* "Mi
M"^t »t »ll,.l,¿r ,
«t ,t IMr*-jc .1 »j-
'HNii'i »"i »o-î-t. v: rt%Voo*y -.v.» ...
, »I.V. »,.,.'
,1,tr' *°*« M *«>-*^ VfelmMC*
Vr»., «
Oi-T'.irn-Hm:ll;N, WhX
MC1*XK<,nr, -km»»* »ï nt-....
'i"*"J< M,, ,4,,. ,, lyjt. -
*"^ ^rmu¿Qa .,
».
As a matter of fact, the two most
important values of the library for our
historical understanding today lie in¬
tertwined right here. Of course the
library has increased tremendously our
available source materials in all by
something over a thousand pages. And
hence the knowledge of these off-beat
movements will be immeasurably in¬
creased. But this new knowledge will
also reflect new light on orthodox
Christianity, with which much of it
was in debate.
For example, Nag Hammadi docu¬
ments not only quote the New Testa¬
ment in line with their own views, and
claim Jesus and the apostles for their
side of the argument; they do in fact in
some cases prove to have carried on,
even if in a exaggerated or distorted
way, primitive Christian traditions that
gradually disappeared from orthodox
Christianity... perhaps because such
ideas had ended up in heresy.
Where this leaves us is, for example,
with a New Testament that is not
nearly as orthodox as the church fa¬
thers who collected ¡t into the canon
thought it to be. Some of the New
Testament books seemed almost as
readily to point to the other outcome.
One reason the church fathers may
have had for including in the New
Testament some of the latest canonical
books is that these late works in effect
superimposed upon the earlier books
and traditions (such as Jesus' sayings,
Paul's letters, the Gospel of John) an
unambiguously orthodox interpretation
for it was precisely they to whom the
heretics appealed.
Thus what at first sight seemed a
dusty archaeological find from a rather
obscure time and place, at least as far
as the average person is concerned,
and written in a language most rea¬
ders have hardly heard of, turns out
to be a whole library of some fifty
works; part of the Greek language
literature from which most of our clas¬
sical heritage stems; written in various
parts of the ancient world, from
Egypt to Syria; and covering a time
span reaching back into New Testa¬
ment times, picking up the story of
off-beat sects about where the Dead
Sea Scrolls leave off.
For if the latest of the Scrolls would
be near to 70 AD, when the Essene
monastery was wiped out in the
Jewish revolt, the earliest Nag Ham¬
madi text to be dated thus far ("The
Revelation of Adam") is dated In the
first century B.C. or A.D. And, just
as the Dead Sea Scrolls document an
off-beat Judaism later weeded out, the
Nag Hammadi library not only docu¬
ments off-beat Christianity, but also
off-beat Judaism.
Indeed, the shift from "scroll" a
book in the form of a long roll to
"codex" a book in the form of pages
as we use today is typical of the
transition from the "Dead Sea Scrolls"
to the "Nag Hammadi Codices".
In fact, the library is now seen to I
be much more varied than was origi¬
nally supposed. It Is usually called
"gnostic" the name of a spiritualistic,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

8
COPTIC MANUSCRIPTS (Continued)
speculative, other-worldly religiosity
that swept the ancient world In early
Christian times. One used to think
of Gnosticism as a distortion of
Christianity, that is to say, as of
Christian origin, essentially a Christian
heresy. More recent study had
already argued that Gnosticism was
much more widespread and probably
in its origin too early for such a deri¬
vation. And the Nag Hammadi library
tends to confirm this more recent
theory.
This is especially true of the part of
the library that has not yet been
published. For it so happens that what
has been published thus far, by coinci¬
dence and perhaps in part because of
its particular interest, has been largely
Christian gnostic in type. But this
impression will change when the bulk
of the library, not yet generally acces¬
sible, is made available through the
facsimile edition being prepared by the
U.A.R.-Unesco International Commit¬
tee for the Nag Hammadi Codices.
| HIS project, first envisaged
by Unesco in 1961-62, is now approach¬
ing its realization. Prior to the involve¬
ment of Unesco, about half the library
was assigned out by the Cairo Coptic
Museum to Individual translators, a
good part of which has by now been
published, so that something like a
third of the whole is already available
in published translations.
Unesco's intention has been to
publish photographs of all the pages,
so that all qualified scholars can work
on the materials simultaneously. Pho¬
tographs were taken between 1962-66
through the good offices of the Docu¬
mentation and Study Centre for the
History of the Art and Civilization of
Ancient Egypt (set up in 1955 by the
U.A.R., helped by Unesco).
But since hundreds of fragments
were unidentified and unassembled,
many of these photographs, though of
good quality technically, were not in
the form in which they should be
published. The fragments should, to
the extent possible, be identified and
reassembled, and new photographs
made of the newly assembled pages.
Over the past four years, several
institutes In the U.A.R., U.S.A., Switzer¬
land, Fed. Rep. of Germany, France,
etc., painstakingly sifted through the
jumbled fragments on the basis of
photographs and transcriptions, and
identified a large number of the
fragments.
This was usually not possible simply
on the basis of fitting contours, as one
does a jig-saw puzzle. For the worms
ate "inlets" and "bays" Into the
papyrus, so that it was a matter of
placing "peninsulas" and "islands" In
the correct relation to each other.
This would have been relatively
CONTINUED PAGE 10
ABPACAAABPA
ABPACAAABP
ABPACAAAB
ABPACAAA
A B P A C A A
A B P A C A
A B P A C
A B P A
A B P
A B
A
ABRACADABRA
The word "abracadabra" that nowadays
signifies "hocus-pocus", "an incanta¬
tion", "gibberish", has come down to us
from the Gnostics who used it as a
magic formula to ward off disease or
misfortune. According to the Gnostic
physician Quintus Serenus Samonicus,
it was to be set down as a mystical
design by dropping a letter on each line
(above). Hung as a talisman around
the neck it was said to be a charm
against fevers and other agues. The
word is supposed to be derived from
'abraxas' the Gnostic designation of
the Supreme Power. This drawing with
its ancient spelling was made by Dom
Bertrand de Montfaucon in his 1 8th cen¬
tury treatise, "Antiquity Explained and
Depicted".

THE RIDDLE OF THE
ABRAXAS' AMULETS
The new light thrown on Gnostic symbolism
by the discovery of the Nag Hammadi ma¬
nuscripts may help to solve the riddle of the
strange Abraxas stones. Over the centuries
these stone medallions with their cabalistic
carvings, the work of Basilidian Gnostics,
have been found in their thousands in Egypt,
Rome and the Mediterranean world. For
some Gnostics 'Abraxas' meant God. The
letters of the word in Greek notation make
up the number 365, the number of days in a
year. Sun worship, widespread in ancient
Egypt, remained closely linked with certain
forms of Christian Gnosticism. Winged
figures (1 and 7) probably represent the
sun. The serpent holding its tail in its mouth
is an ancient symbol both for the sun and
for eternity. In the finely carved scene (2)
two riders flank a star-spangled figure and
the serpent symbol is again repeated. An
angel or a cherub (3) sitting on a lotus
flower is the sign of the goddess Isis.
The scarab (4) represented the sun for the
ancient Egyptians. Many abraxas in the form
of scarabs have been found. Some, like the
one here, have ribbons overthe eyes showing
they were intended to be worn round
thé neck. The cabalistic writing on the
clothing of the figure (5) are prayers or
protective incantations. (6) A creature half
man, half snake. (8) Lion eating a bee. The
lion was both the sun symbol of Mithraism
and the symbol of Christ for the early
Christians. (9) Water flowing from a vase or
canope topped with the head of the Egyp¬
tian god Osiris. (10) Creature with the
head of a cock and snakes for legs.
BRAXAS
> ) y
r W ts
em
1
PAn/VAna
MTO (Da
A cj)£ NA
'\(^ /CPO
ih.\-j
W
BOOK OF LEAD. Scholars are puzzled by most of the mysterious
symbols on the 'abraxas' (left). In 1 71 9, Dom Bernard de Mont-
faucon, of the Benedictine Order, a great Orientalist of his
time, described the symbols in great detail in his five-volume
work, 'L'Antiquité Expliquée et Représentée en Figures'
(Antiquity Explained and Depicted). All the drawings on
these two pages are taken from Dom Bernard's work. The
drawings shown above illustrated the 12 pages of a small
Gnostic book discovered by Dom Bernard in Rome in 1699.
Measuring 7 cm. by 10 cm., this remarkable little book was
made entirely of lead pages, binding, hinges and nails to
hold them. The inscriptions on the first four pages are
written in Etruscan and Greek letters, but are still undeci-
phered. According to Dom Bernard, the figures represent
the hours of the day. The seventh hour is portrayed by
Serapis, a Greek solar deity adopted by the Egyptians.
9

COPTIC MANUSCRIPTS (Continued)
easy, if the original papyrus had been
available. But It was put in safe
keeping and had not been available
since. Hence identification was usually
based on translation, and the conjec¬
tural fllling-in of the letters in an "inlet"
or "lake" of missing papyrus.
Often the contours of the "penin¬
sulas" or "islands" on one page,
whose identity was certain, would pro¬
vide the basis for placing fragments
with almost identical contours on the
preceding and succeeding pages. The
outcome of combining such methods
was a relatively high degree of cer¬
tainty in identifying many fragments.
The results of this painstaking work
were tabulated on conversion tables,
which listed each fragment by the
number of the photograph and its
position on the photograph, and, be¬
side that numeration, gave the original
Coptic page number and position on
that page. This would make it possi¬
ble, in theory or in the abstract, to
"convert" from the unordered status
of materials on the photographs to
a reconstruction of the original page
sequences and fragment positions.
w
V W HAT remained to be done
of course was to move from theory to
practice. When the International Com¬
mittee for the Nag Hammadi Codices,
convened by the Egyptian authorities
with Unesco's aid, met in Cairo, on
December 15-18, 1970, one of its
recommendations was that a technical
sub-committee be designated to take
the conversion tables that had been
put at the committee's disposal and
reassemble the actual papyrus frag¬
ments themselves.
The facsimile edition is planned to
appear in eight volumes. Those books
which have been inaccessible thus
far will be published first, so that the
scholarly world can move promptly
toward publishing translations of them.
The facsimile edition should be com¬
pletely published by 1973.
Meanwhile a complete English edi¬
tion is being prepared and will appear
in five volumes. French and German
translations, which have been ahead of
English translations in the parts pre¬
viously published, will also follow soon
upon the appearance of the facsimile
edition.
An open-ended series of volumes
interpreting the significance of the Nag
Hammadi library had also been re¬
cently launched, at the meeting of the
International Association for the His¬
tory of Religions in August, 1970 at
Stockholm.
Thus the 1970s will be a decade in
which "Nag Hammadi studies" (to
make use of the title of this series
of volumes) will be a very active and
important area of research, bringing
to light what was in effect a hippie-like
movement In our cultural past.
Below, a Coptic Christian community in present-day Egypt
not far from the site at which the Nag Hammadi library was found.
There are today some 1,200,000 members of the Coptic Church
in Egypt and a further 3,500,000 in Ethiopia. Right, the last
of the 114 sayings attributed to Christ in the "Gospel according
to Thomas". The text shown here reads: "Simon Peter said
to them, 'Let Mary go out from among us, because women are
not worthy of the Life.' Jesus said, 'See I shall lead her so that
I will make her male, that she too may become a living spirit,
resembling you males. For every woman who makes herself
male will enter the Kingdom of Heaven'."
