Persian guards sculpted in stone on the ceremonial staircase leading to the audience hall of Darius I at Persepolis.

THE EPIC
OF
THE KINGS
Persia's national saga
the 'Shah-nama'
T
32
by Joseph Santa-Croce
HE Shah-nama or the Book
of Kings, written towards the end of
the 10th century by the Persian poet
Ferdowsi (or Firdausi), is a work of
vast literary wealth and of exceptional
moral value. It is indeed an achieve¬
ment on the grand scale, not only In
its sheer length (some fifty thousand
couplets) but also in Its scope,
relating as it does the exploits of the
kings who founded Iran.
It soon becomes clear, however,
that the Shah-nama is more than just
an epic tale; it contains full-scale
courtly romances as well as a political
and moral message. Yet this astonish¬
ing diversity in no way detracts from
the literary excellence of the work.
The author is a poet to his fingertips
and a master of a pure and simple
style.
Not the least surprising feature of
the Shah-nama is that, though It was
JOSEPH SANTA-CROCE was lecturer at
the Faculty of Letters of Teheran University
from 1965 to 1969, and is the author of
many studies on present-day Iran. He is
now on the staff of the International Lycée
at Saint-Germain-en-Laye near Paris.

written in about 995 A.D., it remains
clearly intelligible to the average
Iranian of today. Quite apart from the
continuing success it enjoys in Iran,
its significance for our present day
world is strikingly apparent to anyone
who cares to study it; in short, it is
an extraordinarily topical work.
As the French oriental scholar Henri
Massé has pointed out, the period of
Persian history covered in the Book
of Kings stretches over four dynasties
of pre-lslamic kings: the king-judges
(the Pichdadians), the Kaianid dynasty
(a word derived from the old Persian
"Kavi" meaning king), the Arsacids
(otherwise known as the Ashkanians)
and the Sassanian Shahs.
Henri Massé adds that "the first
two dynasties are almost wholly legen¬
dary, while the third is limited to but
a few names. These dynasties are
sub-divided into fifty reigns of varying
duration which do not, to be sure,
correspond to the historical dates".
Massé asserts that divisions within
this sprawling epic should be based
"not oh the reigns of individual kings,
but on the episodes, the minor epics,
which combine to form the whole".
In this brief study it would be neither
feasible nor desirable to mention all
these episodes. Only the most impor¬
tant and the most famous of them,
therefore, will be highlighted with now
and then a glance at some other, more
arbitrarily selected, episodes which
seem worthy of comment.
Let us call the roll of names which,
in the first books, awaken in the
Iranian nation memories of their early
moments of trial and glory: King Jam-
shid and the monster Zahhak; the
doughty deeds and just judgements of
King Faridun and King Manuchehr; the
strange fate of Zal, whose foster father
was the fabulous bird Simorgh (his
real father having abandoned him at
birth because he could not accept a
new-born babe with a head of white
hair); the advent of Rostam, an Iranian
Hercules and Achilles rolled into one,
as renowned for his magnanimity as
for his sudden rages; Slyavosh who,
unjustly accused by Sudaba, was to
meet the same fate as Euripides'
Hlppolytus; Alexander the Great who,
at his own desire, became Iranian,
adopting the name Sekander; the reign
of Nushirvan and the famous ministry
of Bozorgmehr; the reign of Khosrow
Parviz, and, finally, the calamitous
reign of Yazdergerd which led to the
fall of the Sassanian Shahs and a long
foreign occupation.
Interspersed with the heroic epi¬
sodes are delightful tales of courtly
love (Zal and Rudaba, Bizhan and
Manizha, Khosrow and Shirin) as well
as passages evoking Zoroaster's aus¬
tere doctrine and recalling readers to
the similarly monotheistic Moslem
faith.
One of the more paradoxical aspects
of Ferdowsi's style is that it recon¬
ciles and makes play with the vigour
CONTINUED PAGE 39
Photo
The colossal statue of Shapur I in a grotto near Bijapur (south-west Iran)
stands nearly 8 metres (26 ft.) high. Though damaged by a fall of rock,
probably caused by an earthquake, this 3rd century A.D. sculpture still
offers a majestic portrait of one of the most renowned Sassanian kings. A
great builder and founder of cities, Shapur created Jundi-Shapur, near
modern Ahwaz in south Persia. There he set up a hospital and medical
school that became a famous 6th century university where Persian, Greek
and Indian doctors met to elaborate medical laws and to discuss their
work. Ferdowsi's "Book of Kings" describes Shapur as "guardian
of the world and husbander of the wealth of great and humble alike."
33

A
Sassanian
royal
hunt
Boars, stags, elephants, horses, camels, hunters, musicians, boatmen
a host of human and animal figures' surges along the walls of the
famous grotto at Taq-i Bostan in eastern Iran, forming one of the most
majestic spectacles of rock-cut sculpture ever created by Iranian
artists. These hunting scenes, imbued with vigour and vitality,
were carved by Sassanian sculptors in a great grotto set in a sheer
cliff face near Kermanshah, a town on the ancient Silk Road of Asia.
On these and the following pages we present, almost in their entirety,
the two hunting scenes cut in relief on the side walls of the grotto
towards the end of the 5th century A.D. Below, the royal boar hunt.
In the centre, standing in a boat, a Sassanian monarch, possibly King
Khosroes II, lets fly an arrow at his quarry. Carcasses of the boars
are shown loaded on the backs of elephants (left and lower left).
Right, the royal stag hunt carved on the opposite side of the grotto.
In this monumental work, the sculptor has depicted (top to bottom)
the three phases of the hunt. Top centre, seated on his horse beneath
a parasol, the king awaits the signal for the start of the chase. Musi¬
cians seated on a nearby dais play for him. Below, the king gallops
in pursuit of the stags. Bottom, as the hunt ends, the king, quiver in
hand, slows his horse to a trot.
CONTINUED PAGE 36

Photos Paul Almasy - Unesco Courler

ROYAL HUNT
(Continued)
Left, a train of camels
carries away the stags
bagged by the king dur¬
ing the hunt. This parti¬
cular sculpture from the
grotto of Taq-i Bostan is
situated just beyond the
section of the hunting
scene shown on page 35.

Photos Paul Almasy - Unesco Courier
Iran's 5th century artists were highly skilled sculptors of animal forms.
Their feeling for the material they worked in and their ability to
imbue every feature of their carvings with movement and narrative qualities
is revealed in these details from the royal boar hunt (see also photo page 34).
Left, boars stampede In headlong flight through the marshes. Above, pierced
by arrows, a boar falls in front of the king's boat. Another boat, bottom right
of detail, carries court musicians.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
37

a7ï
vT"*.
r,«ÎV
*
§
:^3V
£vV?Ç*
Î*U
3**:
38 ROYAL HUNT
(Continued)
Photo Paul Almasy - Unesco Courier
Another detail from the relief depicting the stag hunt. A puzzling aspect of this scene is the
group of four figures that appear to be lying down in front of a line of realistically depicted
advancing elephants. Viewed horizontally the figures are seen to be marching men. The significance
of this detail has not been explained.

THE EPIC OF THE KINGS (Continued from page 33)
of the art of an earlier age and the
more studied refinements of a civiliza¬
tion that has already reached its peak.
After noting the frequent recurrence
of two themes, "the lament for the
fallen kings and heroes and the des¬
cription of sunrise", Reuben Levy, to
whom we owe a translation of the
Shah-nama (1), rightly points out that
"tKe full range of poetic arts are
brought into play so that no two sun¬
rises are described in the same terms
or in the same manner and no two
laments are identical".
Ferdowsi also excels in his des¬
criptions of the settings of these epi¬
sodes, for example, the rock on which
Simorgh's nest was "built so high that
its topmost level touched the skies,
for no toiling hand had built it, nor
was it made of stones and earth". It
is in this grandiose setting that Zal,
abandoned by his father, becomes
Simorgh's foster child, being suckled
not on milk but on the blood of the
fabled bird.
Ferdowsi is incomparable in his
evocations of battles; at times he
paints the scene in vivid colours, as
in the capture of Salm's fortress:
"...Twelve thousand men were killed
and a pall of smoke hung heavy over
the flames. The waves of the sea
were black as pitch and the desert
was a river of blood."
At times he conjures up the sounds
of battle, combining them with visual
impressions to create the effect of a
Delacroix painting set to the music of
Wagner: "... Such was the pounding of
horses hooves and the dust raised by
the armies that both the sun and
the moon were eclipsed. The mist
resounded to the clash of drums and
the swords were sated with red
blood... battleaxes pounded on golden
shields and helmets till the heads
beneath them reeled."
Ferdowsi's pictorial genius is as
universal and as wide-ranging as that
of a Rembrandt. He can turn from
awe-inspiring scenes of war to portray
with equal mastery the subtle tones
of the countryside in all the seasons,
and particularly in autumn.
Thus, for example, he puts these
words Into the mouth of King Bahram
Gur, so often represented in Persian
miniatures: "Now bring forth flowers,
pomegranates, apples and quinces and
let the golden beakers be never empty
of wine. When I shall see the apple's
cheek blush the colour of pome¬
granate, when the sky is spotted with
clouds like a leopard's coat, when the
camomile is fragrant and heavy with
seed, when the wine is red as the cup
bearer's cheek, when the air is mild,
neither hot nor cold, the earth cool
and the waters blue, when we have
donned our autumn robes of fur, then
must we go hunting by way of Djez."
I
(1) Reuben Levy, who died In 1966, was
professor of Persian at Cambridge University.
His translation has appeared In the Persian
Heritage Series of the Unesco Collection of
Representative Works under the title "The
Epic of the Kings" (Routledge and Kegan
Paul, London, and Chicago University Press,
1967).
I N the Book of Kings,
Ferdowsi does not limit himself to
descriptions of battles and the seasons;
he also touches upon the great moral
truths which he expresses with the
same studied perfection as the epic or
romantic episodes.
The Iranian tradition passed on by
Ferdowsi affirms its divine origin, lead¬
ing ever back towards God. Its mes¬
sage is the need to establish justice
and spread civilization throughout a
country freed from foreign domination.
For Ferdowsi, with his Iranian out¬
look, the monarchy was the perfect
instrument and vehicle of this tradition.
The Book of Kings, we sense, is not
only an Iranian Iliad and Odyssey and
the setting for the knightly romances
of the first empire to be built on a
truly world-wide scale (indeed, the first
genuinely "modern" state in history);
it also contains a treasury of wisdom
and moral guidance, as well as a store
of political precepts.
Intelligence, courage, strength and
justice are not seen by Ferdowsi as
being in opposition to each other, by
reason of some "principle" of the
separation of the virtues, but as being
linked together in the living person of
the King of Iran. Indeed, the Shah-
nama Is expressly conceived for the
furtherance of royal education. Fer¬
dowsi himself writes: "When you have
written this book of kings, give it to
the kings."
Young Iranians are taught at an
early age a fine precept from the Epic,
quoted by the poet Saadi in his Bustan:
"Canst thou reconcile the fact of hav¬
ing received life with the act of taking
the life of another? Harm not the ant
toiling with his grain of wheat; he too
has a life to live and even the ant's
life is sweet, to the ant."
Ferdowsi's tender feelings for King
Iraj can easily be sensed: "Since the
earth shall be our bed and a brick our
pillow, wherefore plant a tree today
whose roots will be watered with
blood, whose fruit will be vengeance
so long as It stands?" He shows that
Iraj's gentle nature is not without
wisdom and foresight. Later, the King
is murdered by his two jealous and
resentful brothers, but he is reveng¬
ed by his son who kills his two uncles
in single combat.
Though Ferdowsi frequently calls
into play the world of the fabulous,
he makes no claim to have pierced
the mysteries of life or indeed of the
hereafter. The wisdom he propounds
is imbued with an undeniable nobility
and dignity, nor can he be accused
of any lack of clarity or balance.
With aptly chosen metaphors the
poet gracefully illustrates the austere
ethic he wishes to impart: "Put not
thy trust in the favour of Fate; it is
not in the nature of a bow to be
straight. Heaven revolves above us,
now hiding from us the face she
revealed before; treat her as thy foe
and she smiles upon thee; call her
thy friend and she averts her face. A
word in thine ear, rid thy soul of love
of this world."
One of the great and terrible lessons
of the Book of Kings is its demons¬
tration of how, with the fall of the
Sassanians and the eclipse of Yazde-
gerd, the country's independence, lan¬
guage, civilization and well-being
crumble.
Yet Iran's destiny seems to be
closely linked with the Book of Kings.
With the passing of the centuries, as
we have seen, new dynasties arise,
restoring to the country her indepen¬
dence and language and enriching
civilization as a whole.
In my view it is neither rash nor
unrealistic to conclude that these
successive "renewals" drew inspira¬
tion and vigour from the epic work of
Firdowsi which highlights the great
regal figures of Iranian history.
O
NE of the book's opening
passages describes how Husheng,
one of the early kings: "built conduits
and canals to carry the water and by
his royal might soon brought this work
to completion." King Husheng himself
declares: "I have girt myself with
justice and righteousness according to
the command of God who ordaineth
victory." To this Ferdowsi adds: "From
that time on he set to civilizing the
world and to spreading justice to
every corner of the earth."
King Faridun's character resembles
that of the civilizing and justice-loving
Husheng. Like those he took as his
models and those who later were to
mould themselves on him, this king
of kings is a just king: "Whoever shall
maltreat a poor man, become arrogant
because of his riches or persecute the
wretched, him shall I deem an infidel
more wicked than Ahriman."
Today paintings of the heroes of the
Book of Kings Rostam, Siyavosh, lraj,
Bahram Gur the hunter adorn the
café walls in every town and village
of Iran. In the Zour Khaneh (gym¬
nasia), in which for centuries sport has
been considered as both a physical
and a moral discipline, Ferdowsi still
has a wide popular audience as the
athletes exercise to the rhythm of his
poems chanted by their instructors.
That Ferdowsi speaks to an ever¬
growing audience can only be a matter
of satisfaction. This legacy of moral nn
grandeur, undying wisdom and literary xU
brilliance constitutes an invaluable ****
offering to mankind from the Iranian
genius.
