BANTEAY THOM
fflEAH KHAN .
With century »
This general view shows the site of Angkor
(meaning "city") in its present forest setting.
Capital of the Khmer empire from the 9th
to the 13th century, the city covered an
area of 600 square kilometres and boasted
600 temples. Some 100 of these temples
have been cleared of vegetation and
the most important ones are identified on
the plan above. The prosperity of Angkor
was dependent upon the construction
by the Khmers of a fantastic irrigation
system to support the production of rice.
During the rainy season, water was stored
in artificial lakes, or "barays", and a network
of canals provided irrigation for an area
of 1,000 square kilometres, thus providing
the food supply for a population which,
at Its height, numbered one million.
The greyish-white areas surrounding the
temples or seen as rectangles are
canal-works, basins and lakes forming
part of the extensive Khmer irrigation system.

6
ANGKOR
masterpiece
of architecture
& town-planning
by Henri Stierlin

/
35 kilometre* from Siem Reap
temple of
^ BANTEAY SREI
^^ 10th century
NEAK PEAN
12th cunt
TA SO M
Y SAMRE
ing 12th century
as from Siem Reap templas of
'REAH KO end 9th
Drawing by Tanguy de Rémur © Paris-Match
I HE city-state of Angkor is
widely renowned for its splendid art
and monuments; but it is worth
recalling that this extraordinary artis¬
tic achievement was due, firstly, to
man's resourceful adaptation to his
surroundings, and secondly, to the
remodelling of natural conditions by
12th century Khmer society to create
an artificial environment entirely
geared to intensive rice-growing.
Nowhere in the world is the full
significance of the term "environ-
HENRI STIERLIN, Swiss writer and T.V. film¬
maker, Is an expert on the history of archi¬
tecture. He is editor of the series "Archi¬
tecture Universelle", 16 volumes of which
have been published thus far in seven lan¬
guages by Editions de l'Office du Livre, Frl-
bourg, Switzerland. The same series Inclu¬
des his own volume with texts and photo¬
graphs entitled "Angkor". In collaboration
with the noted French specialist on Angkor,
Bernard Grosller, he recently produced a
series of television programmes on Angkor,
its art, history and development.
ment" so clearly illustrated as at
Angkor. This site in Cambodia, the
capital of the Khmer kingdom from
the 9th to the 14th century, provides a
perfect example of the way in which
a civilization equipped itself with the
means of producing an ample food
supply without which a vigorous
culture could never have flourished in
the hostile setting of virgin forest and
the Indo-Chinese jungle.
This article briefly describes the
main influences which shaped the
Angkorian civilization and its match¬
less architecture, recently thrown into
high relief by the tragic events in
South-East Asia.
The Angkor site forms a vast net¬
work of dozens of temples and satel¬
lite cities, equipped with the water
supplies required for agriculture and
for the day-to-day needs of the Khmer
population. Thus Angkor strikes a
miraculous balance between land and
water, men and gods; from the fusion
of these four elements emerged one
of the greatest civilizations in medieval
Asia.
Even before the beginning of the
Christian era, the fruits of India's
advanced civilization, especially in the
spheres of religion and art, had begun
to spread beyond its frontiers. Ceylon
was the first of its neighbours to be
subjected to the Buddhist influence,
as early as the 3rd century B.C.
Burma, Indo-China, Java and Bali
were not impregnated by the creative
genius of India until the early cent¬
uries of the Christian era. The trade in
exotic products between the Far East
and the Roman Empire was the chief
vehicle for the dissemination of the
Buddhist and Hindu creeds throughout
south-east Asia. The links then forged
between India and the Far East
endured in some instances centuries
after the trading relations had ceased.
There was some sort of division into
spheres of influence between India
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

MASTERPIECE OF TOWN-PLANNING (Continued)
Delicate balance between ecology and aesthetics
and China in this part of the world;
hence the name of Indo-China acquir¬
ed by the peninsula watered by
three great rivers: the Menam and
the Mekong, where Indian-influenced
cultures flourished; and the Red River,
which watered the provinces gravi¬
tating in China's orbit.
The first architecture in durable
materials clearly shows the Indian
influence; but a capital named Oc-Eo
is known to have existed even earlier
on the Bassac Delta in the lower
Mekong valley. In the 3rd century
A.D., it was enclosed in a rectangle
3,000 metres long by 1,500 metres
wide, formed by a series of five earth¬
works separated by moats. The
shrines in this region, known to the
Chinese of that time as "Fu-nan",
seem to have been built of light mat¬
erial (wood and thatch), and no trace
of them remains.
Among the earliest monuments of
which we have certain knowledge are
the sanctuaries of Sambor Prei Kuk
in Cambodia, a town which seems to
have covered an area 2 kilometres
square. Construction in this capi¬
tal of the early 7th century, which
dominated the unified Tchen-la empire,
was on an impressive scale: the brick
sanctuaries, standing in vast square
enclosures, had high roofs with jutting
arches; their soaring silhouettes were
obtained by superposed storeys of
diminishing size, forming a sequence
of small temples, on a principle which
recurs in all Khmer architecture.
During the 8th century, when Tchen-
la had split into two kingdoms whose
history remains obscure, there seems
to have been little artistic develop¬
ment. Javanese raiders invaded Malay¬
sia and Indo-China; and the Javanese
influence was to play its part in
shaping the course of Angkorian civi¬
lization.
The full flowering of Khmer archi¬
tecture was preceded by an "incu¬
bation period" in the Kulens, 50 kilo¬
metres north-east of the Great Lake
of Cambodia, where the capital of the
kingdom was then transferred. It was
as if the royal house foresaw that the
destiny of the Khmers was to be
played out in the heart of the country,
and no longer in the southern delta,
as at Oc-Eo, or to the east of the
Great Lake, as at Sambor.
In this period, between 800 and
850 A.D., were laid the foundations of
the art form which first emerged at
Roluos in the Angkor region. At Rong
Chen, in the Kulens, the first temple-
mountain was built; its conception is
typical of all Khmer architecture. It
marries the two main architectural
features inherited from India through
the Javanese incursions; the stupa (an
artificial mound around which Bud¬
dhists walk in ritual procession, and
of which Borobudur is the most perfect
example) and the Hindu shrine of
superposed storeys, derived from
Indian models at Mahaballipuram, for
example, through the Javanese temples
of Dieng or Prambanam.
Thus, the temple-mountain is a stupa
crowned by a square shrine, with a
roof formed of vertically superposed
storeys, symbolizing the City of the
Gods built on the Mount Meru of
Hindu legend.
The Ak Yum temple erected north¬
west of Angkor just before the 9th
century was a second attempt at the
same effect. It seems to have been
built by the Khmer King Jayavarman II,
who lived for many years at the Court
of the Sailendras of Java, and was
responsible for establishing the royal
city once and for all in the Angkor
area.
The specific Khmer technique really
came into its own, however, with the
foundation of Roluos by King Indra-
varman (877-889) in the south-east
quarter of Angkor. For the first time,
the Indo-Chinese did more than merely
dig channels to make the fullest use
of the monsoon rains; they undertook
a vast development scheme to improve
the yield of rice, which formed the
staple food throughout the whole of
Photo © Luc Ionesco, Paris
<>-/>
***£>
m* *

south-east Asia. This was the source
of wealth to which the vast Angkorian
complexes owed their construction.
Indravarman realized that to break
the immutable monsoon cycle, with
torrential rain for four months in the
year, and not a drop falling for the
following eight months, there was only
one solution: to store the surplus
water for redistribution in time of
shortage.
It was thus possible to use the
Angkorian plain to the best advantage;
with abundant irrigation all the year
round, it could bear as many as three
rice crops a year. To this end,
Indravarman initiated vast hydraulic
engineering works, and created huge
artificial lakes or barays. These
formed reservoirs for the accumulation
of the water needed to irrigate the
rice fields.
The Lolei baray at Roluos in south
east Angkor, the earliest known exam¬
ple, formed a rectangular sheet of
water 3,000 metres long and 800 me¬
tres wide. Dykes were used to
construct this artificial lake, thus
ensuring a permanent head of water
the water level was higher than the
plain.
It was merely necessary to open
trenches in the dykes for the water
to run out at the required rate for
regular irrigation of the rice fields.
The baray, filled by a feeder canal and
by the monsoon rains, with a storage
capacity of 6 million cubic metres,
was to be the source and basis of the
wealth of the Khmer Kingdom.
The succeeding kings followed up
this hydrological development by
creating the great Eastern Baray, meas¬
uring 7,000 by 1,800 metres, built by
Yasovarman about 900 A.D., then the
Western Baray measuring 8,000 by
2,200 metres, which was constructed
about 1050 A.D., with a storage capa¬
city of more than 40 million cubic
metres.
This vigorous technological improve¬
ment of the Angkorian plain inevi¬
tably entailed a profound modification
of the landscape. The hydraulic sys¬
tem moulded the countryside, which
was furrowed by countless irrigation
channels and sub-divided by the
checkerboard of the rice fields.
The Khmers had thus worked out
their specific system of area develop¬
ment, and the plain of Angkor was to
produce 150,000 metric tons of rice a
year from a stretch of nearly 1 ,000 sq.
km. This was enough to feed a popu¬
lation which, in the 12th century, can
be estimated at 700,000 or 800,000 in
the Angkor region alone, with a pro¬
duction surplus of about 40 per cent
for export to less prosperous regions
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
THE SERPENTS
CAUSEWAY
Right, the final section of the
axial road leading to
Angkor Wat seen from the third
storey' of the building.
350 metres long, the raised
causeway is flanked by "nagas"
water divinities In the form
of snakes. In the background
stands the triple entrance
pavilion, or "gopura", cruciform
and topped with high towers
now partially collapsed. On
either side, the gallery
extends to link the entrance
pavilion to two other "gopura"
(not visible in the photo)
which were constructed so
as to allow the passage
of elephants and carts.
LOTUS-EATING
ELEPHANTS
Left, the Impressive Elephant
Terrace of the King's Palace
situated In the centre of the
three kilometre square site of
Angkor Thorn. The Royal Road
led to the palace which was
built facing the rising sun.
This vast frieze with its
hunting scenes and life-size
elephants mounted by their
mahouts, all in high relief,
stretches out for 300 metres
on either side of the stairway
to the palace, casting its
reflection in the waters of the
moat. At the end of the
frieze, forming pillars flanking
the stairway, stand the
triple-headed elephants of
the goddess Indra, gathering
lotus blossoms with their trunks.
Photo © Henri Stierlin, Geneva

MASTERPIECE OF TOWN-PLANNING (Continued)
;< 'Stiffs
Water conservation: key to the Khmer equation
10
which had no similar "rice factory" to
draw upon.
This artificial environment, comple¬
tely dominated and largely moulded by
man, was reflected in the ground plan
of the towns, with their strictly right-
angled lines framing the temple placed
at the very heart of the city. Every
part of the Khmer world was inter¬
connected, from the embankment
bordering the Cambodian peasant's
rice field to the three-walled temple
whose moats were linked to the
irrigation system.
This is illustrated by the city of
Roluos, the first great dynamic capital
in the Angkor region. Indravarman was
not content with constructing the Lolei
baray; in 881 he built the temple-
mountain of Bakong, which stood in
the centre of the city then called
Hariharalaya.
The temple is formed of five super¬
posed sandstone terraces or plat¬
forms, almost square, measuring 67
by 65 metres at the base, and form¬
ing a monumental pedestal 15 metres
high for the principal shrine.
The fourth storey of the temple was
ringed by twelve "chapels", and eight
massive brick towers (prasats) stood
watch around the pyramid, within
a precinct measuring 160 by 120
metres, surrounded by a moat
60 metres wide and about 1 ,500 metres
round.
The dwelling-houses, made of thatch
or matting, and raised on piles to
protect them from the monsoon rains,
bordered this first moat, and were in
turn encompassed by a second moat
22 metres wide. The city formed a
quadrilateral 800 metres long, with a
population of some 7,000 to 8,000.
Four axial avenues crossed the moats
on earthen causeways to converge on
the central temple, thus dividing the
city into four equal parts.
The Khmer complex was thus com¬
plete: a baray supplied water to the
moats in the town, with the temple-
mountain or royal sanctuary at its
heart. The whole constituted an inter¬
acting technological and religio-
magical mechanism which ensured the
prosperity of an agrarian society based
on intensive rice cultivation.
That is the key to the Khmer equa¬
tion; and even when the proportions
of the Roluos enterprise were magni¬
fied 4 or 5 times, in Angkor, in the
walled cities of Yasodharapura and
later at Angkor Thorn, the system
remained the same. The architecture
was only an embellishment of the func¬
tional hydraulic works installed for
irrigation.
The temple protected and sanctified
the technological achievement through
the image of the deity inhabiting the
inner shrine. The Khmer temple,
whether dedicated to the Hindu divi¬
nities of Siva, Vishnu or Brahma, or
(when the world of Angkor had nearly
run its course) to the Buddha-King,
represented the centre of creation, the
Mount Meru which was the home of
the gods (as Olympus was the haunt
of the divinities in the Greek Pan¬
theon).
The square plan of the temple, with
its geometrical divisions, constituted
an immense mándala (a mystic sym¬
bolic diagram of Indian origin), includ¬
ing the temple (which was thus
brought into harmony with the laws of
the Cosmos), the royal capital inhab¬
ited by humans (which was thus iden¬
tified with the centre of the universe),
and the vast expanse of the plain
(which was thus dedicated to the
gods). The whole panorama was quar¬
tered by the four axial avenues running
from the sanctuary in each direction to
be lost to sight in the perspective of
the Khmer landscape.
This all-round symmetry of construc¬
tion along the axial roads is a fun¬
damental law of temple composition
in the architecture of Indian-influenced
countries; but only the Khmers suc¬
ceeded in impressing that symmetry
on the sacred edifice, on the human
city and on the surrounding country¬
side.
This total vision of mystic symbol¬
ism and its religio-magical power,
associated with the practical function
of the barays and the irrigation sys¬
tem, is the hallmark of the Khmer
genius. From this astonishing talent
for synthesis, embracing all aspects
of human creation, emerged the admi¬
rable apotheosis of Angkor Wat.
One of the factors responsible for
the individual character of Khmer art,
which differentiates it from its Indian
sources, derives from the popular
architecture typical of ancient Cam¬
bodia, especially the wooden dwellings
built on piles and topped by gabled
roofs covered with thatch. This domes¬
tic style probably dates back to pre¬
historic times, and is hardly distin¬
guishable from pre-lndian neolithic
building.
The popular art represented on
Khmer bas-reliefs (at Angkor Wat and
Bayon, in particular) inspired some
typical forms of Angkorian architecture.
Its influence can be detected in many
instances of translation into stone of
features borrowed from what were
originally wooden structures.
One example is the moulded window
balustrades, reproducing in sandstone
the rounded lattice gratings of hut
dwellings; others are the cross-gabled
roofs, imitating the carpenter's tech¬
nique in stone; the colonnettes border¬
ing some raised walks, reminiscent of
the traditional gangways leading to pri¬
mitive dwellings beside the Great
Lake: the mortise effect at the apex
of doors and windows, and so on.
All these traits are characteristic of
f
I
i
I
o
&
APSARA AND DEVATA
OF ANGKOR WAT
Khmer art, and in no way derived
from Indian models. Thus, Khmer
architecture drew its inspiration both
from native and from Indian sources.
A rich symbolism already infused
Indravarman's achievement at Roluos
(the temple-mountain of Bakong); but
there followed a steady development
in architectural science which became
more complex while also gaining in
uniformity and quality. Thus, the long
structures bordering the Bakong sanc¬
tuary on either side of the axial ave¬
nues began to proliferate, and even
invaded the steps of the temple-moun¬
tain.
These narrow halls were soon occu¬
pying the steps of the pyramid on
every side. Here we can see the
inspired process of simplification

This photograph is quite extraordinary in more than one sense. What appears to be a simple wall with several figures
on it is in reality a tele-photo picture in foreshortened perspective of a 30 metre stretch of several planes of
the great gallery of Angkor Wat. This gallery forms the vestibule of the temple, the biggest and best preserved
of the temples of Angkor, which was built by King Suryavarman II in preparation for his eventual apotheosis. The figures
with diadems and long skirts, bare-breasted in the ancient Khmer tradition, are minor divinities, known as "apsara"
or "devata", destined, according to Buddhist mythology, to gladden the hearts of the Gods and the blessed ones.
which led (in the temples of Phimeana-
kas and Takeo) to the emergence of
the encircling gallery, that essential
element of classical Khmer architec¬
ture.
The long buildings were run toge¬
ther, the outer wall of the gallery thus
formed was finally placed at the edge
of each storey, the axial entrances
(the Hindu gopura) and corner towers
were integrated in the composition.
The various concentric platforms sym¬
bolize the mountain ranges surround¬
ing the human universe, encompass¬
ed in turn by the primordial ocean,
here represented by the wide moat
skirting the city.
Meanwhile, there was appreciable
technological progress: as a result of
the general adoption of masonry for
temple architecture, the sanctuaries
built of brick and hewn stone, to pro¬
vide the eternal gods with imperishable
materials, were soon topped by roofs
where wooden timbers and tiles were
replaced by corbelled vaulting built
of sandstone.
Lastly, the classical period paid spe¬
cial attention to the perfection of orna¬
mental detail. The use of hewn stone
contributed to the quality of the sculp¬
ture. One of the first really classical
buildings in this sense is the small
temple of Banteay Srei, some twenty
kilometres north of Angkor.
The layout of this jewel in stone is
highly original, as it is not a temple-
mountain, but a horizontal temple,
where the successive closes represent
a horizontal version of the superposed
galleries typical of the pyramid form.
But the fame of this miniature sanc¬
tuary is founded on its extraordinarily
rich and elaborate decoration. Des¬
pite a certain leaning toward "pretti-
ness" it reveals such authority in its
excellence, such a marked feeling for
grace and elegance, such a sure hand
and such perfect mastery that it un¬
deniably represents one of the highest
peaks of Khmer artistry.
The little temple, built in 967 A.D., is
completely covered with divinities,
nymphs and guardians, beautifully car¬
ved in the pink sandstone. The sur¬
face shows not an inch of stone which
is not decorated with matchless craft,
reminiscent in its luxuriance of the
primeval forest around it.
In the great temple of Angkor Wat,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
11

)
MASTERPIECE OF TOWN-PLANNING (Continued)
12
constructed during the reign of Surya¬
varman II (1113-1150), the most re¬
nowned and glorious of the Angkorian
kings, Khmer architecture reached its
culmination, both in perfection of form
and spacing and in quality of crafts¬
manship.
The temple proper is a veritable
cathedral of the jungle. Paradoxically
enough, it is a contemporary of the
great gothic structures of Chartres,
Sens or Notre-Dame de Paris. Ang¬
kor Wat is not only the largest, but
also the finest of all the temples
erected in the Indo-Chinese penin¬
sula.
The moat, nearly 200 metres wide,
lines a rectangle measuring 1,500 by
1,300 metres, and encloses an area of
2 sq. km. larger than such a town as
Timgad under the Roman empire. The
temple forms the pivot of an urban
system of which only the buildings
constructed with durable materials
have survived, but which must have
housed a population of some 17,000 to
20,000 people.
The moat, measuring 5¿ km. round,
is bridged on the west by a dyke
supporting a causeway leading to an
immense portico 235 metres long, pier¬
ced by three gateways. This spacious
structure forming the main entrance
prefigures the temple façade, which
comes into sight on the far side of
these majestic propylaea.
Another axial avenue 350 metres long
leads to the foot of the temple pro¬
per, its façade rising from a high,
elaborately moulded sub-structure,
dominated by the five towers crowned
by a tiara-shaped stone roof. The
colonnaded wings of the immense
surrounding gallery, measuring 187 by
215 metres, form a perfectly balanced
composition.
Along the inner walls of this gallery
runs a fantastic sequence of bas-
reliefs girdling the whole temple,
which represents a distance of over
500 metres. They constitute a sort of
chronicle of the rulers of Angkor,
combined with a pictorial mythology.
Passing through the gateway, the
visitor enters the cruciform courtyard
found at the centre of all classical
Angkorian architecture. It consists of
four small courts connected by cover¬
ed corridors and linking the friezed
gallery to the gallery encircling the
second precinct.
The cruciform courtyard provides the
first example of sandstone vaulting
supported by four rows of pillars to
form a central nave flanked by two
aisles. It is a graceful, airy composi¬
tion, decorated in high relief by a
dancing procession of Devata and
Apsara (Indian goddesses).
To proceed to the upper storey, the
three parallel galleries in the court¬
yard follow the rise of the covered
stairways by an arrangement of super¬
posed overlapping arches. The gallery
running round the second storey
opens inwards only, through balustrad-
ed windows. This second precinct,
measuring 100x115 metres, encloses
the enormous base of the temple
13 metres high, topped by the five
towers of the sanctuary.
The third tier of the temple-moun¬
tain is also formed by an encircling
gallery, but its balustraded windows
open outwards, while pillared porticos
look on to the inner patios. The central
shrine, on a level with the four corner
towers, is connected with the gallery
by covered cloisters, as in the cruci¬
form courtyard. Resting on four pro¬
jecting porches, it soars a sheer
42 metres upwards to its summit
65 metres above the level of the plain.
From that height the gigantic mándala
described by the whole complex struc-

JEWEL-TEMPLE AND TEMPLE-MOUNTAIN. Left, the "mandapa", or ante-chamber preceding the sanctuary,
of the temple of Banteay Srei. This jewel of a temple set in the forest some 20 miles from Angkor,
is watched over by mythical guardians; génies with the bodies of humans flank the stairway leading to the
pavilion, while men with the heads of monkeys stand sentinel over the richly-carved entrance to
the pink sandstone building. Above, an aerial view of the ruins of Phnom Bakheng, a temple-mountain
with 109 towers built on a natural hill situated between Angkor Thorn and Angkor Wat. The temple
stood 13 metres high atop five rows of terracing. It was surrounded by sandstone towers, arranged
in a quincunx, of which only the ruins to be seen on the fifth terrace remain.
ture can be clearly perceived, plann¬
ed in the image of the celestial palace
which is the home of the gods.
Upon the death of Suryavarman II,
about 1150, the Khmers' neighbours,
the Chams, took advantage of the
general disorganization of the empire,
then plunged in palace revolutions and
struggles for the throne, to carry out
a daring raid against Angkor, which
they destroyed by fire in 1177. The
merit of restoring the Khmer power
belongs to King Jayavarman VII; he
succeeded in expelling the invaders,
and was crowned King of Angkor in
1181, when he at once undertook the
total reconstruction of the city.
Jayavarman forsook the Hindu reli¬
gion of his predecessors and was con¬
verted to Buddhism. An entirely new
style of building suddenly sprang up,
redolent of an oddly fascinating baro¬
que, which superseded the classic for¬
malism of Angkor Wat by a new con¬
ception of space and volume: a new
art flowered where no line was drawn
between sculpture and architecture.
The towers of the temples were car¬
ved with colossal faces in relief,
representing both the image of Buddha
Sakyamuni (Gautama the Sage), and
the effigy of Jayavarman VII. There
was thus a complete upheaval in both
religion and its outward forms.
The King first erected the temple-
city of Ta Prohm, which covered an
area of 1,000 by 600 metres. , The
temple proper was built on a plan
which was to serve as a model for
most of the Buddhist monasteries
constructed in Jayavarman's reign.
The fundamental conception was that
of the horizontal temple already applied
at Banteay Srei, but the precincts were
enclosed with concentric peripheral
galleries as well as walls.
Thus, the progressive encroach¬
ment of the surrounding galleries on
the steps of the temple-pyramid
was completed, while the symbolism
remained the same in the horizontal
temple as in the temple-mountain.
The layout of the Preah Khan tem¬
ple, encompassed by a moat 40 metres
wide and covering an area of about
1,000 by 750 metres, closely resembled
that of Ta Prohm; but both these
structures were hurriedly and perfunc¬
torily built, the construction often being
of mediocre standard, the adornment
crude and lifeless. All the buildings
put up in Jayavarman Vll's reign show
signs of haste.
The capital named Angkor Thorn (or
"Great Royal City"), built about
1200 A.D., initiated a new trend in
Angkorian architecture. It marked
the formation of the specific language
of the baroque-type art which preceded
the decadence of the Khmer empire.
The precinct of the new capital at
once introduced a new style; the five
dykes crossing the moat supported a
fascinating innovation: the Giant's
Causeway. This is an approach
bordered on either hand by high
balustrades formed by 54 giants
bearing in their mighty arms the body
of an enormous Naga (a mythical
Indian snake).
This vast allegorical composition
symbolizes a theme dear to Indian
mythology: the Churning of the Sea
of Milk, which represents the creation
of the world. Overlooking this
mythical scene, at the gateway to the
city, stand towers carved with a four¬
fold effigy, representing the imposing
image of the Buddha-King, the ruler
of the world, whose regard embraces
the four points of the compass.
All this symbolic art culminates in
the extraordinary structure of the
Bayon, Jayavarman Vll's major
CONTINUED PAGE 40
13

MASTERPIECE OF TOWN-PLANNING («^t-«.«;
40
achievement. The Bayon represented
an entirely new departure which was
rich in significance, as it heralded the
irradiation of the Khmer country by
the Buddhist faith.
Such is the moving and impressive
legacy left by the last of the great
Khmer Kings. In his time, architecture
broke through its confines, effaced the
distinction between building and
sculpture, and adopted the rôle of
mystic diagram, way of initiation,
giving man the key to the universe
and the divine world.
During the 14th century, despite
the repeated incursions of the war-like
Thais from across the border, a few
weak kings succeeded each other on
the throne of Angkor; but the city
was abandoned in the mid-1 5th
century. The vicissitudes of war and
the widespread destruction altered the
rate of flow in the vast hydraulic
installations of the plain of Angkor.
The water, which was previously
clouded with silt, became limpid, and
fostered malaria.
The whole Angkorian mechanism,
which had brought wealth, prosperity
and power to the Khmers, seemed to
fall under an evil spell, and ground
to a halt. Fever and malaria compelled
the decimated population to desert
the immense city, now a useless seat
of pestilence. Pollution had brought
low a powerful empire.
Any attempt to assess the achieve¬
ments of the Khmers during their four
centuries of flourishing civilization at
Angkor should recall that the rice-field
and the temple were the two extreme
links in the same sequence of events
governing the development of the
area. Ecology illuminates the forms
assumed by art.
Henri Stierlin
