A 1 9th CENTURY
CHAMPION
OF ANTI-RACISM
IN NEW GUINEA
by Nikolai A. Butinov
of the N.N. Miklukho-Maklai
Ethnographic Institute
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences
Exactly 100 years ago, a young Russian scientist, Nikolai Miklukho-
Maklai (above), landed on the coast of north-eastern New Guinea, the
world's second largest is/and. He was to make five expeditions in all
to this "terra incognita", where he pioneered anthropological studies
and became an active defender of the Papuans and their independence
(see article opposite). In his thinking on racial questions, particu¬
larly his rejection of the myth of racial superiority, he was ahead of
his times. Below and on the following pages we publish passages from
his diaries, correspondence and other papers.
w
/
/ /// S^-
/ ft A...'	L
Papuan
diary and
sketchbook
Left, a village meeting house
for men at Bongu, Maklai
Shore. New Guinea, sketched
by Miklukho-Maklai. Right,
portrait-sketch of a Papuan
from Bili-Bili island.
Photos © APN - Miklukho-Maklai
Ethnographic Institute. Leningrad
aB>T^f:5ijia5i.¿*$

IIn September 1871, the
Russian corvette "Vityaz" dropped
anchor in Astrolabe Bay in New Gui¬
nea, and a young Russian natural
scientist by the name of Nikolai N.
Miklukho-Maklai went ashore. To this
day, the place carries the name Maklai
Shore.
I ask the reader to take himself
back 100 years, when many scientists
were devoting their efforts to finding
evidence to substantiate Darwin's
theory of the evolution of man from
the ape-like predecessors. Scientists
travelled to the deepest, darkest
corners of the earth in an attempt to
find a living, rather than fossilized,
specimen intermediate between man
and his predecessors.
The "Jena heretic", Ernst Haeckel,
one of Darwin's most ardent followers,
felt the Papuans of New Guinea
represented this missing link. Guided
by superficial observations made by
navigators from aboard ship that the
body hair of the Papuans grew in
tufts, he categorized them as a "tuft-
haired* race.
After attending his lectures at Jena
University, Nikolai Miklukho-Maklai
found himself in disagreement with
Haeckel on this question. He saw the
danger of the possible racialist
conclusions that could be drawn from
the allegations about a "tuft-haired"
race. This played no small role in his
deciding to devote several years to
studying the life of primitive peoples.
Convinced that an adequate study of
the Papuans could be made only at
first hand, Miklukho-Maklai set sail for
New Guinea. He settled among
the "tuft-haired" people and began
conducting anthropological research.
This is all now part of history, but
100 years ago it was a major achieve¬
ment. Every day among the Papuans
brought new discoveries, but many
were the days when his life hung upon
a thread.
To avoid the loss of the results of
his research he showed the Russian
officers who escorted him to the
island, where he would bury his notes
"so that if I should not survive, my
manuscripts, in cylinders, would be
unearthed and sent to the Russian
Geographical Society."
Fortunately, Miklukho-Maklai did
survive, although his health was
seriously impaired because of the
climatic conditions, so difficult for him,
a European, to adjust to. He was able
to win the confidence of the Papuans,
learn the Bongu language, collect
unique ethnographic and anthropolo¬
gical specimens, and make important
advances in scientific research.
Miklukho-Maklai made five separate
voyages to New Guinea: three to
Maklai Shore, where he lived a total
of two years and eight months, one
to the northwest shore and one to the
southeast shore of the peninsula. He
travelled twice to the islands of
Melanesia and Micronesia, visited
some Polynesian islands, made two
difficult and dangerous expeditions
into the depths of the Malacca penin¬
sula, visited the Philippine islands, and
lived a long while in Australia.
The Russian scientist's articles,
diaries, sketches and collections,
especially those connected with his
stay on Maklai Shore, constitute a
golden treasure of world ethnographic
science. Modern researchers studying
the culture and life of the Papuans of
New Guinea still refer to the works
of Miklukho-Maklai. "How rich the
culture of the tribes of Tangu may
have been can be imagined from the
drawings and sketches of Miklukho-
Maklai," wrote, for instance, the well-
known English scholar, K.O.L Burridge.
Miklukho-Maklai pioneered the
ethnographic and anthropological study
of New Guinea. He staunchly de¬
fended the concept of mankind as a
single species: the Oceanians were
retarded in their cultural development
by virtue of a number of historical
causes, but in their intellectual and
moral qualities they were not at all
inferior to Europeans. Miklukho-
Maklai not only subjected racialism to
scientifically valid criticism, but became
an active fighter for the freedom and
independence of those peoples.
His feat ¡s a brilliant example of
selfless service to science. But
besides the purely scientific side of
Miklukho-Maklai's feat, there is yet
another the humanitarian side which
the great Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy
noted and considered of primary
importance.
He wrote to Miklukho-Maklai "As
far as I know, you are the first to
prove indubitably by experience that
man is the same everywhere, that is,
a decent, social being, with whom
intercourse should be entered into
with kindness and truth, and not with
cannons and vodka..."
From a report of his travels
to the Russian Geographical Society
St. Petersburg, 1882
WHEN, in November 1877, I finally decided to return to Singapore on an
English schooner that chanced to pass by, I sent a message to all villages that
two people from each should appear before me the oldest and the youngest.
However, more than two persons from each village came to me, so it was a large
crowd that gathered near my hut. I told them that I was leaving them, probably
for a long time. They very much regretted my departing.
I then explained to them that there would probably be other people, also white
like myself, with the same kind of hair and in the same kind of clothing, coming
to them on the same kind of ships as I arrived on, but that it was most likely that
they would be people completely different from Maklai. I considered it my duty
to warn the natives about that class of traders who to this day make the islands
of the Pacific Ocean a place of very sad events.
To this day, you meet with so-called "kidnappings", that is, the abduction of
people into slavery by various means... I anticipated that the same thing could
happen on New Guinea that happened on the Melanesian Islands (the Solomons,
New Hebrides, etc.), where the populations decreased markedly due to slavery.
Therefore, feeling that Maklai Shore would also in time be visited by the slave
traders, I considered it my duty to warn the Papuans and explain to them that
although they might see the same kind of ships and the same kind of people as
Maklai, these people could carry them away into bondage. This warning filled
them with consternation, and they tried to persuade me to stay.

The 'tuft-hair' of the Papuans
From his diary (January 3, 1872)
Maklai Shore, New Guinae
FOR a long time now, it has seemed to me an incorrect pro¬
position that the hair of the Papuans grows in tufts or "bunches".
But the huge "wigs" of my neighbours have not permitted me to
clearly ascertain just how the hair is distributed. In observing the
distribution of hair on the temples, crown and nape of the neck of
adults, I was able to note that there was no special grouping of
the hairs in tufts, but so far I have not had occasion to see a
shortly-cropped head of hair among the natives.
... I soon fell asleep... Through my sleep, I heard voices calling
me and, seeing the callers, I immediately jumped up. It was Kolle
from Bongu with a nine year-old boy who was very closely cropped.
I examined his head with great interest and attention and even made
drawings of what seemed to be the most important. I was convinc¬
ed of the fact that the hair of the Papuans grows not in bunches or
tufts as is written in many anthropological textbooks, but exactly the
same as ours.
Sketch of a Papuan named "Böge"
by Miklukho-Maklai. 1872
Reflections on the fate
of the aborigines
From a letter to his friend A.A. Meschersky
(later Secretary of the
Russian Geographical Society)
Maklai Shore, New Guinea, October-November 1877
26
about the fate of the aborigines to whom I have
become so attached often occurred and always led to the same
question: would I be doing the natives a service if I facilitated access
to their country by Europeans through my knowledge of this country,
its customs and language.
The more I thought about it, the more I was inclined to a negative
answer. Sometimes I put the question the other way: looking at the
incursion of the whites as an unavoidable eventuality, I then asked
myself: whom should I help to whom should I give the advan¬
tage the missionaries or the traders?
The answer was always neither one nor the other, since the
former, unfortunately often and under disguise, actually engage in
the activities of the latter, paving the way for them. I therefore
decided that in no way, either directly or indirectly, will I promote
the establishment of relations between the whites and the Papuans.
Arguments that the dark races, being lower ard weaker, must give
way to the higher and stronger white variety, seem to me to constantly
demand more and more proof. In accepting this proposition and
advocating the destruction of the dark races by arms and disease,
the next logical step is to suggest that those among the whites
who do not fit a given ideal of a member of the chosen white race
should also be picked out and destroyed.
Logically, a further conclusion would be to consider various hospi¬
tals, orphanages and alms-houses to be unnecessary and even
harmful, and to advocate a law that every newborn baby who does
not reach a certain length and weight should be removed, etc.
When, on the other hand, with the aid of impartial observation,
one arrives at the conclusion that the different parts of the earth
with their various conditions of living cannot be populated by a
single group of the species homo with identical organizations, quali¬
ties and abilities, and when one realizes therefore that the existence
of various races is completely consistent with the laws of nature,
one must then recognize that the members of these races are
entitled to universal human rights, and must agree that the des¬
truction of the dark races is nothing other than the use of brute
force, which every honest person should oppose...
'I have decided to
defend their just cause7
From a letter to A.A. Meschersky
The Pacific Ocean (March 17, 1876)
I LEFT New Guinea in December 1872, despite the
persistent appeals of the natives that I remain with them;
but I promised them I would return when I knew that
my coming could be of benefit to them.
Recently, because an incursion of European coloni¬
zation, with all its dangers to the natives, has been
threatening my black friends, I have felt that the time
has come for me to fulfill my promise, which I must
and want to keep, despite the fact that this decision
will tear me away for a time from purely scientific work.
At the present moment I am en route to Maklai Shore,
where I plan to settle with the aim, in accordance with
my promise, of trying as best I can to be of help to
the natives, that is, to do as much as possible to prevent
the collision between European colonization and the black
population from having any disastrous consequences for
the latter (as happened in Tasmania, continues in Austra¬
lia, and will most likely happen on the Fiji Islands).
I hope that the opinion of all honest and fair people
will prove sufficient patronage and protection for my
cause against the illegal claims of governments and
against the unjust and violent deeds of various European
exploiters and those who seek enrichment and personal
profit by any and all possible ways and means.
If, despite all my endeavours, my efforts turn out to
be in vain, then perhaps the scientific research and study
in this already familiar country will compensate for my
sacrifices of time, health and money; if not, the know¬
ledge that I kept my word will be sufficient reward.
I would hope that my friends know me well enough
not to consider my decision to be a frivolous act and
will maintain their former friendship and sympathy for
me, knowing that regardless of anything, I am keeping
my word and returning to New Guinea, not only as a
naturalist, but also as a "protector" of my black friends
of Maklai Shore, and that I have decided to defend as
much as I am able their just cause: their independence
in the event of European incursion (which would have
inevitable fatal consequences for the natives), although
I realize that their cause is a matter of the weak against
the strong!
BBBBBBBBBBBaBBBaBBBBBl

Might is not right
From a letter to Sir Arthur Hamilton
Governor of Fiji and High Commissioner
of the Western Pacific
Sydney, Australia, (January 23. 1879)
feâS Y the exercise of patience and by dint of fair and very friendly behaviour,
I have finally succeeded in gaining the full confidence of the natives,
who at first, and for several months, were far from friendly.
After learning the Papuan language, I have been able to study their ways
and customs. Having spent nearly three years among these people and having
had the time to assess their character and capabilities, I feel a deep and
disinterested concern for their future, especially since I foresee that an invasion
of New Guinea by white men could easily, indeed almost certainly would
spark off a chain of catastrophic and regrettable events.
However, I am sure that many of these repugnant injustices committed by
the strong upon the weak could be avoided if the governments of the civilized
world, respecting the precepts of justice, would confirm and enforce the elemen¬
tary principles of the law of nations and of international law.
Outrigger boat at Bili-Bili island, drawn by Miklukho-Maklai, 1872
Telegram to Bismarck
January 9, 1885
THE NATIVES OF MAKLAI SHORE REJECT GERMAN ANNEXATION
-MAKLAI
Letter from Tolstoy
September 25, 1886
13 EAR Nikolai Nikolayevich, thank
you very much for sending your
brochures. I was very pleased to read
them and found in them much of
interest. What moves me and arouses
my admiration is that, as far as I know,
you are the first to prove indubitably
by experience that man is the same
everywhere, that is, a decent social
being, with whom intercourse should
be entered into with kindness and
truth, and not with cannons and vodka.
And you proved this by a feat Of
genuine courage which is so rarely met
with in our society that the people of
our society do not even understand it.
Your case seems to be as follows:
people have lived for so long under
the deception of violence that both the
oppressors and the oppressed have
come to believe that this abnormal
relationship among peoples, not only
among cannibals and non-Christians,
but even among Christians, is actually
normal.
Then, suddenly, one man, under the
pretext of scientific investigation
(please excuse me for this frank
expression of my belief) goes alone
among the most fearsome savages
with neither gun nor bayonet, but
armed with reason alone, and proves
that all the outrageous violence by
which we live in this world is only old,
outlived humbug, from which people
who wish to live rationally should
have been freed long ago.
This js what is so touching and
admirable to me in your work, and
why I so desire to see you and enter
into communication with you.
Please let me tell you the following:
even if your collections are very
important, more important than any¬
thing that had been thus far collected
from anywhere in the world, then, even
in that case, all of your collections
and all your scientific observations are
as nothing compared with those
observations of human characteristics
which you made while you lived among
the natives, communicated with them,
and influenced them by reason alone.
And, therefore, for the love of all
that is holy, set down in the greatest
detail and with the strict adherence
to truth which is characteristic of you,
all of the person-to-person relation¬
ships you established among those
people.
I do not know what contribution
your collections and discoveries will
make to the branch of science which
you serve, but your experience
among the natives is epoch-making in
the science which I serve, namely the
science of how people should live
with one another. Write that story
and you will perform a great and good
service to all mankind.
27
