The prospects for the
biological manipulation
of man are both
exciting and frightening
and the problem of
responsibility for the
uses of science may
become acute in the
field of genetics before
the year 2000. Left,
students from a
New York high school
walk through this
model structure of
a gene designed to
promote better
understanding of basic
molecular, genetic and
chemical aspects of life.
The model represents
a section of a
chromosome
(enlarged
300,000 times) at the
stage when it
duplicates itself
in accordance with its
hereditary code.
Photo © Upjohn Co., Kalamazoo, USA. Model designed by Will Burtln

by Robert Jungk
BREAKTHROUGH
TO
TOMORROW
T
HERE has been a meteoric
rise in the popularity of futurology
among the public. But sudden, world¬
wide popularity of this kind Is often
based on over-simplification or misun¬
derstanding of the facts, and this is
true of futurology.
People expect so much from futur¬
ology. They seem to imagine that it
can work scientific "miracles" and
come up with infallible remedies for
the crises that convulse the modern
world. Seizing on futurology, popular
imagination has raised some of the
pioneer "futurists" to the rank of pro¬
phets a role which most of them are
loath to accept.
Predictably, the public's misconcep¬
tions about futurology have aroused
far more expectations than can be ful¬
filled. Demands are made not only for
clear-cut programmes covering the
decades ahead, but also for precise
techniques concerning the forecasting,
control and direction of events that
would enable man to forge his future,
to stem, as it were, the course of
history in the way he has dammed tor¬
rential rivers and harnessed them to
his needs.
ROBERT JUNGK is a leading figure in the
field of futurology. He founded the Institute
for Future Research in Vienna, was co-foun¬
der of the Association for the Study of
Problems of the Future, in Hamburg, and
is on the Board of the Future Research
Centre in West Berlin. He is the author of
several books on futurology including "To¬
morrow is Already Here" (1953), 'Brighter
than a Thousand Suns" (1958), "Children of
the Ashes" (1961) and "The Big Machine"
(1969). With lohan Gattung he edited "Man¬
kind 2000" (1969) based on the First Inter¬
national Future Research Conference, held
in Oslo in 1967, and on the ideas and aims
of a project called "Mankind 2000" which
he initiated in 1964. Dr. Jungk at present
teaches at the Technical University in West
Berlin and at the Otto Suhr Institute of the
Free University of West Berlin.
It is hardly surprising that after so
many decades of unrest people nowa¬
days seek security and prefer certain¬
ties to surprises. And this attitude is
even more understandable In view of
the dangers that have arisen from the
population explosion, famine, the des¬
truction of the environment and the
threat of war waged with nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons.
But impatience and haste are un¬
reliable counsellors; they lead people
to expect too much, too soon. So
one cannot rule out the possibility
that futurology may one day be
swamped by the stampede of those
who are impatient to reach solid
ground, and thus founder like a hastily
built raft which capsizes through over¬
loading.
Whoever is concerned with the
future of research into the future is
obliged to consider the possibility of a
"shipwreck" of this kind now that
opinion has swung from a premature
craze for futurology to a no less pre¬
mature condemnation.
Futurology is nowadays increasingly
attacked by critics who point to errors
In its forecasts and predictions. A
recent example is the study by Keith
Pavitt (of the Scientific Affairs Directo¬
rate of the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development, in
Paris) and Claude Mestre (French
Ministry of Transport) which empha¬
tically contests the reliability of several
well-established methods of technolo¬
gical forecasting.
The report is so pessimistic that
many persons on reading it might
well conclude that "experimental long-
term forecasting" has been an utter
failure from start to finish, and should
be abandoned without delay as a cost¬
ly enterprise whose conclusions merely
serve to mislead us.
But this would be a disastrous mis¬
take. The systematic scrutiny and
exploration of the future has become
an imperative need in the present era
of revolutionary changes in science
and technology.
In the view of the French philoso¬
pher and educator, Gaston Berger,
the need for a scientific and specula¬
tive concern with the future ¡s a direct
consequence of the unprecedented
acceleration of change In the present
age.
So long as changes were spread out
over long periods of time, man could
be compared to someone walking
along a dark road. All he needed to
make his way in reasonable safety
were his eyes. Then came the compa¬
ratively faster tempo of the horse-
drawn carnage, and torches or lanterns
were needed to light the road for
some distance ahead. When the
speed of the automobile was reached,
powerful headlights were required to
prevent collisions.
Since Gaston Berger's death in 1960
(he was killed in a road accident) the
pace has increased to the point where
today's supersonic aircraft would be
unable to operate safely without the
help of complex electronic guidance
systems.
So instead of disparaging or doing
away with techniques that would help
to smooth out our progress from the
present to the future, we should en¬
deavour to improve them. But we shall
be unable to light the way ahead
merely by boosting the power of our
traditional "lamps". The development
of techniques for forecasting the future
will demand feats of ingenuity compa- n
rabie with those that have carried us H
from automobile headlights to radar,
and beyond that to the beams of lasers
that now enable us to probe and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

BREAKTHROUGH TO TOMORROW (Continued)
10
explore greater distances than ever
before.
Several thousands of specialists,
working in almost every country of
the world, are already developing tech¬
niques for lighting up at short, me¬
dium and long-range distances the
road that lies ahead. This exploration
is becoming a new dimension of our
society and an indispensable condition
for its survival and development.
In nearly every case, the work of
these specialists relates to practical
problems and projects. They advise
governments, city authorities and In¬
dustry They are asked for forecasts
on trends in population growth and
the availability of food supplies. They
are consulted on developments in
technology, new materials, transport,
production methods and trade. What
they describe are "possible future
trends" in fields ranging from world
politics down to changes in the struc¬
ture of the family, and from the ex¬
ploration of outer space to the study
of man's "Inner space" his mind or
his spiritual nature.
Yet only a minute part of the intel¬
lectual and material resources devoted
to futurology Is used for a critical
appraisal of the work it accomplishes
or for a comparative study of its dif¬
ferent methods with the aim of devel¬
oping and improving them.
Thus far, almost no theoretical re¬
search has been done on futurology
itself. New perspectives are revealed
only as by-products of practical fore¬
casting. This is one of the weakness¬
es of the new science of futurology.
It scrutinizes the heavens and the
earth, but looks at itself all too seldom.
The origins of modern futurology
research go back to the latter part
of World War II, when it was first
taken up seriously as an auxiliary
science to military strategy, on which
It came to exert some influence.
The end of 1945 saw the launching
of the Rand (abbreviation for Research
and Development) project, comprising
a working group of physicists and
technologists and operating within a
private aircraft construction company.
From this group came the Rànd Cor¬
poration, established In 1948 by the
Ford Foundation and registered in the
State of California as an independent
non-profit-making enterprise.
In retrospect, the historical sig¬
nificance of this undertaking has
become clear, not only through the
work accomplished by Rand, but
because it was a striking "social
innovation". It was, in reality, the
prototype of a new type of Intellectual
Institution, the so-called "think fac¬
tory", and as such it became the model
for many similar establishments in
government and industry.
The most striking innovation in the
"Think Factories", and their smaller
Photo Unesco-Lesage
lames Watt took out a patent for his steam engine in 1769,
but it was not until 56 years later that George Stephenson's
famous locomotive "Rocket" pulled the world's first railway
passengers from Stockton to Darlington, in England.
Rendered obsolete by the development of diesel and
electric traction, the steam locomotive, the driving force
behind the industrial revolution, is fast disappearing,
like the "iron horse" which has been put out to grass, above.
In the modern world, the pace of change is quickening
and the interval between scientific discovery and large
scale application is shortening dramatically. This change
of pace is vividly illustrated in the diagram below which
shows the development periods of eleven major discoveries
made between the early 18th and mid-20th centuries.
Our diagram is based on one published in "The Future
of the Future", by John McHale.
The
narrowing gap
between
discovery
and
application
Solar Battery 1953-1955 2 YEARS
Transistor 1948*1951
Television 1922.
Radar 19254^1940
X-Ray tubes i895^^FÍ9i3
Vacuum tube 1884
Radio 1867
Telephone 1820
Electric motor 1821
Photography 1727.
3 YEARS
10 YEARS
12 YEARS
15 YEARS
18 YEARS
31 YEARS
35 YEARS
56 YEARS
65 YEARS
112 YEARS
Interval between scientific discoveries and their application
CONTINUEO PAGE 12

It took 112 years from the discovery of the principles of photography to develop its practical application, yet only two
years to complete the same process with the solar battery. So fast is the pace of development nowadays that the
practical results of basic research are upon us before we have had time to assess their desirability or consider their
future implications. It is here that the futurologist, by extrapolation of trends, can give a breathing space in which
to reflect The first practical prototype laser was developed in 1960 by Dr T. H. Maiman; it is already being used
in fields requiring great precision such as eye surgery, the control of machines, the machining of very hard materials,
and ultra-accurate measurement. The use of lasers as communications channels, including inter-planetary
communications, offers great promise. Below, part of the French designed reflector placed on the moon by the
Soviet Luna 17 to bounce back beams emitted by an earth- based laser to enable scientists to measure the distance
of the moon from the earth at a given moment with pinpoint accuracy.

BREAKTHROUGH TO TOMORROW (Continued)
Three-pronged shape of things to come
versions, the "Think Tanks," was their
working methods. Whereas In uni¬
versities, prior to 1950, one rarely
found group work going on between
the various science faculties, in the
Rand Corporation interdisciplinary
teams were quickly set up in which
physicists and technicians were soon
joined by mathematicians, geo¬
graphers, historians, economists,
sociologists, specialists in politics and
finally, ethnologists and psychologists.
An outstanding feature of these
working groups was the easy inform¬
ality with which opinions were ex¬
changed, criticism expressed and new
hypotheses or concepts developed.
Many researchers were attracted by
this relaxed and Intellectually stimul¬
ating atmosphere which contrasted
favourably in many ways with the
nice formal and monotonous character
of university life.
Most of the methods used in system¬
atic forecasting which were accepted
in the 1950s and 1960s, but which to¬
day are targets of growing criticism,
were first developed In the American
"Analytic Institutes" (a title they
themselves prefer to the journalistic
tag "Think Factories"). Among these
institutes are the Rand Corporation
(already mentioned), IDA (Institute for
Defense Analysis), RAC (Research
Analysis Corporation), SDC (Systems
Development Corporation), ANSER
(Analytic Services) and SRI (Stanford
Research Institute).
The hundred or so methods by
which they seek to grasp the shape
of things to come can be considered
under three main headings:
Intuitive forecasting
Exploratory forecasting
Normative forecasting.
Intuitive forecasting combines ex¬
pertise with imagination and insight.
The best known techniques It has
developed thus far are "Brainstorm¬
ing" and, above all, the "Delphi
technique".
In both cases participants in a
panel are asked to "invent the future",
that is, to make an intuitive forecast
of future developments in specific
fields (in automation, food resources,
health and education, for example).
Whereas in "Brainstorming" this takes
place in a group session, and
each person tries to let himself
be freely influenced and stimulated
by the Ideas of other participants,
in the "Delphi technique", specia¬
lists are questioned Individually in
order to prevent them being Influenc¬
ed by other participants with excep¬
tionally strong personalities (or per¬
suasively loud voices).
A typical Delphi experiment makes
use of from 50 to 60 specialists and
is systematically organized In several
"rounds", in which more and more
questions derived from the results of
THINK TANKS' AND 'WORKSHOPS
12
IANY people consider that imagination is
incompatible with research. For them imagination is the
antithesis of the scientific approach impossible to check
up on, elusive, and erratic. Yet if one takes the trouble
to consider the actual processes of scientific discovery, it
will be seen that the leap from the known into the unknown,
from the verifiable to the conjectured, is due not to calculat¬
ed judgement but to intuition, imaginativeness, and the
ability to project into the future.
This is clear from the remarks of many of the
greatest inventors. Naturally they follow the path of pure
reason up to the confines of the new and the different, but
from there on they must be guided by imagination on to
new paths and new areas of thought.
Imagination plays a special part in the exploration of the
future. It is the only force capable of bursting the bonds
of the "prison of time" in which we are all incarcerated.
We are all, even geniuses in the Einstein class, much more
marked by the spirit and style of our age than we are
willing to admit, and this influences our vision of future
developments.
Max Iklé, the Swiss-born American futurologist, has
given a very apt illustration of how forecasting is con¬
ditioned by the time context in which it takes place. Taking
the example of medieval man, he tried to imagine how he
might have envisaged the future. Very probably he saw
it as an age in which church, cloister and clergy would play
an important part in fact a kind of Middle Ages writ large.
Looking back we now know that such a surmise as to
the nature of modern times would have been not only very
incomplete, but also partly mistaken. Yet surely we are
following the same line of thought when, to take the most
frequent example, we imagine the twenty-first century as
a period of still deeper probes into the exploration of the
world and nature, and of still more powerful and precise
technological development.
If futurology is to learn from the mistakes made by
prophets of the past, it must do more than merely prolong
current trends or extrapolate curves. It must also attempt
to extend its thinking to take in that which has never been
seen, the unheard-of and the wholly or virtually inconceiv¬
able. Yet here it comes up against a paradox. For if we
knew what we cannot yet know, this would fall within exist¬
ing knowledge; hence it could not be part of "things to
come" in the strict sense of the term.
There is however a broad area of the future where that
which is no longer Today, and which is not yet Tomorrow,
can exist in the form of hypothesis, conjecture, or specula¬
tion. Only a very few of the many ideas which spring
from this intermediate area later become a reality. Most
of them are short-lived; some of them, premature antici¬
pations of the future, are allowed to "hibernate," while
others begin in intellectual forms totally different from their
subsequent practical application. This is the area of the
future to which futurology should pay particular attention.
Futurology should not merely assume the role of observer,
but should also provide an incentive and a stimulus.
Futurology should, first of all, continue the age-old
tradition of the search for Utopia. The Utopians described
the desirable (that which could not be attained in the world
in which it was located) by projecting "ideal states." This
was no more than an intellectual game for philosophers

earlier rounds are put to the par¬
ticipants. The purpose is to obtain
increasingly precise data on the proba¬
bility of the hypotheses advanced and
when they might conceivably become
reality.
In this way, majority and minority
opinions are finally obtained, and
these represent an informed intuitive
judgement on probable, possible or
desirable future developments.
Questions are sent out in written
form and replies are examined and
evaluated by a central office for use
in subsequent rounds of the experi¬
ment. In order to reduce the length
of this process, the Institute of the
Future, in the U.S.A., plans to set up
a permanent, electronic world-wide
Delphi circuit which would be connect¬
ed to a central computer.
Exploratory forecasting examines
probable future developments, using as
a basis existing knowledge and trends
as well as recent scientific, techno¬
logical,, economic or social innovations
or those expected in the near future.
From extrapolations based on this
data, exploratory forecasting suggests
which trends should be reinforced
and which should be curbed.
Futurology has introduced some in¬
novations here, such as the "encircl¬
ing curve", which attempts to draw a
circle round the extreme possibilities
of a technical system the maximum
possible utilization of the power of a
nuclear accelerator, the most rapid
rnethods of transport, the brightest
possible light, and so on. Account is
taken of so-called "internal" limits
set by nature and "external" limits
such as those related to population
growth, the national product, or the
surface of the globe.
Other methods are aimed at improv¬
ing exploratory forecasting. First on
the list come "study curves" whereby
past assumptions as to future develop¬
ments can be compared with those
which actually took place, and conclu¬
sions drawn as to possible sources
of error and margins of uncertainty.
In "contextual mapping", account is
taken of the mutual interaction of
various extrapolated trends. This
method appears very promising, since
it convincingly shows the mutual inter
dependence of technological and
scientific evolution, and develops by
experience new ways of thought which
subsequently accommodate social,
political and psychological factors.
In exploratory forecasting a special
place is occupied by the "morpho¬
logical method" of the Swiss astro¬
physicist Fritz Zwicky. The steps con¬
sist of stating the problem precisely,
exposing the important parameters,
revealing the dimension, range, and
number of values for each parameter,
determining the number and kind of
solutions, and finally evaluating and
choosing the preferred solution.
For example, Zwicky has shown that
on the basis of the 11 basic parame¬
ters of a jet engine, 25,344 different
types of engine could be put on the
drawing-board. Yet some of them, for
example an underground jet engine
(which could possibly be used for
mining), might remain for a long time
at the planning stage.
Typical of this class of studies are
today's widely-publicized forecasts of
the increase in world population, of
the number of motor-cars, of the pol-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
OF THE FUTURE'
since no one has ever envisaged the achievement of such
a state in respect of a "non-place."
Today, Utopia has acquired a new function which is
much closer to reality. As man's awareness of himself
grows, he believes that he is able to shape his history to
a large extent, and the intellectual form taken by his aspira¬
tions becomes his model for action. Today he replaces far-
off dreams by a workable plan which he sees as the direct
opposite of all that he finds unsatisfactory in the present.
I HE Netherlands futurologist, Professor Fred
Polak, has very ably shown how concrete images of the
future influence the present by modifying it or even giving
it a new direction. What we merely anticipate or desire
forms just as much part of the present as what we perceive
and know. No one concerned by changes in what exists
can afford to ignore these boundary zones of reality.
People tend to think that science is centered on what
has already beon formed, described, or has already taken
place, or on what can be accurately observed or measured.
But this involves setting up far too rigid a system of checks.
Discoveries in recent decades, from X-rays to psycho¬
analysis, from the irruption of assymmotry into mathematics
to the assault on the principle of the conservation of parity
in nuclear physics, have shown time and again that standard,
accepted opinions are often no longer capable of correctly
apprehending reality because they are based on too rigid
and dogmatic a conception of what reality is.
By reinstating imagination, and by associating it with
research which can be tested and evaluated, it is possible
for futurology to open up and enlarge the way in which
the scientist works and give him greater flexibility. And
since it lies halfway between the two cultures of art and
science, it can overcome prejudices and obstacles on both
sides.
In "Think Tanks" or "Workshops of the Future" much fruit¬
ful collaboration has already been developed beUveen
sculptors and engineers, painters and computer experts,
poets and naturalists, linguists and sociologists, novelists
and political scientists.
The forms assumed by these joint attempts to discern and
shape things to come are highly varied. In a "brainstorming"
session participants temporarily suspend their critical sense
and give free rein to the creative interplay of their imagin¬
ation. An attempt can be made to discover the future
course of events by writing a political scenario. Simulation
or gaming techniques are used to produce an idea of future
town planning and communication problems, after which
complete community systems are constructed.
Starting with the idea "imagine what it would be like
if . . . . " it is frequently possible for several individuals, by
pooling and adding to each other's ideas, to envisage some¬
thing which is really new; through conversations, tape
recordings and paperwork the future can in fact be "dis¬
covered."
ROBERT JUNGK
Taken from one of a series of talks
broadcast by the International
University of the Air.
13

BREAKTHROUGH TO TOMORROW (Continued)
The world we want tomorrow
lution of the atmosphere and of the
growth of stockpiles of nuclear wea¬
pons. Such studies can and should
serve as "early warning systems" and
thus enable us to slow down certain
dangerous trends or to speed up other
more positive developments. Already,
with the help of computers and modern
mathematical methods, the research
techniques used for many years by
political economists and demographers
have been vastly improved.
More detailed studies are now being
made of the interactions between nu¬
merous recent developments in tech¬
nology. A typical example is the in¬
vestigation of possible effects of the
further development of means of
communication (telephone, television,
"picturephone", computer links to
every home, and so on). The possible
psychological development and the
new aspirations and values of future
generations are questions that have
still to be explored.
Such are the kind of ¡mages of the
future that exploratory forecasting
seeks to project, taking into account
many different factors which are diffi¬
cult to determine since they are far
more varied and contradictory than
they were even a few years ago.
Normative forecasting, another
group of methods, is now coming
to the fore. Here advantage is taken
of a criticism which has always been
levelled at attempts to forecast the
future. It is argued that intrinsic in
any forecast is either the incitement
to act in its favour or a counter-reac¬
tion against it. In other words, since
a forecast is heard by men ready to
act, it carries within It the seeds either
14
FUTUROLOGY AND THE SEARCH
FOR PEACE
I HE major aim of futurology can be to safeguard peace.
It could even be said that the possibility of the world destroying itself has
provided the most powerful impetus to the development of this new form
of research. By warning us of the crises and catastrophes that threaten
it aims to prevent them or to lessen their effects.
But can futurology really be effective in this field? By means of explo¬
ratory forecasting it can explain dangerous trends to politicians and
the public. Anyone, for instance, who examines the comparative trends in
population growth and in discoveries of new sources of food over the
next twenty years will have no difficulty in deducing that between 1975
and 1982 some serious crises will arise that will inevitably affect world
politics.
Other forecasts, for example those which point to the unequal growth
in average national income in the highly industrialized and the developing
areas (a twenty to one ratio), indicate a further increase in the inequality
that already exists between the "North" and the "South" of our planet.
If we add to this the. forecast that towards the end of the 1980s the
population of the developing countries under the age of 15 will equal the
entire population of the industrialized countries, then the warning signal
is plain for all to see.
The warning role played by futurology should not be underestimated.
It has an increasing effect upon politics, but, paradoxically, is likely to harm
its own reputation with the public. The latter might indeed be inclined to
scoff if the catastrophes predicted by the "pessimists" fail to materialize.
Not everyone will want to admit that disasters were avoided precisely
because futurology's "radar" picked them up in time.
Futurology can play another, and in the long run perhaps more important,
part in the search for peace: it can draw up the requirements for future
peace on a broad basis and in great detail. Work along these lines inclu¬
des not only the studies on "models for world order" undertaken in the
U.S.S.R., India, Japan, Uganda, Chile and the Fed. Rep. of Germany, but
also the many studies of the Pugwash movement, founded by Albert Ein¬
stein and Bertrand Russell, which seek to develop a host of ideas for future
peaceful co-operation between different peoples and ideologies.
ROBERT JUNGK
of its destruction or its realization. In
a system of exploring the future which
does not claim to be an "objective"
science, but a "science of action",
such criticism is not contested; on the
contrary, it is admitted and exploited
in a positive way.
The trend at the present time is
consciously to shape the future by
drawing up standards and objectives.
The viewpoint of Olaf Helmer, a U.S.
futurologist, who with his associates
at the Rand Corporation developed the
Delphi method of forecasting, based
on the polling of a series of expert
panels, is characteristic of this new
attitude to moulding the future.
"The fatalistic concept of an unfore¬
seeable and unavoidable future", he
states, "is being progressively aban¬
doned. We are beginning to realize
that there are a great number of pos¬
sible futures, and that appropriate
action can Influence these possibilities
in different ways. This raises the
exploration of things to come and the
attempts to influence them into realms
of great social responsibility. If we
wish to assume this responsibility we
must cease to be onlookers at the
spectacle of the world's history, and
must influence history with the inten¬
tion of shaping the future."
A
M >N example of this kind of
normative behaviour was the American
project for a manned lunar landing.
Years before the scientific and technic¬
al capability for a successful flight was
sufficiently developed, a project was
begun and its execution "forecast" for
a specific date. A target was set, and
"future history was made".
Normative forecasting has developed
methods for weighing all possible
objectives against each other as
impartially as possible, and for estab¬
lishing priorities. Its range includes
modern theories on decision-making.
A series of methods has been devised
which, using a kind of reverse-planning
technique, starts from the future objec¬
tive and works back to the present; the
necessary intermediate stages are
thus determined and an attempt made
to plot the best possible course bet¬
ween Tomorrow and Today.
The "Relevance Tree" method has
proved to be particularly satisfactory.
Starting from the fixed objective, the
top of the tree, and working down¬
wards, alternative approaches are
assessed and weighed against each
other. Originally developed in the mili¬
tary field, this method has signally
proved its worth elsewhere, for exam¬
ple in the evolution of biology and

As the world tumbles along
at its precipitous pace
of technological change,
futurologist and non-futurologist
alike need a moment for calm
reflection and meditation.
This "classical" thinker of yore,
pondering the "machine"
alongside him, seems to be
asking what it all means
and where it is all leading us?
Photo R. Dix © Hanns Reich Verlag, Munich
medicine. It highlights for decision
makers what decisions they should
take and when, and what finance they
should inject into specific projects.
Simulation techniques occupy a spe¬
cial place among normative methods.
An attempt is made to envisage pos¬
sible conflicts and possible future
developments which have been over¬
looked.
Recently, a new trend in futurology
has gained ground in every country.
It makes men and women of every
race and from every sector of the
social system the focal point of its
activities, and seeks to explore a broad
range of their hopes and aspirations
biological, psychological, political
and social.
Throughout Europe, futurologists
such as Bertrand de Jouvenel (France),
Dennis Gabor (U.K.), Ugo Spirito
(Italy), Johan Galtung (Norway), A.
Sörensen (Denmark), Fred L. Polak
(Netherlands), Ossip K. Flechtheim
(Fed. Rep. of Germany), Igor Bestuz-
hev-Lada (U.S.S.R.), Radovan Richta
(Czechoslovakia), A. Apostel (Roma¬
nia), Andrzen Sicinski (Poland), Edel-
ing (German Democratic Republic), to
name but a few of these specialists,
are turning from technological forecast¬
ing and scrutinizing the future with
humanistic objectives in view.
A similar trend is evident in the
United States led by futurologists such
as Kenneth E. Boulding, John Dixon,
John McHale, Hasan Ozbekhan, John
R. Piatt, Alvin Toffler, Stuart Umpleby
and Arthur Waskow. And here there
is a new development, as imaginative
as it is surprising, in the direction of
"open-ended anthropology".
Thus futurology Is more and more
playing a part which it had not origi¬
nally foreseen for itself. It is becoming
a forum for the discussion of questions
which had been pushed aside in the
fever of scientific and technical pro¬
gress during the last three hundred
years, questions about the meaning
of life and the ethics of human coexis¬
tence.
Whoever decides that the future can
no longer be left to chance and an
often inexorable fate, has to do more
than merely "produce" and "act"; he
needs to turn again to philosophy and
look ahead to the "ultimate problems"
so that, in tackling the immediate ones,
he will have the welfare of future gene¬
rations constantly in view.
Research into the future is thus parti¬
cularly concerned with the problems
that education will face in the years
ahead.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
15

BREAKTHROUGH TO TOMORROW (Continued)
16
The American Census Bureau esti¬
mates, for Instance, that 125 million
U.S. children will be of school
age in the year 2000. Developing
countries will have an even more
spectacular rate of increase. By the
end of the 1970s, nearly four times
as many children as today in these
countries will be attending school un¬
til the age of 14. The number of uni¬
versity students should rise more
slowly. Nevertheless, by 1985 it is ex¬
pected to double and even treble in
some countries.
The time spent in school is also
expected to increase. Kjell Eide, of
the Norwegian Ministry of Education's
Planning Department, recently carried
out for the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development, in
Paris, a "prospective analysis" of Nor¬
way's education needs.
His conclusion was that school
attendance for Norwegians, before
they start work, would leap from an
average of seven years in 1930 to an
average of 11.5 years by the end of
1970 and would average 14 years by
1990. This would mean that not only
a privileged few, but all young Norwe¬
gians would then be attending school
until the age of twenty.
However, the aim of futurology is
not only to assess the educational
problems and possibilities of tomor¬
row, but also to prepare the ground
for new teaching methods.
Robert Tschirgi, Head of the De¬
partment of Academic Planning of the
University of California, believes that
the computer "represents the greatest
opportunity for innovation since the
invention of the printing press."
Data processing machines and pro¬
grammed instruction will adapt the
rhythm of tuition to suit the individual
pupil and will check more accurately
than a human teacher the amount of
knowledge that has been retained.
Furthermore, such teaching machines
will train children to discover the facts
for themselves, to compare and to
assess them.
By leaving the pupil alone at his
desk to do his work in short, logical
stages, programmed instruction will, it
is hoped, free the teacher of the fu¬
ture to undertake more personalised
teaching.
But who will draw up the program¬
mes? Who will make the films in which
famous scientists will record their lec¬
tures for thousands of students? Who
will produce the films and tape-record¬
ings which will in part replace text
books? Who will prepare the televised
classes? Will a large scale "teaching
industry" develop? These are some of
the questions of vital social signifi¬
cance which the futurologists have
to consider.

In dealing with economic questions,
as in any other field of forecasting,
futurology needs to take a global view
and utilize the expertise and resources
of numerous disciplines.
The trends of population growth are
a major factor In economic forecasting.
Within the span of half a life¬
time (that Is, in thirty-five years)
the population of the world will
probably have doubled. This is one of
the most important of almost all econo¬
mic considerations. The production of
food and clothing and the building
of homes for an extra three thousand
million persons will gradually take
priority over all other economic prob¬
lems.
Economic resources will be mobi¬
lized more and more to cope with so¬
cial problems. Air and water pollu¬
tion, noise, traffic congestion, the dete¬
rioration in the quality of life through
the mass "herding" and monotony of
urban living are all, in large measure,
the consequences of a philosophy of
life which has laid too much stress on
economic achievement while giving
scant regard to the high price that has
to be paid for it.
Economic exploration of the future
will thus need to be more concerned
with problems of professional life and
with opportunities of employment. In
the very near future, it will become
almost as important to create new jobs
as to manufacture goods.
The need for a fairer distribution of
jobs, large scale and properly timed
vocational retraining to meet frequent¬
ly changing needs, a totally different
outlook on work, viewed as a "pos¬
sibility" and no longer an "obligation,"
will require economists to give spe¬
cial consideration to psychology, the
study of behaviour, and philosophy.
Questions about "the meaning of life"
will often be raised in the economic
sector. "Homo Economicus" is al¬
ready considered by the younger ge¬
neration as a limited, even atrophied
form of man; soon he will be looked
upon as no more than a relic of history.
Exploration of the future which aims
to serve mankind needs to consider
not only those alive today ; it should
keep in mind the needs of coming
generations. Futurologists will accom¬
plish one of their most important tasks
if they regard themselves as the
"defenders of those not yet born",
whose conditions of life have already
become endangered by lack of fore¬
sight on the part of 19th and 20th
century man.
Even if the new efforts deployed to
explore the future achieved nothing
more than a strengthening of the feel- ^
ing that we today are responsible for I /
the welfare of those who will follow
us, it would by that alone have proved
Its worth.
