by Elizabeth Freund
Making learning
real fun
for blind children
A
28
_ ^blind child clearly cannot
explore the world around him as
freely as one who is sighted. No
matter how hard he tries to "see"
with his fingers the objects near to
him, many things will escape him
completely, either because the objects
are too big, like most buildings, or too
small, like anything that can be seen
only through a microscope. Drawings
or photos of far-away things are of
no use to him.
An education strictly confined to
book learning or oral explanations
cannot make up for this great disad¬
vantage, and very often only produces
mental pictures which do not conform
with reality.
At Overbrook School for the Blind
in Philadelphia, U.S.A., we have tried
to counteract these difficulties by
setting up a "Touch and Learn Center".
The Idea is not new. Most schools for
the blind have some mounted animals,
models, feelable maps, etc., but very
likely none of their collections is as
large and diversified as ours with its
1,800 items. It Is not a museum in the
traditional sense, but a very active
means of instruction in constant use.
There is a world of difference, for
instance, between knowing only from
hearsay how a water pump is worked
and actually operating It oneself. Chil¬
dren are always astonished to find
how small a sparrow Is "Such a little
thing; I thought it was much bigger".
And the cured foot of an elephant
makes them aware how enormous the
real animal Is compared with the small
models they had handled previously.
Already, one can almost hear some
ELIZABETH FREUND Is Curator of the
Touch and Learn Center at Overbrook
School for the Blind in Philadelphia, U.S.A.
She founded the Center in 1959 and has
since lectured and written widely on the
use of touch and learn techniques in educ¬
ation for the blind. Her manual on teach¬
ing longhand writing to blind students is
used in schools for the blind in the U.S.
and other countries. She is the author of
"Crusaders for Light" (1959) which tells
the story of the pioneers of education for
the blind in the United States.
readers saying: "No wonder, It is easy
for these Americans with all their
money to have such a collection." As
a matter of fact, our collection did not
cost very much. The largest expense
was for a rubber model of the human
body which can be taken apart, and
which we had to buy from a school
supply house.
Most of the other models were made
by ourselves or at sighted schools
and later donated to us. A great num¬
ber of exhibits are gifts from manu¬
facturers, museums, or collectors
whom we asked for help.
It would take too long to enumerate
each and every Item in our collection.
We have a good many objects from
the Far East, South America, and Afri¬
ca. There is almost a whole zoo of
mounted animals, from a small shrew
to an exhibit about whales and
whale oil. Fortunately, we often
have the same animals in different
positions. As a supplement, each
spring two truckloads of living farm
animals come for a day-long visit
a big improvement on the additional
visits to the zoo, when there is not
enough time to really get acquainted
with the animals.
There are innumerable models of
buildings, bridges, and ships. We
have a model of a coal mine on which
the elevator goes down to the coal
layer and comes up with a filled lorry.
Most of the buildings have detachable
roofs; machinery can be handled and,
where possible, there are "cut-away
windows" so that the student can feel
how the parts move Inside.
Whenever necessary, the life size
of a small model is indicated by human
figures on the same scale; or the right
key is given by comparing the model
to some well known dimension, such as
the size of a football field, the length
of the school building, or the height of
the classroom.
A water-tank is used in the demon¬
stration of a canal-lock, which really
closes and opens so that a little ship
can climb from the lower to the higher
level. With the help of an electric
pump a water-mill turns a cogwheel
and makes some bells ring. Any
model which has movable parts, or
can make a sound, Is better than a
rigid or silent one.
The children get the greatest bene¬
fits from exhibits "In action". For
instance, when we lecture about inclin¬
ed planes, we let the children go up
a large inclined board. If they com¬
plain that the board Is too steep, we
can change it into a gangplank by
adding rungs. They can roll up kegs
or little wagons, and so discover by
themselves the advantages of the
inclined plane compared to lifting a
heavy weight straight upward.
Exhibits of Egyptian, Greek, and
Roman temples and buildings, or me¬
dieval castles with drawbridges and
moats and a full size knight in armour
are the best illustrations for these
periods. For modern times, we need
not only a large collection of aero¬
plane models, but others of the solar
system, rockets, the moon, and
Snoopy, the moon landing module.
T
HE most revolutionary new
invention for the instruction of the blind
is the electric Thermoform machine
made in California. It uses a vacuum
forming process under great heat. You
write a page in braille on ordinary
braille paper, cover this "master" with
a plastic sheet, and push it into the
heated oven of the machine. A dupli¬
cate is produced in a few seconds and
this process can be repeated as many
times as you want. Mathematical prob¬
lems, quizzes, or any other kind of
Information can be duplicated in almost
no time at all.
In the very same way "Illustrations"
to history, geography, science, or so¬
cial studies can be produced. A mas¬
ter is made from a paper base from
cardboard, netting, sandpaper, tape In
different widths, small grains, or metal
pieces in short from anything that
will feel different to touch on the
finished sheet.
Of course, the resulting picture has
only two dimensions; but it is easy to
read and by cutting and underlying
some parts with an extra layer of card-
CONTINUED PAGE 30

Photo © Jules Shlck, Philadelphia, U.S.A.
Thanks to special teaching techniques and equipment the horizons of blind persons
have widened tremendously in recent years. Overbrook School for the Blind
in Philadelphia, U.S.A., for instance, has a Touch and Learn Center where students
are able to get a realistic mental picture of objects by handling them. Most of
the 1,800 items in the Center's collection the largest and most diversified of its kind
in the U.S. cost very little to produce. A wooden frame and some fine yarn
are all that is required to "spin" this feelable spider's web.
29

Feelable maps bring geography alive for blind students.
The shapes of Europe, left, were cut out
of cork sheet and then stuck to a base representing
the ocean. Minute gaps between countries
mark national borders and different types
of upholstery nails stand for capitals and other
important cities. On the relief map of Africa, below,
plastic strips placed in the gaps between countries
make borders easy to identify.
30
FUN FOR BLIND CHILDREN (Continued)
board, a certain 3-dimensional effect
can be produced, but any kind of pers¬
pective has to be avoided. The stu¬
dents quickly get accustomed to this
method, and soon have no difficulty
in understanding it.
The only drawback to the Thermo-
form machine is its price about
$450 plus the current expenses for
the plastic sheets. It is a pity that not
every school for the blind will be able
to afford the purchase of such a ma¬
chine its advantages are enormous.
On the other hand, the size of a Ther-
moform picture is only 28 by 28 cm.
(11 x 11 in.) so that some things the
larger geographic maps, for example
just cannot be reproduced.
To provide our school with good
maps has been one of our major tasks.
We had a lot of large, 92 by 123 cm.
(3x4 ft.) wooden maps made in
jigsaw-puzzle fashion. We improved
them by glueing the pieces to their
base, and inserting plastic strips into
the gaps for borderlines. Another
method was to nail the lines between
states or countries.
We also made maps from cork
sheets 3 mm. (1/8") thick by tracing
the outlines of printed maps and
glueing the traced paper to the cork
upside down (this makes it easier to
cut the cork). We cut away 3 mm. at
the outside of each part so that when
glueing it to the base a gap between
states was produced, wide enough to
be felt easily.
All names were printed on self-
adhesive plastic tape in braille and in
printed letters. The different states
were painted in brilliant colours for
the partially blind students. Cork
maps are especially suitable for desk-
size maps.
I
IT is important for each
student to have a small map before
him. The large map in front of the
classroom doesn't work too efficiently
with blind pupils. These cork maps
can be .made at negligible costs, and
serve their purpose better than brailled
paper maps.
When blind students are taught how
to find their way around with a cane,
it is a great help to have good maps
of city or neighbourhood at hand. For
our mobility classes, we made not only
a map of the school campus and ano¬
ther of its surroundings, but also feel-
able maps of the subway system, the
Philadelphia Suburban Railroad Ser¬
vice, a map showing all the suburbs,
and a big map of the centre of the
city with markers for all the historical
buildings, and the places of interest
to a blind person.
These maps seem to fill a real gap
in our instruction, as we can see from
the enthusiastic reception by our stu¬
dents. For most of the maps we need¬
ed a photo enlargement of the section
in question from a printed map. Once
we had ¡t, it was easy and inexpensive
to build whatever we wanted to show,
by using cardboard squares for city
blocks, balsa wood pieces for bridges
or houses, velvet paper for parks, and
upholstery nails as markers for rail¬
road stations or important sites.
A very inexpensive help with the
Instruction of blind children Is the
screen pad. This ¡s a piece of ordin¬
ary metal window-screen stapled to a

A revolutionary new invention for teaching the blind is the electric
thermoform machine. A sort of blind man's photocopier, it uses
a vacuum process under great heat to reproduce a sheet of braille writing
in a few seconds. "Illustrations" made from a variety of materials
with a different feel (cardboard, netting, sandpaper, tape, metals, etc.)
can be reproduced in the same way. A sheet of plastic is placed
over the master copy and pushed into the heated oven of
the machine. Photo, above, shows an illustration of the human eye
made by the thermoform process. Similar illustrations have been
used to teach about plant growth, place setting at table,
the development of the human embryo, the human skeleton, etc.
heavy cardboard of approximately
36 by 46 cm. (14x18 in.). If you
cover this board with thin newsprint
paper and use an oil crayon, the under¬
lying mesh will hold back the oily
material of the crayon so that the blind
student can feel what he is drawing,
while he is drawing. The screen pads
can be used In mathematics, geogra¬
phy, etc., by the students themselves;
or the teacher can use this tool for
making a quick sketch when explain¬
ing a topic.
We even found that totally blind
children who had been deprived of the
joy and pleasure of drawing pictures
can do so on these screen pads.
Characteristic was a conversation
overheard between two totally blind
girls of about 12 years of age. One
said: "What did you draw?" And the
other told her that she had drawn a
rabbit. (They had been shown mount¬
ed rabbits before this lesson). "Oh,
let me see," said the first girl, and
"looked" at the picture. She felt it
carefully tail, head, body, and paws
and then said with great admiration.
"Isn't that a very nice rabbitl"
The screen pad was instrumental, too,
in teaching the students how to sign
their names. For this purpose, the
thin paper was lined in braille. We
wrote a Manual about Longhand-Writ¬
ing, which is now widely used not only
at our school, but at other American
schools, too. Since the students get
a good mental picture of the shape of
a letter by feeling it, the results of this
method are good.
The largest Touch and Learn collec¬
tion would be of no value at all, if it
were not used- regularly. In our
school all the elementary classes
come for at least one period weekly,
and are shown exhibits relating to their
studies.
Teachers may also borrow material,
if they want to use it in their class¬
rooms. We arrange exhibits for sec¬
ondary school classes on request.
Co-operation with the teachers Is most
essential, and once it Is established,
it really works. The teachers ask for
the models they need and the Touch
and Learn Center is more than glad
to make these models, or try to find
the material wanted.
A well-kept filing system is funda
mental for the best use of a collection.
Our material is classified not only
alphabetically, but also by subject, so
that if a certain exhibit is requested
we are reminded which other items
might be used in connexion with this
lecture.
We hope that some of the ideas we
use in Philadelphia may stimulate other
schools to build up a similar collection.
As we stressed at the beginning, this
project need not to be expensive, but
some Initiative and imagination are
necessary. The work is fascinating
and the results are most rewarding.
In our case we know that it has widen¬
ed the horizons of our students immen¬
sely.
I will be glad to give more details
or explanations if needed. Please get
in touch with us German, English,
Spanish and French will be under¬
stood (1).
In any case, may 1 wish you a lot
of good luck for your Touch and Learn
Center. 01
(Í) The Overbrook School -for the Blind
is located at 64th Street and Malvern Avenue,
Philadelphia, Pa. 19131, U.S.A.
