THE THOUSAND
AND ONE FACETS
OF CULTURE
On the following pages we present a selection of brief
quotations of different views expressed by participants at
the conference on cultural policy organized by Unesco last
year, in Venice.
Morocco
When the first man used a gourd, or something like it,
to take up water for a drink, that was utilitarian. It was
still utilitarian when he tried to fashion a bowl out of clay,
in imitation of the gourd. But his purpose in attempting
to decorate this bowl was no longer utilitarian; it was the
response to a deep aspiration for beauty which is the
specific attribute of culture.
Mohammed El Fasi
Minister of Culture
Hungary
A good cultural policy should give culture to a wider
public and give the artist freedom to create that was
what the Hungarian poet Sandor Petofi had in mind a
century and a half ago in writing of the ray of sunshine of
the spirit shining on the windows of all the houses.
Pal llku
Minister of Culture
France
It must be admitted that It is difficult not to believe that
one's own culture is the best that exists, or understand
that a wholly different way of thinking may be exactly what
someone else needs. But we should encourage everything
that is authentically human In every civilization. France is
prepared to help any country which asks, in making an
inventory of Its riches and in making its culture better
known inside and outside its own frontiers.
Edmond Michelet
Minister of Culture
Somalia
Culture is a way of life chosen or adopted by a society
or group of societies. It amounts to the sum of traditional
values and way of thinking of the society.
Mohamed Seek Hassan
Director-General, Ministry of Education
Australia
Culture must not be too narrowly conceived. Indeed,
properly, it comprehends much that lends quality to life and,
in one sense, it can be seen as a desirable component to
all aspects of living. Thus in Australia the natural environ¬
ment of an ancient continent, a wild-life rich and strange,
and a certainty of sunshine have traditionally established
open-air activities and the artistry of sports as integral
parts of our way of life and of our national culture. There
is, of course, classical justification for this view In the
example of ancient Greece.
We must be careful too not to impose narrow ethnic
limits on the content of culture. In our own case migrants
to our shores have brought us a better appreciation of the
complexity of European culture, and increasing contact is
bringing the influence of the richness and vitality of the
manifold cultures of Asia to bear upon the minds and
imagination of our artists. Perhaps, most importantly, we
have come better to understand and to value the unique
art and culture of the aboriginal Australians.
Nigel Bowen
Minister for Education and Science
Iraq
Culture is the collective intellectual achievement of a
people and the embodiment of their values, their aspirations
and their way of life.
Saad Abdulbaki
Minister of Education
World Federation of Trade Unions
To working men, culture is not only art and letters,
although they appreciate the full intrinsic value of these
without always having access to them; and culture would
amount to little if it were merely decorative and escapist.
Culture must be comprehensive, including all the sciences
and technologies, the arts, sport, and the indispensable
social culture economic, trade union, political forming an
indissoluble whole, each influencing all the others.
... One autumn day, Jaurès was walking through a forest
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
21

1001 FACETS OF CULTURE (Continued)
22
and met a woman with a load on her back. He greeted her
and remarked on how beautiful everything was around.
"If you would help me to get this wood off my back," she
said, "I could look up at the trees and see if it really is."
Maurice Gastaud
World Federation of Trade Unions
Mexico
What we want is that, once freed from immediate
necessity, protected and free, educated and healthy, man
should be fully human i.e., be able to use his judgement, to
imagine, to meditate, and to dream.
José Luis Martinez
Director-General of the National Institute of Fine Arts
The Holy See
The State is "paid" less tangibly for the cultural facilities
it provides than for others which are more material, and
is sometimes paid with ingratitude. And still, this wider,
more flexible, more disinterested part of what it does should
not discourage it from working for cultural development as
an integral part of development as a whole.
Mgr. André-Jacques Fougerat
Adviser to the State Secretariat
Guyana
In the smaller and weaker States, one purpose of cultural
policy must be to achieve a greater resistance to the
onslaught of the twentieth century without at the same time
encouraging the growth of inhibiting parochial timidity.
M.W. Carter
Minister of Information and Culture
Iran
Culture is a way of interpreting the world. Science is a
way of transforming it. That is not sufficient reason for
keeping them separate. In so far as science is a culture,
it should be integrated, and one of the primordial tasks of
cultural policy Is to ensure that integration. And, as
cultural policy is a matter for individual governments,
Unesco must endeavour to provide the world co-operation
which offers the only way of bridging the ever-growing
scientific gap between the advanced and the developing
countries.
Mehrdad Pahlbod
Minister of Culture and the Arts
Guinea
Mass culture is essentially different from élite culture
but in no wise inferior to it. It is a potentially explosive
creative force which could be compared to its advantage
with the individualist subjectivity carried to its extreme by
certain intellectuals and artists who, seeking a new lan¬
guage, had reached total incommunicability or, at best, a
code language that strangely recalls that of the most occult
sects. Culture and witchcraft are surely different things...
Cheick Cherif
Consul-General for Guinea in Berlin
Denmark
There is probably no society on the face of the earth that
does not have to neglect vitally humanitarian and cultural
problems because of what it spends on armaments. At the
same time as technological progress follows a vertically
ascending curve, we are all thinking on horizontal levels;
the technological revolution has not been accompanied by
a revolution in our ways of thinking.
C Helveg Petersen
Minister for Cultural Affairs
Togo
A number of paradoxes merit reflection. Culture has
never been as rich and yet, never so much called in
question. Culture has never been as universal and yet
never so torn apart internally. Culture has never spread
so widely and yet never been so much in danger of losing
its central purpose: man. Culture has never had so many
material and technical aids available to it for its conser¬
vation, and yet has never been so totally menaced with
extermination. For, looking at the apocalyptic pictures in
the museum at Hiroshima, I could not help thinking to
myself: the whole world could be like this tomorrow, and
not only that, but there would not be even one spectator
left to come and remember our destruction.
N'Sougan Ferdinand Agblemagnon
Permanent Delegate to Unesco
Sweden
To the younger generations, cultural Isolation, like other
forms of national isolation, seems not merely unrealistic,
it seems absurd. The fact of artists being forced or induced
to create an underground civilization can only be taken as
a symptom of serious sickness in the political structure.
Art is not merely a social product; it is also an instrument
for changing society. Artists must be free to use their own
means of expression. History has left us many examples
of how reality sooner or later often in the most drastic
way takes its revenge on those who deny the artist the
freedom to follow his own calling.
Sven Moberg
Minister of Education
Federal Republic of Germany
In a deliberate move away from the appalling experience
with absolute State power, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many limits itself to aiding and promoting, without pre¬
conditions or compulsion. The task falling to the State, and
indeed the community, is to protect human values and
human dignity. Art, in the words of Camus, can only live
under its own laws; it dies when exposed to external
demands. Administration and culture can go together only
on the understanding that intellectual creative activity
shall be free. And a culture which takes shelter behind its
national boundaries must necessarily decay.
Bernhard Vogel
President of the Permanent Conference
of Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs of the Länder
Spain
Planning means establishing an order of priorities i.e. a
scale of values. But even assuming that there are
unchanging models and an artistic golden rule (which seems
to be more and more unlikely), there remains the major
problem of the renewal of patterns, types, styles, ways of
life; and the risk of fossilization which the administrators
run immediately becomes apparent. There are questions
of taste and fashion which cultural policy has only to touch
incidentally upon to provoke, on both sides, misunder¬
standings, interference, refusals, reticence. This becomes
all the more serious because the modern State, if it is
unable to indoctrinate artists, can perfectly well even
without wishing to do so orientate, influence, condition
public taste; and private and commercial interests do so
deliberately and without scruple.
This does seem to be inherent in culture: to be
condemned to devour or to be devoured and, in this sense,
all countries without exception are invaders or invaded.
But things are even more complicated. To a certain extent
every culture devours itself: in a kind of cultural canniba¬
lism, innovations In style, type or taste, to feel sure of
themselves, have to destroy their predecessors.
Emilio Garrigues
Permanent Delegate to Unesco

Italy
We hope, in the present and future history of mankind,
never again to have to regret the humiliations and absences
caused by the repressive intervention of the State against
freedom of thought and freedom In art.
Vittorino Veronese
Former Director-General of Unesco
Cameroon
Can anyone Imagine the African peoples flourishing
without music, without dancing, without masks and statues,
without the immense verbal wisdom bequeathed by gen¬
erations of thought, and without the legendary joy of our
tribes? But how can this art be preserved against the
assault of the modern world unless artists are given the
means and techniques to express themselves in the style
of their times, confidently and with dignity, and still be
perfectly authentic? Excepting with the help of the public
authorities, how else can this be done?
Too many bilateral and even multilateral agreements
exclude cultural matters or regard them as superfluous
luxury.
Zaché Mongo Soo
Minister of Education, Youth and Culture
Belgium
The year 2000 is only thirty years away. It will probably
contain 140 working days. Education should not forget the
remaining 225.
Universal education is becoming a reality but will take
its full effect only In future generations. For the moment,
probably not more than a tenth of all adults lead a
conscious and active cultural life. This is partly because
their education has been based too exclusively on a mere
transfer of knowledge and on having to learn a bit about
everything. At the age of 19, a boy or girl ought to know
about theatres, concerts, libraries, museums. The sad fact
is that they often do not Some people are satisfied
with their days off, their paid holidays, their sports matches
and their television. Even those who do not want to work
are supported by the State, and some students, drop-outs,
hippies and beatniks see no reason for continuing the
material struggle for existence.
The other extreme is represented by people who work
themselves to death in order to gain more and more of the
products of a consumer society.
How is this challenge of the welfare society to be met?
Some surveys have revealed that 70 per cent of those
who started work between the ages of 14 and 18 never
followed another course of any kind. They obviously need
properly thought-out facilities for education, in and out of
school. Otherwise, it is difficult to see how there can be
any democratization of culture.
Frans Van Mechelen
Minister of Dutch Culture
Colombia
The Bank of the Republic of Columbia has been called
"the bank with a soul." To it is due the Museo del Oro,
in Bogota, which has an impressive collection of pre-
Columbian gold objects, a regular El Dorado of the
archaeologists; the numismatic museum; the "Cathedral of
Salt" at the Zipaguira mines; and a centre for youth and
artists...
José Manuel Rivas-Sacconi
Director of the 'Caro y Cuervo" Institute, Bogota
Japan
I should like to refer to what might be called
the intermediate arts that are widespread among the
Japanese people and vary between highly sophisticated
art and popular amusements: the tea ceremony; flower
arrangements, and the writing of the short poem
known as "Tanka" and "Haiku". Over twenty million
people are learning how to sip a cup of tea with formal
and refined manners, how to enjoy the making of formal
flower arrangements in their homes, how to write verse.
Two kinds of art and culture of different origin, European
and Japanese, can now be regarded In Japan as like the
two wheels of a cart, and have brought incomparable
variety to our lives.
Kenji Adachi
Deputy-Commissioner, Agency for Cultural Affairs
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

1001 FACETS OF CULTURE (Continued)
India
Culture will have to have a vast base for survival In the
modern world. And youth cannot be forgotten when
thinking of the masses. States rarely provide adequately
for their needs. Much of the present-day ills of youth can
perhaps bè traced to culture starvation, or what one might
perhaps call cultural Illiteracy.
We in India would not like the development of culture
to be equated with the development of arts, especially
literary, performing or plastic arts. We believe that through
culture, a hierarchy of values can be established in the
mind of the individual. Indeed, this Is the message of
traditional cultures, especially the culture of India. At no
point of the history of India was there any doubt regarding
the ultimate goal of life not in making man as comfortable
as possible, but in making him aware of his immense
possibilities for spiritual development.
Indian tradition stresses the need to develop the har¬
monious man who, says the Bhagavad Gita, does not cause
disharmony In the world, nor does the world cause
disharmony in him. ..
T.R. Jayaraman
Joint Secretary, Ministry of Education and Youth Services
Netherlands
Social security marks a major step forward, as also
have compulsory education and paid holidays. Modern
development would be pointless without making the same
sort of progress In cultural matters. Are the public author¬
ities then entitled to exert pressure and Influence, as
Orpheus tried to influence the destiny of Eurydice by des¬
cending to the underworld? The answer is evidently: no.
The mass media have their advantages and their draw¬
backs. We must live with both. We must encourage the
greatest creativity of the greatest number and this is
obviously a matter for the public authorities unless we
want passive receptivity to win; if it does, the spectators
will have given in, accepting this culture, wrapped and
laoelled like a pharmaceutical product.
The industrialized countries are certainly more cut off
from creative sources than countries less well off materially.
Where the sources have dried up, they must be renewed.
This requires a new type of organizer, who is not an
educator in the formal sense, or a psychoanalyst, and
still less a sergeant-major. He must be both fellow-
player and guide. Part of his rôle in continuing education
is to rid people of the idea that, however successful they
may be in economic matters, art and cultural activities are
beyond them.
Marga Klompe
Minister of Culture
Switzerland
The Swiss Confederation has four languages and three
cultures, and firmly believes in the peaceful coexistence
and mutual enrichment of its various languages, religions
and cultures cultures linking us to the three neighbouring
countries with whom we share them but without prejudice
to our own cultural autonomy.
Willy Spühler
Former President of the Swiss Confederation
Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia is a country with two alphabets, three reli¬
gions, five nations, six republics and several nationalities.
Vukasln Micunovic
President of the Federal Council for Education and Culture
Bulgaria
The acclaim won by the superficial is always short-lived
and never, finally, evokes a real social response. The
democratization of culture in Bulgaria has never been inter¬
preted as simplification, as draining works of art of their
real content.
Pavel Matev
President of the Committee for Culture and the Arts
