Futurescapes
of the
21st century
When teenagers
and architects
see eye to eye
ä
K
Photo <D Shell. Brussels

Imaginative drawings in which young people from
different countries portray their ideas about the city
of the future were a popular attraction at a recent
"Science and Science Fiction" exhibition in Paris.
A selection is presented here and on pages 18 to 21,
alongside designs for cities of the future made by adult
architects and artists. A 14-year-old Paris schoolgirl
drew the "futurescape" (right) with its pinnacled buildings
topped by spiral antennae and an airspace crammed
with satellites. The flying cities soaring over a futuristic
panorama (opposite) were conjured up by an artist
for a calendar depicting the world of tomorrow,
published by an oil company in Belgium in 1962.
The housing complex (below) was a project designed
for a New York site by Frank Lloyd Wright,
shortly before his death in 1959.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Photo © Editions R. Laffnnt, Paris
From "Où Vivrons-Nous Demain ?" by Michel
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris

FUTURESCAPES (Continued)
"There's no place like dome" is what people may say of these cupola-shaped
houses of the future (right). Part of a project designed by the American
sculptor and architect Bernard Redek, these buildings would be constructed
with synthetic materials, suspended in mid-air on metallic arc-shaped
supports, and encircled by a network of access roads. Similar domelike
structures set between interlacing motorways figure in "The City of
the Future" (above) visualised by a 14-year-old French girl, and also in
"The World of Tomorrow" (above right) as imagined by- a young Japanese boy.
In the city, below, drawn by a teenage Paris student, busy highways
criss-cross and at one point climb upwards supported by a giant hand.
Beside the hand, seven spheres represent an arrangement of atoms
in a giant model symbolizing the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
'NO PLACE LIKE DOME'
Photos ß Paul Almasv. Paris
eg tri A.
(0
» c c
C00
O i- oi
« > «J
-5>K
m
©P-s
Û.U-.Q
.

MILE-HIGH UNIVERSITY. This "up-ended" university campus (left), soaring skywards
for over 1,200 metres (almost a mile) would house 30,000 students. Designed in Paris
by the famous sculptor Nicolas Schöffer, it is a feature of his project for a
"dynamic-space" cityhalf "working" city and half "recreation" or "fun" city
in which Schöffer alternates horizontal and vertical buildings. The flower-petal
city rising into the sky (above) is proposed by a 15-year-old French schoolgirl.
Her "Daisy City" as she calls it appears to have everything except a lift to reach it:
a children's paradise (with unlimited sweets), petal "neighbourhoods" for
gastronomy, cinema, flowers, the forest, the sea, ski-ing, as well as a "realm of
sleep". A busy space programme is in operation at "Cape Kennedy"; alongside,
an empty petal is held in reserve for still undetermined uses.
19
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

FUTURESCAPES (Continued)
Photos © Paul Almasy, Pans
MUSHROOM CITIES. Below, model of "Intrapolis", a city designed 50 years ago by the
Swiss architect Walter Jonas. It consists of inter-connected, funnel-shaped structures inside
which dwellings would be placed in terraces on the sloping sides. Also reaching upwards
to the light is the "Hotel for the Year 2000, with terraces", above left, drawn by a 16-year-old
schoolboy, and the tree-like metal structure, above right, conceived as the setting for a
town by a boy aged 14. Attached to the latter drawing are tbe boy's explanations:
"To the right are the public buildings, to the left the living area, and, in between, the business
centre; the power, heating and communications elements are grouped at the top of the structure.'
RAISED TERRACES
AND
SUNKEN ISLANDS
Photo © Editions R. Laffont, Paris

-±<iM
Photo © Editions R Laffont. Pans
From "Où Vivrons-Nous Demain ?" by Michel Ragon
Photos © Paul Almasy, Pans
OCEANOPOLIS. Why not take a tip from the Aymara Indians
of Lake Titicaca, who live on floating, artificial islands made of woven
reeds, and build floating cities? The American architect William Katovolos
sees nothing bizarre in this idea and has designed a floating city
using plastic materials, top right. If cities can be built on the sea,
why not submarine cities? Commandant Cousteau has already shown
the way with his underwater houses. A 15-year-old schoolgirl envisages
a whole underwater city composed of vast, sack-like living areas
suspended from a leaf-shaped surface float, above. An 11 -year-old
Japanese boy sees man the scientist dominating the underwater world
with a complex system of aeration and exhaust pipes (right).
His "oceanopolis" would be inhabited by a hardy people to whom
skin-diving would be as normal as walking.
