by Ali. A. Mazrui
Learning
the three T's
in school
28
WONFRONTED with a world
of tense relations between racial and
ethnic groups, what can the school do
to reduce and eliminate such tensions?
How can societies use their educa¬
tional systems to improve the quality
of inter-group relations among the
coming generations?
Inter-group relations vary signifi¬
cantly from one country to another,
and techniques for resolving group
tensions have, to some extent, to be
related to the special features of the
country concerned.
The division which cannot, for the
time being, be escaped is the one
between the white world and the
coloured world, between white children
and coloured children and the parti¬
cular problems which have to be
faced if the quality of their mental
images of each other is to be
improved.
If we were considering education
in an exclusively white country, the
emphasis in educational reform might
have to be towards promoting greater
tolerance of alien cultures and alien
groups. But if we were concerned
with education in an exclusively black
country, we' might have to contend
not with the problem of intolerance,
but with the problem of the depen¬
dency complex.
The educational system in an African
country might need to handle the
crisis of a sense of psychological
inadequacy, sometimes seen in the
indiscriminate imitation of western
culture, and sometimes in aggressive
hostility towards that culture. Both
cultural aggression in the black man
and cultural imitation could be symp¬
toms of an inner dependency complex,
still struggling to find ways of self-
liquidation.
ALI A. MAZRUI, of Uganda, is head of the
Dept. of Political Science and Public Admi¬
nistration at Makerere University, in Kampala.
He is the author of "Violence and Thought:
Essays on Social Tensions in Africa" (Long¬
mans, London) and "Towards a Pax Afri¬
cana" (Weidenfeld, London).
But what about a country which is
racially mixed? There are times when
equal attention might need to be paid
both to promoting greater tolerance
in white children and to overcoming
dependency in coloured children. But
since racially mixed societies are not
all at the same stage of integration,
the relative sizes of the problems
might vary considerably.
As a generalization, we might say
that the central problem in South
Africa for the time being is not so
much black dependence, as white
arrogance. If we were hoping to see
educational reforms in South Africa,
the first emphasis might be towards
transforming the attitudes of the white
children in the direction of greater
tolerance and understanding of groups
other than their own. The problem
of the dependency complex in black
children, though certainly very much
there, is for the time being secondary
in a society whose stratification arises
purely from the racial assertiveness
of the whites.
But a look at American society re¬
veals a different emphasis. There is
indeed still the lingering problem of
white arrogance as an aspect of the
American racial scene. On the black
side there are two problems the
residual dependency problem and the
problem of loss of identity.
The residual dependency problem
may be manifested in "Uncle Toms",
people who are taken or mistaken to
be blind imitators of western or Anglo-
Saxon norms, and who feel uneasy
about being abandoned by the Anglo-
Saxon world. But the dependency
phenomenon in the United States may
take more subtle forms than that of
blatant imitation, it may sometimes
lead to aggressive reaction to what is
taken to be white abandonment of the
black man.
What challenges do these inter-
ethnic and inter-racial problems pose
for educational systems? One point
which needs to be grasped immediately
is that the problem of relations bet
ween races has points in common
with problems of relations between
religious denominations, as in Ireland
or between tribal groups, as in Kenya
and Uganda. The educational impli¬
cations of plural societies may be
strikingly similar, regardless of whe¬
ther the plurality derives from racial,
religious, or ethno-cultural differences
On close examination it may well
turn out that there are at least three
politically significant values which can
be inculcated by the educational
system, regardless of the nature of the
society, and indeed regardless of the
regime in power. We might call these
values "The Three T's of Training in
Nationhood". The T's I have in mind
are first, Tolerance, second, Toil, and
third, Teamwork. They are themselves
to be seen as supplementary perhaps
to the three R's of basic education
Reading, Writing and Arithmetic.
B' Y "Tolerance" I do not
mean the promotion of a sense of
"brotherhood". The idea of human
brotherhood is a religious idea, and
people respond to it more positively
when they are listening to a sermon
in a church than in their day-to-day
lives. It is just not realistic enough
to expect people who are otherwise
rivals and strongly in competition, and
have no connexion of any kind with
each other in blood or cultural affinity,
to regard each other as brothers
nevertheless.
Even the Christian imperative of
"love thy neighbour" is a tall order.
Even a literal neighbour may be quite
demanding if he plays his gramo¬
phone too loud at night, or if his
children are noisy and boisterous.
The critical issue for a society is
not how much brotherhood there is,
but how much tolerance. There is no
special credit in being favourably dis¬
posed towards your own brother. The
real test comes when, in spite of
being unable to regard a stranger as
CONTINUED PAGE 30

ïï
i tt
Photo © Holmes-Lebel, Paris
The Masai, a pastoral people who range along the great Rift Valley of Kenya and Tanganyika
(Tanzania), have preserved many ancient customs including that of blood brotherhood. Above,
a young Masai girl prepares a white boy for a "brotherhood" ceremony. She took a liking to him
because his hair is cut as short as that of Masai girls. Children are not born w¡th racial prejudice;
they learn it as they grow up. And ignorance of other peoples and their cultures creates the false
beliefs and stereotypes from which racial prejudice develops.
29

LEARNING THE THREE T's (Continued)
Tolerance, toil and teamwork
30
your brother, you still tolerate his un¬
usual and idiosyncratic ways.
Our societies need, above all, the
capacity to tolerate people of. differ¬
ent cultural backgrounds, or differ¬
ent regions or identities, or different
political views. Our societies need to
be guided not necessarily by the
values of liberalism in their totality,
such as individualism, nor indeed by
the institutions of liberalism, such
as certain types of parliaments and
certain types of multi-party systems.
But our societies do need to be
governed by the liberal rules of the
game the rules which simply say
"Live and let live". The liberal rules
of the game permit competing view¬
points and competing interpretations
of reality to survive together. The
liberal rules of the game prescribe
toleration of differences and of plura¬
lism.
Tolerance is, in fact, the most diffi¬
cult of these three values to inculcate
in children. Children are notoriously
intolerant at times, and can be pain¬
fully and brutally cruel. The question
of what kind of approach should be
adopted to foster and build-up their
capacity to tolerate others is perhaps
one of the most important and yet in¬
tractable problems in the whole field
of child education.
But, at the level of Intellectual toler¬
ance, there is a good deal to be said
for a system of education which puts
a special premium on debating as an
activity. The idea of getting school¬
children to debate amongst themselves
on a variety of fundamental issues
has great potential as a teaching
device to promote tolerance of differ¬
ing viewpoints. The training here
springs from exposure to radically
polarized viewpoints.
The debates should take place
several times a term, instead of once
or twice a year. By all means combine
these debates with the idea of invit¬
ing controversial speakers to address
current affairs societies, and answer
student challenges and expostulations,
but controversial speakers should
supplement confrontations between
students themselves over intellectual
issues.
Debating becomes a useful tech¬
nique in a situation of fluid values,
partly because it helps to sharpen the
faculties of deciding between different
values, and gradually developing a
sophisticated evaluation of different
alternatives. Debating is also a criti¬
cal training in the art of toleration.
The imperative of Toil, like the other
two T's, is subject to cultural varia¬
tions. Attitude to work is conditioned
by those cultural factors. President
Nyerere in Tanzania has claimed that
in traditional Africa everyone was a
worker "a worker" not just as distinct
from "employer" but also as distinct
from "loiterer" or "idler".
Nyerere sees work in traditional
Africa as a factor balancing African
hospitality. The tradition of hospitality
and support for one's kinsmen could
all too easily result in parasitism. The
obligation to work is the safety valve
against excessive hospitality. As
Nyerere put it:
"Those who talk about the African
way of life, and quite rightly take
pride in maintaining a tradition of hos¬
pitality which is so great a part of it,
might do well to remember the Swa¬
hili saying "Mgeni siku mbili; siku ya
tatu mpe jembe" or in English: "Treat
your guest as a guest for two days;
on the third day, give him a hoe."
The incentives to work in traditional
Africa were often in the following
order: first, the need to meet the indi¬
vidual's own basic needs and those
of his immediate family; secondly, the
individual's contribution to the welfare
of neighbours and kinsmen if this is
customarily expected; and only thirdly,
the individual's interest in accumulating
more things for himself and aspiring
to self-improvement as distinct from
self-maintenance.
1 HE ordering of priorities is
quite significant. It is not correct that
the traditional African subordinated his
own basic needs to those of his com¬
munity. His own basic needs came
first, the needs of his community and
kinsmen came second, and the need
for personal improvement came third.
The incentive to hard work varied
accordingly. Working for personal
maintenance made good sense;
working hard to meet one's normal
or customary obligations to one's
kinsmen also made sense; but working
hard for some undefined target of
self-improvement was, in many cases,
less clearly understood.
Perhaps educators could investigate
ways of transmitting the ethic of work
in a manner which attempts to recon¬
cile working for society with working
for one's own improvement. The very
process of acquiring an education
poses the dilemma as between educa¬
tion for effective citizenship as against
education for personal ambition.
What should be remembered is
that the harder it is to acquire an edu¬
cation, the more it will be regarded
as a passport to a future life of
leisure. Many African children walk
long distances every day, and take
heavy part-time work, in an endeavour
to acquire an education. Because they
have acquired their education the hard
way, they tend to feel at the end of it
that they have now "arrived" and
deserve to rest. Thus the educated
become, alas, an élite of leisure.
The third "T" of Training in Nation¬
hood is the imperative of Teamwork.
It is important that, at all levels of
education, there should be opportu¬
nities for teamwork. These should
range from encouragement of basket¬
ball and soccer to encouragement of
student political societies and social
organizations. The aim should be the
promotion of national integration.
Africa is confronted with ethnic
pluralism and cultural diversity. The
interaction between different tribes
could generate considerable stress
and tension. The quest is for a system
which would permit these groups not
only to tolerate each other which
is the first pre-condition but also to
work with each other in pursuit of
shared goals. And even when the
groups are in competition, the com¬
petition itself should be subject to rules
of fair play.
Some school games may be better
suited for training in tolerance and
teamwork than others. If so, which
are which? Educational research could
pay renewed attention to the study
of sports and games, and their com¬
parative efficacy as media of sociali¬
zation and promotion of national
values.
If certain games, as yet untried in
African schools, are better for citi¬
zenship-training than those which are
already popular, there is a compelling
case for experimenting with the new
games. In some situations the gym¬
nasium may be a more effective school
of values than an ideological insti¬
tute can hope to be.
In countries which are both multi¬
ethnic and multi-religious, there should
be a purposeful policy to ensure that
each school not only mixes races and
tribes but also mixes religions. The
theory of cross-cutting loyalties as a
mechanism for integration provides
the basis for this recommendation.
If some black families are Catholic
and some are Protestant, and some
white families are Catholic and some
are Protestant, integration in schools
should not only aim to mix blacks
with whites but also to mix, at the
same time and in the same school,
black Catholics with white Catholics
and black Protestants with white
Protestants.
The fact that these categories in
such a school overlap and cut across
each other would itself reduce the
dangers of a neatly reinforced confron¬
tation. On some issues white would
gang up with white against a black
opposition, but on others white Pro¬
testants would gang up with black
Protestants against Catholic opposi¬
tion. The fluidity of alliances afforded
by criss-crossing pulls of this kind
CONTINUED PAGE 32

LEARNING THE THREE T's (Continued from page 30)
would themselves be a step away from
a petrified and rigid ethnic confron¬
tation.
Another pre-condition for the pro¬
motion of inter-ethnic harmony is the
application of the principle of cultural
parity to the curriculum. Where
groups have different cultural back¬
grounds it is imperative that the educ¬
ational system should not betray too
sharp an evaluation in favour of one
cultural heritage as against another.
The eruption of black studies in the
United States is itself one indication
of the quest for cultural parity in the
educational system of that country.
But black studies have to be an
intermediate measure, to restore
balance, rather than a permanent
innovation. After all, there are no
"white studies" as a distinct area of
academic pursuit in the United States.
To single out black studies as a
separate entity itself implies an
absence of cultural parity. Full cul¬
tural parity would only be achieved
when the educational system has
integrated more coherently a respect
for the black heritage fully integrated
into one curriculum, instead of isolated
as a separate esoteric preoccupation.
In Africa, cultural parity also
requires important reforms in curricula
and syllabuses. The inherited assump¬
tion that not enough African history
has been recorded to be usable in
school syllabuses has already been
vigorously challenged. Courses in
African history are provided increas¬
ingly, though the pace of Africanization
of syllabuses has been considerably
slower in former French Africa than in
former British Africa.
The introduction of creative writing
by Africans as part of the courses in
literature is another innovation of the
last few years. Books by African
writers are being introduced with
increasing emphasis in African schools.
Basically, in much of English-speak¬
ing Africa, there is a vigorous pursuit
of cultural parity, though many educ¬
ational reformers among Africans
would argue that not enough has been
achieved. Francophone Africa, in
submissive dependency within the
educational system, continues to be
decisively Franco-centric.
Finally, there is the problem of the
staffing of schools.
A situation where a disproportionate
number of teachers belong to a differ¬
ent community from the students they
teach has potentialities for creating
either submissive dependency or
aggressive dependency. In the United
States, aggressive dependency among
black children in schools has, from all
accounts, been rising. In much of
Africa the massive use of imported
teachers continues to consolidate
more submissive dependency rather
than aggressive.
Two policy recommendations are
particularly urgent. One concerns
the headmaster. As rapidly as poss¬
ible African secondary schools should
have African headmasters. The case
for African headmasters is particularly
strong in those schools which have a
disproportionate number of white
teachers. A black headmaster, clearly
active and in authority, helps to
reduce the dangers of socializing the
children into a persistent dependency
orientation towards the white man.
As regards primary schools, unless
it is desperately necessary, there
should be no white teachers working
in black primary schools.
One reason is that the primary age
is a particularly impressionable stage
in the socialization process. It is
important that at this stage the child
should be spared conditioning influ¬
ences which would adversely affect
his orientation towards the Western
world.
But another reason why it is imper¬
ative for primary schools to have
African teachers concerns the very
structure of primary education. At
the primary level the child normally
has one teacher in any particular year,
or at any rate one main teacher.
There are continuities here with the
role of the parents, emphasized by
the very fact that the teacher remains
the same.
In conditions like those of the United
States a modification of policy is in
order. Black schools should, as far
as possible, aim for mixed staffing,
with a black headmaster, conspicu¬
ously authoritative and active. It
would not do to have a black head¬
master mistaken for just a figurehead,
an Uncle Tom placed there for appear¬
ances. His authority over his staff
should not be too subtle.
White schools should attempt to
have at least one or two black
teachers and, where realistic, a black
headmaster. The images which have
to be transformed in black children
are fundamentally different from those
which need to be transformed in white
children. It therefore makes sense
in white schools to appoint a black
headmaster where one is available
and suitable; but to have a white
headmaster in a black school should,
for the time being, be avoided.
While the introduction of such
educational techniques should be
seriously considered, it ought always
to be remembered that the school is,
in the final analysis, only one agency
of socialization, only one factor in
helping young people to find an
identity. Society as a whole must
engage in similar self-analysis for
reform if the positive effects of a
rational educational system are not to
be neutralised by countervailing
influences from the social world
beyond the classroom.

