Environmental control
and economic systems
L
24
IKE the many-headed Hy¬
dra of Greek legend, pollution seems
to grow two new heads for every one
we succeed in striking off. When the
newly invented flush toilet was intro¬
duced in London and night soil began
to disappear from the streets of the
city, deaths from typhoid soared as
sewage was flushed straight into the
drinking water supplies.
This early lesson in the futility of
tinkering with the symptoms of pollu¬
tion instead of tackling the problem at
its roots went long unheeded; pollution
remained a technical problem for which
technology was blamed and for which
the scientist was expected to find an
answer.
But like control of nuclear power,
of telecommunications satellites, of
the potent forces of modern chem¬
istry, controlling pollution is a social
problem and at the Symposium on
Environmental Disruption organized
by the International Social Science
Council, in Tokyo last year, some lead¬
ing social scientists showed that they
were ready to assume their responsi¬
bilities.
Getting down to the social roots of
the problem, in perhaps the most inte¬
resting of their discussions, they debat¬
ed environmental disruption and its
control, in relation to different econo¬
mic systems.
Professor Erik Dahmen, of the
Stockholm School of Economics, went
straight to the heart of the problem.
To the question "Has the pace of en¬
vironmental disruption been different
under differing economic systems?" he
gave an unequivocal answer.
"A general survey of conditions in
different countries", said Professor
Dahmen, "leads to an unambiguous
conclusion: Differences in the degree
of environmental disruption exist be¬
tween countries of different levels of
development, with different population
densities, different degrees of urbani¬
zation, different geographical condi¬
tions and different climates. But there
is no evidence whatever that different
economic systems are of any impor¬
tance in this connexion, and state-
owned companies are no different
from privately-owned companies in
the extent to which they damage the
environment."
This did not mean, Professor Dah¬
men pointed out, that it might not be
easier to check environmental disrup¬
tion under one system than under
another.
Environmental disruption was caus¬
ed by a combination of factors such
as technological and industrial pro¬
gress, urbanization and population
development, with geographical condi¬
tions and climate as contributory
factors.
It was, however, an "organizational
factor", Professor Dahmen suggested,
that played a determining role in
encouraging pollution. In the complex
industrial world of today, with its
highly advanced division of labour,
different stages of decision-making
corresponded to different stages in the
production process, and this was true
of both main types of economic
systems.
In socialist systems, central autho¬
rities usually set the production
goals and decided on financing and
on the distribution of resources, but
producers were often at liberty to
take decisions regarding technological
matters that could have a direct effect
upon the environment, not unlike their
counterparts in non-socialist countries.
Control of pollution could be
attempted, Professor Dahmen maintain¬
ed, either by the imposition of regu¬
lations or by evaluating the hitherto
ignored socio-economic costs and
charging them to the producers
concerned. It was likely, he believed,
that regulations would be more
effective under a socialist system and
a fee method under free enterprise.
P,
ROFESSOR Marshall Gold¬
man, of the Department of Economics
of Wellesley College, Massachusetts,
in the U.S.A., viewed pollution as a
world-wide phenomenon, existing not
only in the western world but also in
the U.S.S.R. and other socialist
countries. This he found surprising
since, as he put it, "In theory, environ¬
mental disruption is usually regarded
as a function of selfish private en¬
terprise where the public good and
social costs are ignored".
Whatever the theoretical implications
of how socialism should be able to
avoid environmental disruption, the
Soviet Union, said Professor Goldman,
was as puzzled as the rest of us that
their pollution problems should be so
great. He quoted the editor of the
Soviet magazine Soviet Life as
asking, "Why, in a socialist country
whose constitution explicitly says that
the public interest may not be ignored,
are industry executives permitted to
break the laws protecting nature?"
Massive fish kills had been reported
in the Soviet press in the Gulf of
Finland, the Caspian Sea, and the
Volga and Don rivers. Oil disposal,
said Professor Goldman, was another
problem. Until 1965, the oil refineries
at Baku had no sewage treatment
facilities and waste oil was pumped
directly into the Caspian Sea; oil tank¬
ers were in the habit of discharging
their ballast overboard. Harbour treat¬
ment plants, however, have now been
built and it is claimed that 40 per cent
of the oil waste flowing into the Cas¬
pian is now cleaned up. Nevertheless,
complaints were still made according
to the Bakinskii Rabochi about the in¬
effectiveness of the new treatment
plants.
"Naturae enim non imperatur, nisi
parendo" (we cannot control nature
except by obeying her) wrote Francis
Bacon, and the huge system of dams,
reservoirs and irrigation canals built
in the Soviet Union, though bringing
multiple benefits to thousands of
people, had led to the diversion of
so much water that there is now
serious concern for the future of the
Caspian and the Aral Seas.
The level of the Caspian had
dropped 2\ metres over the past
20 years, reducing the spawning areas
for sturgeon by about one third,
reported the Ekonomicheskaia Ga-
zeta. Between 1961 and 1969 the
level of the Aral Sea dropped more
than 1£ metres which suggested that,
if this rate of shrinkage was maintain¬
ed, by the year 2030 the Sea would
be little more than a vast salt marsh.
Paralleling the pollution problems
of the Great Lakes of North America,
Professor Goldman declared, were
those now affecting Lake Baikal,
which contains the largest volume of

by Howard Brabyn
fresh water of any lake in the world.
Despite widespread protests that in¬
dustrialization near the lake would
destroy the quality of its water, two
paper mills were built and plans for
additional mills had been discussed.
The danger had been recognized
and stringent controls imposed on the
mill at Baikalsk and production tem¬
porarily halted at the other mill.
Despite these precautions, reported
Pravda, the Limnological Institute of
the Soviet Academy of Sciences had
estimated that the number of plants
and animals in the zone where sewage
from the Baikalsk plant was discharged
had decreased by between one half
and one third.
The cutting of trees to supply the
mills also contributed to erosion
problems causing silt to flow into the
lake. The Director of the Limnological
Institute, Gregory Galazi, had pointed
out that the whole taiga region might
be affected.
I
IT was pointed out by
Professor T. Shibata, of Tokyo
Metropolitan University, that an
examination of environmental dis¬
ruption in Japan, for example, would
certainly produce a far more formid¬
able list of problems than those facing
the U.S.S.R. and he asked Professor
Goldman whether' he could identify
any particular built-in mechanism in a
socialist society which tended to
cause proliferation of environmental
disruption.
Professor Goldman replied that, just
as many examples of environmental
disruption in the Soviet Union could
be duplicated in almost any other
industrialized country, so many of the
explanations for them were similar.
As in many non-socialist countries,
anti-pollution regulations were not
always obeyed in the U.S.S.R. At Lake
Baikal, for example, the paper plants
had at first found it cheaper to pay
the fines than to improve machinery
or close down altogether.
It had often been assumed that this
kind of thing could not happen in a
socialist economy and that each
government-owned factory would in-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Erosion is a global
environmental
catastrophe. During
the past century, wind
and water erosion have
destroyed an estimated
5,000 million acres the
equivalent of over
a quarter of the earth's
farmlands.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL (Continued from page 25)
26
elude in its price an amount equal to
the social costs it was responsible for.
Yet while the Soviet accounting system
of "Khozraschet" did involve charging
for the direct cost of factors used,
Soviet accountants had not been
more successful than anyone else in
making explicit the social costs arising
from an enterprise's activities and
including them in the cost of pro¬
duction.
Though many environmental prob¬
lems were common to both socialist
and non-socialist countries, certain
others were peculiar to an economic
society like the Soviet Union in which
a heavy premium was placed on
continued investment for future growth
and there was a reluctance to divert
funds from productive to non-pro¬
ductive uses. Unfortunately, expen¬
diture on pollution control tended to
be non-productive.
On the other hand, Professor Gold¬
man pointed out, there were a number
of ways in which the Soviet system
was better able to cope with or
prevent pollution problems. Because
government agencies owned the util¬
ities as well as most of the buildings,
it was relatively easy in the Soviet
Union to take advantage of economies
of scale in dealing with environmental
disruption. In most large cities in the
Soviet Union heat and hot water were
supplied to entire neighbourhoods by
the Teplovaia Elektro Tsentral, or
"TETs".
In densely populated urban areas
this eliminated the need for each
building to have its own furnace and
hot water heater. Fifty per cent of
all heat consumption was provided
centrally in the U.S.S.R. The instal¬
lation of such a system in the town
of Alma Ata had made it possible to
eliminate 436 individual building fur¬
naces and boilers.
The enormous power of the State
in the U.S.S.R. could also be an
advantage. The State could decree
the establishment of a natural reserve
without going through the expensive
and time-consuming process of com¬
pensating private property owners that
was necessary in the U.S.A.
"Industrialization, and not private
enterprise", Professor Goldman declar¬
ed, "is the primary cause of environ¬
mental disruption. The question re¬
mains, can you have industrialization
without environmental disruption in any
society? Since the answer seems to
be no, it should come as no surprise
that, despite the differences in eco¬
nomic systems, the solutions to en¬
vironmental disruption in the U.S.S.R.
are no simpler than they are in U.S.A.".
Professor V. S. Semenov, of the
Moscow Institute of Philosophy, ex¬
pressed sharp disagreement with
Professor Goldman's conclusion that
industrialization and not free enterprise
was the villain of the piece, nor was
he convinced by Professor Dahmen's
earlier statement that there was no
evidence that different economic sys¬
tems were of any importance in con¬
nexion with environmental disruption.
He maintained that a socialist state
could spell out the objectives of social
action according to the specific stage
of development of that society and
concentrate all the social forces and
resources in accordance with prior¬
ities indicated by scientific planning.
"New, non-damaging production meth¬
ods and products could be developed
much more easily under socialism
once that objective was defined."
The fundamental point, said Profes¬
sor Semenov, was the fact of the pub¬
lic character of ownership under so¬
cialism thanks to which, for example,
even a step to close down particular
factories could be taken, when nega¬
tive effects became too blatant, with¬
out in any way victimizing the workers
and the managers concerned.
Referring to problems of environ¬
ment and scientific city planning, Pro¬
fessor Semenov gave some startling
statistics about the rate of urban
growth in the fifty odd years of de¬
velopment in the U.S.S.R.
In 1917, the city-dwellers accounted
for only 17 per cent of the total

population; by 1968 this proportion
had risen to 56 per cent. A total of
934 new cities came into existence
between 1926 and 1969; each decade
following 1917 was the equivalent of
more than a century of pre-Revolution
development in respect of new cities.
Population growth had been equally
startling, he said. In 1926 there were
only three cities in the U.S.S.R. with
populations of 500,000 or more; in
1969, there were 34 such cities.
Practically speaking, a modern urban
environment has been created in the
U.S.S.R. in the space of fifty years,
during which period 113,400,000 people
have become city-dwellers.
"Working and everyday conditions",
said Professor Semenov, "are the two
main components of the city environ¬
ment. The conditions under which a
city-dweller lives depend upon the
rational organization and harmonious
development of these two aspects of
his life."
The imbalance in the development
of industrial and everyday aspects of
urban life which existed during the
period of industrialization before the
outbreak of the last war had begun
to decrease during the past few
decades with the all-round develop¬
ment of Soviet cities. Resources haa
also been more evenly distributed
making it possible to launch a major
offensive against backward municipal
and public services inherited from the
past.
In pre-Revolutionary Russia, only
214 cities had water supplies and a
mere 23 had sewage systems. Today,
water supplies and sewage systems
had been provided for all cities.
Electricity for domestic use was
universal in Soviet cities and the
housing conditions of the urban
population had been greatly improved.
"The problems of environmental
disruption in the U.S.S.R.", said Pro¬
fessor Semenov, "are partly of a
general nature, but possess their
specific features since they are linked
with the features of big socialist cities.
"Practically everything in such cities
is the property of the entire popu¬
lation, not of private individuals or
groups. Socialist cities do not have to
concern thermselves with restrictions
on the actions of certain social groups
or forces whose running of the
enterprises they own is detrimental
to the entire city and its environment.
They are concerned with organizing
scientifically grounded and conscious
control of the development of cities as
social organisms."
Many regulations had been imposed
in the U.S.S.R. in an attempt to control
urban construction and to establish
building norms and protect the atmos¬
phere, water resources and the soil
from harm caused by industry.
For Professor T. Isomura, of Osaka
Municipal University, pollution was a
world-wide phenomenon which requir¬
ed "an existentialist approach". For
him "Environmental disruption was
environmental disruption" wherever it
was found and differences in social
systems were of little consequence.
This view was not entirely shared
by Professor Chombard de Lauwe, of
France. Environmental disruption was
a many-faceted phenomenon which
could be classified broadly under five
separate but interrelated headings:
*social and
political, »pro¬
blems of development and education.
All these aspects had to be consider¬
ed in dealing with the problems of
pollution and the disruption of the
environment.
However much the participants may
have disagreed about the part eco¬
nomic and social structures played in
encouraging or discouraging dis¬
ruption of the environment, they were
all agreed that pollution was a real and
growing threat to the quality of life.
If our environment is to be pre¬
served, sociologists, scientists, eco¬
nomists and each member of the public n*T
will have to spend a little more time, £ /
like Wordsworth, "On Man, on Nature
and on Human Life, Musing in
Solitude." M
