An Italian initiative
SCHOOL
FOR DISARMAMENT
T
| HE impressive mass of
the 15th century Castello Duino stands
on a rocky promontory overlooking the
Adriatic Sea a few miles south of
Trieste in Italy. For three weeks last
summer this ancient monument
housed a gathering of eminent men
and young scholars, from 21 countries,
attending the 3rd International Summer
School on Disarmament and Arms
Control.
It was In the course of a con¬
versation m with Professor Edoardo
Amaldi, during the 1962 summer
school for physicists organized by the
Italian Physics Society, that Professor
Carlo Schaerf first put forward the
idea of an international school on
disarmament and arms control.
As Professor of Physics at Rome
University and author of a number of
important papers on nuclear physics,
Carlo Schaerf was more aware than
most of the full implications of modern
warfare and he was determined to
make his own contribution to the cause
of world peace.
Perhaps the formula used with great
success to expose physicists to the
latest experimental and theoretical
results and update their education in
fields that were not exactly their own
could be used also in the field of
disarmament and arms control.
Disarmament, Dr. Schaerf reasoned,
is a political problem. It can be
achieved only by the concerted poli¬
tical decisions of world leaders acting
under pressure from their respective
national public opinions. However,
disarmament is also a very difficult
technical problem. To understand the
political problems of disarmament a
vast amount of technical information is
necessary.
Suppose such information could be
brought to the attention of men of
influence in countries throughout the
world, would not this at least have a
moderating influence on the councils
of men and perhaps finally snowball
until disarmament and arms control
became a self-evident necessity
instead of a Utopian dream?
Professor Amaldi, himself a member
of the Continuing Committee of the
Pugwash Conference, the informal
organization of scientists for the inter¬
national exchange of ideas on the
impact of science on human affairs,
accepted the idea with enthusiasm.
Then began the long struggle to
convince other people of the value of
the idea and to raise the funds ne¬
cessary for its realization. The Car¬
negie Endowment for International
Peace, in the United States, and the
Italian National Commission for Unesco
were the first to act on the initiative
and grant financial support. The
School opened its doors for the first
time on July 13, 1966, with Professor
Amaldi as Director.
Invitations to the principal lecturers
at the Summer School were issued on
the basis of the teachers' specific
interest and reputation in the sphere
of disarmament and related subjects.
Amongst the personalities who have
lectured at the School are such experts
as Mr. Jules Moch, of France, former
statesman and at one time president of
the United Nations Disarmament
Commission, Mr. V. Emeljanov, presi¬
dent of the Commission for the
Scientific Problems of Disarmament
of the Academy of Sciences of Mos¬
cow, Mr. M. Markovich, Professor of
the Philosophy of Science at the Uni¬
versity of Belgrade, and Mr. Bert
Röling, Secretary-General of the Inter¬
national Peace Research Association.
Participants included young scho¬
lars of international relations, foreign
office officials, sociologists, econo¬
mists, etc.
Courses cover a period of two
weeks with approximately three ses¬
sions every day. They start with formal
lectures and continue with long dis¬
cussions. Round tables, open discus¬
sions and very specialized seminars
are organized on the initiative of the
Director or at participants' request. At
night, people gather in small, informal
groups to continue the arguments of
the day. The 1970 course was follow¬
ed by a week-long symposium.
One of the techniques that has been
adopted by the School, both for
teaching purposes and for research, is
the use of social simulation and game
theory, both highly complex techni¬
ques employing laboratory experimen¬
tation with environments simulating
those of international situations. The
game theory was applied to disarma¬
ment problems in the early 1960s and
the School sought to integrate this
knowledge and induce more and
better research on them.
M
I ^B OW, at the end of several
years' experience, the School has be¬
come an internationally recognized
initiative in the field of peace-orientat¬
ed education and research.
It is a minimum budget operation
with no regular financing, and while
this situation causes the organizers
some headaches it also ensures the
School's great virtue of independence.
No national or political pressure group
can claim to influence in any way the
work of the School. Impartiality and
the freedom to discuss any argument
on its merits are the rule.
The International Summer School on
Disarmament and Arms Control
attempts to achieve the fusion of
knowledge-seeking and social action.
Perhaps, in the words of one distin¬
guished participant, Professor Rapo-
port of the University of Toronto, from
this initiative and others like it "an
applied science of peace will emerge,
just as in another age natural science
was born when philosophers overcame
their reluctance to handle things and 07
moved into the workshops where *" '
craftsmen and artists were already
working." "
