Pittsburgh was once renowned as "The Smoky
City." Today it should perhaps better be known
as "The Smokeless City." Photo left shows
how the city used to look in its pollution heyday,
when at midday one could hardly see clearly
across the street. Pittsburgh in recent years has
launched an anti-smoke campaign that has had
revolutionary results, as recent photo (right)
shows. The strange cylindrical mechanisms in
foreground are "sniffers" placed atop
Pittsburgh's skyscrapers to analyse the air for
invisible pollutants such as carbon monoxide,
sulphur dioxide and fine particles that drift in
the air. Apparatus serves as an early warning
system and relays "alert" signals when rise in
pollution is recorded.

PITTSBURGH
smoky city
to smog-less
skies
by Edward L. Stockton
Photo Gene Smith © Magnum
EDWARD L. STOCKTON is consultant to
the National Sanitation Foundation, in the
United States, and was formerly with the
Bureau of Air Pollution Control at Pitts¬
burgh, Pennsylvania.

i_JN Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
these days, it is possible to wear a
white shirt, or a white dress, from
dawn to dusk and come home almost
spotless. Housewives are able to hang
out the wash on a sunny morning
without having the load to do again
by noon because of sootfall and dust.
Most of the downtown skyscrapers
appear newly constructed, though it
has been several years since the
surfaces were washed or blasted.
Before the 1940s, however, gen¬
erations lived in Pittsburgh once
known as the Smoky City that often
found it difficult to see the opposite
side of the street. Today Pittsburgh,
the once murky steel-town, is visually
one of America's cleaner cities.
Pittsburgh has reduced its smoke
and dustfall by an amazing 84 per
cent since World War II. Visibility
from downtown is now about 10 miles
compared to the former blackout
conditions. Today the pollution trend
is reversed and invisible gases, such
as carbon monoxide and sulphur
dioxide, from the automobile and fuel
combustion, now comprise about 90 per
cent of the pollution concern for
control officials.
The key to success came through
co-operative community action. To
understand the enormity of the job
that faced Pittsburgh and Allegheny
County when they launched their
smoke abatement efforts let us glance
at the major smoke-producing factors
then prevalent:
1,600,000 persons resided in 500,000
households, most of which burned soft
coal.
A vast complex of 1,600 industrial
and commercial installations existed in
the area. This complex included the
steel-making and processing facilities
of major companies: over 150 furnaces,
cement mills, coke plants, brick kilns,
coal mines, paint factories, chemical
works and oil refineries.
Railroads and steamship lines kept
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
These laboratory animals suspended
in their cage over a busy U.S.
highway are used by scientists
investigating the biological effects of
continually inhaling motorcar exhaust
fumes. Last year for the first time
more than 100 million motorcars were
registered in the U.S.A., and exhaust
fumes have become one of the
leading factors in air pollution for
most large cities all over the globe.
The automobile industry in the U.S.A.
is now spending hundreds of millions
of dollars on research to reduce
exhaust fume pollution.

PITTSBURGH (Continued)
Laundry bill
savings
$40,000,000
per year
up a steady traffic through Allegheny
County.
It was a task to discourage any
but those of stout heart. But the
community rose to the challenge in
an orderly, efficient campaign; not the
pellmell irresponsible drive that panic
begets.
Pittsburgh and Allegheny County had
to call upon every element of the com¬
munity for co-operative effort, and they
got it without any financial help from
the government.
In this campaign, help came from
many sources:
Householders volunteered either
to abandon the use of soft coal or to
install smoke preventative fuel-
burners.
Industry volunteered the expen¬
diture of tremendous sums to greatly
reduce or eliminate smoke emissions
from its stacks.
Railroads and shipping lines volun¬
teered to shift from steam to diesel-
powered operations.
Coal mines volunteered to bring
under control fires in gob (waste
material) piles.
The total investment in fuel change¬
over, installation of cleaning devices
and process changes to clean the air
since World War II has amounted to
the gigantic sum of over $380,000,000.
It cost home-owners about 25 per cent
of this amount and industry the re¬
maining 75 per cent.
Another vital factor leading to the
success of the campaign was that
industry not only assigned its
engineering personnel to develop new
devices to control smoke emissions
in its own plant, but provided joint
engineering know-how through re¬
search on smoke control problems.
As technological solutions were found,
this knowledge was shared by com¬
petitors.
The important discoveries were not
only of benefit to the community, but
to the entire United States, and were
especially helpful in writing in air pol¬
lution control device specifications as
new plants were being designed or
built.
The fight for clean air really began
late in 1939, but it was seven grimy
years before any specific results could
be seen.
Leading industrial and business
executives, including representatives
of the steel industry, sparked the
renaissance through formation of the
Allegheny Conference on Community
Development. By 1942 another civic
group, the United Smoke Council, was
formed by 142 men and women from
71 organizations. In 1945, the United
Smoke Council became a part of the
Committee on Smoke Abatement, a
subdivision of the Allegheny Conferen¬
ce on Community Development.
But something else took place in
1945 that dramatized the struggle for
clean air so prominently that most of
Pittsburgh's population had to take
sides. David L. Lawrence, an inde¬
pendent and well-to-do industrialist,
campaigned for the nomination for
mayor, and his major appeal was to
those who wanted smoke control.
Not everyone wanted smoke control
by any means. Householders were
told that smokeless fuel would cost
them dearly and that smoke control
would drive industry from Pittsburgh;
that it would become a jobless ghost
town if the Lawrence supporters had
their way.
It was a tough battle, but Lawrence
won the nomination and the election.
And he proved to be a man who kept
his campaign promises, particularly
where smoke control was concerned.
"If I had to choose, I would rather
One key to Lawrence's campaign
was an impressive fact sheet about the
high cost of atmospheric pollution.
Respected physicians said that Pitts¬
burgh was not a healthy place to live
in, and statistics on respiratory
diseases appeared to bear them out
(in 1945, for example, Pittsburgh led
the nation in deaths from pneumonia).
It was disclosed that forty industrial
firms had decided to leave Pittsburgh
because of smoke, smog, and impure
air, as well as a recurring danger
from floods and contaminated water.
Actually it was in 1941 that Pitts¬
burgh embarked on its cleaner air
quest. It passed, with wide civic and
industrial support, an ordinance with
more than adequate teeth, but World
War II prevented enforcement.
On October 1, 1946, the smoke
abatement ordinance was put into
force. Regulations severely restricting
smoke emissions by industrial plants
and railroads, took effect immediately
while family dwellings were given a
year of grace to comply.
In 1946, the Pittsburgh Chamber of
Commerce, the League of Women
Voters, and other civic groups joined

have birds than aeroplanes."
Charles A. Lindbergh
the Allegheny Conference fight to
extend air-pollution efforts to all of
Allegheny County. Pittsburgh had
discovered what many other regions
have still failed to grasp: that polluted
air knows no political boundaries; it
drifts over borders and chokes com¬
munities impartially.
Within two years the city had gain¬
ed some of the benefits of air pollution
control. Two years after its smoke
control ordinance went into effect,
visibility in downtown Pittsburgh had
improved 67 per cent and there was
a 39 per cent improvement in days of
sunshine observable. The pall of
smoke was thinning out.
In May, 1949, after one of the finest
displays of community dedication and
with all the segments closing ranks
industry, labour, business and civic
groups, educators, the press and
householders the Allegheny County
smoke control' ordinance was passed
by the Board of County Commis¬
sioners. This regulation was to last
until 1960 when it was revised.
The law was drafted, it should be
emphasized, with the participation
of those who for the most part would
be the first to be hit by its demanding
provisions.
General public acceptance of the
stringency of the smoke abatement
provisions was made considerably
easier by the educational campaign
carried on while the ordinance was
being drafted. In this endeavour the
entire press in the area did yeoman
service.
The community, of course, was con¬
ditioned to the realization that no mira¬
culous "instant" results could be ex¬
pected. It was prepared for a long
pull and in this it was pleasantly sur¬
prised, for after a single year of enfor¬
cement some rather remarkable pro¬
gress had been achieved.
And so it went. Each succeeding
annual report brought good tidings.
Within a very few years there was no
longer a need to wait for progress
reports. The evidence was all around,
for all the populace to see.
Those who knew Pittsburgh "when",
could hardly believe their eyes on
re-visits. By 1955, there was a reduc¬
tion of 96.6 per cent in heavy smoke
and of 88.8 per cent in total smoke
since 1946. The annual estimated per
sonal savings amounted to $41 mil¬
lions in laundry and cleaning bills as
soot no longer descended on lines and
curtains.
On top of all its other virtues, the
smoke abatement campaign is gen¬
erally credited with a major role in
sparking Pittsburgh's mammoth rebuild¬
ing programme that changed the face
of the city.
Although improvement piled on im¬
provement, Pittsburgh and Allegheny
County refused to rest on their laurels.
They went after bigger air pollution
game. Up to that point they had
directed their attack to smoke abate¬
ment. Now they were determined to
tackle the emissions from open-hearth
furnaces, sintering plants and electric
furnaces which had been omitted from
the first ordinance because there was
no known way to control their emis¬
sions. The new Advisory Committee
was assigned the job of drafting a new
ordinance, one that would deal with
these emissions, and other pollutants.
This situation was not without irony,
since it was the successful result of
research by the very steel companies
which would be affected by the new
regulations that led to the decision to
put stringent emission limitations into
law.
Though the composition of the
1949 County Advisory Committee had
changed, its dedication to the public
interest was as unswerving as that of
the original group.
In March 1960, the Committee
drafted an ordinance that imposed
new stringent regulations described
as the strictest ever invoked against
air pollution.
A quick look at some current statis¬
tics provides astonishing proof of the
long road that Pittsburgh and Alleghe¬
ny County have travelled on their
march into the bright new era of
cleaner air which was shaped through
co-operative community effort.
In 1940 there were 1,000 hours
when downtown visibility was less
than 3/4 miles. By 1960 this was
reduced to under 75 hours per year.
By 1970 visibility had been extended
beyond 10 miles on most days.
The crowning touch to the measur¬
ement of Pittsburgh's present high
state as a centre for cleaner skies,
came in a U.S. Public Health Service
survey in 1962, which disclosed that
Pittsburgh had less fine dust per
square mile than nine of the 11 cities
tested. The only city that was below
Pittsburgh was Salt Lake City.
As a result of control efforts to
date, the air in downtown Pittsburgh
is visibly clean. However, Pittsburgh
and Allegheny County are fully aware
that their battle against air pollution can
never be completely won; none ever
is.
But the citizens are prepared to .t «j
continue their anti-pollution campaign I /
with unrelenting vigour, secure in the
knowledge that they can depend on
community action.
