NUBIA
Victory
of
international
solidarity
by Abdel Moneim El Sawi
ABDEL MONEIM EL SAWI held the post
of Under Secretary to the Egyptian Ministry
of Culture for 12 years, during which time
he was directly concerned with the inter-
national campaign to save the monuments
of Nubia. He was deputy chairman of the
joint venture to displace the temples of
Abu Simbel, and supervised the project
until the end of 1969. Mr. El Sawi is
editor of the Arabise edition of the"Unesco
Courier"and is chairman of the Unesco
National Publications Centre in Cairo, which
is responsible for the publication of Arabie
editions of a number of Unesco penod) ca/s.
An Arab man of letters, he has published
a number of books in Arabic.

The rescue of the Abu Sim-
bel temples from the waters
of the Nile was not only one
of the greatest engineering
feats of the modern era. it
was also one of the finest
examples of selfless, disin-
terested, international co-
operation of ati time. Left,
one artist's conception of
the salvage operations be-
fore they were actually un-
dertaken. A temporary cof-
ferdam, in foreground, holds
back the rising waters as the
Great Temple of Rameses is
excavated and prepared for
dismantling. The smaller
Queen Nefertari Temple,
right of photo, awaits the
builders'attentions. A spe-
cially constructed road runs
along the cofferdam and up
to the new site where the
two temples were finally to
be installed in artificial
hillocks, 200 feet above
their original site. To exca-
vate the temples from the
hillside, 300, 000 tons of rock
had first to be removed.
The temples were then cut
up into blocks weighing up
to 30 tons each and with a
total weight for the two
temples of 15, 000 tons. Work
began in 1964 with the con-
struction of the cofferdam
and the two temples were
ceremonially inaugurated on
their new site on September
22, 1968.
Hue International cam-
paign to save the monuments and
explore the archaeological sites of
Nubia is one of the great achieve-
ments of Unesco in its quarter of a
century of existence. Eleven temples
once threatened by the rising waters
of the Aswan High Dam have been
removed and re-erected on new sites,
and four others dismantled and pres-
ented to the U. S. A., Spain, The
Netherlands and Italy in recompense
for the help they gave in the rescue
operation of the Abu Simbel temples.
Ah that remains is to dismantle the
temples of Philae and to reconstruct
them on the island of Agilkia, beyond
the reach of the Nile.
The tourist in Nubia today who
stands admiringly before the temples
now resurrected in the cultural"oases"
at Abu S ! mbe !, Amada, Wadi Es Sebua
and Kalabsha may little realize the
gigantic efforts that went into this
international achievement.
Nubia lies between the Aswan Dam
in Egypt and the Dual cataract in the
Sudan-over 500 kilometres of rugg-
ed country flan king the course of the
Nile, remote from urban civilization,
with an austere climate and acces-
sible only by boat.
As work started on the construction
of the High Dam, a vast exodus from
Nubian villages and hamlets began.
Soon the entire area was denuded of
life. Fruit and vegetable plantations
withered and then the waters rising
behind the dam wall slowly but inexo-
rably swallowed up roads, palm trees,
houses, te ! egraph and telephone lines.
Finally there were no communi-
cations, no crops, no food, no sec-
urity or guard posts, in fact virtually
nothing except the Nile waters and the
desert sands. It was in this austere
setting that an unprecedented cultural
rescue operation began.
During the Nubia monuments cam-
paign, from 1960 until 1968, perhaps 61
the most difficult years were those
when the lochai population was evac-
uated. When this emigration was
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
ø'+,. < : ;"o
: I .Q)
1 : >'"a :
ë: >
C
3. <&gt;
'"F. 
èi

NUBIA (Continued)
completed in. 1963, Nubia looked so
dead and empty that it seemed impos-
sible that men had ever lived there.
Nevertheless. the new.. inhabitants"
of Nubia-specialists, technicians and
workers from Egypt, Sudan and many
other countries-accepted the chal-
lenge of scorching sun and arduous
living conditions as they set about
the operation launched in response
to Unesco's international appeal of
March 8, 1960
T ODA Y,., l, ee. II the
achievements of this compaign, 1 would
like to pay tribute to the men and
women who embarked on this historie
endeavour : scientists, engineers,
artists, technicians and workers from
a ! ! parts of the world.
Nubia was transformed during the
excavation seasons into a unique in-
ternational arena. During the long
summer months when thé Ni ! e water-
level dropped beyond the Aswan Dam
as the sluices were opened to drain
away the flood water, excavation
teams searching for monuments and
other remains were scattered through-
out Nubia.
Living on Nile boats and in white
tents, they worked from dawn till
forenoon, then resumed work from
the afternoon till late in the evening.
Throughout each season, lights glowed
on both banks of the Ni ! e as thé scien-
tists busied themse ! ves with their
studies and, when they couid, org-
anized social life and entertainments.
tn these camps one coula hear
English, French, Czech, Spanish.
Polish, German and Russian spoken,
as oeil as Arabie and many other
languages.
An international spirit prevailed
everywhere in Nubia. This"Nubian
spirit", as it came to be known, over-
came ai ! différences and unified
everyone within a framework of co-op-
eration and friendship. The same
spirit prevailed among those at work
salvaging the temples.
The archaeological teams were
carrying out excavation work during
several months each year, before re-
turning home with their finds. During
these months the teams removing the
temples were also at work so that the
62 whole area bustled with activity.It should be recalled that the
operation of dismantling and re-siting
the two temples at Abu Simbel went
on without interruption for nearly five
years (from 1963 to 1968) despite
great material difficulties. For the
teams engaged on this project the
operation was a life and death race
against the rising waters of the Nile.
Yet the contract covering the joint
venture at Abu Simbel, signed in
November 1963, did not permit the
erection of any installations prior to
the start of the operation. We could
not have risked spending millions of
dollars on construction work until the
attitude of the International Nubian
Campaign towards this special project
had become quite clear.
Thus, we had to mobilize every
avallable means, however simple. Two
Nile boats were built and in these we
carried a the archaeologists, engin-
eers and technicians to their work
sites. At first we also carried food sup-
plies by boat. But refrigeration facil-
ities were so inadequate that we had
to send fresh vegetables, only to see
them spoiled by the scorching heat.
Finally we had to depend on canned
vegetables and make up any dietary
deficiencies with vitamins.
Another major problem was the
lack of pure water. This we over-
came by installing equipment for the
stringent filtration of water from the
Nile. Bread, too, was in short supply,
and at first we supplied Abu Simbel
with bread by air until another bakery
couid be built.
But gradually we completed the
construction of the village of Ram-
eses Sil at Abu Simbel, today the love-
liest community in the area of the lake
of the High Dam. It now comprises
hotels and rest-houses ; and it has elec-
tricity and pure water, a swimming
pool, tennis courts, a hospital, a mos-
que, a telegraph and post-office a
wireless station, paved roads and a
police post. Beautiful gardens have
been planted in which grow fruit trees
and vegetables, and now that an air-
port has been built, Abu Simbel has a
direct air link with Aswan.
Through the Nubian campaign,
Unesco has been able to achieve more
than one of its important goals. First-
! y, in undertaking to save the ancient
cultural heritage of Nubia, it has link-
ed the past to the present. Secondly,
it has linked the world with one idea,
bringing nations and peoples closer
and binding them together with this
strong and unique tie. Finally, Unesco
has proved that differences between
nations could be eliminated if only the
world as a whole were to co-operate
in constructive work, instead of squan-
dering its energies and resources on
disputes and wars based only on nar-
row se ! f-interest. «
5 MILLION
DOLLARS
NEEDED
TO SAVE
PHILAE
MONUMENTS
Qi. < :;()"oLL
aQ.
Xû.
0
a
Õ. < :;a

Unesco has launched an international appeal to save the
great temples on the island of Philae in Egypt. $1 million is
needed by July 1, 1972, to start the rescue operation and
$5 million by 1976. The monuments of Philae-its temples,
colonnades and carvings-stand on an island submerged by
the Nile for most of the year. They will be irreparably lost
unless they are quickly dismantled and rebuilt on the nearby
island of Agilkia. The action to save Philae will crown a
remarkable achievement in cultural co-operation and will
be the last phase of the international campaign launched by
Unesco to save the monuments of Nubia from oblivion
beneath the waters of the Aswan High Dam. The cost of
"operation Philae", from dismantling to reconstruction, will
total $13. 700, 000, one-third of which will be provided by
the UAR. By June 1971, in response to Unesco's appeal,
nearly $1, 600, 000 had been pledged by 17 countries-Belgium,
Cambodia, Cuba, Cyprus, France, Fed. Rep. of Germany,
Ghana, India, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malta, Nether-
lands, Spain, Sudan and the United Kingdom-and about
one-third of these contributions had been received. So that
this international cultural rescue operation can be success-
futtycompteted, Unesco's Director-General, Mr. René Maheu,
has renewed his appeal of November 1968 to governments,
institutions, foundations and individuals to contribute to its
final stage. Above, part of the great temple of the goddess
Isis on the island of Philae. On left is the colonnade of the
"mammisi", or"birth house"of Horus, son of Isis. The
image of the goddess Hathor, sustainer of life and mother
of the world, is carved on the capital of each column. Pho-
tograph was taken when the Nile waters were at their
lowest level. But the temples and their remarkable sculpture,
over 2, 000 years old, are not likely to resist much longer
their immersion for nearly nine months of the year in the
waters of the Nile. There is no time to lose...
