FREEDOM FOR MANKIND, a prepa¬
ratory design by the noted French
sculptor and engraver, Guy-Charles
Revol, for a sculptural work in light
alloy, 3 metres in diameter.
INTERNATIONAL
YEAR
AGAINST RACISM

RACE
AND I.Q
by Otto Klineberg
The United Nations General
Assembly designated 1971 as
International Year for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, to be observed
in the name of the ever¬
growing struggle against so¬
cial discrimination in all its
forms and in the name of
international solidarity with
those combatting racism. It
called on all States to co¬
operate in every possible way
in implementing this interna¬
tional campaign and to in¬
tensify and expand their ef¬
forts, at the national and inter¬
national levels, towards ensur¬
ing the rapid and total eradica¬
tion of racial discrimination,
including the policy of apart¬
heid, nazism and all of its
contemporary forms, as well
as other manifestations of
racism. U.N. Secretary-General
U Thant has expressed the hope
that the International Year
Against Racism will bring "a
general recognition that the
theories, ideas and prejudices
which lead to racism and racial
discrimination are unjust and
abhorrent, and that a great
responsibility rests upon all
to eradicate the shameful prac¬
tices which they encourage."
OOME 20 years ago there
was good reason to believe that the
notion of a genetic or inborn racial
hierarchy had practically disappeared
from the thinking of social and bio¬
logical scientists concerned with this
issue. The general position could per¬
haps best be stated in negative terms,
namely that there was no acceptable
scientific evidence in favour of such a
hierarchy, and that consequently any
political or educational programme
based on the alleged innate inferiority
of any racial or ethnic group had no
scientific validity.
Some years earlier (1944) Gunnar
Myrdal and his associates in An
American Dilemma had called for an
educational offensive to reduce the
gap between this position of the social
scientists on the one hand, and that of
the general public on the other. In
the years that followed, it began to
appear that at least in the United
States a real change in this respect
had occurred in the general public.
When a representative sample of
white Americans were asked the ques¬
tion: "In general, do you think that
OTTO KLINEBERG, of Canada, is one of the
world's leading psychologists and authorities
on race relations. He is at present visiting
professor at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes
Etudes at the Sorbonne and director of the
International Centre for Intergroup Relations,
in Paris. Among his long list of publications
are: "Race Differences" (1935), "Negro Intel¬
ligence and Selective Migration" (1935),
'Tensions Affecting International Under¬
standing: A Survey of Research" (1950), and
"The Human Dimension in International Rela¬
tions" (1964). His study, "Race and Psycho¬
logy", first published in 1951, also appeared
in Unesco's "The Race Question in Modern
Science" in 1956. A revised edition of this
book is scheduled to be published next year.
We are happy to publish here passages from
a new chapter In this forthcoming new edition.
Negroes are as intelligent as white
people that is, can they learn things
just as well if they are given the same
education and training" the propor¬
tion answering in the affirmative rose
from 50 per cent in 1942 to almost 80
per cent in 1964 (Hyman & Sheatsley).
It looked as if this particular issue
was dead, or at least dying. Myrdal
went so far as to say in a Nobel
Symposium published in 1970: "The
racial inferiority doctrine has dis¬
appeared, which is an undivided
advance, since it has no scientific
basis."
This "disappearance" is far from
complete, however, and the question of
innate psychological differences con¬
tinues to attract considerable attention,
not only in the United States but else¬
where as well, and not only in the
general public but also among scholars.
In 1962, Carleton S. Coon present¬
ed the theory that human evolution
had occurred more rapidly in Europe
than in Africa, and that as a con¬
sequence modern man emerged in
Europe earlier. With some caution, he
added that though dead men cannot
take intelligence tests, it may be infer¬
red that "the subspecies which first
crossed the evolutionary threshold
into the category of Aiomo sapiens
have evolved the most... and the levels
of civilization attained by some of its
populations may be related pheno¬
mena".
In a comment on this theory, Weyl
and Possony (1963) conclude that
"differences in structure, physique and
mentality among the racial divisions of
mankind can be derived". The context
makes it clear that the innate infer¬
iority of the African is indicated by
his evolution at a later date.
One Is struck by the versatility of
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

RACE AND I.Q. (Continued)
Inactivating the 'Jensen bombshell'
6
those who insist that there must be
innate psychological differences bet¬
ween racial groups. In many of the
earlier writings of the origin of races,
for example, and also in some mu¬
seums of natural history, one may find
an evolutionary genealogical tree, in
which whites are presented as having
evolved most recently. There the
inference was that Africans were
more primitive and therefore inferior.
In other words, if the African evolved
earlier he is more primitive; if later,
he is inferior because he has had less
time in which to develop.
A second example of this versatility
is found in the interpretation of certain
test results. In 1931, Myrtle McGraw
applied the Bühler Babytests to black
and white infants in the south of the
U.S.A. and found the latter to be su¬
perior. This was interpreted (by others)
as proving that even before culture had
the opportunity to exercise its in¬
fluence, inborn group differences could
still be demonstrated. (McGraw her¬
self in a letter to the American Psy¬
chologist repudiated this interpretation
of her results.)
More recently, Géber and her asso¬
ciates (Géber & Dean, 1957) used the
tests of the Gesell Institute, in New
Haven, U.S.A. on infants in Uganda,
and found them to be definitely in ad¬
vance of the norms established in New
Haven. Weyl and Possony (1963) com¬
ment: "A superficial conclusion from
this might be the mental superiority
at birth of Negro children. Actually,
the reverse is indicated."
Obviously, early rapid development
signifies an inferior brain, more like
that of an animal which quickly rea¬
ches full maturity. Again, if black in¬
fants do poorly on tests, they must be
inferior; if they do well, this indicates
that they will be inferior later.
By far the most striking recent dev¬
elopment in this field striking because
of its identification with a reputable
psychologist at a great university (Uni¬
versity of California at Berkeley) and
also because of the intense public
reaction with which it was received
is represented by the publication in
1969 of a monograph by A. R. Jensen
in the Harvard Educational Review.
In answer to his own question, "How
far can we boost IQ and scholastic
achievement?" Jensen developed the
thesis that genetic factors "may play a
part" in intelligence differences be¬
tween black and white children.
The Harvard Educational Review de¬
voted three whole issues to the views
of Jensen and of his critics, the latter
ranging all the way from temperate dis¬
cussion of his genetic assumptions to
vituperative attacks on his "racist" and
reactionary viewpoint.
The popular press, throughout the
United States and a number of other
countries, seized upon Jensen's thesis
with enthusiasm, and gave it a truly
remarkable amount of publicity. It
seems highly probable that opposition
to the notion of innate psychological
differences between blacks and whites
is not very firmly rooted in the popular
mind.
Another move in a direction similar
to that of Jensen has been made by
William Shockley, Nobel Prize-winning
physicist at Stanford University, also
in California, who urged the National
(U.S.) Academy of Sciences to conduct
extensive research into the problem of
genetic (including racial) intelligence.
Basing his argument in part on the re¬
sults obtained by blacks and whites on
intelligence tests, Shockley insists that
the failure to study the nature of the
genetic potential of the blacks repre¬
sents a profound degree of moral irres¬
ponsibility.
The issue of racial differences in
innate intellectual capacities may not,
therefore, be regarded as entirely re¬
solved. In a series of statements
issued by experts convened by Unesco,
the position taken is that there is no
adequate scientific evidence, based
either on tests or on other varieties
of data, which justifies the conclusion
that such differences exist.
To take only the most recent of
these, dated September 1967, the con¬
clusion is reached that: "The peoples
of the world appear to possess equal
biological potentialities for attaining
any level of civilization", and further
that: "Racism falsely claims that there
is a scientific basis for arranging
groups hierarchically in terms of psy¬
chological and cultural characteristics
that are immutable and innate."
In what follows the attempt will be
made to present and assess the varie¬
ties of evidence related to this thesis,
with particular reference to the results
obtained through the application of
psychological tests.
Article II of the Universal Declara¬
tion of Human Rights affirms:
Everyone is entitled to all the
rights and freedoms set forth in
this Declaration, without distinc¬
tion of any kind, such as race,
colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national
or social origin, property, birth or
other status.
One of the obstacles to the realiza¬
tion of this part of the Declaration is
the belief, widely and stubbornly held,
that some races and peoples are in¬
ferior, and that they therefore do not
have the same "rights" as others.
As already noted, scholars and
scientists have in some cases attempt¬
ed to support the argument in favour
of a racial hierarchy. It is curious,
although perhaps understandable, that
those scientists who have expressed
OVERCROWDED CELLS
AND PRISON
DORMITORIES
themselves in this manner, have usually
arrived at the conclusion that their own
people are superior to all others.
Some of the German scholars, for
example, were convinced that the peo¬
ple of Northern Europe excelled the
rest of mankind in intellectual endow¬
ment as well as in character and mora¬
lity. An Italian anthropologist was
equally certain that the peoples of the
Mediterranean were responsible for
most of the great contributions to our
civilization. For some black scholars,
everything good in contemporary civi¬
lization has come out of Africa.
These rival claims do not help us
to arrive at the truth concerning the
relation of race to psychology. We
need a more objective method, a more
certain technique; one that is not so
dependent on purely subjective judg¬
ments as to who has superior intellec¬
tual endowment, or what is a greater

A report of the U.N. Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, of
the Commission on Human Rights, Is devoted to racial discrimination in South Africa and other territories
In southern Africa. In territories under Portuguese administration, it writes, evidence shows that
"black prisoners are subject to discriminatory treatment. Dormitories are overcrowded and cells very
small. According to witnesses there is a severe lack of medical services and there are instances where
prisoners have been left to die without receiving medical attention." Photo above, though not taken in
Angola or other Portuguese African territories, symbolizes the plight referred to in the U.N. report.
contribution to civilization. We need
proof that is scientifically sound; evi¬
dence that is scientifically acceptable.
Psychologists have developed a
method which, with all its faults,
appears at first glance to have consi¬
derable advantages for this purpose
the psychological test. Instead of hav¬
ing to decide whether a German
scientific discovery represents a high¬
er intellectual achievement than an
Italian painting, the test permits us to
present to a group of Germans and
Italians a series of problems to solve,
and we can then determine who solves
them more quickly and more effec¬
tively.
If someone else doubts our results
he may repeat the study, using the
same or other subjects, and the same
or other tests. If his results agree
with ours, our confidence in them is
increased; if not, we must suspend
judgment until other investigations help
to determine who is right.
This is all that would be necessary
to settle the question of superior and
inferior races if psychological tests
were perfect instruments for the
measurement of native or innate
differences in ability. It is true that
they were accepted as such for
a long time, at least by some psy¬
chologists and educators, as well as
by many laymen. We now know,
however, that they are far from perfect.
The successful solution of the prob¬
lems presented by the tests depends
on many factors the previous experi¬
ence and education of the person
tested, his degree of familiarity with
the subject matter of the test, his
motivation or desire to obtain a good
score, his emotional state, his rapport
with the experimenter, his knowledge
of the language in which the test is
administered and also his physical
health and well-being, as well as on
the native capacity of the person test¬
ed.
It is only when such factors are
"held constant", that is to say, when
they are in essential respects similar
for all subjects tested, that we have
the right to conclude that those who
obtain higher scores on the test are
innately superior to those whose
scores are lower.
This makes it immediately obvious
that we must use great caution in
interpreting the results when a psycho¬
logical test is administered to two
different racial or national groups.
Living under different conditions, dis¬
similar in culture, education and point
of view, such groups may differ widely
in the test results not because they
have an unequal heredity but because
of their unequal social environment.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

RACE AND I. Q. (Continued)
Unjustified conclusions from intelligence tests
The great French psychologist
Alfred Binet, who was responsible for
developing the first scale of intelli¬
gence tests in 1905, was aware of this
limitation in the application of his
method. He pointed out that his tests
could safely be used in order to arrive
at inborn differences only if the
various individuals or groups tested
had had substantially the same oppor¬
tunities. Many psychologists neglect¬
ed or forgot Binet's wise counsel, and
drew unjustified conclusions from their
data.
In view of the many ways in which
culture and previous experience may
affect test scores, it is not surprising
to find that the British psychologist
Philip E. Vernon, who has had long
experience in research and teaching in
this field, concludes: "There is no such
thing as a culture-fair test, and never
can be" (1968).
Attitudes toward
the test
One of the major arguments against
the notion of a "culture-fair" or "cul¬
ture-free" test is the fact that groups,
and even individuals, vary greatly in
their attitude toward the test. The
very act of competing against others
in a test situation is itself influenced
by the values and attitudes develop¬
ed in a particular society.
Professor S. D. Porteus in The Psy¬
chology of a Primitive People (1931)
tells of an interesting experience in
administering psychological tests to a
group of Australian aborigines. The
tests were made up of a series of
mazes, the problem consisting of trac¬
ing a pathway through the maze until
the exit was successfully reached.
Each subject was expected to per¬
form the task by himself. This situa¬
tion turned out to be a strange one for
these Australian natives. They are
accustomed to solving their problems
together, in groups. "Not only is every
problem in tribal life debated and set¬
tled by the council of elders but it is
always discussed until a unanimous
decision is reached."
The subjects were frequently puzzled
by the fact that the examiner would
give them no assistance when they
experienced some difficulty in solving
the problem of the maze. This was
particularly true in the case of one
group of natives who had recently
made the psychologist a "blood bro¬
ther" of their own tribe, and they could
not understand why he refused to help
them.
A similar indifference to the kind of
competition taken for granted in Wes¬
tern society was noted by the present
writer in an investigation undertaken
among the Yakima, a tribe of American
Indians living in the state of Washing¬
ton on the U.S. west coast.
The tests used were a group of
performance tests, in which no know¬
ledge of language is necessary, and
the task consists of placing pieces of
wood of various shape into the appro¬
priate areas of a wooden frame "as
quickly as possible". The scores ob¬
tained depend on the speed with which
the task is completed and the num¬
ber of errors made in the process.
These Indian children, however,
never hurried. They saw no reason to
work quickly. Western culture places
a premium on speed, on getting things
done in as short a time as possible;
the Indian children had not acquired
this attitude. They went at their task
slowly and deliberately, with none of
that scrambling impatience that is so
often found among American children.
The Indians, as a consequence, took
much longer to finish the tests, though
they made somewhat fewer errors than
the white Americans with whom they
were compared.
The writer made an analogous
observation among the Dakota (Sioux)
Indians in the state of South Dakota.
There it is regarded as incorrect to
answer a question in the presence of
others who do not know the answer:
this might be interpreted as showing
off, or as bringing shame to" others,
and is consequently condemned by the
whole group.
These Indian children also have de¬
veloped the conviction that it is wrong
to reply to a question unless one is
absolutely certain of the answer. Psy¬
chologists who have given the Binet
test to these children have observed
that they never guess at the answer:
if they are not sure, they keep quiet
indefinitely. This, too, reduces their
scores to a certain extent, since a
guess may succeed, and since credit is
given for an answer that is even partly
correct.
As a final example in this context
may be noted the experience of the
anthropologist Margaret Mead with
Samoan children, and reported in her
Coming-of-Age in Samoa. She was
administering the Binet test, which has
as one of its items the Ball-and-Field
problem. A ball is lost in a circular
field, and the task of the subject is to
trace a pathway along which he would
walk in order to find the ball.
These Samoan children, instead of
tracing the most efficient pathway,
used the occasion to make a pretty
design. Their aesthetic interest was
evidently stronger than their desire to
solve the problem.
These examples all indicate the pos¬
sibility that the cultural background of
the individual may determine his gen¬
eral approach to the test situation in
such a manner as markedly to influ¬
ence his test score.
Even in the case of minority groups
within the same society, such as
American blacks, evidence indicates
that their attitude toward the test, their
motivation to do their best, may not be
similar to what is found in the white
children with whom they are compared.
They are often suspicious of the test
and what it means, and they lack con¬
fidence in their ability to do well.
Attitudes toward the
children tested
Expectations regarding performance
may be important not only for those
who are tested, but also for those who
do the testing and teaching. Clark
' (1963) has presented the view that
culturally disadvantaged (one might
add also culturally different) children
are the unfortunate victims of teachers'
educational self-fulfilling prophecies;
in other words, if children are expect¬
ed to do poorly, they will do poorly.
This hypothesis was tested experi¬
mentally by Rosenthal and Jacobson
and published in Pygmalion in the
Classroom (1968); they gave to tea¬
chers the names of children who alle¬
gedly had done well on a "test for
intellectual blooming" which indicated
that they would show striking gains in
intellectual competence during the next
eight months of school.
Eight months later this experimen¬
tal group, together with a control group
of equal competence whose names
had not been given to the teachers,
were re-tested on the same intelligence
test.
The experimental group those
whom the teachers expected to do
well gained 4 more points in I.Q.
than did the control group; on a
reasoning test, the difference was
7 points. As the authors point out,
the difference between the two groups
was in the mind of the teachers. This
finding appears to be of very real im¬
portance in the comparisons that have
been made, and continue to be made,
between ethnic groups.
The effect of language
One of the clearest and most ob¬
vious ways In which social and edu¬
cational background may influence test
results, is through its effect on lan¬
guage. Most of the psychological tests
in general use, including those devis¬
ed by Binet, are verbal in character.
For the successful solution of the
problems presented, not only must the
subject have an adequate compre¬
hension of the questions asked; not
only must he be able to answer intel¬
ligibly once the solution has been
reached; he must also be able to mani¬
pulate words successfully in order to
reach a solution.
So important is language facility in
many of these tests that psychologists

can often reach quite an accurate
estimate of a subject's mental level
merely by knowing the extent of his
vocabulary. This early led to the con¬
clusion that these intelligence tests
were unfair to the foreign-born, or to
others (like the American Indians in
the United States, for example) who
had inadequate knowledge of the lan¬
guage in which the test was adminis¬
tered. Even if they spoke and used
that language with relative ease, they
were still handicapped if that were
not their native language, or if they
were bilingual.
This was demonstrated years ago.
Welsh children speaking only English
obtained better scores on the Binet
scale than those who spoke both
Welsh and English. In Belgium, the
Walloon children who spoke only
French, were superior to Flemish chil¬
dren speaking both French and Fle¬
mish.
This should not to be interpreted to
mean that bilingualism causes a defi¬
nite or permanent intellectual inferio¬
rity; it more probably is due to the
simple fact that the vocabulary of a
young child is so limited that if he
learns words in two languages, he will
not know so many in either one. With
the passage of time, the handicap due
to bilingualism will be more than com¬
pensated by its undoubted advantages.
The effect ofpoverty
The influence of poverty or of
socio-economic class on test perfor¬
mance cannot be kept separate from
the issues already raised. Low expect¬
ations as to pupil performance may
affect the poor white as well as black;
differences in language patterns have
been demonstrated in the case of the
poor in England (by Bernstein, 1960)
and in the United States (John, 1963).
The fact of poverty and its conse¬
quences acquires importance in this
context because of the proportionately
greater frequency of poverty among
minority groups, and particularly
among the blacks in the United States.
This consideration alone should im¬
pose considerable caution in arguing
from the inferior test results obtained
by black children (an average I.Q. of
85 as compared with the "normal"
100). Research conducted in many
countries and by many psychologists
indicates beyond a shadow of a doubt
that the test performance of poor white
children is markedly inferior to that of
the well-to-do; the difference between
groups at the extremes of the econo¬
mic range is in the neighbourhood of
20 points in I.Q., that is to say, greater
than that between American blacks
and whites.
To this it is retorted that even when
the comparison is between blacks and
whites of the same economic level the
difference, though smaller, still per¬
sists. All that this really means, how¬
ever, is that poverty, although of great
importance, is not the only factor res¬
ponsible.
In a critical review of the research
on ethnic differences in the United
States, Dreger & Miller (1960) correct¬
ly point out that it is not enough to
equate ethnic groups in terms of social
class and economic variables; the dif¬
ference is not solely socio-economic.
They add that even those blacks
whose economic status is higher than
that of most white persons will still in
the majority of cases be prevented
from living the same kind of life in all
respects; many other factors may also
be important.
To return to the effect of poverty,
psychologists have so far not suffi¬
ciently emphasized its role in causing
fundamental impairment to mental de¬
velopment as a consequence of malnu¬
trition.
In a survey of the relation between
nutrition and learning, Eichenwald and
Fry (1969) bring together an impres¬
sive mass of data in this connexion,
based partly on animal experimentation
and partly on observations of the
effects of nutritional deficiencies on
human beings in many parts of the
world, including Africa and Latin
America.
They conclude that malnutrition dur¬
ing a critical period of early life may
"permanently and profoundly affect
the future intellectual and emotional
development of the individual". The
factor of malnutrition appears to be of
fundamental importance in assessing
the intellectual potentialities of poor,
including poor black, people.
The effect of previous
learning and experience
In the early days of testing,
many psychologists believed that the
elimination of the handicap due to
language was equivalent to eliminating
the influence of culture and experience
in general. One psychologist, Profes¬
sor Florence L. Goodenough of the
University of Minnesota, devised a per¬
formance test consisting in "Drawing a
Man"; scores were determined not by
the aesthetic quality of the drawing,
but by the inclusion of the largest pos¬
sible number of essential aspects, by
proper attention to bodily proportions.
She regarded this test as "culture-
free" that is, independent of the pre¬
vious background and experience of
the subjects, and therefore capable of
measuring native differences in intelli¬
gence. In 1926, she conducted a study
by means of this test, and reported
definite differences in the "intelli¬
gence" of various immigrant groups in
the United States, as well as between
whites and Negroes.
Since then, many investigators have
made use of this test, and they have
been able to demonstrate that, contra¬
ry to the earlier view, the results are
indeed affected by many aspects of
previous experience. Professor Good-
enough herself later recognized this
fact, and very honestly and courage¬
ously pointed out her former error.
Writing with Dale B. Harris on "Stu¬
dies in the psychology of children's
drawings" in the Psychological Bulle¬
tin (Sept. 1950) she expresses the
opinion that the search for a culture-
free test, whether of intelligence, ar¬
tistic ability, personal-social characte¬
ristics, or any other measurable trait
is illusory, and ... the naive assumption
that the mere freedom from verbal
requirements renders a test equally
suitable for all groups is no longer
tenable.
More recent evidence along the
same lines comes from a study by
Wayne Dennis (1966) who gave the
Draw-a-Man test to samples of chil¬
dren in approximately fifty different
cultures. Averages ranged from an
I.Q. of 124 for children in American
and English suburbs, in a Japanese
fishing village, and among the Hopi
Indians. The lowest average, 52, was
found in children of a nomadic Bed¬
ouin tribe in Syria; this is explained
by their limited experience In graphic
art. Children of Lebanese Arabs, on
the other hand, with considerable
exposure to Western culture obtained
an average I.Q. of 94.
Qualitative differences
in test performance
Factors related to cultural back¬
ground and previous experience may
also determine qualitative differ¬
ences in the nature of test perfor¬
mance. Strauss (1954), for example,
found that university students in Cey¬
lon obtained better scores than Ame¬
ricans on verbal tests, but were mark¬
edly inferior on non-verbal or perfor¬
mance tests. He suggests that their
culture "has the effect of defining a
set of role behaviours that on the one
hand tends to deprecate manual and
technical ability, and on the other tends
to emphasize and reward the verbal
type of scholarly excellence".
A number of other investigators
have been concerned with qualitative
differences in test scores obtained by
various ethnic groups. Vernon (1969),
found an entirely different pattern of
abilities in the case of Jamaican and
Eskimo boys, respectively; the former
were better in Arithmetic and Word-
learning, the latter in tests dependent
on Induction and on Drawing.
Lesser et al (1965) also found qua¬
litative (as well as quantitative) dif¬
ferences in the abilities of young Chi¬
nese, Jewish, Negro and Puerto Rican
children in the United States; Iscoe
and Pierce Jones (1964) showed that
although Negro children were inferior
to whites in general test scores, they
were superior in measures of what the
authors call "divergent thinking", bas¬
ed on the ability to suggest a number n
of different uses for familiar objects. M
Clearly differences in the measured
capacity of ethnic groups may be a
function of the particular test applied.
CONTINUED PAGE 12

WHAT
PRICE
I. Q. TESTS?
Drawing on the results of psycho¬
logical tests given to children of varied
origins, certain psychologists, even
recently, have argued in favour of
the notion of a genetic or inborn
racial hierarchy. Many other experi¬
ments, however, have shown over¬
whelmingly that the theory has no
scientific validity. Groups of dist¬
inguished scientists convened by
Unesco have issued a series of
statements on race. The most recent
of these affirmed, in 1967, that
"Racism falsely claims that there is
a scientific basis for arranging groups
hierarchically in terms of psychologi¬
cal and cultural characteristics that
are immutable and innate". As instru¬
ments for measuring and comparing
innate differences in ability among
different ethnic groups, intelligence
tests are far from perfect. Previous
experience and education, living
conditions, background and emotional
factors can influence the results.
Thus, faced with one test or another
designed to measure the Intelligence
Quotient (above, a test in which
various shaped blocks are used to
form a specific design in a given
time) the reaction of this woman from
northeastern Siberia (left) or that of
the Brazilian Indian, who seems to
be playing at "cat's cradle" (top right)
may differ completely from those of
a European or an African. Research
shows that as environmental opportu¬
nities of different groups become
more alike, as in the case of the
black and white children in the class¬
room, right, differences in test results
also tend to disappear.

* f
Photo © Chiara - Musée de l'Homme, Paris
m

RACE AND I.Q. (Continued from page 9)
Objections to Jensen continued
12
If every test is "culture-bound" that
is to say, affected by the whole com¬
plex of previous education, training
and experience, can the use of tests
give us any information at all about
racial differences, or similarities, in
intelligence? If we cannot disentangle
hereditary from environmental influen¬
ces in the results, has the testing me¬
thod any relevance at all to our
problem?
We can of course legitimately say
that racial differences in intelligence
cannot be demonstrated by means of
the tests, for the reasons given; we
can at least say: "Not proven!" Is
that all we can say? Or is there some
more positive manner in which the
tests may be used to answer the ques¬
tions we are raising?
us look at the problem
a little differently. It is true that the
test scores obtained by two different
groups are due to the interaction of
hereditary and environmental factors
which cannot be disentangled. The
inferiority of one of these groups to
the other may then be due to an
inferior heredity, or to a poorer
environment, or both.
Suppose now we make the two en-
. vironments more similar; equalize them
as far as possible. If as the environ¬
ments become more alike, the differ¬
ence in test scores tends to disap¬
pear; if when the environments are to
all practical purposes equalized, the
difference in test scores disappears
completely; we then have a strong arg¬
ument in favour of the environmental
rather than the hereditary explana¬
tion of the observed differences. What
do the results show?
If a test which has been found to be
useful in establishing differences
among children in Paris or New York
is administered to children in Mozam¬
bique or New Guinea, we could hardly
expect the latter groups to do as well
as the former. That should be obvious,
though unfortunately it has not always
been recognized.
There are, however, a number of
countries in which groups of different
ethnic or racial origin live side by side,
and it would seem a simple matter to
use such groups as a basis for com¬
parison.
If in the United States, for example,
we find Americans of Scandinavian,
Italian, Chinese, Negro and American
Indian origin, all living in an "Ameri¬
can" environment, can we not assume
that they all have the same cultural
background, the same educational and
economic opportunities so that any
differences in test results could with
scientific safety be attributed to differ¬
ences in hereditary capacity?
Unfortunately, this is not so. The
American Indian, for example, usually
lives on reservations separate from the
surrounding community; he usually
goes to different schools; he lives a
different life; he speaks English, but
frequently not too well; his economic
status is on the average inferior.
The Negro, although his position in
American life has improved markedly
in recent years, is still in most cases
subject to very definite handicaps; his
economic status is also on the average
very much below that óf the whites;
the schools which he attends have
certainly been inferior in the past, and
to a certain extent are still inferior
to-day; he finds it more difficult to
obtain certain types of employment,
or to participate fully in American life.
Once that is understood, it should
not be surprising to find that American
Indians and Negroes, adults as well as
children, do on the average obtain test
scores inferior to those of whites. But,
it must be noted, this is a difference on
the average. There are many indivi¬
dual Negroes who obtain scores high¬
er than those of a great many indi¬
vidual whites. What is more impor¬
tant, there are sometimes whole groups
of Negroes who do better on the tests
than groups of whites with whom they
have been compared.
This important fact first aroused
widespread interest during the First
World War, when over a million re¬
cruits in the American Army, including
many Negroes, were given psycho¬
logical tests. The results showed that
Negroes from the south (where educa¬
tional and economic handicaps were
greater) obtained scores which on the
average were definitely inferior to
those of Negroes from the north
(where such handicaps, though they
existed, were much less severe).
Even more strikingly, the Negroes
from some of the northern states turn¬
ed out to be superior to the whites
from some of the southern states. This
was true in the case of both types of
intelligence tests used, one depend¬
ing on language, the other a perfor¬
mance or non-language test.
It began to appear, at least to some
psychologists, as if the colour of the
skin were less important in determining
success with the tests, than the oppor¬
tunities given to the individual to ac¬
quire the needed abilities.
As an indication of the wide differ¬
ences in test scores, within the same
racial group, which accompany diffe¬
rences in the environment, one finds
at one extreme, a group of Negro chil¬
dren in rural Tennessee obtaining an
average Intelligence Quotient of 58,
and at the other extreme, Negro chil¬
dren in Los Angeles, California, with
an average Intelligence Quotient of
105.
For the white population as a whole,
an I.Q. of 100 is to be expected; that
is by definition the standard or norm
with which these results are to be
compared. In the inferior environment
of rural Tennessee, the Negro score
goes far below this standard; in the
more favourable environment of a big
city like Los Angeles, the Negro score
reaches and even exceeds by a small
amount the "normal" Intelligence Quo¬
tient. This is an important result and
its implications for so-called racial dif¬
ferences in innate capacity appear to
be obvious.
Another ethnic group which has
been studied in considerable detail,
and with a large variety of tests, is the
American Indian. In general, their test
scores are the lowest of all groups
examined in the United States; their
average Intelligence Quotient is in the
neighbourhood of 81, instead of the
"normal" 100. This result is not at
all surprising, in the light of the "cultu¬
ral" factors discussed above.
The late Professor T. R. Garth of the
University of Denver, Colorado, tried
to discover what would happen if
American Indian children were given the
opportunity to live in a social environ¬
ment similar to that of other American
children. He made a study of Indian
children who had been placed in white
foster homes, cared for by white fos¬
ter parents. These Indian foster child¬
ren obtained an average Intelligence
Quotient of 102.
	1 ORE recently evidence has
accumulated to indicate that training
may markedly raise the level of perfor¬
mance. McFie (1961) was able to
produce a substantial improvement in
the test scores of his African subjects
as a result of education which placed
emphasis on drawing and construction;
there was a significant increase in
both speed and accuracy of per¬
formance.
Lloyd and Pidgeon (1961) also report
that in testing school children in Natal,
they were able to produce a marked
rise in the test scores of African
children after two short sessions of
coaching. The authors warn against
any assumptions about the innate
abilities of children from different
cultures on the basis of these tests.
A significant review by Hunt (1971)
of a number of educational pro¬
grammes, directed not only to the
children of the poor but also to the
mothers of such children, has shown
how much can be done to improve
performance. He writes: "These
findings of substantial gains in the
I.Q.s. of children of mothers so
taught . . . provides a substantial hope
of developing a method of preventing
the development of incompetence in
children of poverty..." Hunt adds that

this perspective is applicable to both
the black and the white poor.
With these findings in mind, it is
difficult to understand why Jensen
answers his own question, "How much
can we boost I.Q. and scholastic
achievement?", with the conclusion
that the gains are small. Many of his
critics have pointed out that gains have
indeed been obtained, and that they
would be much more substantial if the
relevant programmes were maintained
over a sufficiently long period, and
affected a wider range of the child's
experience.
A statement by the Council of the
Society for the Psychological Study of
Social Issues, a division of the
American Psychological Association,
includes these words:
"One of our most serious
objections to Jensen's article is
to his vigorous assertion that
compensatory education has appa¬
rently failed. The major failure in
so-called compensatory education
has been in the planning, size, and
* scope of the programme. We
maintain that a variety of pro¬
grammes planned to teach specific
skills have been effective and that
a few well-designed programmes
which teach problem-solving and
thinking have also been success¬
ful. The results from these pro¬
grammes strongly suggest that
continuous and carefully planned
intervention procedures can have
a substantially positive influence
on the performance of dis¬
advantaged children."
Jensen has been severely criticized
on a number of counts, including the
neglect of many of the research
findings that throw doubt on his thesis,
and the fact that a good deal of his
argument is really irrelevant to the
subject of race differences. He makes
a strong case, for example, in favour
of the role of genetics in determining
variations among individuals and
families; most psychologists would
agree that heredity does play an
important part in connexion with such
individual variations, without, however,
accepting his inference that this
implies ethnic differences as well.
On this latter point the conclusion is
still "Not proven". It should also be
emphasized that Jensen is not nearly
so dogmatic in his assertions as some
newspapers reported. His actual
words are that it is a "reasonable
hypothesis" that genetic factors"may
play a part" in intelligence differences
between black and white children.-
The many factors that enter into
test performance, and that have been
reviewed above, indicate, however,
that even this relatively temperate
position rests on no solid evidence,
and that his hypothesis is far from
"reasonable" in the light of the various
considerations.
One further important environmental
factor emerges from the report prepar¬
ed by J. S. Coleman and his colleagues
CONTINUED PAGE 32
NEW ZEALAND
OUTLAWS RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
New Zealand, a country which has always prided itself on its race relations,
today seeks to maintain this situation through a law that will make racial
discrimination illegal from January 1, 1972. With the country's growing
Maori population moving increasingly to the cities and an influx of Polyne¬
sians from the South Pacific islands, the government sees the need for
safeguards against the possibility of racial tensions. New Zealanders have
also become aware of changes in world opinion regarding racialism, and this
has influenced the government to clarify the country's position concerning
racial equality. In recent years a greater awareness of the minority Maori
group has developed in New Zealand. Intermarriage has contributed to
the change, but so has an upsurge in interest in Maori arts and crafts
and in the Maori language. Here, a young Maori woman a former
"Miss New Zealand" greets a former president of the New Zealand
Travel and Holidays Association with a "hongi" traditional Maori
greeting in which noses are touched together during the handshake.
13

RACE AND I. Q. (Continued from page 13)
32
for the U.S. Office of Education, and
published under the title Equality of
Educational Opportunity in 1966.
When a pupil from a minority group
living in "a home without much educa¬
tional strength is put with schoolmates
with strong educational backgrounds,
his achievement is likely to increase".
The effect is similar when those with
"strong educational backgrounds" are
black rather than white, but it is not
surprising, in view of the whole history
of the United States, that such favour¬
able home backgrounds are found
more often in the case of white chil¬
dren.
For this reason, one of Coleman's
findings is of great significance,
namely that "the average Negro ele¬
mentary child is in schools where
16 per cent of the students are
whites"; the proportion rises in sec¬
ondary schools, but in 1966, it was
still only 24 per cent.
In this connexion it should be point¬
ed out that the U.S. Government and
the law courts are strongly committed
to reducing this disproportion, and are
insisting on a much more significant
degree of school desegration, but the
actual changes in the schools take
place very slowly.
The net result of all the research
that has been conducted in this field
is to the effect that innate racial
differences in intelligence have not
been demonstrated; that the obtained
differences in test results are best
explained in terms of the social and
educational environment; that as the
environmental opportunities of dif¬
ferent racial or ethnic groups become
more alike, the observed differences
in test results also tend to disappear.
The evidence is overwhelmingly against
the view that race is a factor which
determines level of intelligence.
As formulated in the Unesco
"Statement on Race": "It is now
generally recognized that the intelli¬
gence tests do not in themselves
enable us to differentiate safely
between what is due to innate capacity
and what is the result of environmental
influences, training and education.
Wherever it has been possible to
make allowances for differences in
environmental opportunities, the tests
have shown essential similarity in
mental characteristics among human
groups."
