The scientific
legacy of Iran
by Desmond Stewart
I ODERN man lives longer,
in an environment increasingly under¬
stood, thanks in part to the labours
of the turbaned scientists of medieval
Iran. The munificence of their scien¬
tific contribution indeed constitutes a
mystery which some writers have
tried to unlock by invoking race.
Climate and geography are more
rational keys. Iran's climate, torrid
in summer and in winter icy, at once
stimulated and hardened its sons.
Its position as the mountainous
turntable linking India, Central Asia,
the Middle East and Europe entailed
invasions by Greeks and Arabs from
the west, by Seljuk Turks and Mongols
from the east; its people were thus
thrown in vivid contact with varied
traditions.
Iran's own periods of attack, when
Persian armies moved east or west,
played their role in mixing a distinctive
blend of humanism, speculation and
practicality.
Since the Iranian character typically
expressed itself in what was useful
as well as beautiful, an appropriate
point at which to begin a discussion
of Iranian science is medicine, a
science which modern man can
acclaim without reserve.
Iran's medical tradition was already
old when the conquests of Alexander
the Great linked the Persian plateau
with the Hellenistic world. Persian
myth ascribed the introduction of the
12
DESMOND STEWART is a British author who
has written widely on the Middle East. The
early development of science In the Arab
world and Its influence on other cultures has
interested him for many years. His works
include 'Early Islam", 'The Middle East:
Temple of lanus' (a comprehensive history
of the region from 1869 to the present day)
and "The Arab world".
healer's art to Jamshid, the legend¬
ary fourth hero and king of Iran.
Much later, the greatest Persian
historian of medicine, Ibn abl Usaybi'a
believed that so noble a science must,
like the Koran, have derived from
a revelation of God. With such ante¬
cedents, the Iranian physician, usually
deriving from a noble family, enjoyed
a loftier social position than his
confrères in the Greco-Roman world.
At the same time the Iranian open¬
ness to outside ideas made such his¬
torical kings as Cyrus and Darius
proud to have imported Egyptian phy¬
sicians (particularly those specialized
in the eye diseases common in the
dusty east) to their imperial courts.
The same tolerant spirit was later
instrumental in making Sassani.an Iran
the originator of medical schools. For
in the three centuries between the
conversion of Constantine and the
rise of Islam the Byzantine persecu¬
tion of heretics and pagans drove
east, first the Nestorian scholar-
physicians of Syria and then the last
Neo-PIatonists of Greece.
All found a hospitable welcome
across the border in south-west Iran.
One town, Jundishapur near the
modern Ahwaz, housed a cosmopolitan
university with a scientific bent, which
reached its zenith under the 6th cen¬
tury Núshírván, known to the west as
Khosroes the Great.
Most of the instruction in its medical
school was in Syriac, but its scholars
also spoke Sanskrit, Greek and early
Persian. Besides translating Greek
and Indian authors with an Eliza¬
bethan fervour, the university produced
original works. One Sassanian product
was a thirty-volume encyclopaedia
dealing with all then known poisons
and their properties.
The Arab invaders of the 7th century
respected Jundishapur, but their effect
on the Persian language was similar
to that of William the Conqueror on
Anglo-Saxon. Henceforth for some
centuries Arabic was the lingua franca
of all educated Moslems.
Yet far from restricting Persian
genius, the Islamic conquest gave it
a "global village' in which to act.
Iranian science particularly flourished
once the Abbasids moved the caliphal
capital from Damascus, close to the
Hellenistic Mediterranean, to the site
of Baghdad but a day's journey from
the Iranian foothills.
Baghdad was founded in the mid-
8th century by Mansur, a belligerent
caliph tormented by indigestion. Cured
by the chief physician of Jundish¬
apur (he was summoned to the capital
when Mansur's own doctors admitted
themselves defeated) the Caliph en¬
couraged an immigration of Iranian
scholars from Jundishapur, which
increased under his descendants.
The Abbasids lasted in Iran from
the 8th Century until their final defeat
by the Mongols in 1258. They not
only married Iranian women but
sponsored a cultural compost in which
Arabs largely dominated the studies
linked to language theology, poetry
and law while conceding to foreign¬
ers, and in particular Persians, what
we would think of as the physical or
practical sciences, but which they
termed "foreign".
Mansur's great-grandson, al-Ma'mun
(whose mother and wife were both
Persians) founded a "House of Wis¬
dom" comparable in cultural impor¬
tance to the Mouseion founded by
the Ptolemies in Alexandria more than
a thousand years before. Appropri¬
ately, much of the science of Alexan¬
dria was translated into Arabic, often
via Cyriac, for Ma'mun's Dar al-Hik-
mah (DAR).
T
HE institution's most
famous head was Hunayn ibn Ishaq,
born at Hira in Iraq. Hunayn pursued
the medical manuscripts of Galen with
a lover's passion. He was never
satisfied until he had obtained the
most accurate text available even if
this necessitated exhausting Middle
Eastern journeys.
Other scholars translated the geo¬
metry of Euclid, the Almagest of
Ptolemy as well as the works of
Archimedes, the greatest practical
scientist of the ancient world. It was
not until the late 12th century, three
hundred years after Hunayn's death,
that these works were restored to
Europe through the activities of men
such as Gerard of Cremona working
in Toledo at the frontiers of Christian
and Moslem Spain.
But Iranian physicians also made
original constributions both in the
CONTINUED PAGE 14

As early as the 10th century
A.D. Persian scholars and craftsmen were
renowned for the design and manufacture
of astronomical instruments. These
17th century Persian astrolabes
instruments for taking the altitudes
of celestial bodies show the
delicacy of workmanship and precision
of design for which the work of Persian
astrolabe makers was prized
from Asia to Europe.
LA
Photos © Henry Cohen - Conservatoire National
des Arts et Métiers, Paris
Photo © Bodleian Library, Oxford
A study of the stars was part of the normal learning of the educated Persian
in medieval times. This representation of the constellation Virgo, shown as a
human figure with dots indicating the stars, illustrates a 10th century "Treatise
on the Fixed Stars" by an Iranian scholar, Abd ar-Rahman As-Sufi. The figure
is reproduced from a copy of As-Sufi's work made by his son in 1009 and now
preserved in the Department of Oriental Books, Bodleian Library, Oxford
(MS. Marsh 144, p. 223). Pictures in As-Sufi's treatise reveal a Moslem trans¬
formation of classical images of constellations as human figures, in both
dress and appearance, which is strongly Oriental, particularly for women.
13

One of the greatest legacies left by the Persians in the field of medicine Is their conception
of hospitals. The modern hospital, it has been said, is a direct growth of Persian foundations.
Doctors and teachers of medicine were drawn from Persia to staff hospitals and schools of
medicine in Baghdad and other cities. Painting (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York)
shows Persian pharmacists preparing medicine about 1224 A.D.
Ancient Persian medical books describe operations from trepanning of
the skull to excision of varicose veins. Persian doctors are credited
with using many chemical drugs of which the sulphonamides of today are
the heirs. This medieval Persian engraving shows a physician treating a
patient's ear.
Persian doctors not only developed new treatments with medicinal drugs, but adopted the
scientific methods of other peoples and modified them by their own discoveries. In hospitals
specialization was encouraged. This 12th century Persian miniature shows treatment
of the spinal column.
SCIENTIFIC LEGACY (Continued)
diagnosis of diseases (one was whoop¬
ing cough) and, most important of all,
in treatment. The modern hospital is
the lineal descendant of the Islamic
maristan, seen by Crusaders in the
Holy Land and visitors to Egypt. It
derived from Persia.
The greatest medieval clinician was
Razi, born near the modern Teheran
in 865. Living seven centuries before
the theory of bacteria was first pro¬
posed, Razi intuitively discerned the
importance of hygiene. When com¬
missioned to choose a site for a new
hospital In Baghdad, he hung joints
of fresh meat at different points round
the sprawling, circular city. Where
the meat took longest to decay, there
he sited his maristan.
Razi was a prolific writer, devoting
half of a reputed output of 200 works
to medicine. His description of small¬
pox, clearly differentiating it from other
disruptive ailments, enabled later phy¬
sicians both to diagnose the dread
disease and predict its course. His
treatment was based on good diet
and nursing amidst clean and comfort¬
able surroundings. It has not been
radically bettered since.
Razi's most important legacy was
his monumental encyclopaedia. In this
he recorded both the extensive clinical
observations which earned him his
honorific title "The Experienced" and
the collected knowledge of Greek,
Syrian, Arab, Hindu and Persian
doctors.
An equally versatile physician was
Ibn Sina (980-1037), the Latin version
of whose name, Avicenna, testifies to
a reputation that leapt the frontiers of
faith. It leapt centuries too. His
Canon of Medicine, a million-word
encyclopaedia dealing with the treat¬
ment of disease in all its aspects, was
the standard teaching text in European
universities from its translation into
Latin in the 12th century until the
medical revolution of the 17th: a record
for durability beaten only by Galen.
Razi and Ibn Sina, though living in
successive centuries, shared the poly-
mathic approach to learning character¬
istic of medieval Islam. The hundred
or so works of Razi which were not
concerned with medicine dealt with
alchemy, theology and astronomy;
Ibn Sina's non-medical writings treated
philosophy (in which he synthesized
Aristotle, Neo-Platonism and Islamic
theology), astronomy and mathematics.
As an interesting innovation, he wrote
some his books in Persian.
Persia was an important transmission
point for Hindu numerals in their
voyage to the west. They were first
publicized to the Islamic world in the
first half of the 9th century by al-
Khwarizmi, whose name shows that
he comes from a city just south of
the Aral Sea. Astronomer and geo¬
grapher, he also served as court
mathematician to al-Ma'mun, the
founder of the House of Wisdom.
By synthesizing Greek and Hindu
mathematical knowledge, al-Khwarizmi

influenced medieval mathematical
thought more than any other individual.
Yet there was again a surprising
time lag in the European acceptance
of Hindu numerals. Not until 1202
did Fibonacci (an Italian with North
African contacts) publish his oddly
named "Book of the Abacus"; this for
the first time explained the numeral
system which would, slowly, put paid
to the abacus.
Because the Hindu numerals, as
modified by Moslems, had by this
time been used by the Arabs of
North Africa for some centuries, Euro¬
peans designated them as Arabic;
others at the time called them
"Jewish", since the Jews were far in
advance of their Christian contempor¬
aries in knowledge of Islamic science.
Along with Hindu numerals, the
Hindu decimal system and the concept
of zero were transmitted through Ira¬
nian mathematicians such as al-Khwa-
rizml. The Arabic word for an empty
object, sifr, was translated as zephy-
rum in Latin. Besides using its Ital¬
ian* derivative zero, English keeps the
original sifr as "cipher".
The use of Hindu numerals and the
zero made it possible for al-Khwarizml
to compose the first easily intelligible
text-book on Algebra. The word prob¬
ably derives from al-Khwarizml's
Ketab al-Jabra wa'l-Muqabala, which
can be roughly paraphrased as "the
art of bringing together unknowns to
make a known quantity."
Al-Khwarizmi took three centuries to
reach the west. In 1126 Adelard of
Bath, an Englishman who had travelled
as far as the Middle East, translated
his astronomical tables, which included
tables of sines, into Latin. Adelard thus
introduced trigonometry to Europe.
Algebra was introduced through two
versions published in the same year,
1145. The first was made by John of
Chester (who had lived in Spain), the
second by Plato of Tivoli from the
Hebrew translation of his friend, Abra¬
ham bar Hiyya.
Sometimes an Iranian scientist
would be his own transmitter. An
outstanding example was al-Buruni,
roughly a contemporary of Ibn Sina's
and born, like the inventor of algebra,
in Khwarizm. As well as being a
mathematician, astronomer, encyclo¬
paedist and rational philosopher (he
argued that the exclamation "Allah
knows best!" was no excuse for
ignorance), al-Buruni was also a geo¬
grapher who travelled widely.
He translated works of Sanskrit
science into Arabic and at the same
time transmitted Moslem knowledge to
Hindus. Since he had himself accu¬
rately determined latitudes and longi¬
tudes and discussed the rotation of
the earth on its axis, he had much to
transmit.
One of the last great Iranian mathe¬
maticians died just a few years before
Adelard of Bath published his trans¬
lation of al-Khwarizmi. Omar Khayyam
(whose quatrains, woven into a con
iza:.,.J..W?
This 15th century Persian miniature from Shiraz gives a good idea of some of the technology
and crafts for which Persia has been famous for thousands of years: rug making, weaving
and embroidery (lower right and top left), bronzeware and other metalwork (lower left).
Note unusual shape of bellows used by craftsman at furnace (left centre). Regal figure
(top centre) is Iran's legendary King Jamshid, through whom "all skills appeared on earth".
nected poem, The Rubaiyat, would
burst into the western consciousness
with Edward Fitzgerald's 19th century
translation) was renowned in his own
time (mid 11th to early 12th century)
as a mathematician.
"His Algebra," George Sarton, the
historian of science, has written,
"contains geometric and algebraic
solutions of the second degree; an
admirable classification of equations,
including the cubic; a systematic
attempt to solve them all, and partial
geometric solutions of most of them."
His calendar was probably more accu¬
rate than the Gregorian.
The Mongol invasions shook the
foundations of Islamic culture. But it
is worth remembering one positive
result of their rule over Iran. Islamic
theologians, like their Christian equi¬
valents, had condemned the practice
of dissecting corpses, and so made
difficult the serious study of anatomy.
In the 9th century, it is true,
Yuhanna ibn Masawayh had kept mon¬
keys for the purpose of dissection.
But systematic study only became pos¬
sible under the relative freedom of
Mongol rule. The result was the 1396
Illustrated Anatomy of Mansur bin
Faqih llysás. Its illustrations (also
abhorrent to the theologically strict)
were another result of Mongol tole¬
rance.
After the Mongol invasion, the study
of mathematics and astrology continu¬
ed to flourish, as shown by the con¬
struction of observatories at Maragheh
and Samarkand.
Limits of space have restricted this
discussion to peaks, at the expense of
the lesser heights and valleys without
which no mountain range exists. Not
only have such branches of science
as optics been passed over but impor¬
tant names have been omitted. Nor
has the question whether some of the
scientists were wholly Iranian been
discussed.
This suggests indeed a final tribute.
To these Iranian physicians, chemists
and astronomers the question of their
national origin would have seemed
irrelevant in a discussion of their work.
Ignorant of racism, though aware of
their particularity, they stood as con¬
scious heirs of Greek and Hindu fore¬
runners. They saw their contributions
as part of an interwoven human endea- *
vour which had its source in God, 1 Jl
the origin of knowledge, and its
purpose as the service of his creation,
mankind.
