TV receivers galore
set a perplexing
problem of choice for
shoppers in a section
of Tokyo that
specializes In the sale
of television sets
and other electrical
equipment and home
appliances. Japan has
over 21 million
television receivers
(one for every five
persons) and over
2,600 transmitters.

TV
The challenge of
the 70s
+
QUANTITY
QUALITY
by Martin Esslin
| ELEVISION is the mass
medium par excellence. Never In
the whole of human history have the
products which television diffuses
news, views, entertainments, drama,
human personality been ingested In
such enormous quantities by such
large masses of human beings.
In Great Britain the first country
MARTIN ESSLIN is head of Drama (Radio)
for the British Broadcasting Corporation.
A member of the Arts Council of Great
Britain and script adviser to the Royal
Shakespeare Company, he has written
extensively on modern theatre and contem¬
porary playwrights. He is the author of
"Brecht, a Choice of Evils" (1959), "The
Theatre of the Absurd" (1962), "Harold Pin¬
ter" (1967), and "The Genius of the German
Theatre" (1968), and is the editor of
"Beckett" a volume of critical essays
(1965). The present text is based on a
study by Mr. Esslin published in Unesco's
science quarterly, "Impact of Science on
Society' (Vol. XX. No. 3). July-Sept., 1970.

v :
m JT'1
m ' "
1 IH:!
il 1 " I
I
in the world to introduce (in 1936)
a regular television service and thus
one of the most highly developed
television areas In the world the
average viewing audience lies bet¬
ween one-quarter and one-third of the
total population. In the peak viewing
hours In the evening, it can reach bet¬
ween 40 and 50 per cent of Britain's
population.
It can well happen that one of the
most popular programmes will be
watched by more than one-third of the
total population an audience of 16
to 17 million people for a single play,
light entertainment show, or serial.
These figures must be viewed in
relation to the sizes of audiences for
a single event or artistic presentation
in pre-mass media epochs: one hun¬
dred thousand spectators for a foot¬
ball match, or, assuming a theatre of
a capacity of a thousand spectators
giving eight performances a week,
about one million spectators for a play
that runs for more than two years to
packed houses.
A single popular television play in
Britain thus reaches an audience which
corresponds to a run of more than
thirty years in a theatrel And this
happens not just exceptionally, but
almost every day, and sometimes even
several times in the same evening!
In times past, another person's
thoughts were one of the greatest of
mysteries. Today, during television
peak hours in one of the more highly
developed countries, the contents of
a very high proportion of other peo¬
ple's minds have become highly pre¬
dictable.
Indeed, if we regard the continuous
stream of thought and emotion which
constitutes a human being's conscious
mental processes as the most private
sphere of his individuality, we might
express the effect of this mass com¬
munications medium by saying that
for a given number of hours a day,
twentieth-century man switches his
mind from private to collective con¬
sciousness. It Is a staggering and, in
the literal sense of the word, awful
thought.
The above considerations are based
on figures for television viewing in
Britain, where more than 95 per cent
of all households possess a television
set. While other countries may not
yet have reached this state of satura¬
tion, the likelihood that they eventu¬
ally will is extremely high, almost to
the point of certainty.
Three different channels are avail¬
able in Britain; in many countries
there are fewer; In some, like the
United States, where up to ten or
more different channels may be avail¬
able to viewers in the bigger metro¬
politan areas, there are more. Tele¬
vision in the United States is operat¬
ed by private enterprise and supported
by advertising, In contrast to most
countries, where it is a public mono¬
poly operated by an agency of the
government.
Taking the United States as an
example, it would then appear that
commercial television, offering more
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

TV's CHALLENGE (Continued)
Putting the vision in 'telly7
channels, provides the viewer with
much more variety. Paradoxically,
this is not the case.
The availability of more channels in
a commercially operated system, like
the American one, seems rather to
restrict than to increase the choice for
the viewer. This is true because mar¬
ket research is extensively used to
determine what kind of programme
tends to appeal to the maximum num¬
ber of viewers at a given time.
As a result, there tend to be the
same kinds of programmes on all
the channels situation-comedy series
next to other situation-comedy series,
Western against Western, football
(American variety) against football.
This tends to result In even greater
uniformity in the type and level of
material offered than in the British
or German systems where at least
two of the three channels are planned
to provide genuine alternatives: seri¬
ous against light material, arts against
sports, intellectually demanding against
popular fare.
Seen In such terms millions of
viewers hooked into the same stream
of consciousness at a given moment
the quantitative aspect of the cultur¬
al revolution which the advent of tele¬
vision constitutes seems staggering
enough. Yet, it might be argued, there
is another, and even more stagger¬
ing, even more revolutionary aspect
to the matter. This, it seems to me,
lies In the fact that the material of
television music-hall show or play or
football game Is available continu¬
ously In an uninterrupted flow, on tap
like piped water or electricity.
A
6
ADMITTEDLY, with the ex¬
ception of the United States, the con¬
tinuous stream of programmes does
not yet, in most parts of the world,
cover all the hours of the day and night.
However, even in those countries
where television hours are still res¬
tricted to afternoons and evenings,
they cover the periods when most
people are at leisure to switch on.
The main consequence of the con¬
tinuous stream of material which tele¬
vision provides is that it juxtaposes,
and tends to reduce to the same level
in the consumer's mind, very different
kinds and categories of viewing
matter, different not only in the super¬
ficial qualitative sense that some of
it is better, some worse, but in a far
more basic regard. The viewer has
come to see as one kind of thing
television programmes what is in
fact an amalgam of very heteroge¬
neous material, in a far deeper quali¬
tative sense.
One can arrange the material trans
missible by television In a spectrum
ranging from total reality at the one
end to total Irreality (fictitiousness) at
the other. Thus, we can begin with
events totally unrelated to any planning
done by the television industry, e.g.
news films of a war or a natural
disaster.
Next are events that are still real,
but foreseeable, so that they can be
planned and in some degree pre-pro¬
cessed by the television producers,
e.g. a coronation, a military parade,
a sports event like the Olympic
Games.
Then there is a range of events that
are still real in the sense that they
involve people in their real personali¬
ties, but are already structured and
pre-planned as entertainment, e.g.
parlour games in which members of
the public answer questions to win
prizes, or studio discussions between
well-known personalities. And finally,
at the other extreme end of the spec¬
trum are the totally fictitious events:
a play, a serial, a feature film.
The effect of the continuousness
with which this material is presented
for entertainment is that it tends to
blur the qualitative distinctions bet¬
ween the different kinds of material.
A scene from the fighting in Viet-Nam
which shows real soldiers really dying
may precede or follow a scene from
a war play with actors simulating war;
a politician trying to raise real Issues
on which the population is to make up
its mind may precede or follow a
comedian who Is merely using his
personality to amuse an audience.
What Is significant Is that to the
audience as a whole, television is
basically a medium of relaxation and
entertainment. It is inevitable, there¬
fore, that the distinctions between the
real and the artificial tend to become
blurred, at least subconsciously.
But the critical consequence of this
is that, even by those who are quite
clear In their minds as to what is
reality and what is fiction, the ultimate
qualitative judgement was this good
or bad television? is made on the
basis of entertainment values.
Thus it may well happen indeed
will happen almost inevitably that the
real soldiers really dying in Viet-Nam
will be judged as either more or less
moving, absorbing, entertaining than
the actors in the war play, and the
politician by whether his performance
was as entertaining as that of the
comedian.
No wonder that comedians and other
television personalities become figures
of national importance and influence
on a par with politicians, that poli¬
ticians are judged by the electorate
on the basis of their abilities as
comedians or television pundits.
The child who, on seeing the live
television pictures of the first moon
landing, remarked that he had seen
more exciting television treatment of
the same event in a science fiction
serial a long time ago, highlighted a
very real problem with, in the very
long run, very alarming consequences.
For the events which happen un¬
expectedly and spontaneously, the
most real events of all, are the ones
which are most outside the control
and planning of the television pro¬
ducer, and therefore tend to produce
less good in the sense of less en¬
tertaining, less skilful television. The
closer an event lies to the other end
of the spectrum, the irrealistic end,
the more manageable it becomes from
the television producer's point of view.
\^RGANIZERS of a demon¬
stration who inform television news
organizations beforehand that there will
be violence which will provide good
filmed news material are making use
of the same basic problem of tele¬
vision. Because it is possible to film
the event with a greater degree of
planning and preparation it assumes
far greater importance in the minds
of the viewers as a piece of news
than it may well deserve.
The French dramatist, Claude Oilier,
highlighted this disturbing aspect
of the mass media in a radio play
In which the assassination of a head
of State ultimately turned out to have
been prearranged by a broadcasting
organization in need of really gripping
first-hand news reporting. Reports
which from time to time appear about
executions held up or even arranged
for the benefit of television camera¬
men in an African civil war show that
the satirist, in this case, was by no
means exaggerating.
The increasing theatricalization of
public life and politics, the selection
of candidates by their faces' aptitude
to take make-up, the conduct of
election campaigns according to the
televisual potential of issues rather
than their real relevance all these
are ultimately a consequence of the
medium's insatiable demand for en¬
tertainment material.
On the other hand, the positive,
beneficial effects of the vast quantity
of material on real, semi-real and
pseudo-real events which television
pours out must not be overlooked.
By the very fact that politics and
public affairs have become a branch
of the entertainment industry they have
been brought nearer to millions and
millions of people who never pre¬
viously gave them a thought.
The candidate for office may be

selected according to the same criteria
by which a film star is promoted, but
he will also have become as familiar
a personality as a film star to vast
masses of electors whose interest
would have remained dormant in the
pre-television age. And the sheer
quantity of news films about an event
like the war in Viet-Nam has, it can
be very convincingly though never
wholly conclusively argued, transform¬
ed American public opinion about It.
All this occurs at the most real end
of the spectrum of television material.
What of the middle ground of events
involving real people but staged and
stage-managed by television?
Whereas real events are hard to
capture and plan for, the wholly fiction¬
al programme requires a very scarce
commodity, writers and performers of
outstanding ability, quite apart from
being the most costly type of pro¬
duction because it needs long re¬
hearsal, expensive sets, costumes,
etc. On the other hand, the pseudo-
event, such as the parlour game, the
confrontation between interviewer and
public personality, and a multitude of
variations of the same pattern, Is both
plannable and relatively inexpensive
to stage in terms of rehearsal time,
sets, etc.
The greater the quantity of material
a television system has to provide the
larger will this element have to loom
in its output.
From a cultural point of view this
material is the least positive aspect
of television. It is entertaining but little
else. Neither information nor edifica¬
tion are conveyed by It. In addition, by
exposing members of the public to the
lure of large prizes it contains an ele¬
ment of manipulation, of the exploita¬
tion of greed and of the longing for
notoriety, which make it less than just
harmless amusement.
T
HE same applies to Inter¬
view shows where one guest after the
other is paraded before the audience,
exposed to more or less searching
questioning and then involved in gene¬
ral and fairly trivial conversation. Emp¬
ty air time is here, literally, filled with
vacuousness: the viewer switching off
his consciousness and switching it on
to material of this kind is replacing his
own thoughts by a spiritual and intel¬
lectual vacuum.
None the less, in the search for ma¬
terial to fill empty spaces by foresee¬
able and plannable events, television
has occasionally performed socially
useful acts. Thus, in Britain, for exam¬
ple, a programme of the parlour-game
type, In which archaeologists were
CONTINUED PAGE 10
Today's children have been called "the first generation to be
raised by three parents", the "third parent" being the television
set in the corner of the living room. Estimates from different
countries indicate that the average child of elementary school
and high school age (six to sixteen) devotes from 12 to 24 hours
a week to television. In the U.S., it Is estimated that a child
of three is already averaging about 45 minutes a day on
television "the electronic baby sitter" in many homes.
7

I
Above, camera team from "Sesame Street" films the letter D
executed by a skywriting planeone of the varied techniques
used to prepare materials for lessons, so unobtrusive that
children learn without realizing it. Puppets in the sweet
shop (below) are teaching numbers as prices.
Photos USIS, Paris
8
AMERICAN
TV's 'OPEN
SESAME'
TO
EDUCATION
>
ï
« i
z

To millions of children around the globe, the
name "Sesame Street" has come to mean a
fascinating world of fun, adventure and learning
with a chuckle. Hailed in the U.S.A. as the best
children's show in TV history, it will this yea/
be seen in some 50 countries by children and
grown-ups. This witty, fun-and-games pro¬
gramme began as an experiment on U.S. tele¬
vision in October 1969, with the help of grants
totalling $8 million from the Carnegie Founda¬
tion, the Ford Foundation, the U.S. Office of
Education and related government agencies.
Within six months, 190 stations were carrying
it to 6 million pre-school age children in the
U.S.A. "Sesame Street" is different from the
run-of-the-mill fare offered to junior TV viewers
for two reasons. As opposed to the programmes
filled with violence found in so many countries,
it brings to children's TV a series of wit and
humour, devoid of any violence, containing the
positive message that no problem can be solved
without co-operation. Secondly, it seeks to
teach youngsters letters, numbers and simple
counting skills, to stimulate their vocabulary
and powers of reasoning and to open their
eyes to the world at large. Despite its ad lib
atmosphere, it is meticulously planned and uses
well-proven and highly skilled TV techniques to
bring home its lessons simply and usually with
a joke. Researchers testing children who have
watched it have found that counting, reasoning
and other skills have improved by two and a
half times as compared with those of non-
viewers. "Sesame Street" has been called "true
international television" and has been a success
in every country where it has been introduced.
This year it is opening a "side street" a
programme aimed at children aged from seven
to eleven.
"Sesame Street" is set
in an imaginary city
neighbourhood (right) that
gives the programme its
name. On the street with
its brownstone houses,
stores and an alley, live the
four chief participants In
the programme. They are
(photo above right) a married
couple (in foreground), a
teacher (seen on left) and
a sweet shop proprietor (in
apron, seated on steps).
Photos USIS, Paris
Paid advertisements, called
"commercials" are a common
feature of American
television. "Sesame Street"
programmes include
15-second spoof
"commercials" to "sell"
the letters of the alphabet
and numbers. Left, a
cartoon character teaches
the letter "L" (for lunchbox)
and a surprise ending wraps
the lesson In a joke.
The "commercials" may tell
young viewers "this
programme has been brought
to you by the Letter Y and
the Number 3".

TV: the new folk art of the 20th century?
10
asked to guess the origin, nature and
age of objects supplied by museums,
led to a vast expansion of interest in
archaeology, a quickening of amateur
exploration of the local past, and a
rise in the sale of books dealing with
the subject.
Any television programme can be
seen as good or bad from the point of
view of the consumer, whose primary
test, a short-term one, is whether it is
entertaining or boring.
To the detached observer consider¬
ing the effects of television in the long-
term context of its impact on a society
or culture, a programme will be good
if socially beneficial, bad if it tends, in
the long run, to debase the cultural
level of the society or to have harmful
effects on its political health.
P
ASSING to the area of the
wholly premeditated, planned type of
television programme, which is also the
area where the mass medium conveys
artistic values and may itself become
something like an art, the concept of
quality appears in a third form. Good
or bad here means artistically success¬
ful or unsuccessful.
It Is by no means certain that the
quality of a programme of this nature
will be apparent to the viewer, who is
above all preoccupied by entertain¬
ment value. The very profusion of
quantity in television creates innumer¬
able dilemmas of evaluation: the sil¬
liest parlour game may be infinitely
more entertaining than an artistic mas¬
terpiece which and here is the rub,
and the measure of the dilemma may
in fifty years' time be appreciated as
an immortal work.
Television's appetite for skills of
artistic or pseudo-artistic nature is
literally insatiable. Whereas, before the
advent of television, a country's thea¬
tre demanded no more than, say, one
hundred or two hundred new plays
from its dramatists each year, today
a country with three television chan¬
nels may well present six or more dra¬
matic programmes (plays, serials, com¬
edies) each evening and thus demand
something like two thousand new dra¬
matic scripts a year, and this is a
highly conservative estimate.
The same remaining in the relat¬
ively restricted and therefore compara¬
tively easily surveyable field of drama
applies to the performers.
Before the advent of this mass
medium an actor who learned a new
part could, if the play proved success¬
ful, count on appearing in it a hundred
times or more in one theatre, and then
afterwards touring in it to other parts
of the country.
On television a single performance
practically saturates the entire popu¬
lation of the country. The public can¬
not accept the same actor in a mul¬
titude of parts within a short span of
time, so the demand for actors also
has vastly increased.
How many playwrights, how many
actors of outstanding talent can a
country produce? How many does it
need to provide enough material for a
full television service? The supply of
talent cannot be unlimited. So here
quantity directly creates a problem of
quality.
This point has major cultural conse¬
quences In the case of the smaller
countries or language areas. A coun¬
try of three or four million inhabitants
may simply not possess enough actors
or playwrights to provide even a frac¬
tion of the material that is demanded
by television.
So the answer is found In the mass
import of foreign material, dubbed or
with subtitles, and this in the long run
poses a serious threat to the cultural
identity of the country concerned. One
can say that the mass medium tends
to create the large cultural unit.
In the case of large language areas,
like those of the English and Spanish-
speaking countries, this cultural effect
is at least part of a process of organic
change, even though some of its
effects may be viewed with distaste
by some of those affected.
In the case of smaller national cul¬
tures, however, the long-term effects
may well be much more far-reach¬
ing. This is particularly the case in
countries which are not only small in
area but are bordered by powerful
neighbours like Switzerland, where
German, French and Italian television
can be received in considerable areas
speaking the same language as the
neighbouring larger unit.
I F the importing of tele¬
vision material is having such an im¬
pact on highly developed European
countries, in the developing world,
where television is often a prestige
symbol of newly independent States,
having neither a tradition of the skills
required nor a reservoir of trained per¬
formers, these effects may be disa¬
strously magnified and surely will be
in the near future.
It will require great insight and skill
on the part of those in charge of tele¬
vision programming in these countries
to avoid, or at, least minimize, a really
catastrophic development: the loss of
their own cultural identities. Perhaps
this can be done by judiciously mixing
imports from very different areas and
by concentrating on manifestations of
the local culture which may be unspec¬
tacular the local story-teller or folk-
singer but which are firmly based in
the national tradition.
It would be wrong, however, to re¬
gard the effects of the mass demand
for drama, situation comedy and spec¬
tacular musical and dance shows at
least in the larger culture areas as
wholly detrimental. A large demand
stimulates talent. Indeed, throughout
the history of art the highest achieve¬
ments have always sprung from situa¬
tions where many craftsmen or artists
were engaged in satisfying a large
demand: Rembrandt's artistic produc¬
tion was based on the widespread
demand for portraits among the rich
burghers of Holland which evoked a
numerically strong guild of painters;
Shakespeare and Marlowe, Calderón
and Lope de Vega, Racine and Molière
were the peaks of a broadly based cul¬
ture which created a considerable
demand for dramatists.
The same is true in the field of tele¬
vision of the artistic skills which spring
directly from the production process.
There can never have been as many
highly skilled film directors and
cameramen as we find today in coun¬
tries like the United States, the United
Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many or France.
The effects of this on related arts,
such as the cinema, are obvious. Many
of the best film-makers started their
careers in television. And the cinema
it must perhaps be stressed will
in all likelihood emerge as the highest
and most characteristic artistic ach¬
ievement of our century when viewed -
from the vantage point of history.
The same is true of dramatists, at
least in certain countries like the
United Kingdom or the Federal Repub¬
lic of Germany. The large demand
for television drama ¡s without doubt
one of the reasons for the current
flowering of dramatic talent in Britain.
In the United States, by contrast, the
commercial nature of television has
been detrimental to the development
of drama: plays are too costly to pro¬
duce relative to the size of the au¬
dience they can command, which in
turn determines the advertising reve¬
nue. In many European countries the
public-service concept behind the or¬
ganization -of the mass media has been
able to counteract this tendency to
make size of audience all-determining.
Precisely in the field of television
drama, the quantitative demand has
created certain characteristic forms
which have their strong negative as¬
pects side by side with some positive
ones:
The dramatic series, in which the
same set of characters reappears in
self-contained episode after self-con¬
tained episode, is perhaps the most

characteristic feature of television. It
is also one of the most formidable cul¬
tural phenomena of our time.
These series are undoubtedly among
the most popular features of television
in the major countries and the cha¬
racters they create become mytholo¬
gical figures with their own lives and
personalities which far transcend the
relatively modest confines of their
original raison d'être. They are the
archetypes of twentieth-century man's
collective consciousness and, per¬
force, also of his collective uncons¬
cious.
The series is the logical and inevi¬
table outcome of television's vast hun¬
ger for material. It allows the same
character, the same leading actor, and
essentially the same story to be re¬
peated week after week for months
and years.
Such series are the sagas of the
twentieth century. They correspond
almost exactly to the stories which
in primitive communities bards and bal¬
lad singers used to provide, always
about nearly identical exploits of the
tribal heroes. The western series In
particular here provide an uncannily
apt parallel.
T
HE mass demand which for
the first time since man emerged
from the primitive tribe enables every
member of the community to have a
say in the creation of its cultural mate-
rial-^-whereas in every culture since
antiquity, cultural creation always res¬
ponded to the requirements of a small
élite minority and the annihilation of
all physical distance through the elec¬
tronic mass media (which Marshall
McLuhan has rightly called the creation
of the electronic village), have thus
literally re-created something like the
cultural situation of primitive man.
The chief can once again speak
directly to his people and can be ins¬
tantly recognized by every member of
the community, and the whole com¬
munity again shares in the exploits of
the heroes: real the soldiers at the
war front one sees in the newsreel, or
the wise television pundits who are
the medicine men of our societies; or
legendary the neo-mythologlcal figu¬
res of the fiction serials.
The analogy is complete, but does
it reveal a situation which is frighten¬
ing or which is reassuring? Neither,
I think. For it has great positive as well
as negative aspects: after all from pri¬
mitive man's myths about heroes
sprang such immortal works as the
Iliad and the Odyssey.
Television is, or can at least be¬
come, the great folk art of modern
CONTINUED PAGE 32
-v» ¿- '»' a»\ ---
-**
Scanning the empty desert skies, this
Telstar ground station brings programmes
relayed by satellite to the television screens
of Kuwait. The oil-rich island boasts 185
television sets per 1,000 of its 540,000
population (1968 figures). This compares
with 294 per 1,000 for Canada, 280 for
the United Kingdom, 185 for France,
158 for Italy, 106 for Argentina, 71 for Cuba,
13 for the United Arab Republic and I for Sudan.
11

TV's CHALLENGE
(Continued from page 1 1)
OF THE 70s
32
man. The huge quantity of material it
produces, the vast number of human
beings on which It has to draw do give
it the character of genuine folk art
based on the demands of the mass
rather than on the tastes of a few
elitist figures.
The negative aspect of the above si¬
tuation follows from the fact that while
there Is a true analogy with the primi¬
tive man in his tribe and his village,
modern man Is not a primitive and his
world Is a village only in the electronic,
not in the literal sense. Clearly the
possibilities of mass manipulation
through television commercial mani¬
pulation in some free-enterprise socie¬
ties, political manipulation In collecti-
vist countries are truly frightening.
It seems to me, however, that the
very quantity of television carries its
own built-in safety valve. Television
commercials may be effective sales
devices, yet in the long run surely they
must Immunize their audience. The
time will come when the law of dimi¬
nishing returns sets in.
The very quantity of the material
poured out to the electronic village
must, over the generations, the deca¬
des, the centuries, produce a highly
critical and sophisticated tribe, a com¬
munity hardened and immunized
against both the overt and the hidden
manipulators. And such resistance to
manipulation and criticism is also, I
believe, the immediate task of those
aware and informed enough to be able
to think in the long term.
Criticism and judicious evaluation of
material offered on the mass media
must surely become one of the prin¬
cipal subjects treated in the education
of future citizens in any truly demo¬
cratic community. Since anyone who
is familiar with the technical problems
and procedures behind the scenes of
the medium develops a trained eye to
detect the concealed manipulation,
surely generations of children who
have grown up with television and
become familiar with its techniques
will no longer be as credulous and as
naive as their elders who first en¬
countered it as a new toy when they
were already adults.
They will certainly develop their own
almost automatic evaluation of the
different kinds of material offered to
them, will become able to distinguish
between the real and the manufactured
event, between the genuine and the
synthetic personality, between the true
work of art and the spurious hack
product.
Television may have reduced our
culture to the status of the primitive
tribe, but that tribe will soon comprise
the whole of humanity, without dis¬
tinction of race, creed or social class.
That tribe will then, if external cir¬
cumstances remain favourable, have
vast opportunities for development
development towards mass sophistic¬
ation, mass wisdom, and a genuine
mass culture. These opportunities are
made available, for the first time In
history, by an electronic communic¬
ations medium which Is able to bring
the whole of human wisdom to every
human being.
In the long term, perhaps quantity
will have become the foundation of a
great leap forward in the overall quality
of human culture and through it of
human life itself.
