Inequality
in S. Africa
Photo Hugues Vassal i Gamma. Paris
SEGREGATION IN SPORT is strictly enforced under South
Africa's apartheid laws. White and non-white persons may not
compete against each other in sports nor even attend the same
sporting event as spectators. Exceptionally, as in this photo
taken recently near Johannesburg, non-whites are allowed to
attend major events provided that separate entrances, seating
and toilet facilities are made available.
Like other modern States, the
Republic of South Africa is a
country governed by laws. And
the laws by which a country
chooses to live are normally
matters with which the United
Nations not only does not concern
itself, but which, in fact, it is
expressly forbidden from inter¬
fering with by its own Charter.
However, a feature that gives to
the laws of South Africa the
character and dimension which
have caused concern throughout
the world and which have made
them the subject of formal denun¬
ciation by the United Nations
can be simply stated : while these
laws apply to all the people of
South Africa white and non-
white alike they are laws of
the white man alone, enacted by
the white man alone, for the
benefit of the white man alone.
Neither in the formulation nor
in the execution of these "laws"
do the Africans, who form 70
per cent of the population, nor
the Asians and the Coloured,
have any voice or influence.
It is this character which makes
many of the "laws" of South
Africa, in effect and in reality,
instruments of iniquity and
oppression.
The folio wing examples are drawn
from a study prepared by Pro¬
fessor Leslie Rubin of Howard
University, Washington, D.C., a
former Senator in South Africa,
representing Africans, for the
United Nations Secretariat 's Unit
on Apartheid, showing how legis¬
lation described by the South
African Government as being
designed to promote "separate
development", amounts to a
legalized contempt for all human
beings of the non-white races.

RACE AND COLOUR
A person who is "obviously in appearance white"
and is "generally accepted as a white person" may not be
classified as a white person if one of his natural parents
has been classified as a coloured person.
AN African is "a person who in fact is or is
generally accepted as a member of any aboriginal race or
tribe of Africa".
A coloured person is
white person or an African".
"a person who is not a
A person who is not in fact an African, but "in
appearance obviously is an African" will be classified as
such in the population register, unless he discharges the
onus of proving that he is not in fact and is not generally
accepted as African.
A man who "in appearance obviously is a white
person" must be classified as a coloured person, if one of
his natural parents has been classified as a white person
and the other as a coloured person.
IN deciding whether or not a person is "in
appearance obviously a white person" the official concerned
must take into account such person's "habits, education,
speech, deportment and demeanour in general".
IF a person "in appearance obviously not a
white person" is "generally accepted as a white person"
in the area where he is employed, but is not so accepted
in the area where he lives, he may not be classified as
a white person.
EVEN twenty-five years after a person has
been classified in the population register as a white person
and issued with the corresponding identity card, the Secre¬
tary of the Interior has the right to seek such person's
reclassification.
MOVEMENT
A proclamation in the Government Gazette
may, at any time, prohibit any African from being in any
town during such hours of the night as are specified,
unless he is in possession of a written permit signed by
his employer or by an authorized official.
EVERY African who has attained the age of six¬
teen years must be in possession of a Reference Book.
Any policeman may call at any time on any African to
produce his Reference Book. An African unable to do so
because he has left it at home is guilty of a criminal offence.
HOME, FAMILY AND RESIDENCE
AN African who was born in a town and lived
there continously for fifty years, but then left to reside
elsewhere for any period, even two weeks, is not entitled
as of right to return to the town where he was born and to
remain there for more than seventy-two hours, unless
he has obtained a permit.
AN African who has, since birth, resided conti¬
nuously in a town is not entitled as of right to have living
with him in that town for more than seventy-two hours a
married daughter, a son who has reached the age of eigh¬
teen, a niece, a nephew or a grandchild.
I F an African woman, having contracted a
marriage, takes up permanent residence with her husband
in accommodation provided by his employer in a town where
her husband has lived and worked continuously for
25 years, she is guilty of a criminal offence.
A policeman is entitled to enter and search pre¬
mises on which he has reason to suspect that any Afri¬
can youth (eighteen years of age) is committing the crimi¬
nal offence of residing with his father without having been
issued with the necessary permit to do so.
AN African boy, aged sixteen, who has left
school and lives at home with his parents (who maintain
him) but does not work may, at any time, be arrested with¬
out warrant by a policeman who "has reason to believe
that he is an idle person".
AN African who was born in a town and has
worked and lived there for five years may be required
at any time to leave that town and take up residence in
a Bantu area where he has never lived and has no relatives
or friends. If he remains in the town more than three days
after he has received written notice to leave, he is guilty
of a criminal offence.

THE law of South Africa provides for the divi¬
sion of all towns into separate "group areas" in which only
members of the white and the coloured "groups", may
own land or premises.
NO "obviously white" person who is married to
or cohabits with an African or a coloured person may be
included in the white group.
THE State President may, "whenever it is deem¬
ed expedient", by proclamation in the "Government
Gazette", declare that a defined area which has been occu¬
pied by coloured persons who own land there (no matter
how long such occupation and ownership have continued)
shall be a white group area as from a specified date.
When such white group area has been declared, a coloured
person living in the area (even though he has lived there
continuously for fifty years in a house which he owns) may
not remain there longer than such period of grace, of not
less than twelve months, as the Minister of the Interior, in
his discretion, decides to grant.
IMO white person living in a town may (unless he
has received a licence from the city council) accommodate
on the premises which he owns the son of his African ser¬
vant who lives there, if such son has reached the age of
ten years.
A labour officer may, at any time, cancel the em¬
ployment of an African who works in a town, no matter
how long he has been employed, even though his employer
opposes the cancellation. An African whose employment
has been cancelled, may be removed from the town where
he worked and prohibited from returning to that town for
such period as the labour officer specifies.
A white person living in a town who employs
an African to do any carpentry, bricklaying, electrical fitting
or other skilled work without special exemption granted
by the Minister of Labour commits a criminal offence. A
white person living in a town commits a criminal offence
if he employs an African as a waiter at a party in his
home, unless such African has been granted the necessary
permit by a labour bureau officer.
IT is unlawful for an African worker to take
part in a strike for any reason whatsoever. If he does, he
is guilty of a criminal offence punishable by a fine not
exceeding $1,400 or imprisonment for not longer than
three years, or both such fine and imprisonment.
AN African factory worker who calls on other
workers to strike for an increase in pay commits a criminal
offence.
15
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

INEQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW (Continued)
16
AN African who, as a personal favour and
without receiving payment, repairs a defective electrical
fitting in the living quarters of a friend who resides on his
employer's premises in 'a town is guilty of a criminal
offence.
AN African is prohibited from doing skilled
work in the building industry in any town in white South
Africa.
A white person who pays his domestic servant
for repairing a damaged roof in his home commits a cri¬
minal offence.
A municipal labour officer may, at any time, ter¬
minate the employment of any African in his area, if he
decides that such employment "is not bona fide", even
though the employment has continued for twenty-five years
to the complete satisfaction of such African's white em¬
ployer.
A white workman, who is permanently totally
disabled is entitled to a monthly pension based on his
earnings; an African similarly disabled is entitled to a lump
sum based on his earnings, but not to a monthly pension.
WHEN an employer has established living quar¬
ters for his African workers, no worker living there may
receive a visitor at any time, unless he has been granted
permission to do so by his employer or some other autho¬
rized person.
EDUCATION
THE Minister of Bantu Education may, at any
time, and without being required to give any reason for
doing so, withdraw any subsidy previously granted by him
to a school maintained by an African tribe or community.
AN African living in a town who, without being
paid for his services, conducts a class in reading and writ-
ting in his own home for a few of his African friends is
guilty of a criminal offence.
A white man who spends a few hours each week
in his own home teaching his African servants to read is
guilty of a criminal offence.
AN African religious minister who conducts regu¬
lar classes for his congregation, in which he teaches them
to read the Bible, is guilty of a criminal offence.
A private correspondence college which enrols
an African as a student in any course without the permis¬
sion of the Minister of Bantu Education is guilty of a crimi¬
nal offence.
ANY person who provides special education for
handicapped African children without the approval of the
Minister of Bantu Education is guilty of a criminal offence.
AN African student who attends even a single
lecture in a course at the University of Cape Town without
the permission of the Minister of Bantu Education is guilty
of a criminal offence.
MARRIAGE
IF a marriage officer performs a marriage cere¬
mony between a white man and a coloured woman, the
latter having falsely represented that she is white, the
marriage is void and of no effect.
IF a white South African lawfully marries a
coloured woman abroad, the marriage is void and of no
effect in South Africa.
ASSEMBLY AND ASSOCIATION
A N African who has lived continuously for fifty
years in the town in which he was born is not entitled
as of right to have an African friend visit and remain with
him for more than seventy-two hours.
IT is unlawful for a white person and a non-
white person to drink a cup of toa together in a café
anywhere in South Africa unless they have obtained a
special permit to do so.
U NLESS he has obtained a special permit, an
African professor delivering a lecture at a white club, which
has invited him to do so, commits a criminal offence.
A coloured person attending a public cinema in
a town (even though he occupies specially separated
seating) is guilty of a criminal offence, unless a special per¬
mit has been issued.
AN African attending a Church fete in a town
is guilty of a criminal offence, unless a special permit has
been issued.
IF there are no cinemas in a coloured town¬
ship a permit will be issued allowing coloured persons to
attend a cinema in a town, provided that separate entrance,
seating "and other facilites" are available for coloured
persons.
A permit will not be granted to a white orchestra
to accompany an African choir presenting performances
even though the audiences are segregated.
A permit will not be granted to Africans to watch
a Carnival organized by the students of a white university;
it will be granted to coloured persons and Asians only on
condition that no refreshments are served.
IF an Asian (or a coloured person or an African)
sits on a bench in a public park (which has been set apart
for the exclusive use of white persons), by way of protest
against the apartheid laws, he commits a criminal offence
punishable by a fine of not more than $ 840 or imprison¬
ment for not longer than three years or a whipping of not
more than ten strokes, or both such fine and imprisonment,
or both such fine and whipping, or both such imprisonment
and whipping.
ANYONE who has rendered aid to the family of
a person convicted of committing an offence by way of
protest against apartheid laws is also guilty of an offence.
IF there is only one waiting-room in a railway
station, it is lawful for the station-master to reserve that
waiting-room for the exclusive use of white persons, and
any non-white person wilfully entering it commits a cri¬
minal offence.
An unmarried man who is "obviously in appea¬
rance" or "by general acceptance and repute" a white
person and who attempts to have sexual intercourse with
a woman who is not "obviously in appearance" or "by
general acceptance and repute" a white person is guilty
of a criminal offence punishable by imprisonment with
compulsory hard labour for not longer than seven years,
unless he can prove to the satisfaction of the court that
he had reasonable cause to believe, at the time that the
alleged offence was committed, that she was "obviously
in appearance or by general acceptance and repute" a
white person.
A coloured person is guilty of attending a
"gathering" if he has two friends to dinner.
IT is unlawful for any political party to exist
unless all its members are persons who belong to the

same ethnic group i.e. unless all its members are Africans
or whites or coloured persons.
IF a white person addresses a gathering most of
the members of which are coloured, and calls on his
audience to support any political party, he is guilty of a
criminal offence.
TAXATION
EVERY African, male and female, who has
reached the age of eighteen years is liable to pay an
annual tax (known as the general tax) of a least $4.90, in
addition to the ordinary income tax payable by all South
Africans, unless he satisfies the authorized official that he
has reached the age of sixty-five years.
EVERY African who is the occupier of a dwel¬
ling in an African township is liable to pay an annual tax
(known as the local tax) of $ 1 .40.
IN certain defined areas, any white policeman
may, at any time, stop an African walking in a city street,
if he believes him to be liable to pay these taxes, and
demand from him the receipt for his general tax or local
tax for inspection.
IF the African fails to comply with such demand,
the policeman may arrest him and have him brought before
a Bantu Affairs Commissioner, who may then order his
detention until arrangements have been made for payment
of such tax as may be due.
against unjust apartheid laws, his premises may be
searched at any time on a warrant issued by a magistrate
for evidence that an offence has been committed.
IF such letter was typed, the typewriter may be
seized and delivered to a magistrate who may order that it
be destroyed.
ANY African born outside South Africa (even
though he has lived in South Africa for 50 years and has
not committed an offence) may be declared to be an unde¬
sirable inhabitant.
AN African who writes "Down with Apartheid"
on the wall of the house of any person, is guilty of a cri¬
minal offence.
IF one issue of a weekly magazine published
in South Africa has been held to be undesirable, and the
Publications Control Board is of the opinion that every
subsequent issue is likely to be undesirable, all future
issues of the magazine may be prohibited as undesirable,
by notice in the Government Gazette.
THE RULE OF LAW
AN African who has been required by an order
of Court to leave a certain area must do so, and no
Court of law may grant an injunction preventing such
removal, nor may appeal or review proceedings stay or
suspend such removal, even when it has been established
beyond all doubt that the order of Court was intended for
some other person and was served upon him in error.
OWNERSHIP OF LAND
NO African is entitled as of right to acquire free¬
hold title to land anywhere in South Africa; nor is it the
intention of the present Government ever to grant such
right to the African, even in his own Bantu areas.
OPINION AND EXPRESSION
THE South African Publications Control Board
consists of nine persons (all of them white) appointed and
paid by the Government. One of the functions of the
Board is to prevent the showing of any film which depicts
white and non-white children sharing the same class¬
room or white and non-white adults dancing with one
another or white and non-white men and women embracing
and kissing one another.
ANOTHER function of the South African Publi¬
cations Control Board is to prevent the showing of any
educational documentary film which expresses approval
of racial integration or disapproval of discrimination based
on race and colour.
IT is a criminal offence for a newspaper to
publish an article which is held by the court to have harmed
relations between whites and Africans because it used
strong language to assert that apartheid is unjust to the
African people.
THE South African Publications Control Board
may, by notice in the Government Gazette prohibit the
importation into South Africa of all books (other than those
for which it chooses to issue a special permit) published
by a specified publisher, if it is of the opinion that such
books are likely to create the impression that apartheid
is unjust to the non-white people of South Africa.
IF an African has received a letter from another
African asking him to join in a peaceful demonstration
ANY person who breaks the window of a
building (including a private residence) in the course of a
demonstration calling for the grant of increased rights to
the African people, is guilty of the offence of sabotage,
unless he proves that his act was not calculated or
intended to encourage feelings of hostility between white
persons and Africans. The offence is punishable by sen¬
tence of death.
ANY person who advocates military intervention
by the United Nations in Namibia (South West Africa) is
guilty of a criminal offence punishable by imprisonment
for not less than 5 years or by death.
No person other than the Minister of Justice or
an official may have access to such detained person, nor
is any person (not even members of his immediate family)
entitled to any information as to what has happened to
him or where he is.
No court of law may order the release of such
detainee or pronounce upon the validity of any action which
has been taken against him.
A N African living in a Bantu area may not,
without special permission to do so, carry a knife whose
blade is more than 3£ inches long, while outside the
allotment on which he resides. If he does he is guilty of
a criminal offence punishable by a fine of not more than
$280 or imprisonment for not longer than 12 months,
or a whipping, or both imprisonment and a whipping.
The case-laws cited derive, for the most part, from the
Bantu (Urban Areas Consolidation) Act No. 25 of 1945 ; the
Bantu (Abolition of Passes and Co-ordination of Documents)
Act No. 67 of 1952; the Bantu Labour (Settlement of
Disputes) Act No. 48 of 1953 ; the Bantu Building Workers
Act. No 27 of 1951 ; the Workmen's Compensation Act No
30 of 1941 ; the Bantu Education Act No. 47 of 1953; the
Extension of University Education Act No. 45 of 1959 and
Proclamation No. 333 of 1 November 1957 issued under the
Group Areas Act No. 77 of 1957.
17
