PUNCH PROOF PLASTIC. Even a violent blow cannot break this thin
plastic film. One of the versatile new materials created by modern
chemical technology, it can be used in different forms for anything from
household equipment and motor-car parts to containers for oil and
liquid chemicals. Today thousands of lightweight, fireproof, rigid, flexible,
tough or gossamer-thin products are being produced by the plastics industry.

THE MAGIC
OF MODERN
CHEMISTRY
by Gene Gregory
Towards a new
quality of life
c
4
rHEMISTRY, like all science
and technology, has an ambivalent
status in society today. On the one
hand, it is acknowledged that it has
enabled man to survive and flourish
on our overcrowded planet. Men and
women in advanced industrial nations
are using chemistry to defend and
extend the material benefits that derive
from increasing human predominance
over the rest of nature. At the same
time, the people of less developed
countries are striving after the pro¬
ducts of modern chemistry that can
make their lives more healthy, com¬
fortable and productive.
And yet, there are many who decry
chemistry as the cause of undesirable
qualities of modern life. In an explo¬
sion of irrational compulsion to con-
GENE GREGORY, Is a special research writer
for the 'Unesco Courier" on world problems
of science and technology (March 1969 Issue:
"New Food Revolution"; March 1970: "Spin¬
off: the Fruit of Space Research"). A chemi¬
cal engineer and industrial consultant, he was
formerly editor-in-chief of the "Weekly Tri¬
bune", in Geneva, Switzerland, and a member
of the editorial board of 'Asia Magazine",
Hong Kong. He spent many years In South-
East Asia where he was a foreign corres¬
pondent for Reuters Agency and held several
editorial, posts. The four-part article pub¬
lished here is a special Inquiry he has carried
out for the "Unesco Courier" into the revolu¬
tionary applications of chemical technology.
demn those very intellectual, scienti¬
fic and technological endeavours that
have enabled modern man to rise from
savagery, chemistry has been blamed
for all manner of treachery against the
quality of life.
But denial of the humane value of
scientific knowledge and obstacles to
its wise use for the benefit of mankind
are by no means unique to our times.
History is replete with records of
opposition to scientific inquiry and the
introduction of new technologies that
challenged old beliefs, threatened esta¬
blished institutions and changed pat¬
terns of life.
Antoine Lavoisier, Nicolas Leblanc
and Joseph Priestley who along with
Henry Cavendish were the founders
of modern chemistry are classic
examples of scientists who were
opposed and suppressed by irrational
prejudice.
Fortunately, nowadays these men
are granted their due credit for having
opened the doors to a whole new field
of science which has since led to the
development of one of the key indus¬
tries of our technological world
making products used in practically
every aspect of life.
Still, as we enter the post-industrial,
or technetronic, era, we hear politi¬
cians deploring, much as did those
leaders of the French Revolution who
sent Lavoisier to the guillotine, that
"today we stand helpless before the
onslaught of science."
Similarly, there are those intellectual
Luddites who would destroy the very
edifice of human progress by forcing
scientists to answer the question of
what impact their achievements will
have upon the quality of life.
While it would seem to be self-evi¬
dent that the Swiss inventor of LSD
could no more predict the abuse
others would make of his breakthrough
in the development of psycho-active
drugs than Henry Ford could have
foreseen, or been held accountable for
the death and maiming of countless
ten of thousands of people in automo¬
bile accidents, the nature and the moti¬
ves of the scientist, hardly so well un¬
derstood as those of the inventor, are
called In question. The scientist, ra¬
ther than the malefactor, is held res¬
ponsible.
Here, indeed, may be the root of the
problem. Because the layman does
not understand the mysteries of com¬
plex science and has seemingly less
control over its products than he has
over the motor car, fear and suspicion
of science have replaced the curiosity
and active interest in scientific advan¬
cement that was the hallmark of the
two centuries of phenomenal progress
between 1750 and 1950.
But because of the vital role played
CONTINUED PAGE 6

Photo © Dupont de Nemours, Paris

MODERN CHEMISTRY (Continued)
by science in modern society, its rejec¬
tion in some quarters as a means for
improving the quality of life could
have especially serious social conse¬
quences. Clearly, if the 7,000 million
people who will inhabit the globe in
the year 2000 A.D. are to be adequa¬
tely fed, clothed, housed, educated,
informed, transported and purposefully
employed in short, if they are to be
masters of their environment rather
than its slaves it will be only through
the instrumentality of applied science
and that form of human activity we
know as industry.
This increasing power to change the
physical world around us, to fulfil hu¬
man needs and aspirations, is due in
large part to the science of chemistry
and the industry which translates its
findings into new and better products.
We can divide the needs of human
beings In society into four grades of
urgency to each of which chemistry
makes a critical and frequently central
contribution.
First of all, there are the primary
biological needs of food, shelter,
health and recreation. Then there are
the means for providing these require¬
ments: productive industry, communi¬
cations and transportation. Social and
economic structures are then neces¬
sary to maintain balance and provide
the necessary ambient conditions for
human fulfilment. Finally, man takes
cognizance of himself and at the same
time expresses himself through what
may be called his culture: in manners,
art and intellectual endeavour.
Quite obviously, it is in meeting the
first two sets of human needs, those
basic physiological needs which sustain
life and society, that chemistry plays
the greatest part. But, along with
other sciences, chemistry is also an
agent of social and economic change;
and both as an operative science and
by the image it presents, chemistry is
an essential factor in the manners and
cultural activity of men.
At the beginning of the 1970s, the
average citizen of an industrially ad¬
vanced country was using from 300 to
500 chemical products in his everyday
life: about 60 in his clothing, some 200
in his home, office and automobile;
another 50 in medicines to safeguard
his health, and still another 50 or
more at every stage of producing and
preparing the food he consumes.
There is hardly an activity of modern
man that does not, in some way, use
some of the nearly one million chem¬
icals that exist today.
T
HE list continues to grow
every year. In the U.S. alone, more
than 500 totally new chemicals are
introduced commercially each year,
while in the city of Basel alone, 3,500
scientists spend almost $150 million
annually in research and development
of medicines, dyestuffs, plastics, agri¬
cultural chemicals, cosmetics and a
wide variety of other products all des¬
tined to meet human needs in 1985
and in 2000 A.D.
If half of today's chemical production
consists of products which were not
in existence ten years ago, by 1985 a
whole new generation of chemical
products will have been developed and
before the turn of the century still
another generation will have made its
appearance.
While In the 1960s in most advanced
countries the chemical industry was
fourth in rank after petroleum, primary
metals and transportation equipment, by
1985 it will have surpassed primary me¬
tals, and very possibly it will be the
leading industry along with electronics
in the year 2000. Here are just a few
of the reasons why.
If we are to produce enough food
in. 1985 to feed the world, the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Orga¬
nization estimates that in developing
countries alone consumption of ferti¬
lizers and crop protection chemicals
must be at about 12 times the 1962
rate; and by the year 2000 consumption
will have increased another eight to
ten times over the 1985 level.
Parallel to the demands for an in¬
creased supply of foodstuffs for the
world's population there will be a rise
in clothing needs which, as prosperity
increases, is expected to be dispro¬
portionate to the increased consump¬
tion of food products. However, since
for climatic and regional reasons the
production of wool and cotton has
already reached its maximum level,
clothing needs must be met almost
entirely from increases in production
of cellulose and fully synthetic fibres.
Annual world production of cellulose
fibres, now running at a level of
3.5 million metric tons, will grow to
more than seven million metric tons by
the turn of the millenium. Even more
remarkable, the production of synthetic
fibres is expected to grow from a cur¬
rent three million metric tons to an
estimated 25 million metric tons by the
year 2000.
During the same period, the value of
plastics output for consumer, cons¬
truction and industrial applications will
far outstrip that of steel production,
as the introduction of a wide variety
of composite materials combine, for
instance, the great strength of pure
crystals of metals with the elasticity
or other qualities of organic chemicals.
This incipient "materials revolution"
will make possible an enormous num¬
ber of new products, new satisfactions
and new markets; it will advance man
one more step along the road of inde¬
pendence from nature and control over
his environment to the adequate satis¬
faction of primary human needs.
Photo © Rhône-Poulenc Textiles, Paris

I I
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho. Paris
The 100-storey building (above) dwarfs
skyscrapers around it on the Chicago
shore overlooking Lake Michigan. Using
aluminium backed with plastic foam
as an Insulator, Chicago architects were
able to design the 100-storey building
at a cost no greater than that of a
conventional 45-storey building. Specially
designed plastics have opened new
horizons for more economical housing
and building construction.
ROLLING OUT
THE ROAD AND
SHOES TO GO WITH IT
Why not? But who would have believed
it? Far left, a road (near Poitiers,
France) is being rolled out on to the
bare earth. Made of synthetic fibres
it comes, like oversized linoleum, in
giant rolls. Tar macadam is then poured
over it and Bob's your uncle the road
is finished. Left, sheets of synthetic
shoes roll from a press after being
stamped with patterns that will be
fashioned into shoe uppers. The
material is water repellent and to
duplicate leather's "breathability",
it has more than a million pores
per square inch.
7

The new chemistry of food
Debunking some pesticide and
fertilizer myths
Miracle proteins for wheat and corn
i
8
I F you polled the earth's
population, there would be no question
about the most critical problem in the
world today; clearly, it is how do we
get enough of the right food to eat.
While it is easy to overdramatize the
tragic character of the world's present
food situation, it is also possible to
assess the needs of the present popu¬
lation and any future world population.
This ability to comprehend, measure
and predict with some degree of
probable accuracy the food needs of
humanity, as was recently undertaken
in the FAO Provisional Indicative
World Plan, makes it possible within
the scope of available technology to
construct a system of production and
distribution in which those needs
would find satisfaction.
To be sure, taken at face value, food
statistics can be brutal. Food supply
is at present adequate only in 30 in¬
dustrialized nations in the temperate
Northern area, where 900 million
people live. But in 70 other less
developed countries, the diets of
1,900 million people are nutritionally
inadequate, chronic malnutrition is
widespread, and thousands still die
from hunger every year. Moreover,
before these countries can possibly
make much progress economically or
socially, they must have better diets
to sustain the necessary effort.
Until the latter years of the 1960s,
population in all developing countries
was growing faster than the increase
in food production. If this were to
continue, alarmists claimed, we would
be confronted with world famine by
1975. Then came the "green revolu¬
tion", with a veritable takeoff in wheat
production in Mexico and Pakistan,
followed by sharp increases in rice
production in south-east Asia.
Suddenly, what scientists instinctive¬
ly, if not empirically, knew all along
began gaining some degree of popular
credence: we can, after all, feed the
present and foreseeable population
of the earth. New technology has
brought new hope to developing
countries that there will be enough for
all to eat in this generation.
Once improved varieties of cereals
had been developed, much of what
had to be done was the task of chem¬
icals plus* the proper increments of
water applied at the right time and
places.
In 1840 the pioneering German
agrichemist Justus von Liebig formul¬
ated his basic theory on plant nutrition:
any plant requires a certain amount
of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium
in a soluble form in order to secure
its growth, and these three essential
elements can neither be replaced by
others nor are. they interchangeable.
While the scientific work of Liebig
had an immediate effect on the pro¬
motion of the phosphate and potas
sium industries, the amount of soluble
nitrogen compounds from natural
deposits turned out to be insufficient
and all efforts to convert the nitrogen
content of air into suitable compounds
had failed.
Then came the dramatic appeal in
1898 of Sir William Crookes, in his
now-famous lecture at Bristol, to
chemists all over the world to develop
a method for the fixation of the nitro¬
gen content of air. He made it clear
that the spectre of general famine
would not be banished as long as
there remained an inadequate supply
of nitrogenous mineral fertilizers and
that this supply could not come from
the technologies and production
facilities then available.
Thanks to the work of Fritz Haber
and Carl Bosch, who in 1908 intro¬
duced the technique of hydrogénation

under high pressure of the nitrogen
contained in air to form ammonia, the
amount of nitrogen production in the
world became the decisive factor for
the increased volume of food pro¬
duction, helped by mineral fertilizers.
Over the last hundred years, by
the gradual application of new soil
treatment technology, Germany has
increased yield per hectare of both
wheat and potatoes over four times.
But the potential improvement from
fertilizers is far from being fully
developed even in the most advanced
countries. Complete fertilizers which
contain in one application all the ele¬
ments for plant growth in the correct
combination are being developed.
Despite the advances in fertilizer
technology over the past century,
there still persists among some
seemingly knowledgeable people the
extraordinarily erroneous notion that
any further additions to the world's
area of cultivated land must be
very limited. Even in the very cau¬
tious view of the late Sir Dudley
Stamp, mid-twentieth century man was
working only about one-third of the
world's potential agricultural land.
With intensive use of fertilizers and
other available improved techniques
of cultivation, as practised in the
Netherlands and Japan, the potential
agricultural area of the world could
provide food at maximum consumption
standards for 35,000 million people,
or over ten times the world's
present population without allowing
for further improvements in technol¬
ogy or further Increases in food from
the sea.
Fertilizer use is on the threshold of
making an important breakthrough in
forestry and fisheries, conserving and
developing these resources to the
better long-run service of humanity in
Microbes that devour garbage and
convert it into protein-rich animal fodder
could help relieve the world's growing
refuse disposal problem. Right,
Dr. W. Dexter Bellamy, a biochemist
at one of New York's large research
and development centres, has identified
bacteria that can digest cellulose
and related chemical compounds
which together account for most of
the solid wastes produced by large cities.
Fertilizers are the key to making poor
soils produce economic crop yields,
and slow-acting fertilizers, now coming
on the market, avoid over-dosing and
require only one application during the
entire growth cycle. New farming
techniques combined with modern
chemical fertilizers offer hope to
developing countries of providing enough
to eat for all within this generation.
Left, graceful crop patterns of a hillside
farm in central Africa.
an evolving balance of man and
nature.
In Bulgaria, systematic application
of fertilizers in the controlled atmo¬
sphere of large 50-hectare glassed-
in greenhouse farms, has enabled
that country to emerge as one of
Western Europe's primary year-around
suppliers of vegetables.
In the early 1960s, Carl N. Hodges,
a graduate student from the University
of Arizona, developed a special
research facility at Puerto Peñasco,
Mexico. He did so by combining fresh
water, produced from the sea by a new
technology in solar desalination, and
carbon dioxide, from diesel engines,
with proper inputs of soil nutrients.
In this facility, housed in controlled-
environment greenhouses of air-inflat¬
ed polyethylene film, 160 varieties of
18 vegetables and fruits have been
grown.
Results achieved by this synergistic
combination of products of modern
chemistry, which produced higher
yields of at least one variety of each
fruit and vegetable tested than nor¬
mally obtain in field crops, had imme¬
diate revolutionary implications for
desert areas of the world with access
to ocean or brackish ground water.
The first large-scale "portable" farm
using the results of a new University
of Arizona Environmental Research
Laboratory under Hodges' super¬
vision was, understandably enough,
developed for the Arabian Gulf
Sheikhdom of Abu Dhabi about
500 miles south of Kuwait. Production
cost of vegetables grown, allowing for
a 10-year amortization cost of the
installation, is running about 20 cents
(US) a pound, compared with an aver¬
age $1.50 or more a pound at retail
for produce shipped from Kuwait.
Already, half of the world's popula
tion is fed by the extra yield that is
produced by the use of commercial
fertilizers, now being consumed at the
rate of 27 million metric tons annually.
To be able to feed properly the popula¬
tion expected by the year 2000, fully
utilizing new agrichemistry technology
as it develops, it will be necessary to
increase world production to 90-
95 million metric tons a year.
With the use of natural gas and
mineral oil fractions as the raw
material source for the needed
hydrogen, the necessary fertilizer
factories could, in principle, be erected
directly in the various markets through¬
out the world. With the present
level of technology this will require
capital expenditures of $33,000 million
at 1970 prices to meet the needs up
to the end of the century.
But this is only the beginning of
chemistry's contribution to the poten¬
tially abundant food supplies of the
future. As man strives to produce
more food for 60 million new mouths
each year, he creates field conditions
that encourage the zooming multiplica¬
tion of more than 10,000 species of
insects who compete for a food supply
not yet adequate to assure a minimum
diet for all.
It has been said, perhaps with some
exaggeration, that we humans can
feed only on what is left over for us
by pests. Somewhat more precisely,
expert estimates made in the 1960s
by six different authorities put total
food losses from pests at between
$30,000 and $60,000 million, with a
leaning toward the higher figure.
Some calculations have put the
losses due to bugs and weeds even
higher: a minimum of $70,000 million
is currently lost, with insects account¬
ing for losses of approximately 12 per
cent, plant diseases for 12 per cent,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

MODERN CHEMISTRY (Continued)
DDT from A to Z
Photo Jean Manuel- FAO
LOCUST LEFTOVERS. It has been said that humans feed on what
is left over by the pests, and a single locust with its powerful
jaws devours its own weight in food each day. A swarm of
locusts will eat between 30,000 and 100,000 tons of vegetation in
twenty-four hours. Despite the current controversy about DDT
and other chemical pesticides, it is still an open question as to
whether they are as harmful as many people think. A top
official of the Food and Agriculture Organization stated recently
that " millions would starve without chemical defences against
Insects ", and the World Health Organization has defended the
use of DDT as indispensable at the present time to combat
malaria-bearing mosquitoes.
and weeds for 10 per cent of potential
production. And these losses are
suffered even with the widespread
use of pesticidal tools now available.
Dr. Herrel DeGraffe, Cornell Uni¬
versity nutritionist, estimates that if
we were to eliminate chemicals in
food production about one-third of the
world's people would not eat at all.
"Millions would starve without chemi¬
cal defences against insects," a top
ranking FAO official said recently.
Even in the United States, where
food surpluses have bugged econo¬
mists and policy-makers for over a
quarter of a century, without chemical
pesticides, food supply would have to
be rationed; housewives would have
to queue to buy inferior foods, and
they would pay 25 per cent more for
them.
Although fighting against tremendous
odds, man has been resourceful
enough to eliminate weeds that
compete with food plants for nourish¬
ment from the soil and to fight
off persistent hordes of insects.
Throughout the ages he has sought
new weapons to increase his advan¬
tage over insects in the competition
for food.
Gradually, with the advent of an in¬
dustry specialized in the production of
pesticides, magic spells, waving fans
and flails wielded by weary slaves,
the only weapons early man could
command in his war with bugs, were
replaced by over 200 efficient and
safe chemical compounds which have
now seemingly tipped the scales of
battle in favour of homo sapiens.
As a result, in Japan, where pesti¬
cides usage per hectare of crop is
more than five times that of Europe
and North America, yields per hectare
are almost twice those of Europe and
more than double those of the U.S.
Loss from insect damage to rice is
estimated to average only 1.5 per cent
as a result of a continuing vigorous
pest control campaign, where damage
inflicted by the stem borer caused
losses of 50-60 per cent in South
Japan in five years out of ten up to
thirty years ago.
S
10
"IMILAR advances in dis¬
ease control in Japanese rice crops
have resulted from the general use of
fungicides, particularly for seed treat¬
ment. These chemical defences, along
with improved seeds, have transformed
Japan from a chronic major food deficit
area to a country of food surpluses in
the short span of 25 years, at a time
when the exodus from rural areas to
the cities reduced agricultural man-

power from 47 per cent to 19 per cent
of the labour force.
While rice production was a mode¬
rate 3.63 tons per hectare before
World War II, it rose to 5.02 tons per
hectare in the mid-1970s, compared
with ¿- meagre 1.4 tons per hectare
output in India and 1.3 tons per hectare
in the Philippines or about the level
of output already attained in Japan
by the 16th century.
Despite these low yields, statistics
indicate that the use of pesticides to
eliminate storage losses alone could
go far toward rendering India self-
sufficient in cereal grains at current
rates of consumption. Losses of main
cereals during storage exceeded 5 mil¬
lion tons in India during 1962-64, or
roughly a million tons higher than the
country's entire food-grain imports
in 1962.
Despite the urgent need for more
effective protection of pre- and post-
harvest losses from pests, diseases
and weeds, and the demonstrable
profitability of efficient crop protection
operations, farmers in most countries
often still regard such damage as
something to be endured but not
cured, in the same manner as floods,
droughts, hurricanes and other natural
hazards.
A
LT the same time, some
gifted polemicists, with an emotional,
romantic and mystical bent, have
effectively managed to persuade many
people, including some public officials,
that pesticides especially DDT are
dangerous and should be banned.
Contrary to many reports, no-one
has yet been harmed in any way by
residues of crop protection products.
All these substances, if taken in
sufficient dosages, can be lethal.
But only a few pesticidal chemicals
ever reach man's body, and then only
in minute traces except by accident,
suicide or murder.
Yet panic caused by current wides¬
pread denunciation of DDT and other
pesticides has resulted in premature
measures to restrict its use, with
resultant reversals of results obtained
by expensive campaigns to conquer
malaria and eradicate other pests.
On the whole, despite increasing
efforts to develop suitable biological
methods of control, FAO and WHO
warn that there are as yet few alter¬
natives to destroying pests by chemi¬
cal means. FAO plant protection
experts say specifically that "in the
developed world the great DDT
controversy is largely an irrelevancy.
It (DDT) is going out because so many
insect pests are developing resistance
to it and because better and more
refined control methods are becoming
available.
"In the developing world the situa¬
tion is more difficult. There is no
other pesticide available that is still
effective against so many insects, that
is non-toxic to man and that is so
cheap. The developing world simply
cannot abandon DDT at present
although it will in the future begin to
benefit from the new methods of pest
control being developed in the more
technologically advanced countries."
Any major change in the established
agro-ecosystem tends to disturb the
complex crop-pest equilibrium, causing
minor or relatively stable incidences
of pest and diseases to erupt suddenly
as major outbreaks. Many of the
measures taken during the coming
years to improve agricultural product¬
ivity in developing countries will in¬
evitably alter the environment, often
creating more favourable conditions
for pests. Crop protection, in all its
aspects, therefore, will assume rapidly
increasing importance in developing
countries during the next two decades.
Fortunately, there are signs of
rapidly changing attitudes toward pest
control amongst farmers. Imports of
pesticides in 1965 by India and Taiwan
were three times the 1961-63 average,
while imports of the Republic of Korea,
Pakistan and Thailand doubled in the
same period. Even more dramatic
increases have been reported since
1966 from South Asia, where the gross
area covered by plant protection
measures had increased five times in
India in the four years 1965-1969 and
pesticides imports by Ceylon jumped
175 per cent in 1967 alone. For all
developing countries, FAO estimates
pesticide requirements in 1985 at
$2,000 million per year, compared with
consumption of only $180 million
in 1962.
New technology will alter this
estimate over time, however. Insecti¬
cides derived from phosphoric acid
esters, already available commercially
under various brand names, will gain
in importance during the next few
decades, whereas use of chlorinated
hydrocarbons such as DDT will be
progressively receding.
At the same time, the increasing
use of selective herbicides, one of
the most striking post-war phenomena
in crop protection, is to be expected
in developing countries in coming
years. The net efficiency of these
herbicides is considerable, achieving
yield increases of up to 30 per cent
by their timely use in temperate zones,
and even over 50 per cent in some
tropical countries.
Equally important, the introduction
of the so-called "systemic" chemicals
a new generation of non-persistent
pesticides which enter the vascular
system of the plant, spread their
protection throughout, and then meta¬
bolize into harmless degradation pro¬
ducts is expected to save Britain, for
instance, some £40-50 million worth of
cereal grains per year by eliminating
powdery mildew a ' disease that
regularly causes losses of up to 15 per
cent of grain yields in the U.K.
While chemistry is to play the
major role in increasing agricultural
output during the next three decades,
a tremendous increase in protein
value of world cereal supplies can be
achieved within a few years by the
use of synthetic amino acid additives.
Methods have been developed for
enriching wheat with lysine, corn and
sorghum with lysine and tryptophan,
and legume-based foods with methio¬
nine either before milling or by
introduction into flours and meals.
Increases of more than 50 per cent
in wheat protein value can be achiev¬
ed by the addition of no more than
0.4 per cent lysine, while appropriate
additions of lysine and tryptophan to
corn approximately doubles the utiliz-
able protein. Major food-producing
countries have found soybean meal
fortified with methionine most econo¬
mical as a major protein source for
poultry and swine rations. Similarly,
developing countries in which legumes
are used on a large scale for animal
feeding, as well as for human con¬
sumption, can boost protein avail¬
ability sharply at relatively low costs
by incremental applications of these
amino acid additives.
All essential amino acids are now
produced in chemically pure form,
although for some production costs
are still extremely high. As costs
decrease with their increasing use in
fortification of natural foods and
synthetic processes are developed
further, it should be feasible before
the end of the century to combine
these into palatable synthetic foods
fully satisfying the protein require¬
ments of man.
B
UT chemistry has develop¬
ed still other means of providing
animals, fowl and fish with industrially
produced proteins to supplement their
normal diet, increasing the quality and
yield of food from these sources.
Yeast products derived from mineral
oil, while as yet unsuitable for human
nutrition, can be used as components
in the manufacture of concentrated
animal and poultry feeds.
Experimental efforts by more than
a score of multinational petroleum
companies to use petroleums as a
feedstock for yeast production have
established the technical feasibility.
One of the companies, British Petro¬
leum, brought a plant on stream in
1970 which is expected to produce
16,000 tons of protein a year. The
Soviet Union, chronically short of
feedstuffs, is also producing single-
cell protein (SCP) of feed quality on
a limited scale, while Japan is moving
rapidly toward large-scale commercial
production expecting to produce
more than 300,000 tons yearly by the
end of 1971.
Should this technology become as
firmly established as those investing
huge sums in its development believe
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
11

12
MODERN CHEMISTRY (Continued)
it will, it is bound to have far-reaching
implications for conventional animal-
husbandry and for agriculture as well.
While presently conceived as a feed
supplement, it may come to compete
with grain feeds in animal diet and
even to alter human eating habits as
well.
How ironic that would be: photo¬
synthesis, occurring eons ago, produc¬
ed plant life that was eventually
converted into petroleum; now petro¬
leum chemistry has made it possible
for that solar energy to compete with
products of photosynthesis occurring
on our farms in the production of food
for man today.
But this irony deserves more than
passing observation. While it may be
hard to believe in an age marked by
hysteria about the prospects of world¬
wide famine, just as the process of
industrialization will transform the
economies of all developing countries,
food surpluses rather than food
shortages are likely to be the major
problem of the future.
In both Western Europe and North
America food surpluses, even in this
age of relative global food deficiency,
challenge the distribution capabilities
of business and governments alike.
How much more complex the problem
will be if magnified on a global scale.
Here, too, modern chemistry has a
critical role to play. Sterilization,
refrigeration and cryogenization, co¬
louring, flavouring and packaging all
depend upon the availability of new
and improved chemical products.
Applied chemistry also promises new
materials for construction and power
sources that promise to facilitate the
task of storage and transport of food
under conditions and at costs which
will assure its availability to consumers
in all countries.
If, then, the industrial revolution can
be said to be little more than a massive
breakthrough in agriculture, chemistry
takes primacy of place as a force for
change. And if the benefits of this
revolution are to be made available to
those countries still relatively un¬
touched by this progress, in the
remaining years of this century,
organic chemistry, biochemistry and
microbiology the scientific triumvirate
which powers the modern chemical
industry are destined to play a major
role.
Only the radical progress in these
fields can explain the dramatic turn¬
around in prospects for world agri¬
culture in the last five years.
In a host of countries throughout
the world the agricultural revolution
suddenly shifted to the takeoff stage.
This was a dual revolution; a revolu¬
tion of new techniques at critical
stages of the food-raising and pre¬
serving process, and a revolution in
the sense that known techniques long
held back by a variety of political and
social barriers are now being made
available to the less developed parts
of the world.
The ever-expanding
armamentarium
of drugs
SPARE INNER TUBE. Part of a
plastic artery, magnified about
three times, which is used by
surgeons to replace defective
human arteries. The applications
of modem discoveries in chemistry
have already gone a long way
towards making "spare parts
surgery" on a large scale a
practical possibility.
A
revolution, in which chem¬
istry plays a role equally as important
as in agriculture, is underway In
modern medicine and public health.
Synthetic detergents have vastly im¬
proved sanitation, and debilitating,
and lethal diseases have been elimi¬
nated by the eradication of carri¬
er insects through widespread and
systematic application of insecticides.
A vast array of preventive and thera¬
peutic medicines have conspired with
improved diets and better shelter to
reduce infant mortality and increase
average life expectancy to 67 years for
men and 74 years for women. By 1985,
the figures are expected to reach 80 for
both males and females of the species.
Much of this success derives from
modern medicine and its ever-expand¬
ing armamentarium of drugs, provided
very largely by the organic chemists,
biochemists, nuclear chemists and
microbiologists working in the re¬
search-based pharmaceutical industry.
Attempts to use drugs to alleviate
disease are as old as the history of
man. The Chinese, for Instance, deve¬
loped an elaborate pharmacology using
a wide variety of remedies found in
nature.
But the concept of systematic labo¬
ratory investigation of drug action did
not arise until the 1850s when the
striking development of the German
chemical industry prompted Oswald
Schniederberg to study the damage
brought about in living organisms by
chemically active substances. Only
after 1930 did the pharmaceutical in¬
dustry reach the takeoff stage, when
a powerful array of new therapeutic
agents was developed in a surpris¬
ingly short time.
Already we tend to take for granted
the improved quality of life that has
evolved from the fact that man can
expect longer life, to spend less of
his life in illness or in pain, and to
have a steady flow of important new
drugs at prices that are within his
reach. During the twenty year period,
1944-64, in the U.S. alone, some
3,250,000 people survived who would
have died if the 1944 death rate had
prevailed throughout the two decades.

-*TT
I gqp
But the discovery and development
of the sulfonamides, antibiotics, and
other anti-infective drugs have drama¬
tically reduced death rates from a
number of infectious diseases through¬
out the world.
Thanks largely to drugs, remarkable
changes have taken place in the treat¬
ment of tuberculosis: with the use of
streptomycin, a 49 per cent decline
in death from this long-time major
killer was attained, and within a year
after the introduction of isoniasid, the
death rate had declined by 86 per cent.
These are but a few examples of the
rapid improvement in life through
chemistry in the last three to four
decades.
Many pharmaceutical products have
marked effects on the quality of life
without effecting longevity, however.
Non-addictive pain killers, are one
example. Reliable oral contraceptive
therapy, which makes intelligent family
planning possible, is another. Tran¬
quillizers and other drugs that influence
the central nervous system have made
an important contribution to the control
of mental diseases and the restoration
of mental patients to normal life.
Prospects for further advancements
in biochemical pharmaceuticals and
their contribution to our health, vigour
and longevity during the next thirty
years are exciting, and in psychoactive
drugs and genetics both attractive and
a little frightening.
As people live longer, medicine for
the aging will claim more attention.
There will be a decrease in the debili¬
tating effects of senility, heart disease
and arthritis. The development of new
synthetic organ and tissue substitutes
will serve to prolong life where only
parts of the body are threatened; and
techniques of organ transplantation
with the development of improved
immuno-suppressive drugs will be
further perfected.
And, not least, scientists may deter¬
mine in what sense death is an inevi¬
table biological necessity, or how far
it is the result of a series of patholo¬
gical accidents, each one of which can
be separately eluded or corrected by
changes in dietary habits or the appli-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
MODERN CHEMISTRY (Continued)
The most exciting innovation since antibiotics
cation of proper chemotherapeutic
agents.
New understanding of the molecular
basis for disease, through increasing
sophistication of biological research,
will strongly influence the design of
new synthetic drugs, providing for effi¬
cient action against disease with
less danger of harmful side-effects.
Likewise, ' new knowledge about
mechanisms by which hormones regu¬
late life processes, and the in¬
fluences of aging and disease on such
activity, make it possible to design
drugs which can exercise effective
control of metabolism during disease
and aging. If successful, the process
of aging may be retarded and ssni-
lity reduced, resulting in a longer spar
of useful life.
I
14
N the past few years,
several pharmaceutical products have
been made available which effectively
lower the blood pressure, and along
with diuretics, are helpful in sustaining
the health and prolonging the lives of
patients suffering from hypertension.
More effective heart disease drugs to
reduce fatty deposits that clog blood
vessels are being prepared for us.
And permanently installed artificial
pacemakers using synthetic piezoelec¬
tric crystals to generate sufficient
electric current from the movement of
the diaphragm will offset damage to
the cardiac nerve centre, prolonging
life with greater ease for those inflic¬
ted with heart trouble.
If, as recent findings of Dr. Howard
M. Temin and Satoshi Mizutani seem
to confirm, some forms of cancer are
caused by viruses, preventive and
therapeutic vaccines can be expected
to replace surgery as the principal
form of treatment for this dreaded
threat to human life. Cancer appears
to be not one, but a variety of dis¬
eases, so that several approa¬
ches will probably be required to
control it. Well-defined programmes
of nucleic acid research, with focus
on new prospects of medicinal chemis¬
try, offer hope of new anti-tumour
drugs and agents active against leu¬
kemia.
Powerful new weapons against vi¬
ruses of a wide variety will be in use
before 1985. Here, some sensational
developments are predictable. Anti¬
viral drugs and products of nucleic
acid research to cure influenza and
the common cold can be anticipated.
Some new anti-viral drugs will not be
specific to one particular virus, but
will affect a spectrum of viruses, pro¬
bably including useful bacteriophages
that attack bacteria.
Careful, structural molecular analysis
has also led to experimentation with
cage-shaped vaccine molecules that
interfere with viral attachment to or
penetration of human cells on the
perfectly sound theory that prevention
of cell penetration will render the virus
harmless. Other drugs will interfere
with the assembly of viral components,
or simply mislead viruses by the in¬
duction of faulty coding. Vaccines
against mumps and German measles
have been developed and another
recent discovery 55-f luorodeoxyuri-
dine is effective In treating herpes of
the eye.
These are small-, but meaningful,
triumphs. With the understanding of the
nature of viruses and their reproduc¬
tion growing rapidly, however, the
current rather unimpressive cupboard
of antiviral drugs will be expanded
steadily in the next two decades to
lighten the human burden of disease.
A new breakthrough in the long
struggle against schistosomiasis has
produced a promising new drug, niri-
dazole, which stops egg laying by
schistosoma worms, destroys the eggs
inside the human body, and kills the
parent worms, curing the patient and
helping to obstruct perpetuation of the
parasite all in one concerted action.
Described by Prof. A. W. Woodruff
of the London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine as "the most
exciting therapeutic innovation in this,
and perhaps any, field since the intro¬
duction of antibiotics", niridazole is
expected to bring relief to between
200 and 300 million people in Asia,
Africa and Latin America who are
infected by the disease.
Serendipitiously, niridazole also has
proved to be an effective weapon
against guinea worm, amoeba and cer¬
tain types of leishmania three debili¬
tating parasites which continue to be
major health problems in tropical
areas. By 1985, nucleic acid research
is also expected to produce new active
agents against parasitic and other
tropical diseases.
Recent research has also focused
attention on various aspects of immu¬
nity, other than those involved in the
use of prophylactic vaccines. New
drugs designed to cure or relieve
arthritis and multiple sclerosis, which
appear to be manifestations of auto¬
immune phenomena, are on the
horizon.
The early generation of immuno¬
suppressive drugs has already made
possible such success as has be n
obtained in organ transplantation. 7 ne
search for better agents, again through
nucleic acid chemistry, will continue,
particularly for pharmaceuticals which,
when use has been discontinued, per¬
mit full recovery of the immune mech¬
anisms.
Attempts are also underway to iso¬
late new hormones, improve oral con
traceptives as well as produce more
potent non-addictive analgesic drugs,
sedatives that do not cause drug tol¬
erance, better anti-inflammatory and
anti-ulcer drugs, and compounds that
prevent or control osteoporosis (a
disease of the bones).
In addition to what may be thought
of as classic medicine, there is an
ever-increasing number of drugs being
developed to influence the mind and
nervous system. Numerous drugs to
control memory and learning are al¬
ready available. Ribonucleic acid, a
genetic messenger, is said to actually
stimulate the brain's memory cells.
Among the beneficial therapeutic uses
of the drug is the treatment of senility;
but it has much broader implications.
Certain hydrazine derivatives have
made chemotherapy of mental de¬
pression possible, and led to the
introduction of anti-depressants for use
in treating mental disorders.
Still another psycho-pharmaceutical
substance selectively relieves anxiety
and tension along with their organic
manifestations, without impairing phy¬
sical and mental alertness. Drugs for
the treatment of tension and compul¬
sive neuroses, euhypnics which induce
sleep by shielding the sleep mecha¬
nism from disturbing stimuli of emo¬
tional, sensory or autonomic origin
have also been, developed.
B
UT the frightening aspect
of all this is the use to which chemical
brain-control agents may be put. Some
scientists believe it may become pos¬
sible to control the individual and
entire societies, and to do all this
unobtrusively without the active co¬
operation of the victims.
Chemicals could be placed in water
supplies, food or the air we breathe,
to work on a mass basis. Or a pres¬
cribed psychological environment in
the very early periods of an indivi¬
dual's life might be used to produce
inferior brains and people on the one
hand, and superior brains and people
on the other thus creating the
master group and the subservient
group envisaged in Huxley's "Brave
New World."
All this is, of course, speculative
but possible within limits of present
scientific knowledge. Self-abuse of
psycho-pharmaceutical drugs is alrea¬
dy with us, indicating a certain mis¬
placed emphasis in the analysis of
social problems these new discoveries
pose. The challenge is not the social
responsibility of the scientist who
contrives a new brain-control com¬
pound; whether the new discovery is
used to good or bad ends depends
on individuals and the social controls
they are prepared to sustain.

The 10,000
metamorphoses
of plastics
and synthetic
fibres
rat V"
.OB v£. KJ%&««"
THE CRANES ARE FLYING in this modern age and carrying their nests
with them. 500 feet above the outskirts of Stockholm, a giant helicopter
carries an artificial fibre summer residence to a new site. Designed by
Finnish architect Matti Suuronen, it is ready for immediate occupation
by four people. Furniture, household equipment and electric central heating
are all incorporated in the original design and even the windows are
made of synthetic material. Now being mass-produced in the United
States, these discus-shaped dwellings are in great demand for motels and
as temporary housing for workmen on building sites.
I
I F chemistry has revolutio¬
nized agriculture and the practice of
medicine in the last generation, its
impact upon the quality of life has
been hardly less far-reaching through
the development of plastics. Plastics,
the only new twentieth century techno¬
logy to emerge as a basic industry,
has enabled man to fashion materials
to meet his specific needs rather than
adapt his needs to the availability of
nature's substances as they occur.
Other basic materials glass, iron,
steel and the non-ferrous metals,
ceramics, concrete, timber and natural
fibres all existed before the begin¬
ning of the Greek era. Paper was
invented by the Chinese much later,
about the time of Christ. Until the
development of plastics looked upon
until only a very few years ago as
"substitutes" rather than as a major
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
15

MODERN CHEMISTRY (Continued)
new technology modern man had
added only rubber and aluminium to
his available materials.
Yet plastics, structured from matter
rather than specific substances and
capable of being fashioned according
to the intended end-use, are only the
beginning of a new materials techno¬
logy. New composite materials with
specific microstructures of atoms and
molecules designed with the desired
physical, chemical and electrical
characteristics will be the products
of physical chemistry and quantum
mechanics with which we will fashion
the clothing we wear, the homes we live
in, the buildings in which we work,
the cities of the future.
Fully synthetic fibres, rapidly
replacing natural fibres, have produc¬
ed a veritable comfort revolution in
the past ten years. Durable press
fabrics have made the most spec¬
tacular changes in fibre use patterns,
in textile processing and economics
and in the lives of consumers, of
any single innovation that has ever
appeared on the textile scene.
As a result, while the consumption
of cotton remained stable throughout
the 1960s, polyester production for
apparel and home-furnishing fabrics
increased by a factor of 20 and is
expected to triple in the present
decade. Improvements consumers
can expect in the fabrics they use
during this period include better stain
removal, higher soil resistance,
greater resistance to burning, and
lower static buildup.
Stretch, or spandex, fibres that
have brought such radical changes to
women's fashions, will also find much
wider future use in all types of men's
and women's garments. The improv¬
ed comfort, fit and draping qualities
obtained are possible when only a
small amount of spandex is incorporat¬
ed into a fabric.
Only slightly less visible than the
influence of new fibres on fashions is
the renaissance of the wig and
hairpieces for women and, to a daily
increasing extent, for men, provoked
by the advent of modacrylic fibres.
While these Innovations may be
more social than utilitarian, their main
object is to enable people to enjoy,
or at least not be ashamed of, their
appearance a most welcomed contri¬
bution to the quality of life.
But new synthetic fibres have also
brought new comfort , styling and ease
of maintenance to the home. New
fabrics for floor coverings, draperies
and upholstery have lustre and
beauty, long life and ease of cleaning
and maintenance. Use of carpeting
in the home, hotels and business
places has increased almost four-fold
in the past ten years, and lower
prices, greater durability and low cost
of maintenance is expected to further
expand its uses even for outdoors.
Similarly, wall coverings in fabrics,
which have functional advantages of
insulation and sound proofing as well
as exciting new decorating and styling
possibilities, will make their modest
contribution to the improvement of
man's environment at home and at
work.
Still more exotic fibres are avail¬
able today for a wide variety of in¬
dustrial and construction uses, Highly
flexible fibrous materials produced in
metallic, ceramic and carbon composi¬
tions are used as separators and
matrices for high temperature fuel cells
and other multiple layer insulation,
reflectors and insulation for inductive¬
ly heated and resistance heated
furnaces, reinforcements for materials
used in nozzles and heat shields, high
temperature filter media for bases and
metals, porous diffusers for infrared
burners, and catalyst supports.
CONTINUED PAGE 20
Photo © DuPont, New York
STRATOSPHERIC 'LEMONS' AND CLOTHES FOR AN INFERNO
Brobdingnagian "eggs" or "lemons" (right) are really giant balloons for stratospheric research made out
of synthetic rubber, being Inspected at a factory in Kazan on the Volga river in the U.S.S.R. The new world
of synthetic materials created by modern chemistry includes a broad selection of heat-resistant polymers.
These range from materials that protect metal from temperatures as high as 4,000 degrees F. for short
periods, to nylon fibres for protection against heat and flame. Unlike asbestos, this new cloth can be made
into garments that protect firemen (below) and those doing jobs with serious fire hazards, while allowing
them to work as easily as If they were wearing ordinary clothes.


ONE DROP OF GLUE
DOES THE TRICK
When does a single drop of "glue" have the sticking power to support a half -ton
weight? The answer: when it's a new-type plastic adhesive. The ability of
high-strength adhesives to weld two materials into a virtually permanent union
is demonstrated in photos on this page. With the development of plastic adhe¬
sives that are stronger, lighter and easier to use than conventional fasteners,
screws and bolts, rivet and nails may one day become obsolete. Houses, cars
and planes may eventually be completely glued together as furniture is today.
Below, delicate traceries produced by glue used to join two sheets of glass.
Pattern was revealed when the sheets were wrenched apart during research.
Photo © Georges Joniaux
e»
Above and below, a single drop of glue is
to join two steel cylinders together to become
part of a heavy-duty hoist. The liquid solidifies
on contact, the tiny amount of moisture and
oxygen present on almost any surface being
sufficient to trigger off the process. Within
minutes the chemical weld created by the drop
is strong enough to support the weight of a
1,200-pound safe (right).


Hwiiiiniiï
mr««lll*H«H
\
^¿'
!' '
Photo Serge de Sazo © Rapho, Paris
MODERN CHEMISTRY (Continued from page 16)
20
Carbon and graphite fibres, produc¬
ed by the decomposition of rayon or
acrylonitrile polymers under carefully-
controlled conditions, are the highest
strength-to-weight and modulus-to-
weight engineering materials man has
yet been able to devise. Because of
high production costs, these yarns
are used only in special applications
such as nose cones of aircraft, space¬
craft and sensitive radar housings in
remote arctic locations.
What synthetic fibres have become
for clothing and home furnishing, solid
plastics developed from the same
resins are rapidly becoming for
home construction, furniture, household
appliances, motor cars and industry.
Environmental conditions which can
maintain ideal climate, pure air, and
freedom from noise, making available
to the average home dweller the
seclusion and comfort once limited to
a privileged few, are now within
reach, thanks to plastics technology.
Special lighting, enhanced by the
use of electroluminescent plastic
panels, together with radiant heating
built into neoprene ceilings, will soon
bring these comforts to millions of
families. Wall and ceiling panels
made of plastic foam sandwiched
between thin metals, ceramic, pressed
wood, or plastic sheets, will have
light-weight, high-insulation properties
and the strength of metals a boon
for new labour-saving, prefabricated
construction techniques. Surface
coatings of foil, film, sheet, or spray
will be tough, durable and colourful.
A new "systems concept" of con¬
struction, providing architects and
builders with engineered plastics spe¬
cially designed to perform specific
functions, in combination with other
products and materials used in a
finished structure, has opened up
broad new horizons for housing and
building construction.
The results are huge savings in
time and money, along with improved
insulation, structural integrity and
creature comforts. Use of black
anodized aluminium backed with ure-
thane foam insulant enabled Chicago
architects to design the Windy City's
futuristic 100-storey John Hancock
Center for construction at costs of a
conventional 45-storey building: $95
million.
Synthetic products used in this and
other high-rise buildings include
corrosion-resistant bearings, adhesives
said to be 30 times stronger than
ordinary cement-lime mortar and
10-30 per cent cheaper, gypsum
wallboard, butyl rubber glazing tape
and neoprene rubber strips around
windows, vinyl-asbestos floor tiles,
plastic laminate panels in elevators
and offices, synthetic fibre carpets,
protective and decorative surface
coatings and bronze-tinted glass
windows.
Still other shapes of the future,
made possible by products of modern
chemistry, were heralded by the
dazzling and bizarre collage of
structures assembled in the Senri
Hills outside Osaka for Japan's Expo
70. Although designed primarily to

"Schematism", says the dictionary, "is
the arranging of parts or particles in a
pattern according to a scheme." The
"Ski-mat-ists" in our photos are gliding
in hot summer sunlight on artificial ski
slopes made of synthetic sheeting to
which a carefully worked out pattern,
below, has given the consistency and
qualities of snow. All year, round skiing
within the reach of all is now a reality
for youth in Yomiuriland, Japan, left,
and denizens of Dieppe. France, far left.
WHERE ARE THE SNOWS OF YESTERYEAR ?
H .s
\ \>£l
oto Serge de Sazo © Rapho, Paris
amaze and delight the eye, the build¬
ings at Expo also incorporated many
sound structural innovations that
could influence building trends for
years to come.
Certainly, the extensive use of
elastomeric building materials for air-
supported structures indicates the
progress that synthetic rubber may
expect to make in the construction
field during the next decade or two.
More than twenty buildings utilized
newly developed neoprene joining
techniques which reduce critical
construction times and assure resilient
and weatherproof structures.
These materials are already finding
wide application in less exotic struc¬
tures the world over. A new
industrialized building system, remark¬
able for its simplicity, flexibility and
speed has been developed in France
by a group of architects and in¬
dustrialists using a patented innova¬
tion a moulded fixation point for alu¬
minium mullions used in the facades
of their multi-storied apartment houses.
A vast roof of unique design,
covering a new gymnasium at Prin¬
ceton University in the U.S.A. has a
weatherpoof coating of neoprene and
Hypalon synthetic rubbers, giving it
added weather resistance, flexibility
and durability. A French fruit-grower
near Avignon has been able to store
fruit for three months longer than
usual and at a much lower cost than in
conventional structures, by using in¬
flated refrigerated warehouses, made
from synthetic rubber coated fabric
that very much resembles structures
of the Osaka Fair.
New materials for new devices will
also play many hidden rôles in home
and office buildings. Packaged power
units, whose future availability de¬
pends in large measure on present-
day materials research by the chem¬
icals Industry, will reduce noise and
air pollution. Direct energy con¬
verters and efficient storage batteries,
taking their charges during off-peak-
load periods, should improve economy
and reduce electric power costs.
Packaged power is already in wide
use, for flashlights, hearing aids, por¬
table radios, electric shavers and the
like. By 1985, small batteries in the
pockets of light weight apparel made
of new synthetic fabrics will provide
well-regulated body-environmental tem¬
peratures without the need for heavy
overcoats. Larger batteries will fur¬
nish motive power for automobiles
and an increasing percentage of
other land vehicular transportation.
With the possibilities of greater
leisure both from work and house¬
hold chores, plastics and other new
materials will play an increasing role
in facsimile information services, video
and sound tape recordings, art works
and published materials.
A whole new generation of televi¬
sion receivers is likely to be the first
futuristic electronic device, made
possible by the development of ferro¬
electric crystals and electrolumines¬
cent layers made of copper-activated
zinc sulfoselenide phosphor particles
encapsulated in a resin. Similarly,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
21

MODERN CHEMISTRY (Continued)
the ecological
imperative
SYNTHETIC MATERIAL
CONSUMPTION IN 1969
MILLIONS OF TONS
U.S.A	 8.45
Japan 4.15
Fed. Rep. of Germany . 3.96 .
Italy	1.50,
France 1.35.,
Sweden 	 0.28 .
'"
WHERE'S THE DISHWASHER?
If it's your turn to wash the dishes the odds are that they will
be made of some kind of synthetic material. The world's
largest producer of plastic materials, the United States
(8,314,000 tons in 1969), has a lower per capita consumption
(35 kilos in 1969) than the Federal Republic of Germany
(44 kilos) and Sweden (38 kilos). The use of plastics is growing
in Japan (32 kilos per capita in 1969), but is still comparatively
low in France (23 kilos) and Italy (20 kilos).
22
standard telephones operating on
sound waves may soon be rendered
obsolete by a system in which laser-
generated light modulated by ferro¬
electric crystals such as lithium
tantalate will carry many times the
volume of information that can be
transmitted by present telephone
circuits.
It is not known exactly when man
identified pollution. as a problem. Not
only was it beneath the dignity of
ancient writers to discuss the matter ;
it wasn't an issue. Pollution was a
part of life.
History does, however, record that
the early Romans complained that a
black soot in the air smudged their
togas. And in merry old England
there was once a law prohibiting the
burning of a certain low grade of coal.
Violation was punishable by death,
and King Edward I (1272-1307 A.D.)
is known to have enforced the penalty.
But pollution in those times was of
a different order than the pollution we
have today. Life was simple, and
society was far from affluent. Very
little in the way of effluent wastes was
created and almost nothing was
thrown out. There were no nations
with 85 million automobiles to account
for some 40 per cent of 200 million
tons of emissions dumped into the air
annually as residue of human activity
as in the United States today.
Thanks to modern technology, we
have been able to achieve a standard
of living undreamed of even a century
ago. But in the process we have
also created many pollution problems.
The problems are new, different,
bigger and they are demanding and
getting a growing amount of our atten¬
tion, time and money.
Just as chemistry has provided
modern man with tools to conquer
hunger and disease, to provide im¬
proved clothing and shelter, it is the
principle means at our disposal for
the conservation of our environment.
After seven years of research, the
chemical industry has perfected an
exhaust manifold reactor, a noncata-
lytic unit that thermally reduces the
gaseous emissions of conventional
auto engines; it will control the two
principle problem pollutants generated
by auto engines: hydrocarbons and
carbon monoxide. Fibres and plastics
are used in a number of other filtering
and reclamation processes, while
chemicals and intermediates are used
in purifying and catalytic systems.
While the apparatus that will filter,
trap or dissolve all pollution materials
discharged by oil refineries, chemical
plants, steel mills, paper plants and
building incinerators has not been

built yet, progress has been made
with the recent development of cellular
ceramic materials resembling honey¬
combs that are effective in fume
abatement. When covered with a
precious metal or metal oxide, these
honeycomb structures cause oxidation
as the fumes pass through.
Nylon and tetrafluorocarbon fibres
are also being effectively used in.
many dust collection systems, particu¬
larly where heat resistance is requir¬
ed. Filter bags in a variety of fabrics
and types are doing service in more
than a dozen industries, including iron
and steel, chemical, cement, gypsum,
quarrying, carbon black, zinc, soap,
smelting, asphalt and the reclamation
of metals.
Somewhat more success has been
obtained with water purification
systems. Direct oxygenation systems
have substantially improved the effec¬
tiveness and lowered the cost of the
secondary activated sludge waste¬
water treatment process used by most
mgnicipal and large industrial systems.
Nylon and polyester fibre per-
meators that can make brackish water
fit to drink may also be used to
remove certain pollutants from sugar,
paper, pharmaceutical, chemical and
dairy industries.
In other preventive applications,
synthetic rubber lining is being used
for storage of brine, hydrocarbon oils,
fuels and chemicals to prevent
seepage which might contaminate
6treams, the soil and subsurface
waters.
In what amounts to the most con¬
certed scientific effort in history, one
far more extensive than that of the
space programmes of the 1960s, hun¬
dreds of governmental and industrial
research laboratories are engaged in
the search for new products and new
technologies to meet the mounting
demand for pollution control and
maintenance of a continuing balance
in the global ecosystem.
Just as astronomy was the basic
science around which a vast constel¬
lation of physical and social sciences
were combined with the humanities in
a systems approach to the conquest
of space, chemistry must be the focus
of a similar global systems approach
to environmental control and improve¬
ment.
As an executive in a leading inter¬
national chemical company pointed out
recently in Zurich, "the restoration
of the environment is essentially
a chemical problem which has to be
.solved in the chemical laboratory and
by the massive application of chemical
products to neutralize the insalubrious
waste of our industrial society."
Within the next ten years the first
results of this intensive research
effort will begin to have a noticeable
impact. By the year 2000, chances
are that the combined efforts of
science, industry, academia and gov¬
ernments will have gone far toward
meeting the ecological imperative.
BRIDGE MADE OF PAPER. "On paper It's possible", said the
structural engineers when asked to design a new type of bridge;
and this is exactly how this 12,000 lb truck is crossing the
gorgeon a 32 ft bridge made of specially processed paper.
The bridge was constructed by American paper manufacturers
merely to demonstrate the strength and versatility of paper, not
as a commercial enterprise. Engineers calculated that the
bridge could carry a weight of up to 30 tons, yet it was light
enough to be put In place by a helicopter. Newly discovered
glues helped to make this feat possible.
23
