View of the ruins of Persepolis, the royal
city created by Darius I, its massive
carvings, gateways and walls recalling
the splendours of ancient Persia. 2,500
years ago ritual processions trod this
ceremonial stairway leading to the palaces
and audience halls of Persepolis.
This issue of the "Unesco Courier"
is published to mark an important
date: the 2,500th anniversary of
the founding of Iran. Unesco's
General Conference, recognizing
the importance of Iranian civi¬
lization in world history and its
"links with other civilizations over
a period of twenty-five centuries",
last year adopted a resolution
calling on Unesco and its Member
States to co-operate with the
Iranian authorities in this com¬
memoration. The Editors hope
that the presentation in this issue
of a few of the features of Iranian
culture and civilization brief and
incomplete though they may be
will help to spark a more profound
interest in the great traditions of
Persia which are as alive today as
they were two millennia ago.



4
cultural
crossroads for
2,500 years
by Peter Avery
w
ITHOUT the genius of
Iran the culture of mankind would
have been exceedingly impoverished.
Between 546 and 331 B.C. the great
Achaemenid Empire, built by Cyrus
and consolidated by Darius (521-486
B.C.), continued and perfected, on a
far larger scale than had ever been
PETER AVERY is lecturer In Persian at the
University of Cambridge, where he was dean
of King's College In 1967-68. Among his
many books on Iran are "Modern Iran",
"Persia, 600-1800", 'Hafiz of Shiraz, Thirty
Poems" (with lohn Heath Stubbs), and sev¬
eral volumes of the "Cambridge History of
Iran" (as editor).

known, the ordering and interchanges
of an imperial state whose beginnings
had been traced by the Babylonians
and Assyrians.
Once the latter had been conquered
by the Iranians, the "law of the Medes
and Persians which changeth not"
sheltered the development of civiliza¬
tion from the Aegean Sea to the
Indian Ocean.
Significantly, the Acheamenids sup¬
plied their own word for "law", data,
which passed into Armenian, Hebrew
and Akkadian, to signify what Is
meant by its root meaning, "to
arrange" or "put in order".
The ancient languages which adopt¬
ed this word indicate the Achaemenid
Empire's dominance over an area
which included the Caucasus and
Armenia, Israel on the Mediterranean
seabord, and the Tigris-Euphrates
Basin. It also stretched into Central
Asia in the northeast, and Asia Minor
in the west.
From the crossroads the Medes and
then the men of Persis, Cyrus and
Darius, marched along routes which
quartered the compass, to create the
model of the universal, cosmopolitan
state.
During the reign of Artaxerxes I
(466-424 B.C.) Greek historians and
men of science travelled in the Em¬
pire to acquire the learning of the East.
Had Democritus (d. 361 B.C.) not
met Babylonian scholars and mathe¬
maticians under the aegis of the
Achaemenid Empire, he would prob¬
ably not have worked out his atomic
theory. His father had entertained
the Emperor Xerxes when the Iranian
"Great King" had been in Thrace in
about 460 B.C.
Leaving those ancient eras when
Iran set the style for uniting nations,
the more recent Islamic culture can be
cited as a phenomenon which would
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

6
CULTURAL CROSSROADS (Continued)
not have existed without contributions
made in cities such as Baghdad,
Bukhara, Herat, Ray, Isfahan, Shiraz
and Tabriz from the 8th to the 17th cen¬
turies A.D. There the poetry, faience,
architecture, metalwork, miniature
painting and calligraphy which are the
characteristic adornments of Moslem
culture were perfected.
The ethos of all these cities was
Iranian, so extensive had former Per¬
sian empires been. Baghdad, from 750
to 1258 the seat of the Caliphs of
Islam, who were Islam's religious and
juridical heads, is near the site of
Ctesiphon on the Tigris, and Ctesi-
phon's great arch still stands as the
memorial of the splendour of the win¬
ter capital of the Persian Sassanid
Empire (224-651 A.D.). Bukhara and
Herat were jewels in north-eastern
Iran, where Achaemenid and Sassanid
influence reached the Oxus and Hindu
Kush, and the Persian language pre¬
vails to this day.
Islam was the faith revealed In the
seventh century to the Arabian
Prophet Mohammed. Shortly after his
death the Arabs' expansion at Iran's
and Byzantium's expense made Islam
inheritor of an Iranian civilization whose
beginnings are traceable to 4000 B.C.
Then a pottery existed on the Iranian
Plateau with designs which reveal
that the leap from realism into abstract
stylization had already been made;
made first of all by prehistoric Iranian
potters.
From this discovery it is evident how
in the clear atmosphere characteristic
of Iran, man's genius was early divert¬
ed from observation and imitation of
natural objects to transmuting obser¬
vation into the ordering of abstract
design.
Objects seen animals poised to
spring, birds in flight were transform¬
ed into universal concepts by the
ingenuity of prehistoric Iranians, and
Iranians have maintained this capacity
to universalize the particular in their
arts ever since, thus displaying the
highest mark of civilization.
The art of those first potters can
be seen again in the bounding gazelles
and partridges on the wing that
decorate the pages of sixteenth cen¬
tury manuscripts as motifs incidental
to more fully developed scenes, of
princes carousing or embattled against
backgrounds of landscapes which are
in a Chinese style and include tents
from the Steppes of Central Asia; or
of philosophers such as Avicenna (Ibn
Sina), discoursing to pupils on themes
preserved from defunct Greek schools,
but taught in medieval Iranian college
courtyards.
The clarity of the Iranian climate is

mammi
>>,.
% V4 ;A'-W A
>
Monumental stairways of Persepolis. Opposite and below, sculptured
reliefs depicting royal guards on the stairway leading to the Apadana
(audience hall). Above, carved frieze of nobles adorns the stairs to the
Tripylon. Medes (far wall) wear rounded headdresses, Persians (foreground)
are shown with fluted tiaras.
in great part the key to this type of
achievement in the visual arts, as later
it will be seen to have been to the
development of religious attitudes.
It is a special quality of Iranian
conditions, by which all comers are
captivated and mentally and spiritually
enhanced. To it should be added the
abrasive quality of rugged mountain
topography and parched plains, drama¬
tically relieved by the luxuriance of
gardens and coppices in places
where carefully husbanded, sparse
water supplies meet cultivable soil.
Wine and genius may be said to
be natural to Iran, whose middle posi¬
tion between eastern and western
continents has always ensured that its
genius had much to feed on, much to
transmute into something vital and
new.
From Herodotus onwards, Iranian
adaptability and quickness to borrow
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

8
CULTURAL CROSSROADS (Continued)
from others have frequently been com¬
mented on. But rarely has this been
done with enough emphasis on the
original genius and absolute and un¬
changing characteristics distinctly
Iranian, to make "borrowing" fresh,
hitherto unthought-of development,
mere imitation being out of the question.
The record can be corrected when
it Is recognized that the toughness of
Iranian conditions, combined with the
possibilities of achieving great refine¬
ment of living, art and intellect, have
forged a human resilience and pre¬
sence of mind to which others have
invariably succumbed, never succeed¬
ing in erasing the influence and effects
of Iranian talent, however calamitously
they may have assaulted the Iranian
land.
Thus, to a greater extent than a rival
Greek might have seen fit to report,
Iranians have received less than they
have exported, or given to their not
always invited guests. Invaders have
been of inferior culture, attracted by
Iran's superior civilization and quickly
conquered by it. From Arabs out of
the desert and nomads from the Asia¬
tic steppes Iran could hope to receive
little but an influx of fresh vitality and
the arduous challenge of refining it
into the Iranian way of life.
This Is to speak as if Iran had
always been, and that not success¬
fully, on the defensive. On the offen¬
sive against the ancient Greeks, Iran
came into Europe and in its turn pro¬
vided the challenge which broadened
the Hellenes' horizon and, for example,
in Xenophon's Cyropaedia, gave the
world a Greek philosophical tale,
based on the examples furnished by
Iranian ' monarchy, and, interestingly
-enough, written in a strikingly Persian
style of exemplary political polemic.
Iranians brought Europe lucerne, the
fodder of their famous cavalry, and
also the domestic fowl, the white dove,
and the peacock. Darius had fruit
trees from his eastern provinces trans¬
planted to regions west of the Euphra¬
tes. The pistachio was taken to Syria,
rice to Mesopotamia, sesame to Egypt,
all within the confines of ancient
Iranian empires. The Shahinshah's
favourite wines, however, failed to
flourish in Damascus.
Salted fish from the Persian Gulf
was eaten in Asia Minor and part of
Egypt's tribute to Iran was paid in
revenue from the Mediterranean and
Nile fisheries; the statecraft of the
Achaemenid King of Kings accom¬
plished and maintained in balance the
first and one of the vastest of amal¬
gams of human resources.
Iranian initiative has repeatedly
revived this dream of the universal
state. Alexander the Great himself,
to win his subordinates' approval, after
they had reproached him for having be¬
come too Iranian in outlook, destroyed
the Achaemenid's cosmopolitan amal¬
gamation in 331 B.C.
Long afterwards, when through
Iranian intrepidity and that of Iranized
Arabs the Moslem Caliphate of Bagh¬
dad rose in 750 A.D., the stage was
set for another far-reaching amalga¬
mation of human forces and global
resources: the Perso-Moslem unity.
Geography has endowed the occu¬
pants of the Iranian uplands with a
very wide theatre in which to spread
the operations and influence of their
genius. They overlook the Oxus
basin and plains of Asia in the north¬
east, the Tigris-Euphrates valley and
Arabian Desert in the south-west, the
Hindu Kush and Indian Sub-Continent
in the east and south-east.
The Caucasus rises in the north and
the Persian Gulf girdles the southern
shores of what is a many-doored
caravanserai, the middle realm bet¬
ween Europe and Asia, Africa and
Siberia. Through Iran came the silk
and paper of China, the Indies' gold
and spices, the horses and hides of
Central Asia, to reach the Roman sea.
When an Iranian empire of old
expanded, it followed the ancient
world's primary arteries of trade bet¬
ween east and west. It supplemented
its wealth by tolls on merchandise,
upon whose raw materials it placed the
stamp of Iranian craftsmanship. It
touched the goods passing through its
hands with the quickening lumin¬
osity of the Iranian mind; with that art
which the early potters on the Per¬
sian plateau had practised.
Not only were designs and images
passed on, so that patterns were
spread on cloth or woven into car¬
pets to speak the world over of
how an Iranian weaver sees flowers,
the delicate poplar, the bird on the
bough, the very colours of Iranian soil
and Iranian contrasts of red, deep
blue and green. Religious ideas were
also exported, to lie deep in Judaism,
Christianity, and profoundly to shape
the Islamic faith Iran took as its own.
Darius's vines transplanted to
Damascene soil may not have taken
there, but aspects of the ritual of
Iran's ancient Zoroastrian religion have
their place in the wine of the Christian
Eucharist.
The heavenly galaxies nightly shine
more brightly on a land most of which
is over four thousand feet above sea-
level, than they do on mistier, more
low-lying regions. There is never a
day without the light of the sun in the
country whose mythical king Hushang
discovered how to produce fire, his
son Jamshid making the festival of
Nauruz, the New Year, mark the vernal
equinox.
Iran's brightness Is reflected in the
enamel-like brilliance both of its visual
arts and the imagery of its exquisite
poetry. The sense of Heaven being
almost within reach has developed
the Iranian spiritual genius to a degree
which makes the Persian people
naturally religious, so that their liter¬
ature and art seem always unavoidably
communicative of the Grace of God.
Their spirituality confers on them
both their innate and abiding yearn-
A general view of the
Apadana, the audience
hall of Darius I.
Of its original 36
slender fluted columns,
19 m. (63 ft.) high,
and the 36 columns
in the three porticoes
to this great hall,
13 are still standing..
ing for a greater perfection than the
world immediately offers, and their
peculiar power to lend lustre to what¬
ever they handle. It offers them the
hope of grace, but also engenders
pessimism and scepticism about the
mortal state. Nevertheless, in Iran
spirituality and pragmatism are so
balanced that to its poetry the world
may turn for enlightenment and con¬
solation when other sources of inspir¬
ation fail to assuage human despair.
Asia and Europe are fortunate to be
bridged by a land whose brightness
could supplant the Mongols' clouded
superstition by vision, so that as an
Iranian ruler, even a descendant of
Chingiz Khan, Ghazan (1295-1304),
became a polymath and, while dismis¬
sing the vanities of alchemy, kept Its
processes, aware of the scientific
value of experiment.
It was the Iranian brightness which
taught Mohammed the Prophet's suc¬
cessors that they were not only the
keepers of Moslem law. Theirs also
to keep was a revelation which ans¬
wered man's most exalted spiritual
aspirations. The Iranian Sufi mystics

r 4
have kept clear for mankind the con¬
cept which the example of Moham¬
med, God's Chosen Apostle, con¬
veyed: that men's hearts when purified
may become the mirror of God's
unblemished light.
The bridging role has, however,
brought vicissitudes. The Iranian spir¬
it's strength and resilience have often
been severely tried. It is well for the
world that they have emerged from
these trials as keen, flexible and
unbreakable as well-tempered steel,
for the world can still derive a great
deal from Iran that is beneficial in
the cultural and political spheres.
A crossroads is a vantage point from
which to observe the ways of men in
their different regions and contexts.
It is also the place in which a people
possessed, through a long and eventful
history, of an almost unparallelled
.experience of human affairs can set up
the signposts commonly to be found
at crossroads.
At the Iranian junction of history,
cultures and indigenous aptitude, Eu¬
rope can be explained to Asia and Asia
can teach Europe. Iran's windows are
like the faces of Janus. Iran is a
sharp-eyed, keenly observant Janus.
Modern Iran now possesses resour¬
ces and has regained the self-confi¬
dence lost in the thraldom and period
of foreign domination and exploitation
which began in 1722 when the Safa-
vid dynasty lost power.
Now Iran again commands inter¬
national respect. It both can and does
play a positive rôle in world affairs.
As a member of the United Nations it
sets the pace for other developing
countries, and has become the obvious
milieu for international conventions for
the discussion of such topics as nutri¬
tion, agricultural development, illiter¬
acy, the rights of women.
It is thus once more the centre
where ideas and techniques may be
pooled, to meet the problems of the
less technologically advanced Orient
with the experience and skills of the
more technologically advanced Occi¬
dent, Iran acting as the catalyst.
Seekers of solutions to the world's
problems could have no more gener¬
ous and perfect hosts than the Ira¬
nians, whose courtesy is rightly pro
verbial and has been almost since
time began; but whose long exper¬
ience as the guardians of civilization
against the encroachment of desert
sands, of rapacious enemies, of chaos
and disorderliness makes them more
than gracious hosts.
The slightest realization of what
Iran has achieved in Improving Its
own domestic well-being since 1960,
and this measured against the former
drain of its old resources, and its in¬
capacity for over a century during
modern times to act Independently,
will demonstrate that the potentiality
alluded to here is not exaggerated.
A wider ranging study of Iran's his¬
tory, and a proper understanding of
its geographical position in a world in
which the East is stirring into new life,
will amply reinforce the argument that
confidence in Iran's capacity for show¬
ing initiative and vitality, and willing¬
ness to accord it the respect it deser¬
ves, could procure for the world the
contribution of a stabilizing force
that a region which might easily
become greatly disturbed urgently
requires.
9
