THE
OTHER
PERSON'S
SKIN
by Mohamed Awad
CO
E
CO
O
20
I
that the present writer faced the ques¬
tion of skin-colour, when, in April,
1945, he came to the United States
of America with the Egyptian Delega¬
tion, on its way to the San Francisco
Conference. This was the famous
conference which was to draw up the
Charter of the United Nations, the
charter that was to declare in its
opening articles that there should be
no differentiation of treatment, based
on language, race, colour, religion, etc.
While we were still in our plane,
approaching the United States, we
were each handed by the US Immigra¬
tion Administration a large sheet of
paper, which carried a number of
questions which we were required to
answer faithfully and truthfully. While
most of the questions were easily dis¬
posed of, there was one that really
stumped me: it asked what was one's
race.
Although I was once told that in the
U.S.A. I should be asked about my
race, I did not take the remark seri¬
ously. Now on entering the States I
realized that this was no joke; and I
had to give an honest answer to an
official question.
It must be admitted that in spite my
geographical studies, which included
a lot of anthropology, it was by no
means easy for me to say to what race
I belonged. The human species to
which I presumably belong, was evol¬
ved on the face of this planet, probably
somewhere in the south west of Asia.
There, according to the most accepted
theory, Adam and Eve got married,
and began to produce an enormous lot
of offspring.
These offspring did not remain in
their original home, but kept on wan¬
dering and multiplying and migrating
from place to place. The wanderings
must have lasted approximately a
million years, in the course of which
the human species was busy making
new races, either by intermarriage or
by other means.
The number of these races must be
very large. The U.S. Immigration Office
wanted to know to which of them I
belonged; or else, presumably, I would
be refused participation in writing
the Charter of the United Nations.
Obviously I was in a predicament from
which I must try to extricate myself.
The U.S. Immigration Office prob¬
ably knew that I should not find the
question an easy one to answer. So
they tried to help the candidate to
supply the required information, by
suggesting that one should write that
one's race was either white or col¬
oured. But this did not make the
question any easier. I did not know
how coloured I was. In the end I
decided to try to be scientific and I
wrote against race: "Mediterranean",
and handed the form to the represen¬
tative of the U.S. Immigration Office.
He did not even look at it.
I must inform the prospective visitor
to the U.S.A. that this difficulty no
longer exists, and one is not now
asked that difficult question.
The reason why I relate my early
experience at some length is that
it included a profound error, in stipu¬
lating that one's race can be only
described as either white or coloured.
Scientifically speaking there is no
human being who is not coloured to
some extent. Even the fairest skin in
the northern latitudes cannot be
described as without colour.
Skin colour differs in quantity but
not in quality. It is the result of the
presence of a huge number of micro¬
scopic glands under the skin, which
produce a pigment, that protects the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
21

THE OTHER PERSON'S SKIN (Continued)
The right to be different
22
sensitive parts under the skin from
injurious rays. In countries where the
sun shines with great vigour, those
glands become more active; the pig¬
ment produced is more substantial
and the colour of the skin appears
much darker. The environment is thus
the decisive factor in giving the skin
the colour it needs.
In the northern climates, in the
lands surrounding the Baltic and the
North Sea, the rays of the sun are
seldom strong, and the production of
pigment is minimal. Here is the home
of the Nordic Race, with its clear skin,
blue eyes, and fair hair. Their glands
produce all the pigment that is neces¬
sary for the climate; and should they
emigrate to a much more sunny and
warm climate, their skin hurts, and they
have to apply more creams and oint¬
ments and wear dark glasses for addi¬
tional protection. As we move from
the northern latitudes towards the
Equator we begin to encounter darker
skin and eyes and hair.
It may be asked what happens to
the person who cannot produce any
protective pigment. This does occur
in some persons whose glands do
not function. Their skin has usually
a sickly white appearence. They are
known as Albinos; and their condition
is lamentable. Albinism is the name
of their disease and it may occur
among animals as well as among
humans. Fortunately, it is not very
common.
To distinguish people according to
their colour is an old custom. One
of the painted pictures left by the
Ancient Egyptians denotes the kind of
people known to them about three
or four thousand years ago, and
shows four different faces. One
depicts an Egyptian, whose colour
is reddish; another has a rather
dark skin-colour and is meant to be a
Nubian; a third has yellowish skin to
denote a Syrian, and the fourth, repre¬
senting a Libyan, has a fair skin and
blue eyes. There is no indication that
one colour is superior to another. The
picture simply represented the peoples
with whom the Egyptians were most
familiar. In other words, there was
no idea of what we now call colour
prejudice.
Similar pictures of classical times
represent the captured slaves from the
Northern plains; their colour was much
fairer than that of their Roman masters.
When we come to modern times
we witness examples of what must
be considered colour prejudice. It is
not necessary to trace the history of
the phenomenon. The essential thing
to note is that it exists in several
parts of the- world, assumes different
forms, and has produced different
results.
Colour prejudice consists essentially
of a feeling that individuals with a
certain skin colour are inferior. Usu¬
ally the persons considered inferior
are those with a dark or deep brown
skin, and they are considered inferior
by individuals whose skin is fair. In
other words persons with little skin
pigment consider themselves superior
to those whose skin carries a lot of
pigment. For the sake of easy expres¬
sion, we mostly call the former
"white" and the latter "black".
The blacks living in a certain neigh¬
bourhood would not quit their homes if
a white family came to settle there, nor
would they leave a hotel, if a white man
came to stay there for a night or two.
Both cases are fairly common where
the newcomer is black.
Many urban districts have been
abandoned by their white occupants as
soon as a few black families came to
live there. These black families may be
culturally or materially well off; but
this will not affect the result. The
neighbourhood soon becomes a black
man's environment.
^9 OME countries have at¬
tempted, with a certain measure of
success, to combat this segregation,
particularly in the schools maintained
by the State, and even in some insti¬
tutes of higher learning. In social
circumstances, however, little progress
has been achieved. People will still
live in districts whose inhabitants carry
the same amount of pigment, and
intermarriage is usually frowned upon.
One may be permitted to say, in
passing, that the policy of desegrega¬
tion deliberately followed by the U.S.
Government is still in its early stages,
and is bound to achieve greater results
in course of time. Already the U.S. has
Negro millionaires, and there are a
particularly large number of sports
champions and Negro artists who are
held in the greatest esteem at home
and abroad, irrespective of the amount
of pigment in their skin.
There are, unfortunately, communi¬
ties which have carried colour pre¬
judice to the extreme limit. No account
of racial prejudice is complete without
reference to the miserable conditions
which obtain in the Republic of South
Africa, where colour prejudice has
been responsible for the misery of
about fifteen million people, and where
it has been designated by a special
name: Apartheid.
South Africa is the only country in
the world that proclaims the inequality
of its citizens in its laws. The South
Africa Act, 1961, declares that only
white persons may become members
of the all-powerful parliament. Though
an Afrikaans word, meaning separa-
teness, apartheid has come to mean
a policy of the State, based on racial
segregation and racial discrimination
and pursued in a most rigorous and
brutal manner by a minority of whites
against the large majority of Africans,
coloureds and Asians. In order to
pursue such a policy, a cruel regime
has been established, supported by a
police state and the most cruel "legal"
machinery imaginable.
For the public, the literature is fairly
simple: Signs reading "Whites only"
"Non-whites only." These signs are
on poles standing in playgrounds,
parks and beaches; they are painted
on benches, stencilled on telephone
boxes and nailed over sports fields,
concert halls, post offices and rail¬
way stations.
No place is too lowly for them
the urinals are strictly segregated
and no complication is too great: at
new stations separate counters are
provided for white luggage, for non-
white luggage, and for white luggage
to be fetched by non-white persons.
The colour bar applies to sex, with
policemen shining their torches
through windows to catch white and
black in forbidden embraces (Immora¬
lity Act). It applies to disaster, with
white ambulances being prevented
from carrying non-white casualties
(Hospital Board Regulations); and it
applies to death, with burial grounds
racially zoned to ensure that the
bodies remain as divided in death as
they were in life (Group Areas Act).
Such are the conditions in the
Republic of South Africa, where colour
prejudice exists at its worst. Little
wonder that the regime in South Africa
is only recognized- by some twenty
countries, and it is difficult to imagine
that such a regime can survive for
very long.
In conclusion, I would hope that the
different examples of the problem of
skin colour have helped to show that
while the properties of colour are
mostly the result^pf natural factors,
colour prejudice is definitely not
natural.
