Latent talent
anagram
a parent
can solve
The famous French writer, Georges Duhamel, who was also a medical doctor, once wrote
that "up to the age of five, every child Is a genius". It is now .Increasingly recognized
that pre-school and even pre-kindergarten youngsters have an untapped capacity for
learning and this capacity could be exploited far more than it is under many current
teaching practices. Hence the growing importance attached by educators and psychologists
to the Idea that everything should be done to stimulate the child's natural curiosity
(photo below) and to encourage the rapid broadening of his knowledge (photo opposite).
Photo © G. Bern, Paris
¿2*9 >
by Boris Nikitin
W
HY do some persons have
aptitudes that others lack. Why are
some talented and others not gifted
In any way? Why doesn't every child
prodigy become a genius? And why,
in general, are geniuses so rare in all
spheres of human activity? Human
ability is a subject that has always
aroused the keenest interest.
The unprecedented acceleration of
scientific and technological progress,
the growing avalanche of knowledge
about the world we live in and the
need to acquire this knowledge con¬
front educators and psychologists
with a multitude of problems.
Giving students more knowledge
means either increasing the number of
years they must study or adding new
material to school programmes. Yet
high school students already have a
longer working day than adult workers
a load that endangers their health.
BORIS NIKITIN of the U.S.S.R. was train¬
ed as a mechanical engineer, but has
studied and written widely on the problems
of development in early childhood. He
and his wife Yelena, who is a teacher,
have now six children, and are co-authors
of a book entitled "Are We Right?" based
on their own experiences and theories on
raising and educating children. Boris Niki-
tin's most recent book on these questions
published In the U.S.S.R. Is "Hypothesis
on the Emergence of Creative Abilities".
Moreover, the "life span'of know¬
ledge Is growing shorter all the time.
Knowledge Is aging faster and faster
and must be constantly "renewed."
One after another, trades and profes¬
sions are becoming extinct and are
being replaced by new ones. In
almost all occupations mental and
creative activity has a tendency to
grow, and to grow at an accelerated
pace. Consequently, development of
creative faculties and intellect is a
paramount task in education. Society
wants to know where genius comes
from.
All sorts of assumptions have been
put forward over the centuries. Since
many geniuses and talented men and
women were known to have had larger
brains than the average person, it
was believed that ability depended on
the amount of grey matter. But there
have also been geniuses who had
small heads or who lost the use of part
of their brain.
After the great French chemist Louis
Pasteur suffered a cerebral haemor¬
rhage In 1868, only one hemisphere of
his brain functioned and he was
partially paralyzed. But he continued
his experiments and made some of his
greatest discoveries during the next
twenty years.
Special studies have been made of
the structure of the brain cells, espe¬
cially the cells of the cortex. These
have shown that the cells of geniuses
sometimes differ from the usual cell
structure, but which differences are
decisive has remained a mystery.
It was once assumed that the first
born child in a family was talented.
The hypothesis found supporters
until statistics disproved It. Out of
73 world-famous geniuses and talented
persons, only four were first-born
children. Milton, Leonardo da Vinci,
Heine, Anton Rubinstein, Benjamin
Franklin and Mendeleyev were each
the 17th child In the family, while llya
Mechnikov, the Russian biologist was
a 16th child.
The belief that ability is inherited has
proved to be extremely tenacious.
Yet geneticists who have made major
discoveries In the sphere of heredity
In recent years are far from unanimous
in their opinions on this question.
How can we explain the following
facts? Small children often amaze
adults with early displays of creative
ability. But as they grow older they
do not develop into geniuses or even
talented men and women. Where did
their precocious abilities and faculties
vanish to? Why do the overwhelming
majority of the children reared in
orphanages and children's homes
develop speech habits so slowly and
do so poorly at school?
In searching for answers to these
questions let us consider the nature
of what we call "faculties."
Science knows of several dozen
instances where small children have
lived or grown up in the wilds among
wolves, bears or apes and have been
returned to human society between the
ages of eight and twelve. Naturally,
attempts have been made to teach
CONTINUED PAGE 31
29

Ac Ku
Np'Pu "Am Cm'Bk C.í. Es. Fm
- V,
:
oT ,.
K C^j
i
i "*&
:f- *
7 ,
Photos O APN

LATENT TALENT (Continued)
them to speak, but not a single one
of these children has ever learned to
speak normally. A girl named Kamala,
found in a wolves' den near Calcutta
at the age of eight, learned to pro¬
nounce only 30 words ¡n the six years
she lived with the family of a minister.
From this we can conclude that
learning to speak is not something that
can be doae at any age. Under
certain conditions the potential de¬
velops into faculty and children begin
to speak quite easily. Under other
conditions, the process ¡s impeded
and progress is slow, while in other
cases it stops almost completely.
Every physically and mentally
healthy child possesses tremendous
potentialities for the development of
his or her creative faculties from the
moment of birth. In my view, the
earlier we start to develop these
faculties the better. Yet we neglect
and discount the period in a child's
life that is most important for the
development of creative faculties.
Let me give you an example from my
own experience in raising five children.
Our family experiment, if one may call
it that, began before the hypothesis of
creative faculties assumed the form
I am describing now. Our project and
the ways we planned to carry it out
were extremely simple. The only
surprising aspect was the result we
obtained.
Like many other parents, my wife
and I wanted our children to be well
developed both physically and mental¬
ly. Yet we had our doubts about
many educational and medical pre¬
cepts, particularly those concerning
the period when mental development
begins. We even doubted whether
these principles had a valid scientific
basis.
We decided to enlarge the child's
world to the extent that the resources
of a family of schoolteachers allowed,
and to fill It with all the things that
make up our "adult" world real
objects, tools, materials, instruments,
books and so on and provide ample
opportunities for human contacts.
The tools were small, but they were
real tools to be used on a work-bench.
The penknives were sharp and so were
the hatchets. Things could really be
weighed on the scales, and gymnastic
exercises performed on the rings,
horizontal bars and climbing ropes.
Even the toys were not just toys.
Big wooden blocks and boards could
be used to build a house large enough
to crawl into. The house could be
wired for electricity, through a low-
voltage transformer. Toy machines
and models were to be built by follow¬
ing real blueprints. The walls of the
children's rooms were hung with maps,
charts, diagrams and the letters of the
alphabet. On the shelves we put
building sets, reference books and
textbooks.
In this small but real world we gave
the children complete freedom to act
as they chose. We did away with a
great number of pedagogical rules and
restrictions, and watched to see what
would happen.
We did not then know how soon a
child is capable of learning to read.
At the age of one, the eldest boy was
already playing with letters printed on
cardboard and on blocks. We prov¬
ided him with a blackboard and chalk,
with paper and pencils, with letters
made out' of plastic and wire, with ABC
books and first-grade readers.
The result took us completely by
surprise. We discovered that children
can learn to read very early. Alyosha,
the eldest, read his first word at the
age of two years and eight months,
Anton at the age of three years and
three months, Anna and Olga at the
age of three years and four months.
By the time they were three and a
half years old, they knew as much
arithmetic as a child in his first year at
school (Soviet primary education
begins at the age of seven.) The
ability to read led to an interest in
maps, books and even textbooks. The
children easily picked up information
about grammar and arithmetic from
textbooks and from conversations at
the dinner table, and even set Father
and Mother problems in division. By
the age of six they could draw a plan
of a route, read maps, and find their
bearings In the fields and forests and
In the town.
When Alyosha was five he walked
dally to the infant-feeding centre, one
and a half kilometres away, to fetch
food for his baby sisters. He was
seven and a half when he made his
first trip on the suburban train from
Bolshevo to Moscow (about 60 km.)
and we were not afraid to let him go
alone. Two years before the boys
went to school they could read figures
up to one million and do simple
fractions, and easily handled measure¬
ments in length, weight and time.
Alyosha completed three years of
schooling in One year. At a mathema¬
tics' contest held in the third year of
school he won first place. Anton
entered school one year later but
quickly caught up with his brother.
He is now nine years old but feels at
ease among thirteen year-olds and has
overtaken his elder brother by coming
first in the last maths contest. Q1
The girls are evidently going to "
move ahead equally fast in elementary
school. Learning to read early, we
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

LATENT TALENT (Continued)
have discovered, makes it easier to
write correctly. Both boys wrote
without grammatical mistakes in their
very first year at school.
I have given the boys psychological
tests in combining, elucidating natural
connexions, and classifying. They did
as well as children of fifteen.
Children of pre-school age have
great opportunities to solve vital new
problems. They have plenty of free
time to do this. That is why there is
often an early flowering of their
creative abilities. But as they grow
older, curiously enough the number of
complicated problems they face
decreases. At school whatever Is
new and incomprehensible is explained
to them. Besides, as the children
move from grade to grade at school
they have less and less time to devote
to what interests them. All this is
bound not only to check but also to
extinguish creative abilities that have
flowered so vividly.
At kindergarten where children stay
throughout the week, going home only
at the weekend, careful supervision
and a strict daily regime are of the
utmost Importance. The child there
is not forced to solve anything for him¬
self. He is Isolated from older
children. Conditions for speech de¬
velopment are unsatisfactory since he
has contacts with only a few adults,
and learns nothing from other children
of the same age.
If mathematical ability depended on
"nature," all schools would produce
equally capable mathematicians. But
they do not, and so we have "special"
schools with "special" teachers and
"special" methods of teaching maths.
This creates conditions favourable to
the development of aptitudes in mathe¬
matics which other schools do not
have.
No matter what faculties we con¬
sider, we find everywhere that the
older the group of children the fewer
the number of capable children. And
on the contrary, the younger the group,
the larger the number of capable child¬
ren.
The Swedish neurobiologist, Holger
Hiden, confirms this in biological
terms. He states that experiments
conducted at a "molecular level" show
that for full development the brain
needs not only physical nourishment
but also stimulation, especially in early
childhood.
Neurons deprived of either of these
factors and especially a stimulating
"study" environment cannot produce
albumin or form a sufficiently develop¬
ed network of fibrous links. Figura¬
tively speaking, they become empty
sacks, and finally atrophy. Mew
research may lead to big changes in
education. There Is already a .move¬
ment in support of starting formal
education in the first year of life.
At the General Assembly of the
World Organization for Early Childhood
Education, Prof. René Zazzo of France
summed up a great deal of recent
research when he said: "Observations
show more and more that the first
years of life are extremely significant.
These first years are filled with un¬
suspected riches." And he added:
"The point of equilibrium between
birth and adulthood is the age of three
years." From their calculations, the
American educator, Robert L. Thorn-
dike and his associates have come to
the same conclusion. By the age of
three, they say, a human being has
covered half of his mental develop¬
ment.

