_
The name of Mikhail Gerasimov is now internationally famous for his
reconstructions of the faces of historic world personalities (here three stages
in reconstructing the face of the great 14th century conqueror, Tamerlane),
which led to his revolutionary work in the reconstruction of the features
prehistoric man.-

THE FACE-MAKERS
66
^^URIOSITY about the past Is an enduring characteristic of
mankind, and Interest In our predecessors Is not limited to the
hard facts of what they achieved and how they lived; equally
intriguing is the question of what they looked like.
Improved scientific methods of creating anthropological por¬
traits from skulls, developed over the past few decades, have
enabled us to reconstruct the likenesses of such legendary figures
of the past as Ivan the Terrible and Tamerlane (see photos below).
These methods have also made it possible to authenticate disput¬
ed human remains, as, for example, in the case of the puzzle of
the two skulls of the German poet Friedrich Schiller (see photo
story page 68).
With historical figures such as these, records and descriptions
exist by means of which we can check the accuracy of our recon¬
structions, but the task is not so easy when we attempt to create
anthropological portraits of our prehistoric ancestors.
The first attempts to reproduce the outward appearance of early
man were made during the last decades of the 19th century.
Anatomists had established certain links between the shape of
the skull and the flesh and muscles of the face. Such men as
Professor Schaffhausen of Germany and Professor Kohlman of
Switzerland were pioneers In this field and during the first half
of this century several anatomists and anthropologists, sometimes
with the help of artists and sculptors, attempted to reproduce the
features of our early ancestors.
However, reconstructions made by different people of the same
Neanderthal skull from La Chapelle-aux-Saints, In France, were
so varied that it was clear that the methods used were inade¬
quate. A big step forward was made by the French anthropologist
by Mikhail Gerasimov
Marcellin Boule who reconstructed the basic muscles of the face,
neck and torso on the assembled Neanderthal skeleton from La
Chapelle, creating a figure with the characteristically stooped
spine, the short, forward-thrusting neck and protruding head.
I had been interested In this problem ever since I was a
schoolboy and realized that before creating a portrait of prehis¬
toric man we first had to learn how to reproduce the appearance
of contemporary man. For ten years I carried out research Into
the techniques for reproducing faces from skulls and, In 1937,
I was able to formulate a method which has proved itself over
more than thirty years and has even been used by criminologists
to identify unknown persons.
Historical problems too were resolved by these methods. Why,
for example, were Tamerlane and his son Shahruh of different
anthropological types? Tamerlane's skull Is Mongoloid, while
Shahruh's Is Europoid. Proof of the blood relationship between
Tamerlane and his descendants Shahruh, Mironshah, Ulug-Beg
and Mohammed-Sultan was provided by the morphology of their
skulls; they all possessed the same asymmetrical form which
could only be explained by heredity. Shahruh, however, inherited
his Europoid features from his Tadjik mother.
When the family sepulchre of Ivan the Terrible was opened In
1963 there was considerable doubt as to the authenticity of the
skeletons found. The reconstructions I made corresponded per¬
fectly with contemporary portraits of the Tsar (the right eye
smaller than the left, the heavy chin, the protruding lower lip,
which combined to give him his "terrible" appearance) and of his
son (an Insignificant, harmless bald-head).
I was also able to identify with certainty the skull of the 11th

MIKHAIL GERASIMOV Is shown at right working on the recon¬
struction of the face of an ancient skull in the Laboratory of Plastic
Reconstruction at the Institute of Ethnography of the U.S.S.R. Aca¬
demy of Sciences, In Moscow, of which he was director until his
death in 1970. A special exhibition of his famous reconstructions of
prehistoric man was displayed at Unesco House In Paris in 1969.
century poet Rudakl; the eye orbits of his skull showed signs
of atrophy resulting from the blindness with which he is known
to have been afflicted.
The comprehensive study of modern man by anatomical and
anthropological methods, by X-Rays and photographs of living
persons, provided a great deal of information about the complex
relationship between the structure of the muscles and soft Integ¬
ument of the head and face and the skull. In the case of pre¬
historic man the skull, of course, Is the only thing we have to go by.
The Individual features of man are determined by the propor¬
tion, size and shape of the skull, its asymmetry, the degree of
relief development, the structure of the surface, the vertical and
horizontal profiles, the structure of the nasal bones, size and
shape of the teeth, their bite, the size and shape of the eye
orbits. The thickness of the soft tissue depends upon the
degree of development of the relief of the skull. As a rule, very
ancient hominids possess fairly strong reliefs and this is taken
Into account in reconstructing their features, but the same methods
and techniques are employed in reproducing the likenesses of
both prehistoric and modern men.
I began working on a portrait of prehistoric man In 1937 and
we now have an entire gallery of portraits showing man's evo¬
lution from the Lower to the Upper Palaeolithic period.
Reconstructions made from the skulls, of ancient forms of men,
such as "Pithecanthropus" and "Sinanthropus", give clear
evidence of the wide range of morphological variations and the
complexity of human evolution. Study of early Neanderthalolds
and of classic Neanderthals, helps us to understand the mech¬
anisms which led to the beginnings and the development of
early "sapiens" forms.

THE FACE-MAKERS (Continued)
THE TWO SKULLS
OF FRIEDRICH
SCHILLER
When the German poet Friedrich Schiller
died, In 1805, two deathmasks were made,
one In plaster and one in terra-cotta, and
a portrait drawn by Professor Jagelmann
(Photo No. 5). In 1826, a skull (Photo
No. 1) and skeleton were exhumed from
the communal grave in which Schiller had
been burled and identified by his children,
by Goethe and by Schwabe as Schiller's.
Later serious doubts were raised and It
was said that the skull was not Schiller's.
In 1911 an anatomist, Froriep, found ano¬
ther skull (Photo No. 3) in the same
common grave which he claimed was the
true Schiller skull. In 1961, the German
Academy of Sciences In Berlin asked
Professor Gerasimov to use his technique
of plastic reconstruction to determine
which of the two skulls was authentic.
Photo No. 2 shows (a) Gerasimov's
reconstruction of the profile of the skull In
Photo No. 3 superimposed on (b) a
silhouette In black of the profile of the
skull in Photo No. 1. Photo No. 4 shows
Gerasimov's reconstruction of the 1826
skull (Photo No. 1) which confirms that
this skull, recognized by Schiller's children,
Goethe and Schwabe, was Indeed authentic.
The man
from La
Chapelle
5
Early attempts to reconstruct the fea¬
tures of a Neanderthal man, whose
skull (Photo No. 3) was found at La
Chapelle aux Saints, France, were
based on Imperfect methods and bore
little resemblance to each other (Photos
Nos. 1, 2). The reconstruction (Photo

1
No. 4) by the French anthropologist
Marcellin Boule, made more scienti¬
fically by building up the basic muscles
of the head, neck and torso on the
assembled skeleton, shows consider¬
able similarity to Professor Gerasimov's
reconstruction (Photo No. 5).

