A Unesco inquiry
THE BOOKS
PEOPLE READ
by Edward Wegman
IN 1970, every minute of
every day, a book was published
somewhere in the world: 546,000 titles
in all, double the output of 20 years
earlier.
Four out of five of the titles come
from a handful of nations. Europe
alone ¡s responsible for almost half
the world's production. If the output
of Japan, the United States and the
U.S.S.R. is added, you have virtually
eighty per cent of all the titles
Issued in any one year. The rest of
the world, two-thirds of humanity, thus
has comparatively little say in the
books that are available for reading.
For the most part, ¡t ¡s a foreign
publisher who makes the decision
regarding their needs and tastes.
What do people read? More often
than not, they read the books that are
readily available, and when the books
they want are not there, they sometimes
do not read at all. It is therefore
apparent that the kind of books
produced is as vital as the mere pro¬
duction of more and more books.
Subject matter has equal, or perhaps
even greater importance in meeting
the world's hunger for reading
materials.
Since books are published to be
read, an examination of the titles
selected for publication can offer an
insight into the subjects which national
publishers believe will interest their
readers. This information is available
through the answers Unesco's Member
12 EDWARD WEGMAN is Head of Unesco's
International Book Year Unit. A former
journalist (New York Times, AP. UPI) and
radio commentator, he was promotion man¬
ager of a book distributing firm before join¬
ing Unesco.
States supply to Unesco annually in
response to questionnaires on the
quantities and subject matter of books
produced. The most recent data,
relating to 1970, are contained in the
latest Unesco Statistical Yearbook (to
be published ¡n October 1972).
The Unesco questionnaire classifies
the subjects of books in 23 categories.
There is no separate classification for
textbooks, which in most cases are
included in the main subject-headings;
i.e. a geography textbook would be
found under "Geography, travel", while
an arithmetic book would be under
"Mathematics".
The most popular subject among
the world's book producers is litera¬
ture, which includes not only fiction
and poetry but also literary criticism.
More than fourteen per cent of all the
books and pamphlets issued in 1970
were concerned with literature. That
was almost double the number
published ¡n the second most popular
category, Industries. In third place
come publications in Political Science.
There is a decided drop in numbers
before we come to the next subjects,
Natural Sciences, Education, History
and Biography, Law and Arts.
Eight of the ten most important book
producers are on the list of those who
put literature first (in order of
importance as producers): United
States, Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, United Kingdom, Japan, Fran¬
ce, Spain, India and the Netherlands.
The two other major producers:
U.S.S.R. and Poland place books on
industry at the top of their production.
Although ¡n the second rank of pro¬
ducers, Mexico, one of the largest
publishers in Latin America, also puts
Industries in first place.
The countries most interested in
legal affairs are Botswana, Ceylon,
Chile, Hong Kong, Luxembourg, Peru
and Turkey, while Jamaica produces
equal numbers of titles on law and on
political science. This last subject is
the first choice of Bolivia and Ireland.
Religious books hold pride of place in
Ghana, Lebanon, Madagascar, and
Mauritius, while they share first place
with education in Kenya. Thailand
produces more books on education
than on any other subject; Jordan and
Tanzania prefer mathematics; Cam¬
eroon, Panama and Kuwait give first,
place to generalities (which Includes
government publications) while New
Zealand publishers favour agriculture.
One quarter of the books and
pamphlets published by Qatar deal
with linguistics, which also occupies
first place in Malaysia.
more detailed look at the
production of individual states is even
more enlightening. Taking the largest
and the smallest producers in each
region, one quickly runs into striking
differences in emphasis.
Of the 23 countries that participated
in the Unesco meeting of experts on
book development in Africa, at Accra
(Ghana) in 1968, only six have present¬
ed the detailed reports on which this
analysis ¡s based. While earlier data
showed that ¡n 1969 Nigeria was by
far the largest producer, Kenya had
in 1970 the most important output
among those who answered the
Unesco questionnaire. Nigeria's pro¬
duction in 1969 was over 1,000 titles,
while Kenya's was only one-tenth of
that figure. In all cases in Africa, the

Two out of seven books
published in the U.S.S.R.
deal with industry and
technology. Technical
books fill the shelves along
an entire wall of this î
Moscow bookshop. Pos¬
ters like the one seen on
the shop window, bear¬
ing the symbol of Interna- J
tional Book Year two fig- "*
ures linking arms within -
book covers are promin- ?
ently displayed in cities °
throughout the U.S.S.R. I
ppppp
»i i n
S*
number of titles was comparatively
small, corresponding to. the con¬
clusions of the Accra meeting that a
virtual book famine existed ¡n the
continent.
Kenya published 43 books and
pamphlets on religion and theology
and another 43 on education. It is
perhaps significant that throughout
English-speaking Africa, missionary
societies were among the first to install
local publishing houses, which might
account for the important place
assigned to religion.
Following well behind these subjects
come games and sports, in a country
that has a certain world reputation for
its runners: 20 titles issued. Next
come history and biography (16 titles)
and then political science (8), both
subjects of major interest to newly-
independent nations. Literature also
was picked 8 times by Kenyan pub¬
lishers, while natural sciences drew
6 titles. As indicative as the titles
selected are those in which nothing
was published: philosophy, trade,
ethnography, linguistics, commercial
techniques and arts.
Among the smallest African book
producers is Botswana. Almost half
of the 20 titles published in that
country dealt with law: four books and
four pamphlets. Four pamphlets were
concerned with generalities, while one
book and one pamphlet dealt with
political science. Geography also
drew two titles, as did agriculture.
History, biography .and commercial
techniques each resulted in one title.
While a certain amount of the book
production in both countries cited as
examples for Africa is in local lan¬
guages, a decided influence on pro
duction is undoubtedly the fact that
much of education is in English. As
a result, book Imports meet many of
their primary needs.
A somewhat similar situation exists
in French-speaking Africa, where Mad¬
agascar was one of the most prolific
publishers, with 158 titles. Religion
and theology accounted for 33 titles,
while second place went to literature,
with 31. This was followed by
political science, education and agri¬
culture.
Interest in ethnography and folklore
was comparatively high, since books
on this subject share sixth place with
publications on law. Once again, as
is the case in English-speaking Africa,
the principal textbook needs, as well
as demand for general reading
material, are met by imports.
* 1VE of the Arab States
have sent in information on book
production in 1970, according to the
Unesco recommendation. While Egypt
producted 1,872 titles ¡n 1969, the
answers to Unesco's questionnaire on
production in 1970 do not contain
statistics for that country.
In 1970, of the 594 titles published
in Lebanon, the second most important
producer in 1969, 135 dealt with
religious or theological themes.
Qatar, the smallest producer in the
region, published 99 books on 14 sub¬
jects in 1970 (see article page 22).
Asia, despite an over-all situation of
book hunger, contains two of the
giants of the publishing world: Japan,
which issued 31,249 titles in 1970, and
India, which published 14,141. There
are a number of similarities' in their
production, as well as significant dif¬
ferences. For example, both put litera¬
ture at the head of their list, and both
assign political science to second
place. In Japan, however, books on
the arts run on the heels of political
science: 2,186 titles to 2,752. In India,
not surprisingly, third place goes to
books on religion and theology, which
are far behind political science (942 to
2,717).
At the other end of the publishing
scale i.n Asia is the island State of
Singapore with 520 books and pam¬
phlets issued in 1970. While literature
is in first place, linguistics follows
closely (68 to 78 titles) which is not
surprising for a country which has
Malay, Chinese and English-speaking
populations. Natural sciences draw
the next largest group of publications
with forty-five titles, while religion was
selected forty-three times and geo¬
graphy forty. Ethnography and folklore
share last place with philosophy: three
titles each.
While book shortages exist in Latin
America, the situation is somewhat
different from the regions previously
mentioned. The problem, speaking
generally, is not so much one of
producing enough books for the region
as it ¡s of developing internal ex¬
changes that can relieve the Latin
American nations of their dependency
upon imported works.
That having being said, it becomes
apparent once one begins to look
.at the individual publication stat¬
istics of the countries of Latin Amer¬
ica that there are some, such as
Mexico and Argentina, which are
highly active publishers, others which
come close to meeting their minimal
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
13

MARCH 18-24
BOOK WEEK 1872
KEEPING POSTED ON BOOKS
During International Book year brightly coloured
book posters have appeared on many windows of
bookshops and elsewhere. Left, "A good book is
a good friend", says this Indian poster, uniting
under its slogan a selection of works in the nation's
many languages. "Books bring people together"
proclaims, in text and image, a United States
poster, below. The Cuban poster, below right.
14
THE BOOKS PEOPLE READ (Continued)
needs and finally, a number particu¬
larly those that are geographically
small which are unable to support
economically a functioning publishing
industry. For that reason, the Unesco
meeting at Bogota in 1969 called for
major emphasis on efforts to make
available to each of the countries the
books published by the other countries
of the region.
Of the countries that participated in
the Bogota meeting, Mexico ¡s the
dominant publisher among those who
have reported their 1970 statistics
according to the Unesco recommen¬
dations, although 1969 data showed
that Brazil, with almost 6,400 titles, was
then the most important book pro¬
ducer, with Argentina in second place.
Mexico published some 5,000 titles
in 1970, of which 857 were concerned
with industry. One can almost see in
all the book statistics of this country
the concentration on development.
Medical science was in second place
with 401 titles, while third place was
devoted to education. Law books and
political science follow, with just under
300 titles each, and then commercial
techniques. Literature, history and bio¬
graphy, and the arts are next in popu¬
larity. As in most of the developing
countries, suggestions for the house¬
wife, incorporated under the heading of
domestic science, come last.
The English-speaking island of
Jamaica is at the bottom of the Latin
American list. In view of its limited
population, its production of 159 books
and pamphlets is a not inconsiderable
achievement. First place is shared by
law and political science with 21 titles
each, followed by history and bio¬
graphy with 13. Literature, philosophy
and commercial techniques make
uneasy bedfellows in next place with
12 titles each. Perhaps even more
interesting are the categories which
are not represented no books were
published on philosophy, psychology,
linguistics, philology, or mathematics.
Among the other countries in the
world, the production of the United
States, of the United Kingdom and of
the U.S.S.R. are among the most im¬
portant. The statistics from the United
States are somewhat difficult to eval¬
uate since the subject matter break¬
down is confined to non-governmen¬
tal publications, which amount to just
about one half the total output of
titles.
These tend to follow more or
less the pattern of the other ad¬
vanced publishing countries of Europe,
with first place reserved to literature
(8,246) followed by political science
(3,121) and then history and biography,
religion, natural sciences, socio¬
logy, geography, medical scien¬
ces and philosophy and psychology.
Education comes in eleventh place,
with some 1,273 titles. Books on
industry are in twelfth position. From
then on, the number of titles dips

reproduces the International Book Year slogan
in Spanish "Libros para Todos" (Books for All).
Right, French poster announcing an exhibition
organized by the Bibliothèque Nationale, in Paris,
for International Book Year. One of the most
important book exhibitions of its kind ever held,
it offers 600 treasures from the library's own
collection, including very ancient books and
manuscripts that mark the development of the
book down the ages.
below the 1,000 mark. Agriculture,
trade and transport are at the bottom
of the list.
In the United Kingdom, literature is
again in the lead, with almost
9,000 titles out of a total production
of 33,441. History and biography are
in second place, with almost the same
number of titles as political science:
just under 3,000. Next on the list is
natural science. The arts are in a
surprisingly strong fifth position, with
almost 2,000 titles. At the other end
of the scale, the least popular titles
are agriculture, domestic science,
trade and transport, military art and
ethnography and folklore in that order.
The production of France is very
similar to that of the United States
and United Kingdom, as is the selec¬
tion of subjects in the Federal Repub¬
lic of Germany, although in the latter
country, education is in second place.
The Soviet Union publishes almost
as many titles as does the United
States with 78,899 as opposed to
79,530. The choice of subjects is quite
different. Two out of every seven
books deal with industry. The next
most important subject, with one out
of seven titles, is political science.
Literature is an important third, with
almost eight thousand titles. Then
come natural sciences, commercial
techniques, agriculture, medical scien¬
ces, education and generalities. This
is followed by linguistics. The least
popular title is ethnography, in which
no books were published. There were
170 works of religion, 375 in domestic
science and 548 in geography and
travel.
There are a number of differences
between the Soviet Union and Poland,
although both put industry ¡n first
place. Poland follows that subject
very closely with literature and then
political science. At 'the bottom of
the ladder are trade and transport,
philosophy and psychology, games
and sports, domestic science, with
ethnography and folklore again bring¬
ing up the rear.
In Oceania, Australia ¡s a medium-
sized publishing country. In 1970, it
published some 5,000 books and
pamphlets. While it is a developed
nation, it is gradually shifting from
largely agricultural production toward
industrialization. The most popular
subject for publication is literature,
which occupies one tenth of its annual
book production. In second place are
books on industry, while third place
is shared by political science and law.
Suprisingly for a country noted for its
athletes, only 55 titles were concerned
with games and sports.
What does all this prove? Perhaps
nothing. And yet a social scientist
wrote recently: "You can't always tell
a book by its cover, but you can almost
always tell a person by his books."
What is true for individuals, may well
be true also for nations.
