One person
out of four
dies
of heart
disease

CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES
KILL 1 PERSON OUT OF 2
46,2
42,5
This graph reveals that more persons
(all ages, both sexes) die of cardiovascular
diseases than from any other cause. In 1967,
nearly one person out of two (46.2 per cent)
died of a cardiovascular disease, compared
with 17.7 per cent from cancer and 6.4 from accidents.
Among cardiovascular diseases, heart disease
kills one person out of four (22.3 per cent).
The data in this graph was supplied by
the World Health Organization and is based
on statistics from 29 countries.
Unesco Courler Graph executed by Martine Hussenot, Paris
17.2
6,2
6,4
k.
1955 1967
cardiovascular diseases
1955 1967
cancer
1955 1967
accidents
by Jean Lenègre
JEAN LENEGRE, who died in February at the
age of 68, was professor of clinical car¬
diology at the Faculty of Medicine in Paris.
A world authority on heart diseases, he was
formerly president of the French Cardio¬
logical Society and president of the Euro¬
pean Cardiological Society (i960 to 1964).
Prof. Lenègre was the author of many studies
on cardiovascular diseases and a member of
several medical associations In other coun¬
tries, Including the Royal College of Physi¬
cians, London.
Ischaemic disease (from
the Greek iskhaimos literally "that
which stops the blood") occurs when
the supply of blood to any part of
the body is considerably reduced or
cut off.
The most common of all the ischae¬
mic diseases is ischaemic disease of
the heart. The term covers those
diseases or disorders which result
from a major reduction in the blood
supply to all or part of the heart.
This may be brought on by various
diseases and by various mechanisms.
For example, a narrowing of the aor¬
tic orifice may interfere, with the flow
of blood to the coronary arteries which
supply the heart walls and muscles.
In almost 90 per cent of cases,
ischaemic heart disease is due to ath
erosclerosis, a general disease of the
walls of the large arteries which shows
a marked tendency to attack the
arteries forming the coronary tree.
The direct causes of atherosclerosis
remain a mystery but an increasing
number of facts about the disease are
known.
Coronary atherosclerosis is far more
common in men than in women, but
while almost all patients under the
age of 40 are men, this ceases to be
true as people grow older; from 60 on,
and more particularly after 70, it strikes
equally at both sexes. Thus women
are in general affected later in life than
men.
It occurs more frequently with age.
Coronary atherosclerosis before the
age of 20 is most unusual and is fairly
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

8
ONE PERSON OUT OF FOUR (Continued)
uncommon up to the age of 40. Be¬
tween 45 and 50, there is a substantial
increase, most cases occurring be¬
tween 50 and 80.
It runs in certain families whose
members, particularly the males, may
for generation after generation be the
unfortunate victims of the disease.
In industrialized countries such as
the U.S.A. or Great Britain, coronary
atherosclerosis is by far the most fre¬
quent cause of death. It is responsible
for 50 to 60 per cent of all deaths from
cardiovascular disease, which itself
accounts for more than half the total
number of deaths. Coronary athero¬
sclerosis kills three out of every thou¬
sand inhabitants of these two coun¬
tries every year, not to speak of the
one million work-days lost annually in
the United States alone.
The figures for Canada, Australia,
the Federal Republic of Germany and
the Scandinavian countries are propor¬
tionally almost as high. In these coun¬
tries it is the No. 1 health problem a
plague of modern society.
The same applies to France, poss¬
ibly to a lesser degree. However, in
spite of the frequency of cardiovascu¬
lar diseases, the efforts made at pre¬
vention remain far below what is re¬
quired. If the same effort were made
in France to prevent cardiovascular
diseases as is made for tuberculosis
or cancer, mortality would indisput¬
ably decline.
Over the past twenty years, doctors
have been making a tremendous effort
to find out what causes hardening and
narrowing of the arteries (atheroscle¬
rosis), and how heart disease dev¬
elops from atherosclerosis. Although
they still have not found the
whole "scientific truth" about the
direct causes of the disease, they are
getting nearer to it and have brought
to light a certain number of "clues" to
the mystery.
Since some families show a mark¬
ed predisposition to coronary athero¬
sclerosis, hereditary or genetic factors
have been suspected. Heredity most
probably influences the disease in a
variety of ways. Disorders of the meta¬
bolism and enzyme disorders such
as an excess of cholesterol in the
blood or diabetes mellitus and some
endocrine defects, may all play their
part. However, it is unlikely that the
heredity factor is a simple mechanism
of gene mutation.
Statistics show us that high blood
pressure is a predisposing factor: at
least 25 per cent of men and 50 per
cent of women with coronary heart
disease suffer from high blood pres¬
sure. Even a mild degree of hyper¬
tension in an adult may have serious
consequences.
In the same way diabetes can be
said to predispose to atherosclerosis.
Typical diabetes mellitus is actually
present in over 10 per cent of patients
suffering from coronary heart disease.
Certain diabetic conditions, where one
of the parents, usually the mother, has
a history of diabetes and/or the results
given by blood sugar tests are clearly
abnormal, are even more frequent.
Hidden defects in sugar metabolism
are often found in association with
abnormalities of fat metabolism. Thus,
some patients should follow a "dia¬
betic" diet and cut out simple sugars
and fruit so as to lower abnormally
high blood levels of cholesterol, tri¬
glycerides or lipids.
A theory that high cholesterol levels
may be responsible for coronary athe¬
rosclerosis has been gaining ground
over the last fifty years. More and
more frequent reports have appeared
of its coexistence with other diseases
of a completely different nature such as
diabetes. All these diseases, however,
have a common denominator a per¬
manently raised blood cholesterol
level. Even when no other disease is
present, patients suffering from coron¬
ary atherosclerosis are found to have
a higher blood cholesterol level than
normal healthy individuals of the same
age.
The incidence of coronary heart dis-,
ease varies widely from country to
country but studies show that such fac¬
tors as race, climate and geographical
situation are less closely related to its
distribution than diet and the level of
economic development.
Obesity, or excess fat, is almost
invariably due to overeating, although
in some cases another factor may
operate such as an inherited family
tendency to put on weight more easily
when calorie intake is high. In certain
individuals every calorie in excess of
the number required to satisfy the
body's metabolic requirements is
stored in the form of fat and leads
slowly but surely to increasing obesity.
The significance of obesity in coron¬
ary heart disease has been variously
assessed. It may not be the main fac¬
tor but there is no doubt that it plays
some part. This is borne out both by
the statistical tables compiled by life
insurance companies, which show how
life expectancy falls as body weight
increases, and by clinical studies,
some of which have shown that deaths
from cardiovascular disease are twice
as frequent among those who are
overweight as among comparable in¬
dividuals whose weight is normal (60
per cent as against 30 to 35 per cent).
Other factors have been suspected
of causing coronary atherosclerosis,
among them cigarette smoking, espe-
CONTINUED PAGE 12
Ï

Diagram WHO, Geneva
The pump
that must
not fail
eart, a machine more efficient than any made by man, contracts an average of 70 times
a minute, 100,000 times a day, 36 million times a year. No bigger than a fist, it can send
from five to 30 litres of blood a minute into the arteries, depending upon how much energy
you are using. Diagrams on these pages show how this remarkable pumping system works.
Blood flowing through the veins is shown in dark grey and blood flowing through the arteries in
light grey. 1: Used blood from the veins and re-oxygenated blood from the lungs enter the
right and left atrium respectively. 2: The used and re-oxygenated blood is
then pumped into the right and left ventricles. 3: The ventricles are now filled with blood.
4: Used blood from the right ventricle is pumped into the lungs for re-oxygenation while
fresh blood from the left ventricle sets off on its journey to feed the body's oxygen-hungry
cells. 5. The amazing, closed-circuit, circulation system that keeps the body going.
Oxygen and nutrients are transferred from the blood to body tissue by thousands of tiny
capillaries that snake out to every corner of the body.
9

cially when the smoke is inhaled.
Almost all the statistics agree that
mortality from various diseases is
much greater among smokers than
among non-smokers. This is true
for lung cancer, chronic bronchitis,
ischaemic diseases of the lower limbs
and, although perhaps to a lesser
degree, coronary thrombosis.
Sedentary habits, the stress and
strain of modern life, and some psycho¬
logical and emotional factors may also
play a part, though this is not yet
fully proved and requires further study.
The very fact that coronary heart
disease strikes more frequently in
nations that are economically rich and
whose populations are predominantly
sedentary and well-fed has led to
atherosclerosis in general, and
coronary atherosclerosis in particular,
being considered as a disease of the
privileged the price we pay for
belonging to what has rightly been
called the "consumer society".
What, then, lies behind this sharp
increase in coronary heart disease?
It has sometimes been alleged that the
increase is more apparent than real
since, with the improved diagnostic
methods at our disposal, it is possible
to diagnose forms of the disease
today which formerly would not have
been recognized.
It has also been said that the
increased incidence of the disease in
the second half of life is due above
all to the fact that we now live longer.
The proportion of men who die from
cardiovascular diseases in relation to
other causes of death varies from
country to country as follows: 21 to
37 per cent die at age 40; 33 to 51 per
cent die at age 50; 39 to 57 per cent
die at age 60; 48 to 62 per cent die at
age 70.
There is thus some truth in these
allegations. But Ostler, who a century
ago in one year met only rare cases
of angina pectoris among his many
patients, was as capable of diagnosing
it as we are today. Moreover, it is
difficult to explain away the increasing
number of cases among people
under 40.
While we have only a sketchy
knowledge of the direct causes of
atherosclerosis we do know quite a
lot about the structure of the lesions
associated with it. They consist of
diffuse and segmentary changes in the
arteries, remarkable in that they show
a predilection for the male sex and
the middle-aged.
The first anatomic changes occur
early in life, from 10 or 20 onwards.
The yellowish fatty streaks which
appear in the internal lining of the
artery are small at first and remain
inactive for many years almost in
definitely in most cases. With the
passing of time, slowly and im¬
perceptibly, thé lésions develop,
showing a preference for certain
regions and particularly for the arteries
forming the coronary tree.
Within these regions, they most
frequently attack the point at which
the main body of an artery divides
or curves. In these areas, the in¬
soluble lipid substances circulating
in the blood (cholesterol and fatty
acids) are precipitated on to the
internal wall of the artery and form
yellowish deposits which in turn are
soon covered by a gradually thicken¬
ing fibrous shell.
Thus an atherosclerotic plaque is
formed which infiltrates deeply into the
arterial wall, eroding or compressing
the middle muscular coat of the artery
and, what is more serious, bulges out
into the blood channel, which becomes
progressively narrower as the athero¬
sclerotic plaque grows larger.
This narrowing of the
arteries progresses very slowly. The
failing blood supply to a certain extent
is compensated for by blood supplied
from other coronary arteries.
The narrowing usually begins to
interfere with the functioning and
nutrition of the heart muscle in
persons aged between 50 and 70.
The normally slow course of the
disease progression as the arteries
narrow, alternating with regression
as the supplementary circulation
comes to the aid of the failing heart
may be accelerated by the formation
of a coronary thrombosis.
A clot of blood suddenly forms
around or near an atherosclerotic
plaque, completely blocking the artery,
and the supplementary circulation is
unable to meet the extra demand for
blood. That part of the heart muscle
which depends on the blocked coron¬
ary artery becomes acutely anaemic
and this condition usually brings on
a heart attack.
This can be defined as complete
ischaemia of a particular area of the
heart wall usually part of the wall
of the left ventricle. The stricken
area ceases to contract, fails to assist
the ventricular pump in its work, de¬
generates and, over a period of
several months, is transformed into
a fibroid scar, incapable of taking
any further part in the working of the
heart.
When the narrowing of the coronary
arteries or in some cases their pro¬
gressive blockage reaches a stage
where the circulation is no longer able
to compensate fully, any occasion

Diagram © Editions Sauret, Paris, from Le Livre de la Santé
Diagram © BunJI Tagawa - Scientific American
When the heart skips a beat
The electrocardiograph detects and records the electrical
impulses that develop in the heart and spread through its
muscles with each heart-beat. To make a recording, the
impulses are gathered at points on the skin corresponding
to precisely determined areas of the heart. Wires are
usually attached to the wrists, ankles and various parts of
the chest. Diagram above shows one normal sequence
in the electrocardiogram of a healthy heart with its small
bump, inverted "V", small bump. Arrows show flow of
blood through the heart during different stages of contrac¬
tion. Upper row of heart diagrams shows electrical impulse
phases. Electrocardiogram on left shows an irregular heart
beat (arrow).
when the heart is called upon to
increase its output may reveal the
diseased state of the muscle tissues
of the heart.
This usually happens when one
makes a big physical effort, especially
walking. After one has walked a short
distance of a hundred yards or less,
especially in cold weather or at a
brisk pace up a hill, or after a heavy
meal, the coronary insufficiency shows
up as a short-lived pain in the chest.
This pain, known as angina pectoris,
comes on suddenly, varies in intensity,
and is usually felt in the centre of
the chest. There is a tight feeling in
the chest but no loss of breath.
Nevertheless, it is unpleasant enough
to bring one to a halt or make one
slow down sharply. The pain goes
as quickly as it came usually in less
than two minutes.
Its passing is often accompanied
by stomach gurglings or by belching,
which gives the mistaken impression
that one is suffering from indigestion,
especially if one has just had a meal.
The pain often occurs while one is
walking but it may also appear for no
apparent reason while resting.
Some persons may suffer several
attacks in one day, others only two
or three in a month. In between these
painful attacks (always very brief and
never lasting more than five to ten
minutes) there is no feeling of illness
or discomfort and one usually says
"everything is fine".
Between attacks, medical examin¬
ations often show no signs of ab¬
normality, the heart appearing normal
under the stethoscope and X-ray. The
electrocardiogram is the best method
of diagnosis. In a third of cases it
reveals abnormalities; in a further
third, the electrocardiogram is not
absolutely normal but the irregularities
are slight and non-typical; in the
remaining third, the electrocardiogram
taken at rest is quite normal. When
the electrocardiogram is normal,
negative or difficult to interpret, it is
best to give a controlled exercise
tolerance test, after which any
irregularity present should show.
When the arteries become so
narrow that the flow of blood
approaches the minimum required by
the heart muscle, then the heart,
which normally needs a lot of oxygen
to function and is not getting it,
reaches a critical stage.
Pains in the chest become more
or less continuous, coming on after
ever slighter exertion and sometimes
even when the person is at rest. The
aggravation of the disease is apparent
in an increase in the frequency,
intensity and duration of the pains
and sometimes even in definite
changes in the electrocardiogram.
One is now under constant threat of
13
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

a heart attack (Myocardial infarction).
In these circumstances, any one of
many "incidents" may cause the blood
supply, and therefore the oxygenation
and nutrition of the heart muscle, to fall
below the minimum vital level and
bring on a heart attack. The immediate
cause may be unaccustomed physical
effort (though this is rare) or a violent
emotion such as anger.
A meal that is too heavy or too
rich in fatty foods may affect the
blood supply in various ways. It may
precipitate an attack by upsetting the
water-salt balance in the blood, by
increasing the work load on the heart,
or by modifying the blood chemistry
and causing a sudden rise in the level
of triglycerides and fatty acids.
Heavy cigarette smoking and inhal¬
ing and various "incidents" such as an
attack of another unconnected illness
flu for instance, accidental injury
or a surgical operation may also
trigger an attack.
In most cases however a major
heart attack occurs suddenly and
without warning. It may surprise the
victim at work, while resting or,
without any apparent reason, in bed
at night. These cases of unexpected
myocardial infarction, particularly
when there are no warning signs such
as recurrence of chest pain, are
usually due to coronary artery
thrombosis.
_ a, .
recrudescence of chest pain (in 40 per
cent of cases) or apparently linked
with an "incident" such as the ones
described above (less than 10 per cent
of cases) or striking suddenly and
without warning, the heart attack is
characterized by a violent bout of
pain which spreads to the whole of
the thorax, often radiates along the
arms, and lasts not minutes but hours.
The immediate risk to a person
suffering such a major attack is even
greater than was once thought. Recent
studies show that the victim often
dies within an hour or two of its onset
If he survives this first critical period,
myocardial infarction usually develops
within the next few days a con¬
sequence of the partial destruction of
a segment of the wall of the left
ventricle.
Once the pain has subsided, the
arterial blood pressure falls and there
is usually a temporary rise in tem¬
perature to about 38 or 39 degrees
Centigrade (100 to 101 degrees
Fahrenheit). Blood tests carried out
in the first few days after an attack
show abnormal amounts of certain
substances (enzymes), indicating that
some degeneration of the cardiac
muscle cells has taken place. Their
presence and the irregularities of
successive electrocardiograms confirm
the diagnosis.
There is nothing to do but to put
the person to bed for three weeks
or so with appropriate treatment and
wait for the damaged heart tissue to
heal.
Although heart disease, and esp¬
ecially coronary heart attacks, are
obviously "Public Health Enemy No. 1 ",
they are not always given the system¬
atic treatment they require. This is
probably because heart disease is
often looked on as part of the in¬
exorable "running-out" of a human
life.
But nothing could be further from
the truth. Heart disease, particularly
ischaemic heart disease, strikes more
and more frequently in all age groups.
Its causes are often accidental, or the
consequence of years of accumulated
neglect. Yet in many cases it can
not only be foreseen and prevented,
but also cured. Proper treatment may
limit or postpone its effects and keep
the disease under control for many
years.
Much of this treatment becomes
critically urgent in the case of a major
heart attack when, as often happens,
the sick person's life is in immediate
danger. Every minute counts and it
is vital that the heart attack should
be diagnosed correctly from the outset.
This calls for education not only
of the public but also of doctors,
whose medical training may not
always have prepared them to under¬
take the modern and sometimes
"revolutionary" treatment called for
in these cases.
The classic treatment of a heart
attack which forbade moving the
patient during the acute stage and
insisted on his being treated on the
spot (often in his own home) is losing
favour. This was perhaps logical in
the days when treatment of myocardial
infarct was largely a matter of "wait
and see".
But today we know that the first
few hours are by far the most
dangerous and during this time "un¬
necessary" deaths may occur, not
because of irreversible damage to the
heart, but following a sudden dis¬
turbance of the heart's rhythm, such
as ventricular fibrillation (chaotic
twitching of the heart muscle cells)
or cardiac arrest (a complete standstill
of the heart muscle).
Such mishaps, against which we
are helpless for lack of suitable
equipment when the patient is treated
at home, are often curable if treated

in centres specializing in the handling
of heart disease, where "re-animation"
and "defibrillation" are standard
procedure.
In view of the immediate risk, the
patient should be transferred right
away to one of these specialized
"coronary units". This calls for a
special ambulance service equipped to
provide immediate intensive care and
able to go into action as rapidly as
a fire engine, and also the setting up
of special units in most hospitals for
the treatment of heart attacks.
These are by no means novel
suggestions such centres have been
in operation in the hospitals of many
cities for years. Any large modern
hospital should find it possible to
meet the cost of such a unit without
overstraining its budget.
,. .. . ., _
patients make a complete recovery
from a first attack of myocardial
infarction, and they may even be
allowed to practise certain sports,
provided that these cause them no
physical discomfort or other difficulty.
But even when "cured", myocardial
infarction should never be taken
lightly.
An infarct, even when healed, or
indeed any anginal pain, however brief,
coming on spontaneously or during
exercise, may signal the presence of
coronary atherosclerosis and indicate
that certain precautionary measures
should be taken.
The patient should be asked to avoid
any physical effort which causes him
discomfort and particularly any move¬
ment which brings on anginal pain.
If pain does occur, a tablet of nitro¬
glycerine should be crushed in the
mouth without delay. This drug is
harmless when taken in the recommen¬
ded dosage and its effect is little short
of miraculous. It may cause a head¬
ache in 5 to 10 per cent of cases
(disagreeable but short-lived).
It is erroneously believed by many
that nitroglycerine loses its powers if
taken frequently; on the contrary, it
continues to be effective indefinitely.
Of all the drugs known today it is the
most reliable, the most rapid and the
most spectacular In its results: in
90 per cent of cases it relieves the
pain of angina pectoris in less than
one minute. No other drug can do
this.
Other drugs, generally thought to
be capable of dilating the coronary
arteries, diminishing the labouring of
the heart, or improving the metabolism
of the myocardium by reducing its oxy-
HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE
Hypertension is a rise in the systolic and diastolic arterial blood pressure
above the normal. Systolic refers to the pressure at the artery wall when
the heart is in contraction and drives blood into the aorta. Diastolic refers to
the pressure when the heart is in relaxation. When the heart pumps rhythm¬
ically, blood pressure oscillates between the systolic and diastolic values. It
changes to meet the needs of muscles and other organs. Systolic blood
pressure is indicated by the first figure and diastolic blood pressure by the
second.
A casual blood pressure of 150/90 is considered normal in a middle-aged
adult, but other factors, including the patient's age, must be taken into
account. A systolic pressure of 160 is a more serious matter at age 40 than
at age 60. Although a person's blood pressure varies considerably during the
day and night, it will vary particularly with emotional upset. Therefore,
comparative measurements should always be taken under the same conditions.
Distribution of blood pressure among 44,000 people in Bergen, Norway,
show the following averages (half the population below and half the popu¬
lation above) :
Age 40-49 yrs. 50-59 yrs. 60-69 yrs.
135/80
130/80
Blood pressure in men :
Blood pressure in women :
These levels, however, may vary in different countries.
145/85
150/85
150/85
160/90
gen (and therefore blood) require¬
ments, may be used with varying
success to complete the treatment.
American surgeons have recently
perfected an effective surgical method
of restoring the blood supply to parts
of the heart muscle that have been
deprived of it, in cases where angina
pectoris proves resistant to medical
treatment.
To supply blood to the affected
parts surgeons use a by-pass graft.
A piece of the saphenous vein is
taken from the patient's leg and one
end is grafted on to the aorta, one
of the major blood vessels, the other
end being grafted on to the coronary
artery beyond the point where it is
blocked.
This operation, logical, simple to
perform and involving little risk, has
proved very effective in controlling
and alleviating anginal pain in the
chest, but it does not cure the
coronary atherosclerosis that has
caused a blockage of the artery.
Any treatment for heart disease
must include advice on principles of
general health and diet. This advice
is of great importance, as much to
persons already suffering from the
effects of the disease as to those
who, though apparently in good health,
have been shown by clinical and
biological tests to be affected by one
or more of the "risk factors".
Among preventive measures, by far
the most important are these three:
stop smoking (in some cases,
smoking is one of the major aggrav¬
ating factors and should be stopped
immediately and for good);
lead a reasonably active life, avoid
sedentary occupations, and exercise
enough to keep the muscles in good
condition;
keep to a diet designed to counter¬
act any metabolic disorder revealed
by biological tests.
The old saying "Prevention is better
than cure" applies to most cases and
underlines the need to set up special
centres for the diagnosis and pre¬
vention of atherosclerotic diseases in
general and coronary heart disease
in particular. With our present know¬
ledge of "risk factors", a relatively
simple examination should enable us
to determine which persons in the
community are "at risk", and to advise
them what precautions to. take.
If this advice is followed, one may
hope that within the next few years
there will be a dramatic fall in the
number of victims of heart disease
and particularly of coronary heart
failure.
15
