ANTARCTICA, SIBERIA
OR ACROSS THE PACIFIC...
Where did
the first Americans
come from?
by Juan Comas
W,
46
HERE did the first inhabi¬
tants of America come from? At what
time in history did their immigration to
the American continent begin? These
are the first questions we must ask our¬
selves before seeking to determine
the biological and cultural traits of the
first settlers in America.
I have used the terms "immigration"
and "settlers" on purpose, thereby
explicitly rejecting the belief com¬
monly held at the end of the last cen¬
tury and in the first decades of the
present century, according to which
the New World saw man evolve inde¬
pendently from earlier forms as in the
Old World, and hence that early forms
of man existed in the Americas many
hundreds of thousands of years ago.
This is the theory held by the so-
called "autochthonlsts" who based
their beliefs on the discovery of bone
remains on the American continent
attributederroneously to hominids
less evolved than Homo sapiens and
unearthed In geological strata judged
to be also erroneously much older
than has since proved the case.
Going counter to this belief is the
fact that only the less evolved pri-
JUAN COMAS, born In Spain and now a
citizen of Mexico, is internationally known
for his work as an anthropologist. He is
head of the department of anthropology of
the University of Mexico, and editor of the
authoritative 'Anales de Antropología', pub¬
lished by the university in Spanish. He
was for many years vice-president of the
International Union for Anthropological and
Ethnological Sciences, and was a member
of both committees of experts on racial
questions set up by Unesco In 1949 and
1955. (See bibliography inside back cover.)
mates, that is, lemuroid fossils corres¬
ponding to the Eocene period at the
beginning of the Tertiary Era (some
55 million years ago) have ever been
found in America. As to the present-
day living species, the New World
comprises only the simpler types of
simians, known scientifically as platyr-
rhines, but there is no trace of the
higher types of primates, called
catarrhines, which include apes and
the anthropoids.
As for the ancestors of Homo sap¬
iens, such as the pre-hominids and
hominids, they are completely un¬
known to the Americas though they
have been found in Africa, Asia and
Europe. All of the prehistoric bone
remains found on the American con¬
tinent indisputably belong to modern
man and hence are much much more
recent than any of the more primitive
forms such as Homo erectus or Nean¬
derthal Man discovered elsewhere.
Many suppositions have been ad¬
vanced over the years (and passion¬
ately argued) to explain where the
first settlers in America came from.
The list includes the Phoenicians, He¬
brews, Etruscans, Egyptians, Sumer¬
ians and Aryans, but no scientifically
valid proof for any of these supposi¬
tions has been forthcoming, nor, for
that matter, for the existence of the
imaginary, fabulous Atlantis as the
birthplace of the first Americans.
Certain writers in the 19th century
and even in the present century took
it for granted that all the Indians of
America stemmed from a common bio¬
logical stock. This gave rise to the
common saying that: "all Indians are
alike in colour and other features.
When you've seen an Indian from one
region you have seen them all."
This was based on the Idea that all
the migrants to the New World were
Mongols of Asian origin who had
crossed the Bering Straits at different
epochs going back no earlier than
20,000 to 25,000 years ago. Accord¬
ing to this hypothesis, the physical and
cultural differences observed among
the Indians of the Americas can be
explained in two ways: partly by the
different degrees of biological evolu¬
tion of the migratory groups that cros¬
sed north-east Asia in the course of
thousands of years; partly by the dif¬
fering environments of the various
regions of America the settlers estab¬
lished themselves in.
Other scientists, however, are of the
opinion that from remote antiquity
CONTINUED PAGE 48
Diagram shows some of the animals
that lived In America from 40,000 B.C.
to 7,000 B.C. Now extinct "giants"
such as the mammoth and the camel
then roamed the land in great numbers
and herds of horses are known to have
existed 40,000 years ago. Weapon
points used by America's prehistoric
hunters to bring down their animal
quarry are shown at right Spearheads
have been found still embedded In the
fossil remains of some animals. The
Stone Age Indian could make a new
weapon point in a few minutes even
a neatly polished axe within hours so
he did not always bother to pull out
his spearhead for re-use or cut It out
when the shaft had broken off.

CULTURES
FOLSOM
DATES
10,000
to
7,500
11,000
to
9,000
ANIMAIS HUNTED
Long-horned bison
Long-horned bison
PROJECTILE
POINTS
LLANO 15,000
to
11,000
Mammoth
SANDIA
Mammot
25,000 (?)
to
12,000
Horse
EARLIER
PERIODS
38,000 (?)
to
20,000 (?)
Mammoth
Sabre-toothed ^tiger
Scrapers
?\
^^»-Xv^i^
Drawing © Editions Le Seuil, Paris, 1970, from "Lea Indiens", by Peter Farb

THE FIRST AMERICANS (Continued)
Deep in the heart of Texas 40,000 years ago
48
there coexisted on American soil
human groups of different physical
characteristics and of different origins.
All the scientists who support this
"multi-racial" thesis nonetheless
unanimously agree that the Mon¬
goloid element that crossed the Ber¬
ing Straits from Siberia at different
periods of migration by far dominates
all other groups.
According to Paul Rivet, former
director of the Paris Musée de
l'Homme, the populations of pre-Col¬
umbian America are the result of mi¬
grations to the continent of four racial
groups: Mongols and Eskimos via the
Bering Straits, Australoids and Malay¬
an-Polynesians across the Pacific.
Rivet based his conclusions not only
on the findings of physical anthropo¬
logy by studying data on physical
and other characteristics of Indian
groups from southern South America
and those of Indians from certain
areas in Brazil, Baja California and
Ecuador, but also on cultural and lin¬
guistic analogies with population
groups in Oceania.
A. Mendes Correa, of Portugal, ad¬
vanced the theory that an Australo-
Tasmanian human element populated
America not by sailing across the
Pacific but by marching across An¬
tarctica, island-hopping across the
string of archipelagos between Tas¬
mania and Tierra del Fuego at the
southern tip of South Americal
Mendes Correa has indeed demons¬
trated that between 15,000 and 6,000
B.C., Antarctica was free of glacial ice
and actually had a temperate climate
at the time. Obviously, no archaeo¬
logical proof exists to confirm this
Antarctic migration hypothesis, and it
will be extremely difficult, not to say
impossible, to uncover any evidence
with the permanent ice cap now cover¬
ing all of the Antarctic continent.
According to Jose Imbelloni of Ar¬
gentina, one cannot truly understand
the racial and cultural history of early
America without taking into account
the contribution of the peoples of
south-east Asia. Imbelloni conclu¬
des that seven distinct racial groups
migrated to America : Tasmanoids,
Australoids, Melanesianoids, proto-
Indonesians, Indonesians, Mongoloids
and Eskimos. In his works he descri¬
bes and delineates a total of 11 types
of Amerindians.
More recently (1951) Joseph Birdsell
of the U.S.A. sharply criticized the
contradictory views concerning the
population of the Americas put for¬
ward by various multi-racial exponents
such as G. Taylor, R.B. Dixon, H.S.
Gladwin, E.A. Hooton, E.W. Count, F.
Weidenreich and J. Imbelloni. He
advanced his own hypothesis that
America had been settled by a mixture
of two racial groups, Mongols and
"Amurians" or archaic Caucasoids who
had also reached the New World via
north-east Asia.
As proof of this dual origin, Birdsell
claims to have found "Amurian" traits
in contemporary American Indians,
among the Cahuillas of the interior of
Lower California and among the Yuki
and Porno of the northern Californian
coast. But if the Indians of North and
South America were indeed the result
of the mixture of only the two Mongo¬
loid and Amurian strains, there ought
to be a much greater similarity in
blood groups than has actually been
observed, particularly as regards the
A-B-0 and M-N groups.
There have been repeated efforts to
establish similarities and Indeed possi¬
ble contacts between the'redskins"
of the Atlantic seabord of the United
States and the prehistoric Caucasoid
man of the Cro-Magnon type who peo¬
pled western Europe at the beginning
of the Upper Palaeolithic or Old Stone
Age. Such claims cannot be dis¬
missed since they do contain an ele¬
ment of possibility but no proof of any
kind has yet been forthcoming.
ROM the above we can
summarize our conclusions concerning
the first inhabitants of the American
continent as follows:
1) No authochtonous human popula¬
tion ever existed in America.
2) Never was there nor is there now
any biologically homogeneous Amerin¬
dian type. .
3) The overwhelming population mi¬
gration consisted of Mongoloids.
4) There is still doubt and debate as
to what and how many other human
types also populated America, the
most widely accepted hypotheses
being 2 (Birdsell), 4 (Rivet) and 7
(Imbelloni).
The advocates of each of these
hypotheses naturally explain the
physical and other differences between
the various types of Amerindians in
different ways, and no definite conclu¬
sion can, of course, be reached until
more extensive data is obtained.
However, the large number of arch¬
aeological explorations carried out in
recent years in various parts of the
Americas has unearthed a rich store
of stone implements and other objects
as well as, to a lesser extent, fossi¬
lized human remains which, with our
modern dating techniques including
Carbon-14 now permit us to establish
with relative certainty when man first
appeared in America and a chronolo¬
gical time-table of his presence there.
Thus we now know that man was
present in the United States, for exam¬
ple, as early as 38,000 B.C. at a site
found at Lewisville, Texas. Other pre¬
historic sites have been clocked at
27,650 B.C. (Santa Rosa, California);
19.500 B.C. (La Jolla, California); 8,505
B.C. (Gypsum Cave, Nevada); 7,883
B.C. (Plainview Site, Texas); and 6,274
B.C. (Allen Site, Nebraska). In each
case we must allow a few hundred
years or more plus or minus as is
customary for C-14 readings. The
people who lived in this area between
40,000 years ago and 8,000 years ago
were all hunter-gatherers.
The oldest human settlement in
Mexico has been found to be Tlapa-
coya in Mexico State where a disc¬
shaped file and an obsidian knife have
been unearthed dating back to
20,200 B.C. (plus or minus 2,600 years)
and 21,150 B.C. (1,950 years) respecti¬
vely. Later prehistoric sites are also
known, of course, which show that
they too belonged to hunter-gatherers.
Here are a few examples of datings
from South America (plus or minus
years are omitted): crude stone tool
industries in Venezuela (14,375 B.C.
and 12,275 B.C.); cultural remains in
Lagoa Santa, Brazil (8,024 B.C.); pre-
ceramic lithic culture in Lauricocha,
Peru (7,566 B.C.); Inithuasi Grotto at
San Luis, Argentina with a pre-ceramic
lithic industry (6,068 B.C.); a cultural
complex on the high terraces of the
Gallegos river in southern Patagonia
dating from between 10,000 and
7,000 B.C.; excavations in Chile
(9,380 B.C.) and elsewhere in southern
Patagcmia (8,760 to 6,700 B.C.).
From the above examples a very
interesting observation can be made,
namely, that as we proceed southward
the datings of the hunting and gather¬
ing cultures are less ancient. Is this
a confirmation of the thesis that the
settlers of America came exclusively
by way of the Bering Straits and that
South America was therefore peo¬
pled many millenia later than North
America? I believe it is still too early
to say and we must wait for further
research and investigations.
IIT is generally agreed, for
the moment, that the oldest date of
38,000 to 40,000 years ago corres¬
ponds to the beginnings of the warm¬
ing up period of the last Ice Age in
North America (known as the Wiscon¬
sin glaciation) when it was possible to
cross from eastern Siberia to Alaska
and thereby reach the more temperate
regions of southern North America.
Culturally, the first hunter-gatherers
evolved until they became sedentary
groups after learning to cultivate
plants and domesticate animals. This
was a slow and gradual process, but
we have evidence of prehistoric sites
where hunter-gatherer tribes were
simultaneously engaged in the cultiva¬
tion of squash, chile beans and later,
maize.

Photo © H.W. Silvester - Rapho. Paris
CAVE DWELLERS OF THE AMERICAS. Dating by modern scientific methods of recently discov¬
ered stone implements and fossil human remains in various parts of the Americas show that man
was present in the United States as early as 38,000 B.C., in Mexico by about 20,000 B.C. and as
far south as Patagonia between 10,000 and 7,000 B.C. Many finds have been made in caves
once occupied by Stone Age man. Photo shows a more recent site, known as the "Mummy
Cave" In the grandiose setting of Chelly Canyon In the state of Arizona. Here hundreds of cave
dwellings and graves containing mummies have been found showing that it was occupied by man
right down to historical times. Ruins at entrance date from later pre-Columbian Indian times.
Such agricultural sites have been
found at Tamaulipas, Mexico, dating
back to between 7,500 and 5,500 B.C.,
at Sierra Madre, Mexico (4,500 -
2,500 B.C. and 5,000-3,000 B.C.). In
the Tehuaca area of the State of Pue¬
bla in Mexico several prehistoric sites
have been unearthed offering definite
proof of the existence of agriculture
between 6,000 and 5,500 B.C.
In New Mexico (USA) agricultural
levels have been found at a site
known as Bat Cave dating back to
about 3,300 B.C. while in the Peruvian
Andes agricultural complexes dating
between 4,700 and 3,000 B.C. have
been found at Huaca Prieta, Nazoa,
Paracas, Chuica, and other sites.
The evolution from the hunter-gath¬
erer stage to agriculture occurred In
America independently of the same
development in the Old World. Re¬
search In plant genetics, ecology and
ethno-history as well as chronological
datings have effectively demonstrated
this, thus refuting the thesis that agri¬
culture was introduced into America
from Asia.
The initial phases of an agricultural
economy are known to have occurred
in different parts of America, first with
seasonal sedentary settlements and
then year-round permanent agricultu¬
ral sites. Central America and the
Peruvian-Bolivian area are at least
two of the centres on the continent
which originated the cultivation of cer
tain species of plants. Graded terra¬
ces and Chinampas (incorrectly called
"floating gardens") are two typical
techniques used here in early inten¬
sive agriculture.
From this point we see the begin¬
ning of a new process of development,
the so-called "high cultures" based
on what Gordon Childe has termed
the "urban revolution", depending on
extensive cultivation of maize, yucca,
potato, beans and squash as well as
the manufacture of ceramics, the use
of polished stone implements and the
beginning of the textile industry, etc.
In Meso-America (Mexico, Guate¬
mala, parts of Honduras and El Salva¬
dor) the high cultures began around
1,500 B.C. in the highlands. This was
the case with the Toltec, the Aztec
and Zapotee civilizations which ended
with the arrival of the Spaniards in the
16th century. The Olmec, Maya and
Totonec civilizations emerged in the
lowlands a little later than 1,500 B.C.
In the Peru-Bolivia area, both along
the coast (Huaca Prieta, Cupisnique,
Paracas, Mochica, Nazoa, Pachaca-
mac, Chuncay and Inca civilizations)
and in the Andean uplands (Chavin,
Cajamarca, Huaylas, Huilca, Qalas-
saya, Tiahuanaco and Inca civilizations)
the high cultures began to develop
about 1,600 B.C. until their decline at
the end of the 15th century A.D.
Alongside these great civilizations
there also existed much less advanced
cultural groups, hampered no doubt by
the rigours of their surroundings and
habitat. Notable amongst these were
the populations living in the great river
valleys of the Amazon, Orinoco and
Parana as well as their many tributa¬
ries.
From the 16th century, with the
conquest, colonization and accultura¬
tion stemming from the arrival of Eu¬
ropean immigrants, the original Indian
population of America underwent the
following three major modifications:
1) The Indians have dwindled to the
point of extinction, as in Uruguay,
Cuba, Haiti, Dominican Republic and
Puerto Rico; or a reduced number are
confined to reservations, as in the Uni¬
ted States.
2) The Indian population still exists
but has little contact with the, rest of
the country, living within its own self-
sufficient economy, virtually untouched
by the process of acculturation. Such
populations are found in the Amazon
and Orinoco river basins, eastern
Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, etc.
3) Large-scale intermingling of races
has taken place to the extent that the
majority of the inhabitants are biologi¬
cally and culturally mixed, though
small pockets of Indian populations,
where less intermingling and accul¬
turation have taken place, continue to
exist, as in Mexico, Guatemala, the
Andean plateau regions of Ecuador,
Peru and Bolivia. M
49
