§ 1 tt *
k M * *
4
Paper, one of the greatest contributions .to civilization of
all time, was Invented by the Chinese about a century before
the birth of Christ (see page 6). The panels above
show five stages In the Chinese papermaking process as
illustrated In a book on Chinese technology printed In 1637.
From left to right, bamboo stems are cut and left to soak
in water; the Inner fibres from the bamboo stems are
boiled over a fire; pulp is lifted from a vat on a screen;
paper Is pressed after the wet sheets from the screen
have been placed on a wooden board; sheets of paper are
dried on heated walls. Illustrations taken from Tien-kung
k'al-wu", by Sung Ying-hsing, 1927 reprint edition.
by Tsuen-Hsuin Tsien
TSUEN-HSUIN TSIEN Is considered a leading world authority
on the history of Chinese printing. He is Professor of Chinese
Literature and- Curator of the Far Eastern Library of the Uni¬
versity of Chicago. In 1962 Professor Tsien published his
authoritative work "Written on Bamboo and Silk: the Beginnings
of Chinese Books and Inscriptions", University of Chicago Press
(now in its third impression). He Is at present preparing a major
study on "Paper, Ink and Printing" for Volume V, part 1 of
Joseph Needham's monumental "Science and Civilization in China"
(Cambridge University Press).



CHINA
true
birthplace
of paper,
printing and
movable type

IIN the development of the
art of bookmaking in the modern
format, a text printed with black ink
on white paper, the Chinese have
probably contributed the most.
It is generally known that paper was
invented in China around the begin¬
ning of the Christian era, and spread
all over the world before the modern
age. Wood-block printing was first
used by the Chinese in the seventh
or eighth century and movable type
some four hundred years earlier than
Gutenberg. Even the use of the
indelible ink of lampblack, which has
been manufactured under the misnomer
"Indian ink", can be traced back to
antiquity in Chinese civilization.
It was the introduction of these
vehicles that made possible the pro¬
duction of multiple copies of a modern
paged book for wide circulation.
Printing has been regarded as the
mother of civilization, and paper as its
carrier to perpetuate man's ideas and
aspirations and expand their capacity
for diffusion and exchange. Paper
and printing represent two of the four
great Chinese inventions (the other
two are gunpowder and the compass)
that contributed to the modernization
of the West.
No other achievements by the people
of the ancient world can compare in
importance with the invention of paper
and the art of printing that was born
from it. Both have a far-reaching
impact upon the intellectual life of
modern people. Can one imagine that
if paper ceased production or printing
were unknown today, what would
happen in daily life in a modern
society? Even though other media of
communication are available, they
cannot substitute for the function of
paper and printing, which is basic and
permanent.
Paper is a felted sheet of fibres
formed on a fine screen from a water
suspension. When the Water drains
away, it leaves a mat of fibres to be
dried. Over a span of two millennia
since the inception of the idea of
papermaking, the art has been changed
and the tools have become complicated,
but the basic principles and processes
remain the same.
The invention of paper in China
originated from the process of pound¬
ing and stirring rags in water, several
centuries before Christ. It is very
likely that an accidental placing of
fibres from the rags on a mat with
water draining away may have suggest¬
ed the idea of making a thin sheet of
paper.
Scholars of the West have sometimes
questioned the Chinese origin of paper-
making. Their doubt resulted partly
from the derivation of the word "paper"
from "papyrus" and partly from their
ignorance about the nature of
Chinese paper.
Papyrus, used earlier than paper,
was made of laminated slices from
papyrus reeds, while paper is a
manufactured product of fibres. The
origin of paper derived from the
writing on textile with its subsequent
improvement to become paper as an
economical substitute.
Paper and textiles were closely
related. Not only were they originally
made of the same kinds of raw material,
but also similar in physical format and
properties. Even their uses were
interchangeable.
The chief difference between them
was probably in the process of their
manufacture and thus in their cost of
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

PAPER AND PRINTING (Continued)
Photo from "Written on Bamboo and Silk", by Tsuen-Hsuln Tslen,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1962.
THE OLDEST PIECE OF PAPER IN THE WORLD
The oldest piece of paper In the world, this fragment of paper (above),
dating back to the 2nd century B.C., was discovered recently In a tomb at
Pa-ch'lao, in the Shensi province of northern China. It has pushed back the
date of the invention of paper to over two centuries before the time of
T'sai Lun, traditionally regarded as the inventor of paper. The papermaking
techniques developed by Tsai Lun and described to the Imperial court In
105 A.D. undoubtedly represented a big advance In the art of papermaking.
T'sai Lun and his papermaking methods are depicted (below) on commemorative
stamps issued by the People's Republic of China.
production. Textiles were made by
weaving spun threads of fibres by
physical means, while paper was
formed by the mixture of disintegrated
fibres into a felted sheet by chemical
processes.
The invention of paper has been
attributed to T'sai Lun, .an official in
charge of manufacture, who reported
to the Court in 105 A.D. his method
of papermaking with tree bark, hemp,
rags and fish nets. This traditional
date of invention was probably arbitrar¬
ily chosen, since there is evidence for
the existence of paper made of plant
and silk fibres prior to his time.
The recent discovery of very ancient
paper fragments in north China indi¬
cates its origin before Christ. Frag¬
ments of this oldest paper are reported
as having been found in Pa-ch'iao,
Shensi province, in 1957, in a tomb
dated no later than the second century
B.C. If this is true, the beginning of
Chinese papermaking may have to be
pushed back at least some two
centuries before T'sai Lun.
The role of T'sai Lun, however, may
have been as an innovator of new
materials, which had not been used
before, and of new techniques for
treating them. The supply of rags and
other second-hand materials was limit¬
ed and the introduction of fresh fibres
from tree bark and other plants
provided new sources of raw materials,
and thus made it possible for paper-
making on a large scale to meet the
increasing demand.
Z«7.i90?
k~«
Photo Dominique Roger - Unesco
6
HE major raw materials
for Chinese papermaking include such
bast plants as hemp, jute, flax, ramie
(China grass), and rattan; the bark of
the mulberry and paper mulberry;
grasses such as bamboo, reeds, and
stalks of rice and wheat; and such
seed fibres as cotton. Hemp and
cotton are probably the best, produc¬
ing the highest yields of pure and
long fibres, but as they are needed
primarily for the textile industry, paper
mulberry and bamboo have been the
chief raw materials for papermaking
in China for many centuries.
Although paper had been used for
writing probably as early as it was
invented, it was not until the third
century A.D. that bamboo and wooden
tablets were entirely replaced by paper
as the material of Chinese books.
We have also found that from this
time on, paper began to be made with
a fine screen-mould, sized and loaded
to improve its quality for writing, and
dyed with an insect repellent for
permanence. It was also made in
different colours and designs for

writing poems, notes, and letters, and
cut into patterns for embroideries and
decorations.
Paper was also extensively used
for documents and bookmaking, for
painting and calligraphy, for calling
cards, for offerings to the spirits, for
wrapping, for covering windows, and
for such household articles as fans,
umbrellas, lanterns, kites, toys, and
even sanitary and toilet papers. All
of these were accomplished or used
before the close of the sixth century.
From the seventh or eighth century
onward, paper is known to have been
used in making hats, garments, pants,
bed sheets, mosquito nets, curtains,
and other household furnishings and
appliances. It was also used in
making screens, tiles, and even armour.
The use of paper as "flying money" to
substitute for heavy metallic coins was
formally introduced in the early ninth
century.
Marco Polo was among the early
European visitors to China who wit¬
nessed the wide circulation of paper
money and the extravagant burning of
paper effigies and replicas as offerings
to the dead in the empire of the great
Khan. The Mongol expansion resulted
in the introduction of paper money,
playing cards, and many other objects
of paper and printing to other parts
of the world.
The Persians first issued in 1294
paper money, for which the Chinese
name ch'ao (money) was adopted. It
is said that certain old systems in
European banking, accounting, and
even money deposit vouchers were
influenced by some of the Chinese
examples.
Wallpaper also is said to have
originated in China. It was first
brought to Europe by French mission¬
aries in the sixteenth century and
has been imitated there since the
seventeenth century. How early it
was used in China is uncertain, but the
decoration of Chinese houses with
hanging scrolls of painting and calli¬
graphy was a very ancient and com¬
mon practice. It is possible that these
paper scrolls were first hung and later
adapted to being pasted on the walls
of European houses.
The use of paper made books much
cheaper and more portable, but their
multiplication and wide distribution
was not possible until the invention
of printing. It is uncertain when and
where the first book was printed in
China and who was the earliest
printer. The beginning of the art must
have been a process of gradual
development and been participated in
by many people, especially the reli¬
gious devotees from whom great
numbers of duplicates of their sacred
writings were in demand.
There was a long history of pre¬
printing techniques of duplication in
China, including the use of seals for
stamping on clay and later on paper,
of stencils to duplicate designs on
textiles and on paper, and of inked
impressions taken from stone inscrip¬
tions. All these processes paved the
way for the use of wood-block printing.
The earliest possible date for the
beginning of printing in China is
probably around 700 A.D. The discov¬
ery in Korea in 1965 of a Buddhist
charm in Chinese, printed no later
than 751 A.D., and a previously known
charm also in Chinese, printed in Japan
around 770 A.D., indicate that printing
at that time was already a refined and
widespread craft. Since both Korea
and Japan were under the influence of
Chinese culture long before the time
when these texts were printed, there
is little doubt that this technique was
introduced from China.
N10 printed material of
comparable date has been found in
China, but specimens of the ninth and
tenth centuries were discovered there
and survive today. These include the
famous Diamond sutra, a complete
book in a paper roll printed in 868 A.D.,
calendars of 877 and 882, many single
sheets of Buddhist pictures of 947-983,
and two versions of an invocation
sutra printed in 957 and 973. All these
early specimens of printing are more
or less related to Buddhism; Confucian
classics were not printed until the first
part of the tenth century.
After that time, printing was widely
applied and perfected through the
efforts of many official, private, reli¬
gious, and commercial agencies. The
Chinese printing of the eleventh
to thirteenth centuries, which may
be compared with the European
incunabula, is especially noted for its
excellence in paper, ink, calligraphy,
illustration, workmanship, and in many
other respects.
All the wood blocks were selected
from deciduous trees: the pear, jujube,
catalpa, and sometimes apple, for their
smooth and even texture. The manu¬
script, written on a thin sheet of paper,
was transferred upside down to the
surface of the block by means of rice
paste. When dry, the backing of paper
was scraped off, leaving a thin tissue
showing the characters in the reverse
position remaining on the block.
The cutter then removed the surface
of the block around the characters
with gauges, picks, and chisels. When
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Engraving of a scholar carrying a bamboo
book, reproduced from a 3rd century B.C.
tomb tile now In the collection of the
Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, Canada.
These books consisted of bamboo tablets
connected with string and used like
a paged book of modern times. Bamboo
and wood were the most popular
materials for writing (along with silk)
before the Invention of paper.
7

THE WORLD'S OLDEST PRINTED DOCUMENT
This Buddhist charm in
Chinese (left), dated
704-751 A.D., is the
oldest known specimen
of printing in the world.
It was found at Pulguk
sa, in Kyongju, southeast
Korea, in 1966. The
characters were carved
in reverse on wood and
then transferred to paper.
Below, an illustrated in¬
vocation sutra printed in
975 A.D. and discovered
in the ruins of the Thun¬
der Peak Pagoda, in
Hangchow, southeast
China, in 1924.
Photo courtesy of the Far Eastern Library. University of Chicago.
CHINESE PAPER AND PRINTING (Continued)
8
the block was ready, it was inked with
a hair brush. A sheet of paper was
then placed on the inked block and
brushed over the back with a soft
brush. It was said that a skilled printer
could turn out some 1,500 to 2,000
sheets of double pages in a day.
The art of Chinese printing was
further developed through the intro¬
duction of movable type in the eleventh
century and of multi-colour printing in
the fourteenth century. According to
a contemporary record, a font of
earthenware movable type was used
by a craftsman named Pi Sheng in
about 1 041 -1 048. He cut the characters
in the soft clay and baked them in a
fire. The type was set on a plate with
a mixture of resin and wax. A flat
board was pressed over the surface
to even out the block of types. Several
plates were used alternately and the
printing was done rapidly.
Other materials were later introduc¬
ed to make movable type, including
wood in the early thirteenth century
and bronze in the late fifteenth and
the sixteenth century. The types made
of wood, bronze, tin, lead, and
ceramics were used repeatedly but
intermittently in the following centuries.
Printing with more than one colour
was used as early as 1340 and
advanced in the late seventeenth
century when many manuals of paint
ings and patterned stationery were
printed in multi-colour. This was done
by means of a series of separate
blocks, one for each colour, applied
to the paper in succession. This
method was used especially in printing
book illustrations, maps, stationery,
and texts with punctuation and com¬
mentaries.
Throughout the ages, the wood-block
printing was the main trend of Chinese
book production while movable type
was only occasionally used. Because
of the nature of the Chinese vocabulary
with a large number of individual
characters, the block printing was more
simple and economical to operate.
After required copies were printed, the

THE INVENTION OF MOVADLE TYPE
The invention of movable type in the 11th century A.D.
was another notable "first" for China and a giant
step forward in printing technique. Experiments were
made with many different materials including earthen¬
ware, wood, bronze, tin and lead. Above, a bronze
movable type printing of the "Mo tzu", a 5th century
B.C. philosophical work, printed in blue colour In
1553., Right, craftsmen making wooden movable type at
the Wu Ying Palace. Illustrations taken from "Chung-
kuo pan-k'o t'u-lu", National Peking Library, 1961.
blocks could be easily stored and
used over again, when additional
copies were needed.
Only when voluminous books were
produced on a large scale, movable
type was preferred. Since the middle
of the nineteenth century, both block
printing and the traditional movable
type have been gradually replaced by
modern printing techniques, including
lithography, typography, and other
machine printing.
After paper was invented, it not only
became popular in China but spread
in all directions throughout the world.
Its introduction to other countries must
have occurred in two stages: first
paper books and other paper products
arrived in these countries to be
followed later by the paper manufactur¬
ing methods.
Paper moved eastward to Korea in
the second century, to Japan in the
third century, southward to Indo-China
no later than the third century and to
India before the seventh century, and
westward to Central Asia in the
third century, to western Asia in the
eighth century, to Africa in the tenth
century, to Europe in the twelfth
century, and to America in the sixteenth
century.
It has often been said that the
Chinese kept secret their knowledge
of papermaking until a few paper-
makers were captured by the Arabs
in the eighth century, when this secret
was revealed to the outside world.
This is certainly not true. The slow
movement to the West was due primar¬
ily to geographical and cultural isola¬
tion rather than to secretiveness, since
papermaking was introduced to China's
immediate neighbours as soon as they
began to have contacts with Chinese
culture.
When the eastward diffusion of
Chinese culture began, Koreans first
acquired Chinese books on paper and
borrowed Chinese characters as their
writing in the second century. By way
of Korea, Chinese books were in-
CONTINUED PAGE 11
9

10
FROM SALT DED
TO
PADDY FIELD
Above, a lively woodblock
illustration of salt
manufacture which appeared
In an old work on Chinese
materia medica, printed
in 1249. The poem and
calligraphy that accompany
the more sophisticated
copper-plate engraving (right)
printed in 1696, of peasants
planting rice in paddy fields,
are the work of the
Emperor K'ang Hsl.
It is one of 46 Illustrations
in the copper-plate
edition of the "Keng
chih t'u", an album showing
the processes of tilling
and weaving.
« & i* « * it
*» * m i* * **
*< Jük * * 4K.
t *LÄ-* jq
k « m * -t
4 ai. % »«,
fc
fr . » I * i * , « * « * i i t t ó il i 4 » *
f'7* i ». K * i < t » ¿ *, i * * i 4 . l -é~H i * 4-1-tV
fc ai ^ * fe* »;É Jl &*« «i t t.» * *-* * i à. fr- » .i » Ö-
l'.'A^'^.,!,',",-,V.	AP, 'ftt»

CHINESE PAPER AND PRINTING (Continued from page 9)
traduced to Japan at the beginning of
the third century.
However, the craft of papermaking
was not begun in Japan until 610 A.D.,
when a Korean monk, who had learned
inkmaking and papermaking in China,
went to Japan and suggested its
manufacture to the Japanese court.
After this time, hundreds of priests
and students from both Korea and
Japan were sent to China to study and
to acquire books. The Chinese craft
of printing must have been learned by
these students and applied in their own
countries when they returned.
How early papermaking moved
southward is uncertain, but it must
have been very early. Chinese
records show that in the late third
century, paper made of special mater¬
ials native to Indo-China was sent to
the Chinese court as a tribute. It is
assumed that the Indo-Chinese learned
the craft from the Chinese. Even
today, the methods used by Indo-
Chinese papermakers are said to be
more closely related to those of China
than of any other Asian country.
As to the printing of books, the Indo-
Chinese have acquired many kinds of
Chinese literature, including Confucian,
Buddhist, and Taoist canons, medical
works, and novels, ever since the tenth
century. Books in Chinese and in
bilingual text of Chinese and Viet¬
namese were printed there for many
centuries with wood blocks, movable
type, and colour process, as was done
in China.
The introduction of paper to India
was probably not later than the seventh
century. A Chinese monk named
l-ching who travelled to India in 671-
694, mentioned the Sanskrit word
kákali for paper in his Chinese-Sanskrit
dictionary. Since the sacred texts of
India were memorized and transmitted
orally for ages, paper was probably
not popular there until the Mohammed¬
an period after the twelfth century.
The use of printing reached India even
much later.
Papermaking travelled westward to
Samarkand in 751 A.D., when two
Chinese papermakers were taken pris¬
oner and introduced the craft to the
Arabic world. A second factory was
started in Baghdad some forty years
later when Chinese papermakers were
brought to that city. From this time,
papermaking spread to the cities of
Damascus and Tripoli, and to Yemen,
Egypt, and Morocco. The Arabs
monopolized papermaking in the West
for some five centuries before it was
introduced to Europe in the twelfth
century.
After the Moors conquered the
Iberian peninsula, they brought the
craft to Spain and established a paper
factory in Xátiva in about 1150. A mill
for maceration of rags was also operat¬
ed there.
Another route which carried the
craft to Europe was probably across
the Mediterranean through Sicily to
Italy from Egypt or Palestine. Paper
mills are known to have been estab¬
lished in Italian cities of Babriano,
Bologna, and Genoa, from the late
thirteenth century, and in several cities
in France and Germany in the four¬
teenth century.
The famous papermaker Ulman
Stromer, who built a paper mill in
Nuremberg about 1390, used tools and
processes, including the water-power¬
ed stampers, similar to those used in
China. The craft was introduced to
the Netherlands, Switzerland, and
England in the fifteenth century and
brought to the New World in the
sixteenth century to Mexico before
1580 and to the American colonies
toward the end of the seventeenth
century.
Throughout a long history of over
fifteen hundred years, paper travelled
from China to almost every part of the
world. Whether printing in Europe
was influenced by the Chinese is
debatable, but knowledge of Chinese
printing and many printed articles from
China were certainly known in Europe
before the first printing there was
accomplished.
The origin of paper in China and its
borrowing by many others is definite
and certain. Papermaking, which was
already a fully developed art before
its spread from China, is probably the
most complete of the inventions that
China has given to the world.
This woodcut by Jose Annam, printed In
Frankfurt In 1568, Is the earliest picture
of papermaking In Europe. It shows
the remarkable similarity of the tools
and processes used by European
papermakers to those employed
centuries earlier In China (see particularly
photos pages 4 and 5). Illustration
taken from "Old Papermaking" by
Dard Hunter, Mountain House, 1923.
11
