ANCIENT IRRIGATION
AND
MODERN SCIENCE
by Boris V. Andrianov
14
/% CROSS the deserts of
Asia from Arabia to Mongolia, outlines
of fields and canals, traces of by¬
gone farming and remnants of former
settlements still mark the sites of
ancient irrigation systems.
Those who have travelled to these
places long remember the majestic
ruins of cities with their formidable
walls and towers, the dried-up canal
beds and the vestiges of skilfully laid
out but long-unploughed fields. Here,
long ago, the farmer reaped bounteous
harvests of wheat and cultivated
grapes and melons.
In our day, every new achievement
in science and engineering, every new
improvement in technology, working
tools and production as a whole re¬
moves us further and further from the
long-forgotten and imperfect farming
methods and techniques of Antiquity.
But these ancient skills and tech¬
niques should interest not only a small
circle of scholars. Historians and ar¬
chaeologists say that a knowledge of
the concrete experience of long-van¬
ished civilizations is of great econo¬
mic value. Information about the dis¬
tribution and nature of the now dry
canals, for instance, can be used in
evaluating water resources and in de-
BORIS V. ANDRIANOV is a leading Soviet
specialist on the history of ancient irrigation
systems. He has written over 100 scientific
studies, including an extensive monograph
on the ancient irrigation systems of the Aral
Sea region, and several books on the
peoples of Africa. He is senior scientific
worker at the Institute of Ethnography of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and scientific
secretary of the Academy's Committee on
the Practical Uses of Historical Data in the
National Economy.
signing the basic course of major
canals, and particularly in laying out
networks of small irrigation ditches.
The lands that were irrigated in
Antiquity make up one of the most
potentially productive zones in the
world: each irrigated hectare of land
in the desert zone is four to five times
more productive than a hectare of non-
irrigated land.
In the last 20 years, the area under
irrigation throughout the world has in¬
creased nearly threefold from 80 mil¬
lion to 220 million hectares (200 mil¬
lion to 560 million acres). Today,
scientists are preparing an even more
decisive attack on the desert, and our
knowledge of its past can make a
valuable contribution to this campaign.
One Soviet scientist, V. V. Dokucha-
yev, has defined the soil as, "a natural-
historical body" which reflects every
change in natural conditions climate,
water conditions, vegetation and so
on. During many centuries man's eco¬
nomic activity too has left its indel¬
ible traces in the soil.
Through a process lasting centuries,
thousands of tons of salts were carri¬
ed by water supply systems to every
hectare of irrigated land, and these
salts remained even after the cultivat¬
ed lands turned into desert.
In ancient times, the struggle against
salinity required the efforts of a whole
army of workers to remove the surface
layers of salts and carry them beyond
the irrigated plots. In the state lands
around Basra (Iraq), according to al-
Tabari, a celebrated Arab historian of
the Middle Ages, this work was done
by thousands of black Zinji slaves.
After the Zinji revolted in the year 869,
CONTINUED PAGE 16

'I
i
»
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
LESSONS
FROM
ANTIQUITY
Complex irrigation systems using a wide variety of storage tanks and canals existed on the Indus
5,000 years ago, and an elaborate code of water laws was applied on the Euphrates in 2050 B.C.
Today's irrigation engineers have much to learn from their ancient counterparts In the matter of
siting water supply systems to reclaim now arid but once fertile lands. Left, among other machines
that help modern man to tame the deserts is this Soviet channel digger which cuts a trench three
metres deep by 14 metres wide at the rate of about 100 metres a day. Ancient methods of lifting
water are still used by farmers in many lands. Above, this "sakiya", a revolving wheel turned by
bullock power, supplies water for crop irrigation in the Sudan.
15

16
ANCIENT IRRIGATION (Continued)
50,000 hectares of irrigated land were
abandoned and ultimately turned into
salt marshes.
Large areas of land in present-day
Iraq are saltridden, and it is no acci¬
dent that this problem has become the
central theme of historical and archaeo¬
logical research with long-term eco¬
nomic aims conducted in the Diala
River basin by Iraqi experts and
specialists from Chicago University's
Oriental Institute.
The study of thousands of large and
small ancient settlements has made it
possible to reconstruct a broad his¬
torical picture of life in the oasis, to
determine the size of the population
during various epochs, and to answer
many questions of practical signifi¬
cance for agriculture in the Republic
of Iraq today.
In 1954-1955, specialists working on
an assignment for Syria's Ministry of
Agriculture used aerial photo mosaics
of the Upper Gezir to draw up a map
of the ancient irrigation systems on
the river Habur. Many of these sys¬
tems have been reconstructed, and
crops now grow on what was only
recently desert land. It would .be ex¬
pedient to include in current develop¬
ment plans for arid zone countries a
broader utilization of formerly irrigated
lands.
Large-scale historical and archaeolo¬
gical research projects with these aims
have been under way for several dec¬
ades now in the. Soviet Union, where
the remains of ancient irrigation sys¬
tems have been located over an area
of eight to ten million hectares an
area equal to all the land presently
under irrigation in the U.S.S.R.
Half of the once-irrigated land lies
at the lower reaches of the large Cen¬
tral Asian rivers, the Amu Darya and
Syr Darya, along the shores of the
Aral Sea. The region has a warm cli¬
mate and a long, frost-free season, but
rainfall is low and farming is possible
only with artificial irrigation. All life
here depends on the river waters and
irrigation systems.
Armed with modern technology, the
farmer has begun to develop the once-
irrigated but now desert land surround¬
ing the oasis. All in all, the area
covers five million hectares.
The Khorezm archaeological and eth¬
nographical expedition of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Sciences, headed by Cor¬
responding Member of the Academy,
S.P. Tolstov, has been working in this
vast region for the past three decades.
Experts in various fields archaeolo¬
gists, ethnographers, geographers, soil
scientists, irrigators, geologists and
aerophotographers have joined in the
CONTINUED PAGE 34
"ßi
<4
r
/
* u
^j
.s

'*+'&&
k_T^
J
Desert traceries
from Central
Asia's past
Photos © APN, Moscow
Revealed by the probing eye of an aerial camera, outlines of fields and irrigation canals mark
the sites of ancient farming communities in Soviet Central Asia. Soviet archaeologists and histo¬
rians have located the remains of ancient Irrigation systems over an area of 8 to 10 million
hectares (20 to 25 million acres). Above left, traces of irrigation canals of antiquity are still
visible among the sand dunes close to Zamakhshar, near the mouth of the Amu Darya river.
Centre, rectangular pattern of ancient fields stands out near a fortress abandoned in the 8th or
9th century. Right, vines and melons once grew in the fields close to the remains of the Dev
Kes-Ken fortified settlement, whose ancient irrigation canal is seen at top of photo.
'Pancakes1
from present-day
Algeria
and the U.S.A.
Opposite page, "Pancake"
oases In the Sahara desert,
Algeria, where palm trees
planted in man-made hollows
draw sustenance from under¬
ground water. Unesco, in co¬
operation with Algeria, Tunisia
and the U.N. Development
Programme, is surveying un¬
derground water resources in
the northern Sahara. Left,
huge circular patterns formed
by irrigation sprinklers at
Moses Lake, State of Wash¬
ington, U.S.A.
17

ANCIENT IRRIGATION AND MODERN SCIENCE
(Continued from page 16)
34
work of this expedition, making it pos¬
sible to link scientific studies, particu¬
larly cartography, with the tasks of
modern economic development. Excav¬
ations of the ancient farming villages
and the towns of Khorezm, systema¬
tic exploration of the whole area and
the use of detailed maps drawn up
from aerial photographs, have produc¬
ed an overall picture of the agricultu¬
ral history of the oasis at the lower
reaches of the Amu Darya.
A legend relates that in ancient
times the Amu Darya did not flow into
the Aral Sea, but into the Caspian.
According to the legend, the king of
Khorezm won from the king of the
"East" the right to divert the river
towards Khorezm only "for one day and
one night". However, the disobedient
river, once turned, continued to flow
towards Khorezm. The people there
"ran canals from it and built towns
along its banks". Archaeologists have
now determined how and when agricul¬
ture actually began in Khorezm.
/AGRICULTURE and canal
building in the lower reaches of the
Amu Darya began in the middle of the
2nd millenium B.C. In ancient times,
the Amu Darya had a huge triple delta,
consisting of hundreds of channels.
Natural silt deposits gradually filled
the upper channels and they ultimately
disappeared.
The ancient irrigator, who learned
his methods from nature, observed
this process and made use of it. The
hydrographie changes he saw taking
place gave him the idea of controlling
small natural river channels and using
them, with the help of ditches, to pro¬
vide a more or less regular water
supply for his fields.
At first, agriculture depended solely
on natural flood irrigation; later it made
use of the gradually disappearing delta
channels, which were adapted for irri¬
gation by means of short aryks, or irri¬
gation ditches, leading from them.
According to the American archaeo¬
logist, Robert McCormick Adams, irrig¬
ation in ancient Mesopotamia, where
natural conditions were similar to those
of the Khorezm oasis, evolved in the
same way.
Nature herself pointed the way to
technological progress for the an¬
cient irrigation engineers. As early as
the Bronze Age, men discovered the
principle of gravity flow and built head
structures far upstream of the delta
channels to ensure a steady flow of
water to their fields. Yet irrigation in
this early epoch still depended solely
on the whims of the river.
In the 6th-5th centuries B.C., during
the Persian Achaemenid dynasty when
Khorezm became a large slave-owning
state, irrigation engineering underwent
a sharp change. The huge irrigation
systems of this period in no way re¬
sembled the small river beds adapted
for irrigation in the primitive epoch.
The building of such irrigation sys¬
tems required vast manpower resour¬
ces as well as strict state organization
and control. The process was accom¬
panied by radical changes in the struc¬
ture of society, the formation of
classes and the consolidation of
state power.
Numerous fortified settlements were
established in the oasis, and the area
under irrigation was increased many
times over. Here grain crops barley,
wheat and millet and cotton were
raised. Viticulture, horticulture and
melon cultivation were developed.
Local growers became skilled in selec¬
tion methods and raised the best
melons in the world and special var¬
ieties of grapes. Remarkably enough,
in the lower reaches of the Amu Darya
the ancient traditional dimensions of
the vineyards (width of beds, 3.2 to 3.6
metres) and the melon fields (up to
2.2. metres) have been preserved to
this day.
The growth of irrigation farming in
the ancient Khorezm oasis was inter¬
rupted in the middle of the Ist millen¬
nium, a time of widespread social
upheaval and a decline in agriculture.
But the ancient lands with irrigation
systems were developed once again in
the 7th-8th centuries during the so-
called Afrigidian period. The huge
90 kilometre-long Kyrk-Kyz canal on
the right bank of the Amu Darya was
put into operation, and numerous for¬
tifications sprang up along its length.
In the year 712, however, the oasis
was invaded by an army led by Kut-
eiba, who ordered all the ancient Zoro-
astrian books burned and the magi
the custodians of knowledge about
irrigation put to death. Afterwards,
in the words of al-Biruni, the 11th cen¬
tury Khorezm scholar and scientist,
"the people of Khorezm remained illi¬
terate and depended on memory for
what they needed."
The 11th to the early 13th centuries
saw a new upsurge of life in the oasis.
Khorezm was transformed from a poor
northern principality into the centre of
a great Eastern empire. The domain of
the Khorezm shahs extended from the
Aral Sea to the Indus River, from Iraq
to Ferghana.
The huge expanse of abandoned
land was again developed, and on the
left bank of the Amu Darya even ad¬
vanced for dozens of kilometres into
the heart of the desert. This area,
studied by an expedition working along
the Chermen-Yab canal, has retained
all the engineering features of medie¬
val irrigation. This differed from the
ancient systems in its more economical
use of the land within the basin, lar¬
ger side branches, and the introduc¬
tion of complex branch layouts
and water-hoisting wheels. All this
was connected with the efforts of
farmers to reduce silting up in the
canals, and thus lessen the work of
cleaning them.
While the overall territory occupied
by irrigation installations was reduced,
the area irrigated actually grew, since
new lands were irrigated within the
existing basins.
Basically, this phenomenon, seem¬
ingly paradoxical at first glance,
reflects the general trend of progress
in irrigation that can be traced from
ancient times right up to our day. The
coefficient of land use has grown from
5-10 per cent in ancient times, to 30-40
per cent in the Middle Ages, and to
50-70 per cent in modern irrigation
engineering systems.
HE flowering of the
Khorezm oasis was cut short in 1220
by the Mongolian invasion. Genghis
Khan's advance detachments appeared
at a time when the rulers of Khorezm
were still at the zenith of their glory.
The Mongolian invasion was disas¬
trous for the farming oases of Central
Asia. At the lower reaches of the
Amu Darya not only was right-bank
Khorezm depopulated, but so were
the vast lands on the left bank, where
the once densely populated oasis
(30,000 inhabitants) along the Cher¬
men-Yab canal was turned forever into
desert.
The dam at Urgench was destroyed
and the dykes fell into disrepair. The
river waters, whose level was higher
than that of the oasis land, destroyed
the dykes and flooded the fields and
villages for a time.
In the 13th and 14th centuries, a

ir
». " ''a.
large part of Khorezm was incorporat¬
ed into the Golden Horde. During this
period, cities and villages were reviv¬
ed and the area of land under irriga¬
tion grew.
But the destruction that accompan¬
ied Timur's invasion in 1379 caused the
waters of the Amu Darya to break
through to the west again, through the
Daryalyk river bed to the Sarykamish
depression, filling it to a level that
allowed it to drain along the dry Uzboi
river bed into the Caspian. Urgench
perished and, as archaeological find¬
ings have shown, only one area of
habitation survived, in difficult condi¬
tions, up to the 17th century.
Stormy political events, strife and
wars between feudal lords, and popu¬
lation migrations all militated against
settled irrigation farming. The out¬
skirts of the oasis, where there was a
frequent population turnover, suffered
the most.
Such scant but revealing facts from
the history of irrigation in the lower
Amu Darya region illustrate the close
connexion between political and social
events and the fate, for better or
worse, of the irrigated lands.
Today, the traces of ancient irrigation
that stand as memorials to the labour
of many generations of farmers are
helping the peoples of Central Asia to
tame the desert. In the Kara-Kalpak
Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic,
for instance, water flows once again in
the newly reconstructed Afrigidian
Kyrk-Kyz canal, which had been aban¬
doned back in the 8th century.
N 1952 the Khorezm ex¬
pedition began to systematically map
the ancient irrigation systems. The
maps have since been profitably used
in planning the contours of new
irrigation tracts on the left bank of the
Amu Darya.
As long ago as 1962, it was propos¬
ed to revive the vast formerly irrigated
lands at the lower reaches of the Syr
Darya and Amu Darya, by creating a
huge rice-growing region covering up
to two million hectares to the east
of the Aral Sea. It is now planned to
divert the waters of Siberian rivers
towards Central Asia. Here again, ar¬
chaeologists have begun to draw up
maps of the ancient irrigation areas.
Irrigation specialists and archaeolo¬
gists of the Uzbek SSR are doing
similar work in Bukhara where the
second section of the Amu-Bukhara
canal is under construction. Over
50,000 hectares of land will be devel¬
oped for cotton growing here in the
near future.
Photo © Tue Pham - Flap, Bucharest, Romania
Malayan farmers carry shrubs
that will be planted to stabilize
and check the spread of coastal
sand dunes.
Knowledge of the history of the irri¬
gated lands and in particular detailed
drawings of the ancient water supply
systems, based on aerial photographs,
will be dependable guides for this
development project.
Thus, the experience of bygone peo¬
ples is being put at the service of
modern economic development. And, as
never before, science is co-ordinating
the search for solutions to complex
theoretical problems with the urgent
tasks of economic progress. The
study of farming methods used by
those who lived in lands where irriga¬
tion was used is a concrete example of
this co-ordination.
Ten years from now, the traveller to
these lands will be greeted by verdant
gardens and orchards, hillsides white
with cotton and new villages spread
out over what was only recently a
wasteland. <
Boris V. Andrianov
35
