BURIED TREASURE
BENEATH
THE SPANISH MAIN
by Mendel L. Peterson
I HE early shipwreck sites
in North America are to be found along
the great Spanish treasure route which
ran from Spain to the Caribbean and
returned to Europe by way of the
Florida Straits.
During the later voyages of Colum¬
bus, the Spanish realized that the sea
and air currents of the North Atlantic
flowed in a clockwise direction. Utiliz¬
ing these currents, ships leaving
Spain for America would sail down the
west coast of Africa to the Cape Verde
Islands. Here they caught the trade
winds which blow steadily westward.
After a voyage of two weeks or so, they
would make a landfall north of Trini¬
dad and enter the Caribbean Basin.
At the height of Spanish power in
the New World, the fleet was organized
in two major convoys: the fleet of
galleons, which served the port of
Cartagena and, indirectly Porto Bello
and South America, and the Flota
which served the port of Vera Cruz and
the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico).
As the combined fleet entered the
Caribbean, the galleons would leave
the company of the Flota and proceed
to Cartagena. Here they would stay
while the merchant ships and small
escort vessels proceeded to Porto
Bello, and its fair.
At Porto Bello, merchants from Peru
MENDEL L. PETERSON historian and spe-
cialist on maritime questions, has explored
many historic underwater sites in the Florida
Straits, West Indies and Bermuda since 1952,
as part of a research programme on naval
history. He was formerly Curator of the
Department of History at the United States
National, Museum, in the Smithsonian Institu¬
tion, In Washington D.C. Dr Peterson has
written numerous articles on naval history
and on the study of coins and medals. This
article Is a condensation of the chapter
"Wreck Sites in the Americas", from Unes¬
co's new book "Underwater Archaeology".
and New Grenada exchanged gold,
silver, emeralds, hides, dyestuffs and
other natural products of the New
World against the manufactured goods
of Europe brought over by Spanish
merchants.
When the fair, which lasted a month
or so, was over, the merchants re¬
turned to the galleons at Cartagena,
the products of the New World were
loaded, and the ships prepared for the
journey home.
Meanwhile the Flota went on to Vera
Cruz where a similar fair took place.
Here, as in Panama, the goods of the
mother country and Europe were ex¬
changed for the wealth of America and
for such precious products of the Far
East as silk and porcelain.
After the fair at Vera Cruz, the Flota
loaded and set sail up the coast of
what is now Texas but was then called
Florida, into the Gulf of Mexico and
down the west coast of Florida past the
dry Tortugas into the port of Havana.
This course was necessary to avoid
head winds.
The galleons from Cartagena and
their convoy rejoined the Flota here.
When ready, the combined fleets sailed
up the Florida Straits, speeded along
on the three-knot Florida current until
they cleared the northern Bahamas.
Here they steered north-east and came
close to Bermuda. Taking a last fix
on those islands they set course for
the Azores and Spain, helped on by
the prevailing westerly winds.
With the beginning of English ex¬
ploration and colonization in North
America a new route came into use.
The English chose to face the head¬
winds of the central Atlantic rather
than sail the long route to the Carib¬
bean and up the Straits of Florida
through waters patrolled by hostile
Spanish ships.
This route led directly from the coast
of Portugal to North America by way
of Bermuda. The English, of course,
used the same westerly winds as the
Spaniards in returning to Europe. As
trade developed between the expand¬
ing English colonies in North America
and the mother country, shipping in¬
creased along this northern route, and
so did the number of shipwrecks.
Finally, with the establishment of
French, English, Dutch and Danish
colonies in the Caribbean Basin, more
shipping was added to the stream and
shipwrecks from many nations began
to pile up in the Florida Straits and
Bermuda.
After the United States had become
independent, the already vigorous sea
trade redoubled, with a vast increase
in shipping along the Atlantic, Pacific
and Gulf coasts of the new republic.
These four-and-a-half centuries pro¬
duced innumerable shipwrecks along
the coasts of North America, and the
Bahamas and Bermuda.
The earliest major Spanish fleet
disaster occured on the Texas coast
near what is now called Padre Island.
In 1553 most, if not all, the New Spain
fleet bearing the silver and natural
products of the Viceroyalty was smash¬
ed by a violent hurricane. Only one
or two survivors returned to Mexico
to tell of the disaster.
East of the Florida Straits lie the
hundreds of islands comprising the
Bahamas archipelago. The Spaniards
did not establish posts in these islands,
which became the lair of freebooters
and privateers who preyed on the
Spanish ships sailing up the Florida
Straits.
In the spring of 1966 three American Vj
spear fishermen discovered an ancient
wreck site on the western side of
Highborn Key island, in the Exuma
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

BENEATH THE SPANISH MAIN (Continued)
The Caribbean: graveyard of countless galleons
24
chain. The site was marked by sand-
encrusted cannon, anchors and iron
fittings from the hull and rigging of the
ship, so well camouflaged that they
looked like a natural reef.
Lead cannon shot with iron cores
were found, and small iron fittings. The
cannon were not disturbed until a full-
scale expedition could be sent. The
next winter and spring the site was
explored, with the help of a grant from
the National Geographic Society, by
the discoverers (Tucker and Canton of
Bermuda) and the author. All metallic
remains of the ship's battery and fit¬
tings were salvaged, and Tucker made
accurate drawings of the guns, fittings,
and traces of ship timbers found under
the ballast.
The sharp lines of the timbers and
the armament, consisting of two bow-
chasers and 13 swivel guns, indicate
that this was probably a pirate ship
or privateer of about 200 tons that
took refuge at Highborn Key after
being damaged by storm or enemy
action, and finally sank while riding
at anchor. The wrought iron, breech-
loading guns, firing lead ball, date the
site at 1560-1580. Historically the site
is important for the survival of a com¬
plete battery of guns and ship's fittings
from this early period.
1 HE other side of the straits
the coast of Florida is even richer
in sites than the Bahamas. This
"western flank of the gateway from the
Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico was
a lee shore when the violent tropical
storms blew up from the south-west
and, as early as the 1570s, numerous
wrecks had already been noted.
On at least three occasions, major
fleet disasters occured on the reefs
and beaches of Florida. In 1662, sev¬
eral ships of a Spanish fleet were
wrecked there and, in 1715 and 1733,
entire fleets were lost.
In 1950, the pioneer Florida under¬
water explorer Arthur McKee, Jr., be¬
gan to investigate a large site some
three miles off Plantation Key in 10 m.
of water. Subsequent investigations,
and checking with an eighteenth
century chart, suggested that the wreck
was that of the capitana (flag-ship) of
the Spanish fleet of 1733, which had
sailed from Havana on Friday, July 13
and was struck by a violent tropical
storm the following Sunday. Eight
ships were driven on to the reefs.
The spot was marked by the ship's
ballast, a high pile of basalt and granite
cobbles. On the ballast lay several,
guns, encrusted in coral and sand.
There were also numerous fragments
of Spanish redware jars.
During a six week investigation of
the site, over two seasons, a significant
collection of artifacts was recovered,
including fragments of Spanish cer¬
amics and Chinese porcelain from the
Manila galleon trade, tools, weapons
and cannon and fittings from the ship's
hull and rigging. Personal effects
found included pewter bowls, silver
forks, religious medals, silver stat¬
uettes and fine Spanish Majolica ware
fragments.
After the salvage, McKee recovered
some silver pieces of four and eight
reals of the crude earlier coinage now
being shipped out for the last time,
and a few of the very rare new milled
pieces of eight, first struck in the New
World at the Mexico City mint in 1732.
Some timber remains were observed
under the ballast, but systematic
excavation was not possible and no
drawings were made of the wooden
fragments on the site.
Several years later, some hundred
miles further north, another underwater
explorer, Kip Wagner, following clues
of coins washed up on the beach and
a notation on a chart in Bernard
Roman's Natural History of Florida
published In the 1770s, discovered the
site of the capitana of the 1715 fleet
like that of 1733, was destroyed
in a violent tropical storm.
Wagner and his associates recover¬
ed the usual ships fittings, ceramic
fragments, anchors, cannon, objects of
personal use and small arms and a
vast treasure of silver and gold which
included gold coins of hitherto un¬
known Mexico City mint issues; these
were of the greatest interest to numis¬
matists studying the early coinages of
Spanish America.
The most spectacular piece of jewel¬
lery was a magnificent gold chain from
which hung a golden dragon, with ruby
eyes, containing a gentleman's groom¬
ing accessories ear-spoon, toothpick,
and beard-plucker. Other jewellery
included pendants and crucifixes.
Among the more important dis¬
coveries on the site were unbroken
Chinese porcelain curs and bowls of
the late 17th century K'ang Hsi period
(the first ever recovered from an Amer¬
ican site); they had been preserved
by some miracle when the ship broke
up in the surf.
A letter written by the admiral of
the fleet (who supervised the salvage
of some of the other ships) describes
the capitana as breaking up in the
heavy waves just offshore where the
water was so turbulent that divers
could not reach the main treasure of
the vessel.
Magnetometer surveys during the
latter phases of the exploration prove
that the ship was scattered over a wide
area, and yet these fragile porcelain
vessels survived to supplement our
knowledge of the Manila galleon trade
through which fine goods from the
Far East were brought into the Spanish
treasure route to Europe. No large
portions of the ship's hull were found.
B ERMUDA, to the north¬
east, was the last important American
signpost on the road home. Here
Spanish pilots tried to get an accurate
picture of their position before setting
out across the trackless waters which
lay between them and safety in Seville.
Sailing too close to the island, ships
frequently ran aground on the sharp
coral reefs which extend into the sea
for distances of up to 20 km. Bermuda
thus became a graveyard of ships but
a rich mine for the underwater
archaeologist.
The first and richest find so far was
the site discovered by the underwater
explorer Tucker in 1950, from which
ship's guns and a few artifacts were
raised. Five years later, Tucker and
Canton returned and, within ten days,
they had recovered the most important
deposit of sixteenth-century material to
come from any site.
This marked the beginnings of under¬
water exploration in Bermuda. The site
yielded tools, heavy and light weapons,
navigators' instruments, including mer¬
cury hour-glasses of very sophisticat¬
ed workmanship, a magnificent Dutch
bronze mortar and a pewter clyster sy¬
ringe, perhaps the oldest known. Fit¬
tings from the ship's hull, which was
smashed to bits in the disaster, add to
our knowledge of contemporary ship
construction.
A surprising discovery was the
beautifully carved staff of office of an
Indian chief, and black palmwood bows
and arrows, souvenirs no doubt. Fine
pewter, bearing French touch marks,
and fine ceramics, including a Majolica
ink-well in the form of a lion mask,
belonged to officers or passengers.
The treasure itself consisted of a
gold bar, two gold ingots, two parts
of gold bars and another smaller gold
ingot, pearl-studded buttons, numerous
silver coins of the reign of Philip II,
CONTINUED PAGE 26

Photo © Roger Vlollet, Paris
Perilous
homeward
voyage
Apart from storm and hurricane, hidden coral reefs and other natural hazards, the Spanish
treasure fleets returning from the New World faced attack by pirate ships and enemy squad¬
rons on the long voyage back to Spain. Above, contemporary engraving of a Spanish
treasure fleet trapped by the Dutch squadron of Admiral ,Pieter Pietersen Heyn off Cuba
in 1628. Below right, divers recover a gold Aztec mask from the wreck of Heyn's own
ship the "Van Lynden" which sank off the Bahamas in 1628. Below left, a magnificent
Aztec gold pectoral recovered from the same wreck. The total value of this cargo has been
estimated at around £750,000.

BENEATH THE SPANISH MAIN (Continued)
26
and the most magnificent object taken
from the ocean in modern times: an
emerald pectoral cross, a breath-taking
masterpiece. The emeralds are of the
finest quality, seven of them represent¬
ing the seven last words of Christ on
the cross. A small chamber in the
back of the cross once held a relic,
organic in nature judging by the stains
on the gold.
No remains of the hull were found
large enough to be measured and
studied. The ship, not yet identified,
may be the San Pedro.
Eight years after his first discovery,
Tucker made another on the south¬
western reefs of the island: the San
Antonio, which sank in September
1621. The brief records in the Bermuda
archives indicate that the ship had
sunk by the bow, and that the crew
and passengers had got ashore safely;
the Bermudans had salvaged the cargo
and recovered the guns, the Spaniards
finally getting back to Spain, without
their cargo and personal possessions.
From the cargo, traces of leaf
tobacco, thin sheets of tanned and
dyed leather, indigo dye, traces of
cochineal, tortoise shell and lignum
vitae (an American hardwood) were
found. Jewellery recovered included
gold earrings set with crystal and
seed pearls, a beryl ring, a gold
nugget, gold buttons and a perfect one-
carat emerald set in a plain gold ring.
Another ring was set with three stones
garnet, crystal and emerald. There
was a gold medal of the Virgin Mary
and the Virgin of Guadeloupe. Hun¬
dreds of single tiny gold links for a
chain were found, unsoldered, scatter¬
ed about the timbers of the ship.
It is believed that this chain was
used as a form of currency, the links
of a measured weight and purity being
left unsoldered for easy separation.
Another form of money was found:
cowry shells, in thousands. These
little shells, were being brought to
Spain for use in the slave trade with
West Africa, where the cowry was
much sought and highly valued.
Pieces of eight, struck at the Potosi
mint in Upper Peru and bearing the
titles of Philip II and Philip III, furnished
a first dating index. The circumstances
of the actual sinking could be deduced
from the position of the ballast. Tim¬
ber remains led to the Identification of
the vessel. This site has furnished
important details of the armament and
fittings of a Spanish ship of the period,
her cargo, and life aboard during the
voyage to Spain.
As the English began to establish
settlements, Bermuda became a station
on the direct route to North America
from Europe. The island was settled
by Europeans accidentally when the
Sea Venture was wrecked there in
1609 on a voyage from England to
Virginia.
Three other early English shipwrecks
two within a year of each other
have been discovered and explored.
The Eagle, bound for Virginia with
settlers and supplies, crashed on the
coral heads to the north-east of the
islands in 1659 and went down in a
deep ravine among jagged coral out-
croppings. The Eagle was compara¬
tively small.
Much larger was the Virginia Mer¬
chant and much more tragic her loss.
With almost 200 aboard, she was
caught by a severe storm even before
clearing Bermuda, dashed on the rocky
coast and, striking an off-lying coral
head, was broken to bits and scattered
along the rocks. Only twelve people
survived. Some of the guns, ordnance
stores, ship fittings and personal be¬
longings of the crew and passengers
have been found.
The most recently discovered early
English shipwreck is that of the War¬
wick, sunk in Castle Harbour by a
severe northern gale in November
1619. The ship was partially salvaged
at the time, but her location was for¬
gotten. In the summer of 1967, an
expedition found the site in deep mud.
Many other wrecks exist to the north
of the Straits of Florida, including that
of the American civil war blockade-
runner Modern Greece which was sunk
off the coast of North Carolina. It has
been estimated that off the coast of
New Jersey alone some 5,000 wrecks
of all types remain.

!
* a2
'Mef
5f
fc: Ä1-
É
. iah» ^r
lv7 *jT*9h
*S ^4&S?S
* ^BP" ^%r*L
*v ". v
V
r5 ;ib "fe v JLJ^HV.
ft 1
.**
X J.^A¿&
The enigma
of the
Bahamas
The discovery In 1969 of a series
of huge stone blocks resembling a
"wall" or "pavement" In the sea off
the Island of North Bimini, in the
Bahamas, has puzzled specialists and
sparked off an international contro¬
versy as to their origin. (Above,
stereoscopic mosaic of the blocks,
first located by the underwater explo¬
rer and photographer Dlmitrl Rebi-
koff). Some believe these stones to
be man-made structures; others iden¬
tify them as a natural limestone for¬
mation lying on a larger stratum of
rock. Dimitri Rebikoff has since
discovered another "wall", similar and
parallel to the first and linked, as
are the first blocks, to an alignment
of stone some 600 metres long.
Carbon 14 tests on nearby submerg¬
ed peat layers give a date of about
5000 B.C. This has led to speculation
that the "wall" is part of a man-
made prehistoric site. Man-made or
natural formation, the stones of the
Bahamas remain an enigma. Left,
aqualung divers following the line of
blocks give an idea of their size
(some are five metres square and
from 30 to 60 cm. thick).
27
