'LETTER TO A TEACHER'
We publish below extracts from an unusual document voicing the
protest of a group of young children against the school system.
Throughout the world the school is under attack, along with the
curriculum, teaching methods and the inequality of opportunities
open to children from different social backgrounds. This protest was
originally written by a group of boys from Barbiana, a tiny hamlet in
Tuscany, Italy. All the boys were pupils in a school founded by a young
priest, Don Lorenzo Milani, for children who were drop-outs from
the State-run schools. Published in 1967 in Italian as "Letters a una
Professoressa" (Librería Editrice Fiorentina, Florence) the book im¬
mediately became a cause célèbre and has been published in many
languages including English ("Letter to a Teacher", Random House,
New York; Penguin Books, London, 1970). Italian and other educators
12 (*) Refugees, victims ' of war and political
upheavals, are another disadvantaged group.
They often suffer abrupt deprivation of rights
and facilities, including education. In the
countries where they seek asylumEditor.
Father Lorenzo Milani, who founded the Barbiana school
In the Tuscan hills about 30 miles from Florence, with four of
his pupils. When the school started in 1954 it had 10 pupils
aged from 11 to 13, but later the number of pupils doubled and
included boys up to 18 years old.

and sociologists, it is true, had previously voiced concern over the
plight of culturally disadvantaged children, especially in the rural
areas in Italy and other countries. One of the most common criticisms
was that the school was élite-orientated rather than trying to give
youngsters real preparation for life. Since the creation of the Bar¬
biana school in 1954, many changes have taken place in Italy. Accor¬
ding to Unesco statistics, 9 pupils out of 10 complete primary school
(see page 21) and 8 students out of 10 who enter the "second cycle"
of secondary education finish the course. The number of university
graduates has risen sharply, and where parents' income is below a set
level, the State now even pays certain college students a "pre-salary"
to study. "Letter to a Teacher" is written in the style of an impassion¬
ed manifesto yet it nevertheless retains its full value as an important
human document on a problem of universal import today, which is
the subject of this entire issue. Don Milani's correspondence,
just published in Italian under the title "Lettere" (Mondadori,
Milan, 325 pages) completes and complements "Letter to a Teacher."
Text © copyright
Reproduction prohibited
© Random House Inc., 1970.
Translated by Nora Rossi and Tom Cole.
I OU won't remember me or
my name. You have failed so many of
us.
On the other hand I have often had
thoughts about you, and the other
teachers, and about that institution
which you call "school" and about
the boys that you fail.
You fail us right out into the fields
and factories and there you forget us.
Compulsory school. After the five ele¬
mentary years I had the right to three
more years of schooling. In fact, the
Constitution says that I had the obliga¬
tion to go. But there was not yet an
intermediate school in Vicchio (The
intermediate school media inferiore
covers the ages twelve to 14)*.
To go to Borgo was an undertaking.
The few who had tried It had spent a
pile of money and then were thrown
out as failures like dogs.
In any case, the teacher had told my
family that it was better not to waste
money on me: "Send him into the
fields. He Is not made for books."
My father did ' not reply. He was
thinking, "If we lived In Barbiana, he
would be made for books."
Barbiana. In Barbiana the boys
were going to school. The priest's
school. From early morning until dark,
summer and winter. Nobody there was
"not made for school".
Barbiana, when I arrived, did not
seem like a school. No teacher, no
* Today each commune (district) Is obliged
to have at least one intermediate (lower
general secondary) school, and In fact even
villages with 1,000 inhabitants now have one.
desk, no blackboard, no beaches.
Just big tables, around which we
studied and also ate.
There was just one copy of each
book. The boys would pile up around
it. It was hard' to notice that one of
them was a bit older and was teach¬
ing.
The oldest of these teachers was
sixteen. The youngest was twelve, and
filled me with admiration. I made up
my mind from the start that I, too,
was going to teach.
The favourite. Life was hard up there
too. Discipline and squabbles until
you didn't feel like coming back.
But there a boy who had no back¬
ground, who was slow or lazy, was
made to feel like the favourite. He
would be treated the way you
teachers treat the best student In the
clacs. It seemed as if the school was
meant just for him. Until he could
be made to understand, the others
would not continue.
The rules of good writing. After three
years of schooling at Barbiana I took,
in June, my exams for the intermediate
diploma as a private-school candidate.
The composition topic was: "The Rail¬
way Waggons Speak".
At Barbiana I had learned that the
rules of good writing are: Have some¬
thing important to say, something use¬
ful to everyone or at least to many.
Know for whom you are writing.
Gather all useful materials. Find a
logical pattern with which to develop
the theme. Eliminate every useless
word. Eliminate every word not used
in the spoken language. Never set
time limits.
That is the way my schoolmates and
I are writing this letter. That is the
way my pupils will write, I hope, when
I am a teacher.
The knife in your hands. But, facing
that composition topic, what use could
I make of the humble and sound rules
of the art of writing in all ages?. If I
wanted to be honest I should have
left the page blank. Or else criticized
the theme and whoever had thought
¡t up.
But I was fourteen years old and I
came from the mountains. To go to a
teachers' school I needed the diploma.
This piece of paper lay in the hands
of five or six persons alien to my life
and to everything I loved and knew.
Careless people who held the handle
of the knife completely in their own
grasp. So I tried to write the way you
want us to.
The trap-complex. The French exam
was a concentrate of irregularities.
Examinations should be abolished.
But if you do give them, at least be
fair. Difficulties should be chosen in
proportion to their appearance in life.
If you choose them too frequently, it
means you have a trap-complex. As if
you were at war with the boys.
What makes you do it? Is it for the
good of the students?
Owls, pebbles and fans. No, not for
their good. You gave an A in French
to a boy who, in France, would not
know how to ask the whereabouts of
the toilet. - -..
He could only have asked for owls, *~n
pebbles and fans (in French hiboux, I A
cailloux and éventails, all words with
an irregular plural form), either in the
singular or the plural. All in all, he
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

Using makeshift equipment, the pupils at Barbiana worked eight hours a day, six or seven days
a week, the "stronger" pupils helping the "weaker" ones, under the supervision of Father Milani
(seen at extreme left of photo above left). In fine weather classes were held in the open air.
Instruction at Barbiana went up to the end of the lower secondary cycle of education and all
these so-called "duffers" did well in their studies.
14
LETTER TO A TEACHER (Continued)
knew perhaps two hundred words pick¬
ed carefully for being exceptions, not
for being commonly used.
The result was that he hated French
the way some people hate maths.
The children they lose. Schools have
a single problem. The children they
lose.
The only incompetents In the matter
of school are you who lose so many
and don't go back to find them.
Not we: we find them in the fields and
factories and we know them at close
range.
Gianni's mother, who doesn't know
how to read, can see what the prob¬
lems of the school are. And so will
anybody who knows the pain endured
by a child when he fails, and who has
enough patience to look through statis¬
tics. Then these figures will begin to
scream in your face. Every blow is a
creature going off to work before
being equal.
Let's try to follow one class of
children throughout their eight years
of compulsory schooling.
First year. Let us drop in on a first-
year class on the first day of school, in
October. Thirty-two students are there.
At a glance they all seem alike. In real¬
ity there are five amongst them who
will sit their exams again and again.
Seven years old, aprons and rib¬
bons, yet already stamped "retarded",
which will cost them dearly later on in
the Intermediate school.
Shooting into a bush. Three children
are missing even before the school
term begins. The teacher doesn't
know them, but they have been in
school earlier. They tasted their first
failure and they have not come back.
We do not Include In our count
those children who never started
school.
In June the teacher fails six children.
To fail someone is like shooting into
a bush. Perhaps you get a boy,
perhaps a hare. We'll find out in time.
Second year. In the following October
the teacher of the seven to eight year
olds again finds thirty-two children in
her classroom. She sees twenty-six
familiar faces and feels at home again
among her own, whom she has come
to love.
A bit later she spots the six new
students. Five are repeating the year.
One of these has already repeated it
twice; he is almost nine years old.
The sixth new face Is Pierino, the
doctor's son.
Pierino. The doctor's chromosomes
are powerful. Pierino could write
when he was only five. He has no
need for a first year. He enters the
second at age six. And he can speak
like a printed book.
Only a fraction of equality. At the end
of the five elementary years, eleven
children have already disappeared
from the school, and it is their
teacher's fault.
"Schools are open to all. All citizens
have a right to eight years of school.
All citizens are equal." But what about
those eleven ? Those eleven boys
who went to work during the five ele¬
mentary years ranged In age from
seven to fourteen*.
They were mostly peasants or, in
any case, children living in isolated
communities where even the smallest
can be given something to do.
First intermediate year. In the first
intermediate year there are twenty-two
children. For the teacher they are all
new faces. She knows nothing of the
* Schooling In Italy Is free and compulsory up
to the age of 14, and check-ups on school
attendance have become increasingly strict.
eleven who were lost. She is truly
convinced that no, one is missing.
At times she allows herself to grum¬
ble: "Now that everybody comes to
school it's impossible to teach. We get
quite Illiterate students."
The oldest and the poorest. She would
also have to study the ages of the
students on her class list. Every one
of these children ought to carry a big
placard: "I am 13. Do not fail me."
And the instructors look at the marks
in their register books, not at the
birth dates.
Some of them may act in good faith.
Some may even want to save the older
students. Then, facing a pupil's paper
full of mistakes, they forget all their
good intentions.
The facts show that the oldest are
always the ones who fail. Those who
have a job within easy reach.
By failing the oldest of the children
the teachers manage at the same time
to hit the poorest.
Second intermediate year. By the sec¬
ond year of the intermediate school,
the average age of the students is
lower, since the oldest are missing.
The distance between Pierino and the
others grows less.
It can be said that the classes grow
older all through the elementary years
because of the boys who are repeating
years. Then in the intermediate school
they become younger again because
the oldest have dropped out to go to
work.
Who is she talking about? Whether
it's a matter of the age or the social
status of the students, the teacher
starts breathing freely when they
reach the second intermediate year.
She looks forward to June. Then
she will get rid of her last four thorns
and will finally have a group worthy
of her.

Photos Barbiana school
"When they came Into the first inter¬
mediate class, they were truly
illiterate. But now, ah, their papers
are all correct."
Who is she talking about? Where
are the boys she received in the first
form? The only ones left are those
who could write correctly to begin
with; they could probably write just as
well in the third elementary year. The
ones who learned to write at home.
The illiterate she had in the first year
are just as illiterate now. She has
simply dumped them out of sight.
Compulsory. And she knows it well.
So well that in the third intermediate
year she fails only a few. Seven fail¬
ures in first, four in second and only
one in the third. Just the opposite of
what she ought to do.
In the compulsory school system, the
compulsoriness ought to carry all the
students through to the third inter¬
mediate year. Then at a final examina¬
tion the teacher could release her
selective instincts.
We wouldn't say a word about that.
If a boy has not learned to write by
then she would do well to fail him.
Summary. In eight compulsory years
of schooling, this class has lost forty
children. Sixteen went to work before
they had completed their compulsory
years of school. Twenty-four are
repeaters. Altogether, fifty-six children
have. passed through this class. By the
third year of the. intermediate school
we find only eleven out of the thirty-
two original students entrusted to the
teacher of the first elementary class.
Born different? You tell us that you
fail only the stupid and the lazy.
Children born to others do appear
stupid at times. Never our own. When
we live close to them we realize that
they are not stupid. Nor are they lazy.
Or, at least, we feel that it might be
a question of time, that they may snap
out of it, that we must find a remedy.
Then, it is more honest to say that
all children are born equal; if, later,
they are not equal, it is our fault and
we have to find the remedy.
Who profits? Let's try to see who
profits from schools kept to a minimum
number of hours.
Seven hundred and twenty hours
per year means about two hours of
school per day averaged out over
the year. But a boy stays awake
another fourteen hours. In well-to-do
families these are fourteen hours of
cultural improvement.
But to the peasants they are fourteen
hours of loneliness and silence, good
only for deepening their shyness. To
the sons of workers they are fourteen
hours at the school of the hidden
persuaders. Advertising Is called
hidden persuasion when it convinces
the poor that unnecessary things are
necessary.
Summer holidays, In particular,
seem virtually designed for the benefit
of the rich. Their children go abroad
and learn even more than they do in
winter. But by the first day of school
the poor have forgotten even the little
they knew in June. If they have to take
any make-up exams they can't afford
a tutor to prepare for them.
Pierino's home. Perhaps the life
story of "Pierino" can give us a key.
So, let us try to take a loving look
at his family.
The doctor and his wife are up there
on top of things. They read, they
travel, they see friends, they play with
their child, they take time to keep
close track of him and they even do
It well. Their house is full of books
and culture. At five I had mastered
the shovel; Pierino, the pencil.
One evening,, as if the decision has
been brought about by the facts them¬
selves, they say half-jokingly. "Why
place him in the first grade? Let's put
him straight into the second." They
send him to take the tests without
giving it another thought. If he fails,
who cares?
But he does not fail. He gets all
9s. Serene joy fills the family, just
as it would have mine.
Pierino, then will become a pro¬
fessor. He will find a wife much like
himself. They will produce another
Pierino. More of a Pierino than ever.
Thirty thousand such stories every
year.
Selection reaches its goal. "Daddy's
boys" constitute 86.5 per cent of the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Scene at Father Milani's fune¬
ral in 1967. On his death the
Barbiana school closed down,
but a number of his ex-pupils
carried on their former teach¬
er's work, creating part-time
courses for secondary level
pupils and a special school
for Invalid children at Calen-
zano, near Florence, where
Father Milan! had started a
night school for working peo¬
ple before going to Barbiana.

LETTER TO A TEACHER (Continued)
16
university student body; labourers'
sons, 13.5 per cent. Of those who get
a degree, 91.9 per cent are young
gentlemen and 8.1 per cent are from
working-class families (Italian Statis¬
tical Yearbook 1963, tables 113-14) *.
For the good of the child. "After all,
it's for the child's own good. We
must not forget that these pupils
stand at the threshold of high school ",
pompously cried the headmaster of
a little country school.
It was immediately clear that only
three of the thirty children in the
class would go on to the upper years:
Maria, the daughter of the dry-goods
merchant; Anna, the teacher's
daughter; and Pierino, of course.
But even if more of the children went
on, what difference would it make?
That headmaster has forgotten to
change the record on his record
player. He hasn't yet noticed the
growth of the school population. A
living reality of 680,000 children in the
first year. Most of them poor. The
rich, a minority **.
It's not a question of a classless
school, as he calls it. His is a one-
class school, at the service of those
who have the money to push ahead.
In Africa, in Asia, in Latin America,
in southern Italy, in the hills, in the
fields, even in the cities, millions of
children are waiting to be made equal.
Shy, like me; stupid, like Sandro; lazy,
like Gianni. The best of humanity.
The real test. When I passed my
exams and left the intermediate school
I went to England. I was 15. At first
I worked with a farmer in Canterbury;
later on with a wine merchant in
London.
Cockney. In London they are worse
off than on the farms. We worked
below ground in the City unloading
trucks. My co-workers were English,
but they could not write a letter in
English. They often asked Dick to
write for them. Dick sometimes would
ask advice from me; I who had learned
my English from records. He, too,
speaks only Cockney like the rest of
them.
The reforms that we propose.
1. Do not fail students.
2. Give a full-time school to children
who seem stupid.
3. Give a purpose to the lazy.
The turner. A turner at his lathe Is
not allowed to deliver only those
pieces that happen to come out well.
Otherwise he wouldn't make the effort
to have them all turn out well.
But you, you can get rid of the
pieces that you don't like whenever
you wish to. So you are happy taking
care of those who are bound to be
successful for reasons that lie outside
the school.
Aptitudes. Every child has enough
"aptitude" to reach the third year of
the intermediate school and to get
by in all subjects.
It is so convenient to tell a boy,
"You are not cut out for this subject."
The boy will accept this; he is just
as lazy as his teacher. But he knows
that his teacher does not consider
him an Equal.
It is not good policy to tell another
child. "You are clearly cut out for this
subject." When he has too much
fondness for just one subject, he
should be forbidden to study it. Call
his case "specialized", or "un¬
balanced". There is so much time,
later on, to lock oneself up in a
specialized field.
By piecework. If all of you knew
that, by any means possible, you had
to move every child ahead in every
subject, you would sharpen up your
wits to find a way for all of them
to function well.
I'd have you paid by piecework.
So much for each child who learns
one subject. Or, even better, a fine
for each child who does not learn
a subject.
Then your eyes would always be on
Gianni. You would search out in his
inattentive stare the intelligence that
God has put in him, as in all children.
You would fight for the child who
needs you most, neglecting the gifted
one, as they do in any family. You
would wake up at night thinking about
him and would try to invent new ways
to teach him ways that would fit his
needs. You would go to fetch him
from home if he did not show up for
class.
You would never give yourself any
peace, for the school that lets the
Giannis drop out is not fit to be called
a school.
Agrarian culture. Glancing through the
pages of a school textbook we see
plants, animals, the seasons. It seems
that only a peasant could have
written it.
But no, the authors are products of
your school. It's enough just to
glance at the pictures: left-handed
farmers, round shovels, hooked hoes,
blacksmiths with tools used in Roman
times, cherry trees with the leaves of
plum trees.
Standing by a plum tree, my first-
year teacher told me one day, "Climb
that tree and pick some cherries for
me." When my mother heard this, she
said, "Whoever gave her a teaching
licence?"
You gave her a teaching licence but
you deny me one, when I know all my
/ trees, each by each.
All alone, like dogs. You know even
less about men than we do. The lift
* See also tables on pages 21, 22, 23 Editor.
** Today there is only one type of interme¬
diate (lower general secondary) school open
without distinction to all children Editor.
serves as a good machine for ignor-
. ing the people in your building; the car,
for ignoring people who travel in
buses; the telephone, for avoiding
seeing people's faces or entering their
homes.
I don't know about you, but your
students who know Cicero how many
families of living men do they know
intimately? How many of their kitch¬
ens have they visited? How many of
their sick have they sat with through
the night? How many of their dead
have they borne on their shoulders?
How many can they trust when they are
in distress?
Human culture. A thousand motors
roar under your windows every day.
You have no idea to whom they belong
or where they are going.
But I can read the sounds of my
valley for miles around. The sound
of the motor in the distance is Nevio
going to the station, a little late. If
you like, I can tell you everything
about hundreds of people, dozens of
families and their relatives and per¬
sonal ties.
Whenever you speak to a worker
you manage to get it all wrong: your
choice of words, your tone, your jokes.
I can tell what a mountaineer is think¬
ing even when he keeps silent, and I
know what's on his mind even when
he talks about something else.
This is the sort of culture your poets
should have given you. It is the cul¬
ture of nine-tenths of the earth, but
no one has yet managed to put it down
in words or pictures or films.
Be a bit humble, at least. Your cul¬
ture has gaps as wide as ours. Per¬
haps even wider. Certainly more
damaging to a teacher in the elemen¬
tary schools.
Philosophy. Any philosopher studied
out of a handbook becomes a bore.
There are too many philosophers and
they say too many things.
My philosophy teacher never took
a stand for or against any of them.
I could not work out whether he liked
them all or simply didn't care.
If I have to choose between two
teachers, one a nut on the subject and
the other totally indifferent, I'll take
the nut the one who has a theory of
his own, or prefers a particular phil¬
osopher. He is certain to talk only
about that philosopher and to attack all
the others, but he would make us read
the original writings of that philoso¬
pher during all of our three years of
school. We would come out knowing
that philosophy can fill an entire life.
Pedagogy. The way pedagogy is
taught today, I would skip it altogether
although I'm not quite sure. Perhaps
if we go deeper into it, we could de¬
cide whether or not it has something
to say.
We might discover that it says one
thing, and one thing only. That each
boy is different, each historical
moment is different, and so is every
CONTINUED PAGE 34

WHERE LESSONS ARE OPTIONAL
A school completely different from Barbiana in its approach to
teaching yet which like Barbiana is a clean break with traditional
methods is Summerhill School, north-east of London, founded
50 years ago by A.S. Nell!. Pupils are free to attend class or
not as they please. "A school that makes active children sit at
desks studying mostly useless subjects is a bad school" says
Neill. "It is a good school only... for those uncreative citizens
who want docile, uncreative children who will fit into a civili¬
zation whose standard of success is money." Summerhill has
pupils aged from 5 to 15, including youngsters who are unable to
adjust to traditional schooling. "There is a lot of learning in
Summerhill," says its director. "Perhaps a group of our 12-year-
olds could not compete with a class of equal age in handwriting,
or spelling or fractions, but in an examination requiring originality,
our lot would beat the others hollow." A.S. Neill (above with
some of his pupils) has written several books about his school,
the latest entitled "Summerhlll" (Penguin, London, 1971). Photos
on this page are by the English photographer John Walmsley
and are published in his pictorial study "Neill and Summerhlll:
A Man and his Work" (Penguin Education Special, 1968).
^*^
,5
vsw*:
17
"T*

LETTER TO A TEACHER' (Continued from page 16)
moment different for each boy, each
country, each environment, each
family.
Half a page from the textbook is all
that is needed to explain this; the rest
we can tear up and throw away.
History. There are several different
history surveys. I would like to get
the figures on those most in use.
In general they are not history at all.
They are narrow-minded, one-sided
little tales passed down to the peas¬
ants by the conqueror. The sufferings
and struggles of the workers are either
ignored or stuck into a corner.
In the best, most "modern" book,
Gandhi is disposed of in nine lines.
Civics. Civics is another subject that
I know something about, but it does
not come up In your schools.
Some teachers say, as an excuse,
that It Is taught by implication through
other subjects. If this were true, it
would be too good to believe. If that
really is such a great way to teach
something, then why don't they use it
for all subjects, building a sound
structure in which all the elements are
blended together and yet can be ex¬
tracted separately at any time?
Admit that in truth you have hardly
any knowledge of civics. You have
only a vague notion of what a mayor
really is. You have never had dinner
in the home of a worker. You don't
know the terms of the pending issue
on public transport. You only know
that the traffic jams are upsetting your
private life.
You have never studied these prob¬
lems, because they scare you. As
it also scares you to plunge into the
deeper meanings of geography. Your
textbook covers all the world but
never mentions hunger, monopolies,
political systems or racialism.
Tests in the classroom. While giving
a test you used to walk up and down
between the rows of desks and see
me in trouble and making mistakes,
but you never said a word.
I have the same situation at home.
No one to turn to for help for miles
around. No books. No telephone.
Now here I am in "school". I came
from far away to be taught. Here I
don't have to deal with my mother,
who promised to be quiet and then
interrupted me a hundred times. My
sister's little boy is not here to ask
me for help with his homework. Here
I have silence and good light and a
desk all to myself.
And over there, a few steps away,
you stand. You know all of these
things. You are paid to help me.
Instead, you waste your time keep¬
ing me under guard as if I were
a thief.

