by
Jorge Enrique Adoum
JORGE ENRIOUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian poet
and writer, was formerly National Director
for Culture at Ecuador's Ministry of
Education. He has also been Director of
the Publications Division of Ecuador's Insti¬
tute of Culture and Secretary of its Theatre
and Folklore Institute. He Is now assistant
editor of the Spanish edition of the 'Unesco
Courier'.

i>
BRADBURY, whose
science fiction predictions have often
proved uncannily accurate (one of his
characters was walking through a
park carrying a transistor many years
before that mini-radio was invented),
has given us the picture of a night¬
mare world in which a police state
passes sentence of death on books.
More recently, some sociologists,
humanists and technologists, interpret¬
ing certain statistics far removed from
the realm of science fiction and
literature, have also prophesied the
disappearance of books owing to the
large-scale development of modern
mass media.
There is nothing new in this ; every
age has been fearful of inventions and
technical innovations which might
endanger the survival of its existing
culture, without understanding that
such innovations were the products
of a continually evolving culture.
When the gramophone was invented,
it was said that the concert halls would
have to close; but the result was that
the works of great composers were
brought into the home and the gramo¬
phone thus helped to make music-
lovers of people who otherwise would
never have gone to a concert.
When the cinema became some¬
thing of a ritual meeting-place for
urban man, it was thought that this
would mean the end of the theatre;
but after nearly a century of this
"twentieth century art", the theatre has
developed along new lines, partly
by adopting cinematographic tech¬
niques which have also had an
influence on literature, as can be seen
in the novels of John Dos Passos.
Sound radio, after starting by
adapting literary works, created a new
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

BOOK, DEAR FRIEND (Continued from page 5)
Masterworks and fire-works
genre which the poet Dylan Thomas,
for Instance, used with great poetic
skill. Television was expected to harm
the cinema, but the relative decline
in film production is in no way com¬
mensurate with the extraordinary
increase in the number of television
sets throughout the world.
Tape recordings supplied the raw
material for the classic works of Oscar
Lewis on the culture of poverty, for
a Truman Capote novel and for some
sociological studies of the Cuban
writer Miguel Barnet. And it is not
too much to expect that with the
development of electronics poetry will
once again become the song which
it originally was by definition and
which printing and our civilization
transformed into a written text thus
obliging Mallarmé and other poets to
replace silences by large blank
spaces and the intonations of the
voice by different typographical
characters.
Fear for the future of books derives
from the fact that films, radio, tele¬
vision, comic strips and periodicals
take up most of one's leisure. But
there were always diversions of some
kind, differing according to class,
place and time sport, story-telling
round the fire, visits, card-playing,
games of chance, time spent at the
club.
On the other hand, mass media

Left, Japanese print by the 18th century artist Torii Kiyonobu II. At the top of this book-pedlar's
pack is a box containing a series of classic short stories and novels. Below, a scene from
Fahrenheit 451. a film directed by François Truffant and based on the book by Ray Bradbury.
Book and film call to mind the burning of such famous libraries as those of Padua, Ferrara,
Cordova, Amsterdam, Brussels and other more recent episodes in the long and sinister series
of book-burnings going back at least as far as 600 B.C., as these words from Maccabees I testify:
"They have destroyed the Book of the Law and have cast its leaves into the flames."
Photo © Films du Carosse. Pans
make books familiar to a wider public.
Consider how many novels whatever
their . quality have become world
bestsellers after the commercial
success of the film based on them.
Think of Kafka's The Trial, Emily
Bronte's Wuthering Heights, Paster¬
nak's Dr. Jivago, Norman Mailer's
The Naked and the Dead, and the
worldwide popularity of Shakespeare.
In France a television version of
Galsworthy's Forsyte Saga created a
demand for a paperback edition of
the work, and a series on surrealism
trebled the sales of works on that
movement. Many years ago, when
Orson Welles was still the enfant
terrible of Hollywood, his alarm¬
ingly imaginative radio adaptation
of The War of the Worlds pushed the
sales of works by his English near
namesake H. G. Wells up to the level
of daily newspaper circulation.
Despite gloomy predictions, there¬
fore, the fact remains that in 1970 alone
over half a million titles were publish¬
ed, most of them in Europe, the Soviet
Union and the United States pre¬
cisely where mass media, indicators
of economic and cultural development,
are most widely established. In Latin
America, however, barely 15,000 titles
were published in 1970, for a popu¬
lation of nearly 280 million.
Despite the aggravation of various
community problems and conflicts, our
age is no worse than previous ones.
In the last twenty years 800 million
persons have become literate, and for
them the book, once an inaccessible
object, is beginning to be the object of
veneration which it was originally In
any civilization.
The Jewish Torah, the Christian
Bible, the Moslem Koran, the Maya
Quiche Indian Popol Vuh, Book of
Chilam-Balam and Annals of the Cak-
chiqueles, were all unique objects for
handing down something sacred which
had to be conserved from generation
to generation.
Even today the book still has the
same function. The Egyptians who
strove tenaciously to protect their pap¬
yrus from damage by insect pests and
humidity were perhaps thinking of us,
just as the countries which generously
co-operated In the task of saving and
restoring documents damaged a few
years ago in the Florence floods were
thinking of the men of tomorrow.
A book was sacred both for its con¬
tent and as an object; a moral treatise
entitled "Table of Merits and De¬
merits" of the Yuan dynasty (1297-
1367) counts 5 minus points for throw¬
ing away a paper with writing on it
and 3 for reading a book with dirty
hands (causing the death of a human
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

8
BOOK, DEAR FRIEND (Continued)
being and offending the gods rated
1,000 minus points, and drinking to in¬
toxication, minus one).
Even without its religious content the
book is still a sacred object. The
older peasants of Paraguay still keep
their books in the corner of the room
alongside a statue of the Virgin.
Aldous Huxley has explained in "If My
Library Burned" the reasons why he
would repurchase the books which he
could not live without, and while each
of us would perhaps compile a differ¬
ent list, the attitude to the object
would still be the same.
Today, the burning or destruction of
books is the crime which, next to geno¬
cide perhaps, provokes the greatest
repugnance. But unfortunately, it was
only too common in the past. In the
year 213 B.C. the Emperor Ts'in Shi-
huaugti ordered the burning of all
wooden tablets the books of the time
to punish the writers who had criti¬
cized his policy or, according to
legend, so that people should speak
only of him and his two almost incred¬
ible deeds the destruction of books
and the construction of the Great Wall
of China. But some tablets were saved
and were surely the earliest clandes¬
tine literature, while the persons who
kept them were the first men to risk
their lives for a book.
The Medes destroyed the library of
Asurbanipal, the Christians the library
of Alexandria, King Edward the Sixth's
commissioners the famous Oxford Uni¬
versity library dating from the four¬
teenth century, the Reformation
brought the destruction of the monas¬
tic libraries, and the deplorable "autos
da fé" symbolized the Middle Ages
and the medieval mentality. "La Car¬
magnole" reminds us that the books of
Jean-Jacques Rousseau were burned,
and the Spanish colonial authorities
burned the "Declaration of the Rights
of Man and the Citizen".
But as it is impossible since the in¬
vention of printing to get rid of a book
completely, a more practical method
was to burn the authors. Luther ad¬
vised all town councillors to spare
neither effort nor expense in establish¬
ing good bookshops and libraries.
But Calvin had Michel Servet sent to
the stake. The Vatican libraries con¬
tained treasures of human knowledge,
but a Papal Council condemned Gior¬
dano Bruno and John Huss to the fire.
Today in many "underdeveloped-
countries which are carrying out litera¬
cy campaigns, the burning of books in
public has been replaced by small fires
in post offices and Customs houses
and by the confiscation of books in
private libraries. Excess of zeal on
the part of some officials ordered to
destroy all "red" literature they find
has led them in some cases to burn
Louis Baudln's Socialist Empire of the
Incas, Stephen Crane's Red Badge of
Courage and even Baroness Orczy's
Scarlet Pimpernel.
And Don Quixote's maidservant who
said that all the books in her master's
An engraving by Cornelis Woudhanus of the library of the famous
University of Leyden (Netherlands) in 1610. As in other librarías of
the day, books were chained to the shelves. At that time the Leyden
University library consisted of twenty-two bookcases of about 40
books each. The relative importance attached to the various disciplines
can be judged from the fact that there were six bookcases of
library should be burned, without ex¬
ception, since they were all to blame
for his lucid "madness", already fore¬
shadows the mother who blames books
in general for her son's revolt against
the consumer society which offers him
little indeed apart from the absolute
tyranny exerted by "things".
In essence, the publisher's function
is similar to that of the orchestra con¬
ductor or the theatrical producer: to
bring the individual creative work to
other people; but his range is even
greater than theirs. It may span the
oceans and the centuries. Horace
prided himself that his poems were
read from the coasts of the Black Sea
to the banks of the Rhone and the
Ebro; and today there are pocket edi¬
tions of the Vedas and the Uppanis-
hads which before the Second World
War were known in the West only
to somewhat esoteric societies in
England.
WiITH the advent of printing,
the .art of calligraphy, which has such
significance in Eastern cultures reli¬
gious significance in Persia, decorative
significance on a level with painting in
China where the name of the calligra-
phist is sometimes known when the
name of the author of the poem has
been forgotten was replaced by the
art of typography, and Gothic illumina¬
tion by woodcuts and etchings. Paint¬
ing and even architecture were drawn
into its field, bindings were decorated
with gold and silver and glass. Today
the "object-book" is beginning to be
turned into the "book-object", akin to
sculpture. The graphic arts have
reached full maturity and a special sec¬
tion of the New York Museum of
Modern Art is devoted to them.
Like all creations of the human spirit,
books were converted into merchan¬
dise almost from the outset. Egypt
carried on a trade in the Book of the
Dead (which had to accompany the
mummy on its journey to the shades);.
Xenophon refers in the Anabasis to
the book trade between Greece and its
colonies ; it is said that Alexander pre¬
sented Cleopatra with 200,000 manu¬
scripts from the library of Pergamum
and books were treasured by the
Romans as spoils of war. In the 16th
century, German pirate editions (pro¬
duced mainly at the expense of the
Danes) founded many a fortune.
Luxury collections have now estab¬
lished a category of privileged per¬
sons within an already privileged class.
The opulent customer asking for
"bound books" (not caring whether he
gets Testut's Anatomy or the memoirs
of some statesman) has his precursors
in the wealthy Romans who thought it
good tone to own a library, but who
were described by Seneca as being far
more ignorant than the slaves they
bought to copy the books.
Printing brought the written work to
a greater number of persons, but it
also meant that more people had an
opportunity to write books. Later this
grew Into an industry, involving the
calculation of costs, market prospects
and utility margins, and so it is pos¬
sible and indeed necessary for com-

theology, five of law, four of history, two each of philosophy,
literature and medicine, and one of mathematics and science. ' A
worldwide survey undertaken by Unesco (see page 12) shows that,
among books published today, literature holds first place, technology
and industry second place, and political science third, clear evidence
of the way our civilization has changed in the course of four centuries.
'Teachers and
companions who
never doze when
questioned...'
Erasmus
mercial interests to impose a work in
the same way as a brand of toothpaste.
The North American writer Saul Bel¬
low has said that it is possible to write
a good book on poverty in the United
States and become a millionaire to
say nothing of the publisher's profits.
Of course other books as harmful as
drugs or poison are also put on the
market (a book published in Germany
in 1925 caused the death of 40 million
people) and there are writers who have
far more talent for making money out
of seamy literature than for writing a
good book.
Certainly there have always been
good writers and bad writers. Sven
Dahl, in his History of the Book, rela¬
tes that it was customary for writers
to read their recent works to a group
of friends, as Herodotus did with his
historical works. But this practice de¬
generated Into a nuisance, as the
worst writers were also the most
anxious to seize any opportunity to
read their works.
The publishing industry, when back¬
ed by adequate publicity and prompt¬
ed solely by the desire to make money,
has contributed, together with the
other media, to a depreciation of lit¬
erature and has converted the dissem¬
ination of knowledge into a low-
grade popularization.
Being consumer oriented, it follows
the preferences of the "public". But
of course there is no single public,
merely readers who, as countless sur¬
veys show, choose a book because it
has been recommended by a critic or
a friend, because of the author's name,
or because of its title or its cover.
The diversity of public "taste" is
reflected in the world statistics of the
authors and works most translated in
1969: Lenin, Jules Verne, Shakespeare
and Simenon (the first victory of Mai¬
gret over James Bond).
The Assyrians made roads or floors
with clay tablets whose contents were
no longer of interest; nowadays the
housewife uses out-of-date or trashy
publications to wedge an unsteady
table or to light a fire. But when we
see, in the "Third World" countries, a
saleswoman reading a romance or a
liftboy with a Western, we feel they
have at least taken the first step and
that perhaps they may manage to take
the second from liking reading to
seeking good books.
I HE terms "daily", or
"weekly", which refer to the frequency
of publication, also indicate how long
the interest lasts; such publications
provide news and news changes even
before the ink on them has dried.
The medium is not the message, but
it determines its duration. A couple
carving the symbol of their love on a
tree (the Greek and Latin words
byblos and liber meaning "book",
something lasting, originally meant
tree-bark) are not only, like the writer,
obeying the impulse to communicate
something to other people, but also
sharing his secret longing that it should
last forever. On the other hand, the au¬
thor of "graffiti" on city walls knows
that the slogan will pass from mouth
to mouth and may endure, even though
the writing and symbols are effaced
within the day.
It is not the new media which threaten
the life of the book, but the use made
of them. Some modern European re¬
views are the equivalent of books of
essays. Stories in pictures were known
in Mexico before the arrival of the
Spaniards; in China they are used
for recounting the lives of heroes
and in Ecuador they have been used
for teaching national history.
If the danger lay in the media them¬
selves, planned societies would have
managed to limit their growth and
Influence. For there is no doubt that
while the cinema, radio, press and tele¬
vision are not Culture neither are
books they nevertheless are part of
culture.
It is not just by chance that the big¬
gest libraries in the world are in Wash¬
ington, London, Moscow and Paris.
Nor is it mere chance that in the thea¬
tres of the Soviet Union books are
sold where in Western theatres ices
and sweets are the rule; that it is prac¬
tically Impossible to find a passenger
in an English train who is not reading;
and that nearly all works' committees
¡n French industry run a library.
Unesco's intention in proclaiming
1972 International Book Year is not to
save the book's life: its objective is
clearly expressed in the theme of the
campaign: "Books for AN". For as
all the institutions taking part ¡n this
crusade realize, ¡t is not that the hab¬
it of reading is going to disappear but
that it has not yet become to many
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
9

10
BOOK, DEAR FRIEND (Continued)
peoples of the world a daily need that
must be satisfied.
That is due to illiteracy, to the lack
of funds for buying books, to the dis¬
like of reading instilled in many
schools which still retain a mania for
chronological teaching and force
youngsters to begin by reading the
Iliad, the Odyssey, the Divine Comedy
or the Aeneid. For if the definition of
a classic as "the mature work of a
mature age" holds for the author, it
also applies to the reader.
The cultural leaders of certain so¬
cieties aspire to the marvellous utopia
of making every factory or farm wor¬
ker an artist, a writer or a scholar;
at the opposite pole of historical dev¬
elopment the aim is that everyone
should read what others have written.
In Cuba, since 1959 and following a
nation-wide literacy campaign under
the slogan "We do not tell the people
to believe, but to read", the Nation¬
al Institute of the Book has produced
an average of 13i million copies of
books each year for a population of
8è million. Yet in my country, Ecua¬
dor, barefoot boys pay 20 cents to
read old dog-eared magazines in a
yard used as a "reading room".
Technological progress will bring
easier access to books and they will
take up less space, but they will still
be "writing", in the form of microfilms,
micro-size books or microfiches.
But what if the book were to disap¬
pear after five thousand years of his¬
tory, and ¡f the dreadful vision of
Bradbury's inhuman mechanized world
were to come true. This would hap¬
pen if we had ceased to deserve that
object to which we can always turn,
which transports us to other places
and other times and introduces us to
extraordinary beings whom we would
otherwise never have known, ideas
which we should never have discover¬
ed for ourselves; to the dictionary
whose pages we turn eagerly plung¬
ing into the intriguing labyrinth of lan¬
guage that "work of art" which we
would never lend to anyone, in whose
margins we do not dare to scribble
notes, that book which in our youth
cost us three weeks'walking to school
or for which we gave up two visits to
the cinema or even went without cig¬
arettes.
If that day comes, we shall surely
hear a voice on the public loud¬
speakers intoning "E = mc2". But
knowing the human spirit and its ten¬
acious striving for freedom and cul¬
ture, there will undoubtedly be under¬
ground radio stations which will con¬
tinue to proclaim from somewhere or
other, at least as an oral tradition, the
thoughts of the great writers of the
"past": "Life is a tale told by an
idiot, full 'of sound and fury, signifying
nothing", or "Happiness is the belat¬
ed realization of a prehistoric longing;
that is why wealth brings so little hap¬
piness: money is not a childhood
desire", or perhaps even more aptly:
"Until now we have lived only the pre¬
history of man." :

%
Birch bark
books
of ancient
Novgorod
SB
fi^&>
\,-L ^*$K
s4Pfe
*S «a.^fe^ Si.
m
K-
sa
H»r
-*.*
.- ^vi
"*&«*:
Medieval birch bark manuscripts unearthed in the Soviet Union
are one of the most important archaeological finds of recent years.
The first document came to light In 1951, at Novgorod, Russia's most
ancient city (100 miles south of Leningrad). Since then more than
500 other specimens, dating from the 11th to the 15th century, have
been recovered from archaeological sites. The first known book written
on birch bark (above) was found at Novgorod in 1963. A 13th cen¬
tury prayer book, it consists of three double leaves. In medieval
Russia, birch bark was the least costly writing material and was
still in use more than a century after the appearance of paper. The
high moisture content of Novgorod's soil preserved the bark on
which writing had been cut or scratched with a sharp instrument.
Ink would have been destroyed by the moisture. The birch bark
writings relate mostly to personal matters, and thus throw new light
on many aspects of medieval life not mentioned in official chronicles.
Top left, Soviet archaeologist examines one of the Novgorod bark
fragments. He has adopted the typical beard and hair-style of medi¬
eval Novgorod. Archaeologists have managed to decipher fragments
of the old Slavonic script on the birch bark document at top of page.
They read: "...for a while to Moses. Come and help... though you
lose... my being in this. At home meanwhile...". Left, excavations
at the site of an ancient market in Novgorod where a 15th century
bark manuscript of the Psalms of David written in Latin was found
in 1971. Prof. Valentin Yanin, Assistant Director of the Novgorod
Archaeological Expedition, hopes that the search for bark manuscripts
will soon extend to other northern European countries where birch
bark writing was also mentioned by medieval chroniclers.
lotos Y. Trankvillitsky 0 APN "Soviet Union" magazine. Mosco»
