APRIL 7
WORLD HEALTH DAY
-*h
YOUR heart ¡s your health"
at is the theme for World Health Day, 1972.
Public health measures against infectious diseases
are obvious to everybody. Urgent action is now
needed against diseases of the heart and blood
vessels, which are the main cause of death in so
many countries throughout the world. High blood
pressure, vascular lesions of the central nervous
system and congenital malformations, for example,
are common everywhere. Ischaemic heart disease
(See Mini-dictionary, starting page 10) is associated
with affluence, while rheumatic heart disease and
heart diseases of infectious origin are more common
among less privileged groups. Some causes of heart
Photo © P. Almasy, Paris
diseases, such as Chagas' disease, are concentrated
in certain parts of the world.
Although the increasing burden of cardiovascular
disease of atherosclerotic origin is to some extent
associated with the rising age of the population,
ischaemic heart disease is becoming more and more
frequent in younger subjects.
Enormous progress has been made in science and
technology and important social and economic
achievements have been accomplished. Yet health
indicators warn us that all is not well with our
civilization and that its harmonious continuation
depends, to an extent which might surprise some, on
the solution of major health problems such as the
cardiovascular diseases. The prevention of those
diseases will require some far-reaching changes in
our way of life and in order to make them possible
we must be sure that we call upon all the scientific
and technical means at our disposal.
"Pour la vie" (for a lifetime) say the words
in French carved on the tree.

Much more than we realize, the health of our
hearts is in our own hands. The time has come for
community action to control high blood pressure, to
prevent rheumatic heart disease, to give proper care
to persons with myocardial infarction or cerebral
stroke, to treat respiratory diseases that often lead
to chronic heart failure, and to diagnose and treat
malformations of the circulatory system in children
as early as possible.
We need better nutrition and healthier living habits.
Much more concentrated research is necessary to
clarify the unknowns of atherosclerosis and ischaemic
heart disease. Since some predisposing factors are
already present in young people, prevention needs
to be concentrated on the young adult, and even on
the child and adolescent by promoting their optimum
development.
We need better care for all stricken by heart
disease. In many places there are excellent hospitals
with modern equipment and trained personnel; but
everywhere there is difficulty in rapidly providing the
right care to all those who need it
This calls for increasing international effort, govern¬
ment support, active participation of health workers
and of the public. If all these forces will universally
unite, we may soon be able to live a better, a healthier
and a longer active life.
I hope that World Health Day 1972 the Day of the
Heart will give impetus to world-wide co-operation
in the conquest of cardiovascular diseases.
Remember: "Your heart is your health."
Dr. M.G. Candau
Director-General
of the World Health Organization



THE HEART
YOURS FOR LIFE
by Zdenek Fejfar
The popular conception of
cardiovascular diseases as a necessary
evil of middle and old age is false on
two counts. Children do have heart
ailments, and, while cardiovascular
disease is an evil, it is not a
"necessary" one.
As with many other problems in
today's world, a number of cardio¬
vascular diseases begin at a young
age. This goes without saying for
congenital malformations of the
circulatory system. Acute heart
disease associated with common child
infections like diphtheria still appears
from time to time, particularly in
connexion with epidemic outbreaks.
Rheumatic heart disease has roots
in streptococcal sore throats of
children. In some tropical and sub¬
tropical areas, particularly with crowd¬
ing and inadequate hygienic conditions,
crippling rheumatic heart disease is
very common among children and
young people in hospital wards.
Various other heart diseases occurring
in tropical and sub-tropical areas, such
as endomyocardial fibrosis (a fibrous
thickening that constricts the cavities
of the heart), or Chagas" heart disease,
begin in childhood and sometimes
lead to irreversible cardiac failure
even before adulthood is reached.
Functional disorders of the heart,
such as cardiac neurosis, are often
recognized in children or adolescents
and are frequently induced by a
chance discovery of an innocent
murmur. If this is incorrectly explained
as a heart disease the stigma may
persist throughout life. Neurosis
usually reflects the hypersensitivity of
the child as well as the neurotic
atmosphere in the family.
CONTINUED PAGE 6
ZDENEK FEJFAR, of Czechoslovakia, is head
of the Cardiovascular Diseases Unit of the
World Health Organization, Geneva. He was
previously director of research at the Cardio¬
pulmonary Laboratory of Prague University.
5

THE HEART, YOURS FOR LIFE (Continued)
6
More and more evidence indicates
that "middle age" heart ailments also
have their roots in childhood. For
example, this is true of hypertension
which accompanies some kidney
diseases.
Ischaemic or coronary heart disease,
the scourge of today's technologically
advanced society, may be due to
unhealthy habits which begin in child¬
hood. Several reasons support this
belief. The most severe manifes¬
tations of ischaemic heart disease
acute myocardial infarction causing
damage to the heart muscle, or sudden
unexpected death are now occurring
in younger people with greater
frequency. Coronary atherosclerosis,
impeding the flow of blood through
the arteries which is the commonest
lesion leading to coronary heart
disease, begins in childhood. Blood
cholesterol levels in children from
countries with frequent ischaemic
heart disease are higher than in places
where heart disease in adults is rare.
The habits which are involved in the
development of atherosclerosis and
ischaemic or coronary heart disease
are acquired in childhood and adoles¬
cence. They include overeating, par¬
ticularly rich foods with saturated fat
and purified carbohydrates, lack of
adequate physical activity and smoking.
The social environment of a child or
adolescent may also contribute to the
development of adult heart disease in
a modern society often demanding a
pace of daily life which exacts a heavy
toll. For example, the insecurity of
a child who suffers from lack of
tenderness or inadequate care from his
parents may carry over uncertainties
of life to school and later on to work
and lead to maladjustment throughout
life and eventually to disease.
Some of these factors are difficult
to control, others can be handled with
relative ease, although changing life
habits usually requires far more
effort than treating symptoms of the
disease with a drug. Some preventive
measures were accepted a long time
ago by the medical profession and the
community. These include early
recognition and treatment of congenital
malformations, of streptococcal and
other infections, or prevention of
cardiac rheumatism.
Health examinations in schools and
education of both children and their
parents help a great deal to raise the
awareness in the community. However
much more effort is needed to reduce
the chances of severe atherosclerosis
and ischaemic heart disease in adults.
It means increasing the emphasis on
investigating causes of the diseases,
on the recognition of known pre¬
disposing factors, and on introduction
of appropriate actions in children and
adolescents to assure optimal condi¬
tions for their healthy development.
It also means adoption of healthier
habits as early in life as possible in
order to set a pattern for the future.
The important rôle of the family first
and school later should be more
widely recognized and appreciated, be
it for adoption of adequate dietary
habits, or in sensitive understanding
and advice on how to overcome the
many smaller or bigger problems of
daily life of the young.
Regular physical education, with
emphasis on sports, must be encour¬
aged to counterbalance hours of
sitting at school and in front of the
television screen. Furthermore, the
young sportsman is not only less
inclined to smoke, but he is also less
apt to develop into a sedentary animal
attached to the seat of his motor
vehicle. He carries with him into
adult life a higher physical fitness
which may easily be regained even
after years of low physical activity,
and which should help him to keep fit
longer than the untrained "soft" type.
The disturbed youth of today less
inclined to compromises than their
parents apparently suffer from the
"achievements" of our civilization. In
this sense the burden of cardio¬
vascular disease cannot be lifted until
the ecological balance of society is
restored and a more sensible adap¬
tation of man to his environment is
achieved. The habits of childhood
often linger for a lifetime.
