OUNCES OF PREVENTION
BY THE 21st CENTURY
by
Igor K. Shkhvatsabaya
Director of the Myasnikov Institute
of Cardiology, Moscow
30
One must obviously agree
with the experts' conclusion that
methods for preventing heart disease
will have been thoroughly explored
before the end of the century, and
that by 1975, or thereabouts, the
pharmaceutical industry will be pro¬
ducing medicines to lower the pro¬
portion of cholesterol in the blood.
Yet to my mind the experts
seem to have picked out isolated
facts from a series of different
discoveries, grouped them some¬
what arbitrarily, it seems to me and
then tried to sketch in, on that basis,
an overall picture of all future trends
in cardiology.
It seems likely, for instance, that
predictions about the use of grafts
from animals (heterografts) in human
heart-transplant operations will prove
to be unrealistic, though this does not
apply to partial transplants.
The experts' forecasts on smoking
also seem to me somewhat question¬
able.
A question worth examining is why
cardiovascular diseases are now the
leading cause of death in the world,
after having ousted cancer from that
unenviable position.
While there can be no simple
answer to this question, one thing
is obvious: the heart occupies a
unique place and function in the body.
It is the focal point of stress from
many forces. It reacts to the slightest
change in the body's environment
and is extremely sensitive to every
occurrence in daily life. Doctors ac¬
cordingly find it hard to master the
problems of heart disease.
In recent years, heart diseases have
"grown younger", as shown by the
increasing number of cases among
young persons. Changes in our way
of life or improvements in diagnostics

are not alone a sufficient explanation
of this. Heart diseases are the result
of a whole series of influences acting
on man's organism.
Past experience has convinced
cardiologists that there is a very close
relationship between high blood
pressure (hypertension), deterioration
within the blood vessels (athero¬
sclerosis), and damage to the heart
due to a faulty supply of blood to the
heart muscles (ischaemic disease).
These processes are interconnected
and influence each other.
Hypertension actively provokes
atherosclerosis. Increased blood
pressure can lead to a heart attack.
And atherosclerosis may trigger the
development of hypertension.
This implies that by treating one
ailment we can affect the development
of another. It took cardiologists a
great deal of time and effort to reach
this simple conclusion. Yet this
"systems approach" is a vital factor
in forecasts concerning cardiovascular
diseases.
So before turning to prospects in
the fight against heart disease, I
would like to say a word on hyper¬
tension and its treatment in the future.
I think that by 1975 we shall be able
to stabilize the pathological process
of high blood pressure in many, if
not all cases. We can expect that
two or three years after such stabiliz¬
ation has been achieved, people
suffering from this disease will find that
their capacity to work has greatly
improved. There will be less need
for. hospital treatment, and far fewer
complications and fatal cases.
Forecasts offer even more hope to
people afflicted by the disease in its
early stages. Between five and seven
years from now,, if seems likely that
medicine, through a combination of
treatment and advice, will be able to
help innumerable victims of heart
ailments by bringing about a "reces¬
sion" of the disease and in some
cases curing it completely.
Over the next ten years doctors
will be able to fight "pre-disease"
more effectively; that is, they will
eliminate conditions leading to hyper¬
tension. Fifteen years ago this hardly
seemed possible. During the second
half of the 1950s medicine was only
taking its first steps towards an under¬
standing of the way arterial hyper¬
tension appears, and how it evolves.
New discoveries about the origin
and development of hypertension have
been made during the past ten years,
and fairly effective forms of treatment
have been developed. Doctors now
dispose of a varied arsenal of med¬
icines which have a very important
selective effect on the crucial links
in the progress of the disease.
Medical treatment is six to eight
times more effective nowadays than
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

OUNCES OF PREVENTION (Continued)
it used to be, and the life expectancy
of patients has almost doubled. During
the next ten years we shall be able
to apply more new methods, with
mathematical models and computers
playing an important rôle.
In the more distant future, cyber¬
netic systems will be more widely
applied to safeguard public health.
They will enable health checks to be
made on a massive scale not only
among existing heart patients but also
for those who are prone to heart
disease. This means that by about
1990, "risk factors" will have been
reduced to a minimum. In some cases
they are likely to be completely elimin¬
ated and in others their effects will
be reduced.
One has to admit that atherosclerosis
is still an extremely serious problem
and, in my opinion, the situation will
not change for some time to come.
Indeed, medicine will need to con¬
centrate much of its effort in the
future on the fight against athero¬
sclerosis; the disease becomes more
acute and occurs more frequently
with advancing age, and every year
the number of persons reaching the
55-60 age group is increasing.
As is often the case in science, the
most urgent problem is also the
hardest one to solve. Yet the outlook
today is encouraging as is shown by
the methods of diagnosis now in use
and based on specially designed
instruments and bio-chemical tech¬
niques
Furthermore, medicines are now
available for correcting the faulty
metabolic processes that lead to
atherosclerosis. Doctors are able to
reduce fairly effectively the amount
of cholesterol and other fatty sub¬
stances in the blood. They can also
correct deteriorations in the exchange
processes of substances such as
carbohydrates and albumen, and they
can restore the correct degree of
permeability to the blood vessel walls.
Given the present pace of techn¬
ical progress and recent advances in
pharmacology, we should be winning
the fight against atherosclerosis by
about 1985 or 1990. But this will
require an enormous effort.
We can be even more hopeful and
optimistic as regards the problems
of defective coronary arteries and
heart attacks. A few years after
World War II, these diseases increas¬
ed considerably in the Soviet Union.
It is now clear that great progress
has been made during the past five
to seven years.
Deaths have fallen by almost half
and complications have also de¬
creased. Statistics show that some
80 per cent of all patients can resume
an active life during the first year
after the disease began. This should
surely encourage us to be optimistic
about the future.
By about 1980 the situation will
improve considerably. The most im¬
portant task is to find effective ways
of foreseeing and preventing heart
attacks. Statistics compiled by the
Institute of Cardiology of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Medical Sciences show a
sharp reduction in cases of recurrent
heart attacks among patients who have
been under medical observation for
three years. The number of working
days lost has been nearly halved and


deaths have also considerably de¬
creased. Thus a heart attack with its
related complications is not necessary
fatal.
The most frequent cause of sudden
death is a serious disturbance of the
heart rhythm in the form of a rapid
twitching of the heart muscle cells,
when the contractions of the heart
virtually cease, thus arresting the
pumping action which causes the
blood to circulate.
Though at this point a state of
clinical death occurs, this can be
reversed if the disturbance in the
heart rhythm is eliminated in time
the aid of an electrical de¬
fibrillator. Most ambulances, hospitals,
clinics and health centres are now
equipped with this apparatus. By 1980
(or by 1985 according to more cautious
estimates) deaths from disturbances
of the heart's rhythm during a heart
attack will be exceptional.
Let us hope that in the 21st century,
cardiology will become simply a
branch of preventive medicine.
Igor K. Shkhvatsabaya
