by Victor Bunak
Man, the first
walkie-talkie
CIENTISTS have long
speculated about the origins of
speech, and a great many theories
have been advanced.
One of the earliest, already current
in Ancient Greece, held that the first
words were onomatopoeias imita¬
tions of the sounds prehistoric man
associated with his various activities.
Another maintained that words devel¬
oped from inarticulate cries of fear,
alarm, delight and so on. According
to a fairly recent theory, it was the
combination of gestures and vocal
noises used to indicate a particular
action that led to the emergence of
speech.
But none of these theories explains
VICTOR BUNAK, of the Institute for Ethno¬
graphy of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences,
is one of the world's leading authorities on
the early development of speech. He has
written many studies on race, genetics, the
theory of the genesis of speech, etc., which
have been widely published in the world
press. Dr. Bunak Is a member of the Inter¬
national Anthropological Association, the
International Society of the Biology of Man
and of many other anthropological societies.
how shouts or onomatopoeias could
turn into articulate syllables and
words, or what factors determined the
development of mental activity along
with the faculty of speech so closely
connected with it. For it is man's
ability to speak that above all dis¬
tinguishes him from the animal.
Modern science places the begin¬
ning of human evolution in the early
Quaternary period, some 1.8 million
years ago, when a branch of biped
primates appeared. These hominids,
man's earliest ancestors, lived in the
open plains. They were omnivorous,
eating fruit, green shoots, roots, birds'
eggs, grubs and so on.
Since they were ill-equipped by
nature for life in the open plains, they
learned to use objects as weapons to
defend themselves and as tools to
obtain food: rocks to fling at their
enemies or prey, bone fragments to
clean carcasses, sticks and shells to
dig up edible roots. These imple¬
ments became essential accessories
to daily life, multiplying the strength
of the hands, extending their reach
and replacing the long, sharp claws of
beasts.
Animal behaviour is guided by
instincts by a chain of automatically
connected actions that never varies.
Actions based on choice and the
experience of much trial and error are
extremely rare.
The chimpanzee, for instance, can
use a stick to reach a coveted bit of
food. If he Is given two short sticks,
he will usually amuse himself with
them rather than try to use them to
reach the food. If he does manage
to join them together to attain the
food, he will have had to make so
many exhausting attempts that the
result has no practical significance.
This is because the two percepts
"action with the stick" and "making
the stick longer" exist in his mind quite
Independently. It is difficult for him
to connect them or to substitute one
for the other.
The use of implements, not accident¬
ally as with animals, but systematically
as in the case of man, became
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
57

ORIGINS OF SPEECH (Continued)
58
successful only when the choice and
treatment of materials began to
correspond to a preconceived aim, in
other words, when an association was
established between a chain of
actions.
Man finally left the animal world
when he was at last able to reproduce
in his mind coherent images of differ¬
ent objects and actions, to distinguish
between them and to combine some
with others. This enabled man to
form percepts about the common
properties of classes of objects. The
mental ¡mages of these linked percepts
are what we call concepts, and the
capacity to form concepts was the
first main feature distinguishing Homo
sapiens from the earlier hominids.
The next stage in man's evolution
was the ability to combine and diver¬
sify these concepts, a process that
represents a considerable develop¬
ment of the intellectual faculty. Con¬
cepts form the bricks of man's mental
activity, and even the simplest among
them differ substantially from the
"concrete percepts" to which the
mental activity of animals is limited.
The combination of percepts in a
single mental operation or concept
becomes possible because of its
association with vocal stimulations.
The link-up between the various per¬
cepts takes place in areas of the
cerebral cortex that are stimulated by
impulses coming from the vocal organs
as well as those coming notably from
the auditory organs. The sound of
the voice and the corresponding
movements in the mouth and throat
become, as it were, symbols of
concepts, a different set of vocal
movements being associated with
each one.
The vocal organs can produce a
great many sounds, but In each lan¬
guage only some 30, known as
phonemes, are used (sounds with a
distinctive and differentiating function).
There are, however, hundreds of
phoneme-combinations or syllables,
and many thousands of syllable com¬
binations. Even so, the resulting
vocal sounds do not become elements
of speech until a specific semantic
content or meaning becomes attached
to them, just as new concepts are not
assimilated until they have been given
specific vocal expression.
In the early periods of human
evolution, before definite speech
systems or languages existed, con¬
cepts and words were formed simul¬
taneously. This is a dual process
which consists of combining mental
percepts and vocal movements. When
a man thinks, even if he does not
pronounce words aloud, his speech
organs make rudimentary movements,
CONTINUED PAGE 69
For some 200 years many people accepted without question the idea that
the world was created in 4004 B.C., a date carefully worked out in the 17th cen¬
tury by James Ussher, Archbishop of Armagh, on the basis of the ages of
Adam and his descendants as recorded in the Old Testament. Although
Archbishop Ussher was a great scholar, an expert in Semitic languages and
the author of several important studies on ecclesiastical history, his name
is today chiefly remembered by many people for the precise date he unfor¬
tunately fixed for the Creation, before the birth of the science of palaeontology.

MAN, THE FIRST WALKIE-TALKIE
Continued from page 58
giving the same record on an electro-
myograph (a recording of muscular
vibrations) as for spoken words. So
the communication of information and
the formation of concepts supplement
and control each other.
The combination - of percepts in
concepts and the expression of their
symbol, the word, has become a
function of the speech organs because
no other human organ can respond
with such versatility, accuracy and
speed to impulses from the cortex,
without an excessive expenditure of
energy and without interfering with
any other motor activities.
Modern man can pronounce hun¬
dreds of syllables a minute, each of
which requires a different use of the
vocal chords, a different direction of
air expelled from the lungs and a
different positioning of the tongue and
the mouth cavity. The whole system
of articulation can switch from one
position to the next in a fraction of a
second.
This mobility of the speech organs
and the extremely flexible link-up of
concepts are the result of a long
evolution. To trace the steps in this
evolution scientists have studied the
different stages of man's increasingly
complex mental activity, the structure
of jaws and other parts of skeletons
in fossilized apes and hominids, and
the stone tools of prehistoric men.
No fossil records have been discov¬
ered of the first hominids who
systematically used stones and sticks.
The cut stones of the Olduvai culture
(1.7 million years ago) show that to
give a stone a pointed tip, the crafts¬
men of that period chipped off several
irregularly-spaced pieces of different
sizes, which suggests that the Olduvai
hominids were at an intermediary
stage between concrete percepts and
concepts, or what are known as
"general percepts".
Their vocal activity probably also
belonged to an Intermediate stage.
They inherited from their animal
ancestors audible signals consisting
of single sounds, but instead of
reproducing these sounds automat¬
ically they were already able to select
them to a certain extent.
The earliest hominids had already
mastered the art of making articulated
sounds and combining them in differ¬
ent ways to form syllables, which
initially remained unchanged. This
early form of articulate speech Is
called the "lalia" stage (from the
Greek word meaning to chatter or
prattle).
Lalias were not used to exchange
ideas or converse, but to stimulate
actions or to signal some important
event in the life of the group. They
were monosyllables with many mean¬
ings and of course had no grammatical
structure. Yet they possessed all
the basic properties of this type of
speech: fixed enunciation of separate
sounds and their combination into
syllables. (The capacity to combine
syllables and words did not come
until much later.)
Substantial progress in the develop¬
ment of speech is Indicated by the
shaped stones of the Acheulean
culture, which emerged some 200,000
years ago. These were implements of
a definite form with regular facets cut
all over the surface. To make a
primitive chopper it had been enough
to remember a sequence of four or
five blows, but to shape the Acheulean
implements the craftsman had initially
to have a clear idea both of the desir¬
ed final shape and of the sequence
of blows and other actions needed to
produce it.
The Acheulean implements reveal a
varied and flexible combination of
percepts corresponding to the con¬
ceptual stage of mental activity, though
naturally in rudimentary form, without
any clear-cut distinctions between
individual percepts. True thought
becomes possible only when there Is
a free combination of at least two
independent elements: the percept of
the action and that of the object or
subject of the action; at the previous
stage both aspects are fused.
Along with the flexible combination
of separate percepts, the Acheulean
hominids mastered the free combin¬
ation of syllables, forming words.
Their fossilized remains show that
they possessed a larger brain than
the earlier forms, as well as a less
massive and shorter mandible. Be¬
cause of this shortening of the lower
jaw, the root of the tongue was lower
and the position of the larynx was
altered, which meant that the air
current was no longer directed straight
at the lips, but had now to overcome
various barriers, notably the tongue.
The first words, still few and mainly
monosyllabic, related to material
objects and basic facts in the lives
of primitive peoples, particularly their
food-gathering, and perhaps some
percepts with a magical meaning.
New words were formed by doubling CQ
or Inverting syllables or by changes Uw
in the pitch of some sounds. First
mastered by one or several members
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

70
ORIGINS OF SPEECH (Continued)
of a group, they were adopted by the
group as a whole if they supplied a
need, and then modified by practical
use.
During the later Stone Age, the
paleoanthropes or Neanderthal men
gradually enriched their vocabulary,
but their intellectual faculties and
speech seem to have remained on the
same level of isolated words. A
major change took place at the end
of the Stone Age, at the time of the
fourth and final glacial period, when
the direct ancestors of modern man,
(Homo sapiens), appeared, some
50,000 to 30,000 years ago.
The brains of these early men were
about the same size as those of their
predecessors, but their skull had a
higher vault and more rounded forms,
especially the forehead and the back
of the head. The lower jaw was
smaller, and the area of the muscle
attachment was also reduced, aiding
rapid articulation. The muscle attach¬
ments inside the lower jaw were
also similar to those of modern man,
while the bone on the outside had
grown forward to form a chin.
These Neolithic men had made
remarkable progress in stone-cutting
techniques. More elaborate imple¬
ments of many kinds were made,
including bone articles and even
needles. Ornamentation, sculpture,
drawing and painting were also widely
developed. The main occupation of
these men was, of course, hunting
wild animals.
So far as their technology, economy
and arts were concerned, these
people of the last glacial period in
Europe had a standard of living and
way of life that were by no means
inferior to those of certain hunting
and food-gathering tribes still existing
today. There is no doubt that they
were able to form paired combinations
of concepts and words (relating an
action to the object of the action).
In other words, they had fully master¬
ed articulate speech.
The emergence of Neolithic man
with his combination of separate
words with different meanings ends
the history of the origins of speech
as a general human trait. The periods
that followed saw the elaboration of
different speech systems or languages
with their own phonetic, lexical and
grammatical structures.
According to historical, archaeolo¬
gical and linguistic research, the great
basic language systems emerged in
the early Age of Metals some 6,000 to
9,000 years ago, while the formation
of many contemporary languages dates
from historical times.
Victor Bunak
