In the hills
of Pakistan
TAXILA: ANCIENT
CENTRE OF THE
by Syed Ashfaq Naqvi
HE earliest traces of human
settlement in Pakistan date from the
Stone Age. Later, the region became
the cradle of many an ancient civiliz¬
ation as shown by the discovery of
such now well-known sites as Mohenjo
Daro, Harappa, Kot Doji, Mainamati,
Mahasthangarh and Paharpur.
Taxila, in the Punjab, 20 miles west
of Rawalpindi, is also one of the
ancient sites which symbolize the rich
cultural heritage of Pakistan.
It lies in the peaceful valley of the
River Haro, a land of bracing air and
sparkling sunshine at the foot of the
snow-capped Murree Hills in the north
of Pakistan. Here, set against the
cool, green landscape, trees and
bushes stand out in their brilliant attire
the "kutchnar" with its gay bonnet
of purple and white blossoms and the
"saimul," a forest giant aglow with
blood-red blooms.
Yet the sweet-smelling orchards and
stretches of green turf seem to attain
their ultimate beauty in the splendid
gardens laid out around the remains,
more than 2,000 years old, of a great
city which attracted the attention of
Alexander the Great of Macedón, and
which later saw the rise of Asoka,
the greatest of the Buddhist kings.
For centuries, Taxila served as a
sanctuary for exhausted travellers
coming from central and western Asia
in search of knowledge or trade. To¬
day, it is a place of pilgrimage for
thousands of tourists who come to
26
SYED ASHFAQ NAQVI, head of the National
Museum of Pakistan, In Karachi, Is an Inter¬
nationally-known archaeologist and museolo-
gist who has excavated at many Pakistani sites
such as Mohenjo-Daro, Harappa and Taxila.
A noted specialist in the conservation of
monuments he has undertaken special missions
for Unesco at Mohenjo Daro, Venice and
elsewhere. He is the author of many studies
on archaeology, modern museum techniques
and ancient art, Including "The Muslim Art"
(1966); "Gandhara Art" (1967) and "1.400 Years
of Quranic Calligraphy" (in publication).
admire this land of wonder and
enchantment.
Taxila flourished for more than
1,000 years from the 6th century B.C.
onwards, and during this period saw
the rise and fall of at least seven
ruling dynasties. Most of our know¬
ledge about this metropolis is based
on the results of the archaeological
excavations conducted at its three
city-sites dating from different periods,
and over a dozen Buddhist stupas and
monasteries during the past 60 years.
This information, supplemented by the
records of Greek and Chinese writers,
helps us to imagine what a varied
scene Taxila must have presented in
far off times.
In its early days, Taxila was a great
centre of learning and was well known
for its university where the arts and
sciences of the day were taught. It
attracted students from different and
distant parts of the sub-continent and
elsewhere. Numerous references in
the Jatakas (the narratives of former
incarnations of Buddha) testify to this
fact, though Taxila owed its reputation
as a seat of learning above all to its
teachers who were the recognized
authorities on their subjects. It thus
exercised a kind of intellectual suzer¬
ainty over a wide world of letters.
But, let us not confuse it with the
western concept of a university a
much later development. In this early
period, a university consisted of
organized groups of independent
teachers. The same appears to have
been true of Oxford and Cambridge in
their early days.
In the east, "this practice continued
for a much longer period, and places
like Nadwa, Poona and others became
renowned as important centres of
learning due to the spontaneous
grouping of well-known scholars who
had dedicated their lives to the cause
of education.
European travellers of the 17th cent¬
ury also noted a similar state of affairs
at Benares. François Bernier, a
French doctor who spent 12 years in
India at that time, writes: "Benares
was a kind of university, but it had no
colleges or regular classes and
resembled rather the schools of the
ancients, the masters being dispersed
in different parts of the town in private
houses."
It was on this pattern that the famous
University of Taxila also flourished
more than 2,000 years ago, though the
innumerable monastic establishments
where the "world-renowned" teachers
lived and imparted knowledge could,
of course, be taken as the component
parts of a great and sprawling univer¬
sity which covered an area of more
than 26 square miles in the valley of
the Haro.
Early Buddhist literature refers to
the students as going to Taxila to
"complete" their education and not to
begin it. They were invariably sent at
the age of sixteen, that is, when they
"came of age." This shows that
Taxila was a seat of higher learning,
not of elementary education.
The minimum age for admission,
curiously enough, was thus the same
as that prescribed by modern univer¬
sities. Perhaps this age for entry was
fixed to ensure that students coming
from far off places were mature enough
to face the rigours of a long and
difficult journey.
u,'NFORTUNATELY, apart
from these few historical facts, not
much is known about Taxila before its
conquest by Alexander the Great
in 326 B. C. Lavish accounts by
Alexander's companions and con¬
temporaries inspired the descriptions
of later writers of Antiquity. The Greek
historian Flavius Arrian calls it "a large
and wealthy city, and the most
populous between the Indus and the
Hydaspes rivers." According to the
Greek geographer Strabo, it was
"a large city crowded with inhabitants
and with very fertile soil." Pliny
describes it as "a famous city,
situated on a low but level plain,
in a district called Amanda."
Soon after Alexander's departure
from the scene, Taxila was incorporat¬
ed into the Mauryan Empire, and it was
during the days of Asoka that Taxila
rose to a pre-eminent position among
the cities of the north-west. A number
of monasteries and stupas were built
in and around Taxila, and their remains
bear testimony to the days when
Buddhism was the prevailing faith.
With the break-up of the Mauryan
Empire, Taxila appears to have lost its
importance, and its history becomes
chequered.
CONTINUED PAGE 28

UNIVERSITY
ORIENT Perched atop a- 300 foot tiill, the monuments of Jaulian, outside Taxila (Pakistan),
have dominated the surrounding countryside since the 2nd century A.D. The buildings,
consisting of a Buddhist monastery with cells for the monks and a main stupa,
were ravaged by fire in the 5th century. The statues surrounding
the commemorative shrine seen in photo show the high degree of skill and artistry
attained by the sculptors of the period. The graceful folds of the drapery enhance
the contours of the bodies and the faces of the figures in meditation
are suffused with an expression of inner peace and serenity.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris

The
double-headed
eagle of Taxila
TAXILA (Continued)
A tale of three cities
28
The Greeks from Bactria returned
for a short time followed by the invad¬
ing hordes of Scythians. The Parthian
King Gondophares, who is said to
' have played host to Saint Thomas the
Apostle, ruled over the city during the
1st century A.D. The Kushans, under
Kanishka, ruled in the 2nd century A.D.
and then in the 5th century A.D. came
the White Huns, carrying fire and
sword. They overthrew the ruling
dynasty and destroyed the city, leav¬
ing the monasteries and stupas in
ruins and desolation.
The Chinese traveller, Hsuang Tsang,
who visited Taxila in the 7th century
A.D., relates that most of the monu¬
ments had been shattered and Taxila
itself turned into a dependency of
Kashmir. He wrote:
"The Pilgrim returned to Utakahantu
(Udaka Khanda) city, went south
across the Indus, here three on four li
broad and flowing south-west pure and
clear, to the Takshasila country. This
was above 2,000 li in circuit, its capital
being above ten li in circuit. The
chiefs were in a state of open feud,
the royal family being extinguished;
the country had formerly been subject
to Kapias but now it was a dependency
of Kashmir. It had a fertile soil and
bore good crops, with flowing streams
and luxuriant vegetation; the climate
was congenial; and the people, who
were hard-working, were adherents of
Buddhism. Although the Monasteries
were numerous, many of them were
desolate, and the Brethren, who were
very few, were all Mahayanists."
During the course of excavations in
this green valley of the River Haro,
three distinct city-sites and a number
of monasteries and stupas have been
discovered by archaeologists. The
first city site, known as "Bhir Mound,"
flourished before the arrival of the
Greeks. It is situated on a small
plateau past the Tamra Nala, a
seasonal stream.
The layout of the city is very hap¬
hazard, the streets narrow and the
plans of the houses irregular. In the
earlier periods, the houses appear to
have been built of rubble and stone
supported by timber which has now
disappeared. In the later stages of
the city, however, kanjur has been
used freely in the construction.
The second city of Taxila which was
founded by the Bactrian Greeks in the
2nd century B.C., and the remains of
which are now found on the western
spurs of the Hathial Ridge, is known
as Sirkap. It was enclosed by a
stone-built city wall about three and
a half miles long.
It is very well planned, the houses
being grouped into square blocks with
straight wide streets cutting each other
at right angles. In planning this city,
Greek principles of defence appear to
have been kept in mind, by including a
considerable area of hilly ground
within its perimeter.
The third city site, which dates back
to the early Kushan times, is laid out
in the traditional Central Asian style
of that age. It is situated to the north¬
east of Sirkap and forms a rough

The invasions that marked the beginning of the 2nd century B.C.
left Taxila destroyed and beyond restoration. The Bactrian Greeks,
who settled at Taxila at this time, transferred the city centre to a
new site at Sirkap to the north-east. Protected by a wall some
6 yards wide, the new city enclosed many temples of which one
of the finest is that of the double-headed eagle (below and detail
left). Similar to those found In early Babylonian and Hittite
sculptures, the double-headed eagle may have been introduced at
Taxila by the Scythians. Despite the Greek presence Buddhism
continued to flourish, as this head of Buddha (right) with its
expression of calm peace and its gentle benevolent smile testifies.
Photo« © Paul Almasy, Paris
parallelogram, about three miles in
length. The material used in the
construction was again stone.
Along with these three city-sites, a
number of Buddist monasteries and
stupas are scattered over this wide
area. The devotees appear to have
taken special care in selecting the spot
for their places of worship and devot¬
ion. These are beautifully situated on
hill tops overlooking the valley or in
secluded places.
One of the most important structures
here is the Dharmarajika Stupa, built
by the Buddists to enshrine relics of
the Buddha or of one of the Buddhist
saints. The construction of a stupa
was regarded as a work of great merit
which brought the builder a step near¬
er to salvation.
The Dharmarajika Stupa is circular
with a raised terrace reached by a
flight of four steps. It is faced with
limestone blocks and appears to have
been originally coated with lime-plaster
and paint. The terrace served as a
processional path for the monks.
Around this great stupa are many
smaller ones. It was here, in 1917,
that a casket was found which contain¬
ed the relics of Buddha. This was
presented by the then Viceroy of India
to the Buddhists of Ceylon and has
since been enshrined in the Temple of
the Tooth at Kandy.
The other important stupa com¬
memorates the pious memory of Kunala,
the son of Asoka the Great, and
Asoka's Viceroy to Taxila. Kunala's
stepmother, Tishyarakshita, had fallen
in love with him, but having failed to
entice the handsome young prince, she
managed to forge a royal decree
ordering Kunala to be blinded. When
the order reached Taxila, the king's
ministers were loath to execute this
cruel punishment, but Kunala brave¬
ly submitted to what he believed were
his father's orders. When Asoka, who
had never issued such a decree, learn¬
ed what had been done, he became
enraged and finding the culprit was
his own wife, he put her to death.
This stupa marks the site where
Kunala's eyes were put out It stands
on a rectangular base of 63 feet from
east to west by 105 feet from north to
south and commands a striking view
of the valley. Of its imposing super¬
structure not much remains, and we
have to visualize most of its past
grandeur from the parts of the beauti¬
ful Corinthian pilasters with an elab¬
orate moulding surmounted by a
dentil cornice and coping which still
remain. The delicate concave curvature
of its 'plinth, is another remarkable
feature of this monument.
The stupa and monastery of Mohra
Moradu are situated at a picturesque
site about a mile to the south east of
Sirsukh. At the time of excavation,
nothing but a portion of the ruined
dome was visible. But as the earth
was removed, there emerged one of
the most spectacular ensembles of
Buddhist architecture.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

TAXILA (Continued)
Cultural meeting place of East and West
Here, most of the stucco reliefs and
images are well-preserved and reveal
a high standard of art. The figures
are particularly endowed with life and
movement and there are traces of
colour which once embellished them.
Pippala, Jaulian, Bhamala and Giri are
other interesting stupas and monas¬
teries in this vicinity which preserve
relics of Buddhist art.
In these Buddhist sculptures, the
arts of East and West are harmonious¬
ly blended. Outstanding examples are
the seated and standing statues of
Bodhisattvas and of the Buddha, in
which particular attention has been
paid to the lines of the face, the
contours of the body, and the free-
flowing and natural drapery. The
artist has tried to make the body
visible through its folds. Here, the
principle of naturalness has been
accepted and the human form perfect¬
ed in every detail.
A brief description of some of the
features of these sites and the art they
enshrine, cannot convey a true idea of
the variety and extent of the cultural
remains of Taxila. Much more has to
be seen' and examined if one is to
visualize the life of the people in those
far distant days. The large quantities
of jewellery, coins, statues and
domestic utensils which have been
discovered at Taxila and which are
now preserved in the site museum
can do much to help us to form a
picture of the culture which once
existed there.
The jewellery which is made of gold
and silver inlaid with stones, comprises
pendants, necklaces, girdles, amulets,
bangles, brooches and hairpins. It is
distinctively Greek or Graeco-Roman
in design and the technical processes
of moulds and dies employed are the
same as those found throughout the
Graeco-Roman world. The granulated
and filigree work is the most attractive
feature of the Taxila jewellery.
The coins discovered here are many
and -varied and throw light on almost
Excavations at Sirkap, site of the second ancient
city of Taxila, have revealed its well-planned
chessboard pattern of square buildings and straight
wide streets laid out within a perimeter wall three
miles long. The most important building unearthed,
the royal palace (350ft. by 400 ft.), has audience
halls and grey sandstone columns. This poster
at the entrance to Sirkap recalls the dynasties that
ruled the city during four centuries.
30
Excavations near Taxila brought
to light the shrine and monastery
of Mohra Moradu, a spectacular
ensemble of Buddhist art
and architecture. Among
the reliefs and images was
this statue of the Bodhisattva
Maitreya set on a pedestal.
A Bodhisattva is a "future
Buddha" or "one on the way
to Enlightenment".
Photo 0 Taxi la Museum
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
all the phases of Taxila's history. The
majority were minted by the local
autonomous kings of the city, the
Sakas, the Parthians and the Kushans,
and a smaller number of coins of the
Greek kings have also been uncovered.
The earliest coins found are the silver
bars with a wheel-like symbol belong¬
ing to the fourth century B.C.
The pottery which has been unearth¬
ed at the different sites of Taxila is
essentially utilitarian in character.
It ranges from capacious storage jars
for oil and wine to cooking pots,
bowls, saucers, pans and spouted and
perforated vessels.
As in the case of other arts, pottery
was marked by foreign influences.
The early wares are rather simple in
shape and decoration, but with the
arrival of Greeks and Parthians, new
forms appear to have been introduced,
including beautiful amphoras, handled
jugs and flared beakers. In the
treatment of the surface and the decor¬
ation of the pottery also, a change is
visible with the introduction of an
attractive lustrous varnish and emboss¬
ed designs.
Among the terracotta and clay
objects, a large variety of sacred and
mundane figurines, toys of different
shapes and personal ornaments have
been found. These objects are mostly
kiln-baked and show a remarkable
freedom and freshness of modelling
work in clay. During excavations, a
large number of bone, ivory, shell,
glass, copper and bronze objects have
also been found in the shape of per¬
sonal ornaments and articles of house¬
hold use.
Of special interest are the seals and
sealings found here which display the
most exquisite artistry. These were
intended for practical use rather than
as ornaments. On them are beautifully
