
Left, Book Fair at Gorky on the
Upper Volga (U.S.S.R.) draws buyers
to open-air bookstalls. The Fair was
a feature of 1970 celebrations marking
the 750th anniversary of the city
(formerly Nizhni-Novgorod and birthplace
of the novelist Maxim Gorky).
In 1970, the Soviet Union's book output
totalled 1,309 million copies,
representing nearly 16 per cent of
world production.
Photo © V. Voitenko-Tass, Moscow

BOOKS
ELECTRONICS
TELEVISION
by Lev Vladimirov
I ARTIN LUTHER, the great
reformer, called the introduction of the
printing press "a second deliverance
of mankind a deliverance from intel¬
lectual darkness", and Abbé Sieyès,
the 18th century French political theo¬
rist, maintained that "printing has
changed the fate of Europe; it will
transform the entire globe."
The introduction of the printing press
to Europe brought a rapid increase in
book production. By 1500, half a cen¬
tury later, just over 30,000 titles had
been printed in Europe, while pro¬
duction reached about 250,000 titles
in the 16th century and exceeded
seven million in the 19th.
Today, even modest estimates fore¬
cast that over 25 million titles will be
published during the 20th century.
In one year alone, 1970, over
1,300 million books were printed in
the Soviet Union more than were
produced during the first 150 years
of book printing in Europe.
Small wonder that some researchers
speak of an "explosion" of printed
matter. And yet, paradoxical as it
may seem, since printing is in its
golden age, certain forecasters say
that the traditional book is facing
extinction, that a general crisis in the
publishing industry is imminent, that
our age carries the germ of a disease
that will kill the book, and that the
monopoly of the press as a means
of mass communication is ended.
LEV VLADIMIROV is Director of the Scien¬
tific Library of the Vilnius State University
(Lithuanian S.S.R.) and a prominent Soviet
expert on books and librarianship. From
1964 to 1970 he was Director of the Dag
Hammarskjold United Nations Library in New
York. Secretary of the Committee tor Library
Education of the International Federation of
Library Associations (IFLA), Lev Vladimirov
has published numerous studies and articles
on the history of books, librarianship. biblio¬
graphy and library organization.
Indeed, the cinema, radio, television,
tape-recorders, video tape-recorders,
microcopying, electronics, cybernetics
and other remarkable inventions are
invading the field that had until
recently been monopolized by books.
And though the growing need for
information has led to an increase in
publications of the traditional type, at
the same time the production of repro-
graphed and photocopied microbooks,
as well as "talking books", has
steadily developed.
In trying to define the further devel¬
opment of the book in our time many
defend the traditional book uncondi¬
tionally and reject everything new;
others predict that books will disappear
or that they will at least lose their
importance, that the book market will
shrink, and so on .
In my opinion, both points of view
are wrong. Pessimistic predictions
are disproved by the steady growth
of publications throughout the world.
According to Unesco, world book
output has grown from 285,000 titles
in 1955 to 487,000 in 1968.
However, an analysis of the corre¬
lation between the population figures
in the various countries and their
share in the world's book output
shows that there still is an astounding
lack of correspondence between these
two figures. The population of the
U.S.S.R., for example, accounts for
6.8 per cent of the world's population,
but its book output represents 15.6
per cent of world production.
Recent Unesco statistics show how
disproportionately book production is
distributed among the various con¬
tinents. Europe, North America and
the Soviet Union produced nearly 75
per cent of all books published in
1969, the largest proportion coming
from Europe, which, with only 13 per
cent of the world's population, pro¬
duced 45 per cent of the titles.
Asia (excluding Soviet Asia), with
56 per cent of the world's population,
produced no more than 20 per cent of
the books, South America with about 5
percent of world population, published
2 per cent, and Africa, with almost
10 per cent of the population, pro¬
duced less than 2 per cent.
Closing the book gap has become
an important priority for developing
countries, and to bring book produc¬
tion up to the level of five books a
year per capita, output would have
to be raised almost twentyfold in
Africa, twelvefold in Asia and sixfold
in South America. It is thus illogical
to say that the printed word is about
to decline and that the book age is
as good as over.
Only market conditions can explain
the drop in book output in France
from 19,289 titles in 1966 to 18,646
in 1968, in Italy from 10,593 to 8,868,
and a simultaneous rise in output in
Great Britain from 28,789 to 31,372
and in the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many from 22,720 to 30,223.
Naturally, in the industrialized coun¬
tries, where the publishing industry
is well developed, output grows more
slowly than in the developing countries.
In Cuba, for example, the output rose
between 1966 and 1968 by 25 per cent
and in Ceylon by 30 per cent, but it
has not reached its maximum even
there, and the need for books is far
from satisfied.
The headway made by education
does much to expand the book market.
It is ridiculous to speak of a saturation
of this market when Unesco tells us
that 800 of the 2,225 million adults
in the world are still illiterate. There
is still plenty of "virgin land" to be a n
tilled and books will be the main | J
implement used for that purpose.
The dissemination of information

BOOKS, ELECTRONICS, TELEVISION (Continued)
'Never will electric power have as much force
as the electricity enclosed in the printed word'
and culture through many channels
is typical of our times. You may get
to know one of Shakespeare's trage¬
dies by reading a volume of his works,
but you can also see it on the stage
or the screen, hear it on the radio,
view its performance on TV or hear
it as a recording on an LP or on tape.
Except for the first two, these possi¬
bilities were not available in the last
century. This abundance of channels
gives rise to definite problems and
disproportions, especially since some
channels "jam" others and develop at
their expense.
In countries where the number of
illiterates is particularly high (75-90 per
cent of the population) books and the
press are, for a long time to come,
unlikely to become a nationwide
means of communication. Newspapers,
magazines and books are there¬
fore of necessity addressed to the
narrow section of the literate audience.
Radio and TV, on the other hand, are
rapidly becoming mass media.
However, in the developing countries
too the growth in literacy and the
rise of the cultural level are quickly
raising the importance of books. The
book is the foundation on which the
culture of a nation is built. Other
means of communication, even such
progressive ones as television, are
only auxiliary means of cultural
development.
Ac
14
ADDRESSING the General
Council of the International Federation
of Library Associations in 1968, J.E.
Morpurgo, Director of the British Na¬
tional Book League, said: "Five times
in my lifetime I have heard that the
book is finished. First, there was the
silent film; and the pleasure of seeing
Pearl White or Theda Bara rescued
from the railroad line was said to be
spelling life to Miss White or Miss
Bara and death to the book. Then
voice was added to the lovely, piano-
tinkling, near-silence of the cinema,
and the stridencies of Hollywood were
thought to have shattered all" hope of
a future for the book. There followed
or there ran coincidental with the
talking film sound radio; entertain¬
ment, enlivenment, enlightenment,
taken into each man's home. . . and, it
was thought, destroying the opportun¬
ity and the will to read. And most
recently came two most potent alter¬
natives to print: television and cyber¬
netics. . . And yet the book survived."
Why did it? What makes us believe
that the traditional book, despite the
development of other effective means
of intellectual communication, will not
only survive but also preserve its func¬
tion as "one of the greatest means of
human progress", and will extend that
function?
First and foremost, because none
of the new technical communication
means can fully replace the book as
a source of information. Radio and
TV can be called means of "instan¬
taneous" or "express" information.
Their informative action stops the
moment the broadcast is over. The
book, however, is a means of constant
information, an enormous reservoir
from which we can draw any amount
of information at any time required.
has shown that
the capabilities of various media differ
greatly according to the nature and
complexity of the information being
transmitted. Simple facts are best
conveyed orally (including the use of
radio and television). To put over
more complex information, a combina¬
tion of sound and ¡mages gives better
results. Highly complex informa¬
tion is best relayed and imparted by a
printed page containing illustrations.
And an ordinary book, unlike a
"speaking" or a microbook, does not
require any kind of electronic appara¬
tus.
It has also been shown that we
assimilate information much more
quickly by reading than by hearing
(even without the aid of new methods
of speed-reading). And we should
also take into account the aesthetic
aspect of the assimilation of know¬
ledge the pleasure we derive, for
instance, from reading a new book, a
perfect product of the printer's art.
The book has indeed travelled a
long road, from the Bible printed by
Gutenberg, a work whose make-up
closely copied those of medieval
manuscripts, to the masterpieces of
the modern printing industry.
Improvements in printing technology
have led to such a tremendous
increase in publishing that, in some
respects, man nowadays resembles
Goethe's sorcerer's apprentice who
was able to conjure up the spirits but
unable to control them. The libraries
were the first to feel the catastrophic
effects of the growing avalanche of
publications, which posed many
serious problems.
F. Rider, director of the library at
Wesleyan University (USA) drew
attention to this danger as early as
1944. He forecast that by the year
2040, the Library of Yale University
would have about 200 million volumes,
occupying 6,000 miles of shelves.
Its index cards, if the method of
indexing was preserved till then,
would require about 750,000 catalog
uing drawers, which would occupy
an area of no less than 80 acres.
The yearly increase of the library stock
would be 12 million volumes and
their insertion in the catalogue would
require a staff of about 6,000 people.
Though the author may have exag¬
gerated, the problem is clearly an ur¬
gent one, even if the book stock in¬
creases half as quickly as he expects.
Microcopying, in his view, is the only
way out of the dilemma.
The microbook has already estab¬
lished itself firmly in libraries. The
Dag Hammarskjöld Library of the
United Nations in New York stores
microfilms of newspapers, and as of
1969, U.N. documents were also
being microcopied. The microbook
is widely used in most scientific and
specialized libraries. This will help
to resolve the acute problem of pro¬
viding storage space for books. It
will also extend the life of publica¬
tions printed on low quality paper,
help libraries to acquire unique
editions, reduce postage fees on the
sending of books from one library to
another, and offer many other advan¬
tages.
But, in my view, it is not the "over¬
population" of the book world and
library storage that should rank as
the "No. 1 problem". The main prob¬
lem is the enormous volume of
scientific and technical information.
Academician A. Nesmeyanov of the
USSR has written: "According to pro¬
visional data, about 10,000 journals
in the world are of interest to chem¬
ists. These publications contain no
less than 200,000 articles on chem¬
istry and chemical technology. About
5,000 books, over 30,000 patents and
about 20,000 scientific reports are
published every year on chemistry and
chemical technology. . .
"If a chemist began, on January 1,
to read all the publications of pro¬
fessional interest appearing during the
year and read them for 40 hours a
week at the rate of four publications
an hour, by December 31 he would
have read only one twentieth of these
publications."
^UlMILAR conditions prevail
in the other sciences. Ever-growing
streams of information submerge the
researcher, complicate his work, and
lead to an unnecessary waste of re¬
sources and effort. Without the use
of technical means, notably of elec¬
tronic computers for the storage and
retrieval of information, nothing can
be done to improve this state of affairs.
The traditional methods and means of
information retrieval are entirely in¬
adequate today.
Only computers can resolve the

Photo © André Kertész, New York
Since its first emergency aid to war-damaged libraries 25 years ago, Unesco has developed
a broad and varied programme designed to Increase and Improve library services. It has
provided training fellowships for librarians, organized seminars and courses and has set
up two librarianship training centres In Africa at Dakar (Senegal) and Kampala (Uganda). The
New Delhi Public Library Project, launched In 1951, has been followed by further pilot
projects In Colombia, Nigeria, and the Ivory Coast Photo shows Mr. Julien Cain, Chairman
of the French National Committee for International Book Year, In his study. Mr. Cain is
President of the French National Commission for Unesco and was for 34 years Director
of the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris.
intricate problems facing the modern
librarian. From personal experience as
director of the U.N. Library in New
York, I can say that this library needed
computers to index the mass of U.N.
documents and publications, a problem
it could not cope with before these
machines were introduced.
Yet even though I believe that elec¬
tronics have a great future in the
information services, the idea that the
library of tomorrow will be a library
without books and even without libra¬
rians is both fantastic and fallacious.
It is said that the most prominent
feature in the library of tomorrow will
be people and not books, since the
book in its traditional form will be
extinct. Such a library, it is foreseen,
will resemble a laboratory in which
there will be switchboards instead of
tables, dictaphones for ordering printed
matter, data and information, auto¬
matic distribution mechanisms for their
delivery to the reader's switchboard,
screens of electronic machines to
reproduce the literature supplied and
even push-button translating machines
in case the reader does not know
the language the text is written in.
This view of the library of tomorrow
presupposes a different type of libra¬
rian from the one we have today. His
main attribute will be a knowledge of
machines whereas the main task of
today's librarian is to be familiar with
books, to know the requirements of
the readers and to satisfy them.
Owing to the giant growth of the
volume of scientific knowledge, the
differentiation and specialization of the
sciences and research institutions,
more and more libraries will specialize
in particular fields. Naturally, as in the
world of science, this will go hand in
hand with integration. Our age is
the age of specialized libraries and
specialized networks of libraries, which
supplement each other, and are co¬
ordinated and interlinked by every
means of communication.
Nevertheless, the traditional book
will hold a place of no little importance
in the technological process of these
"information factories". In ordinary
lending libraries the traditional book
will probably continue to play the prin¬
cipal and decisive role.
The new technical means are not
the enemy of books, but their ally
and helper. The historic role of the
book as a means of establishing
contacts between people, satisfying
their spiritual needs and providing a
source of knowledge will grow in step
with mankind's social, cultural and
scientific advance.
Answering those who bemoan the
imminent death of the book in the
age of technological progress and
predict its replacement by new con¬
venient mechanisms for word and
thought transmission, Stephan Zweig
wrote:
"No power source has been able to
create as much light as is sometimes
emitted by a small volume, and never
will electric power have as much force
as the electricity enclosed in the
printed word. The book is a never-
aging and invincible force, the most
concentrated and multiform; should it
then be afraid of technology? Is it
not with the help of these same books
that technology improves and dissemi¬
nates? Everywhere, and not only in
our personal life, the book is the alpha
and omega of all knowledge, the foun¬
dation of every science."
15
