.,^íí a
tóvv» V* *
>v>wXv>ävä\
v.v.**\»r vwr
.**"
^mmim
***MH,
University City at Caracas, Vene¬
zuela, is one of Latin America's
most architecturally modern uni¬
versity centres. Buildings on the
500-acre campus, designed by the
Venezuelan architect, Raúl Villa-
nueva, are linked by covered walks
featuring a variety of structural
designs and concrete canopies.
Curving ramp (above) leads Into
the campus assembly hall. Sculp¬
ture, mosaics, tiled murals and
other works by famous modern
artists decorate many buildings.


THE NEW
LANGUAGE
OF LATIN AMERICAN
by
Rubén Bareiro Saguier LITERATURE
H,IISTORICALLY, Latin Amer¬
ican culture is a mixture of Spanish
and Portuguese traditions grafted on
to the many-branched tree of Amer¬
ican Indian culture, which little by
little it absorbed along with later
African elements and traces of mi¬
grations from other parts of the world.
This diversity has been at the root
RUBEN BAREIRO SAGUIER, of Paraguay. Is
a literary critic and writer, and the author
of many critical essays on literature. He is
at present Professor of Latin American Lit¬
erature at Vincennes University, Paris. His
latest work is a book of short stories. "Ojo
por Diente" (An Eye for a Tooth). It was
first published In a French translation ("Pacte
du Sang", Editions du Cerf, Paris, 1971) and
will shortly appear in Spanish.
of a fundamental problem that has
troubled Latin Americans over the
years and continues to do so today
namely, the search for a cultural
identity. This is apparent in Latin
American literature, with its long
search for a new language of
expression, and the translation of
ideas into an idiom to a certain extent
foreign within a political context
devoid of unity.
"Western culture" that is, the
sum of values and norms introduced
by the conquerors was imposed
upon America. In this meeting of
substantially different cultures, the
cultural divergence was undoubtedly
one of the most extreme ever known
in the Christian era. It was all the
more dramatic because, thanks to
the technical superiority of their fire¬
arms, thanks to the wheel and the
horse, a handful of Europeans con¬
quered hundreds of thousands of
Americans, many of them organized
into powerful nations.
At the same time, it was the ration¬
alist culture of the Renaissance that
came into contact with the magic
universe of the Indians. The com¬
plexity of this relationship might explain
the conflict in which that experience
which contributed to the creation of
a Latin American cultural identity was
lived.
Arising from the imposition of West¬
ern Christian culture on the New
World, the use of Spanish Castilian
and Portuguese as "national idioms"
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
27

THREE
NOBEL PRIZEWINNERS
FOR LITERATURE
GABRIELA MISTRAL
Chilean poet and Nobel Prizewinner 1945, she
won fame for her sympathetic verses about chil¬
dren, the downtrodden and the humble. She
wrote four major books of poems, "Desolación"
(1922), "Tala" (1938), "Ternura" (1945) and
"Lagar" (1954). A book of her "Selected
Poems", translated by Längsten Hughes, was
published by the Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, U.S.A., in 1957.
LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE (Continued)
28
in literary expression leads to the
problem of the independence of
Latin American letters. Are they not
simply offshoots of metropolitan
literature? To what extent does Latin
American literature exist as an inde¬
pendent totality?
The doubt arises, in the first place,
because our literature is expressed
in a language defined by the qualify¬
ing term "Spanish", a term which
has an unmistakable historical and
political context. This tradition an
important element in defining identity
is alien to us, something borrowed.
This is aggravated by the absence of
Spanish-American unity, that is to
say, of the single national basis of
Spanish literature.
In reality, the language system as it
relates to a concrete world, increases
in complexity as it "adapts itself to the
world it expresses". In this way,
both languages, the Peninsular and
the American, are simply variants of
the same system, but variants which
reveal different and independent ex¬
periences. Hence the diversity of both
literatures, associated by ' a common
system and separated by the variants
and reflecting different historical uni¬
verses.
The break in Peninsular linguistic
purity, both in the dominions of Spain
and in Brazil in which there is not
only evidence of Indian speech but
also of Negro influence is extremely
important for the later evolution of
Latin American literature and, to a
great extent, for the present quest for
expression.
The linguistic break Is critical and
becomes a conscious programme
Immediately after Independence. In
effect, as early as 1825, people speak
of the "Brazilian language" and a little
later, in Spanish America, of the
"national language" especially in
Argentina and Mexico.
It was the Modernist movement which
was to break with the linguistic purity
of Spanish American literature in a
conscious manner and within the area
of high culture. If the Romantic
"nativists" intuitively regenerate the
language, the Modernists do so delib¬
erately, through their aesthetic ex¬
plorations. While ideologically Roman¬
ticism was anti-Spanish, Modernism
was pro-French and Its greatest repre¬
sentative, Rubén Darío, gladly accept¬
ed the accusation of "mental galli¬
cism" applied to his school.
w ITH the generation of 98,
Spain recognized the value of the
Modernist experience and introduced
it into the Iberian Peninsular. It was
the first time that the former colonies
had imposed their cultural patterns on
the old metropolis; the direction of
influence had been reversed.
The American origin of the Modern¬
ist renewal does not depend on indi¬
genous, local or native elements.
Essentially cosmopolitan and refined,
Modernism denied immediate reality
Darío expressed it thus: "I detest
the life and the time into which I
have been born" and where it call¬
ed upon such elements, it was in the
same spirit of exoticism that inspired
references to the East or to Greek
and Latin antiquity.
In Brazil, the speech of the ethnic
minorities of the country has been
a more important source of literary
language. The Brazilian Modernists
looked towards indigenous and Negro
cultures in order to borrow words
and expressions from the former,
rhythms, structures and images of
MIGUEL ANGEL
ASTURIAS
Guatemalan novelist and poet, and
Nobel Prizewinner 1967, he combines
in his writings the mysticism of the
Indians and the militancy of social
protest. Three of his most important
novels have been translated into
English: "The President", translated
by Frances Partridge (Victor Gollancz,
London, 1963), "The Green Pope",
translated by Gregory Rabassa (Dela-
cote Press, New York, 1971), and "The
Mulatto and Mister Fly", translated by
Gregory Rabassa (Harmondsworth-Pen
guin Books, London, 1970).
-
expression as well as the lexical
element from the latter.
The initiation In Brazil of what is
known as Afro-Brazilian literature
occurs at the same time as Afro-
Antillean literature: Luis Palés Matos,
Ramón Guirao, Emilio Ballagas, Nico¬
lás Guillen, José Tallet.
Referring to these movements, the
Haitian writer, René Depestre, des¬
cribes their "use of rhythmic elements
of onomatopoeia and of sensorial ele¬
ments proper to the oral literature of
the Negro. This signals the initiation
of the 'Negro theme' as a literary
fashion." Among the writers mention¬
ed, Nicolás Guillen is outstanding since
the content of his works reflects his
mulatto condition and thus transcends
Africanism.
Literary Indigenism which emerges
in the Spanish American novel around
the 1920s and 1930s, was, from the
point of view of stylistic expression,
more timid and colourless than Afri¬
canism. In reality, despite the ideo¬
logy of protest on behalf of the Indian,
the language continued to be that of
Modernism with modifications in its
development because of naturalist and
positivist influences.
Indigenous words were used; the
writing was larded with more or less
indigenous expression but the select¬
ive criteria continued to be the same
as Modernist exoticism. Sympathy for
the Indian did not go beyond the
framework of a superficial interest and
did not extend to the investigation of
the components of their culture.
By using the myth-coloured speech
of the Indians, Miguel Angel Asturias
blew open the language of the Latin
American narrative. Having gone to
the roots of maya-quiché culture,
Asturias demonstrated the magic value
of the word in that civilization. Fur-

PABLO NERUDA
Nobel Prizewinner 1971, Pablo Neruda
is a Chilean poet who is concerned
with harried, exploited, alienated man.
Among the major works of this prolific
writer the most important published
so far In English is his "Canto
General", translated by Nathaniel Tarn
and published under the title "The
Heights of Machu Picchu", Jonathan
Cape, London (1966). Several selec¬
tions of his poems have also been
published in English including: "Select¬
ed Poems", edited by Nathaniel Tam
and translated by Anthony Kerrigan
and others (Jonathan Cape, London,
1970), "The Early Poems", translated
by David Osman and Carlos B. Hagen
(Rivers Press, New York, 1969), and
"A New Decade of Poems, 1958-1967",
translated by Ben Belitt and Alaister
Reid (Grove Press, New York, 1969).
ther, by assuming this sacred function
and translating it into a literary plane,
Asturias Increased the power of lan¬
guage, of a language which is generat¬
ed by Inherent laws.
This is creation through and within
the word, as American Indian culture
conceives it. The work of Asturias
and his masterpiece, Hombres de
maíz (Men of Maize) is the clear¬
est example of the indigenous cultural
contribution to Spanish American
literary language.
Two other contemporary writers
have had the same impact as Asturias
although In a more discreet, a more
underground manner: José María
Arguedas and Augusto Roa Bastos.
The former is a Peruvian whose mother
tongue was Quechua and who recre¬
ates the marvellous world of the sierra
Indians. He writes in a Spanish that
Is poured into the moulds of the
aboriginal language.
Arguedas attempted to define his
style thus: "I wrote in a type of Castil¬
lan which is not that of a mixed lan¬
guage but of a mixed style in which
the spirit and the characteristics of
Quechua are clearly vibrant, are clear¬
ly evident within the Castilian style."
The Spanish professor, Antonio
Tovar, has made a prediction about
"the languages which could emerge
in America". It Is based on the "hope
that at least in areas that are now
remote, in those profound and rich
deposits of old traditions, this fruit¬
ful fusion of cultures and of langua¬
ges will be kept free and alive."
Another phenomenon the contem¬
porary determination to realize the
synthesis of almost five centuries of
warring cultural existence through lit¬
erary expression is worth serious
reflection and analysis, although this
is a project still to be realized.
Never was awareness of the task
so acute as in the works of the pre¬
sent generation. "We live in countries
where everything is still to be said,
but In which we still have to discover
how to say this everything. If, in
a Latin American novel, there is no
striving after an original language, then
It does not exist for me," declares
the Mexican novelist, Carlos Fuentes.
The path seems to be that of bring¬
ing the written language closer to liv¬
ing speech, a task which is slow and
difficult.
I HE contemporary writers
who have come to the fore since 1945,
base their literary creation on linguistic
innovation. This means that literature
is progressively appropriating an
already-existing cultural heritage; a
collective creation which is the result
of constant borrowings and grafted
onto the trunk of the mother tongue.
The so-called "degeneration of the
language" an old colonialist myth
is thus shown to be fruitful.
Language even the literary lan¬
guage is not a capricious invention
but a historical product. In this
sense, the most recent writers, by
breaking the linear development of
language, testify to a present reality
that is characterized by the increasing
complexity of the Latin American
world. And this is also valid for
Brazil where, from the extreme inno¬
vations of the Modernists onwards,
the literary language went through a
process similar to that of Spanish
America.
The breakthrough which permitted
these writers to appropriate collo¬
quial and regional language accounts
for the emergence of a writer like
Joäo Guimaräes Rosa who was able
to make the speech of the Brazilian
North East into a universal instrument.
The sertäo (backlands) was one of
the last strongholds where Portuguese
met up with indigenous and African
languages. Guimaräes Rosa uses the
substratum of this spoken language
to construct the long narrative-mono¬
logue of Riobaldo (which is more
appropriately heard than read) in his
Gran sertäo veredas (The Devil To
Pay in the Backlands).
The possible limitations of this folk
and colloquial speech are overcome
by great Inventive skill and by the
poetic energy of the novelist who
uses words as stimulants, as free
suggestions, rather than as fixed
categories.
The theme which is the second
factor selected in order to analyse
the phenomenon of the meeting of
cultures in Latin American literature
rapidly becomes the key to the defi¬
nition of what is American and, as
will be obvious, becomes the pro¬
gramme of literary emancipation.
From the beginning of the nine¬
teenth century up to the present, many
writers have seen the problem of lit¬
erary independence, as one of "dis¬
covering a continent" through the des¬
cription of the geographical and social
environment. Furthermore, some cri¬
tics have emphasized the telluric in
the definition of our literature, thus
giving precedence to the "content"
aspect as a synonym of "authen¬
ticity".
The vision of Latin America during nn
the colonial period was generally ¿Jq
idyllic or, in any case, out of touch
with reality. With Independence, the
vision fundamentally changes and is
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE (Continued)
more in touch with reality. The Latin
American Romantic generation espe¬
cially Andrés Bello in Spanish-speak¬
ing Latin America and Gonçalves de
Magalhäes In Brazil outline a definite
programme: the new literature should
match the new political reality.
The programme of the Romantics
a literature with an American theme
and content represents a search for
continental identity, geared towards a
future and with a concept of America
as a complete whole.
The Romantic programme of "lit¬
erary independence" is carried out pre¬
cisely by the writers who emerge in
the second decade of the twentieth
century, from the period of the Mexi¬
can Revolutionary novel onwards.
These also assume an essentially
ethical approach and attempt, like the
Romantics, to seek an American
literary identity in theme and content.
The analogy no longer applies be¬
yond this point because naturally
times have changed and ideologies
have been transformed.
When the generation of writers
which J. A. Portuondo defines as "the
generation of social problems" emerg¬
ed, the Mexican Revolution was at its
height; soon after, the Russian Revol¬
ution broke out, and in Spanish Amer¬
ica the University Reform movement
got under way. These political events
profoundly affect the works of the
period, determining the overriding in¬
terest of the writers in social themes
and specifically determining the com¬
mitted nature of that literature.
H
30
OWEVER, part of this
fiction the so called "novel of the
land" follows an identical line to that
of the nineteenth-century in its admir¬
ation for wild nature which must, at
the same time, be conquered in order
to make it productive.
In any case, the greater part of
this literature is definitely political;
it is a literature that denounces
and protests. Further, the historical
situation had changed since the period
of the Romantic generation. Spain
had ceased to be the target for
Spanish American writers. The
colonial period was far off. The period
in which there emerges the generation
of "social problems" coincides with
foreign penetration and armed
intervention.
Anti-colonialist literature was written
which denounced invasion or the
miserable conditions in which the
exploited population lived in the mines,
in the banana plantations or the
petroleum fields. The disturbing
fresco of continental exploitation was
depicted hurriedly, indignantly with
twisted, caricatural, grotesque per¬
sonages through whom the writer
hoped to state his protest and to
regenerate man rather than to create
a novelistic world.
The Brazilian novelists of the 1930s
Unesco translations series Representative works
MANUEL ANTONIO DE ALMEIDA (Brazil). Memoirs of a Militia Sergeant.
Translated by Linton L. Barrett, Pan American Union, Washington, U.S.A., 1959, 244 pp.,
($1.50).
CONCOLORCORVO (Pen name of Alonso Carrio de la Bandera - Peru) El
Lazarillo, A Guide for Inexperienced Travellers between Buenos Aires and
Lima, 1773. Translated by W.D. Kline, Indiana University Press, Bloomington,
U.S.A., 1965, 315 pp.
MANUEL DE J. GALVAN (Dominican Republic). The Cross and the Sword.
Translated by Robert Graves, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, U.S.A., 1954;
Victor Gollancz, London, U.K., 1956, 366 pp. (75p).
BALDOMERO LILLO (Chile). The Devil's Pit and other stories. Translated by
Esther S. Dillon and Angel Flores, Pan American Union, Washington, U.S.A., 1959,
152 pp.
TERESA DE LA PARRA (Venezuela). Mama Blanca's Souvenirs. Translated by
Harriet de Onis, Pan American Union, Washington, U.S.A. 1960, 129 pp.
OCTAVIO PAZ (Mexico). Anthology of Mexican Poetry. Translated by Samuel
Beckett, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, U.S.A., 1958, 213 pp., ($6); 1965,
Paperback edition ($1.95); Thames and Hudson, London, U.K., 1958.
FLORENCIO SANCHEZ (Uruguay). Representative Plays. Translated by
Willis Knapp Jones, Pan American Union, Washington, U.S.A., 1961, 326 pp.
DOMINGO SARMIENTO (Argentina) Travels (selection). Translated by Ines
Muñoz, Pan American Union, Washington, U.S.A., 1963, 297 pp.
JUAN ZORILLA DE SAN MARTIN (Uruguay). Tabaré. Translated by Walter
Owen, Pan American Union, Washington, U.S.A., 1956, 366 pp
Unesco collection of contemporary works
MODERN BRAZILIAN POETRY. Translated by John Nist, Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, U.S.A., 1 962, 1 75 pp. Available from Kraus Reprint Co. New York ($9.50).
OCTAVIO PAZ (Mexico). Selected Poems. Translated by M. Rukeyser in colla¬
boration with the author, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, U.S.A., 1963, 171 pp
($5.75) ; U.K. title " Configuration ", Jonathan Cape, London, 1971 (£ 2.95).
JAIME TORRES BODET (Mexico). Selected Poems. Translated by S.P. Karsen,
Indiana University Press, Bloomington, U.S.A., 1964, 155 pp. ($5.75).
Many of the above books are out of print, and are listed for information purposes.
cultivated a type of narrative that was
exactly equivalent to that of their
Spanish American contemporaries.
The most important are the "North¬
eastern" novelists Graciliano Ramos,
José Lins do Regó, Jorge Amado.
Within this social tendency, it is
interesting to pick out the Indigenist
stream which is especially relevant to
our theme. What differentiates these
social works from the idealized
Romantic position of the Indianists is
in their emphasis on the real problem
of the Indian as an outsider in a class
society.
It has been pointed out already that,
on the linguistic plane, Indigenism did
not give rise to very convincing works.
Similarly, thematically, it suffered from
undeniable faults; a caricatural dualism,
a predominantly humanitarian approach
which attempted to defend the Indians
from exploitation and at the same time
condemned their culture by implication,
by proposing that they be levelled
up to and integrated within "white"
society.
The reaction was foreseeable.
Indigenism had been based on the
classical, ethnocentric theories of the
West. The authors who transcended
these limitations Arguedas, Asturias
are those who exposed the essence
of indigenous culture by measuring
the continuing validity of the structures
of these civilizations.
Another occasion when the prob¬
lematic meeting of cultures as a
theme appears in Latin American
literature occurs with the emergence
of the black question. We have
already seen the birth of Africanism
as an expressive instrument of African
rhythms. Later there arises négritude
which attempts to explain the deep
roots as the consequence of that
cultural shock.
This new attitude accuses Africanism
of having retained only the superficial,
folklore aspects of the Negro condition
in America. It preaches a spirit of
rebellion in order to realize a "search
for identity". This is most fully
realized in West Indian literature
especially that in French; in Spanish,
writers such -as Nicolás Guillen and
Adalberto Ortiz are worth mentioning.
The ethical position of négritude puts
it in the current of the "social problem"
stream in Spanish American literature.

To sum up, the search for literary
identity through the production of a
social and committed novel represents
an important step in the process of
identifying that social reality. But it
was, to a certain extent, an erroneous
search. The very criterion of "docu¬
mentary truth" that was adopted was
deceptive because It represented a
surface deformed by the redemptionist
intention which the author imposed.
In this sense, the term "sociological
literature" also attributed to it, is
dubious.
José Carlos Mariátegui had already
warned of the danger of a realism that
drew away from reality. And we have
not even mentioned the weaknesses
whose evil consequences are still with
us which resulted from the attempt
to found the authenticity of the Latin
American writer on telluric and protest
factors.
This leads us to consideration of the
"content" aspect as conceived and put
into practice by novelists who began
to write about 1945. Contemporary
Latin American writers are in the
process of making a synthesis by
drawing on a multiplicity of cultural
borrowings, on the tensions which
have arisen from these conflictive
encounters, on previous experience
and on the wish to penetrate deeper
and to experiment. The result is that
their vision of reality is enriched by
their multiple approach to it.
IS ORGES described the
transition from one conception of
literature to another with an ironic
and lucid phrase: "reality is not always
local." Recognizing the diversity and
complexity of the social and cultural
environment, writers have renounced
superficial description and explicit
moral statement. Instead, they stress
the discontinuity, contradictions and
doubts that mark the social and cul¬
tural limits of an underdeveloped
continent which oscillates between
the opposites poles of revolution and
total dependence.
Their procedure is often to use basic
cultural ingredients. Thus the under¬
lying, distilled thematic presence of
Indian mythological symbols can be
detected in a great many present-
day works, especially by Mexicans
(Fuentes, Rulfo, Arreóla, Yáñez) and
in writers of other countries like
Arguedas and Roa Bastos. I am not
here alluding to direct utilization (of
the legendary element) but to its
literary transmutation and adaptation
to the contemporary situation in
function of the narrative.
Seen in this way, the theme or
content of literature can be considered
a defining element of Latin American
literary identity because it is the result
of a great diversity of cultural contri¬
butions, and as such is always open
to new developments.

