Cave wall art
comes to man
by
André Leroi-Gourhan
30
ANDRE LEROI-GOURHAN is one of the out¬
standing world authorities on prehistoric art.
He is professor of prehistory at the Collège
de France and director of the Institute of
Ethnology in Paris. He has directed many
archaeological excavations in Europe and the
Far East. He took part In Unesco's 1969
international symposium on the origin of
Homo sapiens, in Paris (see bibliography
inside back cover).
HE contemporary arts of
Africa and Oceania are often mis¬
takenly labelled "primitive" a serious
error since these arts have had just
as long an evolution as western art.
Traces of this evolution have all too
often vanished, yet those that survive
prove that styles varied over the
centuries and that, although their
"language of forms" differs from that
handed down to us from Ancient
Greece, the so-called "primitive" arts
are in no sense rudimentary.
The same cannot be said for the
oldest prehistoric art whose first
expressions canx be perceived at the
dawn of modern man. This is the true
primitive art.
As other articles in this issue make
clear, the concept of humanity changes
according to whether we consider man
within the span of history or within the
context of the modern age.
In the modern context we find a
single global concept of man; Homo
sapiens, symbolizing the human race.
But within the span of history, things
are quite different. For one or two
million years, perhaps even longer,
thousands of generations of bipeds
succeeded one another, and Homo
sapiens emerged perhaps less than
fifty thousand years ago.
Along this interminable road of
early human development we en¬
counter relatively few works of art.

The cave of Lascaux in S.W. France
boasts some of the finest prehistoric
art of the Magdalenian period (15,000-
9,000 B.C.). Cave artists, who deplet¬
ed hundreds of vigorous and lifelike
animal figures on its walls and ceiling,
knew the animals around them intima¬
tely, and displayed an extraordinary
understanding of and skill in painting
by contrasting black, brown, red and
yellow paints to enhance the realism
of their work (see back cover). Horses
in this Lascaux fresco (centre, beneath
a leaping cow, and at far left) have
been called "Chinese" because of
their similarity to horses seen in Chi¬
nese art 15,000 years later.
At best, one can imagine the pre¬
decessors of modern men, while their
intellect gradually evolved, indulging
an occasional aesthetic impulse by
using their voices, beating out rhythms
and making body movements, the pre¬
cursors of song, music and dance.
As one approaches the types of
men nearer our own Neanderthal
man for Instance one can add to
these embryonic forms of artistic
creation the first signs of engraving,
painting and sculpture.
No structured and decipherable work
of art from these very distant times
has yet been discovered, but we do
know that between 40,000 and 100,000
years ago Neanderthal men handled
natural red ochre and may even have
scratched lines on bone fragments
with the point of a flint.
Unfortunately, there Is little to help
the prehistorian to understand how
the arts were born: only a few traces
of pigment to attest that men were
already interested in colour. Some¬
times, too, the odd-shaped stones and
fossilized shells found among the used
flint tools and remains of game in
early settlements show us that our
nearest forefathers were intrigued by
the spontaneous forms of nature.
This attraction for "natural curiosities"
is deeply anchored in the aesthetic
behaviour of man and has survived
all through history, right up to our own
times.
That Neanderthal men, or the type
of humanity just preceding our own,
had aesthetic needs, as well as the
means of satisfying them, is shown
by the already advanced state of their
technical skills. The shaping of stone
tools creates forms which quickly
acquire regular outlines (ovals, blades
with nearly parallel sides, triangles,
and so on). The first production of
such artificial forms was dictated by
the technique used to prepare the
Photo 0 Jean Vertut. Paris
flint blocks from which the efficient
tool was to emerge.
Although It has been shown that
chance fragments of split flint can be
used as tools, we perceive, during the
first million years of human prehistory,
a search in progress for processes
which would enable artifacts to be
standardized. We find, too, a gradual
evolution of styles which enable us to
identify objects from different periods.
The search for efficient tools and
the need for an economical use of
whatever raw materials came to hand
are the obvious explanation for this
evolution in tool-making. Yet the
truly significant fact is that this
increasing technical progress is in¬
separable from the growing elaboration
of aesthetic forms.
However, until about 40,000 B.C.
one cannot really speak of true works
of art works in which the hands of
men created not merely an object but
also a symbol.
It is difficult to draw clear lines of
demarcation between the successive
stages of man's evolution since, in a
theoretical sense, they are not those
of pre-men, proto-men and finally true
men. From the very beginning we
are dealing with men who gradually
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CAVE WALL ART (Continued)
became more and more human, right
down to modern times. The same is
true for art which did not suddenly
appear fully formed, but evolved
gradually through the ages. Neander¬
thal man's interest in the curiosities of
nature or in pigments, therefore mark¬
ed a decisive phase in a continuous
process which reached its full develop¬
ment later.
This development, reflected in the
nature of modern men, is in all
probability linked with the emergence
of language, or at any rate, the
capacity to formulate abstractions.
The hand, like the vocal organs, faith¬
fully expresses thought. And although
it is true that until the appearance of
writing we have no direct witness to
verbal expression (which stems from
the same cerebral centres as manual
expression), nothing prevents us from
supposing that language and technical
skill were interdependent all through
human evolution.
But if from the beginning the hand
gave form to thought through the
craftsman's gestures and left a perma¬
nent "memory-print" of the un¬
conscious search for forms, no trace
of any consciously created shapes
with a symbolic rather than practical
function has been found among the
remains of the men who lived between
500,000 and 1 million years ago.
What the' hand did not translate is
not likely to have existed in the
language; and it seems that any
change had to wait until the long
process of cerebral and cultural
development reached a certain thresh¬
old. Homo sapiens the present
human species crossed that thresh¬
old some forty thousand years ago.
Strikingly enough, ornaments (pierc¬
ed teeth and pendants) appeared at
the same time as the first attempts at
figurative art. It is as though the
emerging modes of expression trans¬
lated at the same time the symbols
of social behaviour (ornaments) and
the symbols of abstract expression
which confirms the link between
artistic and verbal expression. The
aesthetic impulse is always the carrier
of social yearnings, in the fullest
sense. It does not exist for its own
sake because it is a means of express¬
ing or giving form to feelings of
power, love or religious aspiration.
So far as one can judge, the orna¬
mental or figurative prehistoric arts
obeyed the same rules as later arts.
The exact date of their emergence is
difficult to fix, partly because we are
far from knowing the prehistory of all
Two tiny statuettes carved by artists of the Aurlgnacian
period (30,000-25,000 B.C.). The one above measuring
only 37 mm. (1 1/2 In.) was discovered at Lake Trasimeno
(central Italy). Right, the famous 'Venus of Willendorf"
(Austria) is 110 mm. (4 In.) high.

Prehistoric artists rarely portrayed the human face. Inside front
cover depicts one. Two others are shown here. Above, human
head carved on a limestone pebble no bigger than a hen's egg.
Believed to date from about 20,000 B.C. it was unearthed at
Aq Kuptuk in northern Afghanistan. Right, a head carved in Ivory
47 mm. (2 In.) found at Dolni Vestonice (Czecholovakia).
the regions of the world, but above
all because we are dealing with an
evolutionary per¡od¡ not a particular
moment in time. Behind innovation
there is always an inventor; but
behind the inventor looms a whole
social and historical background.
And when, as In the present case, the
facts cover many small stages spread
out over thousands of years, it would
be an oversimplification to speak of
the "invention" of painting or sculp¬
ture.
Our knowledge covers the final
period of European Neanderthal man
and the end of the last glacial period
perhaps from 50,000 B.C. and
certainly up 9,000 B.C. The begin¬
nings were extremely slow; and more
than half the period was gone before
the creation of the great paintings or
low-reliefs of the western European
caves.
During the second half of the
period, however, there was an extra¬
ordinary abundance of decorated
caves in Spain, France, Italy and even
the Urals, and a profusion of sculp¬
ture and engraving all the way from
the Atlantic to Lake Baikal in Siberia.
Works from this long initial period
of artistic evolution will certainly be
discovered in other parts of the world.
But up to now the thousands of paint¬
ings and engravings discovered in
Africa or southern Asia, for instance,
belong to more recent periods. This
does not, of course, make them any
less valuable or significant.
A very important point should be
noted concerning prehistoric art: its
technical means reached their fullest
development from the very beginning.
This is something that radically dis¬
tinguishes artistic creation from
technical invention. Hunting, fishing,
weaving, clothing and home-making
skills slowly evolved up to the present.
One cannot imagine prehistoric man
inventing the aeroplane on the basis
of the scientific knowledge offered
him by his own society. But 'with
coloured earths and with flint tools
whose cutting power is superior to
most metal ones, the artist was
immediately in possession of all his
means of expression.
Time brought new processes like
mosaics or oil painting, new colours
like greens or blues, as well as various
nuances in the execution; but from
the very first the artist could give his
whole measure In forms, in contrasts
of colour and in relief . . . The position
is therefore very different for art than
for technology.
In technology, the factor of the
prehistoric craftsman's creative ima-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CAVE WALL ART (Continued)
HORSE'S HEAD IN MINIATURE
Carved with superlative skill and minute precision by an artist of the
Magdalenian period on a tiny piece of reindeer antler, this horse's
head measures only 45 mm (2 In.) from ear to muzzle. It was found
in a cave at Mas d'Azil (south-west France).
Photo © S. Celebonovlc, Geneva
gination can be disregarded when one
considers the material equipment at
his disposal. His level of achievement
corresponds to the stage at which his
society has arrived, according to its
period and geographical situation.
For art, the dependence on the
technical and social environment is of
another order. Crude works and
those which reach full mastery of
expression can be found in the same
society, simultaneously or succes¬
sively.
Where engraving and sculpture are
concerned, the problem of tools does
not arise. Flint is perfectly adequate
whether for cutting or carving bone,
lumps of soft stone or the walls. of
caves and rock overhangs. And it
is even easier'to trace shapes with a
finger on wet clay or to model them
in the same material. So such works
are found from the beginning. Model¬
ling and sculpture in low-relief do not
appear until relatively late, however,
probably not before 15,000 B.C. But
the search for "three dimensional"
effects is a dominant trait in the
evolution of prehistoric art.
In the case of "hollowed out" works
of art, one point deserves special
mention. For practical reasons, low-
relief is only found in hollows lit by
daylight. The designs must have
taken many weeks to execute; and in
deep caves this would have required
some form of lighting, as well as
prolonged stays underground.
But In some caves (for instance at
Font de Gaume in the Dordogne), one
comes across an expeditive process
for rendering relief which reveals the
use of an astonishing technical knack.
After the figure has been traced with
a line a few millimetres deep, the Inner
border has been rounded off, and with
side lighting this gives a striking
illusion of relief.
LPART from wall figures,
prehistoric artists have left numerous
engravings on stone tablets or bones
and antlers. Certain objects like the
tips of weapons are decorated with
simple geometrical patterns; and spear
throwers often bear highly elaborated
animal figures.
Small sculptures in the round in the
form of human and animal figures were
also made. In certain regions, such as
Czechoslovakia or the U.S.S.R., where
cave art is unknown, hundreds of
statuettes carved in soft stone or
modelled in clay have been found,
while female figures, generally . with
CONTINUED PAGE 39

.4S.
ê
^ v ï /
1 S r
Í
;
\ -
CAVE WALL CAVALCADE. Cavalcades of animals painted ¡n Palaeolithic times on cave walls and ceilings
vividly illustrate how hunting dominated the life and imagination of prehistoric man. The meticulous portrayal
of horses and remdeer, chamois and bison, lions, bears, mammoths and other animals shows that they were the
work of experienced artists. This shaggy-haired mammoth figures on a painted panel of beasts in the Pech-
Merle cave in the Lot Department of south-west France. The painted horse (centre spread, overleaf) from a
cave at Niaux (S.W. France) Is outstanding for its lifelike representation. Note how the artist has imitated
flow of the mane by skilful use of sloping lines. Photos © Jean Vertut, Paris

\
1,
'TSBKM
BWP

ART OF
PREHISTORIC
SPAIN
The artists of prehistory
depicted many kinds of
deer. Left, antlered stag
(40 cm. long) on the wall
of the famous Las Chime¬
neas cave near Santander
(northern Spain). Below, a
red-painted doe from the
Covalanas cave in the same
area.
Photos © Jean Vertut, Paris

CAVE WALL ART (Continued trom page 34)
The palette of the Palaeolithic painter
greatly exaggerated forms, are com¬
mon from the Atlantic coast of the
Pyrenees to Lake Baikal in Siberia.
The development of painting is
equally remarkable. As has been
shown, colours were in use very early
on. By 35,000 B.C., prehistoric man
knew how to employ fire to oxydize
natural ochres and change their
shades; and the whole range of
yellows and purplish reds was known
and used. Black was supplied by
natural manganese or charcoal.
ECHNIQUES for applying
paint were no less varied. When the
ochre or manganese was sufficiently
firm and friable, true crayons were
cut, which served to decorate flat
surfaces. Hard colours were ground
on a palette of rough stone; and both
these and natural powders were
applied in various ways according to
the nature of the background or the
effect sought after.
Sometimes the pigments were
stippled in close dots, dabbed on with
the tip of the finger or printed with a
small stick; sometimes continuous
lines of varying width were drawn in
the same way or even with true
brushes.
Occasionally, a special method was
otherwise have discouraged artistic
efforts. The most striking case is the
main part of the Lascaux grotto (Dor-
dogne, France). The surface of the
white calcite walls is lumpy, like a
cauliflower, and ill-suited to the usual
painting techniques.
The Lascaux artists, some 15,000
years ago, solved the problem by
stencilling on the powdered colours
with the help of a fur pad, giving a
dappled effect. As these blurred
dabs made it difficult to obtain a clear
outline, the painter masked the outer
edge of the figures with a strip of
bark or leather, moving it along as he
advanced.
This extremely ingenious process
required considerable manual dex¬
terity; and it confirms the feeling one
has when one studies the great
artistic achievements of the French
and Spanish caves: the fresco artists
must have been specialists, at least
part of whose activity was devoted to
decorating underground sanctuaries.
As was mentioned earlier, the most
original aspect of prehistoric cave
wall art is perhaps the search for a
three-dimensional effect. As well
as low-relief sculptures and carv¬
ings with rounded inner edges, two
other techniques were developed.
The first is common to the various
painting and engraving processes. It
consists in taking advantage of natural
irregularities in the wall by placing
the work in such a way that a bump is
used for a flank, the edge of a rock
for a bone or a small knob for paws
with colours or engraved lines
stressing the natural volumes and
making them explicit.
The second solution is to vary the
thickness of the line or use shading
or hatchings. This method is used
with great skill at Altamira near San¬
tander, in northern Spain towards
11 or 12,000 B.C. and at Niaux (Ariège,
France). It puts the frescoes in the
depths of these caves on a level with
the finest works produced by the great
artists of historical times.
Can one indeed justifiably des¬
cribe as "primitive", an art which
already has thousands of years of
development behind it? It is reassuring
to remind ourselves that at a time
when technology was rudimentary and
human life still at a subsistence level,
thousands of years before agriculture,
metal-working and writing brought
into being the civilizations of antiquity,
man had found ways of giving full
expression to his artistic thought and
by the same token to his humanity.
Ancient rock carvings have been
found In many parts of the world.
This rock engraving is from Lake
Onega, 200 km east of Leningrad,
where archaeologists have uncover¬
ed numerous traces of Neolithic peo¬
ples who lived on the lake's shores
and Islands: tools, and rock-cut ani¬
mal figures including many reindeer.
39
