
Colour page opposite
GODS, EPICS AND HEROES. A four-century old book a combination of art album and
historical novel has just been published In the Unesco collection of Representative
Works. Surprisingly modern In style, it is the famous "Tovar Manuscript" with Its superb
water-colour Illustrations depicting Aztec epics, gods and heroes, copied in the 16th century from
ancient Indian paintings. In 1587, a Mexican Indian missionary. Father Juan de Tovar,
gathered the historical and legendary traditions of the Aztecs Into a single work. All trace of
the manuscript was lost between the 16th century and the 19th century, when It was re-discovered
by an English collector. The "Tovar Manuscript" has now been published by the Akademische
Druck und Verlaganstalt, at Graz (Austria). It presents a Spanish text prepared by the
French hlspanist, Prof. Jacques Lafaye, of the Sorbonne (from the original manuscript now
in the John Carter Brown Library of Brown University, in the U.S.A.), a French translation and
numerous notes and commentaries. Opposite, three of its illustrations. Bottom left, Quetzalcoatl,
the "plumed serpent", a major deity in the Mexican pantheon and the Aztec god of creation,
inventor of agriculture and patron of learning. His cape of feathers symbolizes the wings
of a butterfly, the form in which warriors journeyed to paradise. Bottom right, an eagle perched
on a cactus devours a bird. The painting recalls the legend of the sun god, Huitzilopochtli,
telling the Aztecs to build their capital at a spot where an eagle was devouring
a snake (an image from which Mexico's national emblem Is derived). Tenochtitlan, the Aztec
capital, is now buried under Mexico City. Footprints around the cactus roots symbolize
the Aztecs' search. At upper right of painting is the god's shield with five points
representing the divisions of space, and two arrows. Left, the same symbols figure In
the painting of Huitzilopochtli.
Photos © Akademische Druck und Verlaganstalt, Graz
by
Miguel Angel Asturias
Nobel Prize for Literature

Painted manuscripts
of pre-Columbian
America
HE existence of books
among the pre-Hispanic peoples of
America, the materials used and their
typology, is such a wide theme that
the three major cultures (Náhuatl,
Maya and Quechua) should really be
studied separately.
The Mexican, Maya and Peruvian
Indians discovered and cultivated
different "modes" of transmitting their
culture and ethics. Some of them
still amaze us with their plastic beauty
MIGUEL ANGEL ASTURIAS, one of today's
greatest novelists in the Spanish language,
was bom In Guatemala in 1899. In 1967, he
was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature.
Three of his most important novels have
been translated into English: "The President"
(Victor Gollancz, London, 1963), "The Mulatta
and Mister Fly" (Harmondsworth-Penguin
Books, London, 1970) and "The Green Pope'
(Delacote Press, New York, 1971).
and their esoteric ingenuity, and in
them all we discern a fundamental
and even obsessive urge to preserve
and transmit through original forms
of writing the profound meaning of
man and the universe.
Unlike the African world in which
social and historical traditions are
handed down through an unbroken
chain of oral communications, in the
pre-Columbian world, especially the
Náhuatl and Maya cultures, writing
and its preservation acquired an
importance matched only among the
Egyptians and the Jews. It is the key
to the universe, the tool that unlocks
its hidden mechanism, the sure and
constant guide in the conflicts and
catastrophes of an evolving world.
For this reason writing became
something sacred and esoteric for the
pre-Hispanic peoples. Written signs,
writing materials and those who could
handle them were considered by the
people as being connected with the
divine. The writings themselves, in
their creation and their appearance,
had a magical character, closely linked
to cosmogonie conceptions.
That is why the various systems of
writing that evolved among peoples
with such a high level of technical
expertise bore no relation to practical
needs; they were symbols for the
sacred message concealed within.
We know that writing, its preser¬
vation and interpretation were the
responsibility of a special class of
dignitaries with priestlike functions
sometimes they even were priests
who used language, materials, colours
and contents indissolubly related to
the archetypal situations of the Indian
deities.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

PAINTED MANUSCRIPTS (Continued)
In Moctezuma's "List of Tributes",
which contains a kind of "live" classi¬
fication of metals and materials dif¬
fering profoundly from our modern
ideas but corresponding perfectly to
Indian religious priorities, paper made
of amatl bark Is rated as highly as
quetzal feathers and pieces of jade.
It was very widely used, both in
religious ceremonies and for preparing
codices. Many types of ceremonial
vestments, ritual objects and orna¬
ments were made of amatl paper;
some were natural-coloured and others
were richly decorated with painted
designs or splashed with "hule",
another sacred material.
The images of the gods were
adorned with crowns, fans, banners
and garments of paper. For some
ceremonies the priests wore paper
suits called tilmatl, and In pouches of
this material, decorated with seashells
or painted to imitate ocelot skin, they
carried incense or copal. Prisoners
about to be sacrificed were dressed
in tilmatl and decked with other paper
ornaments. The women who took part
in the festivals in honour of Huit-
zilopochtli also wore paper garments
painted with fine black stripes.
The original religious significance
of these systems of transmitting cul¬
ture has been lost for ever. So instead
of comparing their characteristics in
the different Indian cultures, I shall
s? > .* j* v* - - *
.r*«»»?-** '/sir
Photo © Musée de l'Homme, Paris
give some specific examples of the
special even unique importance of
the methods or "channels" used for
perpetuating the sacred explanations
of the universe, the divine stories of
kings and princes, which were the
heritage to which our ancestors clung
in the uncertainties of changing cir¬
cumstances.
The pre-Columbian peoples pos¬
sessed several systems of writing
(ideographic, calendric, pictographic,
numeral, phonetic) with which they
wrote on deerskins, stones, and strips
of amatl paper. In their eyes however,
the very fact of recording and of
keeping these records was of such
vital importance that their loss or
preservation was identified with the
destruction or continuity of the
universe.
, >»-, ,«
As with the arts of gold and silver
and feather working, we do not know
when writing and books, for reasons
of technical facility, lost their purely
symbolic and priestly character and
began to have profane uses. But
throughout the history of the pre-
Columbian peoples there is always a
close relationship between their
vision of the cosmos and their style
of writing, between their sense of
existence and the words stored in
books and codices or on stones and
skins.
The oldest Náhuatl account of the
origin of the People of the Sun
mentions "an ancient tale told by old
men" and speaks of the arrival of the
ancient settlers In the mythical Ta-
moanchan, where the forebears of the
Aztecs lived. With them lived some
Below right, a page from the "Codex Fejervary-Mayer", now in the Free Public Library and Museum
of Liverpool, England. This codex of the Mixtees ("The Cloud People"), neighbours of the Mayas, was
a calendar for divination. It has a system of numbering using vertical bars (see photo). The Mayas used
the same system, but placed the bars horizontally. Below left, a page from another Mixtee manuscript,
the "Codex Becker", now in the Vienna Museum für Völkerkunde. A historical and genealogical work,
it was used in a court case in 1852 as a "property deed" by an Indian claiming hereditary ownership of land.
h:ii:ii:ii:ii:ii:ii:ii:b:
fllll III!
© IIM
1 L

Left, detall from the "Codex Mendoza"
(a record of Aztec life commissioned
in 1541 by the Spanish Viceroy in Mexico)
listing different tributes paid by subject
peoples to the Aztec emperor Moctezuma.
It records in great detail, from left to right,
the name of each city identified by its
glyph, the form of tribute (birds, shields,
clothes, etc.) surmounted in some cases
by a symbol Indicating the quantity.
A feather signifies 400 items. Right,
a page from another Illustrated manuscript,
the "Codex Borbonlcus" (see also back
cover). It depicts children dancing round
a "maypole" decorated with paper clothes
on the occasion of an Aztec festival.
wise men who are described in the
native language as "knowers-of-things"
and "possessors-of-codices".
These interchangeable epithets are
remarkable in themselves, but the tale
which follows is even more interesting.
The wise men had arrived from the
Gulf Coast and one day they heard
the voice of their god telling them to
depart, taking with them the ancient
traditions and the art of the black
and red inks which they used for
writing on deerskin. The text says:
And there were the knowers-of-
[things.
The so-called possessors-of-codi-
[ces
The wise men then went away,
They took away the black and red
[inks,
The codices, the paintings,
They took away knowledge,
They took everything away with
[them,
The books and the songs
And the music of the flutes
The old Indian tale goes on to depict
the utter desolation in which the
ancient Nahuas were left. It is easy
to compare' this state of stunned
helplessness with the effect produced
by the Spanish Conquest. The Indian
text tells how the ancient Aztecs kept
on tormenting themselves with ques¬
tions:
Will the sun shine, will the day
[dawn?
Since they have gone away, since
[they have taken away
The black and red inks, the codices,
How will the earth and the city
[endure?
What will govern us?
What will guide us?
What will be the rule?
Where must one start from?
What can be the torch and the
[light?
: /
jy-irvv^ M
....
I
ñ
n.-
We are obviously faced here with
a historical concept, a view of the
importance of tradition and of writings
closely linked and practically assimilat¬
ed to the ontological conceptions on
which the whole Indian way of life was
built.
In fact, in order to make sure that
the world will continue to exist and
that the loss of the instruments of
transmission does not bring about the
end of their lives and the destruction
of the universe, the ancient Nahuas
meet to reinvent or rediscover the old
knowledge and the old form of pre¬
serving the past, the life and essence
of their people.
As may be seen from the text below,
they are not concerned with the form
and various ways of recording the
past hence their infinite variety but
with the act of recording it so that its
remembrance may illuminate and give
coherence to a world filled with gods,
conflicts and doubts.
Then they invented the count of the
[fates,
The annals and the count of the
[years,
The book of dreams;
They recorded the sequence and
[course of events,
The time that passed
Under the lordship of the Toltecas,
The lordship of the Tepanecas,
The lordship of the Mexicas,
And all the lordships of the Chichi-
[mecas.
Later Tlacaelel, the minister who In OQ
practice governed the Aztecs during £v
the period of their greatest splendour,
carried out a radical ideological reform
CONTINUED PAGE 42

Painted manuscripts of pre-Columbian America «m«^ *«, w *>
42
by burning the historical records which
mentioned other peoples and by
manipulating the codices so as to
establish for his people the people
chosen by the gods a past which
would provide a model for its future.
This is one reason not the most
improbable for the dearth of Maya
texts and the abundance of Náhuatl
writings. The Spanish Conquest and
the destruction that ensued (the
Council of Lima in 1583 proclaimed
the "tabula rasa" of provincial ar¬
chives) put an end to the various
systems of transmitting Indian culture.
A few missionaries, imbued with the
spirit of Renaissance humanism and
interested in "Indian antiquities",
discovered and expounded the nature
and ways of conserving the doctrines
and events of the past. It is almost
exclusively through their works that
something of the great pre-Hispanic
fervour for books and tradition has
come down to us.
In the final phase of the Mexican
tragedy, when the first twelve Catholic
missionaries arrive In 1524 to convert
the vanquished, there is a scene
highly significant of the importance of
the codices in the pre-Columbian
world. The missionaries attack the
Indian religion and way of thought and
at this point one of the Chiefs rises
to express "with courtesy and urban¬
ity" his displeasure af this attack on
the customs and beliefs so dear to his
ancestors. It is not for him to defend
them since there are still some
survivors of
Those who turn the rustling leaves
[of the codices,
Those who have in their power the
[black and red inks and the painting.
They lead us, guide us, show us
[the way.
They order how a year passes,
How it follows its course,
The account of the days
And each of the twenty-day months,
That is their business,
It is for them to speak of the
[gods . . .
There could be no more concise
description of the old Indian concep¬
tion nor any better expression of the
loneliness, sadness and helplessness
of a bewildered, leaderless people.
Neither is it surprising that the main .
purpose of the survivors should be
precisely to bequeath to posterity a
full undistorted picture of their history
and the characteristics of their culture.
This and the testimony of a few
missionaries are all that is left to us
after the cataclysm of the Conquest.
Despite everything the old custom of
fixing dates was maintained, although
now they commemorated only them ruin
of the Indian peoples, and we seem to
hear the revered voice of the Chilam
Balam de Chumayel lamenting:
Alas, my younger brothers,
Your cup will overflow with
[sorrow . . .
Prepare to bear the load of misery
That is coming to your peoples . . .
And today those fabulous codices,
whose ideographs have not yet been
deciphered, can still be seen in the
Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris, In the
library of the Palais Bourbon, in the
Vatican, in Florence and Dresden,
testifying to the remarkable achieve¬
ments of the Amerindian peoples in
the production of wonderful books.
Miguel Angel Asturias.
u
z
2
r
s
a.
I
O
I
o
z
2
