1. KYRENIA. In 1967, the remains
of five ships were located off the coast
of Cyprus. The most promising wreck,
that of a 4th century B.C. amphora-
carrier, was lying In 30 metres of
water near Kyrenia. The hull had been
sheathed In lead to protect it from ship-
worms the earliest known use of this
technique. Excavations by a University
of Pennsylvania Museum team recov¬
ered hundreds of amphoras and other
objects, and the vessel was raised In
sections for reassembling and preser¬
vation in Kyrenia castle.
2. ANTIKYTHERA. Discovered in 1900 by
Greek sponge divers, this wreck achieved world¬
wide fame when helmeted divers raised a number
of bronzes, including the "Antikythera Youth",
thought to be an original by the Greek sculptor
Lysippos. Dated at between 50 and 80 B.C., the
wreck also yielded up a decorated bronze bed,
36 marble statues, a gold earring in the form of
Eros playing the lyre, glass vessels, the gears
from an astronomical Instrument and amphoras,
cups, pitchers, jugs and cooking-pots.
Photo © Pennsylvania University Museum,
National Geographic Society
The bottom of the Mediterranean has
been called " the greatest remaining
treasure-house of information about
the ancient world." Already, scores of
ancient shipwrecks, representing near¬
ly every period of antiquity, have been
found in the Mediterranean. Many have
been photographed or briefly described ;
others are known only from finds made
by fishermen. On these pages, George F.
Bass, an experienced underwater archae¬
ologist in Mediterranean waters, and
author of the article on page 8, describes
briefly some of the more noteworthy of
the wrecks which have been studied in
detail, through mapping, salvage or
actual excavation, between 1900 and
1968. The material is condensed from
the author's article published in Unesco 's
new book " Underwater Archaeology ".
12
9. SPARGI. New mapping
techniques for underwater ex¬
cavation, Including the use of a
grid for identification and re¬
cording, developed following
the operation at Albenga In
1950, were used in the excava¬
tion of a 100 B.C. Roman
amphora carrier that had sunk
In 20 metres of water between
the island of Spargi and Sardi¬
nia. The ship, about 35 metres
long and nine metres wide, was
sheathed in lead held in place
by copper nails. It carried some
3,000 amphoras, of which 300
were raised, as well as many
dishes, bowls and pitchers.
10. 11. MARZAMEM1. Two wrecks were
found off the coast of Sicily in 1958-1959.
One, lying In six metres of water not far
from Marzamemi, contained decorative
stonework for an early Christian church,
Including an ornate marble pulpit. The
ship, sailing from Constantinople or some
Aegean city, about 500 A.D., was perhaps
bound for Italy, Sicily or North Africa
where the church was to be erected. The
second cargo ship, lying at about the
same depth near Marzamemi, contained
fifteen huge blocks of coarsely worked
building stone from Greece, dating from
the third century A.D.
12. 13. SAN PIETRO AND
TORRE SGARRATA.
Searching for evidence
about Roman commerce
in marble, granite and

3. ARTEMISION. A masterpiece of 5th
century B.C. Greek sculpture, the
famous bronze statue of Poseidon or
Zeus (see front cover) came to light
with the discovery of one of its arms
In 1928 by a Greek sponge diver near
Cape Artemision on the northern coast
of the Greek Island of Euboea. The re¬
mainder of the statue was later recov¬
ered together with a bronze jockey
and parts of a galloping horse of the
Hellenistic period. It is thought that an
entire cargo of about the time of Christ
still lies beneath the sand.
4. 5. METHONE. The cargoes are oii
that remain of two wrecks off Cape Spitha,
near Methone, the ships themselves having
been eaten away by shipworm and broken
up by waves. The first cargo consisted of
fragments of about 16 granite columns,
broken before shipment and probably from
a destroyed building. Pottery fragments
suggest that the ship went down In late
Roman times. Four granite sarcophagi with
lids and a few ballast stones are all that
rerrjain of the second wreck which dates
from the 2nd or 3rd century A.D.
Photo © Guido Ucelll
6. 7. LAKE NEMI. Two enormous
Roman ships, each more than 230 feet
long, sank In Lake Neml, 16 miles
from Rome, In the 1st century A.D.
An unsuccessful attempt was made
to salvage one of them In 1446. In
1535, a diver wearing a crude wooden
helmet inspected the wrecks, and in
1827 an 8-man diving bell was used
to explore them. A large scale sal¬
vage operation was begun in 1928.
Pumping lowered the water level by
70 feet (photo above); 4 years later, the
ships, now high and dry, were re¬
moved to a museum. These "floating
palaces" were equipped with heated
baths and their decks were paved
with mosaics and coloured marble
slabs. Both ships were destroyed
during World War II .
B. ALBENGA. The wreck of a Roman ship
lying in 44 m. of water, near Albenga in north¬
west Italy, was first investigated in 1950 after
a fisherman had brought up amphoras in his
nets. A grab, directed by observers In a
diving bell, brought up over 1,000 complete or
fragmentary amphoras and dishes, bowls, stor¬
age jars, jugs and cooking-pots, presumably
from the ship's galley.
porphyry, a University of
Pennsylvania team mapped
a 3rd century cargo of
22 unfinished sarcophagi
off San Pietro, south-east
of Taranto, in 1964. In¬
vestigation of another
wreck near Taranto, at
Torre Sgarrata, revealed
18 sarcophagi and 23
roughly-hewn blocks. The
planking, frames and part
of the keel were raised.
Pottery, tiles and coins
date the wreck to the late
2nd or early 3rd century.
14. MAHDIA.
A 1st century B.C.
wreck was dis¬
covered in 1907
by sponge divers,
and some of Its
cargo, consisting of parts of buildings
stone bases, capitals and marble
columns and statues, was salvaged
by helmeted sponge divers between
1908 and 1913. Well preserved bronzes,
including the figure of a herm signed
by Boethos of Chalcedon (see centre .
colour pages), figurines of dancing
dwarfs, and busts were recovered.
Wearing aqualungs, an expedition led
by the French underwater exploration
pioneers, Jacques-Yves Cousteau and
Philippe Tailliez, cleared mud from the
wreck In 1948. This marked the start
of "aqualung archaeology" which made
scientific excavation possible for the
first time.
15. CAPE GELIDONYA. A wreck, dating
back to around 1200 B.C., was discovered
by Turkish sponge divers near Cape Gelidonya,
In south-west Turkey in 1958. Two years later,
the vessel was . completely, excavated by a
team from the University of Pennsylvania
Museum and the London University Institute
of Archaeology. The cargo consisted of about
one ton of metal, including some thirty-four
large copper ingots, smaller ones and traces
of tin Ingots. Mixed with the ingot fragments
were hundreds of broken bronze tools being
transported for their scrap value. Objects
found on board suggest that this was a Syrian
ship which had taken the metal aboard in
Cyprus before sailing westwards.
16. 17. YASSI ADA. 3,533 individual dives were made during
the excavation, between 1961 and 1964, of a 7th century Byzan¬
tine wreck at Yassl Ada, near Bodrum, in south-west Turkey (see
back cover). This wreck provided an opportunity for a unique
efficiency study of underwater archaeological methods. Finds
included probably the largest dated hoard of Byzantine pottery
plates, cups, pitchers, bowls, cooking-pots, lamps and the ship's
water jar. Lying only a few metres away, in slightly deeper
water, was another wreck whose cargo of amphoras Is thought
to date from the fifth or sixth century.
13
