In the 1920s and '30s, In the Soviet Far North (right) migratory schools followed
the nomads and their reindeer herds, travelling from camp to camp. In the 1940s
and '50s, they were replaced by boarding-schools. Schools were non-existent
in these immense icy wastes 50 years ago. Below, two Koryak herdsmen break
the monotony of the long polar day with a game of chess.
Photo ©
HE Arctic, with its hun¬
dreds of thousands of kilometres of
tundra and taiga, its rivers and lakes,
ice-bound almost throughout the year,
its long polar nights, severe climate
and harsh living conditions, Is the
home of the "small peoples" of the
North the Chukchi and the Koryaks,
Canadian Indians, Eskimos, Nentsi,
Evenks, Khanty, Mansi, Itelmen, Yuka-
girs, Selkups, Lapps, Saami, Kets,
Aleuts and many other tribes, who
live mainly on the shores of the Arctic
Ocean.
The Icy waters of that ocean wash
the coasts of U.S.S.R., Canada, U.S.A.,
Norway, Greenland and Iceland. For
centuries, the hunters, fishermen and
reindeer-breeders, living on and near
these inhospitable shores have fought
30
YURI RYTKHEU is well known as an author
In the U.S.S.R. He was born into the family
of a Chukcha nomad sea-hunter on the shores
of the Bering Strait on the Chukotka Penin¬
sula. His books on the Soviet Far North
have been translated from Chukcha Into Rus¬
sian and many national languages of the
U.S.S.R., and have appeared in 20 foreign
languages.
the cruel environment with varying
success.
Like all other small peoples, the
Arctic nationalities found themselves
in a paradoxical situation at the turn
of the century. They had become
objects of keen interest, and their
customs were studied by scientific
societies, scholars and even laymen
interested in the exotic, yet there were
few who seriously worried about their
future, about the fact that these ancient
peoples, with their patriarchal way of
life now being drawn into the world
economy, were totally unprepared for
it and helpless.
Not assimilation, but extinction
threatened them. The Yukagirs who
once had been numerous and about
whom ancient legends told that the
glow of their many campfires had put
the Aurora Borealis in the shade, were
dying out by 1917 there were just 300
of them left.
Alcohol, various diseases brought
by the white newcomers against
which the Arctic peoples had no im¬
munity, cruel exploitation and plunder
by heartless traders and indifferent

Schools
governments had by the turn of the
century ruined many of the small
northern peoples physically and spiri¬
tually.
Roald Amundsen, the great Nor¬
wegian explorer, who knew these
people well, said in one of his books:
"The best I can wish our friends, the
Netchili Eskimos, is that "civilization"
should bypass them."
At the beginning of this century the
small Arctic peoples still lived under
the tribal system, and ¡n some places
they continue to do so. In the 1920s,
when the first Russian teachers came
to the Siberian taiga and tundra, the
local nomadic tribes had never heard
of schools.
There were no words for "school"
and "learn" in the northern languages.
In the Chukcha language, for example,
the word "to discover" was used for
"learn", the word "to look at speck¬
les" for "read". The people there did
not think education necessary.
Another formidable obstacle to
schooling was that the languages of
the small nationalities were primitive

of the Soviet Far North
by Yuri Rytkheu
y*t V& *f^
in many respects and that most of
the Arctic peoples had no written
language.
Their word stock was rich as regards
terms to describe their natural envi¬
ronment and their occupations; at the
same time, however, there were few
words to describe less habitual con¬
cepts. There were no words for the
various mineral resources, for crops
and implements used in agriculture, no
words to express abstract concepts.
An interesting example of the in¬
ability to draw generalizations is given
in the reminiscences of Pyotr Skorik,
a Russian teacher, who came to far¬
away Wellen, on Dezhnev Cape, some
60 miles from Alaska in 1928:
"I remember a lesson in arithmetic
I had prepared using local examples.
'One hunter,' I told them, "killed five
seals, another killed three. How many
did they kill altogether?'
"Suddenly questions were being
fired at me from- all sides.
'When did they kill the seals?'
'Yesterday,' I replied without think¬
ing.
"Yesterday nobody went hunting, the
weather was bad." .
'Who killed the five seals?'
'Lenle,' I gave the first name that
came to my mind.
"There was an uproar of contagious
laughter, and 1 involuntarily joined in.
Lenle was probably the most un¬
successful of all the hunters in the
camp."
Geographic isolation was another
aggravating factor. The northern peo¬
ples generally lived in small groups,
dozens or even hundreds of kilometres
apart; they often migrated from place
to place in pursuit of animals and in
search of better pastures for their
herds.
It was therefore extremely difficult
to establish equal educational oppor¬
tunities in practice (formally they had
been proclaimed by the Constitution
of the Russian Federation in 1918) in
the extreme north where nature was
so uncharitable that even some ani¬
mals were unable to subsist.
A Committee for Assistance to the
Peoples of the Northern Borderlands
was set up In 1920. It played an impor¬
tant role in advancing the economy
and culture of the small northern
peoples. In the early 1930s national
areas were formed throughout the
Siberian tundra and taiga in order to
enlist the participation of the local
population in matters of state admin¬
istration. Thus, the approach to the
development of education in the
northern' areas was of necessity a com¬
prehensive one palliatives, half-heart¬
ed measures could not resolve the
problem.
The idea underlying that approach
was to preserve national traditions, to
develop and enrich them. Letters of
recommendation were given to young
people sent from the Far North to
schools in central Russia. The follow¬
ing letter was issued In August 1926
to Tevlianto, a Chukcha from Anadyr,
who later became the first represen¬
tative of the Chukcha people to the
Soviet Parliament:
"At the proposal of the Kamchatka
Regional Revolutionary Committee the
bearer of this letter, Tevlianto, a Chuk-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

SOVIET FAR NORTH (Continued)
Like a time machine into the future
32
cha from Anadyr, has been sent for
schooling to Soviet Russia.
"Tevlianto has spent all his life in
the inhospitable, severe tundra, in
conditions found only in the Polar
North. The land he visits does not
resemble Anadyr at all. The Revolu¬
tionary Committee is afraid that he,
not knowing the Russian language and
local customs, may encounter diffi¬
culties he will be unable to cope with.
Besides his specific psychological
make-up, his vulnerability, excessive
impressionability and so on, may
aggravate matters.
"We ask those to whom he may
apply to give Tevlianto every possible
help. He deserves it, for even though
he does not know how to read and
write, he is one of the most gifted
and inquisitive young Chukchas in the
whole area. There is much in Tev¬
lianto a Russian school can bring to
the surface, and which will help him
to advance his people."
In the 1920s the Institute of the
Peoples of the North in Leningrad
became the main teaching centre.- The
first 19 students (of 11 different
northern nationalities) enrolled in 1925.
By 1930 it had a student body of 195
(including fifty girls). Naturally, the
students were drawing government
grants.
With the help of their Russian col¬
leagues the first students of the North
worked out alphabets for their lan¬
guages to enable them to write in the
vernacular.
aF^T the end of the 1920s and
in the early 1930s, so-called cultural
bases were set up throughout the
Soviet Far North. They did much to
transform the economy and change
the way of life of the people there.
Each cultural base had a boarding-
school, factory, hospital, bakery, repair
shops for the fishing fleet, mobile
medical and veterinary teams.
These "bases" became the meeting
ground between the old and the new,
between age-old traditions and the
material, social and spiritual innova¬
tions introduced by the new life. In
these cultural centres the local people
learned about modern life. They saw
unusual things and heard new ideas,
and their children were taught to read
and write.
I was one of them. When I was a
little boy and left my yaranga to go
to school in the morning it was as
though I made a journey with a time
machine into the remote future.
In the evening when I returned it
took me back thousands of years. I
would sit on a sealskin with my books
doing my homework, while my relatives
next to me perused a piece of fur sub¬
merged In a pot filled with sea water
to divine the currents in the bay, to
predict the approach of seals to the
shallows, and many other things. They
muttered their invocations and their
voices blended with mine as I was
learning a poem by heart. Putting my
copybook aside for a minute, I had
to bow my head to my elders to have
my forehead rubbed with sacrificial
blood...
In 1930 universal, compulsory, pri¬
mary education was introduced into the
national areas and districts of the
North. The "migratory schools" for the
children of nomad reindeer breeders
provided many thousands with primary
education. The number of schools
grew from 123 in 1930 to over 500
in 1936.
Early in the 1940s an almost com¬
plete set of textbooks In the verna¬
cular of the various Arctic peoples was
published for the first and second
school years, and some textbooks for
the third and fourth, and also some
suggested teaching methods as well
as children's literature for extra-mural
reading. At the same time some
60 titles of books on different subjects
appeared in the vernacular.
At present all the basic types of
schools provided for by the Soviet edu¬
cational system primary (eight-year)
and secondary (ten-year) schools
operate in all the national areas and
districts of the Soviet extreme north.
The conditions in the North make
for the spread of boarding and day¬
care schools. In the 1967-68 academic
year there were 523 schools in the
northern national areas, with a pupil
population of 90,000 (including 23,000
children of the "small nationalities").
There are also over 100 children's
music schools, 21 children's artistic
schools, 34 specialized secondary
schools (general, musical, theatrical
and choreographic) in the Soviet north.
It should also be pointed out that
the peoples of the north do not
have to spend a single penny on the
education of their children. The state
takes care of them from the day of
their birth. Creches are open to them
at state expense; after that they go on
to kindergartens and boarding schools,
where they are fed, clothed and pro¬
vided with textbooks; during vacations
they travel free of charge to their
parents' domicile and back again.
The programme of secondary schools
in the extreme north is the same as
that for schools in any other part of
the Soviet Union. In the initial stages
at primary school they are taught in
the vernacular, so that the Chukcha,
Eskimo, Nenets, Mansi and other
children will be able to read and
write in their own language. In the
final stages of their primary education
they learn the Russian language in
parallel with their own.
This basic knowledge in his own
language helps the pupil to master the
three R's and, hence, also spoken and
written Russian, which he needs for
his secondary education, for the sys¬
tematic study of the rudiments of the
sciences. The Russian language is
particularly important for the northern
peoples since it unlocks to them the
door to culture and knowledge.
I know that from personal exper¬
ience. Acquaintance with the best
works of Russian literature did us a
world of good. In those days we
considered even the books by foreign
authors as part of Russian culture, for
they came down to us through the
Russian language.
The Russian language greatly in¬
fluenced the languages of the Soviet
"small nationalities". They kept their
figurative speech, their phonetic
system and their basic word stock,
but it was filled with a new content.
1 HE modern development of
the North has created the need for
people with varied specialities execu¬
tives, mining engineers, physicians
and the young people there are now
being trained for the many professions
needed by their rapidly growing eco¬
nomy.
The government helps the northern
peoples in many ways and in parti¬
cular by giving them top priority in
admission to all educational estab¬
lishments in the U.S.S.R. So it is
hardly surprising that they number a
high percentage of persons with a
specialized education.
But the conditions responsible for
the former economic and cultural
underdevelopment of the northern
peoples (primitive economy, geogra¬
phic isolation and so on) are found
not only in the ice-bound Arctic but
also In the world's jungle and desert
areas. So in helping to pass on the,
educational experience of the Arctic,
Unesco will also aid peoples in many
other parts of the world.
