Six hundred million
new literates
in twenty years
A crucial point has been reached in the mass­
ive world effort to wipe out illiteracy, according to the
latest information received by Unesco.
Some of the updated statistics covering the last two
decades look like light at the end of the tunnel. They
show that:
'. round the world, the number of people who can read
and write has risen by 600 million since 1950, the rate of
increase keeping ahead of the rate of population growth;
:. in the regions with the greatest illiteracy-Africa
and the Arab States, Asia and Latin America-illiteracy
rates have dropped over the past ten years;i. the tide is turning in Latin America, where the percent­
age of illiterates has been cut by more than a quarter to
23.6 per cent and where, for the first time and ag'ainst the
world trend, the absolute number of illiterates has been
reduced;
,. despite the rise in population, the number of illiterates
rose marginally less than had been predicted.
But world figures, also serve several warnings. The
estimates reveal:
:. a staggering total number of illiterates in the world­
even counting the reduction on the predicted rise:
783 million instead of 810 million;
• in Africa and the Arab States the drop in illiteracy
rates still leaves 73.7 per cent of the adult population
unable to read and write;I. even on the most optimistic projections, the number
of illiterates in 30 years is not likely to be less than
650 million or about 15 per cent, so the problem of illiter­
acy may not be solved this century.
Replies to a questionnaire sent to Unesco Member
States make the perspective clearer and tend to confirm
hopes that at last the right approach to the problem has
been taken on a world scale. According to the Unesco
statistics, the proportion of illiterates in the world-not
far short of 50 per cent in 1950 and still 40 per cent in
196D-is now down to 34.3 per cent.
The 73.7 per cent illiteracy rate in Africa and the Arab
States and the 46.8 per cent rate in Asia still represent a
gigantic task, but in ten years Latin America has cut its
rate from 32.5 per cent to 23.6 per cent, demonstrating
what can happen when the two-pronged attack through
primary education and adult literacy instruction begins to
break through.
For in 1957, Latin American countries launched a contin­
ental "major project" to extend primary education and, in
ten years, increased enrolments by 35 million children.
Adult literacy programmes on the continent, such as
Colombia's famous "Radio Schools of Sutatenza· have
also been in operation for some years and are gaining
impetus.
In Asia and Africa, however, relatively newly independent
countries have only begun to tackle the problem of provid­
ing primary education, let alone adult literacy teaching.
Replies to Unesco's questionnaire show that literacy and
adult education are now widely regarded as integral parts
of social and economic development. Roughly half the
countries with a literacy problem take this view, and have
included literacy in their national development plans.
Allied to this is an Increasing acceptance of the "functional
literacy" approach promoted by Unesco: literacy teaching
that gears reading, writing and arithmetic to daily life and
work, with literacy and job training combined as part of
industrial and agricultural development projects.
After a long count-down, Unesco-assisted projects under
the Experimental World Literacy Programme are just
beginning to have a measurable effect, the most advanced
projects now having reached the expansion stage: in India,
64,800 adults are being taught, in Iran, 55,000; in Mali,
40,000; in Tanzania, 20,000.
Enrolment in these 13 projects has risen from 25,000 in
September 1969, when the first became operational, to
more than 235,000 today. The rate of increase in enrol­
ments will speed up this year and if countries decide to
create future programmes they will have a solid base of
literate workers to build on.
The "if" is a big one. Future action to combat illiteracy
will depend on the priority given and the funds available:
in neither case is present evidence cause for optimism.
For example, returns from 44 countries giving figures
which are internationally comparable reveal only four (only
one a developing country) spending more than three per
cent of their education budget on adult education, including
literacy. Three-quarters of the countries were allocating
less than one per cent to adult education and since literacy
forms only part of this, the priority-or lack of it-is clear.
IN fact, developing countries have rapidly in­
creased their total spending on education in the past
decade. But though the percentage of the total education
budget of developing countries nearly equals that being
spent by industrialized lands (in Africa, the 1965 average of
16.4 per cent is even higher), the absolute amount is
incomparably less for popuJations which are frequently
incomparably greater.
While their Gross National Product only inches forward,
there is small prospect of much more money being found
by the developing countries themselves. Dr. V.K.R.V. Rao,
when he was India's Education Minister, advocated a
national emergency programme to reduce the 150 million
illiterates in the 15-25 age group to 50 million by 1981.
Even at a cost of only $4 a head, this would require
$400 million. India's Fourth Plan, however, provided for
only $1.3 million.
The dilemma is whether resources should be con­
centrated on providing primary education or whether the
problem should be tackled through adult literacy instruction.
Belief is growing that the best solution is an attack on
both fronts; reports of drop-out rates (as high as 81 per
cent in Africa) indicate that merely providing schooling is 33
not the whole answer. Until the problem of resources is
solved at an international level, however, part solutions
are likely to set the pace for progress. •
