by
Thierry
Lemaresquier
A Unesco youth forum
on democratization
of education
RANK face-to-face discussions between teachers and schoolchildren,
education administrators and students have long been a familiar feature of
school and university life. But until the International Conference on Education
organized by Unesco in Geneva, in September 1971, no International conference
had ever provided a forum for a dialogue between students and those responsible
for national education policies.
The Geneva Youth Forum brought together conference delegates from some
hundred countries and schoolchildren and students of different nationalities. Its
aim was to bring the dialogue "into the public arena" through a confrontation of
views on the major theme of the Conference the effect of students' social
background on their chances of success in school.
Although the views of educational
planners and administrators often co¬
incide with those of school-children
and students as regards the facts of
today's educational problems, there
are numerous points of disagreement
as to the basic causes and to the
remedies proposed by one side or the
other.
Opening the debate, the students
declared that making education more
democratic means not only providing
more education for more people, but
also giving more persons a say in how
it should be run. "Traditional educa¬
tion cannot be adapted to the needs
of increasing numbers of people,"
they affirmed; "it must be remade."
But who is to remake it? Not only
education officials and administrators,
but the people as a whole. Only they
know what their needs and aspirations
are. The question of "democratizing"
education should be discussed at
every level of the population. Let the
process of making education more
democratic begin with a truly demo¬
cratic act, said the students: the
participation of the greatest number
in the remoulding of education.
From this standpoint, the problem
of education and in particular its
democratization is Inseparable from
the national and international social
28 THIERRY LEMARESQUIER, 25, of France, Is
a member of Unesco's Youth Division. From
1968 to 1971 he was president of the Inter¬
national Student Movement for the United
Nations, and has been a U.N. consultant on
youth participation In development.
and political context. Conference
delegates and students agreed that
one cannot hope to make radical
changes in a country's social structure
through education while continuing to
regard education as an isolated
instrument for development.
The aims of education are not ends
in themselves but the means through
which all peoples can fulfil their
highest aspirations. Children should
study in order to develop their minds
rather than to pass examinations and
collect diplomas, said a background
paper prepared by the students, which
quoted the words of the French writer
Paul Valéry : "Diplomas are the worst
enemy of culture."
Education should not be a "funnel".
It should be an instrument that reveals
the need for changes as these arise:
it would be absurd to develop educa¬
tion while maintaining a social structure
that is almost universally unjust.
Teaching, said the students' paper,
should seek to promote a worker's
personal and social development and
not simply his productivity.
The students also criticized the
reasoning that problems of democratiz¬
ing education should be approached
in one way in industrially developed
countries and quite differently in
developing countries. The idea is a
fallacious one that too often serves to
screen the real problems.
Indeed, while it is not easy
to establish the exact relationship
between a country's economic develop¬
ment and the increase in the number
of young people entering school, it is
more and more difficult to see a direct
link between the kinds of education
now being exported from the Industria¬
lized countries to the developing coun¬
tries and the real needs of the peoples
concerned.
Some students said frankly that
while the democratization of education
gives the mass of the people a fuller
awareness of their situation and
Droblems, it is quite clear that with
few exceptions education in the
developing countries has been made
only superficially democratic. Accord¬
ing to one student, most attempts by
young people to press for reforms in
the developing countries inevitably
lead to the exclusion of these students
from the educational system.
Quite often the very idea of school
is alien to the cultural environment in
which students live. Thus the pro¬
cess of making education more
democratic is bound to spark off
conflicts over values between parents
and children, city-dwellers and rural'
communities, the wealthy and the
under-privileged. Education and edu¬
cational institutions patterned after
those of industrialized countries
become instruments of social segrega¬
tion instead of a means to mobilize
national effort based on the goals and
aspirations of the developing peoples.
ROGRAMMES for making
education more democratic affirm that
each person has an equal chance of
success, but in reality lead to greater
inequality, since an educational system
open to all inevitably reflects the
existing social structure. In other
words, education has given rise to
aspirations based not on the real needs
of its "consumers", but on the objec¬
tives of educational administrators.
Students taking part in the forum
felt that the problem of equal chances
in school could not be dealt with
rationally without first examining the
question of pre-school education.
Research has shown the importance

of parental influence at this stage of
childhood when receptivity is at its
greatest. During his pre-school years,
a child gradually acquires a rich
intellectual, cultural, social and emo¬
tional heritage which will largely
determine his behaviour during his en¬
tire life. ,
Among other factors, growth dis¬
orders due to undernourishment or
malnutrition are often a cause of failure
in school. Students stressed the
importance of nutrition and especially
the need to ensure a balanced protein-
rich diet for under-privileged children.
The students were opposed to the
principle of competition which they
saw as the pivot of most educational
systems. "The school must redefine
its purpose and the content of educa¬
tion, and bring about a transition from
competition to solidarity," they declar¬
ed in their background paper for the
Unesco Geneva Forum.
This applies particularly in trade
and technical education which is often
regarded as being reserved for the
"half-failures", and which always
recruits its students from the poorer
sections of the population. While
stressing the need for this type of
education in the developing countries,
the students found it regrettable that
leaders in these countries are too
often inclined to accept the myth of
the "humanities" and Western schol¬
astic tradition, thereby tending to
lower the standing of manual work In
the eyes of their own citizens.
This theme, which many analysts
have developed in the past, is part
of a broader criticism of education
for its failure to open up sufficiently
to the outside world and its scorn of
the information and knowledge that the
communications media can bring to
young people.
Studies have been made of the
proportion of information school-age
children receive from school as
compared with that reaching them
through press, radio, television and
other mass media. They show that in
a highly-industrialized society, some
CONTINUED PAGE 34

UNESCO YOUTH FORUM (Continued from page 29)
34
80 per cent of all information obtained
by children aged between 12 and 15
comes from outside school, and,
moreover, that 80 per cent of the
information imparted by schools is
largely irrelevant.
Many students criticized schools for
basing learning on essentially abstract
data which could often equally well
be acquired out of school, instead of
providing an education that links
training to the practical needs of
everyday life.
Since the school is part of a back¬
ward system which can almost never
avoid reproducing a given social
structure in a caricatural form, the
question of education, they felt, might
well be posed outside the school
framework.
"Education," they declared, "should
no longer be confined to a particular
age group, but should last for a life¬
time, constantly opening up new paths
before men and women and, even more
important, offering fresh chances to
all. With education as an uninterrupt¬
ed process, notions of failure and
success will lose much of their present
meaning. Those who fail at a parti¬
cular age or at a particular task will
have other chances. They will no
longer be condemned throughout life
to the consequences of their failure."
The purpose of lifelong education,
said the students, is to enable each
person to master the rapid changes of
modern life, though it is by no means
certain that all those responsible for
drawing up educational policies
accept this idea. The principle of
lifelong education could even be
surreptitiously transformed so as to
become an instrument of lifelong
indoctrination. History, unfortunately,
offers plenty of examples for those
who might find such a prospect
tempting.
The problem of social background
raises fundamental issues concerning
the role of the entire community in the
definition and running of education.
It is wrong for parents to relinquish
their role in favour of a teacher caste
made all-powerful as- education be¬
comes more and more institutionalized.
Nor is it normal for the teacher to be
relieved of his original task and to
become merely an overseer enjoying
an immunity conferred on him by the
school's monopoly.
The school itself should not abdicate
its social role within the community.
Founded to meet the needs of the
community, which daily become more
complex, the school has grown Into a
monopolistic system whose rigidly
structured principles are an obstacle
to any realistic social action.
To bring about radical changes In
the school, the students propose that
it should "adapt its action to the dev¬
elopment rate of each child; take the
child's personal motivation as its start¬
ing point, without however excluding
personal effort; reject all trends and
constraints that run counter to these
objectives; enable each child con¬
sciously to choose his future instead
of forcing him blindly to adapt to
existing conditions; let him learn by
personal observation, reflection and
experiment; develop joint research
activities; introduce a method of work
that allows for the expansion and
deepening of knowledge already
acquired."
The .community parents, children
and teachers should work together to
break down the barrier between the
school and everyday life. This nat¬
urally implies that the purpose of
democratizing education is to decen¬
tralize rather than to standardize, that
the development of personality should
become at least as Important an ob¬
jective as striving for "productivity",
and that educational change should be
part of an overall process leading to a
democratic society.
If, as is said, the educational budget
in many countries has reached its ceil¬
ing in relation to national economic
resources, it is surely disquieting to
find in the same overall national bud¬
get evidence of completely contradic¬
tory policies and expenditure.
How can a developing country con¬
ceivably go on spending more of Its
resources on arms than on education?
How can budgets for peace and bud¬
gets for war continue to expand side
by side? And is it reasonable for
some of the fruits of education to be
destroyed because resources needed
for a country's equipment are being
spent on defence material imported
from wealthy countries?
In a broader context, is the goal of
education to give a country's working
population better training so that it
may serve the interests of other
countries more efficiently? Should not
Its real aim be, to use the words of the
students, at the Geneva Forum, "the
emergence of a society in which each
person will be capable. of taking his
destiny and his future in his own
hands?"
Thierry Lemaresguier
