The
life and times
of
Stone Age man
by François Bordes
14
'ISCOVERIES in Africa in¬
dicate that the Old Stone Age, or
Palaeolithic period, began more than
two million years ago. The first stone-
worker was Australopithecus, half¬
way between the great apes (gorillas,
chimpanzees, orang-utangs) and our¬
selves, with a still rudimentary brain.
His tools were simply pebbles, chip¬
ped to give them a cutting edge, and
roughly trimmed flakes.
The evolution of man and his indus¬
tries took place over a very long
period. Pithecanthropus knew how to
use fire, at least in China, and produc¬
ed the Abbevillian and early Acheulean
industries, traces of which are found
in various parts of the world. Little is
known of the various types of man in
the Middle and Upper Acheulean
periods; and finally, about 100,000
years ago, Homo sapiens emerged.
A distinction used to be made be¬
tween Neanderthal man, Homo nean-
dertalensis, associated with the Mous¬
terian culture, and modern man Homo
sapiens, of the Upper Palaeolithic age.
FRANÇOIS BORDES Is professor of Pre¬
history and director of the laboratory of
Quaternary Geology and Prehistory at the
University of Bordeaux and director of Pre¬
historic Antiquities for the Aquitaine region
of France. An Internationally famous auth¬
ority on Palaeolithic tools, he can himself
make all the known varieties of Palaeolithic
Implements (see photo story page 22 and
bibliography Inside back cover).
The trend today is to establish two
sub-species, Homo sapiens neander-
talensis and Homo sapiens sapiens.
The exact relationship between
these two fairly different types Is still
a matter of controversy. It Is possible
that there were intervening links, mod¬
ern in some respects and Neander-
thaler in others and the evolution of
modern man must have taken place
more or less simultaneously through¬
out the ancient world. Men of a pre¬
sent-day type existed as far back as
the Mousterian period (as shown by
excavations at Djebel Qafzeh in Israel
and perhaps even before).
For the last 100,000 years, men have
lived in very different environments,
the result of geography or climatic va¬
riations. Such variations were particu¬
larly marked In the Quaternary or last
of the geological eras: several times
huge glaciers spread over not only
Greenland and the Antarctic (where
one can see their vast traces today)
but also Scandinavia, North America
and all high mountains, even at the
equator. At their maximum, the Scan¬
dinavian glaciers covered the north of
Germany, most of England, and a great
part of the western U.S.S.R., while in
France the Alpine glaciers came down
almost to Lyons.
These- Ice Ages were matched by
oscillations when the earth's tempera¬
ture fell, though the maximum cold did
not necessarily coincide with the maxi
mum glaciation. Depending on the
period and the place, the cold would
be damp or dry, and In the regions to
the south of the glaciers a variety of
vegetation developed, ranging from
tundra to forest.
In Europe, however, the prevailing
feature was more or less densely
wooded steppes. This lowering of
temperature naturally extended beyond
today's temperate zones, but tropical
and equatorial regions seem to have
been little affected, though depending
on the amount of rainfall there were
periods when deserts spread or shrank
almost to nothing.
The accumulation of water locked up
in the huge glaciers (islandsis) meant
that the level of the seas went down
considerably, sometimes more than
300 feet, with inevitable geographical
changes. England was a part of the
continent, and Japan was attached to
Asia. Our ancestors thus lived In a
changing world (even if the changes
were only gradual) frequently very
different from the world we know.
Throughout this period tool-making
depended primarily on stone as the
basic tool for shaping other tools from
wood, bone, antler, horn, leather, etc.
These have all disappeared, with the
exception of those in bone and antler,
which have often been preserved.
Those who know nothing of the
subject often speak slightingly of
CONTINUED PAGE 16

Painting by Zdenek Burlan © Artla, Prague
A roving band of Neanderthalers, who lived about 100,000 years ago and
vanished about 35,000 B.C. This painting by the Czech artist Zdenek Burlan
appears In "Prehistoric Men", published in Prague, Czechoslovakia, which
is made up in major part of paintings by Mr. Burlan with an introductory
text by J. Agusta.

STONE AGE MAN (Continued)
The myth of the troglodyte 'cave men'
Palaeolithic man and his "clumsy flint
tools". In fact, he was a consummate
craftsman who made the best of his
material. If many of his implements
appear crude, it is because ^-flint,
though easily flaked by a skilful
workman, has a fragile cutting edge
which wears away quickly, or rather
which chips; flint is harder than steel,
as you will see if you scratch the blade
of a knife with a piece of flint. Other
tools or weapons, designed for lasting
use or requiring a perfect ' form for
functional * reasons, were admirably
well shaped.
Not all tools were of flint. In some
regions flint does not exist and was
replaced by obsidian (volcanic glass)
which has a still sharper, though more
fragile cutting edge, quartzite, sand¬
stone and quartz, which is more in¬
tractable, but for which the right work¬
ing techniques had been evolved.
In other areas, fine-grained eruptive
rocks were used, such as basalt and
rhyolite. Tools were often a varied
collection, the finer ones in flint or vol¬
canic glass, the rougher ones in basalt,
quartz or quartzite; the choice of
material depended on the use to which
the tool was to be put.
For flaking stone, man first used ano¬
ther pebble; later, from the Middle
Acheulean period onwards, he realized
that better results could be obtained
with a softer striking tool, or hammer,
of a cylindrical shape, in wood, bone
or antler. Perhaps during the Moust¬
erian age, but certainly in the Upper
Palaeolithic, he began striking by indi¬
rect Impact, placing a wooden or bone
chisel between the hammer and the im¬
plement to be shaped. He also used
pressure flaking, which permits finer
and more regular retouches, though
smaller than those produced by strik¬
ing. In the Solutrean period, about
19,000 years B.C., man discovered that
strong heat applied slowly to flint, fol¬
lowed by a slow cooling process,
changed the structure of the stone and
made it easier to flake by pressure.
In the Upper Palaeolithic age men
hollowed out limestone to make blub¬
ber lamps, sometimes decorated, but
they did not, to our knowledge, fashion
vases, which did not appear until con¬
siderably later. A distinction is fre¬
quently drawn between the Palaeo¬
lithic (The Old, or chipped Stone Age)
and the Neolithic (the New, or polish¬
ed Stone Age). But, apart from the
fact that Neolithic man chipped stone
far more than he polished it, artifacts
in polished stone are by no means un¬
known in Palaeolithic times (for exam¬
ple in Central Europe); and partly pol
ished axes have even been found in
northern Australia, pre-dating those of
European Neolithic by some 15,000
years.
Since the great bulk of artifacts in
perishable material have not come
down to us, our ideas about the daily
life of our far-off ancestors are based
mainly on the examination of bone and
stone implements, the study of depo¬
sits, and a comparison with primitive
peoples of today or recent times. In
cold regions, our ancestors lived
mainly by hunting, eked out by fish¬
ing, and, if the climate was suitable,
the gathering of berries, seeds and
roots. In warmer climates it is pos¬
sible that fruit-gathering was a major
food resource as it is today for the
bushmen of the Kalahari Desert.
Living patterns were not the same
for the Middle Palaeolithic (the Mou¬
sterian and similar industries), domi¬
nated by Neanderthal man, and the
Upper Palaeolithic, by which time
modern man has emerged. There are
however a certain number of constant
factors.
As regards living quarters, people
often talk about "cave men" as if pri¬
mitive men led a purely troglodyte
existence. In fact, they lived chiefly

BIG GAME
HUNTERS
OF THE PAST
A group of Neanderthal hunters
(right) drive Ibex over a cliff to be
despatched by other hunters waiting
below. The more advanced Upper
Palaeolithic men, who superseded the
Neanderthals, dug camouflaged
pits near watering-places to
trap mammoth and rhinoceros
(opposite page).
.aaaafl alaafll '
m t^^^ "J
IB aaCte^H
M
^-^ «á
aaf> ^^^ _ %
*V* t a ^
ar a^aatt A ai aaaF ^aa
flaaaaaaaaT MaMH ^T ' fl
1 1 V jfl
^BL^E. ,4,
mm
laaaaaaaaaaaaaHlKA ' .«B
at the entrance to caves, or under
overhanging sandstone, limestone or
basalt rocks hollowed out by erosion.
But these would have provided very
poor shelter from the intense cold of
the Ice Ages if they had not been
suitably fitted up with skin tents or
huts. Occasionally one finds traces
of the uprights which supported the.
roof, or circles or rectangles of stones
which indicate the foundations.
In or near these huts are to be found
hearths, sometimes merely places for
lighting a fire, marked by reddened
stones and ashes. Elsewhere, there
are more elaborate hearths small cir¬
cles of stones, or hearths floored with
pebbles which were perhaps used for
cooking; the fire heated the pebbles,
which were then swept clear of embers
and ash, and the meat was roasted
directly on the floor.
Other hearths are full of stones
which have been split by the heat.
One can visualise two ways in which
they were used. Either the stones, pla¬
ced directly in the fire, accumulated
heat and then radiated it when the
fire was extinguished, or alterna¬
tively, when hot they were taken out
with wooden tongs and thrown into
a leather bag containing water, to make
the water boil and produce a meat
stock. The Eskimos use this tech¬
nique today.
In warm regions, caves and shel¬
ters were probably fitted out more
simply, with wind screens instead of
huts. Open air camps probably re¬
sembled those of the bushmen or
Australian aborigines, with screens or
huts made from branches. In rainy
areas, protection was provided by a
roof of leaves or thatch.
Open-air camps are however also
found in cold regions, either in areas
where t there are no caves, or else
used as transient camps for the sum¬
mer. Many of these camps are in Cen¬
tral Europe and the U.S.S.R. They
range from the simple round family
hut partly hollowed out of the earth,
the walls reinforced with the bones
of large animals, to the large commu¬
nity dwellings in the Don area, possi¬
bly corresponding to the "long
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

PREHISTORIC INDUSTRIAL DESIGN

Painting Zdenek Burlan © Artla, Prague
The woolly rhinoceros was a dangerous
quarry to tackle at close quarters. To
pierce his thick hide from a safe
distance, early man developed spear
throwers which gave added penetrating
power to his spear. Photos right and
top left show fragments of late Magda-
lenian (10,000 B.C.) spear throwers
made from reindeer antlers and carved
to represent a bison licking Its flank
and two Ibex in an attitude of play or
combat Early man was a fisherman as
well as a hunter. Top right, barbed
Magdalenian harpoons and, left, de¬
corative carving of reindeer and salmon,
two Important Items in early man's diet.
19

STONE AGE MAN (Continued)
Tools and artifacts for every occasion
houses" of the Red Indians in the
eastern United States.
Such open-air camps also existed in
France in Mousterian and Upper
Palaeolithic times. In general, the only
indications of the Mousterian camps
are sites thickly scattered with chip¬
ped flints, debris, burnt stones and
remains of bones. Upper Palaeolithic
camps are well organized; frequently
marked by a series of post holes to
show where huts or tents stood, and
positioned on small spurs overlooking
two valleys, where possible on flat
sandy soil. The reason will be clear
to anyone who has ever camped.
w
20
HILE the large dwellings
In eastern Europe were probably
permanent living quarters, the equi¬
valent of the non-existent cave, the
simpler ones in the west were most
likely hunting or summer camps. From
the fact that the tool kits found there
are not basically different from cave
tools of the same period, it can be
deduced that the hunting expeditions
included women, who were respon¬
sible for dressing skins and smoking
meat.
It is possible that Palaeolithic man
led a semi-sedentary life in the sense
that the caves were inhabited all the
year round by part of the group, and
a^ semi-nomadic life in the sense that
hunting expeditions were divided up
into temporary camps. The same is
true for bushmen today: sometimes
the tribe lives all together, at others
it breaks up Into little groups.
As regards clothing, comic strips or
illustrated novels often show prehis¬
toric man with only the skin of an
animal round his loins. This may
have been the case during warm
periods or on fine summer days, and
of course in tropical areas where clo¬
thing was perhaps even more redu¬
ced. But for life in an ice age, parti¬
cularly in winter, a costume similar to
that of the Eskimos is much more
likely, considering that the temperature
must often have been below minus 40
degrees.
The bone needle was only invented
in the Upper Solutrean age around
17,000 or 16,000 B.C.but while it is
a help to sewing it is not indispens¬
able. Earlier tool kits include bone
points and flint drills with which it Is
easy to make holes in a hide. Thread
was provided by vegetable fibres or
the tendons of animals, in the same
way as tendons of reindeer are used
today by Arctic peoples.
There is also no doubt that Stone
Age man had shoes, probably like
moccasins, even though the footprints
found In caves are all of naked feet.
Tool kits varied from one period to
another and from one industry to ano¬
ther, probably corresponding to diff¬
erent populations. They also devel¬
oped over the ages inside the same
industry.
In the Mousterian age, stone tool
kits are the overwhelming majority of
the artifacts preserved, and are mainly
of flint flakes. They Include a variety
of scraping tools flakes with one or
more edges trimmed to make them
even. They may have been used for
scraping hides, and certainly as knives
and for woodworking. In addition,
there are notched pieces, flakes with
toothed edges like saws, scrapers,
burins or gravers, borers, backed
knives made from elongated flakes or
blades with one edge broken off to
make it possible to lay a finger along
it (as with the blade of a modern
knife).
Among some varieties of Mouste¬
rian tools, there are still hand axes or
"coups-de-poing", multiple purpose
tools, as in the preceding Acheulean
age. Bone tools are no more than
splinters with the end worn down
(perhaps for making clothing) or bones
which show signs of having been
crushed, which may have been pres¬
sure tools for trimming flint.
II N the Upper Palaeolithic
age tool kits were more varied and
specialized. A small number of side
scrapers subsisted, to be replaced by
various kinds of end scrapers. The
number and variety of gravers increas¬
ed considerably, probably partly due
to bone working, which became very
important. Borers, backed blades and
bladelets also play a role, but their
purpose is not always clear. Bone
tools Included points, smoothing tools
for sleeking hides, and towards the
end, needles.
Weapons were used primarily for
hunting, since war, in the modern
sense of the term, was little known in
Palaeolithic times, though there may
have been brief skirmishes over terr¬
itorial hunting rights. Weapons also
varied from one period and one place
to another. The Mousterians had flint
points, spear or Javelin heads, wood
en spears, a few bone points and
probably clubs. Upper Palaeolithic
weapons were more developed
various kinds of flint projectile points,
such as the magnificent Solutrean
"laurel leaf" and shouldered points;
also a great quantity and variety of
bone points, and harpoons during the
last, or Magdalenian period.
While Mousterian projectiles were
thrown by hand, the Upper Palaeo¬
lithic age saw the development of the
spear thrower, which is still used by
Eskimos and Australian aborigines to
give greater range and penetration to
spears. It Is just possible that by the
Upper Magdalenian age bows were
used, but so far there is no positive
proof of this.
Hunting is as old as man, and it is
highly probable that it was a factor
in his evolution, setting a premium
not only on strength and speed but
also on intelligence. By the time of
Homo sapiens, whether Neanderthal
man or modern man, it had existed for
more than two million years; and
Acheulean man, more than 100,000
years ago and perhaps even 500,000
years ago, was already a big game-
hunter or "giant-killer".
There were various means of hunt¬
ing, with spears thrown by hand and
later with spear throwers or bows, dif¬
ferent types of snares, the use of fire
to make animals stampede and leap off
a cliff, tracking with several hunters
taking over from each other until the
prey was exhausted. This is probably
how reindeer, bison and horses were
hunted.
Snares probably varied with the size
of the game : large herbivorous ani¬
mals were probably caught in pits dug
in the ground and covered with bran¬
ches and leaves. Suspended traps
were laid for carnivores, devised so
that when the animal tried to take the
bait he would bring down a roof
weighted with heavy stones, or be
pinned to the ground by a spear;
snares with springs were probably used
for smaller animals such as hares.
Fishing varied in importance accor¬
ding to the period; fish-bones are
only rarely to be found in Mouster¬
ian deposits, though this may be due
to the fact that little effort has been
made to look for them. The Mouster¬
ians probably fished chiefly with
spears or by hand, as we know of no
special fishing equipment.
In Upper Palaeolithic sites, however,
vertebrae and other fish bones are
found fairly frequently. There are

small bone artifacts, pointed at both
ends, which may have been straight
hooks of the kind primitive tribes use
today, harpoons (for both fishing and
hunting), forked objects which may
have been pronged harpoons, all
chiefly in the Magdalenian age, during
which fishing probably played an im¬
portant part.
It is also probable that nets were
already In existence. Some pebble-
flagged floors are supposed to have
been surfaces for drying fish. The
catch seems to have been chiefly sal¬
mon and trout, but remains of eels,
perch and pike are also found.
Little is known of plant resources,
but fossil pollen analysis shows that
the hazel tree must have flourished in
Europe at some periods. Some acorns
are edible. Wild strawberries, rasp¬
berries, sloes, blueberries and black¬
berries also existed and it is very
probable that water-caltrops were
gathered. The bulbs or tubers of
several plants of the period, partic¬
ularly the lily family, were edible, as
also were wild carrots and sorrel.
Gathering was part of the work done
by women and children. In Africa
and south-east Asia plant resources
must have been even more varied.
HE use of fire has been
known to man since Homo erectus, at
least in Asia and Europe, for in Africa
the indications are so far of a later
date. This does not mean however
that Homo erectus knew how to light
it. He may simply have kept it alight
after taking it from a fire due to natural
causes such as bush fires produced
by lightning, marsh fires, etc. But In
the Mousterian culture and still more
in the Upper Palaeolithic age, there Is
no doubt that man knew how to light
fire.
There are two main methods, by
rubbing and by striking. A pointed
wooden stick may be rubbed to and
fro in a groove hollowed out in soft
wood, or rapidly rotated by hand or
with a bow. Striking is not, as is
often thought, the striking of one flint
against another, as the resulting
sparks are simply cold light; a flint is
struck against a lump of iron pyrites.
In some deposits fragments of iron py¬
rites have been found which show tra¬
ces of having been struck; sometimes
they are so worn that they must have
been used regularly as lighters.
It is difficult to estimate the density
of the population, which must have
been thinly scattered, with occasional
large concentrations of several hun¬
dred people living in neighbouring
sites.
The expectation of life was not long,
though recent research tends to leng¬
then the estimates. It was probably
rare to live beyond fifty. There must
have been a high rate of infant mor¬
tality and deaths in childbirth.
The first undeniable burials appear
with the Mousterian culture. In Cor-
rèze, at La Chapelle-aux-Saints, a man
was found lying In a trench with his
knees drawn up and his head pro¬
tected by large animal bones. A bison
leg had been placed by his head, and
beside him in a small pit were a bison
horn and frontal bone, as provision for
a journey or a funeral offering. In
a Mousterian deposit at Shanldar In
Iraq, pollen analysis indicates that a
man was buried on a bed of flowers.
In the Upper Palaeolithic age funeral
rites were more complex. The dead
were often buried with fine objects in
flint and bone and elaborate necklaces
of pierced shells, and were powdered
with red ochre. Sometimes large
stones were placed on their hands and
feet, perhaps to prevent them coming
back to haunt the living.
There are many children's burial
places, and the Soviet prehistorian
Okladnikov attributes this to the fact
that Palaeolithic man was more inter¬
ested in the fate of dead children than
that of dead adults. It is also worth
noting the large number of women's
burial places, often as richly ornamen¬
ted as those of men, which seems to
indicate that discrimination between
the sexes was unknown among Palaeo¬
lithic hunters.
Art probably appeared earlier than
one imagines. Many Mousterian sites
yield mineral paint such as black man¬
ganese dioxide and yellow and red
ochre. But we know of no engravings,
sculptures or paintings depicting ani¬
mals before the Upper Palaeolithic age.
The Mousterians probably used min¬
eral pigments for painting on perish¬
able materials, and perhaps their own
skins, like Australian aborigines.
In the Upper Palaeolithic age, how¬
ever, art developed considerably, parti¬
cularly in the Magdalenian culture, pro¬
ducing splendid achievements in en¬
graving, sculpture and painting compa¬
rable to those of classical antiquity.
It is mainly animals that are portrayed,
but in some caves such as those at La
Marche (Vienne, France) we have a
large number of human figures, fre¬
quently caricatures, as if the exact
portrayal of the human figure had been
taboo.
As regards magic and religion, var¬
ious Interpretations have been given
to prehistoric art. When it was first
discovered, it was argued that such
art was an expression of a highly dev¬
eloped aesthetic sense; subsequently
the theory was long entertained that
prehistoric art was used to cast spells,
either for successful hunting or to
replenish the stock of game.
Recently, Professor Lerol-Gourhan's
school has interpreted it as the ex¬
pression of the dualism between male
and female, some animals represen¬
ting the male principle, others the fe¬
male. There is certainly no straight¬
forward answer; an explanation which
may be valid for the Aurignacian
period (30,000 BC) is not necessarily
so for the Magdalenian (15,000 to
9,000 BC).
M OR a long time it was
believed that paintings were to be
found only on the walls of deep caves
which may have been sanctuaries, but
it now appears that most rock dwel¬
lings were decorated. The great bulk
of decorated caves are in western
Europe, but one has been found in
the Urals.
Much has been conjectured about
the religion of the Stone Age, but
nothing is known for certain. Funeral
rites seem to indicate a belief in ano¬
ther world. The theory of bear-wor¬
ship by the Mousterians has been
strongly contested, but recent investi¬
gations give it a new lease of life.
As regards social organization, we
know very little, since in most cases
we cannot tell the size of human
groups during this period. We still
do not know whether a given number
of tools found In a particular layer
represents 10 men over 100 years, or
100 men over 10 years, though recent
studies are beginning to throw a little
light. Similarities between tool kits
and works of art suggest contacts
between various human groups over
fairly large distances.
In conclusion, much remains to be
learned about daily life in the Stone
Age, but what we do know suggests
that while it was certainly a hard life,
it was not on the whole a wretched
one. Where game was plentiful, man
must have had spare time for sculpture
or story-telling. Unfortunately, while n-f
certain works of art have come down /l
to us through the ages, the entire oral
tradition of stories, legends and songs
has disappeared for ever.
