Right, Children on their
way to school at the water
village of Ganvié, Dahomey,
In West Africa, where the
school "bus" is a canoe,
carry their precious books
on their heads. A major
obstacle to Increasing book
production in the developing
countries is the shortage
of printing paper resulting
from inadequate local
production and the difficulty
of obtaining the foreign
currency needed to buy paper
from abroad. The recycling
of waste paper could help
to alleviate the paper
shortage while at the same
time safeguarding forest
resources and combatting
pollution. Far right, reels of
cardboard produced from
recycled waste paper.



by Y. V. Lakshmana Rao
Books are young
in the Third World
^i#EVERAL times during my
own lifetime, the end of the world has
been predicted by one or another sect
of religious determinists. Some of
them have even gone to the extent
of distributing their worldly possess¬
ions. If I had some stocks in a
publishing firm today, I should perhaps
be selling them, for the death of books
has now been announced by techno¬
logical determinists.
To us in the developing countries
who have not yet partaken fully of
what life has to offer, there is a vested
30
Y.V. LAKSHMANA RAO, of India, is Direc¬
tor of the Asian Mass Communication Re¬
search and Information Centre in Singapore.
A communications specialist, he was a mem¬
ber of Unesco's Division for the Development
of Mass Media from 1965 to 1969, and was
previously Deputy Director of the Press Ins¬
titute of India, in Delhi. He is the author
of 'Communication and Development: a study
of two Indian Villages" (University of Minne¬
sota Press. 1966).
interest in its continuation; so also in
the media (of which the book is one)
as vehicles for passing on of stored
knowledge and new information to our
young people.
The question then is how best this
can be achieved, using the available
resources, the existing abilities and
the present state of knowledge itself
and the effectiveness of the various
media open to us. To a student of
mass communication, this is what the
question boils down to. Should we
necessarily have to choose between
the media? Or can we use the old
and the new side by side, as our
resources permit. Should we put all
our eggs in one basket, be it print
or electronic, or for that matter, our
greatest asset: oral communication
channels.
No scholar who has gone into the
question systematically has so far
suggested either the abandonment of
the old or the exclusive introduction
of the new, costs be damned. This
is as true of the developing countries
as of the developed where the print
media have had to contend with the
newer media for several decades.
Years of experience and research
in such societies have shown that the
media do not kill each other; they
cannot push each other out completely
but that, like the proverbial mother-in-
law and daughter-in-law, they learn to
live with each other and that by and
large they learn to live fairly comfort¬
ably if they are able to adapt to new
circumstances and indeed to take on
new roles of a complementary and
supplementary nature.
Whether in such a process the
book, for example, were to turn into
a "non-book" and television were to
become increasingly more informative
and instructional than it now is, so be
it. But we have no assurance as to
what might happen.
The realities of the developing

Photo © Unilever Ltd., London
countries do not warrant the taking
of the risks inherent in hunches (and
perhaps fads), however accurate they
may eventually turn out to be. The
possibility of their being wrong is
not only much greater but the costs
of such an eventuality are too high
for the developing countries to bear.
This is not to deny that the newer
media can play a significant part in
the overall developmental efforts of
these countries. However, the re¬
sources that are likely to be available
for a long time to come will make it
imperative that within the context of
communication development the brunt
of the tasks of information storage
and retrieval will be borne by the print
media in such societies despite the
advent of electronic media and
computers.
The book will have to continue to
provide the information and know¬
ledge required by the average citizen
to take full part in the changes taking
place around him. This is especially
true for the younger people who are
the mainstay of the revolutions taking
place in the developing countries.
The communications revolution, un¬
fortunately, is not the only revolution
that is taking place in the developing
countries today. The revolutions that
the West went through political, in¬
dustrial, social and technological are
today occurring in the developing
societies all at once and all together.
These revolutions are having to be
handled by people with relatively less
experience and knowledge, and with
far greater urgency and with far
more limited resources. Added to this
is the fact that, in addition to their
own revolutions, they are confronted
with the technological and other
developments in the West, thanks to
the communications revolution.
To the extent that the events, the
ideas and the problems of the West
are impinging upon the developing
nations, the proposition that the
world is tending towards becoming a
"global village" may have some truth
in it. However, it is unrealistic to
believe that internationalism is just
round the corner. One would like to
believe that this indeed could be
true, but then we are confusing fancy
with fact.
In fact, it seems that one of the
essential needs of the developing
society, rightly or wrongly, is the
development of a sense of nationhood
as a prerequisite for nation-building.
The leadership in the developing
countries are now involved in inject¬
ing such a sense of nationhood in
the people, even while taking part
in the larger task of bringing about
the "global village" through participa¬
tion in international forums.
In the developing countries, one is
generally concerned with the very real
villages where most of the people are
illiterate, uninformed and lack the
basic skills necessary for development
and are unaware of the basic concepts
essential for modernization. Even the
young boys and girls in these villages
lack such skills.
In the cities, on the other hand, the
relatively more educated youth find
themselves in a state of limbo which
has led to a great deal of discomfort
for them and to the society of which
they are part. They have neither a
strong sense of nationhood nor do
they feel genuinely international.
The question before the leadership
is how to give youth that sense
of involvement that is necessary
before they can take their rightful
place in society. To be able to do
that, they should obviously be pro¬
vided with a good knowledge of that
society. They should know its history
and its culture.
If the media are going to play an
important part in such transmission of
information and knowledge, the ques¬
tion which has to be answered is
whether these countries are going to
depend on the media available to them
here and now or wait for the newer
media to get up to the state of read¬
iness which is essential before they
can meet the increasing needs of
these countries. _ .
We know that the nature of the A I
"transcript of society" has generally
moved from oral to print. The devel¬
oping countries are at this stage. They
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

BOOKS IN THE THIRD WORLD (Continued)
All our eggs in one basket?
32
are aware of the fact that the printed
transcript is available now. Also that
such transcript can enable the younger
generation in these countries to expose
themselves to the history and culture
of their own people even as the
generations before them.
The advantages of the print medium
and of books are too well known
to be taken up here at any length in
such a short discussion. Print can
provide the required knowledge at a
time when the young people are
ready for it and when they are in the
mood to expose themselves to such
transcripts. That time is now. In
a more specific sense, print media can
be "consumed" when a person wants
to and at the speed at which he is
able to learn. He can go back to it
if he needs to.
IT is also known that the
newer electronic media, because of the
very nature of their limitations, do not
have the advantages of freedom of ex¬
posure in time and to a lesser extent,
in space. At this stage in their devel¬
opment, the electronic media are also
not able to provide the depth necessary
for a fuller understanding of many of
the complicated techniques of society's
production processes or of society's
human problems.
The leadership is therefore not
willing to burn up its present advant¬
ages of the store of knowledge
available for transmission through
print because of the promised potential
of newer media whose ability to
transmit knowledge faster and more
effectively and "through all the
senses" remains to be tested and
to be proved beyond reasonable doubt,
especially when one takes into account
the tremendous costs involved.
It should also be noted that if the
age of print is being overtaken by the
age of the electronic media in the
advanced countries, in large parts of
the rest of the world, the age of print
has not lived its full life. It should
also be noted that these countries are
even today in the stage of "oral
culture" and still "tribalized". If the
problem of the developed countries
is to "re-tribalize" man, what of those
countries which have not been "de-
tribalized" in the first place?
We are talking of societies where
even young people are today un-
involved, non-participants and inactive
despite the existence of an "oral
culture" all around them a state of
affairs which has been described as
stemming from the evils of the print
age. Will the introduction of an
electronic age directly without further
recourse to print, bring about a
different form of "tribalization" which
will lead to involvement, participa¬
tion and action?
It is true that in the industrially
advanced countries, the advent of tele¬
vision and its spectacular rise on the
communications scene led to wide¬
spread conjecture that this must be
the final blow that would make the
book a relic of the past and return the
world to a speech and gesture civiliz¬
ation. But the initial impact and rise
of television soon settled down to a
more reasonable plateau and it
became obvious to most people that
the book would survive.
The age of print to which such
premature obituaries have been
written elsewhere has not had its full
span of life in the developing societies.
If and when it has completed its tasks
and is willing to hand over its res¬
ponsibilities to the newer media, these
societies will perhaps be willing to
accept the mortality of this medium.
Meanwhile, however, there are no
such signs of ageing; the book has
not even grown to its full potential
and right now those responsible for
its nurturing and for its development,
are busy with the problems connected
with the rearing of this "child". Many
of these people are in fact the relat¬
ively more educated young people
of these societies with their own
visions of the future. They are not
only the readers of the books, but
also the contributors. They are aware
that if they are to enlarge their own
sense of participation and involvement,
it is through the print media that
they can express themselves and that
they can multiply their messages to
a wider audience.
The electronic media cannot give
them these opportunities, because
they are limited by the very nature
of their transmission and also by the
controls to which they are invariably
subject. In the developing countries,
they are also invariably government
controlled and operated.
I HESE young people are
also aware of the fact that the know¬
ledge of their cultures as well of other
cultures is available to them in the
books in the libraries which are acces¬
sible to them and from which they can
more easily retrieve the particular in¬
formation they are looking for. Figures
on library usage conclusively prove
that the largest number of their users
are young people. This is only partly
the result of their immediate educ¬
ational needs.
Such evidence of consumption of
print is not confined to the developing
countries. Partly it is true that the
educational system and the age at
which the educational experience is
being gained within the formal
structure, do have a bearing on these
figures of media consumption.
But what is the alternative, es¬
pecially in the developing countries,
where print is by and large the only
available medium for information
retrieval? (We must also remember
that the leadership in many of these
societies is neither willing nor able
to throw its young generation on
the imported products of television
material produced in cultures vastly
different from their own, however
dedicated the leaders may be to the
achievement of that citizenship in the
"global village". The villages they
are immediately concerned with are
their own real villages in which young
people are growing up, often with
not even a sense of the "nation-
village").
f\ PART from exposure to the
printed medium in schools, libraries
and at home, these young people are
also active consumers of the electro¬
nic media where they are available.
They realize that the media are comple¬
mentary and supplementary to one
another, just as they know that their
fathers or their teachers may not be
the repositories of all wisdom. They
watch certain media at certain times
and go back and forth through all the
media that are available to them.
Unfortunately their choice is rel¬
atively limited in the countries they
live in. They have to supplement what
little they learn from one medium by
whatever is available in the other.
Today they find that while the audio¬
visual media are able to inform them
up to a point, they have to go to
the books to learn in depth and to
learn when they are in the mood.
Perhaps tomorrow they will be able
to get far more out of the audio-visual
media at the time and at the place
they happen to be in, but that is for
that uncertain tomorrow. Their prob¬
lems are today's problems just as
their parents' problems were yester¬
day's.
As far as these young people are
concerned, human channels of com¬
munication have existed since time
immemorial, the print media have also
existed since time immemorial, the
audio-visual media are today available
only to a lucky few and will perhaps
be available to more people in times
to come. The book, however, con¬
tinues to surround them and was
available yesterday, is available today
and will be available in all the
tomorrows.
They see no signs on the horizon
of the dawn of universal television
or of widespread usage of computers,
let alone the death of books.
