.<-
^^<
X
3sfe*r
\

"The Fight for Liberty", a huge
mural by José Clemente Orozco
(1883-1949), dominates the stairway
of the Government Palace at
Guadalajara, Mexico. The dramatic
figure towering In the centre of the
mural Is the Mexican revolutionary
priest Miguel Hidalgo who, In
1810, at the village of Dolores,
made his famous call for
independence which was to spark
off the Mexican war of liberation.
This work Is typical of the Mexican
muraiist movement, whose most
outstanding representatives are
Orozco, Diego Rivera and David
Alfaro Siqueiros.

PATHWAYS
TO
A NEW ART
by Jean Franco
I
JEAN FRANCO has written extensively on
Latin American culture generally, and In
particular the art and literature of Latin
America. Professor of Latin American Lit¬
erature at the University of Essex, England,
she is Chairman of the Society for Latin
American Studies of Great Britain. She Is
the author of 'The Modern Culture of Latin
America: Society and the Artist" (revised
paperback edition, Penguin Books, U.K.,
1970) end "An Introduction to Spanish Ameri¬
can Literature" (1969), and the editor of
"Short Stories in Spanish" (Penguin, 1966).
T has become increasingly
difficult in the modern world to talk
of national or continental differences
in art, since national frontiers have
broken down and an international
style predominates. Further, it is
often as easy to see a painting by
Fernand Léger of France, in Caracas
as one by the Chilean, Roberto Matta,
in Paris or a Botero (of Colombia) in
New York. Yet, despite this growing
internationalism, Latin American art
is unique in that it represents a
confluence of indigenous, Western
European and North American styles.
The indigenous styles are those
which derive from pre-Columbian
sculpture, ceramics and painting, which
have provided a powerful source of
inspiration to certain contemporary
painters and sculptors.
At the same time, Latin American
art is also closely linked to Western
and North American art from
which it has derived styles such as
Impressionism, Cubism, Expressionism,
Abstractionism, Surrealism, Pop and
Op art. Even a movement like the
Mexican muraiist movement, which had
a strong nativist and genre element,
was influenced by Italian fresco
painting of the Renaissance, by
Cubism, Expressionism and even
Surrealism.
But perhaps what most clearly
distinguishes Latin American art are
the sociological factors, especially
those which concern the artist's
relation to his society. In many
countries, government patronage has
been more important than private
patronage. This was certainly the
case in Mexico in the nineteen-
twenties; it is the case in present-day
Cuba where private patronage has
virtually disappeared.
Yet even in countries like Brazil or
Venezuela where there Is substantial
private patronage, or very small
countries like Guatemala, the govern¬
ment has commissioned the decora¬
tion of public buildings, the con¬
struction of University cities or even
entire cities of the future like Brasilia.
The Mexican case Is particularly
interesting since Mexico was the first
Latin American country to stimulate
the creation of a "national art" as part
of a deliberate project in order to give
the people a sense of identity in the
post-Revolutionary era (that Is, after
1917).
On the other hand, private patron¬
age for Latin American art is a
recent phenomenon. As in literature,
nineteenth-century art was predomi¬
nantly European or European-inspired.
Wealthy Latin Americans bought their
paintings in Paris; public monuments in
squares or parks were commissioned
from European artists. The first
academies In Latin America established .*
after Independence were run by French I I
or Italian painters. The miracle Is that
a few native painters of genius (such
as José Maria Velasco, 1840-1912, of
CONTINUED PAGE 20

The lake island of Mexcaltitan, in northwestern Mexico (left), completely covered by a village of shrimp
fishermen, is an interesting example of "spontaneous urbanism" where the entire community has been built
within the framework of a circular island. Above, today's urban designers have given the same "modern"
circular shape to the "pilot city" of Jupia, in Brazil. The city was built near Brazil's largest hydro-electric
project at Urubupungá, on the Parana river, and houses 12,000 dam construction workers and their families.
For the ceiling of this concert hall at
the Luis Angel Arango Library, Bogo¬
ta, Colombia (right), the architect, Ger¬
mán Samper, used the most advanced
architectural and acoustical techniques.
The Square of San Francisco, below, in Quito, Ecuador, is
a good example of the great influence of Spanish colonial
architecture, adapted to the wide-open spaces of the Andean
landscape. In foreground, can be seen the lovely forecourt
of the Church of San Francisco built in the 17th century.
Below, the School of Plastic Arts, at Cubanacán, near Havana, built between
1962 and 1965 and designed by the Cuban architect Ricardo Porro. A complex
of domed structures and vaulted passages, the architectural ensemble has been
hailed for its originality and the ingenious way in which the different elements
fit into the surroundings.
Photo Paolo Gasparini - Unesco
i t i i i
ORIGINALITY
AND CONTRAST
IN LATIN AMERICAN
ARCHITECTURE
The architecture of Latin America has a
long tradition of originality going back
to pre-Columbian times with the pyra¬
mids of the Aztecs and Mayas, the
fortresses of Sachsahuaman at Cuzco
and the architectural ensemble at
Machu Picchu, in Peru, to cite only
three famous examples. The Colonial
period, lasting several hundred years
and inspired by Spanish and Portuguese
concepts, produced a new style of
Latin American baroque churches,
palaces and squares. Today's architects
of Latin America, too, at the same time
as they have studied and assimilated
the major trends of 20th century
architecture in the world, have sought
new and often revolutionary solutions
to town planning (as in Brasilia) and
urban architecture (as in Rio de Janeiro,
Mexico City, Caracas and many other
cities of Latin America). Just as
avant-garde Japanese architecture has
its deep roots in Japan's countryside
and traditions, so too have Latin
America's young architects sought to
integrate their new forms and concepts
with the more traditional models of
Latin America's past.
Modern tradition is a tradition of
dissent... In Latin America the
avant-garde violently rejects the
immediate past. But in reality it
is a circular process : the search
for the future always results in
a re-conquest of the past. Tradi¬
tion too is a creation of modern¬
ism. In other words, modernism
constructs its past with the same
violence that it builds its future.
Octavio Paz (Mexico)
19


20
PATHWAYS TO A NEW ART
(Continued from page 17)
Mexico) were able to develop In an
original way.
This imitation of foreign models,
common to all the arts in Latin
America, was the inevitable conse¬
quence of the continent's semi-colonial
status. The taste of potential patrons
was formed in Paris and they took
little interest in native talent before
the nineteen-twenties.
Yet all around them existed extra¬
ordinary native riches some archae¬
ological, like the pre-Columbian
ceremonial centres in the Andes or
Central America; or the baroque
sculpture and painting of the colonial
period; in the rural areas could be
seen the most diverse and exciting
examples of folk art, a folk art that is
often genuinely "mestizo" since it
combines Hispanic and Indian motifs.
Even today, the rural markets,
especially in the Andean countries, in
Mexico and Central America, offer fine
examples of folk painting, ceramic
sculpture, wood-carving, weaving and
pottery. Yet it was not until after
the Mexican Revolution that Latin
Americans began seriously to challenge
the norms of Western art and recognize
the value of their own traditions
whether of the past or whether
belonging to folk art.
The vigour of popular tradition is
nowhere more apparent than in the
engravings of the Mexican, José
Guadalupe Posada (1852-1913), whose
satirical works directly inspired the
Mexican murallst movement and,
indeed, a whole school of modern
engraving.
Posada drew on a purely folk
tradition on the macabre humour of
the skeleton figures which are sold
In Mexico to celebrate the Day of the
Dead as semi-comic mementi mori.
Posada decked out his skeleton
figures with the elegant hats and
clothes of pre-Revolutionary upper-
class Mexicans and so converted the
popular motif into social satire.
But it was the Mexican Revolution
(1910-1917) which really stimulated
both an interest in popular art and new
directions in painting and sculpture.
Artists such as Dr. Atl and Slqueiros
not only helped to introduce the
revolutionary concept of mural painting
but also fought In the Revolution
itself. When the fighting was over,
the Minister of Education in one of the
post-Revolutionary governments, José
Vasconcelos, commissioned murals for
the walls of the National Preparatory
School and other public buildings.
Moral and didactic in purpose, the
muraiist movement soon attracted the
three greatest talents of the period:
José Clemente Orozco (1883-1949),
Diego Rivera (1887-1957) and David
Alfaro Siqueiros (1898). Oddly,
perhaps ironically (considering the
anti-U.S. temper of the time), all of
these painters were as popular in the
United States as in their own country,
and all painted murals there Orozco
in Pomona College, Claremont, Cali¬
fornia, in the New School for Social
Research, New York, and at Dartmouth
College; Rivera in the San Francisco
Stock Exchange and the Rockefeller
Center and the Detroit Institute;
Siqueiros in Los Angeles at the Plaza
Art Center.
Although often linked together as
the main figures of the muraiist
movement, the three painters are in
fact very different. Orozco's work has
an explosive energy and violence
though he never sacrificed technique
to message. Many of his paintings
are, however, allegorical and many
are satirical and moral, attacking the
corrupt rich.
The murals he executed in Guadala¬
jara in the nineteen-thirties represent
the peak of his achievement, those
executed in the Government Palace
being powerfully satirical, and those
in the Hospicio Cabanas being
allegorical. Here he painted his
masterpiece on the theme of the four
elements. Three reclining figures,
depicting Earth, Water and Air,
surround Fire, a mural which fills the
dome of the edifice and shows flames
circling a human figure. The mural
is an excellent example of Orozco's
vigorous, dramatic and passionate
style.
By contrast, Rivera's murals were
lyrical, particularly In the 1920s
when he decorated the walls of the
Agricultural School of Chapingo with
the story of man's social development.
One of his most important murals,
however, Is the one he executed in
the National Palace in Mexico City,
where he painted the conquest and
the oppression of the Indian.
A painter whose colour and lines
can be tender and gentle, he often
turned to caricature in order to depict
the Spanish conquerors or the idle
rich (as in a famous mural in the Hotel
Prado, Mexico City, which for many
years remained covered up).
The third of the trio of muralists,
David Alfaro Siqueiros, has often
declared that he considers easel
paintings secondary to mural painting,
mere experiments for the larger work.
Nevertheless, he has painted a
considerable number of canvases,
many of them of a high quality.
Siqueiros' work Is noted for its
monumentality; he often uses great
shapes and likes to produce effects
of explosion, disruption or sinewy
strength. He has been one of the
most experimental of the muralists in
his search for new materials. Because
of his belief that painting is a form of
production, he has not hesitated to
adopt industrial techniques such as
the use of the spray gun.

The Mexican muraiist movement was
the first Latin American art movement
to spread its influence beyond the
national boundaries and it helped to
stimulate public commissions for
murals in other countries, and even
In the U.S.A. during the "New Deal"
period. Because of the strong "back
to the roots" tendency, encouraged by
post-Revolutionary nationalism, it also
revived figurative painting in which
there was a tendency to idealize
workers or peasants.
We find similar tendencies, however,
even in countries which had not
passed through a Revolutionary situ¬
ation. In Ecuador, Oswaldo Guaya-
samin followed on the tradition of
Mexican muralism, although much of
his work consisted of easel painting.
In Brazil, Cándido Portinari who, like
Siqueiros, painted strong figures of
workers pursuing their daily tasks, was,
in fact, influenced by contemporary
European art, particularly by Picasso's
"monumental" period.
The Cuban Revolution, like the
Mexican Revolution, encouraged art to
move away from easel painting towards
forms more readily accessible to the
people. Before the Revolution in
1959, Cuban art, whilst strongly
influenced by European (especially
French) art, was amongst the best in
Latin America. Among its avant-
garde were Victor Manuel, Amalia
Peláez, whose Matisse-like figures and
designs showed a remarkable use of
colour, Portocarrero, who was influ¬
enced by Futurism and Constructivism
and Wilfredo.Lam, a painter who used
motifs from Cuban African cults in
his works.
Almost all of these painters, though
they did not alter their styles after the
Revolution, began to work for a larger
public. They painted large canvases
for public buildings, designed biscuit
tins or posters. Indeed, it is in the
field of poster and book design that
contemporary Cuban painters and
artists have reached a mass public.
Quite a different path was followed
by painters and sculptors in most other
countries of Latin America where a
high value was placed on technique
and less importance was attached to
reaching a mass public. The pioneers
here were the Brazilians who, in 1922,
held a Modern Art Week in Säo Paulo.
This encouraged a number of painters,
influenced by Fauvism and Futurism.
But soon quite original trends
developed. With Tarsilo de Amaral
(1894), there developed the delightful
Antropofagia (Cannibalistic) move¬
ment, a kind of Brazilian response to
European myths about tropical America.
The Modern Art Week put Säo Paulo
on the cultural map and this city later
became the home of the Biennale
exhibition.
Another Latin American offshoot of
Modernism was Constructivism whose
main exponent was the Uruguayan
artist, Torres-García for whom the
essence of art was "to construct
according to the law of limitations."
As is the case with the literary
movement often known as "magical
realism", surrealism and certain
other European movements served to
encourage Latin Americans to achieve
a new vision of their own continent.
This was true even in Mexico where
along with the muraiist movement,
there flourished painters such as
Rufino Tamayo (1899) who developed
a totally personal art, initially influ¬
enced by Picasso.
Although Tamayo spent some years
in New York and was recognized In
the United States before he was
recognized In Mexico, his colours and
elements are wholly Mexican without
CONTINUED PAGE 32
KINETIC ART
SOCIAL SATIRE
Two examples of opposing
tendencies in contemporary
Latin American art. Left, a
construction in synthetic
materials entitled "Twisted
Shape" by the Argentinian
kinetic artist Julio Le Parc,
a prizewinner at the 1966
Venice Biennale. Right, "The
Presidential Family", by the
Colombian artist Fernando
Botero, a burlesque social
satire in which realistic
representation is deliberately
avoided.

PATHWAYS TO A NEW ART (Continued from page 21)
32
being In any way realist. His "Homage
to the Race", a huge canvas in the
Fine Arts Museum of Mexico City, is
an example of the way he combines
a dream-like atmosphere with vibrant
colours, peculiar to Mexico.
Totally different and yet equally
removed from the tradition of Mexican
muralism are the geometric designs
of the Guatemalan-born Carlos Mérida
which were inspired by pre-Columbian
art. Younger painters like the
abstract expressionists Vicente Rojo
and Luis Cuevas, whose sombre
drawings have a Goyaesque atmo¬
sphere, tend to concentrate on paint¬
ings, drawings and illustrations and
have not followed the muraiist tradition.
In Brazil and Venezuela, however,
Modernism has been a consciously-
pursued policy. Indeed Brasilia and
the University of Caracas are show¬
pieces of Modernism.
Brasilia, designed by Oscar Nie-
meyer, provides a splendid setting
for the work of sculptors like Alfredo
Ceschiati. Sculpture has enjoyed an
extraordinary development in Brazil,
led by artists such as Sergio Camargo.
In Caracas, the University building
provided the same kind of patronage
to national and international artists as
Brasilia. Here abstractionism has
been the outstanding tendency, notably
in the painting of Soto and in the op
art of Carlos Cruz-Diez.
In Argentina, where abstract painting
has flourished since Emilio Pettoruti's
1924 exhibition, there have been a
number of important tendencies such
as Otra Figuración and Madi. The
latter was formed under the leadership
of the European-born, Kosice (1924),
who makes spatial structures of
perspex, wood and metal. More
recently, there has been an outstanding
exponent of op art, Julio Le Parc.
Outside these big countries, where
there is private patronage, an aston¬
ishing number of painters of inter¬
national standing have emerged in
Chile, Peru and in Colombia, painters
who obviously depend on an inter¬
national market. In Chile, Roberto
Matta has led the attack on "official
art" and created an art of unreality,
using striking, visceral forms. ln"Peru,
this international trend is represented
by Szyszlo and in Colombia by Ale¬
jandro Obregón among others.
But Colombia has also produced
one of the really original artists of
Latin America Fernando Botero
whose "monsters" offer a strange,
satirical comment on society. Botero
first began painting in this style in his
"Homage to Mantegna", in which he
first introduced human figures whose
heads were blown up to grotesque
size. His "Presidential Family" with
bishops, soldiers and children is like a
distorted photograph, the large heads
underlining the vacuity of the faces.
These examples will, perhaps, suffice
to show how difficult it is to generalize.
Latin American art came of age with
the Mexican muraiist movement' but in
recent years, by breaking out of the
nationalist framework, it has command¬
ed international attention. The fact
that many Latin American paintings
now hang in galleries in North Amer¬
ica and Europe indicates that the
plastic arts have left provincialism far
behind.
Jean Franco
