The photos on these pages are unusual examples of books selected from
a recent Paris exhibition of treasures at the Bibliothèque Nationale in
conjunction with International Book Year.
EGYPTIAN PAPYRUS. Above, detail of an Egyptian papyrus text
(about 2000 B.C.) discovered at Thebes. The complete scroll
(7 metres or 23 ft. long) records the maxims of Ptahhotep, a
vizier renowned for his wisdom, as well as precepts of other
ancient Egyptian sages.
SUMERIAN CLAY TABLETS. Right, three Sumerian cuneiform
"books" in clay from ancient Mesopotamia. The pointed inscrip¬
tion, recalling a wizard's hat, commemorates the building of a
temple dedicated to the god Nin-Girsu about 2700 B.C. by Gudea,
ruler of the city of Lagash. Text on right is inscribed on a clay
cylinder telling of the consecration of the Lagash temple. Below
it is a book-shaped tablet (about 1900 B.C.) lamenting the
destruction of the City of Ur.
y
<*£<?
BURMESE COPPER SCRIPTURE. Right, a most unusual
manuscript inscribed in "square" Burmese characters on
long thin sheets of gilded copper. It contains the
Kammavâca, a Buddhist religious text in the Pali lan¬
guage. The pages (10 X 53 cm. or 4 X 9 in.) are
hooked, loose-leaf folder-like, between decorated gilt-
copper covers.
SUMATRA BARK BOOK. Left, an 18th or 19th century
treasure of the Batak people of Sumatra (Indonesia), this
collection of magic spells and rites is inscribed on
sheets of the inner bark of the agalloch, a resinous tree
of S.E. Asia. It has a beautifully carved wooden cover.
by Alexei A. Sidorov
30
ALEXEI A. SIDOROV Is the leading Soviet
authority on the history of the graphic arts
and book design. A corresponding member
of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Pro¬
fessor Sidorov has written over 500 articles
and many longer studies on these subjects
for Soviet and other publications.



The book, realm
of many arts
HIISTORY has known count¬
less varieties of "books". They range
from the cuneiform tablets of Sumer,
papyri of ancient Egypt, Ceylonese
books on rectangularly cut palm
leaves, Japanese "butterfly" books,
parchment manuscripts containing
codes of antiquity and medieval folios
down to modern publications.
The book was born of a harmonious
union between the arts and technology.
It became and has remained the joint
work of artist and printer, a fruitful
synthesis of many crafts.
The first European printed books,
dating from the 15th century, combined
the qualities of the illustrated manu¬
script with the new contribution of the
printing and typographic crafts. Since
then the book has undergone a constant
process of renewal.
An individual creation of the author
who writes the text and of the artist
who chooses the type and draws the
illustrations and cover, the book in its
final form is also the combined product
of many persons publisher, printer,
bookbinder and manufacturers of

paper, colours and ink. And it will
continue to be so until photo-compo¬
sition and microfilms take over if they
ever really do.
As an expression of world culture
the book has a long history, but
though many attempts have been
made, a truly comprehensive study of
the book has yet to be written. The
history of the art of the book is not
the history of printing, of book illus¬
tration, of book-binding, or of typo¬
graphy. It is the history of a complex
ensemble, a synthesis of the work of
all who have contributed to the book's
development.
Comparing the creation of a book
with architecture, the French poet
Paul Valéry pointed out that a book's
structural composition obeys clearly
defined laws of proportion.
The effort to make the book a
"celebration", a triumph of man's
creative genius, found expression in
the first masterpiece of European
printing Gutenberg's Mainz Bible.
Without the artist this celebration
would have been inconceivable.
Gutenberg used clear black letter-
type disposed In beautifully pro¬
portioned columns which he embellish¬
ed with hand-inscribed ornamental
borders in red and gold, contrasting
dramatically with the severe order¬
liness of the type. This was the first
instance of an artist painting in colour
on the printed sheets of each indi¬
vidual book.
Soon after Gutenberg printed his
book, one of his former workmen,
Peter Schoeffer, introduced coloured,
engraved initials into the type-setting
of the Mainz Psalter (1457). This
experiment saw the artist entering
directly into the printing process.
Other developments followed. Etch¬
ing on copper was tried, for example
in Dante's books published in 1481,
and attempts were also made to insert
primitive woodcuts as in the case of
Ulrich Boner's "Edelstein" in 1461.
By the end of the 15th century, books
were printed containing so many
engravings that the same engraving
was often repeated with different
captions, making these works the
negation of all that a book should be.
Progress in printing was fairly rapid,
so that when Aldo Manutius published
"Hypnerotomachia", at the turn of the
16th century, the book acquired the
form it has essentially retained to this
day. In this publication the artist
illustrated the text with linear woodcuts
and the printer produced it in carefully
selected Roman type disposed accord¬
ing to strictly defined laws of type¬
setting. Artist and craftsman joined
forces to create a harmonious
ensemble.
Along with woodcuts, copper
etchings were introduced in books
printed in the 16th and 17th centuries.
Since these etchings required different
techniques and equipment from those
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

Facsimile of a page of the 1456 Gutenberg Bible, the
first masterpiece of European typography with its strictly
yet beautifully proportioned columns of type. The lay¬
out and design of the characters owed much to the
traditions of medieval manuscripts which Gutenberg,
and other early European printers took as their model.
I m *
*** ii-iCTi*!»,
ii i ' m m m » m*. - m^-mmmm-jpwmwpm-mmpmhpmi ii ^ .. p m »: m » p
BIBLIA SACRA
J LMM H lt*l tTrUrfTT1 «ta te «P**« « «MbMHM
iSaaras; rpacÄai' °
MM pM»MTH*TM VI» Ml M* M« aj
«é «rMT IWlH MMMB A Mi MMBSM M* M» M» MM-
Mr** lf»»l 11 i »MM MftMM
SET
QUADRILINGUAL BIBLE. In Inter¬
national Book Year, Antwerp (Bel¬
gium) Is celebrating the quatercente-
nary of the monumental Bible in four
languages completed in 1572 by the
famous printer Christophe Plantin
who established his printing works
In Antwerp. Four different founts
of type had to be cast to reproduce
the text of the Bible In Hebrew,
Aramaic, Greek and Latin. Left, the
frontispiece to this edition shows
the lion, the ox, the wolf and the
lamb in peaceful harmony represent¬
ing the union of four languages.
Plantin has given his name to 'a
form of type in use to this day.
FOR EYE & MIND. This page from
Dante's "Divine Comedy" published
in Florence in 1481, provides a feast
for eye and' mind. The Botticelli-
style illustration regales the eye and
the commentaries by Crlstoforo
Landino on Dante's tercets (in
smaller' type alongside the original
text} are rich food for meditation.
r*~T'	1	*1	L.I-J j.j	j '11111111 IHTltlll'lllllMWi I
3finit**uui*Mm.a.t*<dxàiK<#(otvrm*°fraaiimuepm*t&m
» -!*IL»f p*tL10-to4*l
iiMadiiMr
i
32
CANTO SECONDO DELLA PRIMA CÁNTICA
t 0*i«o*»tJK«lfr«rdm(fot»teleli»iU*i
«WnusaMhiHdi «uropropl^tfc
U*,» »a inmn ¿imam .en bcw pi
Hlc ej»dV> *t (*» unal*t*»hi«»Jut i Mi «fo
ri UfjpaK pot** aa« utc«4tM.0ertcAl»R>
toMCf<*! «t t»be»f a ilkumnx»Utinaonr fu
CUlmutU*u*mmuicmmiei*Ur w»i
J^kfcooMLtukgkfc onasoùÉR.ILhr
Mri*-!-^- "J- 	mmiliilin	 	
««IcatllaunuUcJiMrrtfliljrwa
mUdtncniLMfi^átflIlntliUffKaadjittúto ítt
4ou< dt:m Jo Itianu malí nan p-rtur molrt pofktn
lcpCTQ«Wllaw<tniii»iiliii^JTgnio|MTTTh««»fff «ti4tii«fc^»W¥)d»fWf^J»Nt»«^
»dmduiritituVpJmtyjUioAihjpj
O --.ionio fni arfan« ütr brars
tojtuà glunjauli rht fon a Mi
eUUt utKlV loroitt to Tolo una
MmarccTtaao « folk» bflorro
fi M «mao n fl «kit* pKrarci
rht ntram Uncatt oV ma cm
O muff o tiro mptfrnohor nuujurc .
o »cow rht (mutfh no cl»o mdi
qui ii pttri U t» nabiliurr.
REALM OF MANY ARTS (Continued)
with which woodcuts were produced,
they were stuck into the books
separately. The magnificent etchings
inserted into the books of those days
were so numerous that all too often
they made the books look more like
albums or atlases.
A century later, sophisticated letter¬
ing and ornamental vignettes made
their appearance in many books. But
this was not the only trend. Caslon
and Baskerville in Britain, Didot in
£ ¿ France, and Bodoni in Italy introduced
j01 splendid new type styles, and William
S e Blake, poet, illustrator and printer
@o rolled into one, attempted to produce
oSa book that would be unique in every
1 1 feature.
In the 19th century, publishing
became an industry and a battlefield
of conflicting ideas. While the
Romantic poets were forging closer
links with artists, some writers came
to regard their prose as an explanatory
accompaniment to artists' drawings.
Charles Dickens' /Pickwick Papers"
began as an explanatory text to
Robert Seymour's drawings and he
was later to find another collaborator
in the artist Hablot Browne, "Phiz",
with whom he undertook a study of
the London slums.
The 19th century was also marked
by the emergence of masterpieces
of the new style of illustration. Adolf
Menzel adopted a scientific and histor¬
ical approach, while Gustave Doré's
passionate and dramatic style veered
towards the grandiose and the fan¬
tastic. But it was also at this time
that Gustave Flaubert began to protest
against illustrations in books of fiction
in general. He maintained, quite
rightly, that it was what was imagined
and hinted at, whether in a poem or a
psychological novel, that counted most
for both the writer and the reader.
Photography was yet another
development that was taken up by
printers and publishers during the
19th century.
Of vital importance in the history
of the art of the book were the new
possibilities . opened up during the
20th century by the invention of
mechanical type-setting, rotary print¬
ing, photographic techniques, zinco¬
graphy, intaglio printing in colour and
facsimile phototype reproduction.
The progress made in the art of the
book in the 20th century has been the
subject of several studies which
expound the now world famous art
nouveau of Aubrey Beardsley in Brit¬
ain, and Félix Valloton and Théophile
Steinlen in France, and the ¡ugendstil
of German artists.
At the beginning of this century,
the graphic arts and the art of the
book were becoming international in
character, a trend that was clearly
evident at the 1900 World Exposition
in Paris. It is, perhaps, no mere co¬
incidence that in this same year,
Ambroise Vollard, the famous patron
of "modern" artists, began publishing
high quality books including reprints

of works by authors of ancient times
and 19th century poets.
The appearance of luxurious publi¬
cations intended for a handful of
booklovers in many countries was
characteristic of this period, just as
was the contradictory phenomenon of
the spread of a completely different
type of book influenced by futurists,
dadaists and the Weimar Bauhaus
whose chief exponents were the
Russian El Lissitsky (see page 34) and
the Hungarian Moholy Nagy. These
publications appeared for the first
time after the first World War and
the October revolution in Russia.
II T is fascinating to trace the
main trends which gave shape to the
art of the book at the beginning of the
20th century and to study the ten¬
dencies that were common to various
countries.
Innovation was the first character¬
istic. Newly-coined words, new slo¬
gans and ideas produced in the melting
pot of world war and revolution had
immediate influence on the countries
of Europe and later spread to the rest
of the world. At the same time,
however, the book preserved with care
all that was best in the culture and
achievements of the past.
Constructivism was another contem¬
porary movement in which the balance
was maintained between innovation
and wisely selected traditions in book
production. It had little in common
with, the futurism of Marinetti, for
example, or others in whose books
the text was set in whimsically curv¬
ed lines to imitate the explosion of
bombs or shells while the text itself
evoked the whine and thunder of
exploding missiles. Russian futurist
book designers, meanwhile, were
experimenting with lines interspersed
with lithographs and texts printed in
block letters or even typewritten.
During the 1920s, functional cons¬
tructivism dominated and "art" and
"ornament" in books gave way to the
"structural" design of the printed
page; pages were set in types of dif¬
ferent sizes and letters in red were
scattered among the black type. The
tone was set by "The New Typogra¬
phy", a book published in German by
the Czech engineer Ian Tschihold.
One of the most brilliant exponents
of this tendency was the Russian artist
El Lissitsky who worked with success
in the Soviet Union and Germany. Also
in the U.S.S.R., Alexander Rodchenko,
who designed many books by Maya-
kovsky, broke away from the classical
rules of earlier aesthetics replacing
elaborate drawings with simple photo¬
montages. Later, another Soviet artist,
S. Telingater, combined Lissitsky's
pure "structuralism" and Rodchenko's
photo-montages.
In general, books published at this
time are notable for the vivid colours
CONTINUED PAGE 35
MR. PICKWICK IN CHASE OF HIS HAT. "The Posthumous Papers
of the Pickwick Club" are a classic example of the interplay of text and
Image and of collaboration between artist and writer. At the outset,
Dickens' text was written to accompany the humorous drawings of
Seymour, such as that above; later, particularly when the young artist
H. Browne, "Phiz", took over from Seymour, the work of writer and
artist became inextricably interlinked to provide a rich word and image
portrait of 19th century England.
In this illustration for one of Pushkin's four "Malenkle Tragedii" ("Little QQ
Tragedies"), the Soviet artist V. Favorsky attempts to carry the reader JJ
deeper into the world of "evil passions" evoked by the poet.

iV-ff-fffl I í-
A revolution in modern typography
i^B
Hi
A powerful current of new
ideas in literature, the arts
and graphic design surged
through Europe shortly after
the first World War. Numer¬
ous schools or styles, some
short-lived, others more en¬
during, sprang up. Their new
concepts and original works
challenged and radically trans¬
formed long accepted prin¬
ciples of taste and art. One
man who played a pioneering
role in spreading the new art
forms throughout western
Europe was the Soviet artist,
designer and architect El Lis¬
sitzky (1890-1941). In 1922,
El Lissitzky published a ten-
page children's book entitled
"Two Squares" . This book
(all its pages are reproduc¬
ed here in their original The 2 squares
colours) was a revolution in
modern typography. El Lis¬
sitzky had been influenced by
Kasimir Malevich. another
Soviet artist who founded a
movement called "Suprema-
tism", describing it as "the
supremacy of pure feeling or
perception in the pictorial
arts". As the illustrations of
his book show. El Lissitzky
repeatedly uses diagonal lines
and balanced, asymmetric typ¬
ography, techniques which
gave his pages a rhythm and
grace that modern display
advertising has since used to
great effect. In his "Notes on
Typography". El Lissitzky
commented on his book in
these terms: "For this story
of 'Two Squares' I endeav¬
oured to give form to an
elementary idea with ele¬
mentary means so as to stimu¬
late children to play actively ,
and get adults to see " !?°n « read
y
WÊÊÊÊ
jg-l
mmmmI
Bel
mmmI
ruJHIH *_
i
L V
i wJ
I
. .
For everyone, for all youngsters
El Lissitzky: a Suprematist story
about two squares, in six
constructions, Berlin, Skythen
(-Verlag), 1922
Don't read
Take
some paper fold it
some sticks colour them
some bits of wood
build something
Here are two squares They come from far away, flying
toward earth and. . .
. And see the dark chaos everything disintegrates
And on the black the
red stands out This is the end. . . and then.

REALM OF MANY ARTS
(Continued from page 33)
used in their illustrations, though they
were still designed in traditional style.
Typical of this period is the set of
black and white illustrations (1923) by
M.V. Dobuzhinsky for "The White
Nights", by Fedor Dostoyevsky.
Nothing is so indicative of the div¬
ersity of the book as the revival and
almost universal success of books in
which the old woodcut technique is
used. Woodcuts by the great Russian
illustrator and artist Vladimir Favorsky
have won world-wide recognition as
significant works of art.
With consummate skill and intelli¬
gence Favorsky succeeded in reflect¬
ing in his woodcuts not only the con¬
tents of a book, but also its "inner
world", the author's hints and allu¬
sions, whose importance Gustave
Flaubert had stressed earlier. Favor¬
sky showed that artists can build a
new dimension into a book with
decorative techniques such as the
contrasting use of large and small
woodcuts.
This, of course, was not the only
trend. There are always books that
need traditional, colourful, vivid illus¬
trations. Such a book was Tolstoy's
"Anna Karenina" for which N.I. Pis-
karyov executed superb, lively colour¬
ed woodcuts. The book was publish¬
ed In the U.S.S.R. in 1933.
I,IN the 1930s, many of the
experiments of the previous decade
were abandoned and artists concen¬
trated on evolving illustrations that
gave' deeper insight into the psy¬
chology of the book's characters,
rejecting the play of lines and contours
for subtle half-tones of light and shade.
New techniques developed at this
time began to influence book design.
Offset printing was coming into its
own and it became possible to use
a variety of inks in any book.
Diagrams, plates and coloured illus¬
trations (such as those by Picasso
which were to make him famous)
began to be used which were no
longer integrally linked with the text.
The book seemed to split into two
parts, one literary, the other artistic.
Printed separately, these illustrations
were inserted into books.
For a time the "picture in a book"
style of design triumphed; splendid
water colours, realistic, abstract or
romantic drawings, cartoons and
landscapes accompanied the book
without being illustrations in the fullest
sense. The art of the book gave
way to "art in the book".
It was only in the mid 1950s and
early 1960s that an attempt was made
to seek unity in all the aspects of book
production. The new generation of
illustrators tended to demand personal
control over all the artistic aspects of
the book, from the dust cover to the
inside illustrations, second titles, end
pieces, etc. This calls for confident
CONTINUED PAGE 41
SUP
ÄS?
TYPORTBÁIT OF A CROWD. If in the West
calligraphy is little more than an exercise for
children, this is not true of other parts of the
world. This is shown by the age-old writing
traditions of the East, not only In China (where
calligraphy Is one of the fine arts, equal in
stature to painting, sculpture etc.) but also
throughout the Arab and Moslem world.
Calllgraphy's links with modern typographical
design become evident In the work of the
young graphic artist Navendra, born in Delhi
in 1931. His experiments in adapting the
thousand-year-old Devanagari characters, used
In the writing of Hindi, to the requirements
of modern typographic techniques have given
rise to an artistic concept closely allied, as
he himself admits, to that which Inspired such
artists as El Lissitzky. The work above, entitled
"To give an Idea of a crowd", Is composed
una ¡dea de la multitud», realizada con carac¬
teres «devanagari» modernizados.
Cover for Dostoyevsky's "The Idiot", designed
in 1971 by the Soviet graphic artist V. Gorayev.
It Illustrates the striking effect achieved by the
contrasting use of, black and white, serving
as a background to ultramodern typography.
35

The book,
realm of many arts
(Continued from page 35)
mastery of the whole range of graphic
art, enabling the designer to see a
book as a whole, with an imaginative
structure corresponding both to the
spirit of the text and the demands of
modern aesthetics.
A technique frequently adopted by
modern book designers is the
extensive use of colour, by the
introduction, for example, of black or
red pages on which the text is printed
in white. Printing part of the text,
separate words, or parts of a word
in bright colours has nothing in com¬
mon with the coloured initials and orna¬
mentations in ancient books, and the
same holds for the striking light and
black shades favoured in modern
engravings.
The new approach differs from the
old, purely decorative technique
because now the artist introduces
colour to emphasize shades of mean¬
ing in the text or to enhance the
atmosphere of a passage, thus making
the book more vivid and expressive.
A.D. Goncharov used this technique
in producing a new edition of Alexan¬
der Block's poem "The Twelve". The
poem is about the first days of the
1917 revolution in Russia and the
artist, feeling that black and white
illustrations would be inadequate to
convey the dramatic spirit of the
revolution and the burst of enthusiasm
it aroused, introduced illustrations in
the symbolic red of the revolutionary
banner. He used "grotesque" type
which seemed best to suit the poem.
The pages of the book are not all
white; some are red or black with the
text printed in white type. One page
is grey, and the white of the snow
falling on the dead body of a woman
pictured there is made whiter still.
Nevertheless, Goncharov only employ¬
ed fairly simple polygraphic tech¬
niques.
The Soviet artist Dmitri S. Bisti
gave appropriate treatment to Maya-
kovsky's poem "Lenin". The simplicity
of the uncompromising combination of
red and black that he used in his own
way makes Mayakovsky's words stand
out with even greater emphasis.
Indeed, the complete fusion of colour
with graphics, and of illustrations
against white margins, suggests further
striking possibilities in book design.
In the field of fairy stories and
children's books, to which publishers
have always paid particular attention,
joyful, full-bodied colour really comes
into its own. For the student of modern
book design children's books and art
books provide a rich and fascinating
subject of study.
Another, comparatively recent, phen¬
omenon which should not be over¬
looked is the increasing output of
books on science, technology and
science fiction which now compete
with traditional literature in numbers
of titles published and copies sold.
It was inevitable that this consequence
of the scientific and technological
revolution should open a new chapter
in the history of the book, leading to
the use of new designs and motifs
inspired by scientific discoveries.
OLLOWING the two dev¬
astating world wars of this century,
artists not generally regarded as
specialists in the field became in¬
terested in book illustration. The work
of Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse and
Rockwell Kent, Guillaume Appolli-
naire's calligrams, the "typoetry" of
Reinhard Döhl, Vercors' colour printing
and the high artistic quality of the Skira
publishers in Switzerland, have intro¬
duced such a variety, such a conflict
of ideas into the modern book that one
longs for the establishment of an
international centre which would record
and study new developments and pro¬
mote the international exchange of
ideas.
Created by the artist, the graphic
art of the book is one of the prime
elements of culture. In the wake of
the writer, the graphic artist re-creates
the past and records the present.
The images evoked create a dialogue
with contemporary man, becoming part
of his life, his thoughts and his
emotions.
Throughout the centuries books
have provided a distillation of each
different national culture with its parti¬
cular aesthetic and moral ideals. Yet
the process of research and creation
is never complete. Despite all the il
achievements of the past new 'rl
discoveries lie ahead. <
Alexel A. Sldorov
