DOES HIGH STANDARD OF
EQUAL HIGH RATE OF
by Dan Behrman
A high standard of living
can mean a high rate of death from
heart disease. Not only that, but
"labour-saving" occupations are not
necessarily life-saving.
These are the conclusions that one
is tempted to draw from the recently-
published results of a study on how
heart attacks strike a county in the
southern United States. They shed a
glimmer of light on the problem of
coronary heart disease that is, myo¬
cardial infarction and angina pectoris
as a companion to highly-developed
societies.
The story of the study goes back
more than ten years when Dr. Curtis
G. Hames, a general practitioner in
Evans County, Georgia, observed that
his black patients appeared to suffer
coronary heart attacks much less fre¬
quently than whites, even though Evans
County lies in the so-called "coronary
belt" of the United States running from
Virginia through Georgia.
He was not the first to make such
an observation. Other physicians had
noted the apparent immunity of blacks
to coronaries and had attributed it to
racial differences. But Hames' cur¬
iosity drove him further.
As he reported in Archives of
Internal Medicine, recently published
24 DAN BEHRMAN Is a Unesco science writer.
He Is the author of "The New World of the
Oceans" (Little Brown and Co., Boston,
U.S.A.), also recently published in a paper¬
back edition.
by the American Medical Association,
it led to a community study of Evans
County with support from the Amer¬
ican government and the nearby Uni¬
versity of North Carolina.
Evans County must be a quiet place,
judging from .what the Archives of
Internal Medicine says about it. It
lies sixty miles inland from the Atlan¬
tic Ocean on a coastal plain of red
clay and sandy soil. Pine forests
ramble over much of its area (at its
greatest diameter, the county mea¬
sures 19 miles). Not much industry to
speak of, there's a sewing factory giv¬
ing jobs to 500 and another plant that
makes. . . fruitcake.
In 1960, when the study began, the
population of Evans County was 6,952
and, by 1970, it had gone. up to only
7,290. Obviously a stable community,
and a good one for a long-term health
study. Two-thirds of the population
live in completely rural surroundings.
Two-thirds, too, are white and one-
third black.
During an 18-monlh period between
1960 and 1962, every Evans County
resident over the age of 40 and half
the residents between 15 and 39 were
given complete physical examinations,
3,102 in all.
These examinations bore out what
Dr. Hames had noticed. Coronary
heart disease was a rarity for black
men, it hit them only half as often as
it did whites. But the study brought
out a new factor: whites on the bottom
half of the social ladder were not
being affected any more than blacks.
Summarizing the findings in the
Archives, Dr. John C. Cassel, of the
University of North Carolina, comment¬
ed that they could not be attributed
to other factors such as blood pres¬
sure, blood cholesterol levels, cigarette
smoking, body weight or diet.
But the state of a man's heart
appeared to be linked to what he did
for a living or, in Dr. Cassel's words,
"these occupational differences sug¬
gested that possibly physical activity
exerted a protective effect and that
variations in the level of physical act¬
ivity between the various ethnic and
social class groups accounted, at least
in part, for the difference in their
rates."
This looked promising, but not after
a first glance at the results of a follow-
up study made between 1967 and 1969
covering nearly 99 per. cent of those
who had been originally examined.
This study showed that vulnerability
to coronary heart diseases was now
affecting nearly all whites equally. The
doctors reasoned that the younger
men on the bottom were under greater
pressure in any case, their blood
pressure was greater because they
were climbing up.
Yet the difference between blacks
and whites persisted during the follow-
up study. Was it then a matter of
race after all? Researchers looked
hard at the figures. They saw that, as
Dr. Cassel wrote, "the only circum¬
stance in which white men had as low
rates as blacks was when they were
both sharecroppers." He added that
the only difference between white
sharecroppers and other white men
was that they had to work a lot harder
physically, as hard as black share¬
croppers do.
White or black, a share¬
cropper does a hard day's work. A
visitor to one Evans County farm
reported that the tenant was up before
the sun. He ate a big breakfast bacon
and eggs fried in hot lard (enough to
make some people die just at the mere
thought of so much animal fat), coffee
and bread then he and his wife went
out to work. At seven in the morning,
they were caring for some 30,000 baby
chickens on the farm.
When they stopped for lunch, they
filled up on starches and carbohydra¬
tes a stew of cheap beef, rice and
turnip greens. Then back to work until
after six, more fats and starches for
supper, and an evening around the
television set.
The visitor also reported that this
sharecropper chews tobacco, takes a
drink of whisky from time to time, but
never takes a vacation. Yet his chan¬
ces of developing coronary # heart
disease after the age of 40 are less
than a third as high (31 per 1,000 dur¬
ing the 1960-62 period) as those of a
professional man or a top executive
earning $20,000 a year, enjoying a
three-week vacation, but sitting at a
desk all day long. In that bracket, the
coronary rate was 96 per 1,000.
The mere virtues of rural living do
not explain the difference, for the white
farm owner was almost as vulnerable
to heart attack as the city executive.
Dr.- Cassel, the professor, turned to
Dr. Hames, the family doctor, for an
explanation and this is what he was
told.
The men who had been labelled high

LIVING
DYING?
social class, while living in a rural
environment were in fact living a very
"urban" way of life.
In contrast to their fathers, they were
not living by the sun but by the clock;
they were commuting to work in small
industries, their wives were driving in
car pools, and even if they were farm
owners, they were no longer private
entrepreneurs but "employees" of
some larger company.
Further there was some evidence
that an increasing proportion of white
men in Evans County, even those
labelled low social class, were begin¬
ning to participate in this 20th-century
urban "way of life" as the county was
rapidly changing from a rural agrarian
to a more industrialized economy.
However, it would be a mistake to
take the results of the Evans County
study as a plea for poverty (in fact,
it isn't the unemployed, the poorest
of all, got more heart attacks than the
sharecroppers) or a plea for a high-
starch diet.
What it does seem to show is, as
Dr. Cassel says, that physical activity
is a protection against coronary heart
disease, but only above some
"threshold value" which is exceeded
by farmers and particularly sharecrop¬
pers, white and black. Physical activity
increases the diameter of the blood
vessels in the heart and this is a
"plausible biological explanation" for
its role, state the Evans County
researchers.
They are less certain about where
this "threshold value" lies, a subject
of great controversy in the medical
profession. Studies made elsewhere
do not settle it. In one factory in a
large American city, active workers
suffered from coronary heart disease
just as much as their sedentary
colleagues, even though they were
expending over 50 per cent more
calories.
In Evans County, the study also
showed that social instability seemed
to go hand-in-hand with vulnerability
to coronarles. In the lowest social
classes, men were more likely to get
heart attacks if they were moving
upward than if they were stable.
However, In the higher brackets, it
was those up above who seemed to
be less in danger.
It may be that in both cases,
whether stable on the very top or the
very bottom of the social and economic
ladder, a man knows exactly where he
stands and worries less about where
he is going. But that is only a
guess. . .
Photo © Gary Renaud-Holmes-Lebel. Paris
DEEP IN THE HEART OF GEORGIA. A farmer In the southern
United States where a recently completed 10-year study into
the frequency of coronary heart attacks suggests that cardiac
health and hard physical work go together, regardless of race.
25
