The 'Father of the Green Revolution' speaks out
IN DEFENCE OF ffif
AND OTHER PESTICIDES
Jr\re pesticides and chemical fertilizers as harmful as some people
claim? The "Unesco Courier" has devoted space in the past to opposing views
on this controversial question, on the one hand favourable to DDT and pesticides
(Gene Gregory in "The Magic of Modern Chemistry", June 1971) and a number
of articles pointing to the danger of DDT and other pesticides ("Man the Killer
of Nature", a U.N. report on problems of the environment, August-September
1970; "SOS Environment", a message from 2,200 scientists, July 1971). In
addition, our Letters to the Editor column has contained many letters opposing
the use of DDT etc.
In this issue we publish large extracts from the 1971 McDougall Memorial
Lecture delivered on November 8, 1971, at the Food and Agriculture Organization
in Rome by Nobel Peace Prize winner Norman E. Borlaug. Dr Borlaug was
awarded the Nobel Prize for his contribution to the Green Revolution in agri¬
culture (see page 6). His address was entitled "Mankind and Civilization at
Another Crossroads". Here Dr. Borlaug makes a vigorous refutation of the
campaigns being staged in the name of the protection of the environment
against chemical products such as DDT and certain fertilizers. Dr. Borlaug
considers that not only do these products do a great deal more good than harm,
but that their use is essential to the survival of a large portion of mankind,
particularly in the developing world.
by Norman E. Borlaug
Nobel Peace Prize 1970
4
VNCE again the "Naked
Ape" homo sapiens stands at a
crossroad. Before deciding along
which road to proceed, he hesitates
and glances behind at the long road
he has trod.
He is both amazed and proud of the
tremendous progress he has achieved
as he manoeuvred and advanced along
the pitfall-laden trail of human survival
during the brief period he has inhab¬
ited the planet Earth. Within the last
second representing a short 5 million
years as measured on the geologic
clock he remembers emerging from
the bush somewhere in south-east
Africa, standing upright on his back
legs and beginning to assume the role
of Desmond Morris's so-called "Naked
Ape".
With a club in one hand and a rock
in the other, he stalked animals and
became a carnivore. For a long time
he struggled for survival as a hunter
and food gatherer under the hostile
environmental pressures dispensed by
a fickle mother nature. More than
once he barely averted extinction. He
remembers having seen certain other
species perish, because of their in¬
ability to adjust to the capriciousness
of the environment. They have left for
posterity only a fragmented history of
their existence recorded in the book
of fossil rocks.
During his long early period as a
hunter, social progress was negli¬
gible. Survival itself was man's only
sense of achievement. Then his help¬
mate, neolithic woman, only about
9,000 years ago, invented agriculture
and animal husbandry. This brought
new hope. It ensured his food supply
and lightened his load. Survival be¬
came less of a problem. The quality of
human life improved. It gave him time
for pleasure and time to think. There
was time to develop his intellect, a
society and, subsequently, a culture.
He made many worthwhile scientific
discoveries that made life more com
fortable, gratifying and enjoyable.
Among these were the discoveries of
control for many diseases that had
plagued and scourged him from the
beginning of time.
With «the control of diseases and the
resultant drop in death rates, combin¬
ed with a reliable food supply, human
population growth soared. The popu¬
lation monster looms ahead and now
threatens to obstruct further progress,
and even to erode progress already
achieved, unless tamed.
All these events that have taken
place along the tortuous road of
human progress over which the Naked
Ape has travelled, flash back to him
now, as he hesitates and reflects be¬
fore turning forward again to make
the necessary decision as to which
road to choose, at this, the most com¬
plex series of crossroads and inter¬
sections that he has ever encountered
along the highway of social evolution.
He realizes, as he now meditates his
decision, that the world civilization has
split into two factions the privileged
world of the developed nations and
the improverished world of the devel¬
oping nations. One is living a life

Wheat ruined by the granary weevil. An estimated 20 per cent of the annual world food crop
plantings is destroyed or damaged by diseases, insects and other pests.
of luxury never before experienced by
man outside the proverbial Garden of
Eden; the other still leads a life of mis¬
ery built on poverty. Discordant voices
cry out to counsel him now concern¬
ing his choice at the next crossroad.
One of the siren songs is that of
the so-called establishment which
counsels continuing on the road that
has brought the high standard of liv¬
ing to the developed or privileged
nations. This infers that these benefits
can be extended to those in the under¬
developed world by following the
same path.
A second tone cries out against the
establishment and the materialistic
world, even while they themselves are
living as social drop-outs, social para¬
sites in reality.
The third, and most seductive voice,
is that of those extreme environmen¬
talists who discredit science and advo¬
cate a back to nature movement. They
demand the discontinuation of the use
of chemical compounds even though
they are absolutely essential for pro¬
tecting man against diseases, and for
restoring fertility to the worn out soil
so man can produce his food, and pro
tect his crops against the ravages of
weeds, diseases and insects.
Civilization as it is known today
could not have evolved, nor can it
survive, without an adequate food
supply. Yet, food is something that is
taken for granted by most world
leaders, despite the fact that more
than half of the population of the
world is hungry and an even larger
proportion malnourished.
With the help of our science we
must not only increase our food sup¬
plies, but also ensure them against
biological and physical catastrophes,
through international efforts involv¬
ing both developed and developing
nations.
International granaries for food re¬
serves financed by all nations should
be established for use in case of need.
These granaries should be strategic¬
ally located in different geographical
areas so as to simplify logistics in
time of emergencies. And these food
reserves must be made available to all
who need them and before famine
strikes, not afterwards.
Man can and must prevent the
tragedy of famine in the future instead
of merely trying with pious regret to
salvage the human wreckage of the
famine, as he has so often done in
the past. We will be guilty of criminal
negligence, without extenuation, if we
permit future famines. Humanity can¬
not any longer tolerate that guilt.
The destiny of world civilization
depends upon providing a decent
standard of living for all mankind. It
has been said that "Universal and
lasting peace can be established only
if it is based upon social justice. If
you desire peace, cultivate justice".
Almost certainly, however, the first
essential component of social justice is
adequate food for all mankind.
I feel that the aforementioned guid¬
ing principle must be modified to read:
"If you desire peace, cultivate justice,
but at the same time cultivate the
fields efficiently to produce more
bread; otherwise there will be no
peace."
During the past five years, spectac¬
ular progress has been made in in¬
creasing wheat, rice and maize produc¬
tion in several of the most populous
developing countries of southern Asia,
where widespread famine appeared
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

y
*
Photo Marc and Evelyne Bernhelm © Rapho, Pans
6
IN DEFENCE OF DDT (Continued)
inevitable only six years ago. Most
of the increase in production has re¬
sulted from increased yields of grain
per hectare, a particularly important
development because there is little
possibility of expanding the cultivated
area in the densely populated areas
of Asia.
The term "Green Revolution" has
been used by the popular press to
describe the spectacular increase in
cereal grain production during the
past five years. Perhaps the term
Green Revolution, as commonly used,
is premature, too optimistic, or too
broad in scope. Too often it seems
to convey the impression of a general
revolution in yields per hectare and in
total production of all crops throughout
vast areas comprising many countries.
These implications both oversimplify
and distort the facts. The only crops
which have been appreciably affected
up to the present time are wheat, rice
and maize. Yields of other important
cereals, such as sorghums, millets and
barley, have been only slightly affect¬
ed; nor has there been any appreci¬
able increase in yield or production of
the pulse or legume grain crops, which
are essential in the diets of cereal
consuming populations. Moreover, it
must be emphasized that thus far the
great increase in production has been
in irrigated areas.
Nevertheless, the number of farmers,
small as well as large, who are adopt¬
ing the new seeds and new technology
is increasing very rapidly, and the in¬
crease in numbers during the past four
years has been phenomenal. Cereal
production in the rainfed areas still
remains relatively unaffected by the
impact of the Green Revolution, but
significant change has been made in
several countries during the past three
years.
Despite these qualifications, how¬
ever, tremendous progress has been
made in increasing cereal production
in India, Pakistan and the Philippines
during the past three years. Other
countries that are beginning to show
significant increases in production
include Afghanistan, Algeria, Brazil,
Ceylon, Indonesia, Israel, Iran, Kenya,
Malaysia, Morocco, Thailand, Tunisia
and Turkey.
Before attempting to evaluate the
significance Of the Green Revolution
one must establish the point of view
of the appraiser. The Green Revolu¬
tion has entirely different meanings to
most people in the affluent nations of
the "privileged world" than to those in
the developing nations of the "forgot¬
ten world".
Most people in industrialized socie¬
ties have difficulty in comprehending
and appreciating the vital significance
of providing high-yielding strains of
wheat, rice, maize, sorghum and millet
for the people of the developing
nations.
There are no miracles in agricultural
production. Nor is there such a thing
as a miracle variety of wheat, rice or
maize which can serve as an elixir to
cure all ills of a stagnant, traditional .
agriculture. Nevertheless, it is the
Mexican dwarf wheat varieties and
their newer derivatives that have been
the principal catalyst which triggered
off the Green Revolution.
If the high-yielding dwarf wheat and
rice varieties were the catalysts that
ignited the Green Revolution, then
chemical fertilizer was the fuel that
powered its forward thrust. The res¬
ponsiveness of the high-yielding varie¬
ties has greatly increased fertilizer
consumption. The new varieties not
only respond to much heavier dosages
of fertilizer than the old ones but are
also much more efficient in its use.
The continued success of the Green
Revolution will hinge, however, upon
whether agriculture will be permitted to
use the inputs agricultural chemicals
including chemical fertilizers and
pesticides, both absolutely necessary
to cope with hunger. If agriculture is
denied their use because of unwise
legislation that is now being promoted
by a powerful lobby group of hysteri¬
cal environmentalists who are pro¬
voking fear by predicting doom for
the world through chemical poison¬
ing then the world will be doomed
but not by chemical poisoning, but
from starvation.
The current vicious, hysterical pro¬
paganda campaign against the use of
agricultural chemicals, being promoted
today by fear-provoking, irresponsible
environmentalists, had its genesis in
the best-selling "half-science, half-fic¬
tion novel" S/7ent Spring, published
in 1962.
This poignant, powerful book
written by the talented scientist Rachel
Carson sowed the seeds for the pro¬
paganda whirlwind and the press, radio
and television circuses that are being
sponsored in the name of conserva¬
tion today.

other countries. The Borlaug techniques
have since been applied to rice, corn,
potatoes, cotton, millet and other crops.
The International Rice Research Institute,
set up in the Philippines in 1962, assembled
some 10,000 strains of rice from every
corner of the world and began a patient
process of crossbreeding to produce a
dwarf rice strain comparable to the wheats.
Combining a dwarf variety from Taiwan
with a tall variety from Indonesia, the Cen¬
tre produced "IR-8", a new strain that can
easily double the yield of most local rices
in Asia. This rice and other new varieties
since developed have saved millions from
starvation. Left, an agriculturalist at Hyde¬
rabad's Andrah Pradesh Agricultural Uni¬
versity prepares a rice plant for cross¬
breeding with a different strain. Right, cen¬
turies of toil went into the construction of
these terraced rice fields in the Philippines
which, thanks to the new rice strains, has
become a net exporter of rice.
It is both sad and unfortunate that
Silent Spring was the last book
which was written by this gentle, great
scientist and authoress. She had pre¬
viously contributed so much to the
understanding of the beauties of
nature in the best-sellers Under the
Wind and The Sea Around Us.
The gravest defect of Silent Spring
was that it presented a very in¬
complete, inaccurate and oversimpli¬
fied picture of the needs of the
interrelated, worldwide, complex prob¬
lems of health, food, fibre, wildlife,
recreation and human population. It
made no mention of the importance
of chemicals such as fertilizers and
pesticides for producing and protect¬
ing our food and fibre crops. Nor did
it mention that by producing more
food per unit of cultivated area more
land would be available for other
uses, including recreation and wildlife.
Certainly the greatest inexcusable
error of omission was that of neglect¬
ing to mention the valuable role DDT
has played in bringing malaria under
control in many countries.
Silent Spring convinced the general
public that the use of pesticides and
especially DDT was upsetting the
"balance of nature" and was doing
great damage to wildlife, especially
birds and fishes. It implied that' a
number of species were facing
extinction because of its use.
Moreover, it left the impression that
agriculture really did not need insecti¬
cides if it changed its methods. It
indicated that farmers by adopting a
system of extensive mono-culture,
have made their crops more vulner¬
able to pests than necessary.
According to this expert, farmers
have compounded their errors more
by applying insecticides in attempting
to kill insect pests and in the process
have generally only killed off the
predators, parasites and pathogens
that normally kept the insect under
control, and thereby only further upset
the "balance of nature."
Moreover, according to the author,
insects have invariably soon developed
resistance to the insecticide. It
implied that, by shifting to other suit¬
able insect control measures already
available, the losses from insects
could be kept under control without
chemicals.
I am in complete agreement that we
should try to preserve all forms of
wildlife as part of our heritage, as far
as it is possible to do so. On the
other hand, let us not become
egotistical to the point of assuming
supernatural powers. A glance at the
book of rocks tells us of the im-
potency of many species, including man
against the forces of nature. Yet it
is incredible that only a few, if any,
of the leaders of the current environ¬
mentalist movement have studied
palaeontology and the "parade of the
species," in the geologic past.
Spencer estimates that 99 per cent
of all the species that have lived,
since the candle of life was first lit on
the planet earth about 3.2 billion years
ago, have flunked the adaptation
imperative: "evolve or perish," and
consequently have now become
extinct.
The implied command: "evolve or
perish" has been an unwritten natural
law from the beginning of time. It is
equally evident in the physical and
biological world.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

8
IN DEFENCE OF DDT (Continued)
The multitude of changes in the
physical features of the earth, as well
as In our solar system itself, have
repeatedly greatly modified the en¬
vironment of the earth. Climates have
changed time and again in many parts
of our world. Vast areas that once
possessed tropical climates have sub¬
sequently been covered by continental
ice sheets. Areas that once were
blessed with heavy rainfall have
become desert and vice versa. These
changes in environments have, in
turn, exerted strong selection pressure
on the evolution of all forms of life.
There are undoubtedly many subtle
changes being exerted on the environ¬
ment of the planet today that are
beyond the influence and control of
man. Man too, however, is exerting
strong influence on the environment.
The composite effect of the present
day selection pressure of the environ¬
ment, affected both by. natural and
human influences, will undoubtedly
continue to take its toll of some
species that are poorly adapted to
the current world environment.
Rhodes, Zim and Shaffer estimate
that there are at present approxima¬
tely 1,100,000 species of animals,
many of them very simple forms, and
350,000 species of plants that currently
inhabit the planet earth. Of these,
the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service in 1966 listed 33 species of
mammals, 49 species of birds and
9 species of reptiles and amphibians,
and 38 species of fish in the U.S.A.,
which were either rare or endangered.
In discussing the causes for
reduction in numbers and possible
disappearance of these 129 species,
the destruction of the habitat and
disturbances resulting from man's
activities were paramount. Pesticides
were mentioned as possible contribut¬
ing factors in only two cases. In the
past three or four years there has
been much propaganda, but little
convincing scientific evidence, put
forward by environmentalists indicat¬
ing that DDT has contributed to the
decline of the Bald Eagle, Peregrine
Falcon, American Osprey and Califor-
nian Condor.
One does not need a thin egg shell
hypothesis due to DDT to explain the
reduction in the population of these
species. The truth of the matter is
that many ornithologists had reported
on the reduction in populations of
these large birds of prey as far back
as the 1880s and 1890s, long before
the time of DDT. It is almost a fore¬
gone conclusion, for anyone who uses
some common sense, that one or
more of these species is about to
flunk the imperative "evolve or perish."
Their habitats are being destroyed by
the encroachment of man.
Protective legislation alone will not,
in most cases, be adequate to save
them. Dynamic research, propagation
and good sound game management
might do so, providing human popula-
CONTINUED PAGE 10
PARASITES.
MALARIA
Transmitted by the ano¬
pheles mosquito. DDT still
protects several hundred
million people exposed to
this disease.
«SSa*.
PLAGUE
Principal carrier: the rat
flea. The sole means at
present available for con¬
trolling this disease: pesti¬
cides. TYPHUS
The human body louse
transmits typhus and epi¬
demic relapsing fever. Only
current means of control¬
ling serious epidemics: in¬
secticides.
SLEEPING
SICKNESS
Tsetse flies infect humans
and cattle. Tsetse fly infes¬
tation of huge areas of
Africa represents the loss
of a potential cattle popula¬
tion of 125 million head.
Only practical weapon now
available: DDT or Dieldrin.
CHAGAS' DISEASE
Transmitted by reduviid
bugs (sometimes called the
kissing bug) which sucks
human blood and causes
cardiac disorders. One of
the most serious and
widespread maladies of
Latin America. Only effec¬
tive arm today: chemical
insecticides.

KILLERS... PLUNDERERS
Catrinee the appearance of DDT and other
chemical pesticides 25 years ago, says the World Health
Organization, it has been possible, for the first time, to
combat the host of mosquitoes, fleas, lice, bugs, flies and
other insects that are responsible for many of the diseases
that plague the world. In the words of a 1971 WHO state¬
ment: "At one time, DDT was used against a host of insect-
borne diseases : not only malaria, but plague, typhus, yellow
fever, dengue, hemorrhagic fever, encephalitis, filariasis.
sleeping sickness, onchocerciasis, leishmaniasis, etc. How¬
ever, suitable alternatives have now become available for
use against most of these diseases ; but DDT must be retained
for the control of malaria transmitted by mosquitoes and the
sleeping sickness transmitted by tsetse flies".
Photo FAO, Rome
Left, some species of insects that constitute a threat to
human health, and, right, some which plunder our food and
crops and against which chemical pesticides remain, for the
moment, our best defence. Below, an FAO aeroplane used
in the battle against locusts in the Middle East. The world's
desert locust zone extends to 65 countries on three conti¬
nents. A single locust eats its own weight in food every day
and a swarm of locusts will devour between 30,000 and
100,000 tons of vegetation in twenty-four hours. In the
fight against this scourge, excellent results have been
obtained, since 1 945, by the spraying of chemical insecticides.
Drawings Thomas Prentiss © " Scientific American "
JAPANESE BEETLE
A fruit tree pest. The larva
attacks the roots and the beetle
the blossom of fruit trees.
Scourge of Japanese orchards it
has now invaded North America.
MEXICAN
BEAN BEETLE
The beetle and its larvae
eat the the leaves of sev¬
eral kinds of beans and re¬
lated plants.
TERMITES
Sometimes known as the
"white ant". Scourge of
tropical countries. Des¬
troys foodstuffs, cloth¬
ing, wooden buildings and
even boats.
BOLL WEEVIL
Scourge of the cotton crops of
North America. Can only be
kept down by massive spraying
programmes.
9
EARWORM
Larva of the owl moth.
Devours the ear of the
maize plant as it forms.

The banning of pesticides and chemical fertilizers
would result in starvation and world chaos
tion pressures on their habitat are
not too great.
Although it is generally the long-
term continuing changes in the envi¬
ronment which exert their effects on
the evolution and survival or the
extinction of a species, there are
many other changes in the environ¬
ment that effect the more short-
term "balance of nature," among the
many species in a given habitat or
ecosystem. These are the seasonal
shifts we are concerned with in
producing and protecting our crops
or animals.
The cliché "in balance with nature,"
which is in common usage today by
modern environmentalists is very mis¬
leading. It implies we would have a
favourable "in balance with nature"
to assure the protection of our crop
species if the "balance of nature"
were not upset by man. This, of
course, is not true. Nor is there in
existence a single "in balance with
nature" ecosystem. Rather there is,
within a given area, an infinite number
of local and many more extensive
merging ecosystems.
None of them are in static equili¬
brium. They are in a constant state
of dynamic change, responding to the
changes in the environment. At
different times, the selection pressure
provoking change is drought, floods,
frosts, heat, insect or disease attacks,
or invasion of the habitat by other
species.
&ARLY in my career as a
forester working in a large primitive
or wilderness area completely isolat¬
ed from the influence of man, I learn¬
ed of the fickleness of nature. I have
seen 20 forest fires ignited by a
single "dry thunder (electric) storm".
Some of these fires started by lightning
destroyed or damaged vast areas
of several forest types (ecosystems).
In the same area I have seen tens
of thousands of acres of lodgepole
pine killed by Dendroctonus spp.,
infestation. The havoc done by the
Dendroctonus beetle should not have
happened according to some pseudo-
ecologists, for it was, after all, a native
insect pest with its entire army of
natural predators, parasites and patho¬
gens, and consequently should have
been "in balance with nature."
Many times I have seen attempts
made to grow cotton without the use
of insecticides in the native home of
the boll weevil in Mexico where all of
the native predators of this insect were
present. The results were disastrous.
In fact, it was difficult to tell from
casual observation whether the cotton
was being grown for the production of
fibre to clothe man or for the product¬
ion of feed for a native insect. Never¬
theless, there should have been,
according to our environmentalist
jargon, an "in balance with nature"
equilibrium.
I must also point out that modern
agriculture with 3,700 million people
demanding food and fibre has no
choice but to grow extensive areas to
a single crop in areas ecologically
best suited to the culture of that crop.
This was not true 5,000 years ago,
when there was less population
pressure, so that crops could be
grown in small isolated fields.
It therefore becomes abundantly
clear that we cannot rely on biological
control alone to protect our food and
fibre crops from the fickleness of
nature. If we leave things to mother
nature's whims, we will harvest only
one third or one half of the yield per
unit of cultivated area that can be
harvested using a modern balanced
technological package of practices.
Dr. Knipling has clearly indicated
that we must, for the forseeable future,
continue to use an integrated
approach to control the insect pests
of man, of the crops and of the ani¬
mals on which he depends. Insect
control is a complex problem for there
are more than 200 insects that are or
have been important on our main
crops, animals and forests. We will
need to use an integrated approach
to hold them in abeyance.
It is true that in the past few
decades spectacular control of a few
insect species have been obtained
with biological, bio-environmental or
other non-chemical methods i.e.
cottony-cushion scale of citrus, the
spotted alfalfa aphid and the screw-
worm of livestock in Florida.
Some day it may be possible to use
alternate non-chemical methods to
control many of the insects respon¬
sible for the most severe crop and
animal losses, but that day, if ever
attainable, lies far in the future.
Today, however, conventional in¬
secticides are needed to control 80 to
90 per cent of the insect problems
affecting agriculture and public health.
Meanwhile, research to find new
techniques and methods, must be
strengthened. Present control pro¬
grammes must be designed to take
advantage of the best materials and
techniques available so as to reduce
losses to an acceptable level.
The environmentalists would now
like to have a legislative ban placed
on DDT so as to prohibit it for any
use in the U.S.A. Almost certainly as
soon as this is achieved, these
organizations will begin a worldwide
propaganda barrage to have it banned
everywhere. This must not be per¬
mitted to happen, until an even more
effective and safer insecticide is
available, for no chemical has ever
done as much as DDT to improve the
health, economic and social benefits
of the people of the developing
nations.
The World Health Organization
(WHO), with the assistance of the Pan
American Health Organization and the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNI¬
CEF), in 1955 launched a worldwide
campaign against malaria, based on
spraying the interior of all houses with
DDT, so as to kill the Anopheline vec¬
tor and break the cycle.
Of the 124 countries and territories
in the tropics where malaria has exist¬
ed, the disease has been eradicated
from 19. There are 48 other countries
in which eradication programmes are
in progress and an additional 37 where
extensive control programmes are
under way. There remain only 20
nations in malarial areas where no
programmes have yet been initiated.
I HERE is also dramatic evi¬
dence from Ceylon of what can hap¬
pen if a programme is stopped before
eradication is accomplished. When
the campaign was initiated in the mid
1950s there were more than two mil¬
lion cases of malaria in Ceylon. By
1962 it had dropped to 31 cases and
by 1963 to 17, at which point the spray
programme was discontinued for bud¬
getary reasons. By 1967 the number
of cases had jumped to 3,000 and by
1968 to more than 16,000. Before the
programme could be re-established,
in late 1969, two million cases had
reappeared.
In summarizing the progress in this
world wide malaria campaign on
February 2, 1971, officials of WHO
made the following statement:
"More than 1,000 million people have
been freed from the risk of malaria
in the past 25 years, mostly thanks to
DDT. This is an achievement unparal¬
leled in the annals of public health.
But even today 329 million people are
being protected from malaria through
DDT spraying operations for malaria
control or total eradication.
"The improvement in health resulting
from malaria campaigns has broken the
vicious circle of poverty and disease
resulting in ample economic benefits:
increased production of rice (and
wheat), because the labour force is
able to work, and the opening up of
vast areas for agricultural production.
"The safety record of DDT to man is
truly remarkable. At the height of its
production 400,000 tons a year were
used for agriculture, forestry, public

health, etc. Yet in spite of prolonged
exposure by hundreds of millions of
people, and the heavy occupational
exposure of considerable numbers, the
only confirmed cases of injury have
been the result of massive accidental
or suicidal swallowing of DDT. There
is no evidence in man that DDT is
causing cancer or genetic change."
Although more than 1,400 chemicals
have been tested by WHO for use in
malarial campaigns, only two have
shown promise and both of these are
far inferior to DDT.
As more and more scientific evi¬
dence accumulates, the charges
against DDT become less and less
convincing. There is evidence, of
course, that man and most species of
birds, fish and animals that have been
examined have small quantities of DDT
and/or other related componds such
as polychlorinated bi-phenyls in their
fat. But there is very little convincing
evidence available to date which indi¬
cates that it is threatening the exis¬
tence of any species, nor is it causing
any discernible injury to man.
Part of the past confusion concern¬
ing pesticides in the environment
derives from the tremendous improve¬
ments that have been made in recent
years in chemical analysis. With gas
chromotography it became possible to
detect 1 or 2 parts per billion, or even
a few parts per trillion, both of which,
of course, would have gone unnoticed
20 years ago. But such sensitive
methods can also detect contaminants
and in the hands of inexpert operat¬
ors may lead to wrong conclusions.
A recent article by Dr. Thomas H.
Jukes, a reputable biochemist, empha¬
sizes this dilemma: "How reliable is
the test? There has been a great hue
and cry over alleged traces of DDT
in the Antarctic penguins, amounts of
the order of 1 or 2 parts per billion.
I have not yet been convinced of the
validity of these results."
A few months ago at the University
of Wisconsin, some soil samples that
had been sealed since 1910 were test¬
ed for synthetic organochlorine pesti¬
cides by the latest, most delicate gas
chromotographic procedure. Several
pesticides were detected in 32 of the
34 samples. The only flaw was that
these pesticides not only were not
used in 1910, they did not even exist
until 1940.
Another complication is that the
residues of a class of modern com¬
pound called polychlorinated bi-phenyls
(P.C.B.'s) interfere with the DDT test.
The P.C.B.'s are used in water-proofing
compounds, asphalt, waxes, synthetic
adhesives, hydraulic fluids, electrical
apparatus and general plastics. They
are widely distributed in the fat of
wildlife species, in which they have
originated as industrial wastes taken
up by aquatic species. To sum up,
P.C.B.'s are not used as pesticides,
but they interfere with pesticides resi¬
due analysis and they are toxic.
Another complicating factor in iden¬
tifying the origin of chlorinated hydro¬
carbons in human, animal, bird or fish
tissue is that many thousands of tons
of chemical wastes of all kinds have
been and are still being dumped into
the oceans. Do not some of these
also get into the food chain, even if
they still have not got into the "hys¬
terical word chain"?
IT is now obvious that the
current aim is to ban DDT, first in
the USA, and then in the world if
possible. But DDT is only the first of
the dominoes. But it is the toughest
of all to knock out because of its
excellent known contributions and
safety record.
As soon as DDT is successfully
banned, there will be a push for the
banning of all chlorinated hydrocar¬
bons, then in order, the organic phos¬
phates and carbamate insecticides.
Once the task is finished on insecti¬
cides, they will attack the weed-killers,
and eventually the fungicides. As a
matter of fact, by default, they have
already been successful in having
organic mercury seed disinfectants and
slimeicides for papermills banned.
This ban was achieved during all of
'The withdrawal of DDT would be a major
tragedy in the chapter of human health and is
unjustifiable in the light of present knowledge.
Vast populations in malarious areas of the world
would be condemned to the frightening ravages
of endemic and epidemic malaria.'
World Health Organization
February 12. 1971
the confusion resulting from finding
mercury in fish, first in fresh water
species, in the Great Lakes, and rivers
of the USA, and subsequently in both
tuna and swordfish. The ridiculous¬
ness of some of this rhetoric came to
light recently when someone analysed
tuna caught 90 years ago and found it
contained about the same level of mer¬
cury as those caught today.
Moreover, it has been shown that
swordfish recently caught in ocean
waters hundreds of miles from possi¬
ble industrial contamination contained
1 to 2 p.p.m. of mercury. This indicates
clearly that both tuna and swordfish
are picking up the low levels of mer¬
cury from the ocean food chains, of
which this metal has always been a
part.
If the use of pesticides in the USA
were to be completely banned, crop
losses would probably soar to 50 per
cent, and food prices would increase
4 to 5 fold. Who then would provide
for the food needs of the low income
groups? Certainly not the privileged
environmentalists.
Within the past decade, because of
the improved technology and higher
yields, it has been possible to remove
50 million acres from cultivation and
still meet both the domestic and export
needs for agricultural products. Were
the USA still relying on the 1940
technology, however, not only would
the 50 million acres now held in reserve
be back under the plough, but an
additional area of 241.9 million acres
by necessity would have been opened
to cultivation. In reality it would require
considerably more than 241.9 million
acres of additional land since the
quality of the land would be poorer
than that now in cultivation.
In order to bring under cultivation
an additional 241.9 million acres (and
perhaps considerably more because of
the poorer land quality) it would be
necessary to open to cultivation lands
that were in a large part rolling or
semi-arid, and consequently vulnerable
to erosion by water and wind.
It would also require clearing the
forests from large areas so as to meet
the food, feed, oil and fibre needs of
the nation. Now reflect on the addi¬
tional havoc that this expansion of
cultivated area would do to wildlife
habitat, and especially on rare and
endangered species of animals and
birds that are already on the brink
of extinction.
Looking at it from another angle
291,9 million acres of land, an area
roughly equivalent to the total land
area of the USA east of the Missis¬
sippi river and south of the Ohio river,
is today available for other uses,
because of the improvements in crop
production technology that have taken
place in the past 30 years. These uses * u
include recreation, wildlife and fores- 1 1
try. ' "
It behoves all mankind to increase
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

IN DEFENCE OF DDT (Continued)
12
the efficiency of agriculture throughout
the world if we wish to alleviate human
suffering, conserve wildlife and im¬
prove recreational opportunities. Un¬
less the food production of East Africa
is expanded to meet the growing food
needs, the large animals in the Game
Reserves of East Africa will be poach¬
ed out of existence within the next
three decades. Similarly, the elephant,
tiger, and peacock will perish from
India because of population pressure.
It is hard to understand why the
conservation organizations and envi¬
ronmentalists have taken a negative
rather than positive view in trying to
protect wildlife. Why have they not
promoted research and fought for more
funds for game management in gen¬
eral? Why have they not fought for
more funds for research so that
qualified scientists can be assigned to
study the reasons why certain threat¬
ened species are on the verge of
extinction, and whether it is feasible to
try to save them?
Why do they not spend more of
their energies and funds on educating
the public on the adverse effects of
population pressure and rampant popu¬
lation growth on wildlife and the envi¬
ronment? How many of the US public,
for example, know that more than
100,000 deer are killed each year by
automobiles, whereas everyone is
informed in the press or television
whenever a few birds or fish are
found dead, presumably but this is
not necessarily proven from a pesti¬
cide?
Imagine the rhetoric that would be
produced if 100,000 deer were killed
by a pesticide.
I have been a great admirer of the
spendid work that has been done by
game management experts in the USA
in re-establishing species, such as the
wild turkey, that were nearly extinct.
Under wise management and protec¬
tion many other species of wildlife have
made spectacular comebacks. The
tremendous success of the introduc¬
tion of the Chinese ring-neck pheasant,
the Hungarian and Chukkar partridge,
are other tremendous accomplish¬
ments. The research that has brought
under control the lamprey, that threat¬
ened the survival of the lake trout is
another tremendous achievement; so
is the introduction of Coho salmon
into Lake Michigan and Lake Superior.
The breeding of faster growing and
more sturdy salmon is another tremen¬
dous step forward.
I repeat what I have said many times
before: without thinking, conservation¬
ists and environmentalists and only
partially-informed people in the com¬
munications media have embarked on
a crusade designed to end the use of
agricultural chemicals, such as pesti¬
cides and fertilizers. They give no
thought to the end result of such
action: the eventual starvation and
political chaos that will plague the
world.
SIX INTERNATIONAL CENTRES
FOR TESTING NEW IN-SECTICIDES
The World Health Organization has set up six international centres for
the evaluation and testing of new Insecticides and six stations for village-
scale trials. WHO research helps to develop new weapons against
harmful insects replacements for the classic insecticides, which would
be effective yet safe for large scale use, and biodegradable, and to
which insects would be unlikely to become resistant It also seeks for
alternative methods of biological or genetic control of Insects. To destroy
mosquito larvae in areas where resistance to DDT has developed, fish-
breeding centres are being developed in a number of countries (U.S.,
Iran, Greece, Italy, etc.) in which larvae-eating fish called "Gambusia"
(right) are raised for' release in ponds and lakes In infested areas. One
Gambusia eats about 100 larvae per hour. Ladybirds, which have an
insatiable appetite for aphids (photo above), are being raised by the
million to reduce the damage caused by these insects to fruit trees.
The Food and Agriculture Organization and the International Atomic
Energy Agency are experimenting with new means of fighting certain
insects, such as the Mediterranean fly which attacks fruit, by the sterili¬
zation of male Insects by Irradiation.

