UNESCO
publisher
to the
whole world
slick paperback with the
frightening title Planet in Peril? went on
sale during May in bookshops around the
world.
Written by Raymond F. Dasmann, senior
ecologist for the International Union for
the Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources (IUCN), Planet in Peril? was
commissioned and prepared by Unesco.
It is published and distributed jointly by
Penguin Books of London, World Publish¬
ing of New York and Unesco, through
its network of agents.
The striking jacket of the American
edition, black with a moon-shot photo of
the earth looking as green and decaying
as overdone Roquefort cheese, would
stand out on a bookstore display any¬
where, and "Planet" is expected to enjoy
widespread commercial success.
This is not the first Unesco book
destined for the broad general public,
but it is the most recent example of an
increasing trend in this direction.
Up until now, the great majority of
Unesco books and periodicals were intend¬
ed for specialists. The recently published
Origin of Homo Sapiens, for instance,
one of four volumes in the "Ecology and
Conservation" series, deals with what is
perhaps the most intriguing ecological
question of all: that of the origin of man
and the interrelations between it and
environmental changes. But it was written
by experts basically for experts who are
already informed and convinced of the
urgency of the problem. Unesco now feels
that this readership is not broad enough,
especially in an area so vital as pollution.
Of the eleven periodicals published by
Unesco, only the Unesco Courier is for
general circulation and has over two million
readers in its twelve language versions.
Most of the others are Intended for spe¬
cialists (Museum, The Unesco Bulletin for
Libraries, etc.) but some like Impact of
BETTY WERTHER, of the U.S.A., was formerly
a staff member of the United Nations and
is now a free-lance writer and journalist.
by Betty Werther
Science on Society, International Social
Sciences Journal or Prospects (a quarterly
review of education) also appeal to the
educated general public.
The fact of aiming more and more
at this category of readers does not
mean, however, that Unesco intends to
go into competition with the big commer¬
cial publishing houses.
"It would be impossible," says Peter
Thorp, director of distribution for Unesco's
Documents and Publications Bureau. "Our
role is to reflect the Unesco programme,
to spread ideas, while the dominant need
of a private publisher is to make money.
Therefore, we will always be non-commer¬
cial."
Still, Unesco's publishing operation has
most of the characteristics of a major
publishing house. Sales of Unesco books
and periodicals, which may be ordered
through any bookseller or direct from a
national distributor in member countries,
come to over $2,000,000 per year. In
this year's compact, copiously annotated
catalogue, 500 titles are available in
English, French and often in Spanish
versions. The greatest proportion of these
is concerned with education, although an
increasing number fall into science and
culture categories.
This tendency directly reflects the chang¬
ing priorities of the Unesco programme.
In the early days, the late 1940s and 1950s,
when a large part of the organization's
activities was devoted to cultural exchange,
Unesco put itself on the publishing map
with a series of 23 luxury art albums,
many of which are now out of print,
presenting little-known art treasures.
Published in six languages, under the
imprint of the New York Graphic Society,
these revealed artistic treasures such as
those of Cyprus, Poland, Czechoslovakia
and Australia. Much of the same material
was subsequently re-printed in cheap
pocketbook editions. With the same
objectives in mind, Unesco later under¬
took what continues to be one of its
most useful artistic aids the Catalogue
of Reproductions of Paintings which en¬
ables countries with little or no access
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

UNESCO, PUBLISHER TO THE WORLD (Continued)
ibleto original art to procure the best possi
representation.
With few exceptions, Unesco now leaves
the publication of art books as such lar¬
gely in the hands of commercial publishers.
Unesco goes beyond simple presentation
of our artistic heritage to consider a
more penetrating analysis of the role and
functions of art in society in works such
as The Arts and Man, or the 6-volume
Man through His Art published for the
World Confederation of Organizations of
the Teaching Profession with the co-opera¬
tion of Unesco.
Unesco books fall roughly Into three
categories: reference, publications for
specialists, and those destined for the
general public. Particularly In this last
category, about 1 book in 10 is published
as a co-imprint or a Joint-publication with
outside publishers.
One might easily say that the chief
difference between Unesco and other
publishing houses is in the area of refer¬
ence books where the organization can
carry out projects which no private
publisher could possibly undertake. The
Unesco Statistical Yearbook is an obvious
case In point.
The World Survey of Education is also
a veritable monument of its kind. In fact,
Its five volumes total a combined weight
of some 45 kilos (100 pounds). It costs
Unesco more to produce than its $40
($50 In cloth cover) selling price, and for
a private publisher, even if he could obtain
all the information included, which is unli¬
kely, the cost would be prohibitive.
A recent example of a book which only
Unesco, by its unique position, could
conceive and publish Is Learning to be,
a report of the International Commission
on the Development of Education presided
by Mr. Edgar Faure, a former French
Minister of Education. This book is a
blueprint for the progress that education
must achieve if it is to fulfil its new role
In the world today. It is a book for
everyone Interested in the upbringing of
children and young people everywhere.
(See the November 1972 issue of the
"Unesco Courier" on this subject.)
Other books emphasize the growing
Importance of education as a life-long
process, a subject which also goes beyond
the limited circle of experts and techni¬
cians.
w,
32
HAT the World Survey of
Education is to educators, another sizeable
volume (819 pages plus tables) is to social
scientists. Entitled Main Trends of Re¬
search In the Social and Human Sciences
this intensive study by scholars of world
renown started appearing in 1970. It not
only constitutes a report on the main
trends of research, but, in the words of
Claude Lévi-Strauss, the distinguished
social anthropologist, "aims at Identifying
the paths on which the science of
tomorrow may embark". With the stu¬
dent's purse in mind, separate chapters
of this major volume have been or are being
translated for publication in low-cost
pocket-book editions in many languages.
Another typical example of something
which probably only Unesco could do
is the Index Translationum, an annual
International bibliography of translations.
Begun In 1950 with 8,750 items, It Is now
in its 23rd volume and contains data on
41,322 titles in 73 countries (see p. 35).
The Index can answer questions such as:
What country leads in the number of
translations? Who are the world's most
translated authors? In how many langua¬
ges does the Bible appear?
"Only Unesco can request and obtain
this kind of Information", says Mr. Thorp.
"Any private publisher would come up
against a barrier. We have the necessary
lines of communication. Thus it seems
evident that If Unesco decided to drop
publication, the Index would probably
simply disappear."
u
NESCO also has its best¬
seller list of books which, now fully amortiz¬
ed, are making a comfortable profit which
can be fed back into the organization's
publications' fund.
Topping the list by a run-away margin
is the Unesco Source Book for Science
Teaching which is heading towards one
million copies sold. The history of this
popular manual goes back to the post-war
period when Unesco sponsored a small
volume entitled Suggestions for Science
Teachers in Devastated Countries. While
proving useful in these areas, the book
has also been a considerable success in
all regions of the world where previously
there had been little or no low cost
equipment for practical science teaching.
The revised edition thus became the
first edition of the now well known Source
Book , for Science Teaching which has
been translated into 30 languages and
reprinted 23 times. Consisting of ideas
contributed by teachers all over the world,
it makes use of common and widely
available resources and materials for the
construction of simple scientific equipment
and for the devising of simple scientific
activities.
Another widely used book is Study
Abroad. Updated periodically like a
Michelin Guide, it now provides infor¬
mation on international scholarships and
courses for 126 countries and territories.
Here again because of the use of Unesco
resources, Study Abroad and its sister
volume Vacation Study Abroad can be
priced at a reasonable level with students
and low-budget libraries In mind.
One of the most rapidly expanding areas
of Unesco activity over recent years has
been the production of scientific maps.
Individual countries draw up their own
geological and other maps and atlases,
each, using its own set of rules. So
Unesco's World Geological Atlas Is a
pioneering venture, the first concerted
attempt to map the world using a stan¬
dardized International "language" which
can be "read" anywhere.
Celebrating a quarter century of activity,
a thick cumulative catalogue entitled
25 years of Unesco Publishing is now
being completed. It will contain refer¬
ences to some 5,000 to 6,000 titles
ranging from those for which Unesco was
sole publisher to others in which the
organization participated jointly or, again,
played a more remote role such as simply
sponsoring a certain work or providing a
small grant.
Occupying an important part of the
catalogue will be books published under
the "Unesco Programme for Literary Trans¬
lations". These books, most of which are
translations into English or French, derive
from 60 different literatures, corresponding
to some 40 Asian and 20 European lan¬
guages, not to mention the non-Slavic
literatures of the Soviet Union and many
African literatures.
Through this programme, the Greek
poet George Seferls was brought to the
attention of English-speaking readers in
1960 three years before he received the
Nobel Prize for Literature. The same
prize was awarded to the late Japanese
novelist Yasunarl Kawabata whose Snow
Country (Yukiguni) was one of the first
translations published in 1956 in the
Unesco series of contemporary works.
The current widespread Interest in Japa¬
nese literature in the world today is due
in no small measure to Unesco's efforts
in making both classic and modern works
available in the western world.
These books are all published by private
firms.
"You might say that, here, Unesco
comes in to prime the pump" says
Mr. Thorp. "We want to see a certain
work published, so we assume part of the
financial risk involved. We may take care
of the translation or even share print costs.
In any case, were it not for Unesco, the
great majority of these books probably
would have remained virtually unknown."
Unesco can also, and, indeed, feels
compelled to undertake certain other pro¬
jects private firms would hesitate to tackle
alone. Into this category falls a series of
booklets on the "Race Question in Modern
Science" (later published In a collective
volume under the title of Race and Science)
and Apartheid (a Study of its Effects on
Education, Science, Culture and Informa¬
tion). Widely distributed by the co-pub¬
lishers and Unesco, both titles have
become very successful publications.
To quote another example, it was not
easy to find a commercial publisher for the
joint publication of Birthright of Man, an
anthology of over 1,000 texts asserting
man's birthright over the ages. Marking
the 20th anniversary of the Universal Decla¬
ration of Human Rights, it nonetheless
sold 15,000 copies in English and French.
Since then, three other language versions
have been published or are in course of
preparation and there are more to come.
I INALLY, if one were asked
to select a single work as constituting
Unesco's most significant contribution over
a quarter-century of publishing, a reason¬
able choice, and one best exemplifying
the Unesco spirit, might be the History of
Mankind: Cultural and Scientific Develop¬
ment which Is the first genuinely Interna¬
tional account of the scientific and cultural
history of the world.
Already issued by major publishers (or
In course of production) In nine countries
and in eight different languages, with a
print order of 100,000 sets, History of
Mankind was written by experts of world¬
wide reputation who sufficiently contained
their differences to produce an agreed
version of a world view of human destiny.
Negotiations are now being conducted by
Unesco publishing services for low-priced
paperback editions of this work, necessa¬
rily expensive in Its six-volume, Illustrated
original edition.
Encouraged by the success of the
History of Mankind, Unesco Is now pre¬
paring the publication, on the same pattern,
of the first General History of Africa in
eight volumes. The first volume will
probably be issued in 1974 In hard-cover,
and later paperback versions will appear
in different language versions.
This text is a revised and edited version
of a text which first appeared In "Unesco
Features" (No 625 - July 1972) Unesco's
fortnightly bulletin for press, radio and
television.
