Early man
and the emergence
of races
by Vsevolod P. Yakimov
50
HE 3,500 million humans
on our planet comprise an astonishing
conglomeration of peoples. Amid this
vast variety, anthropologists distinguish
between groups of people having a
common origin, living, or having lived,
in certain defined regions, and poss¬
essing differing characteristic features
in their facial structure, skin colour
and colour and type of hair.
Scientists call these groups races,
but we should remember that there
are no strict lines of demarcation bet¬
ween races. All these groups blend
imperceptibly into one another with
intermediate types possessing various
combinations of physical charac¬
teristics.
It can readily be seen that distinc¬
tions between individual groups do
not affect the basic traits that all peo¬
ple have in common an upright pos¬
ture, well-developed hands and feet,
an intricately structured brain encased
in a big skull with a straight, high
forehead, absence of a bony eyebrow
ridge, the presence of a prominent
chin and a common structure of the
VSEVOLOD P. YAKIMOV, of the U.S.S.R.,
Is Internationally famous for his work on
prehistoric man. He has written over
100 studies on primates and the evolution of
man. He Is director of the Research Insti¬
tute for Anthropology and the D.N. Anuchin
Anthropological Museum of Moscow State
University, and is a member of the Executive
Committee of the International Union for
Anthropology and Ethnology.
speech organs. All humans have the
same number of chromosomes (46) in
the cell nucleus; primates have 48 and
the lower simians between 54 and 78.
Thus modern man is biologically uni¬
form in basic features and polymor¬
phous as regards many secondary
features, and scientists consider all
human beings as belonging to the
single species, Homo sapiens. The
variations found in groups living in
different geographical areas reflect
only a differentiation within the single
species due to a host of biological,
social and other factors.
The emergence of the earliest Homo
sapiens was preceded by the stage of
the "oldest" (palaeoanthropus) and
the "old" (late palaeoanthropus) peo¬
ple, though it Is important to note
that late palaeoanthropus co-existed
with early Homo sapiens in adjoining
territories.
The genetic relationship between
various groups of palaeoanthropus and
Homo sapiens is a matter of consid¬
erable controversy. The question on
which anthropologists are divided is
whether all groups of palaeoanthropes
can be considered as the ancestors of
modern man and whether modern man
developed in one or several regions.
In modern anthropology there are
two schools of thought on the origins
of man and the major races the poly-
centric and the monocentric schools.
The founder of the polycentric
theory, the American anthropologist
Franz Weidenreich, assumes that mod¬
ern man evolved in several regions,
relatively independent of one another,
and that people developed at different
rates. His theory claims that modern
man evolved from the "oldest" and
"old" people In each region and that
this gave rise to the formation of the
major races Europoid, Negroid, Aus-
traloid, Mongoloid, etc.
Anthropologists of this school, such
as G. Debetz and V. Alekseev of the
U.S.S.R. and Carleton Coon and
C. Loring Brace of the U.S.A., point
out that representatives of the modern
races still possess traits typical of the
fossil remains found in territories
where these races once lived.
N the other hand, mono-
centrists, Henri-Victor Vallios and
G. Olivier in France, Francis Howell
in the U.S.A., Kenneth Oakley in Bri¬
tain, Victor Bunak, M. Nesturkh, Y. Ro-
glnsky and myself In the U.S.S.R.,
among others, consider that modern
man evolved in a single region. Pro¬
fessor Roginsky believes that Homo
sapiens emerged in a relatively wide
area covering west Asia, parts of cen¬
tral and south Asia, and north-east
Africa. Here various groups of pa¬
laeoanthropes interbred, enriching the
genetic stock and triggering off the
development of modern man.
The ancient Homo sapiens who
evolved there did not possess clearly
distinguished traits of any of the
modern races. In a certain sense he
was "neutral" in racial aspects, and
characteristics of the modern races
were present in him in the most diverse
combinations.
It was only when human groups
spread geographically and settled In
definite territories that racial types
evolved. That is why the races of
modern mankind resemble one another
so closely. This resemblance is a
sign of their common origin, of their
emergence in a single region.
The monocentrists, who believe that
mankind passed in its evolution
through the palaeoanthropus stage,
do not, however, maintain that every

CRO MAGNON
Two major schools exist today regarding the
origins of man and different races: the mono-
centric or unilinear school believes that all
races evolved from a single ancestral line
(diagram above); opposed to this, the poly-
centric school sees the modern races of
man descending from four ancestral lines
(diagram right) which evolved in several
regions of the earth.
AUSTRALIANS MONGOLOIDS EURASIANS
PITHECANTHROPUS'
. SOLOENSIS
I fSolo man)
PITHECANTHROPUS
ERECTUS
(Java man)
PITHECANTHROPUS
ROBUSTUS
PEKING MAN
\
\
\
\ v / /
\\ If
\\ II
IIM
F§
I
E
i>2
<0 »
local group of ancient people formed
part of the ancestry of modern man.
For historical and natural reasons some
groups did not participate in the for¬
mation of modern man, or participated
in that process through subsequent
blending with already existing Homo
sapiens.
Some researchers, including myself,
believe the late Neanderthals, the so-
called classic Neanderthals, who lived
in the Early Wurm glacial period some
50,000 to 35,000 years ago, to be one
of these groups. They differed
greatly from Homo sapiens in physical
respects; they were short (150 to
166 cm.), massive, with big heads
and big, coarse faces, and they also
differed In their brain and hand
structure.
The late Neanderthals of Europe,
however, did not go up an evolutionary
blind alley. They too made consid¬
erable progress in the development of
culture, society and speech. Yet
certain of their characteristics, their
inordinate physical strength and struc¬
tural ungainliness, hindered and com¬
plicated their transformation into
modern man.
This hypothesis is borne out by the
palaeoanthropus fossils of the more
progressive "sapient" type found in
central and west Asia in the Teshik-
Tash caves, in the U.S.S.R. and the
Skhul, Tabun and Çafzeh caves, in
Israel. It is highly significant that they
are older (about 60,000 B.C.) than the
"classic" Neanderthals.
Fossils of ancient representatives of
Homo sapiens displaying some palaeo-
anthropic traits have been found in
the Crimea and the Caucasus, in the
Mousterian culture sites generally
linked with Neanderthals. This can be
taken to indicate that the ancient
"sapiens" spread from the area of
their origin to the west, where "clas¬
sic" Neanderthals still existed at that
time.
Quite recently the Soviet scientists
A. Zubov and V. Alekseev expressed
the view that Homo sapiens emerged
in two centres north-east Africa and
south-west Asia. This is a variant of
the polycentrist viewpoint, based
mainly on the differences between the
specific dental structures of ancient
and modern man, and can in a sense
be regarded as a compromise between
extreme polycentric and monocentric
views. Moreover, both centres fall
territorially within the fairly extensive
area the monocentrists regard as the
cradle of Homo sapiens.
The most likely hypothesis, there-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
51

THE EMERGENCE OF RACE (Continued)
52
fore, as to who modern man's ancestors
were and where and when they
emerged seems to be as follows.
Modern man's ancestors were the
palaeoanthropes who possessed a set
of "sapient" traits and inhabited west
and south Asia and north-east Africa.
From this one area groups of Homo
sapiens spread to neighbouring
territories. As these Homo sapiens
populations, morphologically "neutral"
in relation to modern races, were
migrating, settling and integrating, the
modern races formed. Homo sapiens
probably emerged in the ancient
"homeland" some 50,000 to 45,000
years before our time.
This view is confirmed in particular
by data furnished by the British anthro¬
pologist, Kenneth Oakley. He estab¬
lished that the skeletons from Jebel
Qafzeh were 70,000 years old. Mor¬
phologically "Qafzeh man" was a
transitional form from palaeoanthropus
of the "sapient" type to Homo sapiens.
Radioactive carbon datings fix the age
of Homo sapiens fossils In Europe at
35,000 to 38,000 B.C. The oldest fossil
of modern man, the skull found at
Niah, on Kalimantan Island (Indonesia),
displaying all the traits of fully formed
Homo sapiens, is about 39,000 years
old.
Many original theories have been
advanced concerning the factors res¬
ponsible for the development of Homo
sapiens. At the beginning of this
century the French archaeologists
Gabriel and Adrien de Mortillet
considered changes in climate (from
humid, sub-tropical to a dry climate)
and the change from an arboreal
existence (which they believed Nean¬
derthal man to have led) to life on the
ground to be the main reasons for his
transformation into modern man.
Later, H. Weinert (Fed. Rep. of Ger¬
many) and V. Gromov (U.S.S.R.) and
some other scientists asserted that the
colder climate, caused by the advance
of the glaciers, had been the main
factor in the progressive evolution
of the ancestors of Homo sapiens.
"TILL other scientists be¬
lieve that the evolution of Neanderthal
man into Homo sapiens was due lar¬
gely to the change from in-breeding
within small scattered palaeoanthropic
groups to breeding between different
groups, which thus put an end to the
negative consequences of incestuous
breeding. Naturally, every one of
these factors was Important, but it is
doubtful whether they alone could
have transformed Neanderthal man
into Homo sapiens.
In 1949 I expressed the view (it was
also arrived at independently by Fran¬
cis Howell of the U.S.A. in 1951) that
selection in the severe conditions of
the pre-glacial period prevented rather
than promoted the evolution of the
classic Neanderthals towards Homo
sapiens. The colder climate did not
promote mankind's progressive dev¬
elopment and the severe living condi¬
tions made the Neanderthal's physique
even more rugged.
Refuting the above theory, the poly-
centrists point out that classic Nean¬
derthals have been found in areas
far from the glaciers, notably in Iraq
(The Shanidar cave) and in Israel (the
Wadi el-Amud site). But they ignore
the fact that these were not pure clas¬
sic Neanderthals since they possessed
some "sapient" traits in the structure
of the brain-case and the shape of the
cerebral hemispheres as shown by
moulds of the inner skull surface.
The formation of "sapient" features
proceeded more actively on territories
free of glaciers. When we discuss
"sapient" features, less importance
should be attached to morphological
traits than to those traits of Homo
sapiens which substantially distinguish
him from his direct predecessor,
palaeoanthropus.
Researchers have always been
struck by the relatively high develop¬
ment of the culture of Homo sapiens,
as compared with that of Neanderthal
man, by his ornaments and his flair,
which his ancestors did not possess,
for various forms of graphic art (sculp¬
ture, stone and bone carving, poly-
chromic mural painting, etc).
This testifies to a qualitative change
In man's thinking, to a growing com¬
plexity in the relations between peo¬
ple and hence to a progressive dev¬
elopment of social organization and
forms of communication the emer¬
gence of speech.
Comparative studies of moulds
made of the inner brain-case of palaeo¬
anthropus and Homo sapiens fossils
show that in the latter the areas of
the brain connected with purposeful
labour, that is physical activity, speech
and the regulation of the individual's
social behaviour, underwent consider¬
able changes. Hence we can assume
that emerging Homo sapiens acquired
qualities important to man as a social
being. Groups of ancient people who
attained such qualities more rapidly
found themselves better placed than
other socially less organized palaeo¬
anthropic groups.
Professor Roginsky of the U.S.S.R.
was one of the first to advance this
hypothesis. He drew attention also to
the relative stability of the features
displayed by man as a species from
the moment of his emergence down to
our own times, along with the astoun-
dingly rapid advance of techniques and
social development.
At the same time the replacement of
the Mousterian culture, associated with
Neanderthal Man, by the late palaeo¬
lithic culture, generally associated with
Homo sapiens, proceeded against the
background of great changes in man's
physical type, so important to environ¬
mental adaptation. During the transi¬
tion from palaeoanthropus to man with
his present bodily structure, an evolu¬
tion of the species took place a
transformation of one type of man into
another. It can be assumed that, in
primeval society, selection, which guid¬
ed the evolution of the ancients,
stimulated their development into
Homo sapiens.
'NCE Homo sapiens had
evolved, social tendencies neutralized
and weakened the action of the
species-forming selective mechanisms,
and thus assumed paramount import¬
ance. Modern men began to resolve
the problems facing them, not so
much by adapting themselves to new
environmental conditions which had
resulted in anatomical and physiolo¬
gical changes in their ancestors, but
by relying on and utilizing the fruits
of collective labour.
For this reason the physical type of
Homo sapiens underwent no major
changes during many millenia, whereas
the range and complexity of his activi¬
ties developed enormously. Although
the morphological changes that took
place in Homo sapiens during the for¬
mation of the major races were partly
adaptational, they did not change any
of man's traits as a species.
According to this viewpoint, Homo
sapiens is a supreme stage, in speci¬
fic qualitative terms, of man's evolu¬
tion, a stage characterized by a high
level of social organization. In this
development of man as a social being,
speech has played a major role by
passing on the experience and wis¬
dom accumulated by many generations
and making possible their integration,
along with new individual experience,
in a collective store of knowledge.
Academician N. Dubinin, the So¬
viet geneticist, has aptly pointed out
that Homo sapiens is unique, since,
with his advanced social awareness, he
has developed, In addition to the
hereditary programme possessed by
all organisms, a second, non-genetic,
non-hereditary programme "a pro¬
gramme of social heredity" as Dubinin
calls it, which makes for man's pro¬
gress in every new generation.
