RENAISSANCE
OF ARAB THOUGHT
AND LITERATURE
by Philippe Ouannès
I HE Arab world today num¬
bers some 130 million men and wo¬
men, the great majority of whom speak
.the same language, share the same
religious practices and have the same
traditions. Books hold a central place
in Arab culture; Islam in fact started
with a book, the Koran, which in Ara¬
bic originally meant "recitation" but
has now come to mean "reading".
From the shores of the Atlantic to the
Persian Gulf stretches one of the rare
geographical areas of the world ¡n
which linguistic unity and the same
culture and religion make it possible
for almost all the inhabitants to un¬
derstand each other without difficulty.
Arab civilization flowed through the
civilizations of the Mediterranean and
the west, making an original contribu¬
tion to their development and stimulat¬
ing a wealth of literary and scientific
creation. From the 8th century on¬
wards literature of every kind, from
poetry to astronomy, spread through¬
out the entire Arab-Islamic world from
the Indus to the Pyrenees. Over and
above the honoured names which are
the pride of Arabic literary tradition,
mention should be made of those en¬
quiring scholars, both famous and
anonymous, who "went in search of
science" and spread the inventions
and literature of eastern cultures
throughout the world.
It was through the Arabs, their books
and their translations that the world,
particularly the west, became ac¬
quainted with Greek philosophy and
cosmology, the compass, the invention
of paper in China, Arabic numerals,
etc.
But for the influence of the Anda-
22 PHILIPPE SALIM OUANNES, of Iran, writer
and former professor of sociology and Arab
literature at the University of Paris (Vlncen-
nes), is assistant editor of the French edition
of the Unesco Courier.
lusian Arab civilization and its poets,
such as Ibn Hazm (the author of "The
Ring of the Dove"), medieval Europe
would not have had the same concep¬
tion of courtly love and would not have
explored Its themes and myths in
works such as "Tristan and Iseult".
Writers such as Ibn Muqaffa (author
of Kalilah wa Dimnah), Avicenna and
Ibn Khaldun for the humanities and
scholars such as Khwarizmi, Blruni,
Rhazes and Farabi for the natural
sciences, helped spread or presided
over the creation of works, scientific
theories and discoveries which were
disseminated through books and
manuscripts circulating to the ends of
the Arab Empire and as far as Europe.
It is not the purpose of this article
to draw up a balance-sheet of the cul¬
tural heritage or the rôle of the Arab
world in the flowering of the different
civilizations of the Middle Ages.
Nevertheless this role, and its accom¬
panying traditions, made their imprint
and have left behind social and cul¬
tural features that continue to find ex¬
pression in a vigorous intellectual life
and in works by writers known the
world over, such as Taha Hussein of
Egypt, for example.
But these writers and scholars are
seriously handicapped by the various
problems now posed by book devel¬
opment and production.
Arabic literature in fact does not
occupy its rightful cultural and linguis¬
tic place in the world today for a num¬
ber of reasons. In order to analyse
and find answers to these problems,
the governments of the countries con¬
cerned decided to work out, with
Unesco's assistance, a common policy
for book production in Arab countries.
The work of co-ordinating this policy
was completed by a Unesco-sponsored
conference held in Cairo in May 1972,
attended by experts and representa¬
tives from 15 Arab countries. The
conference agreed to the setting up of
a regional book development centre
in Cairo which would play a decisive
part in formulating a policy for books
and printed matter and in speeding up
their circulation throughout the entire
Arabic-speaking world.
This task is made easier by the
long-established intellectual tradition
of the Arab-Islamic world, the con¬
venience of a common language and
above all, recent massive school enrol¬
ment campaigns. The promotion of
book development will also take into
account the special problems of writing
and book production, and will be based
on a detailed and realistic analysis of
present-day conditions.
*r\ preliminary assessment
based on statistics collected by
Unesco gives a total production in the
Arab world of some, 5,000 titles a
year, or about 1 per cent of world
production, which in 1969 was in the
neighbourhood of 500,000 titles.
Estimates by Dr. M. I. Shoush, Chair¬
man and Director of Khartoum Univer¬
sity Press (Sudan), put the total num¬
ber of copies of school textbooks pro¬
duced ¡n the Arab world at roughly
50,000 per title, as against 3,000 to
5,000 copies per title of books for
general reading. According to another
specialist, Mr. S. Mahmud Shenitl,
Egyptian Under-Secretary of State for
Culture, more copies are printed of
novels, particularly popular tales in
serial form, religious works and best¬
sellers. It would thus not be unreason¬
able to estimate an average of 10,000
copies per title, an overall yearly pro¬
duction of some 50,000 million copies.
This average of 10,000 copies per
title is, of course, considerably
exceeded by certain books such as
the Egyptian author Nagib Mahfuz's
famous Trilogy, each book of which

This calligraphic "mirror" image, in Arabic Kufic writing, reads the same In both directions
starting at the centre. It is the traditional Moslem profession of faith: "There is no
other God than Allah and Mahomet is his Prophet". The artist has prolonged some
of the letters to depict seven minarets and ten domes of Mecca, holy city of Islam.
bears the name of a district of Cairo,
and which traces the lives of three
generations of a Cairo family against
the background of their country's
political vicissitudes from 1917 to
1944. Many of this author's books,
his Zuqaq al Midaqq for example,
enjoy a wider than average circulation.
Book production ¡n the Arab coun¬
tries has however two weaknesses
which create an imbalance. Firstly,
the book industry is still mainly con¬
centrated in Cairo and Beirut, where
most of the printing and publishing is
done. Secondly, production fluctuates
from one year to the next. The
Lebanon for example published
427 titles in 1967 and 685 in 1969;
Kuwait published 153 titles in 1967
but only 80 in 1969.
Another important factor is the num¬
ber of books published by category.
While the social sciences represent
24 per cent of total production, litera¬
ture 20 per cent and religion 11.5 per
cent, the pure and applied sciences
account for only 15.5 per cent, though
it is generally considered that they
should be on the same level as
literature (20 per cent).
There is thus a gap here which
should be filled, particularly since
scientific book output, at some 400
technical works a year, is inadequate
to meet the needs of countries faced
with the problems of an Increased rate
of development and where the needs
of education are becoming increasingly
urgent.»
Annual production in the Arab world
is thus 40 titles per million inhabitants,
as against a world average of 140,
and the number of copies is 0.4 per
inhabitant as against the world average
of 2.3.
All these facts and figures point to
the fact that it is less in the produc¬
tion of titles than for the production of
copies that the Arab world lags be¬
hind. This accurately reflects the situ¬
ation in countries where an active
intellectual life and a vigorous cultural
tradition have existed for many
centuries. On the other hand, the
changing fortunes of history, economic
difficulties and the consequent high
rate of illiteracy today act as a con¬
siderable brake on book development
and circulation.
But what about the reading public
and its needs? Since this public can
be divided broadly into adults and chil¬
dren of school age, the answers can
best be given in terms of three partic¬
ularly important kinds of books: books
for general reading, school and uni¬
versity textbooks and children's
books.
As regards books for general read¬
ing, specialists have assessed minimum
needs as one book for each potential
reader a year, and six titles for each
group of 30,000 readers. In 1970 the
Arab world had 18 million literate
adults, a figure which has been large¬
ly exceeded today as a result of ex¬
tensive literacy campaigns launch¬
ed in all the Arab countries, and the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
23

MOSQUE OF THE BOOKSHOPS
Below, page from an Arabic treatise on astronomy and mathematics dating
from the 358th year of the Hegira (969 A.D.). Written in his own hand by
Ibn 'Abd al-Jalib al-Sidjistâni, a 10th century sage, this original manuscript
is illustrated with diagrams of remarkable accuracy. Right, bookseller's
stall on the Djamaa al Fna square, Marrakesh (Morocco). In the back¬
ground, the minaret of the principal mosque of Marrakesh, al-Koutoubiyya
(mosque of the bookshops), a 12th century masterpiece of Almohade art.
E
<
I *»,>Vjl"î<-"t' cAu*i,
*<**^¿S&'>
»y.1-,
ÍT>-
fa
.
|/i^V>>.-..
.¿3r*>';u "'
V*!ll».iPHrt.,V*l>
¡VW»1!) *«-*>, ->¿.WiL. '
p»W**-./\.W»j^..WI,Ji^».>
'
RENAISSANCE OF ARAB LITERATURE (Continued)
24
number of children now completing
their studies.
Novels, poetry and plays are all
classified under the heading of
general reading. Tawflq al-Hakim, one
of the most widely read of Arab play¬
wrights, arouses unflagging public
interest with plays rich in a symbolism
which is an amalgam of fatalism and
despair (Ahl al-Kahf), or in which his
characters struggle against their own
destiny (Rihla ila-l Ghad).
Among Arab poets we could mention
the names of Adonis, Nizar Qabbani,
al-Chabbi, etc. Poetry and the ability
to memorize verse have always been
highly prized in the Arab world.
Public poetry recitals are common
and, even among the illiterate, it would
be hard to find a person who was
unable to recite a verse or two, an
eloquent reminder of the importance
of the oral tradition.
As already stated, 1970 book pro¬
duction in the category of literature and
general reading represented 20 per
cent of the total, or nearly one thous¬
and titles, of which 3 million copies
were printed. On the basis of the
minimum needs quoted above, it
should have totalled some 4,000 titles
and 18 million copies.
The Arab governments . are fully
aware of the gap between actual pro¬
duction and requirements, and are
making a considerable effort to bridge
it by a policy of long-term planning
of which the decision to set up a re
gional book development centre ¡n
Cairo is a notable example.
Educational books are a -special
case since production is more or less
adequate to needs. The problems are
the same as in other parts of the
world: planning production in order
to keep pace with the increasing
school population, making textbooks
more attractive and above all, suffi¬
ciently varied and adapted to different
regions of each country so that chil¬
dren in remote villages do not have to
use textbooks that talk only of city
life, of pavements, blocks of flats, cars,
and so on.
The fact that Egypt, for example,
published 370 textbooks in 1968 and
distributed nearly 26 million copies in
schools gives some idea of the scope
of the problems involved.
I,IN 1970 there were 54 mil¬
lion children aged under 15" in the
Arab world, representing 45 per cent
of the total population. Of these
children 32 million were potential
readers in the 5 to 14 age-group,
whose minimum book needs called for
an annual production of 1,500 titles
and 32 million copies.
The importance of children's books
has long since been demonstrated.
They stimulate and establish lasting
reading habits and accustom the child
to the printed word, opening up to him
the realms of pictures, drawing and
graphic representation, developing his
powers of imagination as he discovers
the universe, so psychologists, artists
and educators should all co-operate in
producing them.
This question is of special impor¬
tance to the Arab world which has no
publishers specialising exclusively in
children's books. Virtually all large
publishing houses have a youth depart-*
ment, but their publications, though
well produced, do not always corres¬
pond to the needs of the young reader.
No overall figures are available for
this category but one example is that
of the well-known Cairo publishing
firm, Dar al-Ma'arif, the largest produ¬
cer of children's books in the Arab
world, which publishes 58 series of
books for the 6 to 15 age-group, com¬
prising 566 titles of which 136, nearly
a quarter, are for children under 8.
Thus there are no problems of lack
of creativity or ideas to obstruct book
production in the Arab world, which
has a sufficiently rich and ancient cul¬
tural tradition to stimulate writers and
creative artists. One of the chief
obstacles however is in the lac'< of
professional incentive. A career as
a writer does not pay because the
limited number of copies printed does
not provide a livelihood or enable the
author to write full-time.
Another major problem is copyright
protection. Though countries in the re¬
gion have taken the first steps to
adhering to international copyright
conventions, most Arab countries have

no national legislation for copyright
protection. Pirate editions flourish and
are the bane of authors and publishers.
It is to be hoped that a revision of the
Universal Copyright Convention and
the Berne Convention that would
favour the developing countries will
be adopted without delay.
Outside Cairo and Beirut, publishers
in the Arab world are few and far
between. Publishing houses are often
bookshops or printing firms which
originally were to be found grouped
together round the mosques and law
courts and which have gradually taken
on other activities. Morocco has given
a lead in setting up modern publishing
houses, both publicly and privately
financed, in the main centres of
modern intellectual life, (Fez, Casa¬
blanca, Rabat). Morocco's initiative
is an example which should be follow¬
ed not only by the main book-
publishers such as Egypt and Lebanon,
but also by the other Arab book-
producing countries.
The existence of such publishing
houses and their reorganization into
associations, first on a national and
then on a regional level, would make
it easier to adopt joint solutions for
common problems such as the choice
of manuscripts, the planning of mat¬
erial requirements and production,
financial backing, etc.
As regards actual printing works, the
Arab countries have two considerable
achievements to their credit. The first
is the Moroccan Ecole du Livre, unique
of its kind in the Arab world, which is
helping to solve the acute problem of
training qualified personnel. Else¬
where such training is acquired either
from experience on the job or through
courses abroad, though this inevitably
has some drawbacks.
The second achievement is the Al-
Ahram press in Cairo, the most
modern in Africa, equipped with up-to-
date machinery and employing most
of the printing processes in use today.
Both achievements show the efforts
made for book development by coun¬
tries anxious to equip themselves with
the means to follow up their immense
drive for literacy and school enrolment,
by providing books and other reading
matter which readers need to consoli¬
date and extend what they have
learned.
\ptNE of the most complex
and delicate problems faced by the
governments of the Arab countries is
that of costs. The decision of the
Arab Postal Union in March 1971 to
consider the whole region as a single
postal unit is a first step towards
lowering postage rates. These rates,
however, are still high, and .a reduction
for books from the present prohibitive
charges would ease the circulation of
reading matter considerably.
Prices block distribution. High pri¬
ces, whether due to production costs
or those of transport and distribution,
put books beyond the reach of many
potential readers. 4 Distribution goes
hand in hand with book promotion
since it involves the use of varied me¬
thods and channels and the prospect¬
ing of an ever wider public. A variety
of methods are used, ranging from tra¬
velling libraries to sales-points in
highly-populated areas and village mar¬
kets and even in cafés which bring
books to an entirely new reading
public.
As history has taught us and modern
times now demonstrate, the Arab coun¬
tries have a major role to play in
world cultural development. Hitherto,
political events tended to isolate them
from the main highways of commu¬
nication, and their culture and literary
works were thus deprived of the
means of dissemination offered by
modern mass media. These circum¬
stances no longer exist, and the renais¬
sance, or Nahda, of Arab thought and
literature, begun in the middle of the
XlXth century, is today attaining its full
significance.
The book development campaign
will, first of all, enable the Arabs them¬
selves to become aware of the scope
and quality of the creative works pro¬
duced on their own soil. It is to be hop¬
ed that these works will then be made
available to other world cultures,
through an equally ambitious campaign
for their translation into the most
widely spoken languages, so that a
world-wide public can have access to
the literary masterpieces of contem¬
porary Arab scholars, writers and
poets.
25
