GEOGRAPHY
OF HEART DISEASE
by
A.G. Shaper
and
Zdenek Fejfar
The human heart, that vital
busy pump made of muscle interwoven
with blood-vessels, is an organ about
which we know much but need to find
out far more. If it slows down and
fails to supply any part of the body,
that part may literally die; the result
may be paralysis of an arm or a leg,
or part of the brain may cease to func¬
tion; if the heart itself is deprived of
blood, death may occur.
Like any hard-worked machine, the
heart is subject to mechanical failure
from a variety of causes, some known,
others obscure. The distribution of
these ailments in the world's popula¬
tion is not uniform but varies accord¬
ing to sex, diet, area and economic
status. A disease may also lead to
different complications in different
settings; for example, the main
consequences of high blood pressure
are different in developing and highly
developed countries.
In most of the affluent societies of
the world, the level of arterial blood
pressure rises progressively with
increasing age, especially after 40.
Whether this is a normal pattern or
should be regarded as an environmen¬
tally induced disorder remains a source
of heated discussion. Studies of the
aging process in developing countries
may answer this question.
16
AG. SHAPER was formerly WHO Research
Professor at the Department of Medicine,
Makerere University College, Kampala,
Uganda. At present he Is working at the
Medical Research Council's Social Medicine
Unit, at the London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, England.
ZDENEK FEJFAR is Head of the World
Health Organization's Cardiovascular Dis¬
eases Unit, Geneva (see page 5).
The Medical Research Unit in Wel¬
lington, New Zealand, has investigated
several groups of Polynesians. The
population of Pukapuka (Cook Island)
does not show the usual rise of blood
pressure with increasing age, but other
groups of genetically similar Poly¬
nesians, now exposed to the modern
affluent way of life, do; their blood
pressure rises with age; arterial hyper¬
tension and complications are not un¬
common.
Among the Maoris of New Zealand,
the prevalence of hypertension is high
and is still rising, while among the
Europeans in New Zealand it has been
falling; hypertension in the Maoris is
frequently associated with a tendency
towards gout. Tantalizing as these
clues are, their true signifiance has
yet to be determined.
The peoples of northern Kenya, the
Samburu and the Rendille, lead a
nomadic existence with their herds of
cattle, camels, sheep and goats; they
also show no increase in blood pres¬
sure levels with increasing age.
Studies carried out by the World
Health Organization Cardiovascular
Research and Training Centre in Kam¬
pala, Uganda, have shown that young
men from these tribes who join the
Kenya army show a significant increase
in blood pressure in their second year
of service.
One of the many changes associated
with their transition from a nomadic life
to the disciplined existence of the army
is a considerable increase in salt
intake, although other dietary changes
and such factors as environmental
stress may also play a part.
In the affluent countries it seems
that people with high blood pressure
are more likely to develop disease
of the arteries and coronary heart
disease. In the tropical countries,
although long-standing and severe
hypertension results in brain damage,
heart enlargement and heart failure, or
in kidney damage and kidney failure,
severe atherosclerosis and coronary
heart disease virtually do not occur.
A similar situation has been observ¬
ed in China, Japan and Mongolia, as
well as in many tropical countries, and
shows that hypertension should be
regarded as an aggravating factor
in the development of coronary
heart disease and not as a basic
cause. There is clearly a tremendous
need to study the natural history of
hypertension in populations not prone
to severe atherosclerosis.
The usual cause of the reduced
blood supply is atherosclerosis of the
coronary arteries, a process which
leads to narrowing and distortion of
the blood vessels. A sudden obstruc¬
tion in one of these arteries will result
in damage to the heart muscle which
it supplies; this is acute myocardial
infarction, often called by the general
term "heart attack". It is the most
common heart disease in adult man
in all affluent societies.
Yet heart attack is rare in develop¬
ing countries, with the apparent excep¬
tion of small groups of people with
a high level of responsibility and socio¬
economic advantage.
In the affluent societies, cigarette
smoking, hypertension, diabetes melli¬
tus, obesity and sedentary occupations
are factors known to be associated
with the development of coronary heart
disease, yet these factors do not pro¬
duce coronary atherosclerosis and
coronary heart disease in the "average
man" in the developing countries.
This is true even for middle-aged
persons with long-standing hyper¬
tension, diabetes mellitus, obesity and
sedentary occupations! The reasons
are as yet not quite clear but there is
a strong suggestion that all these "risk
factors" are only aggravating factors
which accelerate the development of
atherosclerosis and its complications
in communities already prone to this
disease.
D
The relative importance of
dietary factors and of physical activity
patterns, which are perhaps expressed
in the low blood-fat levels of these
tropical communities with virtual free¬
dom from coronary heart disease, is
of considerable interest. Many claim
that the basic causes of coronary
heart disease cannot be adequately
studied in the communities which
suffer most from the disease because
all individuals are exposed. Hence the
usefulness of studying communities
relatively free from it.
Particularly rewarding studies cover
well-defined groups of people with
considerable differences in the preval¬
ence of coronary heart disease. For
example, in Kampala, Uganda, the
CONTINUED PAGE 20

In some rural areas of Africa, among low income farmers, high
blood pressure occurs as frequently as among city dwellers. Here,
a doctor tests a farm-worker's blood pressure in a Dahomey village.

FACT
IS STRANGER.
'-'
S^* S'lfr
... THAN
(SCIENCE)
FICTION
A recent science-fiction film, pro¬
duced in Hollywood and entitled
"Fantastic Voyage", tells the story of
a scientist seriously ill with brain
damage. In a last desperate attempt to
save his life, an experimental sub¬
marine and its crew of doctors, nurses,
etc, are miniaturized and injected (top
right) into the blood stream of the
patient and undertake an extraordinary
voyage through the heart up to the
brain. Like any other foreign element,
they are attacked by the body's
defence mechanisms (above) as they
search for the site of the malady under
the anxious eyes of their "ground
control" (below). Compare the film's
décor with the real thing. Photo (left)
shows an experiment in heart research:
a stereoscan microscope view of nor¬
mal human blood ten minutes after the
introduction of a synthetic material.
It shows red corpuscles imprisoned
in a dense network of fibrin, leading
to coagulation or clotting of the blood.
A similar phenomenon of coagulation
frequently occurs when blood flows
through the synthetic materials cur¬
rently used in the construction of arti¬
ficial hearts and blood vessels. The
search for a material compatible with
human blood continues.


PYRAMID CLINIC
Rheumatic fever which can cause crippling
damage to the heart is a disease which
often strikes children. Thirty per cent
of adult cardiac diseases are due to
rheumatic fever contracted in childhood.
In the U.S.A., about one million heart
sufferers owe their ailment to this cause.
In Egypt, the Pyramid Clinic, built almost
in the shadow of the great pyramids near
Cairo (right) treats and rehabilitates children
suffering from disabilities of the heart
and joints caused by rheumatic fever. It
has already cared for some 10,000 children
and provides primary school teaching
and appropriate job training.
Chagas' heart disease is a threat to
35 million persons in Latin America, where
it causes many deaths. It affects an
estimated five million persons in Brazil and
one million in Venezuela. Photo left shows
inhabitants of a district where the incidence
of Chagas' disease is particularly high.
GEOGRAPHY OF HEART DISEASE (Continued from page 16)
20
WHO Centre has emphasized the strik¬
ing differences which are found in the
fibrinolytic (clot-dissolving) system of
subjects prone to coronary heart
disease compared with subjects who
are not. The African community in
Kampala have no coronary heart dis¬
ease, and at all ages have an active
system for the breakdown of blood
clots.
The Indian minority in Kampala,
with an incidence of coronary heart
disease similar to any "affluent" group,
have a very poor clot-dissolving sys¬
tem when they reach middle age (40-
60 years), and this inability to break
down blood clots is significantly
associated with body fatness, blood
cholesterol levels and a tendency to
diabetes. This may be a phenomenon
of fundamental importance in the
development of atherosclerosis and
coronary heart disease, and furnishes
another example of how the absence
of a disease in a community may lead
to the better understanding of the
mechanisms of the disease elsewhere.
Food habits may play an important
part in determining whether a com¬
munity does or does not suffer from
coronary heart disease.
In Singapore, where three-quarters
of the population are Chinese and one
quarter Malay and Indian, the Indian
section of the community, whose eating
habits are quite special, is the one
most commonly affected.
In Fiji, coronary heart disease is not
seen in the native Fijians, but is com
monly diagnosed
Indians.
among resident
In Ceylon, where coronary heart
disease is commonly diagnosed in
relatively poor people on low-fat diets,
considerable interest focuses on the
fact that, although the total amount of
fat consumed is low, it consists of
coconut oil, a substance similar in
certain ways to butter, i.e. highly
saturated.
Clearly the nutritional
peculanties of tropical countries are of
considerable concern to those involved
in unravelling the mysteries of athero¬
sclerosis and coronary heart disease.
A small proportion of those who
suffer from certain streptococcal throat
infections experience inflammation of
the heart and swelling of the joints
which may go unrecognized if symp¬
toms are not striking: this is acute
rheumatic fever. However, though the
acute phase soon passes, permanent
injury to the heart in the form of a
thickening of the heart valves may
result; this is chronic rheumatic heart
disease.
There has been a remarkable decline
in the incidence of rheumatic fever in
highly developed communities in recent
years through the treatment of strep¬
tococcal infections with sulphonamides
and penicillin. Moreover, preventive
regimens have considerably prolonged
the life of subjects with chronic rheu¬
matic heart disease, and surgical cor¬
rection of the valvular deformities has
become a well-established treatment.
In many developing countries, par¬
ticularly in the tropical and subtropical
regions, the reverse situation can be
seen. Severe rheumatic heart disease
is being recognized with increasing
frequency and it is the most wide¬
spread and serious chronic heart
disease in children and young adults.
Poor social and economic conditions,
inadequate hygienic and therapeutic
measures as well as increasing urban¬
ization appear to be far more impor¬
tant than climate. The high proportion
of children in the population and the
rapid progression from onset of the
disease to severe permanent damage
of the heart valves and irreversible
heart failure make this a serious
problem.
Tropical physicians "and pathologists
are familiar with the presence of
advanced rheumatic heart disease in
children below the age of ten, and
considerable evidence indicates that
the prevalence of chronic heart dis¬
ease is increasing in many tropical
countries.
Despite the frequency of chronic
rheumatic heart 'disease in the tropics
and sub-tropics, surprisingly little acute
rheumatic fever is diagnosed in these
areas. Surveys carried out by WHO
consultants suggest that the clinical
features of acute rheumatic fever may
be different in the tropical countries

Photo D. Henrloud - WHO. Geneva
and that the natural history of rheu¬
matic heart disease may be modified
by environmental factors.
It is widely accepted that acute
rheumatic fever is caused by strepto¬
coccal infection, usually manifested as
a sore throat, and that treatment of the
infection can prevent rheumatic fever.
A question which requires study in
the tropical situation is whether strep¬
tococcal skin infections, which are very
common and often precede acute
kidney disease, may also result in
rheumatic fever.
At the WHO seminar on cardio¬
vascular diseases due to infections,
held in Manila in November 1968, the
preventive aspects of rheumatic fever
and rheumatic heart disease were fully
discussed.
In Malaysia, Singapore, Cambodia,
Hong Kong, the Philippines, Australia
and New Guinea, there is a significant
amount of rheumatic fever and partic¬
ularly rheumatic heart disease. The
severity of streptococcal infection and
the degree of the immune response to
streptococci are factors influencing a
high rheumatic disease incidence.
Reports from countries in the west¬
ern Pacific region showed a wide
range in the magnitude of the problem;
according to some reports, the situa¬
tion may be considered under control,
for example among the European
population of Australia and New Zea¬
land; elsewhere a severe problem is
recognized, for example in the Philip¬
pines, Hong Kong and Singapore.
Persons who have recovered from
an attack of rheumatic fever remain
susceptible throughout their lives and
thus require continual medical super¬
vision. However, if their infections are
promptly treated with antibiotics,
serious damage to the heart can be
prevented.
In most of the western Pacific
region, existing health services are
able to dispense long-acting penicillin
to those already suffering from rheum¬
atic fever in order to prevent serious
relapse and heart damage. But the
main obstacles to actually doing it are
lack of a clearly defined programme,
the lack of free medicine, and lack of
public awareness.
Of the many parasites which may
damage the heart, the most serious is
Trypanosoma cruzi which is respon¬
sible for Chagas' heart disease. Car¬
los Chagas, a Brazilian physician, des¬
cribed this condition for the first time
in 1909 as being common in central
Brazil although the disease had been
locally recognized in many regions
well before this time.
Chagas' heart disease can be
regarded as one of the plagues in
several countries of Latin America and
there are areas in which as much as
half of the population is infected. The
parasite is transmitted to man by a
biting bug; the acute phase of the
illness occurs within two weeks of
the entry of the parasite.
Apart from fever and typical signs at
the site of entry of the parasite, there
may be acute myocarditis (inflamma¬
tion of the heart muscle) with enlarge¬
ment of the heart and heart failure.
In most cases, this phase passes un¬
recognized and the first symptoms
appear many years later when the
damage has been done and the disease
has become chronic. Although the
heart is the most frequently damaged
organ, in some endemic areas, partic¬
ularly in Argentina and Brazil, charac¬
teristic disturbances in the digestive
tract are also common.
The basic problem of chronic Cha¬
gas' heart disease is a disturbance in
the conduction system of the electrical
impulses which are responsible for the
harmonious pumping activity of the
heart. Various types of rhythm irreg¬
ularities and even interruption of
impulse conduction and heart block
are common, and may lead to stop¬
page of the heart beat in an apparently
healthy subject. In other subjects,
damage to the heart muscle is gradual
and progressive, sometimes resulting
in decreased pumping ability of the
heart and enormous dilatation, and
ending in heart failure.
There is no specific treatment for
Chagas' heart disease. Prevention,
however, is possible by interrupting
the transmission of the parasite by the
proper use of insecticides and espe¬
cially by the improvement of housing
and living conditions. These are vital
tasks for the public health authorities
in the endemic areas.
CONTINUED PAGE 32
21

GEOGRAPHY OF HEART DISEASE (Continued from page 2D
32
At a meeting of the British Cardiac
Society held in Oxford in 1946.
Drs. Bedford and Konstam described a
most unusual form of heart failure in
African troops serving in Asia. The
soldiers were mostly from West Africa,
their average age was 20-30 years.
They were all cases of heart failure
and were found to have greatly
enlarged hearts. Seventeen of forty
patients under observations died and
came to autopsy. The description of
these hearts stimulated widespread
interest in unusual forms of heart
disease in the tropics.
In the more common forms of heart
disease, the heart's function is impair¬
ed by damaged valves, or by an in¬
creased load on the heart due to hyper¬
tension or disease of the coronary
arteries. There are, however, disorders
in which the main feature is a disease
of the heart muscle itself ; these
conditions are now widely known by
the collective term "cardiomyopathies".
Many of the hearts described by
Drs. Bedford and Konstam were of
this kind, and subsequent reports have
contributed greatly to the recognition
of heart-muscle disease in the rest
of the world.
In the more affluent societies, a
diseased heart muscle usually goes
with poor blood supply, and the true
cardiomyopathies have only recently
been sorted out from the coronary
heart diseases. Damage to the heart
muscle may be produced by a wide
variety of agents, some infective, some
toxic, and even by nutritional defi¬
ciencies, hormonal upsets and meta¬
bolic disorders. Frequently, however,
the cause of the damaged heart muscle
is uncertain or unknown.
Apart from alcohol, certain food
additives and preservatives are now
known to damage the heart muscle
cells. Outbreaks of cardiomyopathies
with high mortality have occurred
recently in heavy beer drinkers in
Canada. The beer had been treated with
cobalt and papain; such unforeseen
cardiac accidents are a warning of our
need for a deeper knowledge of the
normal mechanisms of the heart muscle
cells.
In comparison with the incidence of
rheumatic heart disease or arterial
hypertension, the cardiomyopathies
occur with relative infrequency,
although in some areas they are of
considerable importance. In Ibadan,
Nigeria, and among the African popu¬
lation of Johannesburg, South Africa,
about one-third of the patients with
clinical heart disease are considered
to have heart muscle disease, while in
Kampala, Uganda, only about 10 per
cent are included in this category.
At autopsy examination, about 4 per
cent of hearts in Kampala, Jamaica
and Japan have this form of cardio¬
myopathy, while in Cali, Colombia, it
runs as high as 12 per cent. Studies
in many parts of Africa, in South
America and in southeast Asia all indi
cate that unexplained enlarged hearts
are a significant health problem;
reports from Jamaica also point to a
high prevalence of cardiac enlarge¬
ment which is not due to coronary
artery disease.
Endomyocardial fibrosis (EMF), in
which a fibrous thickening constricts
the cavities of the heart, particularly
the ventricles, is a tropical cardiomyo¬
pathy in the true sense of the term;
its occurrence as an endemic problem
is confined to the tropical parts of the
world.
The disease has been intensively
studied in Nigeria, Uganda and other
countries within the tropical belt of the
African continent, and in southern
India, Ceylon, Malaysia, Brazil and
Colombia. The occurrence of EMF in
Europeans who have lived for long
periods in West Africa and the very
occasional report of EMF in subjects
who have never lived in or visited the
tropics are important clues whose
meaning has not yet by any means
been grasped.
The disease apparently begins in
childhood but by the time a diagnosis
is made, heart damage is usually
already serious and the patient is in
a state of heart failure. Predominantly a
disease of children and young adults,
it is found in all age groups. There is
no specific treatment beyond the
general management of heart failure
and, as the cause is unknown, pre¬
vention is not yet possible.

In many ways, EMF appears to have
a natural history similar to that of
rheumatic heart disease. Studies in
Kampala have also demonstrated a
very significant concurrence of EMF
and rheumatic heart disease in patients
on whom autopsies have been made.
This has lead to the hypothesis that
EMF may be a disorder similar to
rheumatic heart disease, another
hypersensitivity disorder of the heart.
Streptococcus, filariasis and malaria
may also be factors in the development
of this disease.
There is a scientific philosophy
according to which many problems of
the highly developed world can best
be solved away from the complexity
and confusion of modern industrial
societies; it may be as important to
study communities apparently free
from a disorder as those in which
almost everyone is prone to it.
As the preceding examples have
shown, there may be something in the
African or Asian diet, or way of life,
which has some protective influence
against the major killing heart diseases
of Europe and North America.
If the factor lacking in the one or
present in the other proves to be
decisive, then ways of preventing
some common causes of death will be
found. This type of comparative study
is a way in which mankind can make
use of its diversity for the common
good.
A. G. Shaper and Zdenek Fejfar
B IT]
11
Books
for
All
A big effort for International Book Year
is being made in Switzerland where this
poster, bearing the Year's symbol and its
slogan "Books for All", is used to announce
Book Year events. The poster was produc¬
ed by the Swiss National Commission
for Unesco and the Press and Information
Division of the Swiss Booksellers and
Publishers Organization.
BOOKSHELF
RECENT UNESCO BOOKS
Looking at Unesco. A booklet for
the general public, 1971, 107 pp.
The Performing Arts in Asia, edit¬
ed and with introductions by James
R. Brandon, 1971, 168 pp (90p, $3).
Cultural Policy in Yugoslavia, by
Stevan Majstorovic, (Studies and
documents on cultural policies) 1972,
81 pp (60p, $2)
The Theory and Practice of
Programmed Instruction, by Jerry
Pocztar. A guide for teachers
(monographs on education series),
1972, 179 pp (£1.20, $4)
UNICEF CHILDREN'S BOOKS
Shaer of Afghanistan by Judith
Spiegelman, photos by Jack Ling,
1969 ($3.50)
Ketut, Boy Woodcarver of Bali, by
Judith Spiegelman, photos by Mallica
Vajrathon and Henky Pantoc, 1971
($3.95)
Dayapala of Ceylon, by Judith
Spiegelman, photos by Hector
Sumathipala and Gamini Jayasinghe,
1970 ($3.95)
Two Brothers of Peru, by Jack
Ling and Judith Spiegelman, 1969
($3.50)
Galong, River Boy of Thailand, by
Judith Spiegelman, photos by Mallica
Vajrathon, 1970 ($3.95)
Ali of Turkey, by Judith Spiegel¬
man, photos by Lèvent Birnen, 1969
($3.50)
Unicef children's books are publish¬
ed by Julian Messner, New York, a
division of Simon Schuster, Inc.
Drug-taking 'epidemic'
Drug abuse in many countries has
reached almost epidemic proportions and
is a danger to health and society, says the
International Narcotics Control Board in its
recent annual report. In a special warning
about cannabis ("a serious and growing
danger in many countries") the report says
that research shows that the effects of
cannabis consumption include "variation in
perception of time and space, disinhibition,
dulling of attention, fragmentation of thought
and an altered sense of identity."
Protecting
our cultural treasures
Proposals for an international convention
to safeguard the world's cultural and natural
heritage will be made to Unesco's General
Conference when it meets in October 1972.
The measures proposed will set inter¬
national standards for the protection of
monuments, groups of buildings and natural
sites and will outline national plans for
safeguarding cultural property.
Computerized museums
Local museums may soon be able to
call up on a screen images of exhibits in
museums all over the world, according to
the Unesco quarterly "Museum". In a
special issue (Vol XXIII, No 1), the magazine
describes experiments in the Fed. Rep. of
Germany, U.S.A., France, U.K. and Sweden
aimed at setting up central banks of
museum data, first on a national scale,
then expanding to form a world network.
$340 million
food aid target
With demands for food aid outstripping
its resources, the World Food Programme
has set a budget target of $340 million
for 1973-74 $40 million more than in 1971-
72. Since it was set up in 1963, the U.N.-
FAO World Food Programme has approved
over 500 food aid projects in 84 countries,
costing over $1,077 million, and has
undertaken 144 emergency operations in
70 countries, at a cost of $107 million.
Flashes
Three new states Bahrain, Qatar and
Oman recently joined Unesco, bringing Its
membership to 128.
The first regional conference of Ministers
of Culture from European countries will be
held at Helsinki (Finland) In June 1972.
The World's medical schools have in¬
creased from 682 to 918 in the past ten
years, reports WHO. Of the 236 new
schools, Brazil has opened 53, India, 40,
and U.S.A., 21.
The number of young people studying
abroad rose 300 per cent between 1950 l\l\
and 1968, when 430,000 students were JJ
taking full-time courses in other countries,
according to the recent Unesco study,
"Statistics of Students Abroad".
