Disasters such as this shipwreck, in which
13 men lost their lives when their ship ran
aground in a sudden gale, may perhaps be
a thing of the past when the results of
GATE, the vast international hydrometeoro-
logical research project in the tropical
Atlantic, beginning in June 1974, are known.
The project will provide a wealth of new
information on the movement of atmo¬
spheric disturbances over both land and
sea and will enable new methods of
forecasting and Influencing them to be
developed.
Photo Tom Smith. Observer - Camera Press 45 Panmage. Paris


OPERATION CATE
35 countries assemble a scientific
armada to study atmospheric phenomena
in the tropical Atlantic
by Yuri V. Tarbeev
YURI V. TARBEEV Is Deputy Director of the
International Scientific and Management
Group (ISMG) of the GARP Atlantic Tropical
Experiment (GATE) described in this article.
He is a member of the WMO Commission
for Marine Meteorology and of the Internat¬
ional Co-ordinating Group for the Pacific
Tsunami Warning System Dr. Tarbeev has
headed a number of océanographie research
expeditions.
one-hundred day inter¬
national scientific experiment to inves¬
tigate the atmosphere and ocean in
the tropical zone of the Atlantic, and
of Africa and Central America is due
to begin on June 15, 1974. Known
as GATE (1) (GARP Atlantic Tropical
Experiment), the operation will be
unprecedented in its scale and
scientific significance.
(1) GATE is being carried out under the
Global Atmospheric Research Programme
(GARP), the far-reaching international re¬
search project jointly planned by the World
Meteorological Organization and the Inter¬
national Council of Scientific Unions. (See
page 9)
For the first time in history, 35 coun¬
tries of Africa, Europe and Amer¬
ica are to join forces in a vast pro¬
gramme of atmospheric and oceano-
graphical research concentrated over
a relatively small area of the earth's
surface.
More than one hundred meteorolo¬
gical stations, located in the tropical
areas of Africa, on islands in the
Atlantic and in Latin America, over 25
research vessels, dozens of ocean
buoys, 11 aircraft equipped as flying
laboratories and several orbiting and
geostationary earth satellites will be
operating according to a synchronized
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
21

OPERATION 'GATE' (Continued)
5,000 deaths each year from tropical hurricanes
22
single scientific programme and plan.
Over 3,500 persons will be engaged
in the programme of observations.
The results will be immediately trans¬
mitted back to Dakar (Senegal), where
an operations control centre for the
experiment is to be set up, to the
World Data Centres in Washington and
Moscow, and to Bracknell (U.K.), Paris
and Munich (German Fed. Rep.) as
well as to other cities. At these
centres, the data obtained during the
experiment will be processed by
computer.
When the experiment has been com¬
pleted, the results will be analysed
by dozens of research institutes, labo¬
ratories and universities in France, the
Fed. Rep. of Germany, U.S.S.R., U.S.,
U.K., Canada and other countries.
Hundreds of experts from different
countries are today working on the
scientific programmes and plans for
the full-scale launching of GATE in
June 1974. To co-ordinate this work,
the World Meteorological Organization
and the International Council of Scien¬
tific Unions have set up an Inter¬
national Scientific and Management
Group.
Between June and August 1972, in
preparation for GATE, the Soviet Union
carried out a one-nation "rehearsal"
of the experiment, with the partici¬
pation of six research vessels and an
aircraft. This expedition discovered a
number of previously unknown features
of the atmospheric processes in the
tropical Atlantic and also produced im¬
portant data which will be used in
planning the global experiment.
A
^TkN international rehearsal of
the tropical experiment is being held
(August 1 to 10, 1973), in the Western
Atlantic.
Two Soviet research vessels, "Aka-
demik Korolev" and "Ernest Krenkel",
the U.S. vessel "Researcher" and the
Mexican ship, "Cadete Virgilio Uribe"
will rendezvous at a point 20° northern
latitude and 60° western longitude to
carry out joint research. Their mission
is to make an "intercomparison test"
of various instruments and observation
systems to be used for measurement
in the stratosphere, atmosphere and
ocean, to work out uniform observation
methods and to get the necessary ex¬
perience in the organization of joint
océanographie work by vessels from
different countries.
In the first fortnight of August 1973,
whilst work continues at sea, the net¬
work of land-based stations and tele¬
communication links in Africa and
Latin America are being checked out.
The purpose of these two international
rehearsals in 1973 is not simply to
compare instruments and to work out
joint operations for the vessels involv¬
ed, but also to solve a certain number
of scientific problems.
It may be wondered why so much
attention is being paid to the very
early stages of preparation for GATE.
There are several reasons.
Firstly, there are likely to be many
more experiments of this kind which
help to solve practical scientific prob¬
lems but which are expensive and
difficult to organize.
Until recently, meteorological re¬
search in the oceans was mainly des¬
criptive in character or else was in¬
tended to solve specific problems of
atmospheric physics. Scientists, of
course, were well aware of the im¬
portance of the need for an integrated
approach to the problem, but the requi¬
site technical and material resources
for carrying out such international ex¬
periments were lacking.
For instance, in order to obtain a
mathematical description of the com¬
plex physical processes in the atmo¬
sphere which govern the weather,
with all their interrelationships, a large
number of simultaneous observations
have to be carried out, employing
satellites, aircraft and large numbers
of research vessels.
It is not a practical possibility for
any country, even the most economi¬
cally advanced, to carry out such re¬
search single-handed. The joint efforts
of many countries are needed, and
there must be a common interest in
the results of the experiment and mu¬
tual agreement to carry out the obser¬
vations simultaneously on the territory
of all the countries concerned and at
sea. Without powerful computers it
would be impossible to deal with the
flood of information produced by such
experiments.
Today, the practical conditions for
the success of the operation have been
fulfilled.
Secondly, and this is perhaps the
most important factor, GATE has at¬
tracted considerable attention because
of the need to find more reliable
methods for weather prediction, long-
range forecasts in particular.
The present rapid growth of industry
and agriculture gives increasing eco¬
nomic importance to long-term fore¬
casts, since early warning of such nat¬
ural disasters as droughts or severe
winter conditions, combined with mod¬
ern facilities for operational planning,
can considerably reduce the losses
which they cause and their other harm¬
ful consequences.
But if industry and farming are to be
planned on the basis of such forecasts,
the predictions have to be reliable.
Reliable forecasting methods can be
established using numerical models of
atmospheric circulation which describe
all the major factors in the state of
the atmosphere and its relationship
with the underlying surface of the land
and the oceans.
Such mathematical models as these
cannot be drawn up without a de¬
tailed study of the processes occurring
in the tropics. This is because the
surfaces of the land and the oceans
in that area store up a great part of
the solar energy which reaches the
earth. The processes taking place in
the tropics thus have a considerable
influence on atmospheric circulation
as a whole.
The research which is to be carried
out during GATE will provide vital ex¬
perimental material for a far-ranging
assessment of the processes occur¬
ring in this area and will help to ex¬
plain how and to what extent they
influence the weather and the climate
in other regions of the world.
M^ INALLY, some processes
such as convection (the upward move¬
ment of warm, moist air), evaporation
from the surface of the oceans, the
formation of cloud systems, etc., which
are of fundamental importance for the
atmosphere as a whole, are particu¬
larly marked in the tropical zone. By
investigating them there it will be
possible to discover the physical
mechanism which governs them more
quickly and more easily.
Until this physical mechanism is pro¬
perly understood, it will be impossible
to deal with such practical problems
as artificial rain-making or the use of
artificial means to reduce the destruc¬
tive force of tropical hurricanes. A
practical example can illustrate the
capital importance of solving these
problems.
Tropical hurricanes and the flooding
which accompanies them cause more
casualties and more damage than any
other natural disaster (for a general
article on typhoons and hurricanes see
page 52). It has been reckoned that
in the hundred years between 1870
and 1970, they caused on average
1,500 million dollars worth of damage
and more than 5,000 deaths per year.
Out of the world total, the countries
of Asia and the Far East suffered
losses to the tune of 950 million dol¬
lars a year, the countries of the Carib¬
bean and the United States about
400 million dollars and the countries
on the south-western shores of the
Indian Ocean about 46 million dollars.
The heaviest losses were suffered by
the economically developed coun¬
tries the United States and Japan
whose losses totalled about 1,000 mil¬
lion dollars a year more than 66 per
cent of the total.

Automatic ocean weather buoys are impor¬
tant links In the World Weather Watch
meteorological network. Dozens of these
giant buoys are to be used in the forthcom¬
ing tropical Atlantic research project.
According to the secretariat for the
international Typhoon Committee, set
up under the auspices of the U.N.
Economic Commission for Asia and the
Far East and WMO, 22 countries in
Asia and the Far East during the per¬
iod 1961-1970 suffered damage ave¬
raging 930 million dollars a year from
hurricanes and typhoons. This figure
is equivalent to the total amount paid
out annually to these countries by the
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development.
The losses caused by tropical hurri¬
canes are a heavy burden on the eco¬
nomies of many countries, particularly
the developing countries. Although
considerable progress has been made
in forecasting and in providing early
warnings of the approach of hurrica¬
nes, the losses suffered by many
countries at present total five per
cent, or even more of the national in¬
come.
In this connexion, it is interesting
to look at a breakdown of these losses
by years for countries with different
levels of economic development. Los¬
ses due to hurricanes in the United
States during the period 1915-1924
amounted on average to only 63 million
dollars. Thus in the last fifty years
the scale of these losses has increased
by 473 per cent, a yearly average in¬
crease of 9.5 per cent which is
about twice as high as the rate of
growth of national income. In the 25
years beginning in 1945, the cost of
damage caused by typhoons in Japan
increased from about 273 million to
600 million dollars a rate of growth
of about 6 per cent per annum.
In the Caribbean countries, the cost
of hurricane damage increased in the
course of ten years from 33,200,000 to
92,900,000 dollars, i.e. an increase of
18 per cent per annum, which is nearly
three times the rate of growth of the
national income. Similar trends are
noted in the Philippines, Taiwan and
other places.
The increasing cost of such damage
is due to intensive economic develop¬
ment in the areas affected by hurri¬
canes and typhoons, the main factor
being the rising cost of construction
and the growing number of technical
installations being built, and these are
reasons which will continue to hold
good in the future.
This means that unless radical solu¬
tions to the problems of tropical hurri
canes are found, the time will come
when the cost of damage will draw
level with the figure for the growth of
the national income in other words
cancelling out any progress.
To prevent such a situation from
arising, we must seek new ways of
dealing with the problem. In other
words, we must develop scientific
techniques for preventing hurricanes.
Such methods will undoubtedly be
found, along with methods for making
clouds shed their rain and techniques
for influencing other meteorological
phenomena, since many atmospheric
processes are of a similar physical
nature.
The GARP Atlantic Tropical Experi¬
ment is certain to produce numerous
observations which will throw much
light on the physical nature of atmo¬
spheric processes, in large and small
scale terms. This will mark a decisive
step in the development of effective
means of influencing such processes.
Since hitherto only a few ships have
usually taken part in ocean expeditions
to investigate the atmosphere and the
hydrosphere, the results obtained have
given only a very approximate idea of
atmospheric and < oceanic processes.
The forthcoming "tropical experiment,
however, will simultaneously cover the
whole tropical zone of the oceans and
the surrounding land areas of Africa
and Central America.
It will thus be possible to follow the
development of atmospheric processes
and the movement of atmospheric dis¬
turbances over land and sea alike, and
hence to determine on a large scale
the influence of the ocean on these
processes.
At the same time, 15 ships, a large
number of data buoys, more than ten
aircraft and several tethered balloons
will be concentrated in a smaller area
of more intensive observations in an
area covering about 800 by 800 km. to
the south of the Cape Verde Islands.
They will keep constant watch on the
atmosphere in this area when the most
interesting phenomena are occurring.
All this should provide material of fk_
unique value for the solution of present JA
and future problems of hydrometeoro- **
logy, and should pave the way for
many scientific discoveries.
