Copernicus noted down his first astronomical
observation while studying at the University
of Bologna (Italy) between 1496 and 1500. On the roof
of the university observatory (right) he used his
astronomical quadrant, here silhouetted against the
evening sky, to observe an eclipse of the moon
on March 9, 1497. Alongside the quadrant are the
Alfonsine planetary tables, compiled for Alfonso X
of Castile by Arabic, Jewish and Christian scholars
between 1248 and 1252. Lying beside the
tables is an early printed edition of the Almagest,
the astronomical and mathematical encyclopaedia
written in the 2nd century A.D. by Claudius
Ptolemy, of Alexandria.




The foundation
of modern science
From his 'remote corner of the world'
Copernicus set in motion
not only the Earth,
but the entire spirit of research
by Owen Gingerich
10
OWEN J. GINGERICH, a leading American
astrophysicist, Is professor of Astronomy and
the History of Science at Harvard University,
and has taken part In Harvard astronomical
research expeditions to several countries,
Including Sri Lanka and Lebanon. He Is also
an astrophysicist at the Smithsonian Astro-
physical Observatory, In Cambridge, Massa¬
chusetts. His publications include many
studies on the history of astronomy and the
applications of computers to this subject
O a modern scientist,
science of the 15th century has a
strange and unfamiliar quality. When
Copernicus was born, men believed
that a weightless, crystalline sun
whirled daily around the earth.
Celestial motions were explained in
terms of strivings inherent in matter
itself. Professors of physics said that
a stone thrown from the hand flew
straight until it ran out of "impetus"
and then fell directly down to the
ground.
In 1543 Copernicus' masterpiece,
De revolutionibus ("Concerning the
Revolutions"), was published, and
in the century that followed, the
curious, time-honoured scientific expla¬
nations of antiquity and the Middle
Ages gave way to the ideas that form
the foundations of today's science.
A great change indeed a revolution
took place in that age, with Coper¬
nicus at its forefront. Far more than
political struggles, with their attendant
fleeting changes, the work of Coper¬
nicus and his Intellectual successors
has shaped our contemporary world.
If indeed Copernicus' contributions
triggered off the entire sequence of
ideas that have become modern
science, we may well ask why this is
a phenomenon only 500 years old.
What prevented the appearance of a
Copernicus a century or two before?
Was an earlier great unfolding of
science prevented by bonds of dogma
and ignorance?
Or, in a contrary view, 'should we
consider creative science a delicate
and fragile plant that blossoms forth
only in particularly germinal conditions?
Perhaps it was not mere coincidence
that the great astronomer lived as a


Photo Erich Lessing O Magnum, Paris
contemporary of Columbus, Dürer,
Leonardo, Erasmus, and Luther. In
that case we can make a fascinating
inquiry: what factors contributed to the
remarkable flowering of science typi¬
fied by Copernicus?
The geocentric astronomy of Coper¬
nicus' day had served well for over
a thousand years; it meshed perfectly
with man's view of himself and with
the primitive physics of Aristotle. To
be sure, learned prelates recognized
that Easter was coming too early in
the calendar year, and a few astrolo¬
gers knew that the planets were some¬
times found several degrees from
positions predicted by tables based on
the venerable Ptolemaic theory. But
if there were a crisis in astronomy,
Astronomía had just as much of a
problem on her hands after Coper¬
nicus as before, for the calendar
remained the same and planetary pre¬
dictions were improved only a little.
No one knows precisely how or
when the Polish astronomer first seized
upon the idea of a sun-centred system;
in any event, by 1515 he was hard at
work on his manuscript of De revolu-
tionibus, a book that encompassed
both his new cosmology and a care¬
ful re-examination of old and new
planetary observations.
Nor do scholars know why he
adopted a heliocentric view of the
cosmos, for the observations of his day
could neither prove nor disprove his
idea. Nevertheless, there is a clue in
his own writings.
A euphoric sense of beauty pervades
the entire composition of the book:
For in this most beautiful temple, who
would place this lamp in another or
better position than that from which it
can light up the whole thing at the
same time?... We thus discover a
marvellous symmetry of the universe
and a fixed harmonious linkage as can
be found in no other way... So vast
is this divine handiwork of the most
excellent Almighty. Surely an
aesthetic vision gripped Copernicus
and guided his analysis of the heavens.
Yet it is a curious and nearly
forgotten fact that the Copernican
Revolution was nearly stillborn. Two
decades after he had begun his book,
Copernicus had run out of steam. By
then in his sixties, he had written the
most profound astronomical treatise in
a millenium, but the small technical
details lacked a final polish and inner
consistency. His manuscript was a
work of beauty, with exquisitely drafted
figures and two-colour tables, but
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
11

THE BOOK
THAT MOVED
THE WORLD
The original manuscript of
Copernicus' "On the Revo¬
lutions of the Heavenly
Spheres" is both a major
scientific treatise and a work
of art. Written in cursive and
formal styles of the 16th
century, the text is illustrated
with many astronomical dia¬
grams, inset in certain passa¬
ges or placed in the margins.
As an anniversary tribute to
Copernicus a full colour
fascimile of the manuscript
(now in the Jagiellonian
University Library, in Cracow)
is being published in several
countries. Right, the famous
diagram from the manuscript
in which Copernicus summa¬
rises his conception of the
Universe with the earth plac¬
ed in an orbit around the sun
exactly similar to those of the
other planets. Left, a later
illustration of the Copernican
system published in Amster¬
dam, in 1661, in Harmonía
macrocosmica (or New Uni¬
versal Atlas) by Andreas
Cellarius. Though it appeared
over a century after Coper¬
nicus' death, this work carried
only one illustration of his
theory of the universe.
THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN SCIENCE (Continued)
12
these paper folios had apparently been
designed as the end-product itself.
His post as canon of the Frombork
cathedral in Poland had given him
financial security and time for
contemplation, but it deprived him
of stimulating intellectual companion¬
ship. In short, there was no one to
talk to about his remarkable book,
that had been so long in the making.
Although Copernicus had found
printed works essential in his own
studies, printing was still a comparativ¬
ely new invention, one that had begun
to flourish only during his own lifetime.
There was as yet no printer in From¬
bork, and the aging astronomer
apparently had no intention of publish¬
ing his work elsewhere.
De revolutlonibus seemed destined
to gather dust in the cathedral library,
to be forgotten and ignored. Such a
fate seems incredible to us today yet
it must have overtaken scores of
astronomical achievements of the
Middle Ages.
But in 1539, in Copernicus' last
years, a young mathematician from
Germany appeared in Frombork, eager
to learn the details of the astronomer's
ideas. George Joachim Rheticus,
already a professor at Wittenberg
though just in his mid-twenties, had
heard rumours of the innovative
Copernican astronomy.
Although the young Rheticus came
from the hot-bed of Lutheranism, the
Catholic Copernicus received him with
courage and cordiality. Caught up by
the enthusiasm of his young disciple,
Copernicus made last-minute revisions
to his opus and then entrusted a
manuscript copy to Rheticus for publi¬
cation.
Rheticus took the manuscript to a
printer in Nuremberg, who finished the
production of several hundred copies
in 1543. These were sold to scholars
and libraries throughout all of Europe.
And thus it came about that the new
technology of printing was able to
play an absolutely essential role in
preserving and disseminating the new
astronomy.
The readers of Copernicus' treatise
gladly accepted his new planetary
observations and his careful attention
to the details of planetary orbits, but
the heliocentric world view itself found
little support. In our own age of
space exploration, when men have
looked back upon the spinning earth
suspended in the skies, the Copernican
system seems natural, almost obvious.
But to most astronomers of the late
1500s, imbued with the physics of
Aristotle, a moving earth had little
appeal. Instead, they chose a primi¬
tive form of relativity.
Keeping the earth as their fixed
reference framework, they viewed the
Copernican system as a clever mathe¬
matical model, somewhat more com¬
plicated than the old Ptolemaic system,
but not a true description ' of the
physical world. There was certainly
nothing obvious about a moving earth
and a fixed, central sun; Galileo later
remarked that he could not admire
enough those who had accepted the
Copernican system in spite of the
evidence of their senses.
NI EVERTHELESS, Coperni¬
cus' De revolutionibus acted like a
delayed action bomb. Around 1600
two great scientists, each in his own
individual way, grasped a truth in the
heliocentric system that went beyond
geometrical model-building. Johannes
Kepler saw in the sun-centred spacing
of the planets a harmonious, aesthetic
relation that could be expressed in
mathematical relations. He envisioned
a force emanating from the sun, and
built a "new astronomy or celestial
physics based on causes."
In Italy, Galileo Galilei turned the
newly invented telescope to the
heavens where he found one astonish¬
ing suprise after another. The moon,
filled with mountains and plains,
traversed the skies as another earth¬
like planet. And Jupiter, with its own
retinue of moons, became a miniature
Copernican system. To Galileo the
universe was comprehensible as a
unity only if the earth was a planet
revolving about the distant, fixed sun.
Both Kepler and Galileo differed
strongly from an anonymous introduc-

jv «^ ^ .*_. r:Xi w** **a^
tion that had been added to De
revolutionibus when it was printed.
In that introduction the Lutheran
theologian Andreas Ossiander stated
a widely-held philosophical opinion:
astronomical theories were mathe¬
matical models intended for predictions
of astronomical phenomena, and
whether they were ultimately true or
false was irrelevant.
Such a view is logical and self-
consistent, but Kepler and Galileo
were convinced that their astronomy
gave a true picture of the universe.
This claim, plus their opinion that in
matters of science the Bible simply
spoke in the plain terms of common
man so as to be understood, brought
them into conflict with the Catholic
Church, and consequently several of
their works were placed on the Index
of Prohibited Books.
To a 20th century scientist, familiar
with the concept of relativity, it may
seem ultimately irrelevant whether the
earth or sun is the chosen fixed ref¬
erence point. But the 17th century
collision between religious dogma and
an innovative world view has had a
profound impact on mankind's views
concerning the source and nature of
truth about our physical world. And
in the 17th century it did make a
difference whether the universe was
conceived in geocentric or heliocentric
terms, because only a heliocentric
solar system leads onward to New¬
tonian physics.
In turn, Newton's laws of motion and
his law of Universal Gravitation
describe the orbits of satellites and
space probes. Thus there is a direct
line from Copernicus through Kepler,
Galileo and Newton to the marvels
of our own space age.
No doubt Copernicus would have
been astonished to learn that the world
would link his birthday to a celebration
of modern science. An unwitting re¬
volutionary, his goal was to return
science to a purer state, conceived in
terms of the perfect circles of the
ancient Greeks. He sought a view
"pleasing to the mind," and he gave
to the mind's eye a fruitful new way
of looking at the cosmos.
Still, our earlier question comes back
to haunt us. Why did this new view
wait until the early 1500s? The
answer lies not so much in the science
as in the society and in new¬
found patterns of communication. The
invention of printing and the rise of
universities encouraged the flow of
information and new ideas. The
discovery of America, while Copernicus
was a student at Cracow, helped
demonstrate the inadequacy of tradi¬
tional knowledge. A seething intellec¬
tual milieu, absent a century or two
earlier, characterized the age.
Furthermore, Copernicus had a
patron the Frombork cathedral chap¬
ter that enabled him to travel to Italy
for graduate study, and which freed
him from financial worries. More im
portantly, he had the time and freedom
to contemplate and choose innovative
views.
In that age of change, a new mobility
of ideas brought Copernicus fresh
knowledge that he required for building
his system, and at the end of his life
this same combination of travel,
freedom, and printing saved his work
from oblivion.
The new-found freedom of inquiry,
combined with the requisite intellectual
resources and the discipline to work
out the consequences and to test the
data this is without doubt more
important for the rise of modern
science than the specific idea of a sun-
centered cosmology.
We learn more for our own age from
Copernicus' persistence, his eagerness
to seek learning beyond his own
provincial boundaries, his willingness
to share with those outside his own
religion and nation, than we learn from
his formidable astronomical tome or
from his paeans to the heliocentric
cosmology.
From his "remote corner of the
world" Nicholas Copernicus set into
motion not only the earth, but the
entire spirit of inquiry that has so
richly increased our understanding of
the universe. But the ultimate reason
for the anniversary celebration and
indeed its challenge is a re-dedica¬
tion to preserve the fragile freedom of
inquiry and the resources that make
inquiry possible.
13
