
A Unesco
inquiry
on the
harmfulness
of cannabis
v^
VMS
Ï
Although the harmfulness of drugs
is generally recognized, this has
been challenged in some coun¬
tries and by certain groups, parti¬
cularly with regard to the effects
of drugs such as cannabis. Unesco
last year undertook an inquiry
on this question as part of the
international study it carried out
on drugs (see page 6). In the
article which follows we sum¬
marize the findings of the can¬
nabis inquiry.
?^tó¿
¿^**
Wg<~ m
i f
', t -w?
Cannabis, or Indian hemp, is grown in all parts of the world's temperate and
tropical regions and is also found, as a wild plant, is some parts of India and
Latin America (above). It is from cannabis that substances know variously as
hashish, marijuana, kif, ganja, bhang, charras and maconha are obtained.
IIN the United States, an
opinion fairly widely held among young
people is that marijuana is no more
harmful than alcohol and that its use
should therefore be legalized and
brought under regulation in the same
way as the use of various alcoholic
drinks. The prevailing view, however,
is that it would be wiser to await the
results of current research before
treating marijuana in the same way as
alcohol, and that in consequence the
use of marijuana should continue to
be prohibited.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
23

CANNABIS (Continued)
Is marijuana
a first step to stronger drugs?
24
It is only since 1968 that detailed
scientific studies have been made in
that country on the effects produced
by the products of cannabis. The
findings of this research to date have
enabled the authorities to state, in a
joint information publication intended
for the public at large, that while
marijuana and hashish may not cause
physical dependence, the long-term
use of these substances brings about
a psychological dependence.
According to this publication, the
excessive use of cannabis can have
harmful effects, particularly from the
psychological and social standpoints,
since it puts an artificial gloss over
reality and thus causes excessive
users, particularly young 'people, to
avoid facing up to life's real problems
and to fail to develop their physical
and mental abilities. Lately, some
research workers have thought they
were able to establish a connexion
between the abuse of cannabis and a
certain type of social maladjustment.
It should be borne in mind that the
view in the United States is that the
effects of the chronic use of cannabis
are not yet scientifically known.
Medical literature contains an abund¬
ance of reports on the acute psychoses
occasioned by the prolonged use of
Indian hemp (cannabis) but it is
thought that this problem still calls for
scientific research on a wider scale.
As for the "escalation" which the
use of the products of cannabis is said
to entail, in other words the pro¬
gression to the use of stronger and
stronger drugs, the opinion is that ma¬
rijuana does not by itself create the
need to use other drugs, but surveys
carried out by the U.S. National Ins¬
titute of Mental Health show that
excessive users of marijuana tend to
experiment with other substances:
most often hashish, and then strong
hallucinogens, amphetamines, and,
occasionally, barbiturates. A small
number also progress to opium or
heroin.
A survey carried out in a college
showed that among the heavy
marijuana smokers, one per cent
became heroin addicts. Other surveys,
however, carried out In California
among persons arrested for using
marijuana, revealed a much higher
proportion of heroin addicts, ranging
from 13 to 22 per cent.
Moreover, surveys conducted among
heroin addicts have shown that about
85 per cent of the persons questioned
tried marijuana to begin with. In
addition, certain lawyers are of the
opinion that the criminality rate is
higher among excessive users of
marijuana.
For the purpose of advancing the
study of problems relating to the use
of the products of cannabis and of
arriving at scientifically valid con¬
clusions, the Comprehensive Drug
Abuse Prevention and Control Act of
1970 provided for the establishment of
a Commission on the abuse of
cannabis and narcotic drugs, which
was to examine the extent and effects
of the use of these substances and to
evaluate the efficacy of the laws In
force in this matter.
After a year's work involving
scientists and experts in all the
branches of learning that might be
concerned by these problems, the
Commission last year submitted its
first report to the President and the
Congress of the United States.
HE Commission bases its
findings on the results of a national
survey carried out under its auspices,
and it considers that the use of mari¬
juana is at present spreading in all
sectors of the population of the United
States. This survey estimates that
about 24 million Americans over eleven
years of age, that is to say, 15 per cent
of the adult population over 18 years
of age and 14 per cent of the adoles¬
cents between 12 and 17, have tried
marijuana at least once.
The survey points out that among
those who have used marijuana, 41 per
cent of the adults and 45 per cent of
the adolescents have given up its use,
but there are nevertheless now half a
million persons who have become
excessive users, taking this drug
several times a day.
The Commission is of the opinion

Monkeys and Cannabis
-<b-^-ffl-<P
8 9 10 11 time in hours
ÜTTHTTTHTlt
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 peanuts given
Photo and graph C Prof. H. Giono, University of Dakar
A series of experiments on the behaviour of
baboons under the effects of cannabis and
other psychotropic substances was recently
carried out atthe University of Dakar, Senegal,
by Professor H. Giono. A baboon injected
with cannabis rapidly experienced diffi¬
culties of balance and was unable to move
along or hang from the horizontal bar of a
climbing frame (far left). Cannabis also affec¬
ted the animal's social behaviour: social
contact was reduced, sexual relationships
diminished and grooming activity and play
restricted. A test with peanuts provided
further evidence of the effects of cannabis.
Two animals sharing a cage were made to
compete for food. After absorbing a dose of
cannabis the stronger of the two, who nor¬
mally seized the food, was reduced to a
pitiful state of weakness (see graph, left).
With a regular dosage of cannabis, the animal
became aggressive and bad-tempered.
that any psychoactive substance is
potentially harmful to the individual,
according to the intensity, frequency
and duration of its use, and that mari¬
juana is no exception.
In examining in this way the effects
of the products of cannabis on the
individual, the Commission has come
to the conclusion that although the
risks of harm, in so far as it has been
possible to prove them, resulting from
the experimental or occasional use of
these products are slight and do not
produce demonstrable organic lesions,
the danger lies in the excessive
and prolonged use of these products
and in particular of their strong pre¬
parations.
Some of the moderate users show
signs of a certain psychological
dependency, the intensity of which
increases with the drug's continued
use. Prolonged use increases the
likelihood of the occurrence of effects
on behaviour and on the organism
such, for instance, as progression to
excessive use.
Excessive users show a strong
psychological dependence on mari¬
juana and often on hashish. These
users are susceptible to organic
lesions and may show signs of
specific changes in behaviour. These
effects are more apparent, however,
when use is over lengthy or very
lengthy periods.
Finally, persons who make unlimited
usage of cannabis and who live in
countries where the use of this drug,
usually in the form of hashish, is an
indigenous and traditional custom,
have in consequence a psychological
dependence. As the use oí the drug
continues, the changes in behaviour
appear very clearly and the cases of
biological lesions become more fre¬
quent. This type of use is not,
however, observed in the United
States.
The Commission is of the opinion
that, in the present state of knowledge
concerning the effects of the products
of cannabis, their use does not
constitute a major threat to public
health. This should not lead to
complacency, since it is none the less
true that these substances are harmful.
wITH regard to the changes
in behaviour which might be induced
by use of the products of cannabis,
the Commission is very critical of the
widely accepted stereotype according
to which the users of this drug are
aggressive, lacking in self-control,
irresponsible, mentally sick, inclined to
crime and, in consequence, a danger
to public safety.
The Commission points out that,
although there may be a statistical
correlation between the use of the
products of cannabis, examined in-
^ÑSscc
dependently of the other variables, and
the frequency of criminal or other
offences, there is no convincing proof
that the use of these products inevit¬
ably leads or incites to crime and
violence.
The American Commission rejects
the idea of regulating or legalizing the
use of marijuana the long-term effects
of which are not yet certain, but is
unanimous in thinking that persons
who smoke or possess marijuana
should not be liable to prosecution (1).
In Sweden, the official position, and
particularly that of the police, is to
consider the abuse of hashish and
marijuana as an introduction to the
excessive consumption of major nar¬
cotic drugs such as opium and LSD 25.
Nevertheless there are varying points
of view with regard to the social
significance of the use of the former
drugs and the effects they may have
on an individual's behaviour.
The police consider that there is a
close connexion between the abuse of
narcotic drugs in general and delin¬
quency, since drug addicts often
engage in drug trafficking or commit
other offences so as to get the money
they need to buy their drugs. In
support of their argument, the police
also point to the fact that the pro¬
portion of drug users is higher among
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
(1) For the Commission's March 1973
report, see box page 20.
25

those people who have been sentenc¬
ed by the courts.
In Denmark, it is stated that the
ideological propaganda for, and the
philosophical justification or cult of,
cannabis have now practically dis¬
appeared.
In Jamaica, according to the reply of
the National Commission for Unesco,
there are contradictory opinions
because scientific knowledge concern¬
ing the effects of ganja [a form of
cannabis] is still approximate and the
conclusions reached are divergent.
The effects attributed to the use of
ganja can be neither categorically
denied nor categorically confirmed.
In the Federal Republic of Germany,
the harmfulness of hashish and mari¬
juana has been called in question by
several publications, and certain circles
are suggesting that the use of these
drugs should be legalized.
Despite the differences of opinion
that are apparent concerning the
physical effects of the products of
cannabis, research in social psychiatry,
psychology and education, as well as
actual experience in medical and so¬
cial institutions for drug addicts, gen¬
erally reach the conclusion that the
habitual use of these substances occa¬
sions a psychological dependence,
conduces to the impairment of the de¬
velopment of the personality and has
harmful effects from the social point
of view, particularly in the case of
unstable individuals.
In many instances, the use of drugs
results in a falling off in performance
at school and at work, which may lead
to the abandonment of studies or of
employment.
Further, information obtained on the
use of the products of cannabis shows
that a large number of hashish or
marijuana smokers try and then adopt
stronger drugs such as heroin,
LSD 25, etc. It should, however, be
mentioned that according to some
research, the phenomenon of "ecala-
tion" occurs mostly among excessive
users.
According to the survey carried out
in Cologne in 1970, for example, most
of the addicts and traffickers inter¬
viewed stated that heavy hashish
smokers are the most likely to use
other stronger drugs or to become
multiple drug addicts.
Some medical research has also
provided indications that the products
of cannabis are harmful even from the
physical and hereditary standpoints.
The Federal Government, taking its
stand on the results of all this
research, is entirely opposed to any
claim that hashish and marijuana are
harmless, and considers that the use
of these drugs should remain pro¬
hibited until their harmlessness is
scientifically established.
SPIDERS' WEBS AND LSD. The spider's web is a prolongation of the animal's own central nervous
system. Researchers can thus measure changes in the spider's behaviour when it is given doses of
a psychotropic substance. A research team led by Dr. Georges Groh carried out experiments at a
hospital in Quebec (Canada) in which they gave doses of LSD 25 to a species of marsh spider, the
"Argyropes". Photos below show how web-spinning deteriorates under the influence of the
drug. Left, after a single weak dose of LSD, the web already begins to show imperfections. Centre,
after minor doses administered for ten days, the pattern of the web shows serious irregularities.
Right, after five weeks of LSD the web is unrecognizable, reduced to a few suspension lines and
a jumble of threads at the centre. It has ceased to be an efficient food trap for the spider.
26
