THE 'JUKE-BOX' CRISIS
IN ASIAN MUSIC
by Tran Van Khê
LLMOST all the countries of
Asia, Africa, Oceania and Latin
America are non-industrial societies.
In all these countries, as in certain
strata of society in Western countries,
music, for the workers who constitute
the great mass of the population, is
not simply entertainment, a source of
spiritual satisfaction, or an art cultivat¬
ed for its own sake, but is closely
interwoven with everyday work and
life.
Professional musicians and music-
lovers approach music more as an art
form, clothing it in theory and relating
it to a certain world outlook or philo¬
sophy. Yet both for this élite and for
the ordinary people, music remains
bound up with social and religious
functions.
Music rocks babies to sleep, and
children use music in their games. It
helps the labourer to forget how hard
his work is, it is "the food of love"
and a balm for hurt bodies and minds.
It sees the dead on their way and
consoles the living. It provides an
accompaniment to all the operations
of the farming calendar, the ploughing,
harrowing, sowing, planting, harvesting
and threshing and the husking and
grinding of the rice.
In non-industrial societies, particu-
6
TRAN VAN KHE is not only a specialist on
Asian music but an accomplished performer
himself. He comes from a Vietnamese
family that has produced several generations
of musicians and has an extraordinary know¬
ledge of Asian musical instruments. He at
present directs the Centre for the Study of
Oriental Music at the Sorbonne's Institute of
Musicology in Paris. He also heads a
research team at the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, also in Paris, and Is
a member of the Unesco-sponsored Internat¬
ional Music Council. For his recordings and
commentaries on Vietnamese music he was
awarded the Grand Prix de l'Académie des
Disques Français in 1960 and 1970 and the
Deutscher Schallplatten Preis (1969). A more
detailed study of the subiect dealt with by
Prof. Tran Van Khe in this article will be
published in September 1973 in a special
issue on 'Music and Society" of Unesco's
new international magazine "Cultures".
larly among the mass of the people,
music is not an art pursued for the
sake of art, but is present at all the
important events of life birth and
betrothals, weddings and funerals.
Farmers and craftsmen each have
their own repertoire and music is pre¬
sent at all rural and seasonal festivities,
at ceremonies to ward off misfortune,
to placate evil spirits or thank the
tutelary gods and guardian spirits.
Such music is usually vocal, some¬
times with the accompaniment of sim¬
ple but ingenious folk instruments
which provide the melody or the
rhythm. It is anonymous and orally
transmitted, and each performer has
the right to imprint his own character
upon it. Performers are for the most
part workers or semi-professionals.
Being essentially functional, this
music differs from that practised as an
art by professional musicians and con¬
noisseurs who use more elaborate in¬
struments, more complex vocal and
instrumental techniques and more
varied scales, and have richer reper¬
toires.
Music of this kind, seen as an art
form, may have its origins in the music
of the people, but differs from it in its
artistic level and its function. As it
is more sophisticated, it is harder to
learn, and those who spend years
learning it must either be able to make
a living from it or be rich enough to
regard it as a pastime.
In the old days, professional musi¬
cians, often of humble origin, had to
seek employment in many cases as
bondsmen or menials with music-
loving chiefs, aristocrats or sovereigns.
At the Court of Hue (Viet-Nam), for
example, palace musicians were gen¬
erally regarded as servants and were
given jobs to do which were quite un¬
connected with their musical functions.
Musicians were somewhat better
treated in China, Korea and Japan but
were not held in great esteem. In
ancient Persia and in India under the
reign of the Emperor Akbar, musicians
and singers enjoyed the favour of the
sovereigns, but at the end of the 19th
century in Persia, when rich men enter- *
tained, there were only two or three
musicians who, according to Claude
Huart in Lavignac's Encyclopédie de
la Musique, sat on the floor in a cor¬
ner during the meal.
The griots, or professional musi¬
cians, of Mauritania formed a separate
caste. Michel Guignard, in a book
entitled Musique, Honneur et Plaisir au
Sahara, has offered an explanation of
their menial status : "To place the
gn'ot on any but a very low rung of
the social ladder would be to suggest
that entertainment and amusement
were of no less value than the courage
and political strength embodied by the
warriors or the religion and learning
embodied by the marabouts."
Even in countries where music is
held in high regard, professional musi¬
cians do not always enjoy the status
they should be entitled to. In present-
day Iran, for instance, performers and
teachers of traditional music prefer to
call themselves employees of the
Ministry of Fine Arts or teachers at
the Conservatoire or the University.
I|N the nineteenth century,
after attempting to conquer the coun¬
tries of Asia and Africa by the
"peaceful" method of converting the
population to Christianity, the Western
powers tried to overrun them by force
of arms. Several of these countries
lost their independence, whilst others
came under foreign economic control.
The vast majority of the population
in the countries which thus fell under
colonial rule consisted of countryfolk
landless peasant tenant-farmers,
agricultural workers at the mercy
of landowners and money-lenders
deeply attached to the traditions of
their ancestors.
CONTINUED PAGE 8

The invasion of modern technology threatens
the musical traditions of the Orient
Perched high on the broad back of a water-buffalo, a
shepherd-boy plays his flute. This ancient Sung dynasty
(960-1260) painting is preserved in the Shanghai Museum.
Photo Paolo Koch © Rapho, Paris

ASIAN MUSIC (Continued)
A few chords to get rich quick
8
Craftsmen, tradesmen and petty offi¬
cials belonged to the "middle class",
forming a moneyed and partly western¬
ized bourgeoisie. The introduction of
capitalist production methods created
a proletariat which worked in the
mines, factories, mills and plantations.
All these political and social upheav¬
als brought about profound changes
in the musical life of the non-industrial
societies. Some kinds of music fell
into disuse or disappeared altogether.
Science and technology have done
away with certain back-breaking jobs,
but at the same time many work songs
have disappeared or are about to do
so. With the advent of power-driven
ploughs, machines to husk the rice
and modern irrigation systems, the old
songs that used to accompany these
operations are no longer heard. As
steamboats replace sampans, canoes
or sailing craft, the songs of the
boatmen will become a thing of the
past.
The development of science and
medicine has spelt the end of the old
superstitions in many countries.
People now prefer to go to the doctor
rather than the witch-doctor when they
are ill, and the incantations for healing
the sick, driving out devils and com¬
municating with spirits are beginning
to disappear.
Transistor radios have now penetrat¬
ed even into very remote areas, and
the peasants and shepherds who can
now listen to music at home are not
In any hurry to go to the market-place
to listen to strolling singers, just as
city-dwellers are no longer so easily
drawn to concerts or plays when they
have television at home. Listening to
the "new" music put out by the broad¬
casting stations, country folk tend to
imitate an urban style of singing, parti¬
cularly that of well-known singers or
musicians.
The worst thing about this situation
is that young country folk are deterred
by the "new" music composed by
young people under western influences
from composing new songs in the
traditional styles.
In contact with city-dwellers and lis¬
tening to "arranged", "harmonized"
versions of folk-music, they adopt a
new repertoire composed by young
musicians who are often unaware of
their own traditions and have merely
picked up a few rudiments of western-
style composition, modelling their
style on that of popular songs. Crea¬
tive talent and the artistic level of
folk-music are everywhere in decline.
Several musical genres have indeed
disappeared. Chinese, Korean and
Viet-Namese court music is dying out
now the courts themselves have gone.
It is performed only on very special
occasions, e.g. for national holidays
for receiving ambassadors, for groups
of tourists, etc.
Confucian temple music is no longer
played in China and Viet-Nam and
is only heard in Seoul and Taipeh,
where societies for the preservation of
musical traditions have attempted to
save them. The old ceremonies are no
longer performed in Confucian temples.
In Iran, the ta'ziya, a historical and
religious spectacle comparable with
the medieval passion-plays, showing
the martyrdoms of the Imams (legiti¬
mate successors of Mohammed), is
no longer performed in the big towns,
with the exception of Shiraz where it
was presented during the internatio¬
nal festivals of 1967 and 1970. The
custom lingers on in the countryside
but the plays are no longer performed
with the same spontaneity as of old.
In Mauritania today, the character
of the griot has greatly changed.
Michel Guignard, whom we quoted
above, writes in this connexion that
they are becoming less and less the
minstrels and familiars of the nobility.
Anyone can now go and listen to them
or hear them on the radio. They
therefore reach a wider audience with
tastes and needs different from those
of the minority whom they formerly
served.
Similarly, the expert Hugo Zemp
writes that now that the traditional
way of life of the chiefs of the Senufo
of the Ivory coast has gone into
decline, or has completely vanished
as a result of changing political condi¬
tions, the flute orchestra has lost its
raison d'être.
In Morocco, the Near East, India
and Cambodia, all observers empha¬
size that modern life and the intrusion
of modern technology deprive folk-art
of new subject matter and seem to
dry up the wellsprings of musical
inspiration.
new music is appearing
everywhere, often as a result of the
"acculturation" of traditional music, a
process which is no less prejudicial to
tradition than the disappearance of the
old musical genres. "Acculturation"
is a modern term signifying the adop¬
tion by a given people of a culture
i -Hi?
other than its own, but the phenomenon
is by no means new.
Japan adopted Chinese music of the
T'ang dynasty, Korean music and cham
music in the ninth century, and the
result was the Togaku, Komagaku and
Rinyugaku styles of Japanese court
music (Gagaku). Viet-Nam not only
assimilated the Chinese tradition but
also the Indian, through the inter¬
mediary of the ancient Indian-influen¬
ced civilization of the Champa king¬
dom, while north Indian music was
influenced by the music of Islam.
In the last few centuries, it has been
primarily the encounter between west¬
ern music and the traditional music of
the non-industrial societies which has
caused the most profound upheaval in
the latter.
The causes of acculturation are
many. In the beginning, it may be a
praiseworthy desire to learn some¬
thing new, a desire for progress, which
incites musicians to do something dif¬
ferent from their masters or predeces¬
sors, . to give their music a personal

WANDERING MINSTRELS AND DANCING MUSICIANS. Two young Nepalese minstrels sing to the
accompaniment of a form of viol, one in a miniature version. They travel the length of the Katmandu
valley presenting their repertoire of popular folk songs in one small town after another. Left, sculpture
of a dancer holding a kind of trumpet found on a column of a temple in the town of Jaisalmer in the
Thar desert, India.
stamp. When they had to rely on
their own resources, change was slow;
when they came into contact with
neighbouring countries, more significant
changes occurred. Acculturation is
the product of contact between peo¬
ples and civilizations, combined with
the attraction of novelty.
Contact between countries with the
same culture is very fruitful consider
the impact of Chinese music, particu¬
larly of the Tang dynasty (eighth-
ninth centuries) on Japanese music,
of T'ang and Sung (tenth-eleventh cen¬
turies) music on Korean music, and of
Ming dynasty (fourteenth-fifteenth cen¬
turies) music on the Vietnamese of
the Le dynasty (fifteenth-sixteenth cen¬
turies). Thai music owed a great deal
to the Khmer tradition and the instru¬
ments of the p'iphat orchestra of Thai¬
land are the same as those in the bas-
reliefs of Angkor. Turkish, Arab and
Persian musicians all paid allegiance
to the same musical theorists.
Above all, the encounter with the
West has engendered hybrid musical
forms. Africa and the East have fol¬
lowed the western lead and some have
ascribed this to the superiority of
western music.
The colonial peoples tried to imi¬
tate those who dominated them by
the superiority of their technology, in
the belief that their culture too must
be equally superior, and ended up
confusing progress and modernization
with westernization.
Lastly, the development of such media
as radio, television and records speeds
the process of acculturation even
more. Transistors and records have
reached even the remotest villages.
Under constant musical attack from
all sides, young people today are
drawn and fascinated by this easy-to-
write, easy-to-play, easy-to-remember
music, and no longer have the patience
to spend several years of their lives
learning the traditional music.
They need only learn to play a few
chords on the Spanish guitar and after
six months they can accompany them¬
selves singing the western-style songs
written by their compatriots. Those
who fall in with the fashion of the day
may become radio, television or record¬
ing stars and get rich quick.
The development of communications
has also made it easier for musicians
to travel. Some Oriental virtuosi who
have given concerts in the West have
been impressed by symphony orches¬
tras and returned home with the idea
of writing concertos for a traditional
instrument and symphony orchestra.
The result is hybrid music.
Etymologically, the words hybrid or
hybridization are not pejorative. As
biological terms, they refer to the
crossing of different species or even
different varieties of the same species.
In everyday speech, a hybrid is some¬
thing in which two elements of differ¬
ent nature are artificially combined.
Applied to language, to art or music,
the term implies a certain disdain.
At the Shiraz seminar on Asian
Music in 1968 and again at the Con¬
gress of the International Music Coun¬
cil in New York, I suggested that there

Photo Unesco - M Serraillier
Photo © Claude Sauvageot
WATER
AND
BAMBOO
MUSIC
Gongs, xylophones and bowls of
water are Instruments which pro¬
duce sounds by natural vibrations.
Above right, the Khong-Vong, a
traditional Thai Instrument com¬
posed of 17 knobbed gongs
strung in a circular bamboo frame
in which they vibrate. Above,
bowls with different levels of
water are used by an Indian musi¬
cian to create an unusual musical
instrument with a lovely tinkling
sound. Once widely played in
India and Viet-Nam, it is now
rarely heard. Right, an Indone¬
sian class plays traditional music
on the Anklung. The instrument
is played by sliding the bamboo
pieces in a groove, thus produc¬
ing a musical sound.
10
ASIAN MUSIC (Continued)
were two distinct sorts of hybridization.
Firstly, there is the sort which im¬
poverishes, which sometimes destroys
the national character of one of the
two traditions involved, which is what
happens in most cases when the music
of the East or of Africa comes into
contact with western music.
Oriental or African musicians accom¬
pany songs based on particular tona¬
lities on a piano tuned to an equally
tempered scale, or use clarinets, saxo¬
phones and even electric guitars to
perform traditional music, playing com¬
mon chords or arpeggios to punctuate
the musical phrases of traditional
music. Hybridization in such cases is
detrimental because it tries to apply
the instruments and styles of one tra¬
dition to another tradition with which
they are incompatible.
On the other hand, there have been
cases of beneficial hybridization where
the borrowing of foreign elements has
led to a new flowering of a particular
tradition.
This was what happened when the
music of northern India came into
contact with the Islamic tradition, when
Japanese court music was enriched by
the influence of T'ang dynasty Chinese
music, Korean and cham music, and
when Vietnamese music assimilated
both the Chinese and Indian traditions.
The effect is beneficial because the
elements borrowed are compatible
with the original tradition.
Acculturation has reached epidemic
proportions and caused havoc among
the musical traditions of the non-indus¬
trial societies, because instead of bor¬
rowing from the West new and con¬
structive elements such as would lend
new vigour to their own musical tra¬
ditions, Asians and Africans have bor-

rowed elements which are incompatible
with the basic principles of their tra¬
ditional music.
Acculturation is a universal pheno¬
menon. What we must try to do is
to turn the potentially destructive
forces involved into constructive
forces. The problem appears to me
to be one of incompatibility and com¬
patibility. Whereas the combining of
compatible elements produces a suc¬
cessful "graft", the incompatibility of
the elements concerned causes "re¬
jection".
A very thorough knowledge of one's
own national culture and the culture
from which the elements are to be
borrowed is needed in order to avoid
"rejection". Unfortunately, the leading
exponents of the traditional music,
aloof in their ivory towers and blinded
by their own superiority complexes,
refuse to allow change and in many
cases are unfamiliar with any tradition
other than their own, which they con¬
sider to be the only valid one.
Young people, on the other hand,
are only interested in western music,
the only form they consider valid, the
music of their own country being
regarded as mere "folklore". Thus
neither the traditional musicians nor
the young are capable of distinguishing
which elements are compatible and
which are incompatible and thus avoid
ing a type of acculturation which is
prejudicial to their traditions.
In many countries, the new music
corresponds to a new need, the need
to sing together at mass gatherings.
It has thus made its own contribution
to the awakening of national conscious¬
ness and to preparing the peoples of
those countries for the national lib¬
eration struggle, and has hence fulfilled
its historical mission. In most cases,
however, such music leaves a great
deal to be desired from the artistic
point of view.
Several young musicians have stud¬
ied composition in the conservatoires
of Europe and America and have
adopted the# Western musical idiom
once and for all. The general public
is not yet receptive to their music, but
at the same time it has lost interest
in traditional music, which now only
has a minority audience. Private con¬
certs are given less and less frequen¬
tly, while radio, television and records
plug the new, heavily westernized
music.
I do not agree with the fatalistic
argument that traditional music is
dying and must soon disappear to
make way for another type of music,
which, though perhaps less authentic,
is more in keeping with the needs of
modern society.
The traditional music of the non-
industrial societies is not "dying" ;
it may be sick, but the thing to do
with a sick man is not to kill him off
or to let him die without trying to cure
his sickness. The present trouble
may turn out to be nothing more than
growing pains if proper steps are
taken straight away.
The re-birth not the survival of
musical traditions is, needless to say,
a problem which requires primarily a
national solution. The cultural and
educational organizations, public and
private, and the governments of Asia
and Africa could improve the teaching
of traditional music, raise the standard
of living of traditional musicians and
reorganize national musical life.
Western countries could, however,
help us in our task of rescuing our
* musical heritage by showing an interest
in our authentic traditional music.
Performers of such music who have
been invited to give concerts in
Western countries enjoy greater
prestige among their compatriots.
The International Music Council and
the International Institute for Compa¬
rative Music Studies and Documenta¬
tion have not only helped the Western
public to appreciate Asian music at
its true worth but have also helped to
restore the confidence of masters of
the art of traditional music in Asia.
FROM CONCH-SHELL TO TRUMPET-BELL. The conch-shell, once played as a musical instrument
throughout almost the whole of Asia, is fast disappearing and Is now only used In ceremonial and
processional music. The end of the shell Is broken off to form the mouthpiece. Below right, the
bell of a modern jazz trumpet.
Photo © taken from "Du Romantisme à l'Expression",
Photo © Hausman, Munich, Fed. Rep. of Germany Editions Rencontre, Lausanne, 1966
