The don'ts of
drug education
'Only education enjoys the dubious
privilege of having the power to
make matters worse../
by George Birdwood
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited
'AN education succeed
where so many other measures have
failed in preventing the spread of
adolescent drug abuse? This is the
first question we must ask ourselves
before assuming too readily that drugs
education in schools is the panacea
for which society has been searching.
The second problem is more serious.
Can we be sure that our intervention
will not do more harm than good?
Nobody knows the answers. There
has apparently never been a pre¬
dominantly teens and twenties epidemic
of drug abuse, and certainly not on
anything like the present scale. So
there is no social experience to guide
us. Nor do we have any convincing
evidence of a drugs educational
programme that has succeeded in
exerting a preventive influence.
Moreover, experience in related fields
suggests the need for caution. Sup¬
posedly preventive education about
sex in Great Britain and about alcohol
in Sweden, for example, seems to have
done as much to popularize these
"products" as to improve the balance
between use an abuse.
GEORGE BIRDWOOD, British doctor and
medical editor, is honorary chairman of the
London Region of the Association for the
Prevention of Addiction. In this capacity he
has given many talks to schoolchildren on
the question of drugs. His article is taken
from "Drugs and Society" (n° 4, Vol. I, 1972)
published monthly and © by Macmillan
journals Ltd., London.
Let us be clear from the start that
there could be more potential for
positive harm here than with the other
measures so far adopted.
Psychiatric or other medical treat¬
ment may not cure many addicts, but
it does not a few rogue doctors
apart create new ones. Much the
same is true of other types of expert
intervention, such as epidemiological
studies and pharmacological research.
They have little power to make matters
worse.
Only education enjoys that dubious
privilege. Yet it is currently enjoying
a great vogue in several countries.
Some of these programmes look to
me suspiciously like sets of instruc¬
tions. Whether they will have the
hoped-for preventive action or merely
serve as publicity for the drugs cult
is very much an open question. In
effect, teachers are the latest recruits
(or perhaps unwilling conscripts) to
the growing army of experts that
society is sending into the front line to
wrestle with the drugs problem on its
behalf.
Personally, I am doubtful if this is
a battle that the experts can win, and
I am certain that the front line is not
the place for them but more of that
later. First, we must take a look at
the case for drugs education, and then
at the ways in which it might best be
carried out. This is an essential
CONTINUED PAGE 31

OF DRUG EDUCATION
preliminary. On no account should
we uncritically accept the notion that
all drugs education is good, and push
our teachers into an ill-considered
campaign that might well turn out to
be an abuse of education itself. On
the other hand, we must not continue
to miss the opportunity to put educa¬
tion to use.
We have already seen that the case
for drugs education cannot be based
on statistical evidence of its value or
effects. If we wait for such evidence
before taking action always a plaus¬
ible rationalization for official inertia
we may wait indefinitely and in vain.
The constantly changing pattern of
drug abuse and the difficulty of
collecting reliable data may prove to
be insuperable obstacles. So the case
must be made out on other grounds.
The most obvious is the general pro¬
position that well-informed teenagers
would be better equipped to take
rational decisions about drugs.
This sounds reasonable enough to
anxious parents. The snag is that it
is not anxious parents we have to
convince but their teenage children
whose behaviour may be governed
more by fashion, instinct and emotion
than by reason. Somehow we have
to appeal to their hearts as well as
to their heads.
But this may be no simple matter:
what looks like a problem to us looks
much less like one to many teenagers.
Like the promiscuous teenage girl
who denied any sex problems "I just
do what I like, so where's the
problem?" they cannot see what all
the fuss is about. Drug-taking, they
claim, is a private affair which does
not harm others and should not
concern society.
Somehow we have to convince the
minority of potential drug-takers and
their sympathisers that there is a good
case for intervening to prevent (or
treat) what many of them see as a
private, self-regarding action. Unless
we are clear about this in our own
minds, we shall never convince a
generation of teenagers successfully
taught to think for themselves. After
all, it is questionable whether we, with
our cigarettes and alcohol, our tran¬
quillizers and sleeping tablets, are in
a position to point the finger at "them"
at all.
The basic contention that habit-
forming drugs are too dangerous even
for adults to make up their own minds
about is reinforced by the fact that
even in Britain's new Misuse of Drugs
Act, for instance, there is no special
protection for minors. Yet the young
are specifically at risk. We fail them
criminally if we provide neither the
protection to which they are entitled,
nor the necessary guidance on which
to base a decision that drugs are not
worthwhile.
So the case for education can be
based, first, on long-established
principles with which few teenagers
would argue though there might well
be some disagreement about the age
at which they should be allowed to
start taking their own decisions. It
can also be based on certain features
of adolescent drug-taking itself: its
tendency to spread not unlike an
infection among susceptible teenagers,
chronically infecting some, injuring
others physically or mentally.
The point I would make is
simply that teenagers even pro-drugs
teenagers are hardly less concerned
about them than their anxious parents.
Indeed, those teenagers least concern¬
ed about drug-taking as such may be
among the most concerned about its
ill-effects, for they are more likely to
have seen them.
In other words, it is the people that
matter to them, not the drugs; perhaps
this is as it should be. And in a wider
field these same teenagers are often
among the most deeply concerned
about the sort of society in which
youthful and adult drug-taking has
become so widespread. It is here
that the adult world should be able to
reach the heart. as well as the head
of teenage opinion.
For all these reasons I try when
talking to adolescents about drugs to
enlist their interest in drug-taking as
a serious social problem, and discuss
with them why they think it has come
about and what should be done about it.
In my experience, the best technique
in schools is to divide a class of
anything between twenty and fifty into
three or four discussion groups, each
with a leader and a reporter (who
records their main conclusions only).
Each group discusses a specific topic,
such as: Why a specifically teenage
drugs epidemic and why now? Why
are so many adults dependent
on cigarettes, alcohol, tranquillizers,
sleeping tablets, stimulants, even
gambling and TV? What should we
be doing about it?
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

DON'TS OF DRUG EDUCATION (Continued)
Eight pitfalls to be avoided
32
Such groups, especially those dis¬
cussing parental weaknesses, need
little encouragement to discuss actively
for half an hour or more. Few are
bored, as happens so easily when a
lecture on drugs is given to a large
class, which is usually divided into
those who think they know it all
already and those who aren't interested
anyway. After the separate discussion
groups, the whole class comes
together for general discussion, which
must be handled by a well-informed
person, preferably a teacher at the
school in question.
HIS method seems to me
to have several advantages.
First, it can be an interesting, lively
and relevant experience for both
teacher and taught; both have much
to learn from each other, and the
"unmentionable" subject of drugs
suddenly becomes freely discussed.
Second, discussion is automatically
pitched at the right age and intelligence
levels for the pupils, who may be
anything from ten to eighteen, of high
or low intelligence.
Third, the young are pushed into
making up their own minds about
drugs, something that many of them
will sooner or later have to do for
themselves. After all, it Is they, not
us, who are likely to be offered
marijuana, and it is they who will have
to learn to live with the stronger drugs
of the future.
Fourth, there is little difficulty in
reaching broad agreement on the
serious aspects of drug abuse over¬
dosage, inability to work, physical and
mental disorders, accidents, involve¬
ment with crime, the dangers of
addiction, driving under the influence,
corrupting children with drugs and
so on.
The class can then draw a line
between use and abuse medical or
social, differing from country to country
and I find that my line is in almost
the same position as that of the great
majority of teenagers. Even if we
disagree about pot, this tends to fade
into insignificance if we agree about
almost everything else.
In these ways one can avoid the
two great dangers of drugs education:
the giving of sets of instructions in a
way that positively invites experi¬
mentation; and the creation of a
generation gap between a repre¬
sentative of the "anti-drugs" adult
world and "pro-drugs" teenagers.
For the latter purpose it is essential
that we educate parents and teachers
in the same way. In my experience,
the majority of teenagers are by no
means uncritically pro-drugs, unless
we make the mistake of pushing them
into that defiant posture. It is an
easy mistake to make. But it is
equally easy, on the lines I have tried
to outline, to reach their idealism and
their concern for others.
At worst, I believe that this approach
can do no harm, but there are a
number of pitfalls to be avoided.
^p In particular, I believe that we
should not use films or TV in schools,
since these are emotive media likely
to play on a teenager's emotional in¬
stability, unless they are accompanied
by well-informed discussion.
^m It is very unwise to put on star-
turns by outsiders, which may gen¬
erate excessive curiosity and interest.
^p Do not say "don't" in an autho¬
ritarian fashion, for teenagers are
naturally rebellious, and your prohibi¬
tions may act as a dare.
Q Do not stress the dangers of
drugs, because taking risks is nor¬
mal among adolescents. In any case,
they will feel that the dangers "can't
happen to me".
^^ Do not give adolescents sets of
factual instructions about drugs, their
uses, effects, sizes, colours, which
invite experimentation.
^p Do not let ex-addicts tell teen¬
agers about their experiences, because
this may attract more than it deters.
It may also misleadingly suggest that
they too could always kick the habit
should they get hooked.
^P Do not give a highly complex
recital of facts about drugs and their
abuse and then leave teenagers to
make up their own minds. The avail¬
able data would need a computer to
sort out, even if all the "facts" were
true.
O And finally, do not make the
addict's mistake of elevating drugs to
a position of supreme importance; it
is surely better to play them down
as a very poor substitute for active
involvement in real life.
However well it may be conducted,
and this article only sets out one
possible approach, we should not
expect too much from drugs education
in schools. It can never be more than
a major part of a broader campaign of
public education. And that in its turn
is but one among the whole range of
measures required to combat drug
abuse.
However, it may be that just as it
has greater potential for harm, educa¬
tion has greater potential for good
than other forms of expert Intervention,
if we conceive its role broadly enough.
This means, in my view, concentrating
more on people and the sort of society
they live in than on drugs.
The pattern of adolescent abuse in
many countries suggests that it is most
widespread, not so much where drugs
are freely available, as where com¬
munity bonds and the transferring of
social norms and values to the next
generation has been most weakened
by social change.
striking feature of any
stable, self-respecting community is
the transmission of its way of life to its
children. If, as I suspect, some kind
of breakdown in this process underlies
both the youthful demand for drugs and
society's inability to handle the result¬
ing problems, then the responsibility
is primarily a community one.
We cannot push it off in the current
vogue on to the experts, though we
undoubtedly need their specialist help.
It is the responsibility of all of us not
only to convince teenagers that life
has better things to offer than drugs
but to ensure that it has.
The teaching profession can be of
more help here than all the other
experts put together. Unlike the law
enforcement agencies, the psychiatrists
and the research workers, teachers
can help us to give adolescents a
social role, to involve them in a society
that needs their positive qualities but
not their drug-taking.
George Blrdwood
