AFRICA
IN THE
STRESS
OF
TECHNOLOGY
T
24 MODERN LINES. The University of Dar-es-Salaam, "the dwelling-place of
peace", capital of the United Republic of Tanzania. With campus buildings
of strikingly modern design, the university numbers over 1,500 students in
Its faculties of literature, law, science, the social sciences and medicine.
by Ali Lankoandé
II N the countries of the
Third World there is, strictly speaking,
no tension between traditional culture
and technology. In Africa, for instance,
technology is integrated with culture.
In "La Civilisation Africaine d'Hier
et de Demain" (African Civilization
Yesterday and Tomorrow) the historian
and sociologist, Joseph Ki-Zerbo, of
the Upper Volta, describes traditional
black African society as follows:
"It was a perpetually inventive
society. Technically and economically,
each family, each village, each tribal
group discovered how to live in a
positive equilibrium with nature. No
further proof is needed than the
varieties of seeds chosen, the methods
of cultivation, the extremely varied
range of tools and methods of co¬
operative work, and the host of cures
ALI LANKOANDE Is a member of the Na¬
tional Assembly of Upper Volta and a former
member of the Upper Volta National Commis¬
sion for Unesco. He is vice-president of the
Scientific Council for Africa and professor
of physics at the Ecole Normale, Ouagadou¬
gou. The article presented here is adapted
from a text prepared for a Unesco Sympo¬
sium on "Culture and Science" which is
shortly to be published in a Unesco-Presses
Universitaires de France book entitled "La
Science et la Diversité des Cultures'.

The tensions created
by the introduction
of modern science
and techniques
into Black Africa
^
.
devised, even if they were administered
with a wealth of magic ritual."
Tension does however exist, and Is
to be found among an Intellectual élite
and all those with some education
who have acquired a scientific back¬
ground, whatever the level, while still
living in a non-scientific society; for
example, one finds not only people
with little education, but also the well-
educated, consulting the local mara¬
bout or wise man.
The origin of this tension seems
to lie in the juxtaposition of cultures,
which is apparent at all levels of daily
life: ploughing is done to the sound
of a transistor, and the use of charcoal
as a fuel is contemporary with the use
of the motorcar.
This produces a disequilibrium which
appears from school onwards. The
African child studying scales in his
physics class has never seen scales,
unlike the European child who sees
them every day.
The upshot of this disequilibrium is
that in the countries of the Third World
science has a twofold nature.
On the one hand, in everyday
practice, science Is not backed up by
theory, with the result that real use
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
TRADITIONAL WAYS. This millet store on the outskirts of Fort Lamy OC
(Chad) is set on stilts to protect it from animals and damp. Built of ¿,\}
mud and fashioned in a traditional shape, it has an opening at the top
In which a man stands to tread the grain down. When the store is full
the "manhole" Is tightly sealed.
'XjNESC'S*

^*WiS*£
AFRICA IN THE STRESS OF TECHNOLOGY (Continued)
26
cannot be made of it. In his book
"L'Afrique Noire est Mal Partie" (Black
Africa Is Off to a Bad Start) the French
agronomist René Dumont provides an
excellent example of this when criticiz¬
ing the premature use of tractors in
cases where farming has no need of
modern techniques. The employment
of tractors would not only be inefficient
but would exhaust soils to which they
are not adapted. Technical means
are only efficient when they form an
integral part of a fully worked out
technology.
On the other hand, theories are not
sufficiently tested in practice; where
such practice exists, it is only in
laboratories or in a vacuum, cut off
from everyday life. Inevitably, science
seems incomprehensible.
To the extent that it is on the fringe
of the development of productivity the
Third World appears to be bypassed
by scientific developments. Today,
science and technology are as it were
"parachuted" into these countries; and
this being so, it is very unlikely that
they can help to develop a productive
system of which they are not them¬
selves the product.
In that case, if science is to put itself
genuinely above all, effectively in
the service of the human community,
and if it is to promote a dialogue
between cultures, how can it be
integrated with them, or how can
culture be adapted to science?
The most urgent problem is that of
assistance, primarily technical, to the
Third World countries. It seems that
there are two possible solutions, the
first of which would be to adapt
technology to the development of
productivity. Emphasis should be laid
on the development of rural production,
which should of course become in¬
creasingly industrial, but a start should
be made on the workshop level
in order to ensure a type of
industrial development appropriate to
the country.
Africa, therefore, must in large
measure go through the stages through
which Europe has already passed. Yet
a "rapid" solution could also be
visualized which would consist of
introducing the most modern machinery
together with foreign technicians who
would train national technicians to take
over as soon as possible.
Each of these solutions has its
advantages and disadvantages. In the
first case it could be maintained that
the more gradual the initiation the
more effective it is likely to be. But
has Africa the time to spare for this
kind of initiation if she is to progress?
Is the centuries-long development of
techniques that Europe experienced
really indispensable?
The second solution, that of rapid
modernization, would place Africa four¬
square in the twentieth century. Here
one might quote the recent examples
of Japan and China. Yet the history
of technology in Africa should not be
underrated: we need only think of the
technical mastery required to work
brass by the lost wax process.
The disadvantage of pressing on
rapidly is perhaps the very real danger
of not being able to keep -up with
technology, since techniques and their
tools must correspond with needs.
As far as the training of the
individual technician "at the machine"
is concerned, does this really provide
the necessary instruction to enable
him to transfer later to other,
more sophisticated types of machine?

LIFE CYCLE OF A VILLAGE
In the heart of rural Niger, an Instructor
at a special course on agricultural economy
explains to villagers the economic cycle
on which their daily work is based. The
village is represented at the centre of the
drawing on the blackboard (see detail
left); to the left of the blackboard are
shown the fruits of the earth grain and
vegetables; flocks of sheep and goats;
skins and tanned leather; food and millet
stocks. Surplus production is converted
into money with which to acquire (right)
foodstuffs and animal stock that cannot
be produced locally.
Everything hinges on the way such
instruction is given.
If it is only a matter of learning
a number of specific movements
necessary to work the machine or to
repair it if need be, the most that
is being achieved is the production
of good operatives for particular
machines. But one does not have to
go to university to have a well thought
out training. On the spot training can
include teaching in the wider under¬
standing of mechanical processes.
At a broader level the problem is
perhaps more difficult to resolve. To
what extent does the latest equipment
effectively meet a country's needs?
What use, for example, is a computer
in an African bank? There is the
double risk of costly under-utilization
of the computer and of causing
unemployment. As far as possible
the unemployment which, in Europe,
followed each step forward In
mechanization should be avoided.
This is a problem of both policy and
planning.
Immediate effective modernization is
never modernization at all costs, but
the result of prospecting both the
market and the needs of the individual
country.
It is a mistake to imagine that there
is a simple solution. To take the
example of rural schools: the education
they provide, which aims at keeping
the child in contact with his farming
environment and at turning him into a
farm worker who knows his job, is in
itself excellent. Yet only too often
rural schools are a failure because
those who have been trained in
them by instructors who have not
themselves assimilated the cultivation
techniques taught go back to their
traditional village cycle of cultivation,
where they find themselves completely
isolated.
Not only are they unable to make
others benefit from the skills they have
acquired, but they forget these skills
themselves. The general education
they have received makes them drift
to the towns, since their schooling has
not changed their situation in the
village.
It ¡s not possible to produce effective
results operating on too small a scale
or with makeshift resources. Simil¬
arly, the introduction of the most
modern methods Is not In itself enough.
For example, in Upper Volta, In the
Sahelian region, near Markoye, a very
modern cattle farm was established as
an experiment, with carefully selected
and supervised stock and suitably
prepared fenced-in pasture land. Yet
this experiment in rational, intensive
stock farming seems to have been a
complete failure. The reason was that
it antagonized the local people. They
were deprived of pastureland and
wells which were reserved for the
experiment, did not benefit from the
services of the farm veterinary sur¬
geons, and were unable to understand
what the experiment was about.
The first thing to be done, therefore,
is to estimate needs on a national level
and sometimes for several countries
at once. For example, a computer
which is uneconomic at national level
may be worthwhile at the multi-national
level. A highly sophisticated textile
production line, a modern distribution
network, a fruit marketing or stock-
breeding system, the construction of
roads, river control all these major
undertakings sometimes break down
on a national scale for lack of skilled
personnel, while throwing people out
CONTINUED PAGE 32
27

AFRICA IN THE STRESS OF TECHNOLOGY (Continued from page 27)
32
of work. But they are possible on an
international scale.
But the problem then arises in ano¬
ther connexion at the political level.
No African country singly is in a posi¬
tion to master and make effective use
of modern technology and technolo¬
gical achievements. It is thus neces¬
sary to reach multinational agreements
and to synchronize planning estimates,
at least by economic groupings.
Unity is essential, if compensatory
arrangements are to be possible bet¬
ween different African countries: surely
Africa cannot reject an enlarged
market, of the kind that developed
countries such as those of Europe are
obliged to form?
"TILL at the political level,
and related to this problem, is the
choice of methods for industrialization.
Industrialization may start with foreign
and private resources, or alternatively
be national, either private or state-
financed. It is for Africa to choose,
but with the proviso that different
economic and political choices should
not prevent the unity required for
planning on an international scale.
Problems of planning and policy
involve obtaining the maximum return
from technical assistance. While tech¬
nical assistance is seen as the first
method of enlisting science in the
service of the human community, the
second method, every bit as vital, is
education.
Even more than in Europe, it is
necessary in Africa for science and
culture to go hand in hand. European
thought is in essence technical, even
where it has forgotten its origins.
Bergson said that intelligence fabri¬
cates concepts as it fabricates tools:
and surely concepts are nothing else
than intellectual tools.
The European child is born and
brought up in technological surround¬
ings, with increasingly technical toys,
such as the transistor radio set he can
assemble himself, walkie-talkies, and
sophisticated moon rocket models.
Such an ambiance does not exist
in Black Africa; yet the African way
of thought is of a basically practical
nature, whether in religion, dancing or
morals. African culture is something
which is experienced and practised in
depth.
Science, which is well thought out
methods put into practice, can make
use of this practical culture to banish
both misery and ignorance, and to
open up new creative possibilities to
culture. This calls for action on two
fronts, both in and out of school. In
school, the introduction to technology
should be fairly extensive, and here
particularly, manual and intellectual
work should go hand in hand.
A type of education must be devised
which is based on current practice,
and theory must be taught on the basis
of such practice. This, of course,
calls for a complete revolution in
education; but such a revolution is
possible.
The revolution in education also
means that wherever possible, the
most modern methods and techniques
should be used. In certain African
countries educational television makes
up for the shortage of teachers and
provides schooling for children who
would otherwise never go to school.
But an effort should also be made
outside schools, and here experiments,
such as literacy campaigns, have
already been attempted. But too often
such attempts have been "sketchy".
Literacy teaching should not consist
merely of teaching people to read and
write and of giving a few words of
advice to mothers. Shock tactics
should be adopted and real people's
universities should be created along¬
side the traditional universities which
all too often are cut off from the life
of the country.
ODAY reading and writing
are of secondary importance and brief
instruction in these techniques is in¬
effective and soon forgotten. It is
much more important to listen. More
and more news is transmitted by radio
which is now universally available.
Why not make full use of the radio?
Our epoch seems everywhere to be
one of word and image and in this
it resembles traditional African civili¬
zation. This is a line of approach that
should be exploited to the full.
Radio will provide the spoken word.
Existing practical information pro¬
grammes should be developed into a
real "flood" of technological broad¬
casting. This means that at the same
time, there should be adult education
evening classes in the countryside and
the towns, in order to apply the spoken
word in practice. A start should
always be made on what is useful in
everyday life: there should be broad¬
cast courses on child care, how to
mend a plough, how to look after a
bicycle or a motor-cycle.
Whenever possible the spoken word
should be backed up by the image, but,
quite apart from considerations of the
technical difficulties of television and
its cost, it must be handled with care.
It must not be forgotten that few
African peasants know how to "inter¬
pret" a photograph and a great deal
of training in the comprehension of the
image will be required. Television is
so costly that it must not fail to achieve
its objective.
IIN the final analysis, the
tension between science and culture
seems not so much an irreducible
antagonism as a stage in the develop¬
ment of all societies. The integration
of science with culture leads inevitably
to a cultural upheaval, affecting all
cultures. It is in this way that culture
can lead up to a dialogue, and act
as a binding force: science, even when
"exported", is never exported culture;
science and technology can be made
universal, and put into effect by all
men.
But there is still tension in this act
of communication, arising from the fact
that the vehicle of science is culture,
which is never universal. There Is no
such thing as "imperialist", or
"communist" or ideological science;
but ideologies for scientific develop¬
ment do exist, and are inevitable.
When assimilating science, culture
confers on it a particular significance.
That is why we prefer the expression
"adjusting culture to science", i.e.
developing society in one and the same
technological and cultural movement,
and giving that movement its ultimate
direction.
Faith in science is the same as faith
in man. If scientific development is
truly bound up with the development
of productive forces, both accompany¬
ing such development and acting as
a stimulus, the inevitable result will
be a major change in traditional
cultures, in the same way as cultural
change takes place at present in all
societies.
We are no more able to interpret
the significance of this change than
we are able to interpret the signific¬
ance of history. But like history, it
will be the work of men, and it is to
be hoped that men will realize what
kind of science they are producing,
that is to say the kind of society they
are thereby constructing.
AU Lankoandé
