8
Mozambique serves as a reservoir of unskilled labour for South Africa, noted a report submitted
to the U.N. General Assembly in 1966. The report also stated that in southern Africa indigenous
workers were paid from five to fifteen times less than white workers. According to FRELIMO,
the Mozambique Liberation Front, "the South African Government pays the whole of the worker's
wages to the Portuguese Government which deducts various taxes, including a so-called protection
tax, before paying the Mozambican worker in escudos." Above, a worker from Mozambique at the
recruiting office of a South African gold-mine.

THE UNITED NATIONS
VERSUS
THE WORLD'S
'LAST COLONIAL EMPIRE'
F the 28 million people
still living in dependent status through¬
out the world, half live in the Portu¬
guese territories in Africa.
In the last 28 years 71 colonial
territories, comprising nearly 1,000
million people, have become indepen¬
dent and taken their place among the
sovereign nations of the world (see
map pages 28-29).
There are many reasons for this
phenomenon. Principally it is due to
the sometimes tempered, sometimes
violent challenge that the dependent
peoples themselves have brought to
bear on the long-accepted view that
they should continue to be ruled by
remote foreign Powers whose cultural,
ideological and ethnic identities were
different from their own. Largely
because of this challenge, there has
evolved a world-wide recognition that
self-determination and- independence
are not the exclusive prerogatives of
the powerful, but fundamental and
inalienable rights of all peoples every¬
where.
The right to self-determination had
become almost a universally accepted
principle in 1960 when the General
Assembly of the United Nations adopt¬
ed an historic manifesto on decoloni¬
zation which gave a further impetus to
the movement of dependent peoples
toward freedom and independence.
Yet, today, there remains a hard
core of resistance to the recognition
of these rights in the vast territories
of southern Africa. South Africa's
harsh apartheid laws continue to dis¬
criminate against an overwhelming
non-white majority, which includes
those living in the immense territory
of Namibia (formerly South West
Africa). 225.000 white settlers in
Southern Rhodesia have rebelled
against the British Commonwealth, in
order to perpetuate their domination
and control of nearly five million
Africans.
In southern Africa also, Portugal
refuses to relinquish control of both
Angola and Mozambique, territories
which are roughly twenty times its
size. In fact it is waging an endless
war against the liberation movements
of these territories and against natio¬
nalist groups in the small territory of
Portuguese Guinea on the west coast
of Africa.
This struggle is significant since the
Portuguese possessions comprise the
last colonial empire remaining in the
world. Moreover, these territories are
strategically located. In the west,
Angola (population 5,223,000) stands
astride the route from Zaire to South
West Africa and South Africa. In
the east, Mozambique (population
7,040,000) guards the heartland of
both South Africa and Southern Rho¬
desia.
Both territories are wealthy. Angola,
which is more than twice the size of
France (481,226 square miles) has rich
oil deposits, vast diamond mines and
hundreds of millions of tons of high
grade iron ore. It is the world's
fourth largest coffee producer. Mozam¬
bique (297,654 square miles) also has
great economic potential because of
its large areas of fertile land, its ports
and railways and its sources of hydro¬
electric power.
The other territories now under
Portuguese administration are the
Cape Verde archipelago comprising
ten islands off the west African coast,
and the islands of Sao Tomé and
Principe, located on the Bay of Biafra,
west of the Republic of Gabon, and
Macao and Timor in Asia.
The Portuguese Constitution defines
the Territory of Portugal as that which
at present belongs to it and comprises:
B In Europe : the mainland and the
archipelagos of Madeira and the
Azores;
In west Africa: the Cape Verde
archipelago, Guinea, Sao Tomé
and Principe and their depen¬
dencies, Sao Joao Baptista de
Ajudé, Cabinda and Angola;
In east Africa: Mozambique;
In Asia : Macao and its depen¬
dencies;
In Oceania : Timor and its depen¬
dencies.
Until 1961, the majority of the indi¬
genous inhabitants in Angola, Mozam¬
bique and Portuguese Guinea were
not accorded full citizenship status.
The Colonial Act of 1933 had accorded
these inhabitants what may, for con¬
venience, be described as "indígena"
status. As subsequently re-enacted
in the Native Statute of 1954:
"A person shall be considered an
indígena... if he is a member of the
negro race or a descendant of a
member of that race, and was born,
or habitually resides, in the province
but does not yet possess the level
of education or the personal and
social habits which are a condition
for the unrestricted application for
the public and private law pertaining
to Portuguese citizens."
An African could change his status
and acquire Portuguese citizenship if
he fulfilled all the following:
he was over 18 years of age;
he could speak the Portuguese
language correctly;
he was engaged in an occupation,
trade or craft from which he derived
sufficient income to support himself
and his family, or had adequate
resources for this purpose;
he was of good conduct and had
attained the level of education and
acquired the habits which are a condi¬
tion for the unrestricted application of
the public and private law pertaining Q
to Portuguese citizens; and V
he was not on record as having
refused to perform military service or
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

UNITED NATIONS (Continued)
From underground organizations
to full-fledged nationalist movements
10
deserted. Upon fulfilment of these
requirements, an African was accorded
citizenship as an "assimilado".
As a result the majority of Africans
living in the three territories were not
accorded Portuguese citizenship and
were not governed by Portuguese
civil law. As a rule, indigenous per¬
sons were governed by "the usages
and customs pertaining to their res¬
pective societies" and were not grant¬
ed political rights in "non-indigenous
institutions".
The special status of an indígena
carried with it an implication that he
was not "civilized". Census figures
listed the population in two major
sections, the civilizado (civilized) and
nao-civilizado (non-civilized). The civi¬
lized section of the population includ¬
ed all persons of European origin
(Portuguese and aliens). Indians and
Chinese, mesticos (persons of mixed
European and African descent) and
Africans who qualified as "civilized"
Until he acquired the status of an
assimilado, an African was not count¬
ed as a "civilized" person. At the
1950 census, less than one per cent
of the African population in Angola
and Mozambique were officially classi¬
fied as "civilized".
The indígena status also carried with
it economic and social implications.
The indígena status made it an obli¬
gation for an African to work and,
through the operation of the labour
laws, frequently subjected him to for¬
ced labour both for public works and
private enterprises, as in the forced
cultivation of cotton which at one time
involved some 500,000 Africans in
Mozambique.
HE rise of nationalist
movements in the Portuguese terri¬
tories had its origin before the Second
World War when Africans attempted
to give expression to grievances by
pressing for moderate reforms through
legal associations. After the Second
World War, these organizations urged
direct participation of the urban masses
in the affairs of the territories. The
Government, however, reacted by
replacing elected leaders with admi¬
nistrative appointees and by restrict¬
ing the political activities of these
organizations.
In Angola, these measures led to
the establishment of underground
political organizations which extended
their activities both inside and outside
the territory. Between 1950 and 1960
clandestine political movements were
also formed in Portuguese Guinea and
Mozambique. These organizations
were generally regarded by the Govern¬
ment as subversive and were sup¬
pressed by force.
From that time, several strikes were
organized by workers to demand
higher wages and police action in¬
creased. In 1959, for example, the
authorities opened fire on dock work¬
ers on strike at Pidgiguiti (Bissau) and
fifty people were killed.
United Nations involvement began
on February 24, 1956 when the Secre¬
tary-General addressed a letter to 16
new Member States, including Portu¬
gal. He inquired whether these states
had any territories which did not fully
govern themselves, since Chapter XI
of the U.N. Charter obliges Member
States to accept a series of obliga¬
tions towards territories administered
by them.
Portugal replied that it had no such
territories, that the territories it admi¬
nistered were in fact integral pro¬
vinces of metropolitan Portugal. It
maintained, as it has ever since, that
under its unitary Constitution the
European and "overseas province's"
were under the same organs of
sovereignty and had exactly the same
status from both a legal and de facto
point of view. It argued that although
political rights in the territories were
dependent on certain qualifications,
these qualifications were the same for
all inhabitants, regardless of race or
situation.
After disturbances that broke out
on February 4, 1961 in the Angolan
capital of Luanda, the Portuguese
authorities adopted special security
measures and imposed censorship on
outgoing messages, and the entry of
foreign journalists was suspended
until the end of July 1961.
At the request of Liberia and 26
African and Asian States, the U.N.
Security Council met from March 10
to 15, 1961, to deal with the "crisis
in Angola".
Denying that the Luanda outbreak
had any connexion with human rights,
the Portuguese representative main¬
tained that in the Portuguese "multi¬
racial society" there was no colour or
religious bar by law, tradition or appli¬
cation and that "human rights are at
the very foundation of our political
and social structure".
The situation in Angola continued
to worsen. According to the Govern¬
ment of Portugal a "wave of terrorism"
occurred in mid-March when a series
of rebel attacks took place in northern
Angola. The Portuguese Govern¬
ment dispatched large reinforcements
of troops to Angola in April 1961.
The situation in Angola was again
brought to the attention of the Secu¬
rity Council in May 1961 by 44 African
and Asian States. The 44 States
declared that massacres were con
tinuing, human rights were being con¬
tinually suppressed and the situation
was a serious threat to international
peace and security. This was the first
U.N. resolution on Portuguese terri¬
tories.
The gravity of the situation in the
territory was reflected in the toll of
lives lost. By early June 1961, Por¬
tuguese reports indicated that about
1,000 Europeans and 8,000 Africans
had been killed. Other estimates of
the number of Africans killed were
considerably higher; a figure of about
30,000 was frequently mentioned
during the Security Council debates
in June 1961.
Following the outbreaks of distur¬
bances in Angola and United Nations
pressure on Portugal to change its
policies, Portugal introduced what it
called "far-reaching reforms" in its
territories, beginning in September
1961, the most important being the
repeal of the Native Statute.
As a result of this repeal, the Afri¬
can inhabitants of the three territories
were recognized as Portuguese citi¬
zens; they no longer had to meet cer¬
tain requirements to achieve citizen¬
ship status, or to comply with the pro¬
cedures for obtaining it.
IIN 1962, the U.N. Special
Committee on Territories under Portu¬
guese Administration visited Africa
where it obtained information from
representatives of political organiza¬
tions and persons who had recently
left the territories. It had been
refused permission by Portugal to visit
its territories in Africa.
In the Committee's view, the reforms
which Portugal claimed to have intro¬
duced not only failed to meet the
basic aspirations of the peoples for
self-determination, but did not even
bring about any significant changes in
political, economic, social and educa¬
tional conditions.
Subsequently, the U.N. General
Assembly, on December 14, 1962, con¬
demned the attitude of Portugal and
urged it to take steps: to recognize
the right of the territories to self-
determination and independence,
cease all acts of repression, promul¬
gate an unconditional political amnesty
and establish conditions permitting the
free functioning of political parties,
negotiate with representatives of poli¬
tical parties for the transfer of power
to freely elected and representative
institutions, and immediately thereafter
grant independence to all the terri¬
tories.
On March 15, 1963. Angola entered
its third year of war. Portugal was now

said to have 40,000 troops in Angola.
The same year fighting broke out in
Portuguese Guinea and quickly became
widespread. By mid-May 1963, fight¬
ing was reported within forty miles of
Bissau, the territory's seaport capital,
In July 1963, the Portuguese Minister
of Defence admitted that some 5,200
square kilometres (approximately 2,000
square miles) out of a total area
of 36,125 square kilometres were
involved.
In July 1964, it was reported that
the insurgents had cut the territory
in two and that Bissau had been com¬
pletely isolated from the Portuguese
held outposts in the territory. Towards
the end of September 1964, leaders
that would attempt to hamper Portu¬
gal's war effort by requesting States
to deny it assistance.
A number of United Nations bodies
took action against Portugal in an
effort to isolate it in its international
relations. In August 1963, the United
Nations Conference on International
Travel and Tourism, held in Rome,
adopted a resolution inviting Portugal
(along with South Africa) to withdraw
from the Conference. On July 24,
1963 the Economic and Social Council
decided to expel Portugal from mem¬
bership in the Economic Commission
for Africa. At the fourth African-
Indian Ocean Regional Air Navigation
Meeting, under the auspices of the
THE LIBERATION MOVEMENTS
Angola
The People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) issued its first
manifesto in 1956. Its declared objective was the immediate and total inde¬
pendence of Angola. Today it controls more than a third of the Territory, a
region with a population of about one million.
The Union of the Populations of Angola (UPA) in 1962 became part of the
Angola National Liberation Front (FNLA), which, in the same year, established
the Revolutionary Government of Angola in Exile (GRAE). The FNLA operates
in the north-eastern regions of the Territory.
Mozambique
The principal liberation movement in the Territory is the Mozambique Liberation
Front (FRELIMO), formed in 1962 by the merger of three movements. In 1971,
FRELIMO represented Mozambique at meetings of the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa (ECA). FRELIMO has declared one quarter of the Territory
freed from Portuguese control.
Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde
The African Party for the Independence of Guinea (Bissau) and the Cape Verde
Islands (PAIGC) was founded in 1956 by Amilcar Cabrai (see page 12). In 1972,
PAIGC reported that almost three quarters of the Territory had been liberated
and that two thirds of it were under PAIGC control. Elections for the People's
National Assembly were held at the end of 1972, followed in 1973 by the
proclamation of the Republic of Guinea (Bissau).
of the Mozambique Liberation Front
(FRELIMO) declared a general armed
insurrection in Mozambique.
During this period Portugal continued
to introduce changes and reforms in
its territories.
On July 31, 1963, the Security Coun¬
cil declared that the situation in the
Portuguese territories was "seriously
disturbing peace and security in
Africa". It urgently called on Portu¬
gal to recognize the right of the in¬
habitants of the territories to self-
determination and independence. It
affirmed that Portugal's policy which
held that the territories were integral
parts of metropolitan Portugal was
contrary to the U.N. Charter.
All States should refrain from offer¬
ing Portugal assistance which would
enable it to continue its repression in
the territories, and take all measures
to prevent the sale and supply of mili¬
tary equipment to the Portuguese
Government. This was the first of a
host of United Nations resolutions
International Civil Aviation Organiza¬
tion' (ICAO), in Rome, in November-
December 1964, the table of future
aircraft operations in the area was
amended to delete all connexions
between 30 African States and South
Africa, Portugal and the Portuguese
territories in Africa.
In 1965, the General Assembly of
the United Nations called for economic
measures against Portugal by appeal¬
ing to United Nations specialized
agencies, in particular the International
Monetary Fund, to refrain from grant¬
ing Portugal "any financial, economic
or technical assistance" as long as it
failed to implement the Declaration on
the granting of independence.
On June 22, 1966, the Special Com
mittee requested all States, particu¬
larly the military allies of Portugal, to
desist -> from giving the Portuguese
Government any assistance enabling
it to continue its repression in the
territories and to prevent the sale or
supply of arms and military equipment
to the Portuguese Government.
In November 1966, the General Con¬
ference of Unesco decided to with¬
hold assistance to the Government of
Portugal in educational, scientific and
cultural matters and not to invite that
Government to attend special confer¬
ences or take part in other Unesco
activities until such time as Portugal
abandoned its policy of colonial domi¬
nation and racial discrimination. It
confirmed a decision taken by the
Executive Board of Unesco in 1965
not to invite Portugal to attend
meetings of Unesco subordinate bodies
pending the conclusion of an on-site
study of educational conditions in the
Portuguese-administered African Terri¬
tories.
In May 1966, the World Health
Assembly, the executive arm of the
World Health Organization, suspended
the right of Portugal to take part in
regional activities in Africa and sus¬
pended all technical assistance to
Portugal until it furnished proof of its
willingness to comply with United
Nations resolutions.
Meanwhile, fighting was widespread
in Portuguese Guinea in 1965. During
that year the Partido Africano da
Independencia de Guiñé e Cabo Verde
(PAIGC) claimed that a significant pro¬
portion of the territory's estimated
500,000 population was included within
the "liberated areas".
In 1966, there were reports that the
guerrillas had opened a second front
in the eastern regions of Angola.
The insurgents, operated in small,
well-armed groups which engaged in
raids, ambushes and acts of sabotage,
such as the destruction of roads and
bridges. Occasionally, they undertook
large operations, including attacks by
groups of 50 to 150 men on defended
localities and military bases.
During 1967, the flow of refugees
from Angola, Mozambique and Portu-
quese Guinea accelerated. In the
seven years beginning in December
1965, the total number of refugees
from these territories doubled, in¬
creasing from 284,700 to 568,000 at
the end of 1972.
In October 1967, the U.N. Special
Committee considered a detailed
report on the activities of foreign eco¬
nomic and other interests impeding
decolonization in Southern Rhodesia,
Namibia, the Portuguese territories
and other colonial territories. The
report reiterated that foreign interests
and monopolies contribute to the
misery of the indigenous inhabitants
by exploiting the natural resources
in their lands; by taking advantage
of the cheap labour of indigenous
peoples, by helping colonial Govern¬
ments to stay in power; by transferring
most of their profits out of the colonial
territories; and by dominating the
economics of the territories. 1 1
Although several past efforts to
secure Portugal's co-operation with
the United Nations had failed, the
CONTINUED PAGE 32

The United Nations versus
the world's last colonial empire1
Continued from page 1 1
change in the Government in Portugal
in late 1968 led to another appeal for
its co-operation.
But in September 1969, the Sec¬
retary-General of the United Nations
declared that the attitude of the Portu¬
guese government: "remains the cru¬
cial obstacle to peace in southern
Africa and exacerbates the grave
situation prevailing in that region."
At its November 1969 session the
U.N. General Assembly welcomed the
Manifesto of the Organization of Afri¬
can Unity on southern Africa. On the
problem of the Portuguese Territories
in Africa, the Manifesto states:
"In Mozambique and Angola and in
so-called Portuguese Guinea, the basic
problem is not racialism but a pre¬
tence that Portugal exists in Africa.
Portugal is situated in Europe... No
legislation passed by any parliament
in Portugal can make Africa part of
Europe...
"...The peoples of Mozambique, An¬
gola and Portuguese Guinea... are
demanding an acceptance of the prin¬
ciples of Independence on the basis
of majority rule, and for many years
they called for discussions on this
issue. Only when their demand for
talks was continually ignored did they
begin to fight. Even now, if Portugal
should change her policy and accept
the principle of self-determination, we
would urge the liberation movements
to desist from their armed struggle
and to co-operate in the mechanics of
a peaceful transfer of power from Por¬
tugal to the peoples of the African
territories."
The United Nations and its spe¬
cialized agencies have continued to
give the closest attention to the
problem and have increased their aid
and support to the peoples struggling
for their independence. In November
1972 the U.N. General Assembly
recognized the national liberation
movements of Angola, of Guinea
(Bissau) and Cape Verde, and of
Mozambique as the authentic repre¬
sentatives of the true aspirations of
the peoples of these territories.
Unesco is collaborating directly with
the liberation movements in these
territories, providing educational aid
and technical assistance, etc. (see
page 23).
Unesco's position has been summed
up by its Director-General, René
Maheu. In October 1972, addressing
the Unesco General Conference in
Paris, he declared:
"Two States (Portugal and South
Africa) have of their own accord with¬
drawn from Unesco because of the
obvious incompatibility of their racist
or colonialist policies with the ideals
of Unesco and its action to pro¬
mote human rights. The firmness
shown towards these States by the
General Conference is, in my opinion,
fully justified since it is based on con¬
siderations of justice which are
Unesco's raison d'être. Unesco is a
militant organization. But this in no
way means that we cannot hope
indeed fervently desire that these
peoples with their many remarkable
talents and achievements in other
fields, will reject the inhuman policies
which for the time being have separa¬
ted them from us and that they will
soon rejoin us."
This report Is essentially based on a publi¬
cation of the Office of Public Information of
the United Nations entitled "A Principle in
Torment: The United Nations and Portuguese
Administered Territories".

