AMERICANS
READ MORE BOOKS
THAN EUROPEANS
A German specialist debunks two fallacies:
1) Americans rarely ever read
2) The books they do read are of lower quality
by Heinz Steinberg
'OCIOLOGISTS, psycholo¬
gists and economists have done a
great deal of research into book read¬
ing, borrowing and buying habits in
European countries and in the United
States, but so far no systematic com¬
parison has been made between the
pattern in Western Europe and that
in America.
Where researchers have ventured
to compare the two, they have usually
expressed opinions based at the best
on largely random observation and
more often on preconceived ideas
that take root and reappear even in
scientific conclusions.
In an otherwise useful analysis of
the book market in the Federal Repub¬
lic of Germany, published in 1968, a
German demographic -institute repro¬
duced the figures of an American opi¬
nion research institute unchecked and
concluded that "Americans very sel¬
dom pick up a book". This assertion,
of course, is completely unfounded.
By checking statistics, the German
institute could have found out that
people In the United States buy twice
as many and borrow three times as
many books, per inhabitant, as people
in the Federal Republic of Germany.
Not only the Germans but Euro¬
peans In general, priding themselves
on their culture, find it difficult to
believe what is nevertheless an indis¬
putable fact that in the U.S.A. books
have a greater distribution in relation
to population than in Europe.
Before looking at the evidence for
this, let us deal with the objection
28 HEINZ STEINBERG, of the Federal Republic
of Germany, is Director of Further Education
of the municipality of West Berlin, and lec¬
tures on the sociology of books at the Free
University of West Berlin.
another product of the European pre¬
occupation with Culture that Amer¬
icans may indeed buy more books,
but the books are of lower quality
another unfounded argument.
Obviously a great quantity of light
reading matter including detective
stories is sold in the U.S.A. as else¬
where, but in practically every case
where large numbers of books are on
sale or on loan, one also finds
"serious" reading matter, works by
Shakespeare or Thomas Mann for
example, and, above all, non-fiction
ranging from gardening primers to
dictionaries.
On my last trip to America, in Madi¬
son, the capital of Wisconsin, I came
across a drugstore at a considerable
distance from the University where a
copy of Plato's Symposium was dis¬
played alongside a tablet of soap, and
in an area of Washington largely oc¬
cupied by Negroes I found practically
the whole production range of a Lon¬
don fine art publisher at much reduc¬
ed prices, including some excellently
illustrated works on the collections of
Spanish museums.
In particular the American output of
paperbacks is far greater than that of
Western Europe. The total member¬
ship of book societies must also be
considerably higher in the U.S.A., in
relation to population, than in most
European countries. Moreover, Amer¬
ican book societies can provide a
much more specialized service. One
can join a book club, for instance, in
order to buy nothing but sports lit¬
erature.
Another point to note is that book
societies in Europe differ considerably
in their function from country to coun¬
try. French book societies generally
attract custom by high-quality binding
whereas the large-membership German
societies are noted for their low prices
which have enabled them to sell to
a section of the middle-class public
that normally buys few books, and to
some extent to a public on the skilled
worker level as well.
The reason for the high book output
in the U.S.A. is obvious to anyone
travelling through North America. In
the New York subway a European is
struck by the large number of people
reading books, although one reason
for this may be the difficulty of open¬
ing up a newspaper during the
business rush hour. A book can be
easily held in the hand and slipped
back into one's pocket.
In the town centre of Minneapolis,
in Minnesota, I spent hours watching
customers in a large bookshop and
time and time again saw people car¬
rying five or six volumes to the
cashier and these people obviously
came from varied classes, including
those which are rarely found in a book¬
shop in Europe.
This, In fact, seems to be the core
of the difference between Europe and
America. In Europe, at any rate in
western and southern Europe, Includ¬
ing the Federal Republic of Germany,
to some extent, and also in Great
Britain and Scandinavia, books are
associated in the mind of the public
with that section of the population
which regards itself as "cultured".
In North America it is difficult to
detect any relationship of this kind.
For Americans a book is something
to be used, valued for its utility, re:
gardless of social standing, until it can
be dispensed with. To quote Robert
Escarpit's helpful classification, books
fall into three categories of descend¬
ing importance: first, the "functional
book", secondly the "literary book"
and thirdly the "book as an object"

wwiertq éJf* *'&[
But in Europe books have always
been surrounded by an aura that does
not seem to have paled, and this aura
significantly increases the prestige of
persons who read, or who are reputed
to read books.
It would be an exaggeration to say
that cultured Europeans still carry the
book status symbol before them like
the fathers of the church pictured in
the magnificent mosaics in the Basi¬
lica di Sant'Apollinare Nuovo, Ravenna
(Italy), but to the extent that books
are status symbols for the "cultured",
their use by the "uncultured" is im¬
peded.
This psychological barrier has set
a limit to the growth of book reading
in Europe and people who can
read do not necessarily read books.
Manual workers in particular are sub¬
consciously "afraid" to venture into
a bookshop or a library.
In America, unsaddled by such trad¬
itions, the book reading habit has dev¬
eloped more easily with the spread
of literacy, beyond the limitations of
class and race. People read not so
much for the sake of the cultural value
of reading to which so much impor¬
tance is attached elsewhere, but be¬
cause they have discovered the plain
usefulness of reading or wish simply
to enjoy the pleasure that it gives.
This is more fertile ground for the
growth of book reading than any
cultural formulas. Anyone who wants
to help countries to develop with the
aid of books should reflect on this and
refrain from talk of cultural improve¬
ment.
Because of the basic situation just
described, America is better at adver¬
tising books. Admittedly, this has led
to the questionable importance of the
best-seller system, but its main mani-
' ¿W/¿t
Time out for a chat at the famous annual International Book Fair held at Frankfurt
(Federal Republic of Germany). In 1972, International Book Year, some 3,500
publishers, including 2,600 from all over the world, displayed books at Frankfurt.
festation is the fact that books are
promoted by the public authorities in
a way which has no parallel in Wes¬
tern Europe. These activities have
been conducted for years with extra¬
ordinary success by the National Book
Committee in New York.
At Miami Airport in Florida there is
a self-service kiosk for newspapers
and magazines which also has paper¬
backs on display on a few stands. In
November 1971, I bought a 300-page
paperback for 75 cents with the title
"The Wonderful World of Books".
No less than 72 authors are repre¬
sented in the book. Their contribu¬
tions are taken from papers given at
a conference on rural reading held in
1951. The conference was organized
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
in Washington, which had invited ex¬
perts to come from all over the world
In order to promote book reading in
the rural areas of the United States.
It would be difficult to find a book
like this in Europe. There have, of
course, been conferences, and their
papers have often appeare'd in print
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

AMERICANS READ MORE BOOKS (Continued)
but certainly not in the form of a paper¬
back for the customers of an airport
kiosk and they have never become
long-sellers, still being ordered 20
years after the event.
It is practically inconceivable that a
Ministry in the Federal Republic of
Germany, and particularly the Ministry
for Agriculture, would sponsor a con¬
ference on reading. Why should this
be so? The answer is that although
discussion of books is traditional in
Europe, it never escapes from the
cultural area and too little thought is
given to the interaction between book
and reader.
But it must also be acknowledged
in making a comparison, that the book-
buyer in America faces disadvantages
other than those experienced in
Europe. Large and obviously well-run
bookshops exist in American cities,
often with considerably bigger stocks
than, for example, French booksellers
In similar sized towns. But they and
often the chain stores too are not
generally prepared to put books on
order. The usual reply to an enquiry
for a book that is out of stock is a
sympathetic shrug of the shoulders.
There are a few firms which specia¬
lize in ordering books and they gen¬
erally supply through the post against
telephoned orders, which is practically
equivalent to buying blindfold, whereas
traditionally a European bookseller is
quite prepared to order books without
obligation.
Another unfavourable aspect of the
American book market surfaces when
a book has been struck off the pub¬
lisher's list. The only answer is a
good secondhand bookseller, of which
there are very few. In any case the
price rockets and if no new edition is
in sight and a reprint is regarded as
unprofitable, the price of a book in
considerable demand may reach astro¬
nomic heights. Often the only solu¬
tion is to make a photocopy of the
whole book in one of the libraries, an
expensive process apart from the prob¬
lem of copyright.
Although in per capita terms con¬
siderably more copies of books are
printed and sold in the United States
than in Europe (leaving aside the
number of titles for which the compa¬
rison is different), anyone looking for
a specific book may often feel let
down by the American book trade.
The libraries however are prepared
to obtain any book, and a European
finds himself singing, with few reser¬
ves, the praises of American libraries,
except, perhaps, in some respects, for
the largest of them all, the Library of
Congress.
This world-famous library has indi¬
vidual works of unique rarity and col¬
lections which are astonishingly com¬
prehensive. In its bibliographic work
alone its services are irreplaceable.
But Its great size is obviously a han¬
dicap. The operation of a library run¬
ning to tens of millions of volumes
in overcrowded old-style buildings is
difficult to organize satisfactorily and
the time taken to obtain a single book
recalls the operations of the big old
European libraries rather than modern
American methods.
More modern libraries, however,
offer more than just the benefits of
technological innovation; their oper¬
ating systems have generally been so
well thought-out that a user accus¬
tomed to libraries in Europe has the
feeling of being transported into a
book paradise.
The Joseph Regenstein Library,
for example, on the campus of the
University of Chicago, has been built
to house 3è million volumes although
it serves only the humanities and the
social sciences, and within a year of
its opening, already had 2 million
volumes each directly available and
easy to find from early morning until
late at night.
Even the stock of foreign-language
reference books is larger than that in
many university libraries in the coun¬
tries where these languages are
spoken. There is no congestion since
space is provided for 2,900 readers,
half in comfortable cubicles and the
rest in partitioned conference rooms.
Europe's culture pessimists tend to
complain that books are threatened
by electronics and yet American ex¬
perience in no way justifies such fears.
On the contrary, data processing with
high-speed printout is often used in
the service of books and seems to
have the effect of reinforcing the de¬
mand for them.
In scientific information an increas¬
ingly important part is being played
by literature which is not sold through
the book trade, such as duplicated
conference papers, lectures, type¬
written reports on the results of indus¬
trial research and individual articles
in journals. America has already man¬
aged to bring this great flow of paper
under control by a combination of
computer and microfilm.
All the user has to do is to thumb
through the catalogues, but once he
has found the reference he "types"
this in himself on a keyboard and
above it, on a television screen,
appears an abstract of about eight
lines. It is then easy to decide whe¬
ther to borrow or buy the publication.
This can be in the form of micro¬
film costing a few cents and whose use
Latest profile of world translations
30
World figures for translations are still rising 41,322 works
appeared in translation in 73 countries during 1970 compared
with 38,172 in 65 countries in 1969 according to the most recent
issue of "Index Translationum", Unesco's annual bibliography of
translations (1).
For the first time in many years the U.S.S.R. does not lead the
field for the number of works translated. The Federal Republic
of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, are now in
first place with a combined total of 5,932 translations, followed
by the U.S.S.R. with 3,580. Spain, whose translations rose from
2,737 to 2,944 remains in third place.
Up to fourth place (from sixth in 1969) goes the United States
with 2,569 compared with 2,059, overtaking Japan, still lying fifth
with 2,069 (a drop of 98). France comes sixth with 1,918, then
come the Netherlands with 1,651, Italy with 1,587 (compared with
2,483 in 1969 when the country was fourth), Sweden with 1,539 and
Czechoslovakia with 1,440.
Translations of the Bible continue to rise: 223 in 1970 compared
with 202 in 1969 and 187 in 1968.
Lenin is still the most translated author and the celebration
of his centenary in 1970 more than doubled the number of his
works translated (448 against 202). After Lenin comes Shakespeare
(141), Jules Verne (128), Georges Simenon (119), and Enid Blyton
(108).
Among the leaders figure both classical authors and thriller-
writers. Agatha Christie with 95 is followed by Dostoievsky
(78), Dickens (77), Balzac (75), Mark Twain (71), Hemingway (68),
Pearl Buck (65) and Steinbeck (61). Behind Hans Christian
Andersen and R.L. Stevenson with 56 and 55 comes a mixed
field of James Hadley Chase (53), Dumas père (51), Hugo (47),
de Maupassant and Somerset Maugham (46), the Grimm Brothers
(43), Goethe (37), Stendhal (33), the Brontes (31), André Maurois
(30), Faulkner (29), Daniel Defoe (25) Desmond Morris and Ian
Fleming (24), Thomas Mann (20), François Mauriac (18), Kafka (17),
Simone de Beauvoir (12) and Miguel Asturias (12).
Among the Ancients, Plato and Homer tie with 48 each, ahead
of Cicero (34), Aristotle (30) and Sophocles (30).
Writers who have won the Nobel Prize for Literature stand
high: Beckett has been translated 53 times, Alberto Moravia 50,
Sartre 42, Camus 40 and Solzhenitsyn 35 times.
(1) "Index Translationum" Vol. 23, Unesco, Paris, 1972. Price $42, £14, 168 F.

is explained on a film reader, or in
the form of photocopies, considerably
more expensive, which one can read,
of course, in the same way as a book.
But the requirement, at least initially,
is often met by the abstract, a repro¬
duction of which is produced on op¬
eration of another knob above the
screen. This can then be inserted into
one's own card index and used again
when reading other books.
It is possible to imagine that books
might become superfluous in the future
to the extent that scientific information
could be directly stored in and re¬
trieved from the data-processing
equipment. But the very large num¬
bers of people needing to refer to
literature that is not so highly specia¬
lized will continue to read books in
their conventional form, and American
experience goes to suggest that this
need will continue to grow because
QUICK
SERVICE
SKATER
To speed up its opera¬
tion, ' the New York
City Public Library has
equipped employees
with noiseless roller
skates. Here a libra¬
rian skates down one
of the interminable
corridors of the reserve
stock rooms dipping
into a book as he skims
along. The library has
more than 7 million
volumes and over 80
branch libraries.
the apparently competing media of
television, film cassettes and video
recordings tend to stimulate book-
reading rather than the reverse.
For America the growth in the public
libraries is of greater quantitative
significance and more important in
cultural policy terms than the very
impressive development of the scien¬
tific libraries. These public libraries,
more numerous every year, offer ser¬
vices beyond comparison with those
of public libraries in Western Europe
where imperfect user guidance is
generally typified by the limited timé
for which they are open.
Countless new buildings, even in
small townships, and whole fleets of
mobile libraries for people living in
the country, drive the statistics of
American book stocks and borrowings
higher and higher. The example of a
small and externally unattractive
branch (though the aesthetic charm of
American public library architecture
cannot be denied) in a nevertheless
Well-to-do Washington suburb made
the most lasting impression on me.
Seeing a brand new set of the Ency¬
clopaedia Britannica I told the libra¬
rian how pleasant it was to find such
an expensive reference work in so
small a library. But in the library store
there was a second copy. Readers
had occasionally asked to be allowed
to borrow one of the volumes In order
to study a major article quietly at
home, but the complete Encyclopaedia
always had to be available for refer¬
ence, explained the librarian.
She then drew my attention to
another recent acquisition, an Italian
dictionary. "There are many Italian
families living here", she said. "The
children, particularly, are always bor¬
rowing books but their parents, whose
English is not so good, also want to
know many things which are not in our
dictionaries, and they are naturally
happy to have memories revived in
their mother tongue."
When she was talking I was remin¬
ded of the Italian immigrants back in
my country. Would they receive this
sort of attention in a public library?
Hardly, since German libraries, in spite
of many extensions, are unable by and
large to meet the needs of the people
as a whole to anything like the same
extent as American public libraries.
Even if the librarian in Europe were
to acknowledge a democratic duty to
serve minorities as well, he would find
it difficult to obtain enough funds from
the authorities responsible for his
library when resources are not even
sufficient for the needs of the majority.
America, then, may well serve as a
model to Europeans in the field of pub¬
lic libraries. English and Scandina¬
vian libraries have for a long time
successfully followed the American
example. Other countries should do
the same.
This is the only effective way to
repair the harmful effects of a tradi¬
tion which, by placing books on a
pedestal, has in fact withheld them
from those who need them most.
THE FRAGRANCE
OF BOOKS
A new development in publishing:
books which give off a lovely
scent when the pictures and
other illustrations are lightly
scratched with the fingernail. At
present available in children's
books produced by the English
publisher Paul Hamlyn, the scents
offered include cherry, orange
and pine. No wonder the four
children, right, now always have
their noses in booksl
