The 100th anniversary of the
U.N. World Meteorological Organization
marks the transformation of the study
of the weather into a revolutionary
new science on a planetary scale.
UNLOCKING
THE SECRETS
OF TOMORROW'S
WEATHER
A Soviet high-altitude research rocket etches
a pattern, recalling the umbrellas on our front
cover, against the Arctic night sky. The size
of this fiery umbrella, or bow and arrow trajec¬
tory, may be judged against the tiny figures of
research scientists at bottom left of photo.
by Kaare Langlö
4
KAARE LANGLO of Norway is Deputy
Seeretary-General of the World Meteoro-
logical Organization. He has devoted his
entire scientific career to research in meteo¬
rology and was responsible for planning the
World Weather Watch to provide the first
truly global weather observation and data
system. He is a member of the Norwegian
Geophysical Society and the author of many
studies and papers on meteorology.
HE well-known saying that
"weather knows no frontiers" can be
said to have a special meaning in 1973
when meteorologists in all countries
of the world are celebrating 100 years
of organized international collabora¬
tion. Most people will probably
shrug their shoulders and say: "Yet
another centenary; what does it mean
to me?"
One of the purposes of this issue
is to demonstrate what a knowledge
of weather and climate means to every
one of us, and to every country in the
world in other words, it deals with
some of the global aspects of weather
and how the international co-operation
is organized after 100 years of
experience.
In recent years two apparently
unconnected events have had a revol¬
utionary impact on meteorology. One
of these is the emergence of high
speed electronic computers capable
of providing sufficiently rapid numeri¬
cal solutions to the mathematical
equations used to -describe atmo¬
spheric motions. Major advances in
numerical weather prediction have
resulted from this capability and will
doubtless continue.
The other noteworthy event is the

.t*.
development of the artificial earth
satellite. The launching of the first
weather satellite TIROS I in April 1960
surprisingly quickly showed that the
latest technological devices could be
used profitably by the meteorologist.
The potential value of this unique new
platform for global observations (see
later in this article) was no doubt one
of the prime reasons why the United
Nations General Assembly twenty
months later adopted a decision which
in meteorological circles is accorded
historic importance and which led to
the concept of the World Weather
Watch.
What is the World Weather Watch?
The main purpose of the World
Weather Watch (WWW) is to establish
a system by which all countries can
be provided with the weather data
and other information they need to
carry out their national obligations.
All nations participate actively in the
system both by receiving and by
transmitting weather information. In
addition, some countries have specific
international functions; thus there are
three World Meteorological Centres
(Washington, Moscow and Melbourne)
and 21 Regional Meteorological
Centres at which extensive use is
made of high speed electronic
computers.
These large meteorological centres
carry out numerical forecasts of the
future state of the atmosphere, making
use of physical laws expressed
in mathematical equations (called
"models"). In addition to the problem
of developing suitable "models", there
are three major conditions which must
be satisfied: C
We must know the actual state of
the entire atmosphere preferably at a
chosen hour (i.e. by making represen-
CONTINUED PAGE 7

Photo V USIS OF ICE
AND MEN
The ancient Goths of northern Europe believed that storm clouds were evil forces that
threatened their gods. Archers were used to repel these "invaders" as this 16th century
engraving published in Rome (below) shows. Today their action finds a much more
scientific echo in the rockets (right) fired at clouds to eliminate or reduce the destruc-
tiveness of hailstones, in recent years the study of the behaviour of hail has become
a special branch of research. Scientists have now succeeded In producing artificial hailstones
in the laboratory (above).
Photo C Bibliothèque Nationale Pans. Originally published in "De Gentibus Septentrional ¡bus by Olaus Magnus. Rome 1S>5S

TOMORROW'S WEATHER (Continued)
tative observations of temperature,
pressure, humidity, wind and so on)
and also the conditions at the lower
and upper boundaries of the atmo¬
sphere;
We must have the facilities to
process this vast quantity of obser¬
vational data very quickly in order
to reduce to a minimum the time delay
between the hour of observation and
the hour of issuing the forecast;
We must be able to transmit the
original observations rapidly to suit¬
able forecasting centres and to
distribute quickly the products of such
centres (weather analyses, prognoses,
forecasts, warnings, etc.) to their
users.
Until the present day the meteo¬
rologist has always had to accept a
compromise between what is scien¬
tifically desirable and what is econo¬
mically feasible in obtaining data from
a world-wide network of meteoro¬
logical observing stations.
For this reason it has only been
practical to sample the state of the
atmosphere at fixed hours by taking
point observations at a network of
stations on the surface of the earth
and upper air soundings up to say
30-40 km, by means of balloons carry¬
ing instruments transmitting meteoro¬
logical observations by radio.
The present world network of sur¬
face meteorological stations consists
roughly of about 9,000 stations on land,
to which should be added more than
6,000 ships which send observations
when plying the high seas. Soundings
are made from about 700 stations on
land and from a few stationary weather
ships in the North Atlantic and North
Pacific Oceans, supplemented by
observations from a number of aircraft.
It may seem that these sources
would provide a wealth of data and
that little more could be required.
It is of course true that the density
of observations over some of the
world's land area is already perfectly
adequate; but some three-quarters of
the surface of the globe is covered
by the oceans and a high proportion
of this vast area is far removed from
regular shipping routes.
Many land areas in developing
countries, particularly where the
climatic conditions are harsh, still
lack adequate observing networks.
The conditions at the boundaries of
the atmosphere are also insufficiently
known. This means that we do not
know the structure of the atmosphere
over most of our planet in sufficient
detail to understand the physical
processes taking place at any given
moment. Since current methods- of
weather forecasting start from a
knowledge of actual weather con¬
ditions the implications of this
ignorance are very serious.
The first condition for satisfactory
numerical weather prediction is there¬
fore not fulfilled. This is why one of
the first goals of WWW is to plan and
RING OF PROTECTIVE FIRE. Frost can cause incalculable damage to fruit and other crops
and is difficult and costly to combat. Above, a huge gas-burner, in the form of a pipe
pierced at intervals with holes, encircles an orchard. Burners like these can raise
temperature over a limited area to about 25 degrees C. .
develop a truly global observational
system. The most promising new
techniques to fill the major gaps are
meteorological satellites and the so-
called constant-level balloons, i.e.
relatively large balloons floating with
the wind at a constant pressure level
in the atmosphere which transmit their
observations by radio. Although not
a new technique one of the "secret
weapons" during the last world war
the automatic buoy weather station
should also be mentioned as a
promising supplementary means of
obtaining data from ocean areas.
Meteorological satellites have gone
through a remarkable development
during the past 13 years. In the
beginning they were only able to take
television pictures of cloud cover but
nevertheless proved immediately to be
of great practical value in detecting
and tracing the movements of one
of the most devastating phenomena in
the atmosphere: the tropical cyclone
(hurricane, typhoon). In September
1961 hurricane "Carla" was discovered
by Tiros 3 in time for 500,000 people
to be evacuated from the threatened
areas in Texas and Louisiana and only
46 lost their lives.
The introduction of the APT (Auto¬
matic Picture Transmission) System
was a great success. This system
permits any country to receive tele¬
vision pictures direct from the satellite
while it is passing overhead by means
of relatively simple equipment, and
today many hundreds of such
stations are in operation all over the
world and greatly assist in daily fore¬
casting for the public and aviation.
The same polar orbiting satellites as
used for these observations are also
able to measure the approximate verti-
cal temperature distribution over 7
cloudless areas. This technique is
still in its experimental stages but is
sufficiently advanced to create serious
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

TOMORROW'S WEATHER (Continued)
discussion of the possibility of reduc¬
ing the number of the very expensive
Ocean Weather Ships now stationed
in the North Atlantic.
Other types of meteorological satel¬
lites are placed in stationary positions
over the equator. From a distance of
36,000 km. above the earth these
satellites watch the atmosphere per¬
manently and provide invaluable data,
particularly from tropical areas.
Constant-level balloons have been
tested with promising results in the
southern hemisphere. One such bal¬
loon circled the Antarctic continent
several times, and their average life¬
time is 100 days. It is also possible
to use satellites to collect observations
from a large number of constant-level
balloons and automatic buoy stations.
Unsung
heroes
who risked
their lives
to an International Cloud Atlas, and
so on.
On board several thousand mer¬
chant ships, officers are voluntarily
making similar observations at the
same standard times. These obser¬
vations must not only be made at
standard times but also regardless of
weather conditions, however severe
they may be. In raging snowstorms
or the sweltering tropical heat these
brave people do an exacting job for a
modest remuneration. No wonder the
word "heroes" has been used to
characterize them.
Some have given their lives for
meteorology. During a severe winter
storm at the Norwegian weather station
at Jan Mayen, the observer never
returned from a night visit to the
meteorological screen which was only
20 metres from the hut where he lived.
He must have lost his sense of direc¬
tion and was found the next day frozen
to death by the blizzard.
The second condition that must be
satisfied if weather forecasting is to
be improved is that data-processing
technology must provide a rapid means
of dealing with a very large amount
of global data.
An example will best explain the
reason for this condition and con¬
sequently the importance of modern
high-speed electronic computers to
meteorology. As already mentioned,
the basic mathematical equations
which govern the motions of the atmo¬
sphere have been known for many
years. It has, however, not yet been
possible to solve these equations in
their most general form and a number
of simplifications and assumptions
have had to be made.
In 1922 the English theoretician,
Lewis F. Richardson, devised an
approximate numerical solution to
these equations. The simple desk
calculator, which was all that was
available at that time, could not handle
the job. Richardson himself once
worked hard for six weeks to pro¬
duce an (unsuccessful) forecast for
12 hours; he estimated that 64,000 cal¬
culators would be necessary to keep
abreast of the changing weather
patterns.
The high-speed electronic computer
has made calculations of this magni¬
tude feasible and they are now used in
many countries to prepare or assist in
the preparation of the prognostic
weather maps which constitute the
basis on which forecasts are made.
The World Weather Watch is based
on the most modern techniques of data
processing. Each World Meteorologi¬
cal Centre prepares meteorological
charts for very large areas and distri¬
butes them promptly to other world,
regional and national meteorological
centres.
It is a basic principle of the World
Weather Watch that each national
meteorological centre has an obli¬
gation to collect and disseminate a
selection of weather data for use by
the rest of the world. In return, each
national meteorological centre receives
the global data it needs and has access
to those products (charts etc.) of the
world and regional centres which are
required to meet its national commit¬
ments.
8
IIT would be a great omis¬
sion to discuss the observing system
without mentioning the human effort in¬
volved. Consider the observers, those
unsung heroes who provide the basic
information on which the whole struc¬
ture of meteorology depends.
Their task is one of the most incon¬
venient and modestly paid jobs ima¬
ginable. Their duties require them to
be present at fixed hours of the day
and night, on Sundays and public
holidays as well as weekdays. They
must follow implicitly the procedures
laid down as the result of a hundred
years of international collaboration.
If we imagine that it is now time to
make the next observation, we can
visualize a silent army of some
8,000 to 10,000 people of all nationa¬
lities, in all climates from arctic to
tropical, making the same observations
at the same standard hour. They will
read thermometers placed in a special
white-painted screen, determine the
wind speed and direction over an
interval of ten minutes, estimate the
cloud cover and cloud type according
What the telegraph
hath wrought
HERE remains the third
condition that must be satisfied to im¬
prove weather forecasting efficient
telecommunications. A global telecom¬
munication network of higher speed
and greater efficiency, is an integral
part of the World Weather Watch plan.
Telecommunications are often called
the "life-blood" of meteorology. And
in this respect two events have had
enormous consequences for the devel¬
opment of weather forecasting. The
first was, of course, the invention of
the electric telegraph and its practical
introduction both in North America
and in Europe in the 1840s. The sec¬
ond was a disastrous storm which
caused heavy losses to the Anglo-
French fleet in the Black Sea on Nov¬
ember 14, 1854.
Some time after this storm a detailed
study was made to see whether it
could have been forecast had a
weather service based on telegraphed
reports then existed. Napoleon III,
who commissioned the study, received
an affirmative report from Leverrier,
and on the same day he gave the"
famous French astronomer orders to
organize a telegraphic weather ser¬
vice. This soon led to the establish¬
ment of official meteorological services
in a number of countries including
England in 1861, France in 1863 and
Norway in 1866.
International interest in meteorology

was growing apace and important in¬
ternational conferences were held in
Brussels, in 1853, and in Leipzig, in
1872. The first world-wide effort, at
governmental level, to standardize and
improve international meteorological
activities was made a century ago
with the holding in Vienna of the first
International Meteorological Congress,
in 1873. From this Congress was
born the International Meteorological
Organization which, in 1951, was trans¬
formed into the present World
Meteorological Organization.
A world-wide telecommunication net
work for meteorological purposes has
been in existence for many years and
has been further developed under the
auspices of WMO. WWW provides
for a main trunk circuit interconnecting
the three World Meteorological Cen¬
tres and appropriate regional centres.
This trunk circuit will be of full duplex
type and will constitute a closed loop,
thus making it possible to transmit
simultaneously in opposite directions
around the earth.
In 1973 a large part of this circuit is
in-full operation. WWW also provides
for regional telecommunication net¬
works for the collection of observa¬
tional data from defined Darts of the
world and for its transmission to cen¬
tres on the main trunk circuit. These
networks are used for the distribution
of observation data, analyses and
prognoses from world and regional
centres to national centres.
Telecommunication satellites are
used to provide some of the links in
the global telecommunication system
such as Dakar-Paris and India-Aus¬
tralia.
Balloons, buoys and satellites
for longer-range forecasts
wHAT are the main trends in
meteorological research?
It should be clear from the above
description of WWW that an enormous
effort is being made to build up an
efficient world system for exchange
of the weather information used both
for routine daily weather services and
for research.
But our aims and the wishes of the
United Nations General Assembly go
beyond that. We would like to know
whether it is possible to forecast the
weather longer into the future, for say
two weeks, with reasonable accuracy
and we would like to know whether it
is possible by means of electronic
computers to predict future climatic
changes and to tell whether such
changes are natural or caused by
man's activities.
These, in brief, are the purposes of
the Global Atmospheric Research Pro¬
gramme (GARP), a joint undertaking
between WMO and the International
Council of Scientific Unions.
What do we need to do in order to
extend the forecasts further into the
future? Do we for instance need
measurements higher up in the atmo¬
sphere and do we need to take into
account the changes in ocean tem¬
peratures?
The first question is relatively simple.
The mass of air above say 30 km. is
so negligible that in most cases it
can be neglected in the "models" used
in the computer. Likewise it is not
necessary to take into account the
phenomena in the higher atmosphere
the ionosphere which is very im
portant for the transmission of radio-
waves but Is of no significance for
weather phenomena.
On the other hand, although the
temperature changes in the upper
levels of the ocean are much slower
than in the atmosphere and may be
neglected in short-range forecasting,
such temperature changes must be
taken into account when we attempt
to make forecasts for more than a
week.
The basic assumption behind GARP
is that the day-to-day changes in the
weather and also the larger fluctu¬
ations, such as the serious drought
periods now experienced in Africa,
are to a large extent controlled by
fluctuations in the so-called "general
circulation" of the atmosphere.
In order to improve our understand¬
ing of these processes and to produce
reliable forecasts for more than three
days we need to do two things:
design the best possible theoret¬
ical "models" of the atmosphere and
test them in the computer, and,
arrange "experiments" in the
atmosphere to provide the necessary
data for the design of such "models"
and test how good they are.
GARP therefore includes a number
of experiments: A GARP Atlantic Trop¬
ical Experiment (GATE) will study
specific tropical problems in 1974 (see
page 21); a Polar Experiment will study
the rôle of the Polar Regions; and the
Monsoon Experiment will study the
entire monsoon phenomenon from its
pre-onset to its full withdrawal.
Finally, a first Global Experiment is
planned for 1977 to seek overall ans¬
wers to the questions raised above.
As a by-product it is also hoped that
it will assist in determining the most
efficient and economical system of
global observations. To be success¬
ful, a much denser network than at
present provided by WWW will be
necessary.
The Global Experiment using the
whole atmosphere as its laboratory
calls for five geostationary satellites
which it is hoped will be provided by
U.S.A. (2), U.S.S.R., Japan and the
European Space Research Organi¬
zation (ESRO). In addition to the usual
polar orbiting satellites, the experiment
also requires a large number of con¬
stant level balloons and automatic buoy
stations to obtain better coverage from
the tropics and the Southern Hemi¬
sphere.
Vast amounts of data from these
sources will be fed into powerful
computers and it could be that the
year of the experiment 1977 will be
the year that meteorologists have been
waiting for during the past 100 years;
perhaps the atmosphere will finally
disclose some of its remaining secrets
and give the answers to at least some
of our questions.
The importance of these global
research efforts is well understood
both by the man in the street and by
governments. It is not necessary to
blow the great trumpet of alarm to
obtain support for these efforts since Q
it is obviously in the interest of man- ¡J
kind to know more about the behav¬
iour of the atmosphere and the future
of our climate.
CONTINUED PAGE 12


Nature
on the rampage
'The most violent of all storms, a tornado
is a vortex of rapidly spinning air seen
as a funnel-shaped cloud that conceals
winds of hundreds of kilometres an hour.
Tornadoes are born where air currents
of different temperature, density and
moisture collide and a mass of cold air
forces its way beneath warm moisture-
laden air. Though rarely more than a few
hundred metres wide and averaging
speeds of 40 km. an hour, they leave
a swathe of devastation wherever their
whirling tips touch down. Photos left and
below left record the fearful advance of
two "twisters" as these storms are called.
Tornado in lower photo reaching earth¬
wards from a storm cloud resembles a
rampaging elephant's trunk. Right, space¬
craft view of Hurricane "Debbie" photo¬
graphed in September 1961 from 160
kilometres above the Atlantic Ocean.
Debbie's "eye" the comparatively calm
centre of a maelstrom of spiralling
winds is clearly visible at centre.
Unlike tornadoes which form over the
land, tropical cyclones are generally
born at sea. They bring shrieking winds
and torrents of rain when they sweep
over coastal areas. Below, rescuers pull
a man to safety in Rio de Janeiro during
a tropical storm that hit Brazil in 1965.
©
"*^I^
:.'S'.:->-

TOMORROW'S WEATHER (Continued from page 9)
A trump card
for developing nations
12
M EW subjects figure more
prominently in the daily news than the
imperative need to raise the standard
of living in developing countries.
Despite intensive efforts, it is common
knowledge that the gap between the
economics of developed and develop¬
ing countries is still widening.
To combat this trend ' the full
resources of science must be mobi¬
lized and this includes as a matter of
fundamental importance the appli¬
cation of meteorological knowledge to
economic development, whatever the
level attained in the country concerned.
It is no accident that the countries
with the most advanced economies are
also those making the most use of
meteorological advice.
In any programme of economic
development, attention must be given
to climate and weather. Over the
years it is climate that determines
natural vegetation, agricultural yield,
the abundance or lack of water
supplies and the suitability of different
areas for particular human activities.
Weather influences the demand for
power for industrial and domestic use,,
the economic operation of dams, the
choice of the best period for farming
activities, the safety and comfort of
transport services, and many other
facets of everyday life.
Economists recognize that adequate
meteorological information reduces
unnecessary expenditure, helps to
avoid the waste of natural resources
and manpower, and is vital to the
planning and implementation of devel¬
opment programmes.
The World Weather Watch will help
the developing nations to take part in
and grow with the scientific and tech¬
nological progress that is one of its
purposes. It will help to establish the
conditions necessary for effective land
use and water resource management.
The new global data expected from
the WWW will serve to speed up such
work. For instance meteorological
satellites offer many advantages to
developing countries; in particular the
APT system mentioned above permits
early warning of devastating storms.
In trying to raise the potential of
low-income countries, many govern¬
ments npw realize that the investment
of funds in meteorological work is an
essential preliminary to development
projects. For instance, the meteoro¬
logist and hydrometeorologist must
first acquire weather and water
records if they are to avoid the pitfall
of building dams at great expense in
areas receiving insufficient rainfall.
Surveys and feasibility studies,
sometimes sponsored by international
aid programmes, today provide econo¬
mic and technical data on soils, min¬
eral deposits, forests and water
resources; on power, transport and
communications possibilities, as well
as on agricultural and industrial
potential.
No country in the world, whatever
its size, can operate an effective
weather service without information
from neighbouring countries, and even,
for many purposes, from a whole hemi¬
sphere.
The first proposal to set up an inter¬
national fund to assist in establishing
special stations in remote areas or
telecommunications facilities goes as
far back as 1873 and, it was 90 years
before the idea was generally accept¬
able.
Today, in addition to participating
in the United Nations Development
Programme, WMO has established its
own voluntary assistance programme.
Through this programme developing
countries may request assistance to
establish any facility needed for WWW
and any country in a position to assist
may offer either equipment or services,
or both. Direct financial support is
also possible.
In total, during the last 20 years,
WMO has carried out 200 expert
missions, has granted 1,500 fellow¬
ships and has provided equipment and
organized training seminars worth
about 53 million dollars. In 1972
alone, the total of WMO's aid pro¬
grammes amounted to more than
10 million dollars.
The very success of technical co¬
operation in meteorology lies perhaps
in the fact that it is a truly reciprocal
process in which developing countries
are playing a full and indispensable
role.
This co-operation also extends to the
study of world-wide technical and
scientific problems which are handled
by eight technical commissions cover¬
ing all the major branches of meteo¬
rology and part of hydrology.
Did
you
know
that...?
w,HAT are the trends in the
application of meteorology to various
human activities?
Most people have the impression
that the most important activities of
meteorologists, in the sense of econo¬
mic benefit to the country, are the
general forecasts for the public and
the daily routine services to civil avia¬
tion. This is understandable but far
from the truth.
The benefits accruing from meteo¬
rological activities, such as special
forecasts for aviation, agriculture and
industry, are not always easy to cal¬
culate; is it possible, for instance, to
assess the value of human lives? In
spite of such difficulties, comprehen¬
sive studies have been made and it
has generally been concluded that the
savings to the national economy are
many times greater than the money
spent by a country on meteorology.
What kind of human activities
benefit most from meteorological ser¬
vices? They vary from country to
country but it will be a surprise to
many to see the list below which is
valid for a large developed country
and gives the activities in the order in
which they may benefit from available
meteorological services:
1) Fishing, 2) Agriculture, 3) Air
transport, 4) Forestry, 5) Construction,"
6) Land transport, 7) Water transport,
8) Energy production and distribution,
9) Merchandising, 10) Water supply
and control, 11) Communications, 12)
Recreation, 13) Manufacturing.
Here are some examples of the prac¬
tical applications of meteorology.
The effect of bad weather (strong

wind, frost, rain etc.) on industry is
obvious when the work takes place in
the open, though manufacturing pro¬
cesses and working conditions in
indoor industries are also influenced
by the weather. It is the meteorolo¬
gist's job to give advice which will
enable these effects to be reduced to
a minimum. It is estimated that the
annual loss to the United States con¬
struction industry due to weather
amounts to 3,000 million dollars.
In commerce the demand for certain
commodities is greatly affected by
weather conditions. The additional
load placed on power supplies in cold
spells is a good example of the fluctu¬
ating demand, and sales of food (ice¬
cream!) and clothing are also greatly
dependent on weather influences.
Many of the risks against which people
insure themselves or their property
are directly or indirectly related to the
weather. The rates of insurance are
often determined on the basis of climo-
tological statistics. Marine and crop
insurance are two obvious examples.
Almost every aspect of agriculture,
from the planning of land use to the
transportation of crops, calls for expert
meteorological advice. Areas pre¬
viously considered barren can today
be made productive thanks to a wider
understanding of the significant meteo-
roloqical factors involved in plant
growth.
The social consequences of applied
meteorology are seldom as plain as
they are in relation to food production.
It has often been stated that one half
of the world's population does not get
sufficient to eat to maintain normal
health. This horrifyinq figure presents
a challenge that is all the more des¬
perate because the explosive growth
of population of our times tends to
absorb every increase in production
without providing more food per head.
By the year 2000, we are told, there
will be two mouths to feed for every
one today. New sources of food must
be found and agricultural production
must reach unprecedented levels if
starvation is not to assume catastro¬
phic proportions.
In many ways our ability to respond
to this challenge depends to a con¬
siderable degree not only on opening
up new land for crops but also on
preventing the losses which now result
from climate and weather. A much
more detailed knowledge of the range
of climatic fluctuations in food-pro¬
ducing regions is necessary, as well
as a thorough understanding of atmo¬
spheric processes if damaging weather
conditions are to be predicted far
enough ahead.
The implementation of the World
Weather Watch should enable meteo¬
rologists to play a major part in the
food production campaign by enabling
them to give better scientific advice to
the agriculturalist. A stronger justi¬
fication than this would be difficult to
find.
The safe, efficient and regular oper
ation of air, sea and land transport
depends to a considerable extent on
the weather along the route. The
provision of accurate weather infor¬
mation and forecasts is accordingly of
prime importance to these operations.
The advent of high-flying jet aircraft
and the use of radar and other elec¬
tronic aids have not made this infor¬
mation redundant but have rather
created a demand for more highly
specialized advice.
The need to divert to an alternative
airport or the effects of clear air
turbulence in forcing airliners to reduce
altitude also have obvious financial
effects, and the coming introduction
of supersonic aircraft flying higher and
faster will make these problems more
critical. It is extremely doubtful
whether any radical improvement in
accuracy can be expected over many
of the world's air routes until more
information is available from them.
The planned global observational
system would furnish this information.
Meteorological information has many
other applications to transport,
affecting both its safety and the
economics of its operation. The
effects of even relatively minor delays
caused by fog, ice or snow extend
beyond the personal inconvenience
they cause to passengers, resulting
in a loss of working hours which can
hamper national economic growth.
The transport of perishable goods
by land or sea also depends on
specialized weather information. It
has been estimated that by 1975 the
total world freight costs for ocean
cargoes could amount to $15,000
million per year. If better routing
along minimum time paths, thus
reducing storm losses, fuel consump¬
tion and time at sea, could achieve
a reduction of only 1 per cent in these
costs, the annual savings would be
$150 million.
Who will be right
in the year 2000?
_ HROUGHOUT history man
has endeavoured to protect himself
against unfavourable climatic or wea¬
ther conditions. To a limited extent
he has succeeded. Tne heating or air-
conditioning of buildings, even the
wearing of clothes, are attempts to
modify the climate in which we must
work and play. Out of doors the
planting of trees or hedges, frost
protection, hail suppression and even
irrigation are all examples of the way
in which artificial influences have been
used to modify the natural climate.
At the same time man has inad¬
vertently created changes in local
climate by building large cities and
polluting the atmosphere by the
burning of fuels. For many years past
small-scale experiments have also
been carried out in local weather
modification such as fog dispersal or
cloud seeding to increase rainfall, but
the problem of large-scale weather
modification has not been solved.
It is believed that much more
attention will be given to these
questions in the future and in
particular it would be of enormous
importance if sound advice could be
given to governments on the possi¬
bilities of future climatic variations and
whether such variations are natural or
man-made.
The possibility of numerical forecasts
for longer periods, say up to two
weeks, was discussed under GARP
above 'and it is hoped that in 10 to
20 years time we shall know whether
the optimists or pessimists are right.
The potential economic value of
long range forecasting is not the same
for all activities and is not easy to
assess accurately. Aviation is not
much interested in such forecasts but
if farmers-, fuel producers, public
utilities, builders and water managers
were able to make economies of five
per cent only, the probable total
saving has been conservatively esti¬
mated at $5,000 million per year.
The use of natural resources is ..
another area where great progress is 1
not only possible but will be essentia! **
because of the increasing demands on
these resources.
CONTINUED PAGE 16

TOMORROW'S WEATHER (Continued from page 13)
A global search
for new energy sources
and an all-out attack
on air and water pollution
w
16
ATER is life. Not only is it
vital to man's physical being but pract¬
ically nothing that he undertakes can
be carried out without its use in one
form or another. Weather records are
a prerequisite to an assessment of
water resources and to the national
planning of water use.
As a low-cost source of power it can
constitute a sound basis for agri¬
cultural and industrial growth. At both
the planning and operational stages,
the forecasting of weather and floods
is important if efficient and profitable
use is to be made of the available
resources. As an example, a one per
cent improvement in the spring flood
forecasting on the Peace River in
Canada will permit an annual saving
of one million dollars in the operation
of the huge power dam at Portage
Mountain.
The subsequent development of
river basins will aid irrigation and
drainage, flood control, soil conser-.
vation, navigation and fisheries as well
as the production of hydro-electric
power.
The international programmes in
hydrology developed jointly between
Unesco and WMO will ensure that full
attention will be give to these problems
in the future years.
The idea of using wind and solar
energy as power sources is by no
means new but is receiving increasing
attention partly because these re¬
sources are non-pollutant. An essen¬
tial prerequisite to future development
would be a detailed meteorological
survey of the distribution in both time
and space of wind and solar energy in
selected areas and taking into account
the possibilities of using other forms
of energy.
It will be necessary in the future to
pay more attention to the pollution of
the atmosphere.
The industrialization of the highly
developed countries of the world has
brought with it new problems for the
meteorologist. It is a well-known fact
that the burning of fossil fuels has
created changes in the local climate
of some areas and it is only In recent
years that active steps have been
taken to control the further pollution
of the' atmosphere.
The level of pollution in some places
has reached a point at which it has
serious social and economic con¬
sequences. The effect on the health
of the population of breathing impure
air is generally slow but nevertheless
lethal when meteorological conditions
inhibit the transport and dispersal of
the polluting agents. In the great
London smog of early December 1952
more than 4,000 people died, mainly
from bronchial or chest complaints
aggravated by the toxic air.
This example is, happily, one of
rare occurrence, and active measures
are being taken in many countries to
avoid similar disasters; we should not,
however, overlook the fact that the
annual toll of illness resulting from
pollution costs a great deal in terms
of man-hours. The long-term effects
of lower concentrations also constitute
a serious risk to the health of the
public.
A good deal more research into
the relationship between health and
pollution will be necessary before
these effects are fully understood.
Meanwhile, more rigorous legislation
to control the release of pollutants
will help to reduce the dangers, as
will the planning of towns to ensure
that there is adequate air movement
to remove pollution and disperse
contaminants.
Another vital problem for the future
is that the burning of fossil fuel is
believed to steadily increase the
amount of the natural gas carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere and that
industrial activities are changing the
amount of solid particles present in
the atmosphere. The possible impact
of these human activities on the future
climate is now receiving considerable
attention.
For the purpose of studying these
problems the WMO has established
a world-wide network of "background"
pollution stations which are placed far
away from industrial areas and which
are monitoring certain pollutants and
gases in the atmosphere. In the
future the measurements from these
stations will play a major rôle when
studying changes in climate.
M INALLY, one of tKe funda¬
mental problems for the future is the
clear trend towards a greater auto¬
mation of all meteorological work and
the increasing dependence on meteo¬
rological satellites to obtain global
observations. The automation of
observations, plotting of charts, cal¬
culation of future weather charts, etc.,
is a gradual process which changes
the work of many people but creates
no basic problems.
On the other hand, the greater
use of satellite observations could
mean that important global observing
facilities will be dependent on the
national plans of a few powerful
countries or group of countries. While
there is no reason to believe that this
powerful position of a few countries
will be misused in the future, it is most
likely that future satellite systems will
be based on a broader participation by
all benefiting countries through WMO,
the responsible international organi¬
zation.
There is no doubt that the World
Weather Watch and GARP will have
a great impact on future developments
in meteorology. For several gener¬
ations the countries of the world have
endeavoured to develop the science
of meteorology without having adequate
tools to do the job. We still do not
have all the tools necessary but at
least a great effort is now being made
to state in detail what is required in
terms of observations, equipment and
personnel.
It would be premature to try to
define the full consequences of WWW
and GARP, but a great deal will
obviously depend upon technological
developments now in hand and those
to come in the next few years. If
they prove capable of meeting the
complex demands placed upon them,
and if the spirit of international
collaboration continues to prosper and
grow, the realization of these great
scientific projects could be within our
grasp.
At least it is certain that the age-
old desire of mankind to harness the
forces of nature will continue to be
a driving force and the World Weather -
Watch and the Global Atmospheric
Research Programme are natural
steps in this direction. We may there¬
fore be optimistic about the out¬
come which will, inevitably, bring
changes affecting the way of life of
each one of us. >
Kaare Langlö
