THE MANY FACES OF GENIUS. Copernicus
as seen by seven young Polish artists whose
entries for a sculpture exhibition await the judges'
verdict in a storeroom in Torun, the great astro¬
nomer's birthplace. (See also page 27.)
Photo Paul Almasy - " Unesco Courier "

IN THE FOOTSTEPS
OF COPERNICUS
by Jerzy Bukowski
NIICHOLAS COPERNICUS,
the first of the great scientific thinkers
of modern times, was born in the
northern Polish town of Torun on
February 19, 1473. His horoscope,
which still exists, even gives the exact
moment of his birth: 4.48 a.m., though
this detail could be pure imagination
on someone's part.
Copernicus, famous as the originator
of the heliocentric theory of the
universe, Is less well known for his
achievements as a humanist and
classical scholar. With his vast
erudition and profound interest in a
wide range of problems, his Insight as
an investigator and his bold creative
thinking and critical judgement, he was,
in the words of one of his first
biographers, "fired by an ardent
passion for truth". His 'extraordinary
intellect places him among the world's
greatest men of genius, but he was
also a citizen deeply concerned with
his country's problems.
JERZY BUKOWSKI, professor and former
rector of the Warsaw Polytechnical Institute,
Is president of the Nicholas Copernicus Com¬
mittee of the International Union of the
History and Philosophy of Science. A former
president of the Committee of the History
of Sciences and Technology of the Polish
Academy of Sciences, he Is currently vice-
president of the Polish Peace Committee.
No documented historical evidence
exists to tell us about the great
astronomer's childhood and early
youth. His father, also named Nicho¬
las, was a Cracow merchant belonging
to a family of Silesian origin,
whose multiple interests had built
up close links with the towns of
Pomerania.
Nicholas Copernicus the elder be¬
came a burgher of Torun in 1458, and
within a short time occupied a place
of considerable social standing. After
his death in 1483 his children, of whom
the youngest, Nicholas, was ten years
old, were placed under the guardian¬
ship of their maternal uncle, Lucas
Watzenrode, future Bishop of Warmia,
who was at the time a high-ranking
dignitary of the Church and a
distinguished statesman attached to
the Polish royal court in Cracow.
Cracow was at that period the
capital of Poland, which was then at
the height of its power, and of which
one of the great Italian humanists of
the early 16th century was to say,
"of all the lands beyond the Alps none
equals Poland in its love of learning."
Torun was a flourishing town with
prosperous trade and industries. As
an intermediate point for merchandise
routed through the ports of Gdansk
and Elblag, it held a key position in
overseas trade which assured it a
place of considerable importance in
the Polish economic system.
The two towns, which even today
retain their medieval character, are
situated upon the upper and lower
Vistula respectively. Not far from
Elblag, in the eastern part of the valley
of the Vistula, stood the town of
Frombork, where Copernicus was to
spend the latter part of his life and
where he died in 1543.
In the mid-fifteenth century, the
political situation of the towns of the
Baltic coastal province was extremely
complicated. With Gdansk, Elblag
and Torun foremost among them, they
were engaged in a stubborn struggle
to rid themselves once and for all of
the hegemony of the Teutonic Order,
which had settled in the region as far
back as the 13th century. The Treaty
of Torun, signed in 1466, restored
Polish royal sovereignty over the
Baltic coastal region, together with the-
delta of the Vistula, and including the
major towns and the episcopal duchy
of the Diocese of WarmTa.
Both Nicholas Copernicus the elder
and the Watzenrode family played an
active role in achieving this agreement.
To the end of his days, Lucas Watzen¬
rode was to exert a vital influence
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF COPERNICUS (Continued)
6
upon the life of young Nicholas
Copernicus, guiding his studies and
setting the course of his future
ecclesiastical and political career.
A second date confirmed by docu¬
ments relating to Copernicus' youth
is that of his registration at Cracow's
Jagiellonian University in the autumn
of 1491.
The Jagiellonian University was then
at the height of its expansion; it was
the only university in Europe to have
two chairs of astronomy, and was
renowned for the exceptionally high
level of its teaching of the mathe¬
matical sciences. Studies there cover¬
ed not only the treatises of the ancient
Greeks, but even those of the scholars
of Islam.
It was at Cracow that the young
Nicholas Copernicus acquired his first
notions of astronomy, and tradition
has it that the famous astronomer and
mathematician Wojciecj Brudzewski
was among his teachers. During his
studies at the Jagiellonian University,
Copernicus obtained a thorough know¬
ledge of Aristotelian and Ptolemaic
astronomy and Euclidian geometry.
Judging from the books he bought at
this period, which are fortunately still
in existence, his main interest lay in
spherical geometry and trigonometry,
and in theoretical astronomy.
.LTHOUGH they differed
on points of detail, Aristotelian and
Ptolemaic theories, which had pre¬
vailed for over a thousand years, con¬
curred upon two major fundamental
postulates: firstly, the position assign¬
ed to the Earth as the immobile
centre of the universe, and secondly,
the attribution of a uniform circular
motion to all the heavenly bodies
fixed stars as well as planets, and
including the Sun and the Moon. The
latter principle, a Platonic axiom, was
to have a weighty influence upon the
form first given by Copernicus to his
heliocentric system of the universe.
Aristotle and those who professed
and perpetuated his philosophy, as
well as the astronomers and, in par¬
ticular, Claudius Ptolemy, in his treatise
known as the Almagest, give a truly
remarkable description of the move¬
ments of the heavenly bodies, based
on the two principles mentioned above,
although a number of contradictions
and anomalies were inevitably em¬
bodied in their theories.
Copernicus became aware of the
discrepancies contained in the systems
generally accepted and taught, and
through mathematical analysis and
geometrical synthesis, followed by
minutely detailed observation of the
sky, he gradually developed the
idea of a heliocentric system of the
universe.
Nicholas Copernicus probably spent
four years in Cracow, and in the
autumn of 1495 he was once again at
the court of his uncle Lucas Watzen¬
rode, who made unfruitful efforts to
have his nephew appointed canon of
the Chapter of Warmia in Frombork.
His failure to do so may have been
the decisive factor in the destiny of
young Nicholas. His uncle sent him
to continue his studies at the Uni¬
versity of Bologna, where he himself
had studied as a youth, strongly
recommending him to obtain the
degree of doctor of canon law, with
a view to pursuing an ecclesiastical
career.
Copernicus left for Italy in the au¬
tumn of 1496, and remained in Bologna
until the spring of the jubilee year
1500, although Bishop Watzenrode had
in the meantime managed to have a
canonry of the Chapter of Warmia
conferred upon his nephew by 1497.
The presence of famous scholars at
the University of Bologna enabled
Copernicus to perfect his knowledge
of astronomy while at the same time
pursuing his canonical studies.
Copernicus' first recorded observa¬
tion dates from this period: that of the
eclipse of the bright star Aldebaran in
the constellation Taurus by the Moon,
on March 9, 1497. The observation
carried out in Bologna contradicted the
Ptolemaic theory of lunar motion, and
although it did not attack the funda¬
mentals of geocentric astronomy, it
nevertheless demonstrates Coperni¬
cus' critical approach to traditionally
accepted theories.
According to Ptolemaic theory, the
Moon should be much nearer the Earth
at the quadratures and during the full
and new Moon, but the careful obser¬
vations made by Copernicus in Bolo¬
gna showed that the Moon's parallax
at quadrature was virtually identical to
the parallax of the full Moon. In other
words, the distance between the Moon
and the Earth remained unchanged in
either of these positions.
Criticism and denial of the old sys¬
tems gave way to positive research,
which led to the construction, upon the
shattered remains of outdated theories,
of a new system much closer to the
actual truth. This is clearly demons¬
trated by the persevering studies car¬
ried out by Copernicus. He was in
Rome during the great Jubilee year of
1500, worked for some time in the
Vatican Chancery and, according to
tradition, gave public lectures in
astronomy.
In the spring of 1501, the young
scholar returned to Poland to take up
officially his post in the Chapter of
Warmia: the Chapter gave him permis¬
sion to go back to Italy, with injunc¬
tions to study medicine at the Univer¬
sity of Padua. Copernicus Jived in
Padua for two years until 1503, apart
from a few weeks spent in Ferrara,
where on May 31, 1503 he obtained
the degree of doctor of canon law.
The extent and depth of Copernicus'
studies in Padua and his later interest
CONTINUED PAGE 8
14th-century

'pearl of learning'
Above, the courtyard of the Collegium Malus at the Jagiellonian University,
Cracow. The University's foundation charter, dating from 1364, described it as
"a pearl of learning". During Copernicus' four years as a student there
(1491-1495) the University was ravaged by fire and the original Collegium Maius
was destroyed, to be replaced in 1494 by the present magnificent building.
Left, the Jaque Fountain near the church of St Mary, Cracow, surmounted
by the figure of a student in the scholastic dress of Copernicus' day.
Below, a present-day student makes notes from a book on astronomy
dating back to Copernicus' day.


8
Photo Paul Almasy - "Unesco Courier"
The statue of Copernicus In the Old Town Square at Torun and the
house in which he spent his boyhood from the age of seven. The
original house was demolished in 1906 to make way for a department
store, but the two upper storeys were rebuilt In the style of the period.
IN THE FOOTSTEPS
OF COPERNICUS (Continued)
in this field are indicated by the hea¬
vily annotated works on medicine and
natural sciences found in his personal
library fifteen or so of these books
are still preserved in Uppsala Univer¬
sity Library (Sweden).
At the end of 1503, Copernicus once
again returned to Warmia, where he
joined his influential uncle Lucas Wat¬
zenrode in his residence at the epis¬
copal palace of Lidzbark. As the
Bishop's doctor and secretary, he ac¬
companied him on his frequent travels,
and historical evidence shows that his
office gave him ample opportunity to
practise his medical skills.
Copernicus was consulted by a
great number of important people, and
he treated a wide variety of ailments,
and of particular interest are his later
activities as a specialist in public
health and epidemiology, which he
carried out alongside his administrative
duties in the Chapter of Warmia.
During the ten years he spent with
Bishop Watzenrode, Copernicus was
inevitably drawn into political life. It
is certain that his sense of responsi¬
bility in public affairs, of which he
gave abundant proof during the fol¬
lowing years, derives from this period.
It is most probably from this time too
that he became increasingly interested
in the economic problems with which
he was already familiar through his
observation of the expansion of trade
and industry in the Italian towns he
visited during his years of study.
One thing which should be under¬
lined is that Copernicus' stay in Lidz¬
bark in no way diverted his attention
from his main subject of interest,
astronomy. It was in fact during this
period that he finally and irrevocably
formulated his brilliant thesis deposing
the earth from its central position, and
decided to put into writing the funda¬
mental postulates of the new astro¬
nomy.
This he did, in a treatise which was
not put into print, but was distributed
only in a very limited number of hand¬
written copies under the title Nicolai
Copernici de hypothesibus motuum
coelestium a se constitutis commen-
tariolus. (Nicholas Copernicus' Com¬
mentary on the Hypotheses of tne
Movement of the Celestial Orbs.)
The exact date of the Commentario-
lus is unknown, but it was probably
written shortly before 1509, during
which year a further aspect of Coper¬
nicus as a classical scholar was re¬
vealed In 1509 the letters of the
6th century Byzantine writer Theophy-
lact Simoccata appeared in Cracow in
a translation by Copernicus from
Greek into Latin.
Two dates mark the beginning of a
new phase in the life of Copernicus:
1510, the year of his installation at
Frombork and 1512, with the death of
Bishop Lucas Watzenrode. As he
approached his fortieth year, Coper-
CONTINUED PAGE 19

The castle at Olsztyn, Poland, where Copernicus lived for several years. From 1516 to 1519 it was his residence as adminis¬
trator of the properties of the Chapter of Warmia. He returned to Olsztyn in 1520 on the outbreak of hostilities between
Poland and the Teutonic Knights to organize the defence of the fortress against a threatened siege. Despite his many
tasks, Copernicus continued his astronomical studies, using the big, first floor room whose windows are seen in this photo.
Left of photo, the statue of an ancient divinity of the region which already stood in the castle courtyard in Copernicus' day.
L :; râ> -'
Photo Paul Almasy, "Unesco Courier", Paris

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF COPERNICUS
(Continued from page 8)
nicus was faced with an enormous
scientific task: to define and expound
the heliocentric order of the universe
in a work as wide-ranging and exhaus¬
tive as Ptolemy's Amalgest. Coper¬
nicus was to devote the rest of his
life to this undertaking.
Without going into detail upon Ni¬
cholas Copernicus' duties as a mem¬
ber of the Chapter of Warmia, we
should however note the fact that when
the opening chapters of the great
astronomer's memorable treatise were
written, he was also exercising and
highly efficiently numerous time-
absorbing administrative, economic
and political functions.
U ROM 1516 to 1519, Coper-
pernicus lived In Olsztyn, where he
managed the property of the Chapter.
In spite of these activities he in no
way neglected his astronomy, and the
ingenious observation apparatus built
by Copernicus himself can still be
seen at Olsztyn castle, which is now
a museum.
After the death of Lucas Watzenrode,
Warmia went through extremely diffi¬
cult times, during which the Teutonic
Knights waged undeclared war upon
the region, plaguing the diocesan lands
with their armed incursions.
Olsztyn was in close proximity to
the frontier of the monastic State, and
when in 1520 war again broke out
between Poland and the Teutonic
Order, Copernicus returned there to
organize the defence of the fortress
against the impending siege. When
the subsequent peace treaty was con¬
cluded in 1521, he was able to go
back to Frombork.
There he continued his opposition
to the Teutonic Knights on a different
level: the battle-ground of economics.
The fact was that the Teutonic Order
was striking false coins, and thus
causing the disruption of the Pom¬
eranian currency market. After a num¬
ber of interventions on this matter,
Copernicus published in 1526 his Trea¬
tise on Currency, In which he explained
the mechanism according to which
"bad money drives out good".
The formulation of this principle,
known as the Gresham-Copernicus
Law, (it was also expounded by a 16th-
century English merchant, Sir Thomas
Gresham) is by no means the great
astronomer's sole claim to fame in the
field of political economy. To Coper¬
nicus, "good" money, or currency
which consistently maintains its full
value, is as much the result as the
condition of "enrichment", or In other
words, of a healthy economy based
upon the work of "excellent workers"
and a well-organized system of ex¬
change.
Copernicus gives us a highly accu¬
rate definition of the true stimulants
to economic activity a definition
which has little to do with the moral
imperatives of plain hard work expoun¬
ded by the scholastic philosophers.
During the years following his return
from Olsztyn to Frombork, Copernicus
crystallized the formulation of the plan
for his major work, later known under
the title De revolutionibus orbium coe-
lestium, and written in six sections or
books, which was to be the great
Polish astronomer's immortal contribu¬
tion to world scientific literature.
The revolutionary element of Coper¬
nicus' work lies in his elaboration of
entirely new cosmological principles,
by which he stripped the earth of its
role as the Centre of the Universe,
discovered its daily and annual move¬
ments, and redetermined the planetary
system with the predominant position
now attributed to the sun. The treatise
was put into its final form in the early
1530s, but another ten years were to
go by before it was actually printed.
The publication of the printed edition
of the De revolutionibus has a history
of its own. In 1539, Georg Joachim
Rheticus, a young professor of astro¬
nomy from Wittenburg, arrived in War¬
mia, drawn by the rumours in Europe
about the astounding work being done
by the solitary Frombork astronomer.
It was thanks to Rheticus and
Tiedman Giese, Bishop of Chelmno,
humanist and faithful friend of the
astronomer, that Copernicus eventually
allowed himself to be persuaded to
publish his work, and finally prepared
a copy of the treatise for printing.
Rheticus himself published a volume
entitled De Libris Revolutionum D.
Doctoris Nicolai Copernici Narratio
Prima (Gdansk, 1540), which heralded
the appearance of the great work itself.
Two years later, Rheticus published a
lengthy extract from Copernicus' trea¬
tise, dealing with spherical trigono¬
metry.
Science historians will long be fasci¬
nated by all the events surrounding
the printing of De revolutionibus in
Nuremberg, and the part played by
the astronomer Johannes Schöner and,
especially, the theologian Andreas
Ossiander, who both verified the text.
The prudent anonymous foreword
inserted by the publishers when print¬
ing was already under way, which
puts Copernicus' theory forward as a
purely formal hypothesis, contrasts
sharply with the magnificent letter of
dedication addressed by Copernicus to
Pope Paul III, which is an admirable
eulogy upon astronomy and its cogni¬
tive values.
Tradition has it that the first copy of
the work, printed in Nuremberg,
reached Copernicus only on May 24,
1543, the very day of his death at
the end of a long illness.
More than eighteen centuries lie bet¬
ween Copernicus and Aristotle, the
"Prince of Philosophers" of ancient
times, and for 13 centuries, Ptolemy's
Almagest had invariably been accepted
as the perfect representation of the
system of the Universe. The mere
four hundred years or so since the
beginning of the revolution in modern
thinking set in motion by Copernicus
has to be compared with a period of
almost two thousand years of intellec¬
tual stagnation.
'URING the first century
following the death of Copernicus the
names of the illustrious pioneers of
our own knowledge of the universe
were recorded in the annals of
science. Galileo and Kepler both drew
their inspiration from the work of
Copernicus, and it culminated in the
appearance of Newton's Principles.
In the dedication of De revolutioni¬
bus Copernicus wrote: "If, however,
there be guileful men who, although
they know nothing of mathematics,
nonetheless allow themselves to pass
judgement upon such matters, and
who, on the basis of a cunningly dis¬
torted interpretation of a passage of
the Scriptures, dare to attack and
condemn my work, I dismiss them so
entirely as to despise their judgement
as blindly presumptuous."
Copernicus had the courage to ex¬
pound his innovative ideas in a scien¬
tific work of profound maturity and to
contradict the traditional authority of
the Ancients. This is why today the
world is celebrating the quincentenary
of his birth.
The object of our admiration is not
only the creator of the heliocentric
system: to an even greater extent,
Copernicus should be remembered as
the scholar who opened the way for -i n
the long procession of the creators | q
of modern science.
Jerzy Bukowski
