4. The silent
sweep
of hidden
eyes
ECHNIQUES for visual
surveillance are based on the use of
devices for viewing and devices for
recording pictures.
Devices for viewing include instru¬
ments as diverse as miniature
appliances containing a lens that can
be used for secretly observing the
occupants of a room by inserting it
into a hole drilled through a wall;
polaroid and other types of one-way
windows behind which people can sit
and watch what is happening in
another room without the occupants
being aware; and powerful telescopes
that make it possible to observe loca¬
tions in which persons have reason
to assume they are secluded from
public view.
For recording pictures, still and

movie cameras have been miniaturized
and can be installed on premises or
hidden on the user in ways that make
detection difficult.
Miniature still cameras hidden in a
room can be pre-set to take pictures
at periodic intervals or to be triggered
in various ways, by a switch being
turned on, a file drawer being opened,
or a person entering the room.
Telescopic lenses make it possible
to photograph small objects from great
distances. Small telescopic devices
exist, measuring 20 cm., which are
able to photograph a typewritten page
at a distance of a hundred metres.
Light intensifiers, used with or
without cameras, provide normal vision
in poor daylight or moonlight, and
acceptable vision on an overcast,
moonless night; and image stabilizers
allow sharp pictures to be obtained
from helicopters or by hand (even
while the person with the camera is
walking around).
Television techniques may be used
both for viewing and for recording.
For viewing alone, so-called "live"
transmissions are used, in the form
of closed-circuit television.
Television "eyes" of very small
dimensions (8 x 23 cm.) can be
hidden in a room whence they can
send pictures to a receiver a block
or two away. "Optical fibres" to
which a lens is attached can bend
light around corners. This makes it
possible to place only the optical fibre
and lens in the room under surveillance
and to install the TV camera itself
elsewhere. Moreover, TV cameras
are available which are small enough
to fit into a coat pocket and have
an "eye" the width of a cigarette.
'EVELOPMENT of television
tape makes possible the recording
and replaying of televised situations
and events.
The use of infra-red light makes it
possible to observe and to take
pictures in the dark, since concealed
cameras equipped with infra-red film
can photograph actions in a dark room
if an invisible infra-red energy source
has been placed within that room.
This can be done by putting special
bulbs in overhead fixtures or lamps.
To the naked eye the bulb seems to
be unlit, since no visible light is
transmitted; but it is actually flooding
the room with infra-red light and will
provide the basis for clear snapshots
or films. If the windows are bare,
cameras outside the premises can
photograph inside by projecting infra¬
red illumination into the room.
Substances exist which have the
appearance of solid wall panels and
which do not permit the passage of
normal light but do transmit infra-red
light. The source of infra-red light
need not be inside the room but may
be supplied by a beam sent from the
observation post.
A miniature device has been placed
on the market which combines the
television camera with a transmitter.
It can transmit the pictures it takes
and can operate in darkness with
the use of an infra-red system.
Modern technology makes it possible
to pass visible light or "infra-red
energy" through sealed envelopes and
to take pictures. These pictures can
then be read or, more properly,
deciphered by persons skilled in
reading handwriting or typing where
lines are inverted and superimposed.
Also available today is a needle-thin
"flashlight" that can be inserted in a
sealed envelope to "light it up" for
quick reading by a trained investigator.
Optical "scanners" have been
developed, capable of scanning and
recording typed or hand-printed letters,
words and numbers at the rate of
840 single-spaced, typewritten pages
per hour. These "scanners" can be
used to establish an automated "mail
cover" to record systematically the
names, addresses, etc., of persons
sending mail to a particular individual.
Such information, too, may be
forwarded to a computer for storage
and analysis.
Fluorescent powders or dyes have
been produced which are applied
secretly to a person's hands, shoes,
clothing, hair, umbrella, and the like,
or can be added to such items as
soap, after-shave lotion, and hair tonic
which an individual applies to himself.
Although these substances are
invisible under regular light, they
register as "glowing" substances on
the person being followed when he is
illuminated by an ultra-violet light
source carried by the investigator.
A method of thermal detection that
can be used to establish the recent
presence of persons has been des¬
cribed as follows:
Nearly all moving bodies or warm¬
blooded animals contain a source of
motive power that inevitably develops
heat as well as motion. It is thus
possible to detect automobiles, tanks,
ships, aircraft, and human beings, by
the heat they radiate. As a result of 0
World War II and the subsequent **
development of guided missiles,
thermal detectors can now be made
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

HUMAN RIGHTS
AND THE THREAT
TO PRIVACY (Continued)
very sensitive, and capable of giving
pictures of a scene in which the hotter
objects show up more brightly than
the cooler ones.
The exposed portions of the human
body radiate more heat than those that
are clothed, and thus show up as
"whiter". At the same time, the
sensitivity of the thermal detector can
be made so great that even a surface
that is one thousandth of a degree
centigrade above its surroundings
will show up relative to these sur¬
roundings.
It is thus even possible to discover
where a person has recently been
sitting or lying, because his body has
warmed the surface underneath, and
this takes some minutes to cool down
after he has left it . . . but the amount
of information that can be obtained in
this way is very limited.
An aerial hovering device has been
developed which may combine viewing
and listening. This is a unit with two
counter-rotating rotor blades which is
sent to hover aloft, attached by cable
to ground-control equipment. About
three to four feet in diameter and
weighing forty to fifty pounds, the
surveillance unit now carries closed-
circuit TV equipment that transmits
pictures of objects at ranges of one
mile or more. It could carry listening
equipment just as easily. The unit
hovers at altitudes of 100 to 2,000 feet
and rotates 360- degrees for tracking
purposes.
These systems are not difficult to
operate and allow someone, as Alan F.
Westin points out in "Privacy and
Freedom", "to watch, photograph, and
listen to activity within a mile or more
of his own property, without ever
entering the physical air space of his
neighbours."

