The mass media
Are the mass media
doing more harm than good
in dramatizing the drug question?
LLL 14 countries studied
during Unesco's inquiry report that the
information media radio, television,
films and press have at various times
taken the initiative in publicizing the
drug problem.
None of the countries is radically
opposed to using the mass media
for campaigns against drug abuse,
whereas, in the case of education,
their attitudes were less clear-cut.
But many are critical of the manner
in which the mass media have hitherto
dealt with the subject. By dramatiz¬
ing and exaggerating the problem, they
say, coverage has often merely suc¬
ceeded in reinforcing stereotyped
public views on drug abuse.
Some countries, such as Costa Rica,
point out that the information media
have on occasions launched sensation¬
alist campaigns, completely unscien¬
tific in approach, which can hardly
be termed preventive. Switzerland
stresses the need for utmost caution
in the use of the mass media and in
the popularization of knowledge about
the drug problem.
Two countries, France and the
Federal Republic of Germany, go so
far as to hold the mass media (in
particular the popular press) partly
responsible for the sudden spread of
the drug problem, arguing that total
silence would have been preferable to
spreading sensational and often
inaccurate news.
Many nation-wide information cam¬
paigns have been organized by govern¬
ments, with the mass media operating
under their control, so as to counter¬
act the often negative effects of earlier
unofficial campaigns.
All countries, it seems, agree that
the mass media have played an import¬
ant role in the popularization of know¬
ledge about narcotics. But they are
divided on whether this action really
adds up to prevention of drug abuse.
They consider that concerted research
is needed to discover the real effect
of information given out by the mass
media and what dangers should be
avoided.
France, for example, points out that
nothing was done through the mass
media until August 1971, since no
problem had yet arisen, and it was
felt in these circumstances that infor¬
mation would have done more harm
than good. "By a series of haphazard
campaigns," says the French report,
"the press has made the public aware
of the problem without giving it the
real facts."
Differences of opinion arise over
methods of using the mass media.
Should newspaper and magazine edi¬
tors, and film, radio and television
producers be allowed complete free¬
dom of action? Should seminars be
organized to alert them to the need
for a more scientific approach to the
drug problem? Should a strategy be
drawn up at government level and
applied under government control?
Jamaica, Nigeria and Senegal gave
no direct answer to these questions,
but all other countries favour govern¬
ment action based, where possible, on
scientific research. They feel that an
information strategy should:
define clear objectives based on
a selected number of principles;
work out a general plan of campaign
and co-ordinate action by all
government departments involved;
draw up a precise information plan
for each branch of the media.
The French reply warns against the
harmful effects of "bad information",
or rather of a policy of haphazard
information. In the words of a French
Ministry of Public Health report, the
basic aim is "to convince everyone
directly or indirectly affected by the
problem of the dangers of drugs that
CONTINUED PAGE 14

: a two-edged sword
13

MASS MEDIA (Continued)
The need for a new strategy
14
all can play an active part in prevent¬
ing the spread of drug abuse."
The same report points to a number
of dangers to be avoided in achieving
this aim:
Information will be ineffective if it
fails to reach the public for which
it was intended. Appropriate channels
should be selected and information
tailored for each section of the public.
' If improperly presented, information
can stimulate rather than prevent drug
abuse. Detailed explanations of ways
and means of obtaining drugs, incom¬
plete descriptions of their harmful
effects, over-dramatization and inac¬
curacies, undue emphasis on the
pleasure to be derived from drugs,
can all have a negative effect.
The question of the pleasure given
by drugs needs to be approached with
special care. To deny it outright
obviously reduces credibility, especially
in the eyes of a young and often well-
informed public. To emphasize It, on
the other hand, invites experimentation.
"The best solution is to point out that
the use of drugs rapidly becomes a
need to relieve the anguish at their
absence rather than a search for
pleasure."
HE myth of the intellectual
stimulation claimed for drugs must
also be discredited. The social and
group aspects of certain drugs should
be played down and it should be point¬
ed out instead that real drug addicts,
heroin-takers for example, never form
lasting communities.
Information can harden society's
attitude towards drug-takers; it can
have traumatic effects on parents and
lead to the total rejection of the young
addict who will then have no further
hope of being cured.
Information can fail in its dissuasive
task if it establishes a false relation¬
ship between the problem of drugs and
other problems, lumping it together, for
example, with alcoholism; drugs are
a new phenomenon and social defence
mechanisms against them are still
weak. Or it can fail if it makes too
much of the relationship that has been
drawn between the spread of drug use
and the youth crisis and political pro¬
test. "The extension of the drug
problem is mainly due to the activities
of drug-pushers and of drug addicts
in need of funds. It is not a direct
consequence of the youth crisis,"
says the report.
In a booklet entitled "Principles of
an Information Strategy to Educate the
Public about Drug Abuse", the Fed.
Rep. of Germany notes: "It is now
almost impossible to open a news¬
paper or listen to the radio without
reading or hearing about the alarming
increase in the use of drugs among
young people in the Fed. Rep. of
Germany. In most cases these reports
contain no objective, factual infor¬
mation.
"Though supposedly Intended to
enlighten the reader, most articles in
the press actually increase drug con¬
sumption by rousing curiosity and by
minimizing the harmful aspects of
drugs, dramatizing them and adding a
touch of mystery to their use, thus
masking the real situation."
In most countries public information
on drugs has been handled in two
ways. At first information was given
in a random, uncontrolled fashion; but
faced with the ineffectiveness of this
type of approach and, indeed, the
harm it caused, governments reacted
by applying some general principles
and introducing overall plans for radio,
television and films. Trying to impose
a strict discipline on the national press
has often proved to be more difficult.
Six countries (Denmark, Iran (1),
Jamaica, Nigeria, United Kingdom,
United States) out of fourteen have
used special radio broadcasts for their
information campaigns. Two others
(Costa Rica, Fed. Rep. of Germany)
plan to incorporate facts about drug
abuse into general programmes.
In all countries information via the
radio is aimed chiefly at the general
1) Although Iran does not favour the Intro¬
duction of systematic drug education pro¬
grammes In schools, the Imperial Govern¬
ment has been carrying out a serious, far-
reaching campaign against narcotics over
the past two decades. Details of this action
were given to a meeting of experts held at
Unesco headquarters last January by Mr. F.
Saadat, Under-Secretary of State at the
Iranian Ministry of Information.
Mr. Saadat recalled that Iran Instituted a
total ban on the cultivation of the opium
poppy In 1955. In 1969, limited cultivation
was permitted for medical purposes only
under strict government control.
To gain public support for Its anti-drug
measures the government has formed the
Anti-Narcotics Society to deal exclusively
with the problem. The Society regularly pro¬
duces books and brochures on the subject,
broadcasts anti-drug radio and T.V. program¬
mes and, In close co-operation with the
national press, publishes articles and Infor¬
mation on the activities of the Society and
on help available through government hospi¬
tals and dispensaries.
public, though some items are intend¬
ed for the teenage audience, especially
in the United States where advantage
is taken of peak teenager listening
times. Apparently no use has been
made of the regular radio programmes
designed to appeal to young people.
Programmes generally present
panels of specialists answering ques¬
tions on drug addiction (as in Den¬
mark, U.K. and U.S.A.), general infor¬
mation on drugs (Nigeria), interviews
with drug addicts or ex-addicts (Den¬
mark, U.K.), news items about pen¬
alties imposed on drug-users and
drug-pushers (Jamaica), and dis¬
cussions on the question of legalizing
cannabis (U.K.).
wIDE use is made of tele¬
vision: seven of the fourteen countries
have put out programmes, and two
others (Costa Rica and the Federal
Republic of Germany) plan to produce
special broadcasts.
In the U.S.A. an original mass media
"combined operation" was carried out
in April 1970. Heads of radio, tele¬
vision and press in New Bedford,
Massachusetts got together to launch
a special campaign to raise funds to
extend the centre for the treatment of
drug addicts, a branch of the city's
largest mental health centre. Through¬
out April, newspaper advertisements,
news releases and radio and tele¬
vision spots publicized the campaign.
The climax was a combined radio and
television marathon.
The U.K. has been especially active
in the television field. From Decem¬
ber 1969 to November 1971, seven
full-length programmes were put out
by the BBC and by independent T.V.
networks.
Closer examination of the main
themes of these programmes reveals
that the information presented is
largely neutral in tone and is often
woven into a discussion or a detailed
analysis of scientific or social impli¬
cations of drug-taking.
The similarity between youthful drug
addiction and the habitual taking of
aspirin and other pills by adults is
also touched on. The problem is thus
treated in a comprehensive manner
and not confined to a certain section
of youth.
But in some cases the traditional
type of approach is still used. For
instance, the film, "Gail is dead",

screened by the BBC, tells the story
of a teenager deprived of affection
who dies after taking an overdose of
drugs. The film is reported to have
made a considerable impression on
the public. Programmes produced by
the ORTF in France also aim to put
people on their guard.
Articles and news concerning drugs
appear in the national press in all
14 countries, but in most cases the
subject has not been dealt with ade¬
quately. Four countries (Costa Rica,
France, the Fed. Rep. of Germany,
India) are therefore studying how to
influence or control news on drug
abuse published in the national dailies.
In Costa Rica such action would be
taken through the Ministry of Health,
in India through the Office of Press
Information of the Ministry of Edu
cation, in the Fed. Rep. of Germany by
a special body responsible for health
education, and in France by the Inter¬
departmental Action Committee, an
organization set up to lead the fight
against drugs.
In many cases such organizations
supply news items, background mat¬
erial for articles, research findings on
drugs and special articles, such as
those distributed by the Central Fed¬
eral Office of Health Education of the
Fed. Rep. of Germany to 153 news¬
papers, dealing with subjects such as
the dangers of hashish or on escapism
as one motive for drug abuse.
The only country to report preventive
action through youth publications is
France which has distributed a booklet,
entitled "Fed up with Drugs", publish¬
ed by "Education and Social Life" in
collaboration with government organ¬
izations. The booklet Is illustrated
with drawings and cartoons, including
some by contributors to the "under¬
ground" press.
No evaluation of information cam¬
paigns on drug abuse has been made
in any of the countries covered
by Unesco's survey. But several
countries in which drugs have been a
major problem for some years, today
have some useful experience of the
effectiveness of different approaches.
In their view intimidation has proved
ineffective and it has become essential
to remove the "drama" attached to the
drug problem. Accurate and objective
information should be given, they say,
so that the public can freely take its
own decisions in full knowledge of the
facts.
Opening the 25th session of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs on
January 22, 1973, Mr. Vittorio Winspeare Guiccardi, Director-General of the U.N. Office
at Geneva, referred to the global problem of the illicit drug trade. "The traditional
distinction between producing, manufacturing, transit and victim countries grows blurred...",
he said. "The traffic flows from all parts of the world to all other parts, from developing
countries to industrialized countries and vice versa." Below, coastguards inspect a coastal
vessel suspected of carrying drugs.
Photo Paul Almasy - World Health Organization, Geneva
