20
The great
cultural revolution
of the Renaissance
From Poland across Europe to Italy
a whole world in intellectual ferment
by Paolo Rossi
'OPERNICUS was nineteen
year old when Christopher Columbus
set foot on the American continent in
1492. His life covers the central
period of the Renaissance and the
Protestant Reformation, an era marked
by the wonder of Renaissance art and
by the division of Europe into two
religious camps.
It was a period that witnessed the
wars between France and the Holy
PAOLO ROSSI, professor of the History of
Philosophy at the University of Florence, Is
a noted authority on the history of science
in the 16th century. He has written many
books on this period, including Aspettl della
Rlvoluzlone Sclentifica (Aspects of the Scien¬
tific Revolution) and a biography of Francis
Bacon, also published in English editions
(Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, and
University of Chicago Press, 1968). Author
of I Filosofl e le Macchine (Philosophers and
Machines) also published in English (Harper
and Row, N.Y., 1969), he contributed to the
preparation of Italian editions of works by
Bacon, Vico and Diderot.

Roman Empire and a series of econo¬
mic and social revolutions that followed
geographical discoveries and epic
voyages of exploration. It saw the
start of the break up of the European
feudal system and the consolidation of
the great European States.
Copernicus was a contemporary of
the humanist Erasmus of Rotterdam
and the reformer Luther, of King Henry
VIII of England, under whom the English
Church gained its independence from
Rome, of Emperor Charles V, of
Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci,
of the Swiss astrologer and doctor
Paracelcus and of Machiavelli the
great Italian theoretician of political
science.
The cultural world around Coper¬
nicus was in ferment and thirsting for
new things. The Protestant Reforma¬
tion claimed the right to interpret the
scriptures freely and was a determi¬
nant factor in the breakaway from the
rigid intellectual discipline that was a
feature of medieval civilization. The
Astronomy class for Leonardo,
Michelangelo and the Pope
After completing his studies at the University of Bologna (Italy)
Copernicus went to Rome where, in the year 1500, he gave a
course of lectures on mathematics and astronomy, in which
he is said to have drawn attention to the faults in Ptolemy's
conception of the universe. In this 19th century painting,
Wojciech Gerson, a Polish artist, shows Copernicus lecturing
in the presence of Pope Alexander VI. The scene is imaginary,
but all the persons depicted are known to have been at the
Papal court of that time. In addition to Pope Alexander (1),
the distinguished audience includes Leonardo da Vinci (2),
Michelangelo (3), Caesar Borgia (4), the painter Pietro Peru-
gino (5), the architect Donato Bramante (6) and Baldassare
Castiglione, diplomat and author (7).
artists and scientists of his time were
also fired with the desire for complete
renewal and an open-minded approach
to nature.
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) pro¬
claimed the need for an honest study
of the reality of nature enabling phe¬
nomena to be accurately described and
measured. Research into nature, he
declared, should use the tools of
mathematics and the analytical capaci¬
ty of human vision and should, above
all, put an end to the simple repetition
of already prevalent ideas.
Those who base their assertions on
quotations from the authorities of the
past and on what is written in the
old books, wrote Leonardo, "are not
using their imagination but their
memory."
No credence should be given to
those philosophers "whose arguments
are not confirmed by experiment."
Leonardo invoked "experiment" and
"reason" at one and the same time;
he preached the need to weld to¬
gether experimental contact with the
world and abstract or mathematical
theories opening the door to the inner¬
most secrets of the universe.
Contesting the culture of university
professors and "men of letters", Leo¬
nardo described himself as an "un¬
lettered man". Typical of his thought
and the thought of his time was
an insatiable curiosity with regard to
nature. Why were shells found on
mountains? How was it that birds
could fly? What caused the wind?
What were the mechanics of walking
in men and in animals?
These were the origins, apart from
his activity as an artist, of Leonardo's
innumerable plans for machines, his
anatomical research, and his pages of
reflections on science and on what
science should be about.
Violent disagreement with the
followers of Aristotle, a burning pas¬
sion for knowledge of the "mysteries
of the sky and the secrets of nature",
and an encyclopaedic mentality thirst¬
ing for information about all branches
of knowledge, also marked some of
the most famous practitioners of the
so-called "natural magic" of the Re¬
naissance: the Italian Girolamo Car-
dano (1501-1576), the Swiss Paracelcus
(1493-1541), the German Heinrich Cor¬
nelius Agrippa (1486-1534) and the
Italian Gian Battista della Porta (1535-
1615).
The "revival of magic", with which
these doctors and astrologers were
concerned, was above all a study of
natural effects. They felt that it would
give man dominion of the world, and
that man could only achieve this result
by becoming the "minister" or servant
of nature.
The miracles of magic, wrote Cor¬
nelius Agrippa in his work De vanitate
scientiarum. (On the Vanity of Science)
are very different from those described
by religions. In the latter there is
violation of the laws of nature whereas
the miracles of magic are the result of
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
21

CULTURAL REVOLUTION (Continued)
Medieval beliefs and the new thinking
For a long period of his life
Copernicus was more highly
esteemed as a doctor than as an
astronomer. From 1501 to 1503
he studied medicine at the University
of Padua, the foremost centre of
medical learning of the day. New
approaches were being made to
the study of anatomy but research
on human cadavers had only
recently been authorized and
Copernicus' medical studies were
quite conventional. The anatomy
amphitheatre at Padua, shown
in the engraving above, was not
erected until 1594, more than
50 years after the death
of Copernicus.
Photo © from "Inventeurs et Découvertes
Editions Hachette, Paris
22
operations carried out by man on
nature.
These miracles (in the etymological
sense of the Latin word miracula) are
no more than "things which ought to
arouse wonder", and primarily consist
in the ability to speed up the processes
of nature: by shortening the time that
nature needs to ripen fruit on the trees,
for example, or to modify the rhythm
of the seasons by farming techniques.
Before going further it might be use¬
ful to explain some of the fundamen¬
tal aspects of the age in which Coper¬
nicus lived.
The distinction between magic and
science, so obvious today, was not by
any means evident in the first half of
the sixteenth century. The thirst for
experiment, the study of nature and
the observation of phenomena were
exalted and proclaimed at that time
as part of a vision of the world which
is very different from that held in the
next century by Francis Bacon, René
Descartes and Galileo.
The founders of modern science (and
of modern philosophy) waged a bitter
battle (as did Bacon) against the
"magic" mentality of the preceding
century or regarded that mentality (as
did Descartes and Galileo) as an out¬
dated way of thinking with which a na¬
tural philosopher or a scientist should
not concern himself. Copernicus liv¬
ed in an age in which the distinction
between magic and science was not
as clearcut as it came to be later.
The rebellion against traditional
thinking and above all against Aristote¬
lian philosophy was a key theme of the
Renaissance. The French philosopher
and grammarian, Pierre de La Ramée
(Petrus Ramus) claimed to be able to
demonstrate the falsity of all Aristotle's
doctrines.
This rejection of tradition and this
general desire for innovation also im¬
plied a breakaway by the new culture
from the world of the universities in
which Aristotelian philosophy was still
dominant. A majority of scientists in
the 16th century studied in the uni¬
versities and in many cases taught in
them but there is no doubt that the
liveliest discussion that concerning
scientific and cultural innovation no
longer took place within the walls of
the universities as had happened in
the Middle Ages.
The universities, in the second half
of the 16th century and during the
next century, lacked the ability for the
new thinking necessary in times of
rapid intellectual development. The
new Copernican astronomy was to be
very slow in conquering the academic
world. The old Ptolemaic astronomy
continued to be taught for more than
a century after the publication of De
revolutionibus, and Galileo himself
gave courses in Ptolemaic astronomy.
During the years in which a new
method was evolved based on the
recently-discovered texts of Archime¬
des, Euclid was still read in the uni¬
versities. Mondino's work on anatomy
(which was typically medieval in its
approach) long continued to be the
medical students' textbook even after
the appearance of the first modern
book on anatomy, published by Andrea
Vesalius in 1543.
From this situation stemmed the
need for the renovation of institutions,
closely tied up with the need for new
methods of acquiring and transmitting
learning. The groups of student follow¬
ers of a single master, the aca¬
demies, and the scientific societies
that came into being in Europe in the
16th and 17th centuries tended to meet
these new requirements.
Copernicus' great work triggered
off the scientific revolution which
came to full flower in the writings of
Newton and from which many funda¬
mental aspects of the modern world
are derived. From this revolution were
born new forms of physics, astronomy
and medicine, totally different from
those of the ancient Greeks and
Romans.
The contribution made by Copernicus
to the scientific revolution concerns
astronomy, but we should not regard
Copernicus as an astronomer in the
technical and modern sense of the
word. Copernicus was a man imbued
with the culture of his time and his
training was that of a humanist (in
the meaning this term had in his day).
He was learned in law, medicine,
economics, and administration. In the
universities of Cracow, Bologna, Padua
and Ferrara, he studied in turn mathe¬
matics, astronomy, law, medicine and
philosophy. In Italy he learned Greek
and read Plato. One of his teachers,
the astronomer Domenico Maria da
Novara, was a follower of the Platonic
and Pythagorean philosophy that domi¬
nated Italian Renaissance culture.
As with many humanists, Copernicus
presented his astronomical discoveries
and his new world system, not in the
form of a reasoned refutation of tra¬
ditional theories, but as a revival of
Pythagorean theories. He presented
his theory to the reader as being inti¬
mately bound up with a contemplation
of the world looked upon as a revela¬
tion or manifestation of God.
He set out his discoveries in a reli¬
gious context. The sun, lord and king
of the visible world was a symbol of
God.
This glorification of the sun and the
repeated references to Pythagoras
found in De revolutionibus link the
thinking of Copernicus with one of the
main currents of Renaissance philoso¬
phy.
In 1462 the Italian Marsilio Ficino
had begun his translation of Plato's

Dating back to the 10th century B.C., this Egyptian
papyrus painting (above) shows the speckled
body of the sky goddess Nut pushed upwards
by Shu, the god of air, to form the vault of the
heavens, the speckles of her body becoming
the stars. Nut was married to her brother, the
earth god Geb, but the match was opposed by
the great god Re, ruler of the world, who ordered
their father Shu to raise Nut away from Geb, thus
separating the heavens from the earth.
Photo Cairo Museum © Hassla. Pans
According to a learned paper published in 1726
by an eminent French scholar of Greek
literature, Jean Boivin, the Greek poet Homer
imagined that Mount Olympus, the home of
the gods, was a mountain which rested
on the sky and whose summit pointed down
towards earth. In a passage from the "Iliad",
illustrated by the engraving, left, Zeus speaks
of suspending the earth in the air from
a golden chain attached to the
highest point of Mount Olympus.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
Dialogues. Even before working on
Plato he had translated into Latin the
much famed Corpus hermeticum
a collection of the writings of Greek
authors living between the third and
first centuries before Christ.
These writings, a mixture of Platonic
and Stoic themes and showing the
influence of Hebrew and Persian phi¬
losophy, were attributed by Ficino to
a mythical Egyptian being the god
Thoth identified by the Greeks as
their god Hermes and sometimes
known as Trismegistos (thrice great).
In Platonic philosophy Marsilio Ficino
saw a doctrine of the eternal religious
revelation, made manifest in every age
and finding its highest form of ex¬
pression in Hebraism and Christianity.
This religious philosophy, stated
Ficino, "was born with Zoroaster
among the Persians and with Hermes
among the Egyptians, nurtured with
Orpheus among the Thracians, dev¬
eloped with Pythagoras among the
Greeks and the Italiotes and reached
its zenith in Athens with Plato". To
Ficino and to the Italian Renaissance
Platonists, philosophy and religion
were not two separate things: great
philosophical thought and the sacred
writings of the various religions all
converged towards the same result.
In a passage from De revolutionibus
concerning the central position of the
sun, Copernicus refers explicitly to the
name of Hermes Trismegistos. His new
astronomic doctrine first saw the light
of day in a philosophic and religious
context that was clearly neo-Platonic
in inspiration, and he used a quotation
from a famous work in which Hermes
had described the sun cult of the
ancient Egyptians.
For us Copernicus' book has become
a point of departure, and almost the
symbol of the intellectual revolution
from which modern science has sprung.
As we have seen, this book was
written in an age which hungered for
new things, which was prepared to
question traditional beliefs, and which
struggled in the difficulties arising from
the gap between scientific and schol¬
astic institutions and the real progress
of science.
It was not by chance that all this
happened, and in this sense the book
of Copernicus is one of the charac¬
teristic expressions of the dawn of
modern culture. And yet Copernicus,
deeply imbued with neo-Platonic phi¬
losophy, preferred to present his new
picture of the world as a revival of
old doctrines rather than as a revolu¬
tionary innovation.
He was a timid and cautious man.
Perhaps his interest in the sun
which was one of the main topics of
neo-Platonic philosophy of the 16th
century spurred him to his astro¬
nomic research aimed at proving the
sun to be the centre of the universe.
Perhaps also he was endeavouring to
make what was new in his astronomy
acceptable to his contemporaries by
setting it in a philosophical context
familiar to the intellectuals of his time.
At all events, it is clear that Coper¬
nicus used to the full two great lessons
of 16th century thought: that the dis¬
covery of geometrical and arithmetical
regularity in nature is essential for the
understanding of the world; and that
the truths handed down from antiquity
should be examined critically and, if
necessary, revised.
23
