Artificial satellites and high-speed computers, coupled with the more
recent development of relatively inexpensive ground receiving equipment
known as Automatic Picture Transmission (APT), have revolutionized
international meteorology. Direct reception of weather information in the
form of photographs covering an area of a radius of 1,600 km. around
the receiving station is now within reach of every country in the world.'
Right, antenna of the European Space Research Organization (ESRO)
satellite tracking station at Redu, Belgium.


MAKING
THE WEATHER
PAY OFF
An international report reveals
the important changes
meteorology is bringing
to economic and social development
M
Rvw
Wi\\\W w
wjyj
to Ä«
!PP-V
**
rV>r]rrriil7TTi
4M.
H
by Dan Behrman
24
DAN BEHRMAN is a Unesco science writer.
He Is the author of 'The New World of the
Oceans' (Little Brown and Co., Boston,
U.S.A.) also published in a paperback edi¬
tion, and 'In Partnership with Nature: Unesco
and the Environment", Unesco Paris, 1972.
His latest book, "The Man Who Loved Bi¬
cycles', has just been published by Harper's
Magazine Press, New York.
u.'NLIKE someone in an¬
other profession, the meteorologist
cannot bury his mistakes. They are
there for all to see and suffer: the
rain that drenches picnickers on a "fair
and warmer" Sunday; the forecast of
chill that leaves vacation resort oper¬
ators fuming under a hot sun with their
rooms empty. When such things
happen, the weatherman gets the
blame and his reputation suffers.
A great deal to change this image
is to be found in a new technical
publication issued by the World Met¬
eorological Organization on the appli¬
cations of meteorology to economic
and social development. It is a report
by the panel that WMO's Executive
Committee set up to look at the
subject.
There are two ways that meteorology
can change the odds in the great
economic game that man plays with
nature. It can predict what nature
will do, the equivalent of giving the

m **»
¡EJE*
IBS» '¿20 ^asus
&ÄX»
\VA\VW* »«».
8KV
^5S0*&' O*
- .,
Mm
WW
.
...r**«.*«*. ffAV
. r.y.w.-
. :" f.V.V."....
-
«'ifiliiyiiiWiliX'iliii'igrjffla
.V.V.V.V..V.V
P,v£',\\\
* >
iVtVrVïVyY"^:^'^' »777
',*.*.
: 1 1 1 1 i'iy/i'^rXw L^Pvv^>-rt1'rtStrr rwfrf fT1 ttfttffti
punter inside information on a horse
race. Or it can try to manipulate
nature so that, in effect, our bettor
has a sure thing. The WMO gives us
an idea of how far we have come
towards foretelling and changing the
weather two of man's oldest dreams.
James McQuigg, an American re¬
search meteorologist and professor of
atmospheric science, produces a host
of examples to show how accurate
weather forecasts can pay off. Para¬
doxically, the more developed an eco¬
nomy, the more weather-dependent it
may be. The effects of nature's
whims are extremely expensive when
large capital investments are involved.
A good case is the routing of ships
across the North Atlantic. The cost
of producing a recommended route is
about that of running a medium-sized
tanker for half an hour. Since the
forecast may save from four to twelve
hours on a voyage, the shipowner gets
his money back eight to twenty^four
times over.
Ships eat up money in harbour. If
dockers are called out to unload deck
Cargo from a freighter in New York
harbour and rain starts to fall, they
cannot work safely. But they must be
paid a minimum which can amount to
$3,000 or $4,000 for one day. On
the other hand, it costs $5,000 a day
to keep a ship in dock with no one
unloading it. In New York harbour,
a good weatherman earns his pay.
He does on the Missouri River, too,
between Kansas City and St. Louis.
A river forecast centre in Kansas City
can predict river levels from one to
three days in advance. This is pre¬
cious information to skippers of tow-
boats hauling barges on the Missouri.
They cannot use memory and instinct
to get over snags and sandbars the
way Mark Twain and his fellow pilots
did a century ago.
When the Missouri is low, every
*ftNESCc>
extra inch of draught means more
cargo and a gain of $125 per barge
on the 400-kilometre run from Kansas
City to St. Louis. If the forecaster
can safely predict a rise of two feet
above minimum flow, then a towboat
can take half again as many barges.
As one might expect, farmers are
good customers for weather informat¬
ion. The more they modernize, the
more they need it. McQuigg tells us
the implications of the Green Revo¬
lution and the new varieties of crops
it has introduced
"Old locally-developed maize varie¬
ties in Kenya apparently had a broader
spectrum of genetic characteristics,
resulting in less uniform sowing-mat¬
urity requirements (and lower yields).
The climatological information that
proved to be directly applicable was
identification of two maximum rainfall
periods during the growing season,
with the recommendation that two
plantings be made, each using a strain
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
25

MAKING THE WEATHER PAY OFF (Continued)
A breakthrough in airport fog dispersal
underground jet engines
of maize with a short growing period.
"In some areas, this resulted in a
nine-fold increase in yield."
On the Mississippi Delta in the
United States where cotton is king,
a different need arose. In the old
days when cotton was planted by
hand, it had to be replanted if a cold
snap struck. Then came mechaniza¬
tion and higher costs that made
replanting more expensive.
Meteorologists found that a cotton
grower could cut his risks if he knew
the actual soil temperature at planting
depth and then used the five-day tem¬
perature forecast for his region. Mc¬
Quigg estimates that farmers in south¬
east Missouri saved about $500,000
a year using information that cost
$25,000 to produce.
N
26
I EW techniques mean new
problems, particularly when animals
are kept indoors. The climatologist is
now called upon to assess the pros
and cons of air-conditioning dairy
cattle to see if higher yields are worth
the added cost (the answer, according
to McQuigg, varies from one place to
another).
Animals raised indoors are not as
tough as those that roam pastures or
woodland. So the meteorologist is
needed to make sure that weather
conditions will be right when pigs or
cattle are shipped to market or to
warn farmers of the onset of a humid
heat wave that can hurt their indoor
herds.
Wherever McQuigg pries with his
inquiring mind, he overturns some in¬
teresting stones. He tells us that the
construction industry would like to be
able to work all the year round in
cold latitudes, thereby getting a better
return on its capital (interest has to be
paid all the year round). Meteorology
must be able to say when the tem¬
perature will go down to freezing so
that the right precautions are taken
when concrete is poured.
In hot weather, precise short-range
forecasts are the answer to the elec¬
tric power industry's prayer in a coun¬
try such as the United States where
human beings, unlike cattle, want to
be air-conditioned no matter what the
price.
McQuigg cites a case: "One mid
west U.S. electric power company
serves an area with the demand for
power most sensitive to weather in the
summertime. The cost of providing
electric power, using a combination of
hydroelectric, steam and gas turbine
generators owned by the company
and electric power bought from other
companies, on a very warm humid
summer day is three to five times
higher than on a cool dry summer day.
Short-term weather forecasts are very
useful to the manager of this kind of
system."
The electric power industry also
needs long-term forecasts five to ten
years ahead so that it can plan how
to meet future energy needs without
saddling itself with expensive excess
capacity.
Meteorologists are in demand on the
marketplace. The clothing industry
may produce large numbers of bathing
suits only to hear customers clamour¬
ing for raincoats. In New York City,
it has been found that a warm Septem¬
ber will drive sales of women's winter
coats down to only 14 per cent of the
seasonal average. If September is
cool, sales will run to twice the
average.
When it comes to vacation and
leisure pastimes, meteorologists have
gone far beyond the stage of trying
to learn whether it will be a good day
for the beach. McQuigg tells how a
climatologist in the state of Michigan
was asked by two groups of business¬
men if certain sites would have
enough snow to warrant setting them
aside as recreation areas for snow¬
mobile enthusiasts.
Records showed that one site only
had from ten to twenty suitable days
per winter season so peace and quiet
prevailed there. But the probabilities
looked better for the other site and
it is now being developed.
EOPLE in the United Sta¬
tes can now go south for the skiing
thanks to the collaboration of meteo¬
rologists, businessmen and engineers
on the mountains of North Carolina.
At first, Albert V. Hardy, the state
climatologist, said that nature could
not supply enough snow for skiing and
what there was did not last long
enough.
Then engineers found that man-
made snow could be used and, said
Hardy, the outlook brightened. "Many
of the northern facing slopes have a
winter climate able to support a base
snows tends to help nature by cooling
of snow for extended periods. In
fact, the process tends to be self-per¬
petuating since a continuous supply of
the air around the area." Air-condi¬
tioned cattle and snow-cooled air...
Chilling a mountain is weather mod¬
ification, albeit on a very small scale.
The WMO has looked closely at the
possibility of changing the weather
over large areas and the benefits that
might be expected. L.L. Means sums
up progress in his report on economic
and social aspects of weather modifi¬
cation.
The benefits are huge when one
looks at the havoc that the weather
can wreak. Means states that in the
United States alone, hurricane damage
averages about $500 million a year,
hail damage amounts to more than
$300 million and the bill for forest
fires started by lightning is another
$100 million.
m OG delays cost domestic
airlines more than $75 million a year
and no one knows how much they
affect ground and water transportation.
Costs that can be directly identified
with hurricanes, hail, lightning and fog
run to around $1,000 million a year
in the United States alone.
The brightest prospects seem to lie
in airport fog dispersal. In the past,
a number of techniques have been
used. In particular, freezing fog has
been seeded with silver iodide or dry
ice pellets so that it precipitates out
as ice crystals. Warm fog is tougher.
Helicopters can blow it away with a
warm downwash from their rotors but
that only clears enough space to land
a helicopter. Heating the air with
open flames along a runway is costly
and dangerous to planes veering to
one side.
No method really worked until the
French got the idea of putting jet
engines underground at Orly Airport
outside Paris and using them to heat
the air. Means says this could be
"a significant breakthrough from both
the technical and economic view¬
points".
It comes at the right time. The
«. CONTINUED PAGE 28

Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
INTER-CONTINENTAL DUST CLOUD
Scourge of the world's deserts and adjoining regions, sand and dust storms can attain peaks
of tremendous violence. Above, a mountain-high "wave" of sand raised by the wind streaks
across the Sahara, blotting out the sky and enveloping everything in its path. Storms such
as these cover enormous distances. In June and July 1969, the American satellite ATS III
tracked and photographed the extraordinary journey of a dust cloud across thousands of
kilometres from the Sahara across the Atlantic to Barbados in the Caribbean. Series of
photos on left are the actual images transmitted by satellite ; right, the same pictures show¬
ing the African continent and Caribbean area and the moving dust cloud. Not all the effects
of dust clouds on weather are known and satellite photographs are expected to throw new
light on these problems.
MAKING THE WEATHER PAY OFF (Continued)
28
wide^bodied airbuses now being intro¬
duced carry so many passengers that,
according to one estimate, delays and
cancellations may cost twice as much
as in the past. Tests in the U.S. in
the winter of 1969-70 showed that it
cost $118,300 to clear fog at nine
cities while benefits amounted to
$339,970. With bigger planes and
better techniques it is expected that
this ratio will be considerably im¬
proved.
Operations on a much bigger scale
are being carried out to stop hail.
The world leader here appears to be
the Soviet Union. According to
Means, at least four Soviet programm¬
es are now serving nearly 2,500,000
hectares of farm land. He writes:
"Ice-nuclei (usually lead iodide) are
usually delivered directly into the
clouds at appropriate altitudes through
the use of artillery or rockets. Soviet
scientists have reported success in
all of these projects with reduction
in hail damage ranging from 50 to 90
per cent."
In Kenya, hail losses were reported
cut by 58 per cent over an area of
800 square miles where 40,000 acres
of tea are grown. The verdict, how¬
ever, is far from unanimous. Swiss
experiments "showed no significant
difference in duration, areal extent
or intensity of hail when it occurred
on seeded and unseeded days."
The Swiss report said hail actually
fell more often on seeded days which
also saw a 21 per cent increase in
average rainfall. In the United States,
hail-raisers found they were taken to
court because less rain fell after their
cloud-seeding.
Clouds are also seeded in attempts
to stop lightning from starting forest
fires. The U.S. Forest Service says
that its Skyfire experiment has reduc¬
ed lightning-lighted fires by up to 90
per cent in the seeded areas. Some
scientists query this figure and the
method is now being given a more
extensive test.
It would cost $50,000 to send air¬
craft up to seed a front of convection
cells likely to produce lightning as it
advanced across the Pacific North¬
west in the U.S., but it cost $11 million

JUNE 29, 1969
JULY 2, 1969
to fight 124 lightning fires that struck
one forest in that area during eleven
days in 1971.
Even bigger money is involved when
the WMO report turns to the modifi¬
cation of hurricanes and typhoons.
This work is being carried on in the
United States under another impres¬
sive name, Project Stormfury. It aims
to seed hurricanes and thereby reduce
the intensity of their maximum winds.
The WMO report states: "In Hurri¬
cane Debbie (August 1969) data col¬
lected by aircraft showed that on suc¬
cessive runs extending over a period
of about three hours before the first
seeding until five or six hours after
the fifth seeding, the winds at 12,000
JULY 4, 1969
feet decreased about thirty per cent
on August 18.
"The storm re-intensified on August
19, starting about eight hours after
the last seeding on the 18th. On
August 20, Debbie was again seeded
five times. The maximum winds de¬
creased about fifteen per cent... It is
not known whether the decreases in
intensity... were caused by seeding or
by natural forces.
"More experiments are needed to
confirm the encouraging results of
seeding Debbie. Proposals have been
made to move the project to the
Pacific where opportunities to seed
typhoons would occur more often."
As noted earlier, hurricane damage
in the United States runs to $500 mil
lion a year, and an incalculable toll in
human lives is taken by the typhoons
that strike in the Bay of Bengal.
Means notes: "The costs of Storm-
fury experiments and research by
contrast are relatively low. If spend¬
ing continues during the next ten
years at the current annual rate, and
if at the end of ten years it is possible
to modify one hurricane such as
Camille (1969) sufficiently to reduce
the damage by ten per cent, that
reduction will amount to more than
ten times the costs over the ten-year
period."
He does remark, though, that hur- 7Q
ricane modification raises some eco¬
nomic and legal problems which are
easy to imagine. Anyone who could
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

MAKING THE WEATHER PAY OFF (Continued)
Rain-making stories with a happy ending
Rain-making stories with an unhappy ending
prove that cloud seeders brought a
hurricane down upon his head could
collect astronomical damages.
While the United States is alone in
hurricane modification research and
the Soviet Union suppresses hail on a
much greater scale than anyone else,
a number of countries have made an
attempt at "precipitation enhance¬
ment" a piece of jargon that the
meteorologist uses because it sounds
so much more respectable than "rain-
making".
One cannot blame him for trying
to get away from the old picture of
the medicine man beating a drum or
the quack scientist firing a popgun
at the sky. In the past, meteorologists
have always displayed great caution
when the issue of "rain-making"
arose. Now, according to the highly
respectable WMO, they are less sus¬
picious.
30
EANS describes a few
examples. One from Florida in the
United States is illustrative. "The ap¬
proach used 'dynamic seeding' which
involves massive doses of silver iodide
introduced into the top of cumulus
clouds by dropping pyrotechnic flares
from aircraft. Dynamic seeding is
directed toward producing large
growth of the cloud by releasing the
latent heat of freezing available in the
supercooled water content.
"Clouds seeded by suoh a method
are said to rain more because of in¬
creased cloud size and lifetime... Dy¬
namic seeding, if successful, is des¬
cribed as causing one or more cumu¬
lus congestus clouds to grow into
towering cumulonimbi which may
merge into a huge cumulonimbus
complex.
"It was noted that merged clouds
produced ten times more precipitation
than isolated clouds on the same day...
If optional rain enhancement is desir¬
ed, dynamic seeding should be used
deliberately to produce mergers.
"The main result reported of the
experiments and statistical analyses is
that the effect of dynamic seeding on
rainfall is large, positive and signifi¬
cant... The seeded clouds were report¬
ed to have produced more than three
times as much rain as the control
clouds."
the Sovi.et Union, WMO states,
scientists have found that precipita
tion could be increased from 13 to 18
per cent over the Ukraine in winter.
Results from two areas in Australia
showed increases in rainfall up to
300 kilometres downwind from the
area where the clouds were seeded.
The Australians have long adopted
a "show-me" attitude towards rain
enhancement. But now Means quotes
the results of a major experiment
in Tasmania: "In the determination of
the effects of cloud-seeding on the
rainfall over a hydroelectric catchment
area, it was concluded that rain was
increased by 10 per cent or 20 per
cent. It has been estimated that a
one per cent increase in this area
could be worth about $100,000 per
year."
One rain-making story with a happy
ending comes from the Philippines.
"The project was started in April 1970
after months of drought. In central
Luzon, the sugar-cane and other crops
were dying. By the time the project
was completed in June, the islands
were reported as verdant. The Phil¬
ippine Sugar Institute assembled in¬
formation and estimated the impact
on the economy. The value of net
gain in production was estimated at
$43 million. The cost of the project
was roughly $500,000."
Writing for WMO, Means concludes
cautiously : "There appears to be a
general consensus that cloud-seeding
can affect precipitation, but the effect
can be positive or in some cases
negative, depending upon meteorolo¬
gical conditions, background contami¬
nation and possibly other factors.
Some progress is being made in se¬
lecting meteorological conditions for
positive results. Cloud-seeding for
the enhancement of precipitation has
not yet reached the engineering phase
as has dissipation of cold fog."
Nor is it a cheap solution for eco¬
nomic growth. WMO, in fact, issues
a warning by Prof. E.A. Bernard : "It
is time to react against the tendency,
far too common in the developing
countries, to conduct experiments or
operations with artificial rainfall in an
attempt to mitigate the deficiencies of
the rainfall regime. These tempting
but costly practices should be left to
the advanced countries.
"So long as the latter have not
succeeded in providing a tested scien¬
tific and technological basis for such
operations, it will pay better to invest
the budgetary resources involved in
taking better advantage of the water
available on the basis of agrometeo-
rological and hydrometeorological
studies."
There is another factor that slows
such studies, in Prof. Bernard's opi¬
nion. Virtually every country has
airline services and there is no ques¬
tion of cutting corners on the quality
of meteorological facilities for air tra¬
vel. The result, he says, is that the
best of limited facilities must be made
available for aeronautical meteorology.
"As a result", he writes, "public
authorities have been led to consider
meteorology as an operational tech¬
nique for civil aviation. This regret¬
table state of affairs prevails in many
countries of the Third World. It inhib¬
its the setting up of true meteorolo¬
gical services intended primarily to
.serve national priorities in develop¬
ment."
HE moral of this story is
that no meteorologist can make manna
fall from the heavens. The kind of
benefits that James McQuigg describes
are the returns from heavy investment
in adequate meteorological services
and in training scientists to man them.
Prof. Bernard cites some eloquent
figures that WMO has gathered. Of
its 133 member nations, 105 are devel¬
oping countries. They spent $109
million in meteorology in 1968 as
against $854 million spent by twenty-
eight industrially developed countries.
On a per capita basis, this worked
out to $1.38 per North American and
.02 cents per Asian, a ratio of 70 to 1.
Until this ratio changes, it is likely
that in meteorology, as so many other
realms, the rich countries will get
richer and the poor countries will
become... what they have been all
along.
