Photo Georg Gerster
© Rapho, Paris
by Nikolai
Timofeyev-Ressovsky
POWER FROM THE SUN. The French Pyrenees have become a major centre for research into the in¬
dustrial uses of solar energy. At the Mont-Louis solar laboratory, a sun-powered furnace has been used
for specialized metallurgical research during the past 20 years (see "Unesco Courier", Sept. 1958).
Today, the first solar "factory" is operating at Odeillo, six miles away. Here, some of the 63 mobile
mirrors of its solar furnace capture the sun's rays which another concave mirror as high as a 9 -storey
building (not shown here) concentrates on to the furnace itself. "Increasing the world's green plant
cover (which absorbs and uses solar energy)," says Nikolai Timofeyev-Ressovsky, "would trap
enough energy to raise the productivity of the biosphere 2 to 3 times."

The biosphere
is 10 times richer
than we think
NIKOLAI TIMOFEYEV-RESSOVSKY is a dis¬
tinguished Soviet biologist and geneticist
who has published ten major studies and
over 300 papers on zoology, biophysics,
radiobiology, genetics and ornithology. The
winner of many scientific awards he Is inter¬
nationally famous as a member of many
scientific associations outside and In the
U.S.S.R.
'URING the past twenty
years the problem of the population
explosion has moved to the centre of
world-wide attention and concern.
Some economists believe that even
with good infrastructural organization
our planet is not capable of feeding
(on the basis of current scientific and
technical possibilities) more than 8 to
12,000 million people.
Consequently within the next
hundred years or so nearly half the
Earth's population would lack not only
food but also the biochemical sub¬
stances so important to modern life.
Over fifty years ago the great
Russian naturalist Vladimir Vernadsky yO
declared that the industry and **
technology of modern man make such
a powerful impact on the earth's
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

THE BIOSPHERE (Continued)
An optimistic view based on hard facts
30
surface that they may be regarded as
a "new geological factor". Rapid
population growth is accompanied by
an equally rapid increase in the scale,
volume and intensity of man's technical
and industrial activities.
At this pace it is not inconceivable
that life on our planet and the equili¬
brium of the biosphere will ultimately
be disrupted, with disastrous con¬
sequences that might even jeopardize
man's very existence.
At first sight, therefore, the possi¬
bility of achieving a balance between
a teeming population and the limited
productive forces of nature does not
seem very encouraging. It Is predict¬
ed that in a hundred years or so a
good 50 per cent of the population
will be "surplus", with no food to eat
and perhaps not enough air to breathe
and that water will be lacking for both
domestic use and industry.
It follows that of the major scientific
and technical problems before us, the
balance between man and the bio¬
sphere must be regarded as the most
urgent, arid its global solution will
need the participation of all branches
of science, including mathematics.
But let us look at the same question
from a more optimistic angle, using
arguments that are not in the least
Utopian but are based on forecasts
that can be made here and now in
the light of current knowledge and
achievements.
iI^bARTH is a planet on which
many varied forms of life have dev¬
eloped. All cosmogonie theories re¬
cognize the existence in the Universe
of "dead planets", devoid of life. The
great peculiarity which makes earth a
"living" planet is its characteristic
envelope known as the biosphere.
A rough outline of the working of
the biosphere shows, first, an intake
of energy from the sun. Within the
biomass vast metabolic reactions take
place as a result of which certain
organisms are born, others die, some
feed on others, make use of their
products, and so on.
It is an immense continuous biolo¬
gical cycle with countless materials and
energy forms changing from one
biological state to another. The cycle
also has an outlet at the point at
which a certain amount of living
matter and energy is lost in the
formation of sedimentary rock.
What new resources can this vast
biological cycle offer to man? Let us
consider this question on three levels:
the energy intake; the biological cycle;
the end of the biological cycle and
the beginning of the geological cycle.
First, the earth receives a certain
amount of solar energy. Of this only
the fraction absorbed by plants
capable of photosynthesis is of biolo¬
gical interest. Of the total energy
received only 1 to 10 per cent, varying
according to geographical region, is
absorbed by plants and not all of it
is used for photosynthesis.
We can speak of an "efficiency
coefficient" in Nature just as we can
in technology. This coefficient is diffi¬
cult to compute exactly but it can be
said to vary between 2 and 8 per cent,
depending on the species of plants.
Thus we see that even at the
"intake" point man can do something
to make plants absorb a greater
amount of energy by simply increas¬
ing the density of the earth's green
cover.
We have to admit that so far he
has done the contrary. In his
economic and industrial activities man
reduces this density by over-exploiting
forests, pastures and fields. Green
cover density is also lower than it
need be because very little is done to
reafforestate deserts and reclaim arid
lands.
But it is quite certain that in the
present state of technology and
industry it is perfectly possible in
theory to reverse this process and to
raise the density of the green cover
on land and in suitable stretches of
water, especially fresh water lakes.
It has been calculated that if this
were done, the rate of absorption
of solar energy would be increased at
least 1è to 2 times. Biological
productivity would be substantially
increased, probably 2 to 3 times.
This is precisely the production
increase required in the forecasts for
the next hundred years.
Let us now consider the major biolo¬
gical cycle itself. Man cannot really
be regarded as a thrifty manager of his
natural resources, for he destroys or
seriously jeopardizes the balance of
plant life and wildlife. A study of the
reproduction of land and water animals
and plants should make it possible to
increase the effective productivity of
the vast biological cycle considerably,
simply because a vaster area of the
earth's green cover can sustain a
greater number of animals.
In the last ten years genetics the
science of heredity has discovered
more and more about the structure
and functioning of the genotype, the
code of genetic information trans¬
mitted from generation to generation.
Soon man will probably be able to
influence these various phenomena in
order to increase yields and accelerate
selective breeding of crops and
livestock, and this too can enormously
raise the feedback of the biological
cycle.
We may therefore say that at the
level of the biological cycle man can
obtain eventually two, three or even
more times as many useful products
as he does today. In Japan, for
instance, over 20 species of algae
(seaweeds) are already used in the
manufacture of foods for human
consumption and for animal fodder.
us see what increased
potential all this gives us. At the
point of energy intake the increase in
the rate of absorption of solar energy
and plant efficiency gives us a produc¬
tivity increase of from 1 to 2, and at the
level of the major biological cycle we
have a further increase of 3 to 4,
which gives a total increase of about
6 to 8 times. And this is possible
solely on the basis of established
knowledge and current techniques.
Let us now look at another equally
important biological problem. We
know that all over the earth there are
more or less complex biological
communities consisting of numerous
species or organisms living together.
So far we do not know by what
mechanisms such communities persist
through time provided that man does
not disrupt their equilibrium or modify
the species coexisting in them.
When man has found the key to
the balance of nature, he will be able
to obtain infinitely more from the
biological cycle than he does now.
He will be able to alter and improve
the earth's biological communities at
will, deliberately, scientifically and to
his advantage. And if this enables
him to raise the biological productivity
of the earth a further 1i times, that
will bring the total increase up to ten
times.

Now let us look at our last point
the "outlet" of the biosphere. We
know that in some parts of the earth,
at the bottom of some lakes, the mud,
due to a mineralization process by
living organisms, turns into soluble
salts and is ultimately transformed
into "sapropel", an extremely interest¬
ing organic substance mainly compos¬
ed of carbohydrates, proteins and
fats.
There are already many uses for this
substance. The Japanese employ the
best quality in foodstuffs, the medium
qualities in animal feed and the lowest
as organic fertilizer. In other countries
it is used in sweet-making as a sub¬
stitute for gelatine and agar. But by
and large it Is still used only in very
small proportions.
This brings us to a far wider Issue.
It is certain that in future it will be the
special task of biotechnical engineers
to study the products of the biological
cycle with a view to preventing the
gradual degradation of valuable sub¬
stances Into a conglomerate of lower
molecules of little utility, inorganic
salts and limestone.
These specialists will try to harness
the products of the biosphere at the
point where they are present in their
most valuable forms organic macro-
molecules of carbohydrates, proteins
and fats, which mankind needs so
much. This is the third level at which
man can increase the natural produc¬
tivity of the planet.
I began with a rather pessimistic
account of the rapidly widening gap
between population growth and the
natural biological reserves of our
planet. But after examining the
processes going on in the biosphere
and what we have learned from the
research of leading scientists we can
make a far more optimistic forecast:
Man can increase the earth's pro¬
ductivity not twice but ten times and
more without damaging the potential
capacity of the biosphere.
The conclusion is obvious. The
most important and most urgent
problem is that man should learn to
use the products of the biosphere
rationally and with moderation.
Scientists must start now to find a
solution.
A first step would be to make an
exhaustive inventory of the environ¬
ment. Action must be taken im¬
mediately to safeguard nature and to
develop the new technology which
will eliminate from every branch of
industry all sources of pollution and
contamination of the biosphere.
Methods used in forestry and
fishing, etc. need to be rationalized
at once; greater use should be made
of new species of living organisms;
the density of plant cover must be
rapidly increased; biological produc¬
tivity of the various sectors of the
biosphere must be raised.
All these inter-related tasks can be
carried out only if we co-ordinate the
efforts of many fields of science and
draw widely on the most modern
materials and the most varied in¬
dustries. And we should never forget
that the No.1 problem facing mankind
today has got to be solved. For
mankind it is a matter of life or death.
'VER the past 15 to 20
years, the Soviet Government has
shown that the protection of nature
is one of its main preoccupations.
Among other legal and practical mea¬
sures, it has launched vast reaffores¬
tation schemes, made studies of the
hydrological balance of northern water¬
ways, of the Caspian and Aral Seas,
taken steps to preserve Lake Baikal
from pollution and introduced laws
concerning soil use and pollution of
air and water, to quote but a few
examples.
Such action was reinforced and
extended by the adoption, in Sep¬
tember 1972, by the U.S.S.R. Supreme
Soviet, of a new series of far-reaching
measures concerning protection of the
environment and the rational use of
natural resources.
In spite of the effectiveness of
these measures and of those adopted
in other countries, they are not in
themselves enough to resolve many of
the problems of the pollution of the
atmosphere and the oceans. Inter¬
national co-operation is essential since
pollution entails world-wide conse¬
quences which can onk be controlled
by the concerted efforts of all
countries.
S.O.S. FOR PLANET EARTH
Classroom studies and children's books are bringing
home the problems of the environment to young people
in many countries. In Italy the International Book Centre
and the Giunti-Bemporad Marzocco publishing house,
in Florence, recently brought out an imaginative chil¬
dren's book, "S.O.S. for Planet Earth" by A. Pacini and
G. Masini. Subtitled "An Ecological Message to all the
World's Children", it features attractive pull-out and
3-dimensional illustrations. Left, Planet Earth imprisoned
in a bottle marked poison. Above, pull-out showing,
from bottom to top, part of Nature's food chain
threatened by Man's abuses and negligence.
Photos © International Book Centre-
Giunti-Bemporad Marzocco.
Florence, 1971.
31
