MYSTERY
SCRIPT
OF THE
INDUS VALLEY
One of the world's oldest writing systems
still resists the efforts of scholars
by Ahmad Hasan Dani
28
AHMAD HASAN DANI is professor of
cultural history and Dean of the Faculty of
Social Sciences at the University of Isla¬
mabad, in Pakistan. He started his career
in the Department of Archaeology 27 years
ago and though he joined the university
service later, he has continued his interest
in archaeology and carried out a number of
excavations. Author of several books on
archaeology and history, he is editor of the
archaeological bulletin "Ancient Pakistan".
Photo Department of Archaeology
and Museums, Pakistan
HE Indus Valley lies across
ancient migration routes from central
and western Asia to India.
The Indus Civilization introduced
the first urban life in this valley at a
time when similar civilizations had
developed on the banks of the Nile
and the Tigris-Euphrates valleys. Such
urban growth was possible because of
a new technical advance in the
Bronze Age when the river valleys
could be made to yield sufficient crops
to sustain the growing human popula¬
tion.
This also led to overseas trade and
contacts with distant lands. As a
result, a system of writing evolved
in each region. Each system had a
character of its own, but the earliest
forms shared a common pattern derived
from the pictures of the objects
common in their particular civilizations.
These picture writings, known as
pictographs, are not read in the way
we read our alphabets. In order to
specify the meaning it is necessary to
associate one meaning with each
pictograph. Such association simpli¬
fies the process of understanding. To
make it simpler the pictures are re¬
duced in outline and only brief
sketches express human ideas. In this
way, man developed ideograms to
make his symbols understood by
others. This process of simplification
differed from region to region.
As each region had its own lan¬
guage, the regional ideograms ex¬
pressed the words of those languages.
And thus we see simplified pictures
related to human sounds. Man went
a step further in the evolution of writing
when he could express not only the
visible objects in writing but also all
kinds of sounds. And in time, the
pictures actually lost their real visible
shape and meaning. They were
reduced to symbols and came to be
associated permanently with sounds.
Each of the three great civilizations
had their own way of evolution.
Egypt developed a system known as
hieroglyph while Mesopotamia pro¬
gressed towards wedge-shaped writ¬
ing called cuneiform. The Indus writ¬
ing is still a mystery and scholars are
busy solving it.
The scripts of the forgotten civiliza¬
tions need to be deciphered. The way
to decipherment is either by learning
the value of the symbols which would

Photo Guy Thomas © J. Biltgen, Paris
Most examples of the mysterious Indus valley script consist of short inscriptions on seals usually accom¬
panied by representations of real or fabulous anim als (see back cover) or, more rarely, human figures
(opposite page). Inscriptions on copper or pottery tablets have also been found such as the two above,
unearthed at Moenjodaro.
give us words, or by recognizing the
sounds of a known language, and
finally relating words with sounds.
Such a method was possible in the
case of hieroglyph and cuneiform
writing as the discovery of the same
inscription in two or three scripts or
languages (bilingual or trilingual),
enabled the decipherers to get to the
sound and finally they were able to
unlock these ancient scripts.
The Rosetta Stone with its trilingual
inscription helped to reveal the secrets
of the Egyptian hieroglyphs. But no
"Rosetta Stone" has so far been found
in the Indus Civilization.
Attempts at decipherment however,
have not been given up. There must
be some other method to decipher an
unknown script. After all, symbols are
human creations in a given context.
If we know thoroughly the cultural
context and if we can recognize the
symbols in that context and their value,
we are on a path that may lead to
decipherment.
It is also possible to approach the
subject from another angle. Among
the many languages spoken today in
the world, some are inter-related and
form a group belonging to one family.
The languages of one family behave
in a particular way. If the Indus writ¬
ing expresses any language belonging
to any of the linguistic groups surviv¬
ing today, its particular sounds could
be caught, their behaviour pattern det¬
ermined, and this behaviour of sounds
could then be planted on the behaviour
of symbols in order to determine whe¬
ther the design of the symbols agrees
with one linguistic family or another.
This is a complicated method no
doubt but the computer, it is hoped,
can now help us in finding a solution.
But machines work only to the extent
that the human brain instructs them
to, so first we need to examine the
problem methodically.
In the Indus Civilization no long
inscriptions have so far been found,
but short inscriptions engraved mainly
on seals, sealings and bronze tablets
have been unearthed. Some are
found scratched on pots. The seals
carry the negative of the inscriptions
and it is their impression which gives
the positive reading.
The seals usually carry the figure of __
an animal bull, elephant, tiger, uni- /U
corn, etc. and short inscriptions of
one to three lines usually occupy the
top space.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

MYSTERY SCRIPT (Continued)
Did the Indus people
speak a Dravidian language?
30
As all the animals face right, it had
been concluded that the direction of
writing is from right to left. This
conclusion is now proved by an over¬
writing on a pot in which a left symbol
cuts across the right one.
Some of the symbols of the Indus
writing are easy to decipher. These
are short or long vertical strokes num¬
bering from one to ten or twelve.
The strokes are presumed to represent
numbers. But are they just numbers?
As they occur in various combinations
before and after the symbols, it is
inferred that they are used to express
syllabic sounds.
HE nature of the short
inscriptions on the Indus valley seals
has led some scholars to believe that
they are only the names and titles of
the persons who owned the seals and
used them to authenticate documents
or as a trade mark on bales of cotton
or other goods bartered with the lands
far and near. This interpretation is
based on a similarity with the writing
of titles in Ancient Egypt.
Other comparisons have revealed
similarities in the shapes of symbols
and these have been noted on tablets
in places as far away as Easter Island
in the Pacific and on tablets bearing
Hittite hieroglyphic writing.
But similarities apart, there Is no
proof that these symbols have the
same sound value in different civiliza¬
tions. It is therefore essential that the
system of the Indus writing should first
be discovered and then the nature of
this system tested as to its suitability
with one linguistic group or another.
Another possible method is to de¬
termine the particular linguistic group
to which the language of the Indus
people could possibly be related.
Three such claimant groups Indo-
Aryan, Munda or Proto-Austro-Asian,
and Dravidian have been thoroughly
examined in this connexion. On
purely historical grounds, the Indo-
Aryan group has been left out as the
Aryans appeared on the scene in the
post Indus Valley period.
Yet some scholars have tried to link
it with the Indus writing while others
have sought connexions between the
Indus script and the much later Indian
writing called Brahmi. These attempts,
however, have not proved successful,
and neither have efforts to link the
Indus script with Munda, which has
been found to be unsuitable on cultural
and linguistic grounds.
A team of Soviet scientists has ana¬
lysed the Indus symbols in a scientific
manner and has tried to read them on
the basis of the Dravidian language (1).
The Dravidian with Brahui as one of
its branches is still spoken in central
Baluchistan. It is known to have been
pre-Aryan in this part of the world and
thus offers a possibility. But in the
main area of South India where Dra¬
vidian is now spoken, the Indus Civi¬
lization is not known to have penetra¬
ted.
However, the real difficulty is to
establish the particular form of the
Dravidian language which may have
been spoken by the Indus people.
All attempts are now concentrated on
reconstructing that language and with
its help, deciphering the Indus symbols.
Meanwhile new discoveries in the
Gomal valley of Pakistan, in south
Afghanistan and in Soviet Turkmenistan
have shown that during the Bronze
Age there was more contact between
the peoples of these regions than had
been supposed. Not only this fact
but other considerations suggest that
the Altai group of languages may pos¬
sibly help to solve the mystery of the
language used by the people of the
Indus valley nearly five thousand years
ago.
I N an effort to clarify the
mechanics of the Indus writing, several
attempts have been made to collect
the inscriptions, arrange them in some
order, determine the exact number of
known symbols, specify the beginning
and end signs, and follow the definite
form of the symbols as they undergo
changes.
The latest work of this kind, com¬
piled by Asko Parpóla and his coll¬
eagues from Finland at the Scandina¬
vian Institute of Asian Studies in
Copenhagen, brings together in one
place the entire material suitably
arranged with the help of a computer.
This is ready-made material which
could be used profitably by other
would-be decipherers.
In this work, the total number of
signs listed is 396. Some of the sym¬
bols are easily recognizable. They
include the homo-sign, animal sign
and bird, fish and insect signs.
Others are taken from local flora
such as the mushroom, the p/pa/-leaf
and flower and probably the tree itself.
Some represent objects such as the
bow-and-arrow, shrimping net, or
wheeled cart, but most of them are
simple lines or geometrical forms.
H
(1) Attempts at decipherment using a
computer have been made since 1964 by
Soviet teams in Moscow led by Yu. V.
Knorozov.
IOWEVER, the signs have
two main features: some appear in
various combinations and others are
modified by the addition of strokes.
The significance of these two features
is not yet established. It is generally
assumed that they qualify the original
sign in the same fashion as the
grammatical suffixes used with words
in the Altai group of languages or in
Dravidian.
In modern Turkish, which belongs to
the Altai group, we have the base
word "coçuk" meaning child. Changes
are made by adding suffixes as in this
example:
"Coçuk" (child) + "lar" = "çocuk-
lar" (children) + "iniz" = "cocuk-
lariniz" (our children) + "dan" = "ço-
cuklarinizdan" (from our children).
Languages which behave in the
above fashion belong to the aggluti¬
native language group. If Indus writing
belongs to this group, it should be
possible to analyse it and classify the
symbols under the main signs and
suffixes. These suffixes should indicate
the grammatical behaviour of words.
Once the grammatical behaviour is
determined, it is possible to place the
writing definitely in one linguistic group
or another. But so far, this last stage
of classification has not been done in
the case of the Indus writing.
The absence of long inscriptions in
the Indus Civilization writing should
not be a bar to its decipherment. It
is possible that some scholar, in a
remote corner of South America, Afri¬
ca or China may one day devote him¬
self to this task and give us the ana¬
lysis that can unravel the mystery of
the Indus script.
