sÄ*
©C4' c
Drugs
and society
Are we doomed to despair, to the
meaninglessness of human existence,
to the absurd and the grotesque por¬
trayed by Camus, Ionesco and Beckett?
by Marcel Meter
MARCEL HICTER Is Director-General for Youth and Leisure at the Belgian
Ministry of Culture and is on the Faculty of the Université Libre, Brussels. 'He
was Belgian delegate to the International Conference on Youth organized by
Unesco at Grenoble, France, in 1964 (See his article "The Angry Generation",
"Unesco Courier", April 1969). Prof. Hicter is the author of a major study, prepared
for a symposium on drug dependence organized by the Council of Europe at
Strasbourg last year, of which the article published here Is a condensed, edited
version.
{RE we doomed to despair,
to the meaninglessness of human
existence, to the absurd and the gro¬
tesque portrayed by Camus, Ionesco
and Beckett? How can man live in a
scientific age when he is no longer
master of the situation? Technology
is no longer guided by man, it is
impelled forward by its own needs.
I have re-read the futurologists of
both East and West. The "future
shock", the psychosomatic disease of
the entire human organism, is spread¬
ing because of man's inability to
adapt himself rapidly enough to the
lightning progress of technology.
Restricted by its human dimensions,
our conceptual capacity is now insuf¬
ficient. The more man grasps of
nature, the less he can understand
his own nature. To quote the Hun¬
garian-born British scientist Dennis
Gabor, in his book "Inventing the
Future": "Till now man has been up
against nature; from now on he will
be up against his own nature."
Man will become integrated into __
complex operational systems which / /
are multi-functional and multidiscipli-
nary and which will continually call
for new methods of synthesis and a
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

This poster symbolizes the
grip of drugs on modern
society. It was displayed
at Unesco headquarters in
Paris at a conference held
last December on educa¬
tion as a means of prevent¬
ing drug abuse. The pos¬
ter exhibition was prepar¬
ed by a group of Swiss
organizations engaged in
the fight against drugs
(for other posters see
centre pages).
»»r.Aííflf
;;**<- T--*r
: t '-
DRUGS AND SOCIETY (Continued)
The great fear of the morning after tomorrow
*****£-.'«*£:
:, ' .--¡1 «
»fc.
Photo Unesco Office de la Jeunesse, Geneva
28
new humanism. Social stratification
will take on new dimensions. The
gap between rich and poor will dim¬
inish increasingly, only to be recrea¬
ted between the educated and the
uneducated.
Contrary to what is happening
today, when millions of workers ensure
the well-being of a privileged minority,
a minority of the intellectually elite will
be constantly pushed to the limits of
physical and mental effort to provide
luxurious leisure for a majority with
thousands of millions of docile tech¬
nological slaves at its beck and call.
All these problems are likely to be
particularly acute in the case of the
young, say the futurologists Herman
Kahn and Anthony J. Wiener, in their
book "The Year 2000".
Similarly, those among the young
who have no say in the social system,
will feel increasingly alienated by a
society which openly disregards what
youth consider as minimum standards
of social justice (requirements which
appear Utopian and unattainable to
the decision-makers). Ideological
movements will thus be born, aimed
at providing reasoned and moral jus¬
tifications for rebellion and for a clean
break with outmoded values by young
people of all social classes.
Young people who are intellectually
less-endowed, but who also rebel will
tend to sink into delinquency and
crime. Other symptoms of social
malaise (mental diseases and neuro¬
sis; divorces and suicides, for
example) are also likely to increase.
The traditional religions may well
continue to lose ground or will be re¬
interpreted, revised and secularised
so as to offer less of an obstacle to
generally accepted behaviour.
In political terms, such pessimistic
perspectives will lead many persons
to cling to the past, to denounce moral
decay, to reaffirm traditional values
and, as a last resort, to demand strict
enforcement of order, thus creating
an increasing threat to democracy.
Many persons react in this way to
the problem of drugs.
That is why I feel it is imperative to
spotlight the causes of our great fear
of the future and to replace them with
the hope of a happy society based on
a wider participation at all levels.
Man no longer lives in nature as
such, he lives in a nature he has
imposed upon himself. He is no
longer a simple, natural being; he is
now shaped by his own handiwork.
He will soon be living in a world, in
an increasingly artificial environment
where even his gestures will be
artificial.
In this context, the French socio¬
logist Jean Fourastié asks: "How can
human thought, moulded during thou¬
sands of years by the slow and regular
rhythm of the climate, the seasons,
sun and rain, wind and frost, be
expected to respond to the sudden
intrusion of the rapid, staccato, per¬
petually repeated rhythms imposed by
the demands and the use of machines?
"What will be the implications for
man's moral and intellectual equili¬
brium of the new ways of thinking
conditioned by today's technological
environment, by the horizon which has
dwindled from Virgil's fields to a
place on the assembly line, by the
sapping of initiative through growing
specialization, by the rigid timing
imposed by mechanization, and by the
passive submission of the mind to the
laws of the machine, whether in their
discovery, their observance or their
application?"
Have we ever found out what young

people think when we talk to them
about lifelong education, and tell them:
You are being awarded university
degrees for knowledge that is out of
date so your degrees, too, are obsol¬
ete. You will never really "graduate"
from university. If you stop study¬
ing, you may become a "has-been"
at the age of 30.
At forty you will earn your living in
occupations that do not even exist
today. You will have to change your
job several times and your place of
work even more often. And you will
witness several revolutions in indus¬
trial production during your working
life.
You will never be able to relax your
effort to re-adapt and retrain for new
jobs, no matter how difficult and exact¬
ing you find it. And you will spend
most of your "leisure" time doing just
that. Anyone who stays put, who
passively follows a routine at work
will be eliminated.
More than any previous generation,
young people today therefore need an
education that develops solid charac¬
ter and sound reasoning. Yet what
Is happening in reality?
recent inquiry undertaken
by the Académie de Toulouse, in
France, shows that young people
spend 200 hours more in front of the
TV screen than they do listening to
their teachers. And as we know, from
the mass of information he gulps down
indiscriminately, the reader or viewer
retains only what has been dramatized.
Moreover the mass media stifle
information by the very mass of
information they pour out. They can
produce an "industrial conditioning"
of the mind. They result in super¬
ficial knowledge that leads to woolly
ideas about doctrinal systems and
thus to the discrediting of authority
(family, school, political party, trade
union or church).
The media artificially nurture sub¬
cultures "ghettoes" in which the
young are isolated and they strength¬
en the hold of certain industries on
the "youth market," thus promoting
the commercial exploitation of the
young.
When it comes to the problem of
drugs, rather than explain its real roots
which might call an existing system
in question, the press either focuses
on irrelevancies or partial solutions or
highlights only one aspect, leaving the
real problem in the dark, at
the risk of inventing spurious prob¬
lems that mislead both young people
and adults.
The mass media carry advertizing
for alcohol, tobacco and medicines,
in other words for legalized drugs.
The press therefore refers only to
certain drugs in disparaging terms.
"Drugs", as seen by the press are
limited to those banned by law, with
the exception of a few pharmaceutical
products which it puts in the same
bracket.
' Since such drugs are illegal, they
must be combatted with the power
and the arms of the law; police and
court action is then reported in sen¬
sational terms.
Once the forces of law and order
come into the picture the situation
escalates. Things have "gone too
far". The drugs problem becomes
an obsession among adults, parents
in particular, whilst the young grow
more and more angry and embittered.
This drug psychosis and the atmo¬
sphere of fear and tragedy are
aggravated by blaring headlines.
As drugs which are legal and also
profitable for society are deliberately
sidestepped, the young are thus, if
not the most numerous and serious
addicts, at least the ones on whom
the glare of publicity is turned. This
"youth-drugs" association is used and
abused by the press.
The articles published in the press
(on youth and drugs), their titles
(youth and drugs) and the photographs
that illustrate them (youth and drugs)
create a current of public opinion
which influences both parents and
children.
The press thus presents a one¬
sided picture by restricting the meaning
of the word "drugs" and by relating
it solely to youth, whereas it is adults
who are most affected by drug
addiction. Supporting a system which
itself endangers a large part of the
population, the press camouflages the
commercial reasons, which are the
real causes for the phenomenon, by
advancing secondary causes as basic
ones: "To escape from family prob¬
lems"; "Lack of vocational training";
"The urge to 'opt out" of society";
"The generation gap"; "Drug-takers.
want to be addicts".
Sometimes the press publishes
totally false information: "Most heroin
addicts are aged between fifteen and
twenty-one", it tells us.
It quotes non-existent "statistics"
which nevertheless impress the
reader: "Out of 93 people sentenced
for peddling or taking drugs, 48 were
under the age of 25". As the young
are constantly under police sur¬
veillance, and are more vulnerable
than adults when they are up against
the law, it follows that they are the
more frequently arrested and sen¬
tenced.
In other words, by publishing
incomplete, edited and often untrue
information, the press creates an
unmistakable trend of opinion. In
this way, it evades the deep-rooted,
material causes of the problem and
thus does nothing to eliminate it.
Since all these reasons are econo¬
mic, the press, in fact, is looking after
its own interests, under a system on
which it depends and which it defends.
HlOW can the press incite
or discourage drug-taking by young
people?
By treating "youth" as a social
group it isolates and differentiates
young people from others, thus gener¬
ating antagonism between this group
and others ("zenophobia" between
social groups is an established fact
in western society). In isolating the
group it isolates each member of the
group from other social groups. It
makes each young person feel a need
to identify with and join others of his
own age.
By directly associating the words
"youth" and "drugs" the press incites
young people to take drugs since they
feel that only in this way will they be
accepted by the social group into
which the mass media have put them.
A young person who reacts actively
against the society in which he lives
(unlike an adult who reacts passively),
needs to find a social identity. By the
trend of opinion that it has created,
the press forces on him not only the
"youth" concept but the combined
concept of "youth-drugs".
Moreover, by evading the basic
issues of drug abuse it perpetuates in
young people the feelings of anxiety,
insecurity and incoherence created by
the social system in which they live.
It also perpetuates the desire for
escape, oblivion and evasion which
finds expression in drug-taking.
The kind of press I have described
conditions people deliberately to turn
a blind eye to certain problems, and
prevents real answers and remedies
from being found. Instead, the prob¬
lems are aggravated and multiplied to
the point where escape to the world
of drugs becomes the only immediate
evasion for adults and for the young.
Let me give an example quoted by
Dr. André Boudreau, Director-Gen¬
eral of the Office for the Prevention
of Alcoholism and Other Addic¬
tions, in Canada. "In Quebec," he
said, "over a third of young people
questioned during an inquiry into the
drug problem said that they had first OQ
tried drugs as a result of television fcO
programmes in which 'stars' had talked
about drug-taking . . . ". Advertizing,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

DRUGS AND SOCIETY (Continued)
A way of life and not just a standard of living
30
the star-cult and news a combination
which leads nowhere, if not to drugs.
Where young victims of drugs are
concerned I consider police repression
and psychiatric treatment an ad¬
mission of failure and an acceptance
of a tragic situation. The fear of
syphilis rarely stopped our grand¬
fathers from indulging in amatory
adventures, nor has the fear of hell
stopped people having sins to confess.
A different approach is therefore
needed.
Let us be clear about one thing.
There is no "youth problem"; there
are only youth aspects of society's
global problems. The young recog¬
nize no statutory restraint that compels
them to put up with our inhuman
society, unlike their elders who are
obliged by social position or pro¬
fession to follow well-trodden paths
signposted by respectability or other
obligations.
I sometimes wonder whether the
blind rage felt by some adults towards
the young is not mere resentment
because, for reasons of social status,
they themselves dare not indulge in
certain freedoms (sexual freedoms,
for example) which are common
practice among the young.
You may tell me that there is a
silent majority among youth among
adults, too. The silent majority is
resigned to its fate that of being
preyed upon.
But there is a minority that accuses,
dissents and rejects. It has no need
of drugs because its life is full and
boredom is unknown; its stimulant is
hope and it sets new values or infuses
fresh life into old ones.
There Is another, larger minority that
works in the youth sections of the
important philosophical, religious and
political movements. They do not
take drugs either because their partici¬
pation in campaigns for reform and
education occupies their lives and
inspires their will to succeed.
The same is true of those sports¬
men who have not "gone profes¬
sional," who have kept clear of the
commercial side of sport.
Finally there is the minority that
"opts out"; the minority that concerns
us here.
I can already draw one global con¬
clusion, namely that a problem created
by a state of crisis in society can be
solved only by a new policy, affecting
the whole of that society, its organiz¬
ation, its aims and its system of
values.
In a society aimed at promoting
man's development and not merely the
management of production and con¬
sumption, a society that deserves
affection and offers security, there
will be no agonizing drug problem
because there will be no urge or
reason to escape from society.
In other words, the problem I am
posing concerns the quality of life,
and I say that the destiny of man
is to be more not to have more;
to have a way of life, not just a
standard of living, even if this means
struggling against the current of
impersonal forces and endeavouring
to change, by human willpower and
determination, what some would have
me believe is the course of history.
We should begin by changing
education so that as early as possible
a young person becomes an indepen¬
dent, mentally mature adult, respon¬
sible for himself and for the various
communities in whose life he shares:
his family, his district, his town or
country, and finally the world. Trained
to be both independent and respon¬
sible, he will not be caught off-balance
by the suggestions of a friend or drug-
pedlar, and the idea of having to do
the same as others will not even cross
his mind.
From his earliest days, a child must
become accustomed to choosing, in
the cultural and every other field, from
the vast and Indiscriminate flood of
things with which we are being
swamped.
From the start we must stimulate a
child's ability not only to assimilate
knowledge, but also to reason clearly
and selectively, to establish priorities
and values, so that the deluge of
information and suggestion can be
digested and controlled.
From early childhood, attitudes
(and aptitudes) that make for cre-
ativeness must be developed so that
each individual can find in self-
expression constant sources of happi¬
ness and satisfaction, and thus escape
the boredom of commercialized
leisure.
All this should lead to a new and
active form of culture that gives a
more personal dimension to life.
And this gives a new dimension
and urgency to the working out of a
leisure policy, systematically organized,
properly financed and offering the
right Incentives. It would cost far
less to do this than to enlarge our
prisons and psychiatric hospitals.
It would also be more effective in the
sense that an ounce of prevention is
worth a ton of cure.
