Like human fingerprints, no two snow crystals
are ever exactly alike. Although often similar in
general outline and structure, snow crystals come
in a bewildering variety of size, shape and pattern.
They often take the form of triangles, hexagons
or six-pointed stars. When the air is very moist
they may clump together to form snowflakes. One
snowf lake may consist of as many as 50 interlocking
crystals. Enthralled by their beauty, an American
farmer-meteorologist, Wilson A. Bentley, spent
hours each winter photographing snow crystals
near his home in Vermont. Nearly half the 5,000
photomicrographs he prepared appeared in the
book "Snow Crystals", first published in 1931 by
McGraw-Hill Books, New York; we reproduce
18 of these illustrations below.



A SHORT
GUIDE
TO
WEATHER-SPEAK
Photo W.A. Bentley < taken from "Snow Crystals",
by W.A. Bentley and W.J. Humphreys, Dover Pub¬
lications Inc., New York.
by François Le Lionnais
and Roger Clausse
3TJ5
H?6» û
7%
ai&
i
Text i) Copyright O.R.T.F.
Reproduction prohibited
jaiac
' '*&
»'*-#-
'v-.:'
E£
nfflri
FRANÇOIS LE LIONNAIS. Meteorologists use
lots of technical words that are unknown to the
man-in-the-street. As a meteorologist, would you
like to give a few examples?
ROGER CLAUSSE Well, to take a few at random, I could
mention anticyclone, isobar, cyclogenesis, frontolysis, hydro-
meteor or isohypse. Then there are everyday words with
a special meaning, such as "waves" as in "polar frontal
waves" or the word "family" in the expression "family of
disturbances", which means alternate zones of rain clouds,
showers and brief intervals of fine weather. Another fami¬
liar word with a special meaning is "front", in the sense of
a surface where masses of warm and cold air come into
"conflict" the same idea as front in the military sense.
F. L. L. The words you just mentioned front,
conflict, masses of air aren't they connected with
what we usually call bad weather? What causes bad
weather?
R- C. Bad weather is caused by differences of atmo¬
spheric pressure in different parts of the world. Generally
speaking, bad weather is linked with zones of low pressure,
while zones of high pressure keep the bad weather out.
F. L. L. Perhaps you would explain what exactly
atmospheric pressure means?
R. C. Anyone who has looked at a barometer knows
that atmospheric pressure, which corresponds to the weight
of air pressing down on a given surface area, can vary
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
39

40
TALKING ABOUT THE WEATHER (Continued)
from one reading to the next. Atmospheric pressure varies
from one part of the world to another, but at any given
moment pressure will be constant along imaginary lines
which one can draw on the map.
For example, in Brazil pressure might be the same in
Bahia, Carinhanah, Brasilia and Araguari. The line joining
these points is what we call an isobar, which simply means
a line of equal pressure. A different isobar with a different
value might, for instance, pass through other Brazilian cities
such as llheus, Belo, Horizonte and Rio de Janeiro.
These isobars thus correspond to varying values of
atmospheric pressure at a given moment over a region
which can vary considerably in extent. Taken all together
they make up what is called the field of pressure. They
are given in millibars, a unit signifying the amount of pres¬
sure which will support, roughly, three-quarters of a milli¬
metre of mercury in a barometer tube. So what is known
as standard pressure (1013.3 millibars) will support a column
of mercury 760 mm. high or, to give you a better idea, it
represents 1,033 grammes of air pressing down on every
square centimetre.
These isobars form curvy shapes. One might imagine
one of them, say isobar 1,000, passing in the U.S.S.R.
through Odessa, Berdichev, Gomel, Voronezh, Mizlerovo
and back to Odessa, thus describing a rather irregular
circle. Inside this line, there may be other "contour lines",
getting smaller and representing lower and lower pressures
975 - 970 - 965 millibars, etc. This is what we call
a depression, in which the nearer the isobars are to the
centre the lower the pressures they represent.
In other zones the pressure increases towards the centre,
and these are called anticyclones.
Broadly speaking:
a depression is a zone of low pressure and an anti¬
cyclone is a zone of high pressure.
If we keep this idea in mind, it will help us to identify
zones of fine weather and bad weather.
F. L. L. From this idea of anticyclones and
depressions, can. we tell what the weather is going
to be like?
January in Kabul market-place, Afghanistan.
R. C. Certainly. The deeper a depression that is, the
lower the pressure at the centre, the smaller its diameter,
and the more rapidly it moves the more marked will be
the meteorological processes which go with it. In other
words a small depression with a very low pressure at the
centre is likely to be accompanied by a storm. Once we
understand this code, we can at once decipher any graphic
representation of the weather situation such as maps
shown in television weather forecasts.
Because of the effect of the Earth's rotation, winds
move in a clockwise direction around anticyclones and
in the opposite direction around depressions in the northern
hemisphere, and these directions are reversed in the south¬
ern hemisphere.
The position of these elements on the map thus gives
an immediate idea of the general movement of winds in
a particular area. To the east of a large-scale anticyclone,
in the northern hemisphere, for instance, the wind will be
coming from the north and will therefore be cold, while to
the west it will be a warm south wind. It is easy to get
a mental picture of all the possible combinations and all
the winds which would result from them and thus to have
some idea of the likely temperature.
F. L. L. You mentioned storms 'just now. Could
you say a few words about the storms we call
cyclones?
R. C. Yes, because there may be some confusion about
the word cyclone. The basic idea behind the word
cyclone is that of a circular, turning movement. We now
know that this is what happens in the case of depressions
around which the wind and in some cases rain move in
a circle.
A depression is thus a cyclone in this sense, and
meteorologists use either word to mean the same thing.
But most persons use the term cyclone when they mean
tropical cyclones, which originate in the warmer regions
of the world over the oceans. These disturbances are
relatively small a few hundred miles across and the
pressure at their centre is very low 900 millibars, the
equivalent of 675 mm. of mercury. They are accompanied
by very violent winds sometimes reaching more than

200 km./h. They have the typical circling movement
corresponding to the word cyclone.
F. L. L. Do cyclones move about from place to
place very rapidly?
R. C. No, fortunately they move relatively slowly, at
about 20 to 50 km./h., which means that it is possible to
detect them and to forecast their arrival either by means
of radar or by pictures sent back by satellites, from which
they are easily visible in the form of a ring of clouds.
F. L. L. By a ring of clouds, do you mean
that the sky is clear in the middle?
R. C. Yes, this is called the eye of the cyclone, where
the sky is usually clear. Satellite photographs have shown
that even the cyclones in the temperate part of the world
depressions accompanied by clouds and rain often have
a small eye in the middle, which goes to prove that they
are formed in the same way as tropical cyclones.
F. L. L. Just how and why do tropical cyclones
begin?
R. C. Cyclones originate for the most part over the
oceans in the tropics, where the temperature of the sea
and of the layer of air in contact with it is very high in
relation to the upper levels of the air. This causes violent
upward movements, drawing masses of very humid air up
from sea level. These conditions often occur during the
hot season in both hemispheres.
F. L. L. How long does a cyclone last?
R. C. Usually about a week. After that the depression
either fills or spreads out, in either case becoming less
intense. We might in passing mention two other names
connected with cyclones: typhoon, which is simply another
name for the cyclones occurring in the China Sea, and hurri¬
cane, which is another synonym of tropical cyclones, used
in the English-speaking parts of the world.
F. L. L. What word from the language of the
meteorologist shall we look at now?
R. C. Well, as a change from the more violent aspects
of the weather, let's talk about trade winds. Most people
have heard about them and associate them with the sea.
F. L. L. That's right, because in the days of
sailing ships, merchant ships depended greatly on
trade winds. And as a matter of fact they helped
the ships of Christopher Columbus to sail from
Europe to America.
R. C. Some people say that Columbus discovered these
winds. Incidentally the French word for the trade winds
"alizés" is believed to come from an old French word
meaning "regular". The trade winds do in fact blow fairly
regularly in the intertropical zone, from the north-east in
the northern hemisphere and from the south-east in the
southern. They are caused by the same sort of phenom¬
enon as we have just been describing, that of air currents
circulating around the anticyclones which persist over the
tropical regions of the oceans while low pressures prevail
over the equator. They are not very strong from about
15 to 30 km./h. and are usually accompanied by fine
weather.
F. L. L. What happens between these two belts of
winds, at the equator itself?
R. C This is where the equatorial calms occur, the
"doldrums" which sailors in bygone days used to dread.
English sailors also called these regions the "horse
latitudes", apparently because when ships were becalmed
for days or even weeks on end, they had to throw their
horses overboard when their supplies of water and hay
ran out.
F. L. L. While we are on the subject of wind,
perhaps you could tell us about the various terms
used by meteorologists and sailors for strong winds.
R. C. First of all there are the gusts of wind which occur
during a thunderstorm, and which, if they recur frequently,
are characteristic of an unstable, turbulent state of the
atmosphere. Wind speeds in such gusts can vary widely
and rapidly and can reach over 20 m. per second in a few
seconds, which is dangerous for anything which is suscep¬
tible to the wind, such as tents, cranes or sailing boats.
Gales, for which warnings to shipping are sometimes
broadcast, are winds with an average force of more than
34 knots (62 km./h), which is equivalent to force 8 on the
Beaufort scale, so called after the English admiral who
invented it (see page 38). Gale force winds can whip up
waves over 5 m. high, which are very dangerous for sailing
craft. After the gale comes the "strong gale", a wind
which blows at between 75 and 88 km./h.
F. L. L. While on the subject of winds and the sea,
could you tell us about breezes, which are more
popular with sailors than storms?
R- C. Breezes are local winds, usually not very strong
and changing direction depending on the time of day.
When the sun is shining over the coast, both the shore and
the sea are heated by the sun but the land gets hotter than
the sea. Upward currents are formed over the land,
drawing in the cooler sea air. An on-shore (towards the
land) breeze is thus created this happens about three
hours after sunrise and goes on until the sun sets. Sandy
or rocky coasts absorb more heat than wooded coasts,
so that the breezes will be more noticeable.
At night the land cools more quickly than the sea, with the
result that the movement of air is reversed and we have
an off-shore (towards the sea) breeze. This partly explains
why the climate is mild at the seaside because it is warmed
at night by the breezes coming from the land and cooled
in the daytime by the sea breezes.
F. L. L. Does this also happen in other places?
R. C. Yes, in mountain regions where the cold air comes
down from the mountains at night, bringing lower tempera¬
tures with it, while in the daytime the warmer air rises from
the valleys towards the mountain peaks, sometimes causing
the sudden thunderstorms which are a menace to moun¬
taineers. Incidentally, the alternate heating and cooling of
land and sea which produce land and sea breezes are
reproduced on a larger scale in the case of monsoons.
F. L. L. I always thought monsoons were sea¬
sonal winds.
R. C. You're right. They are seasonal. In summer,
the continents heat up more quickly than the oceans.
Rising warm currents over the land create low pressure
areas and cooler air over the oceans flows towards the
continents. These air currents laden with moisture from
the oceans bring with them clouds and torrential rains.
Passing over the steadily rising land to the mountains of
Tibet, for instance, the rising air begins to condense and
precipitate its water vapour. In the winter the process is
reversed and dry air pours seawards from the colder
continental mass. "Monsoon" comes from the Arabic word
for "season", and was first applied to winds of the Arabian
Sea that blow six months from the south-west and six
months from the north-east.
F. L L. So monsoons occur in other places than
India.
R. C. Yes, monsoons are particularly intense in south¬
east Asia, but they also exist, to varying degrees, in the
western part of the Pacific Ocean, northern Australia, parts
of Africa and even along the edge of the Gulf of Mexico.
F. L. L. Now, what about a word which interests
all of us sunshine.
R. C. Meteorologists use the word insolation, rather than
sunshine, in other words, the amount of direct solar radia¬
tion received. They also speak of "insolation duration",
meaning the number of hours and minutes in a day, month
or year when the sun is visible from a given point.
Paris in July, for instance, gets on average 238 hours
of sunshine, Nice 363, Kazan 300, New Delhi about 200
(since it is the monsoon season in India), Perth 250, Rio
and Addis Ababa 200 each, and of course there is none at
all in the Antarctic, where it is the middle of the long
winter night.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
41

TALKING ABOUT THE WEATHER (Continued)
42
F. L. L. When the sun is more or less covered by
hazy cloud, one sometimes sees rings round it. Such
optical phenomena, which usually occur near the sun
or the moon, are known as haloes and coronas, but
people tend to confuse them. Would you tell us
about them?
R. C. Yes, we call them "photometeors", in other words,
optical phenomena of the atmosphere as against "hydro-
meteors", which are composed of solid or liquid water
particles such as rain, snow or fog. The commonest of
the photometeors are the halo, the corona and of course
the rainbow, which we all know.
The halo forms a circle of bright light around the sun
or moon. If you hold out your hand at arm's length with
the palm covering the sun, the circle should appear at
the end of your fingers. Sometimes there is another
circle around the first and sometimes there are even bright
spots on either side of the sun or moon so-called "pillars"
or luminous tangent arcs.
These effects are caused by the refraction of the light
passing through the ice crystals of which high clouds
are formed, when such clouds form a continuous "cloud
veil" often a sign of bad weather.
F. L. L. So the popular belief that a wide ring
around the sun means rain really has some basis.
R. C. Yes, and the belief that a smaller circle means that
rain is not in the offing is also correct. This smaller ring,
which is much less clear, is a corona. The corona has
more colours than the halo, and is closer to the sun or
moon.
It is caused by the diffraction of light through the fine
water droplets not ice crystals this time of the thin
clouds covering the sun. The corona thus usually appears
when there is what is called a "mackerel sky". It may be
a sign of poor weather, with light rain, but this is not an
absolute certainty.
These ideas about the approach of bad weather, bring
us to the term "atmospheric disturbance". A disturbance
is a kind of atmospheric "ailment", which corresponds to
the arrival of a depression and begins with a period of
"incubation". The wind changes to south or south-west
(to take a typical example in the temperate zones of the
northern hemisphere).
Pressure falls, thin clouds appear and begin to accumulate
until they have formed a fine, continuous veil of cirrostratus
cloud which completely covers the sky the sort of cloud
veil we were talking about a moment ago. The barometer
is now at its lowest point, the wind has veered to the west,
and now a hole appears in the cloud cover.
There may now be a clear interval, but before the fine
weather returns, there will be more showers, with fine
periods becoming more and more frequent. The wind
which is now blowing more strongly, sometimes in gusts,
has veered further to the north-west, the barometer rises
again and finally the sky clears.
F. L. L. What about the question of fog and
visibility.
R. C. Fog is another phenomenon which we come across
at the seaside. Sailors sometimes call anything that
hampers visibility a sea mist, but the meteorologist uses
the terms more precisely. He uses the word fog in cases
where visibility is less than one kilometre and mist when
visibility is between one and two kilometres.
F. L. L. Is there an accurate way of measuring
visibility?
R. C. Yes, there are instruments called visibility meters,
which use a light source at a set distance linked to a photo¬
electric cell which makes it possible to measure the degree
of opacity of the air through which the light passes. The
major airports have a very sophisticated system of this sort
on their runways. Instruments in the control tower enable
the air traffic controllers to see at what distance the landing
lights on the runways will be visible to pilots.
F. L. L. Talking about fog, which consists of minute
water droplets suspended in the air, brings us to the
question of pollution, one of the major problems of
our time.
R. C. To see how the various pollutants which are
pumped into the air collect in the lower levels, we need
to go higher into the atmosphere.
We know that in the lower part of the atmosphere, which
is called the troposphere, temperature falls as we go up,
at the rate of about 0.6° C. for every 100 metres or so,
which means that at an altitude of 10 km., the temperature
will be minus 60° C. So we can understand why aircraft
are properly insulated!
But in the layers of air nearest to the ground, there are
many exceptions to this general rule. When thick fog
covers Paris, a thermometer at the bottom of the Eiffel
Tower may show 10° C, while another thermometer at the
top of the tower may register 15°. This often happens in
winter. When the night sky is clear and there is not much
wind, the ground loses much of Its heat by radiation. The
air nearest to it also cools, becoming heavier and remaining
close to the earth's surface, whereas the air above it, being
a poor conductor, keeps more or less the same temperature.
It becomes warmer than the air near to the ground, or at
least warmer than it would be if temperature fell off with
altitude in the normal way.
Thus we have what is called an inversion of temperature.
When it occurs, the air is very stable, since the upper layer
forms a sort of lid which prevents smoke, dust and exhaust
fumes from escaping. They thus stagnate at ground level
for days on end, making the pollution worse and worse.
F. L. L. If inversions of temperature can be forecast,
do special precautions need to be taken?
R. C. Yes, in heavily industrialized areas measures may
be taken to cut back production in industries which cause
pollution or where possible to use products which cause
less pollution. Inversions of temperature can be detected
by means of radiosondes (balloons carrying instruments
aloft whose recordings are transmitted by radio to ground
stations). These devices enable us to find out the temper¬
ature of the air at various levels up to a height of more
than 20 km.
F. L. L. What happens above the inversion layer?
R. C. The temperature again falls off with the altitude,
unless there happens to be a second inversion layer. This
may be caused by the arrival of warm air from a higher
level, which might be the sign of an atmospheric
disturbance on the way. Higher still, about 10 km. up in
the temperate regions, about 7 km. at the poles and about
17 km. at the equator, comes the stratosphere where the
temperature stops falling and starts rising.
F. L. L. What is the temperature at that level?
R. C. At the poles it is about -50° C, in the temperate
regions about -56° C, and at the equator -85° C. This
means that an aircraft flying from the North or South Pole
towards the equator at an altitude of 15 to 17 km. would
have to turn up its heating system, since the outside
temperature would fall from -50° C. to -85° C. in the course
of the journey, in spite of the fact that at ground level the
temperature is getting higher all the time.
F. L. L. Why not go even higher and take a look
at the upper atmosphere which spacemen now traverse
on their missions? You mentioned the troposphere,
in which the temperature falls as one rises, but
you said that above that, in the stratosphere, the
temperature is at first stationary and then begins
to increase.
R. S. That's right, the temperature within this layer of
the atmosphere, which extends from about 10 km. up to
about 50 km., rises from -56° C- to 0. This is due among
other things to the presence of ozone, which is concentrated
about 35 km. up. Contrary to what used to be thought,
violent winds blow through the stratosphere, sometimes
reaching well over 350 km./h.
Above the stratosphere, in the layer known as the
mésosphère, extending up for about a further 30 km., the
temperature falls off again rapidly, reaching 90D below
zero C. at its upper limit, a height of about 80 km.

Patterns in the sky
A sodium vapour cloud writes a
strange message hundreds of miles
up in the sky during a rocket
experiment designed to measure
high-altitude winds and tempera¬
tures. Here, French scientists study
the vapour experiment, launched
from NASA's Wallops Island Station
in Virginia.
Beyond that again, in the thermosphère which extends
to the outer limits of our atmosphere, 1,000 or so km. up,
the temperature again rises, though it varies considerably.
Beyond the level of 200 km., the speed of the highly rarefied
molecules of gas corresponds to temperatures of several
hundreds of degrees but because the air is so rarefied, its
real temperature in normal physical terms is extremely
low.
F. L. L. One word in the meteorologist's voca¬
bulary which everybody knows and understands
is "forecasting". But some people feel that weather
forecasters tend to be overconfident in their pre¬
dictions; that their forecasts are still a far from
sure guide to tomorrow's weather, unlike forecasts
of the tides or the positions of the stars.
R. C. It's true that weather forecasts sometimes tell us:
"Cloud will develop tomorrow morning in the eastern part
of the country" in much the same way as an astronomer
might announce: "The annular eclipse of the sun will begin
at 1 hr. 30.3 minutes Universal Time at 66°20 minutes East
and 20° North" and as far in advance as you like.
Yet there is clearly quite a different degree of accuracy
in these two forecasts: one tends to be rather vague while
the other has a mathematical precision. But I'm sure it
would be rather boring if forecasters were to tell us: "All
we can say about the weather tomorrow is that cloud may
develop in the morning west of a line drawn very roughly
from..., etc."
What is certain is that even with the most powerful
computers, meteorologists can only give the most likely
interpretation, based on the information they have and
using approximate equations which enable them to simulate
the state of the atmosphere and the changes taking place
in it. I agree it would be better if they could indicate the
degree of probability of the prediction they have come up
with, but there are still problems to be solved in this area.
F. L. L. Before we end our visit to the world
¡of meteorology, would you please explain the myste¬
rious terms which you mentioned at the beginning
cyclogenesis, frontolysis and isohypse.
R. C. These terms are hardly ever used in weather
forecasts for the general public, but I can give you a brief
definition: cyclogenesis, as its name suggests, is the pro¬
cess by which a cyclonic circulation is formed; frontolysis
is the process which causes a weather front to weaken or
disappear, in other words, the effects produced by the
encounter of masses of air originating from different sour¬
ces; and an isohypse is a surface, generally an isobaric
surface, within which pressure is constant. So as you see,
the meanings of even these unfamiliar words are really
quite simple.
FRANÇOIS LE LIONNAIS, French science consultant, mathemati¬
cian and engineer, has been President of the French Science
Writers' Association since 1950. He is well known to "Unesco
Courier" readers for his articles of science popularization.
ROGER CLAUSSE is a leading official of the French Meteoro¬
logical Office and for many years headed its Information and
Public Relations Service. A member of the Council of the
French Science Writers' Association, he has written on meteo¬
rology for the press, radio and television and Is the author
of many popular science books on meteorology, including one
for children entitled "Papa dis-moi... Fera-t-il beau demain?"
(Daddy, will it be sunny tomorrow?) published by Editions Ophrys,
Paris, 1971.
43
