by Carlo Munns
Mediterranean:
DANGER!
OIL POLLUTION
LS a result of their proxi¬
mity to some of the world's richest
oilfields, the waters of the Mediterra¬
nean are used by a vast fleet of oil
tankers.
Forecasts point to a staggering
growth in these oil shipments during
the next few years. In 1975, 360 mil¬
lion tons out of a world total of 1,650
million tons of crude oil carried by sea
will be discharged at Mediterranean
ports.
When the Suez canal is re-opened
and the existing pipelines in the canal
zone conveying crude oil from the Red
Sea to the Mediterranean are brought
back into use, some of the traffic now
going round the Cape of Good Hope
could well return to the Mediterranean
routes.
But how is it that oil loaded on
tankers for delivery to refineries
finishes up in the sea?
Oil pollution in the sea is generally
associated with an accident of some
kind, one which arouses public opinion
and draws attention to the high cost
of cleaning up vast areas of water after
an accident at sea.
In reality, the major problem of oil
pollution in the sea is only partly due
to accidents; operational pollution,
bound up with the normal sea trans¬
port of oil and with loading and dis¬
charging operations at the terminals,
is far more important. This is a more
general source of pollution, less in the
limelight than tanker accidents but far
more insidious.
The fact is that less than 99 per cent
of the oil taken on board a tanker is
discharged at the port of destination.
Part of the remaining one per cent is
lost by evaporation of the most volatile
16
CARLO MUNNS, Italian expert on legal and
technical matters concerning protection of
the environment, is working with the Parlia¬
mentary Committee on the study of water
problems in Italy and Is collaborating In the
drawing up of the first "Report on the State
of the Environment In Italy" at present
under preparation by the Italian Ministry of
Scientific and Technological Research. He
has also undertaken research projects on
environmental questions for the Food and
Agriculture Organization and the United Na¬
tions In Rome.
elements in the oil and the rest settles
on the walls and bottom of the tanks
in the ship in the form of sediment.
These far from negligible quantities
of oily substances represent a danger
for the ship itself since they give off
gases which may form an explosive
mixture with the air in the now empty
tanks. It is thus indispensable to rinse
out the tanks with water.
When a tanker has discharged its
crude oil load and leaves again to pick
up another shipment the washing of
the tanks coincides with the need to
take on sea water as ballast. Empty
tankers are unstable and difficult to
manoeuvre and therefore have to take
on amounts of water varying from 40
to 60 per cent of their capacity.
This ballast, which forms an emul¬
sion with the oily residue, has to be
pumped out before a fresh cargo of
crude oil can be taken on, so that
large quantities of this residue find
their way into the sea. The amount,
according to the oil companies, is some
0.4 to 0.5 per cent of the oil carried,
and it is one of the main causes of
pollution.
Authorities in the oil-exporting coun¬
tries do not tolerate the discharge of
dirty ballast and tank-rinsing water
near their coasts or in their ports,
and place strict controls on the quality
of water discharged. So tanker cap¬
tains make a practice of discharging
dirty ballast water on their way from
port to port and of replacing it with
clean water.
Although less toxic for the environ¬
ment than radio-active substances,
non-biodegradable detergents and
plastics, crude oil creates an alarming
problem because of the enormous
volume transported and the high
concentration in one area the Medi¬
terranean.
The natural environment in the area
is obviously threatened by other fac¬
tors: the increasing concentrations of
population and of industry along the
coastline, the development of the tour¬
ist trade, and the growth in consump¬
tion and in waste and refuse which,
Drawing © Mas, Paris.

in one way or another, eventually
finishes up in the sea. But in terms
of urgency oil pollution is the most
crucial issue.
According to estimates, 300,000 tons
of oil residue were discharged into the
Mediterranean in 1970, and this figure
will probably climb to 500,000 tons in
1975 and 650,000 tons in 1980.
But the Mediterranean presents
some special problems. It is a shal¬
low sea (only 3,500 metres deep at its
central part), and its rising currents
are not strong enough to assist in
water exchange and oxygenation by
contact with the air. Water tempera¬
tures at the bottom are more or less
constant because of the protective
effect of the Gibraltar threshold, and
there are no currents moving faster
than 2-3 knots.
The masses of water in the Medi¬
terranean down to the first 150 metres
thus take an extremely long time to
mix and regenerate, a fair estimate
being about 80 years.
Serious harm to the marine environ¬
ment is therefore caused in a number
of ways:
The oil slick on the water pre¬
vents water oxygenation and instead
consumes oxygen itself for its own
degradation.
Oil pollution is a serious obstacle
to the photosynthesis on which de¬
pends the life and growth of the
minute phytoplankton the food of
the Zooplankton on which, in their turn,
the larger sea creatures feed.
Absorbed by fish, the pollutants
eventually reach and endanger human
life.
Every year, according to figures of
the FAO General Fisheries Council
for the Mediterranean, about one mil¬
lion metric tons of fish are caught in
waters of this sea, and the protein
requirement of the Mediterranean
population increases yearly. Recent
FAO reports indicate that some fish
species are already decreasing.
The various governments, concerned
at the worsening pollution situation,
took steps to ban the discharge of
tank-rinsing water within their terri¬
torial waters, with the inevitable result
that the pollution has shifted to the
high seas. In a closed sea like the
Mediterranean this in turn causes pol¬
lution of coastal waters. The problem
therefore called for a solution at inter¬
national level.
The 1954 London Convention for the
Prevention of the Pollution of the Sea
by Oil prohibited all tankers from
discharging oily mixtures containing
more than 100 mg of oil per litre
within 50 miles of land. In 1962,
the 1954 Convention was amend
ed, within the framework of the Inter¬
governmental Maritime Consultative
Organization (IMCO). The ban now
became absolute for all ships of over
20,000 tons and the protected areas
were extended (from 50 to 100 miles
in the case of the Mediterranean).
The result was that in the Mediter¬
ranean two zones were left, one bet¬
ween Libya and Sicily and the other
south of the island of Rhodes, in which
ships were free to discharge as much
tank rinsing water as they wished.
But in the absence of any effective
monitoring system the discharge areas
are expanding unchecked.
As an alternative to the rules laid
down in the 1962 IMCO Convention,
shipping lines and oil companies sug¬
gested a new way of rinsing out tanks
chiefly responsible for the pollution
of the Mediterranean Sea and coast.
Other techniques have been put
forward to save oil from being dis¬
charged into the sea, but technically
and economically they are difficult to
implement in the case of the existing
tanker fleet.
As long ago as 1954, IMCO affirmed
that the only effective way of solving
the oil pollution problem in the Medi¬
terranean was to install plants for
treating tanker ballast and rinsing
water at all oil loading terminals. But
because of the cost of building such
plants the governments of the pro¬
ducer countries and the oil companies
operating the terminals have not so far,
with some rare exceptions, complied
with the recommendation.
"Say, we must be
nearer civilization
than we thought.
This is oill"
Drawing Carl Rose © The New Yorker Magazine Inc., New York
known as the "Load on top" system.
This process consists of separating
the sea water from the oil residue
during the return voyage. The water
is cleaner when discharged into the
sea and the oil residue from all the
tanks is collected into one tank only.
This concentrated oil-water mixture
is processed on board ship after the
fresh cargo of crude oil has been
pumped into the tanks, and is dis¬
charged separately when the tanker
arrives at the refinery port with its
new load.
In order for the process of separa¬
tion by gravity to take place between
water and oily substances a minimum
of about 40 hours is needed, provided
that the weather is calm. Unfortu¬
nately because of the short voyage
time between crude oil embarkation
ports in North Africa and the Near
East and the user countries in south¬
ern Europe, tankers on these routes
cannot effectively use the "Load on
top" system. They have thus become
However, a recent study made for
IMCO puts the cost of providing such
new plants where they are needed and
of improving existing ones at about
80 million dollars. Running costs
would be about 70 cents per ton of oil
shipped.
If these plants were built and oper¬
ated, oil pollution in the Mediterranean
could be reduced to negligible propor¬
tions within a space of three or four
years. A solution is urgently needed,
and many international research orga¬
nizations now investigating the oil pol¬
lution question have made special
studies of the problem in the Medi¬
terranean.
The FAO General Fisheries Council
for the Mediterranean has set up a
"Working Party on Marine Pollution in
Relation to the Protection of Living
Resources".
Co-operating closely with Unesco's j |
Intergovernmental Océanographie '
Commission and with the International
Commission for the Scientific
CONTINUED PAGE 32

MEDITERRANEAN: DANGER! OIL POLLUTION
Exploration of the Mediterranean Sea
(ICSEM, in Monaco), the FAO Working
Party has commissioned an updated
study on the state of pollution in the
Mediterranean.
A draft agreement between all Medi¬
terranean countries has been ham¬
mered out during a series of meetings
in Malta, promoted by a non-govern¬
mental organization called "Pacem in
Maribus", the members of which are
scientists, lawyers and politicians from
all over the world interested in marine
problems.
There have also been important bi¬
lateral and multilateral discussions.
Parliamentary groups from the coun¬
tries of the northern Mediterranean
basin, including Italy, France, Yugo
slavia and Monaco, have frequently dis¬
cussed the serious problems of the
Adriatic and Tyrrhenian Seas.
These direct contacts between coun¬
tries on the shores of the Mediterra¬
nean are in line with the proposals
of the United Nations Conference on
the Human Environment in Stockholm,
which has recommended, in an effort
to eliminate all voluntary sources of
oil pollution by 1975, that regional
agreements should be concluded for
the protection of specific sea areas.
But an agreement between all Medi¬
terranean countries would be of only
relative value unless it were also hon¬
oured by all countries (including those
outside the Mediterranean) whose
tankers use its waters.
For this reason the problem needs
(Continued from page 17)
to be tackled in the amendments to be
made to the 1969 London Convention
and which are to be signed in 1973
by IMCO's member countries.
Italy and France have proposed the
inclusion in the 1973 Convention of a
section concerning the Mediterranean
and other "special areas". This would
specify what anti-pollution measures
should be taken and would make com¬
pulsory the installation and use of
plants for treating tanker ballast.
The building of such plants at all
terminals where crude oil is loaded
would be an immediate and practical
solution, since the Mediterranean can
no longer wait for long-term solutions
and the theoretical prospects of new
technologies to mature.
Carlo Munns

