UNESCO AID FOR
AFRICAN LIBERATION
MOVEMENTS
by Ginette Fontaine-Eboué
U NESCO's contribution to
the cause of peace, whether by direct
or indirect activities, has been sub¬
stantial and wide-ranging throughout
the Organization's history. However'
in recent years, the General Confer¬
ence has resolved that Unesco must
strengthen even more its work for
peace. For while it is appreciated
that Unesco's total programme of
international co-operation in education,
science, culture and communication
contributes substantially and con¬
tinuously to peaceful relations among
nations, there is nevertheless a
demand that still more attention be
given, within Unesco's special fields
of interest, to activities which can be
seen to bear directly on the problems
of peace.
For example, Unesco has played an
important part in aiding African liber¬
ation movements in Angola, Mozambi¬
que and Guinea (Bissau) to obtain text¬
books and other teaching materials
GINETTE FONTAINE-EBOUE, of Chad, is
responsible for Unesco's programme oi
educational aid to African liberation move¬
ments and refugees. After joining Unesco's
Department of Education in 1961, she helped
to co-ordinate cultural and educational aid
to the Congo (today the Republic of Zaire)
on its accession to independence.
and has helped to set up schools in
liberated areas and neighbouring
countries such as Tanzania, Guinea
and Zambia.
In 1971 Unesco sent a fact-finding
mission, led by the Assistant Director-
General for Education, Amadou Mahtar
M'Bow, to the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) in Addis Ababa (Ethiopia).
Working closely, the two organizations
have since channelled considerable
educational aid to liberation move¬
ments and refugees from the three
Portuguese-held African territories.
Since 1972, Unesco has admin¬
istered United Nations Develop¬
ment Programme funds totalling over
$350,000 for refugee education granted
in response to a request for aid from
Tanzania, Zambia and Guinea. This
aid has provided regional and inter¬
national study fellowships and has
helped to pay the training and salaries
of volunteer teachers for the refugees.
It has supplied equipment for the
Institute of Friendship, run at Conakry
(Rep. of Guinea) by the liberation
movement in Guinea (Bissau) and Cape
Verde (PAIGC), for the secondary
school and teacher training centre of
the Mozambique Liberation Movement
(FRELIMO), at Bagamoyo (Tanzania)
and for Nkumbi International College
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

24
UNESCO AID (Continued)
(Zambia) where 40 per cent of the
places are reserved for refugees.
Unesco allocated $40,000 for aid
to refugees and liberation movements
in 1971-72 and a further $69,000 in
1973-74. Part of these sums have
been used to print 60,000 mathematics
textbooks for the independence move¬
ment in Guinea (Bissau), as well as to
help refugee education centres such
as the Institute of Friendship at
Conakry and the secondary school
and teachei.-training centre at Baga-
moyo. The textbooks have been
shipped to Conakry for use in the Rep.
of Guinea and in the liberated areas
of Guinea (Bissau). Unesco is also
helping to train primary teachers and
literacy workers at Conakry and
Bagamoyo.
Unesco is publishing a history text¬
book on Guinea (Bissau) and Cape
Verde, the first to give an account of
current events in this territory.
Unesco last year collaborated with
Sweden and Denmark in a $700,000
aid programme for the Angola Institute
of Education, set up in Dolisie (Peoples
Rep. of the Congo) by the Angola
Liberation Movement (MPLA). The
aid covers buildings (provided by
the Danish International Development
Agency), staff salaries, furniture and
equipment financed through Unesco
by the Swedish International Devel¬
opment Agency. With Unesco's
help, the Angola Institute is devising
special programmes for refugee school
children.
Unesco has shipped to Africa one
million exercise books offered by the
U.S.S.R. which has also made avail¬
able 50 higher education fellowships
to refugees belonging to liberation
movements.
Unesco's appeal on behalf of
African liberation movements and
refugees has brought responses from
other countries. India, for example,
has offered school supplies; Kuwait
is investigating priority needs in
refugee education; Finland has agreed
to print textbooks for the liberation
movements; and Somalia has made
study grants for the training of primary
and secondary teachers.
Under its programme to give
"moral" assistance to African liber¬
ation movements, Unesco is publishing
several major fact-finding reports on
the situation in southern Africa. They
include a special inquiry into Por¬
tuguese colonialism in Angola, Guinea
(Bissau) and Mozambique.' The study,
"Portuguese Colonialism: Its Effects
on Education, Science, Culture and
Information" (in preparation), has been
written by Dr. Eduardo de Sousa
Ferreira (see page 25) and will be
published with an introduction by Basil
Davidson.
Photo ' CSLLCP. Paris
A young Angolan girl learning to read with the aid of a literacy manual preparad
by the Angola liberation movement (MPLA). In the liberated areas, where the
illiteracy rate is reported to reach 95 per cent, the MPLA has set up somo
60 schools and published and distributed its own literacy manuals in Portuguese.
With aid from Sweden and Denmark, Unesco has helped the MPLA to setup
the Angola institute of Education at Dolisie, in the People's Republic of the
Congo, and to develop new curricula and teaching methods.
