4^
- *^-^
LEOFROBENIUS
THE MAN WHO EXPLORED
AFRICA'S SOUL
A great German humanist, free of prejudice,
who proved that wherever men live
there is civilization.
by Eike Haberland
14
EIKE HABERLAND is a professor of ethnology
and Director of the Frobenius Institute at
the Goethe University of Frankfurt (Fed Rep.
of Germany). The author of a number of
ethnological and anthropological studies on
Africa and Oceania, he has carried out sev¬
eral research expeditions, in particular in
southern Ethiopia and New Guinea. Pro¬
fessor Haberland is a member of the Council
of the International Union of Ethnologists
\T a time
still caught up in the
superiority of the wh
culture, a man open
comprehensive cultu
of the entire world,
turning the traditiona
approach to history.
This man was a
Leo Frobenius, born
when Europe was
prejudices of the
ite race and white
ed the door to a
ral-historical view
thus at last over-
I, Europe-centered
German scientist,
in Berlin on June
29, 1873. Philosopher and ethnologist,
Frobenius published his first scientific
works at the age of 20, and at 25 he
astonished the scientific world with
his book "The Origin of African
Cultures" which marks the beginning
of historical and cultural research in
Africa.
With his vigorous mind and strong-
willed temperament, Frobenius was

During a lifetime of tireless research, Leo Fro¬
benius (seen, left, at work at a camp-site in the
Sahara) made a series of twelve great ex¬
peditions to Africa (see map below) from which
he brought back an immense wealth of infor¬
mation about the previously unsuspected cultural
treasures and ancient civilizations of the conti¬
nent. He was one of the first to make known
the importance and splendours of the Zimbabwe
civilization in southern Rhodesia. In this region
he discovered a number of magnificent rock
paintings of which this seated dignitary (right)
is one of the most famous examples (see also
next pages and back cover).
& ¡m
really nobody's disciple as far as
science was concerned. He served
his apprenticeship at various museums
and universities although as he
himself put it his real teachers were
the original sources.
His doctoral thesis on the origins
of African culture was rejected by a
German faculty, and he turned his
back on the universities for good.
From then on, he went his own way
It is true that, as an older man, he
received an honorary professorship
from the University of Frankfurt, but
he never held public lectures, although
the number of those who call
themselves his pupils is considerable.
His achievements are all the more
impressive when we consider that he
was not only a scientific genius, but
also a gifted administrator. His entire
life-work, his research institute with
its many collaborators, his numerous
research expeditions, his extensive
scientific archives were supported for
the greater part of his life with money
he raised himself.
A series of twelve great expeditions,
beginning in 1904 and ending in 1935,
shortly before his death, took him to
the Congo and the Kasai, to West
Africa which he covered in two trips
of almost four years' duration, to
Morocco, Algiers, Libya, and into the
deserts and mountains of the central
Sahara, to Egypt, to the Sudan, to the
shores of the Red Sea and to South
Africa. He also took an extended
trip to India. Thus many years of his
life were spent in the bush, in the
savanna and the tropical forest.
Those travels and the numerous
books he wrote about them in a highly
memorable style established his fame.
At that time, Frobenius was quite
properly called the true scientific
discoverer of African culture, for he
never returned from his expeditions
without material of immense value to
science.
H
MS reputation as an active
researcher was equally undisputed
among the general public and among
ethnologists. He was the daring
revolutionary in many fields, attacking
unsolved problems and making entirely
new discoveries.
Consider Zimbabwe (Rhodesia)
whose culture he brilliantly explained
from the traditions of the wise men and
priests still living in 1930. Consider Ife
in Nigeria where his excavations
brought entirely novel aspects of Afri¬
can art to light
Frobenius had a genius for dis¬
covery. From every journey he
brought back things previously un¬
known whether objects or traditions,
myths or historical reports. He
showed quite remarkable intuition in
discovering things which others, who
had been longer in the country than
he had, passed by unnoticed.
In Nigeria, for example, a man from
Ife told him that "in my country
everyone who lived in olden times is
a big stone." What no one had
believed possible was shown to be
true Frobenius went to Ife and there,
despite opposition from the Yorubas
and the British colonial authorities,
excavated marvellous pieces of terra
cotta and bronze heads. In so
doing he not only founded African
archaeology but revolutionized the
picture of African art which had
prevailed in Europe till that time, by
demonstrating what consummate works
Africa was able to produce.
His writings about these journeys
are today counted among the standard
works of African literature. The most
important are: a comprehensive twelve-
volume collection of African myths,
fairy tales and folk tales; his three
volumes "And Africa Spoke" (in which
he laid down the results of his travels
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
15

FROBENIUS (Continued)
16
in western and central Sudan); "Dying
Africa" in which he describes the
gradual decline of the high traditional
culture; "Erythrea" describing the
Zimbabwe culture; "Paideuma" in
which he sets down his credo as a
philosopher of culture; and finally his
powerful summary the "History of
African Culture".
Yet Leo Frobenius shares the fate
of many other important men: often
mentioned, seldom quoted, and even
more rarely read. Most of his books
some were published in the first
quarter of this century have not been
re-issued. Few of them have been
translated into English (1).
(1) A selection, in English, of the works of
Frobenius, 'Leo Frobenius 1873-1973, An
Anthology", edited by Eike Haberland and
with a foreword by Leopold Sedar Senghor,
has just been published by Franz Steiner
Verlag GmbH, Wiesbaden, Fed. Rep. of Ger¬
many. Other important works of Frobenius
translated into English include: 'The Child¬
hood of Man', Meridian Books Inc., New
York, 1960; "The Voice of Africa", Benjamin
Blom, New York, 1968.
Few anthropologists during his time,
or indeed before or after him, have
devoted their lives with so much pas¬
sion to uncovering the secrets of inter-
cultural influences and relations. Only
the immediate experience of the living
customs of the African, only close,
even intimate, contact with African
people made it possible for him to
achieve such perfection in his work.
Frobenius was a tireless worker
as is proved not only by his numerous
publications, but also by the treasures

.
PAINSTAKING GENIUS Frobenius recorded every aspect of African cultures with the same
painstaking precision. His personal archives contained some 250,000 notes on African art,
history, traditions and folklore. He made vivid reproductions of African paintings, such as this
splendid rock painting from Rhodesia (left), and meticulous plans and drawings of dwellings, fur¬
niture, carvings and decorative designs such as this embroidery from Nigeria (below).
he left behind in his archives, most of
them in his own hand, comprising
250,000 excerpts, pictures and maps in
which he systematically catalogued all
the most important facts from the
literature of his day on Africa.
Frobenius' lifework was crowned
officially when the city of Frankfurt
took over the sponsorship of the
African Institute which, up to then, he
had supported by his own efforts, and
appointed him a Director of the
Ethnological Museum of the same city.
Frobenius could now work more
freely, and devoted the last years of
his life principally to training his
students to succeed him in his work.
He sent them, under his own super¬
vision, on several great expeditions,
the finest fruits of which were the
copying and recording of the Arabian
and the Sahara rock pictures.
Although constantly attacked by the
Nazis, the Institute which later bore his
name, survived the bad years following
his death at Biganzalo, Italy, on
August 9, 1938, up to 1945. Today it
is continuing his work as a centre of
African research in the Fed. Rep. of
Germany.
The vast collection of the Africa
Archive, in which Frobenius recorded
all aspects of African cultures
with great meticulousness whether it
concerned sample calabashes or the
distribution of certain types of beds or
pile dwellings provided the basis of
Frobenius" greatest achievement: the
recognition of the historical back-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
17

18
FROBENIUS (Continued)
ground of African cultures and the
notion of culture as an independent
entity.
Frobenius was the first to try to
shed some light on the apparent
darkness of African history and to put
the African cultures drawn up by him
into historical perspective. With the
help of a cartographic method which
he developed himself he attempted in
his immense work, the "Atlas Afri-
canus", to locate the most important
elements of African cultures and thus
to determine their scope and extent.
He identified an old original Negro
peasant culture which he called
"Ethiopian", the cattle breeding
peoples of East Africa and the various
forms of the state systems and
theocratic kingships which play such
a significant part in recent African
history.
On the other hand he strove to see
the- individual cultures he discovered
not simply as a conglomeration of
various elements, but rather as living
organisms whose various forms of
expression were meaningfully related.
The doctrine of the Gestalt of
cultures from which the expression
"culture morphology" derives culmi¬
nates in the philosophical principle of
paideuma which might be best
translated as the "soul" or "spirit"
of a culture which uses man as an
outlet for its expression.
It "takes possession" of man, man
is "possessed" emotionally involved.
As paideuma is a living being, a culture
has its youth, its zenith, its decay and
death. For Frobenius the study of
African history meant the study of
the great African cultures and the
various stages of their development.
'OPIES made by Frobenius
of the great rock pictures were epoch-
making in the development of African
cultural history. The rock pictures
particularly those in the Sahara region
and in southern Africa were barely
known before Frobenius investigated
them. He surveyed them with
scientific accuracy, made copies of
them and added as many more new
discoveries to what was already known.
For this purpose he trained an entire
generation of artists who accompanied
him in his expeditions and after the
middle 1930's went on expeditions of
their own to make a record of the
treasures of south-west European and
African rock paintings and engravings.
In view of the unexpected wealth
and the stylistic range of his
discoveries, Frobenius hoped that
more extensive surveys would bring
to light enough new pictures of
significance to fill an enormous
"picture book" illustrating the history
of pre-literate cultures.
This hope was not fulfilled. Today
some of the dates given to rock
paintings by Frobenius are rejected,
although for lack of archaeological
evidence there has been no success in
dating them correctly.
Be that as it may, Frobenius holds
the honour of having recognized that
many rock pictures belonged to an
earlier epoch of mankind, when the
inhabitants of Europe as well as Africa
were still hunters. They made pictures
of the things that formed the centre
of their lives and thoughts: the
animals they hunted.
Animals were not simply prey and a
source of food. They lived with man
in symbiotic union. They were central
to the culture. Men were to use
Frobenius' expression "possessed",
emotionally involved, with the animals'
existence.
This was expressed in many rock
pictures, which go beyond mere
naturalistic reproduction of animals.
They show beings with human bodies
and animal heads or with masks.
A climax is reached in the picture of
a demonic elephant which, through the
power of its artistic sensitivity, has
lost none of its strong impact for us
today.
HE rock pictures in the
Sahara took on new meaning when
Frobenius compared them with those
of South Africa some of which had
been made in recent times by hunters,
the Bushmen, before their old culture
collapsed and disappeared leaving few
traces. Here again, we find the over¬
powering profusion of animal pictures
of the highest degree of artistic per¬
fection, here again the same demonic
beings.
On many of his trips around Africa
Frobenius collected information on the
remnants of an old hunting culture
which must have formerly covered
the whole of Africa before it was
supplanted by younger and more
vigorous cultures.
Furthermore, Frobenius found won¬
derful rock paintings in the vicinity
of Zimbabwe which really give the
impression of being illustrations of
history. In the centre there is the
constantly recurring figure of the
theocratic king. Particularly expressive
are the pictures depicting his burial in
the centre of a naturalistically depicted
landscape with its characteristic rocks.
Frobenius had a singular affection
for what he called "Ethiopian culture"
(the reference is to Homer's "irre¬
proachable Ethiopia" and has no
connexion with the country of that
name). It is the culture of the true
Negro that left its imprint on the whole
African continent south of the Sahara.
He said of it: "I was often asked
what occupation best expressed the

FROBENIUS (Continued Irom page 18)
essence of Africa. In my opinion the
essence of Africa is best reflected in
the peasantry with its indomitable
spirit. It decides the fate of continents.
Don't be deceived by the glamour of
large cities, the power of kings and
nobles, artists and craftsmen which
push the peasantry into the back¬
ground."
Since Frobenius, a great deal has
been written about the African
peasantry, but seldom has it been
described with such warm sympathy.
Frobenius has described the cosmic
dualism which is the great universal
law governing the peasant's existence:
the interaction of the maternal,
receptive, life-giving, nourishing earth
and the paternal heaven procreating,
fertilizing the earth with rain.
He has lauded the peasants' industry
and described how sowing and
harvesting are carried out as a sacred
ritual, a religious ceremony reflecting
a consciousness of the miracle of
Nature, the eternal cycle of life and
death, growth and decay.
No other culture, he maintains, has
the strength and genuine religious
fervour to equal that of African
peasant culture. With great admir¬
ation he describes the clay fortresses
built by the peasants and the patriar¬
chal family and clan within its
protecting walls.
M ROBENIUS, in his impress¬
ive style, liked to speak of the "glory
of the Sudan", when he referred to the
African state with monarch, cities,
highly developed crafts and art. To
him we owe impressive reports of the
high culture which prevailed in the
cities and the courts he himelf visited
both in western and southern Africa.
He also pointed out the numerous
similarities in the structure of these
states, which not only had a common
basic principle namely the divine
ruler as the symbol of the state, the
people and the culture but a great
many other common elements as well,
so that there can be no doubt as to
their historical relationship.
Frobenius not only made a record
of the history, traditions and folk tales
of the Sudanese city culture and
published them in many books. We
also owe to him and his assistants
the rich collection of reproductions of
its architecture and the artistic
creations of its craftsmen (embroidery,
leather-work, metalwork, pottery and
wrought ironwork).
Long before archaeologists proved
that contacts had existed between
Africa and its northern and eastern
neighbours, Frobenius had already
pointed out cultural relationships. For
him African high culture was not an
isolated phenomenon developing inde-
pently of the rest of the world. It had
close and fruitful contact with the old
cultures of the Mediterranean and the
Near East. Africa responded to these
inspirations and created its own
distinctive African high culture.
"It was Leo Frobenius who gave us
back our dignity", declared Leopold
Sédar Senghor, distinguished African
poet and writer, and president of the
Republic of Senegal since 1960.
"To the first pioneers of négritude,
Leo Frobenius was more than a
teacher whose ideas deserved con¬
sideration. He became for them an
effective and driving force in the
discovery, awakening and streng¬
thening of the energies lying dormant
in black men. Frobenius spoke to us
of the one problem which had become
our cause: the nature, the value and
the destiny of African culture."
All the cultures of the earth are now
considered to be of equal value. They
are only different, with differing lines
of thought. Frobenius would say: they
have another paideuma, another
culture soul. But this implies no
value judgment. Frobenius was thus
far ahead of other historians who, in
their works, deal with the so-called
"primitives" only in passing.
Leo Frobenius not only recognized
the historic values of all the cultures
of this earth, he also tried to follow the
actual course of their development,
regardless of the lack of written
sources. It does not matter that today
many of his historical reconstructions
require revision. Every great man is
a child of his times.
We should remember how little
source material he had at his disposal ,
he had collected most of it himself
during his travels. We must also
consider that he had absolutely no
technical aids, such as archaeologists
have today, to help him date his
material.
This fate he shares with many
other great pioneers. Nevertheless,
his insight remains the foundation
for the study of African cultural
history. Only subtle intuition and
tremendous industry the two charac¬
teristics of genius made possible his
vast life work, which we cannot help
but admire.
We see him not only as the founder
of African cultural history, but also as
a great humanist, free of prejudice,
who proved that wherever men live,
there is civilization. We also recognize
in him a bold spirit with the courage to
be independent of current official
policy, at a time when racial madness
had reached its peak, with the courage
to say in public that race had nothing
to do with culture.
What he said prophetically in 1921
has now become a commonplace for
us today, namely "that human culture
must be seen and understood in its
entirety as one organic whole from its
earliest origins". For this he deserves
our gratitude.
Leo Frobenius was quick to realize
how Important the Sahara rock
paintings and carvings were to the
understanding of the history of
ancient Africa. From Morocco to
Libya he discovered and copied
hundreds of these carvings and, in
1925, in collaboration with the
Spanish archaeologist Hugo Ober-
maier, he published his reproductions
in an analytical study entitled
"Hadjra Maktuba" (from Arabic
meaning "written on stone"). The
figures above were found at Taghit QQ
and Mou'l Maktuba, not far from £y
Bechar in the Sahara.
Drawings © Dr. Germann. Munich
