AVANT-GARDE AND
IN ASIA, AFRICA & LATIN
by Mikel Dufrenne
I
24
N the developing countries
culture is being challenged. The basic
influence affecting all reflection on art
is, in fact, the confrontation of cultures
between the West and everything that
is not Western.
This confrontation has been a
particularly bitter experience not only
in the former colonies which have had
to fight for their independence and
which have not yet eliminated the
after-effects of a traumatic encounter,
but also in those countries whose
dynamic relationship with the West
assumes the aspect of peaceful
competition. How, in such countries,
are the cultures in this confrontation
regarded?
The national culture, first of all, is no
longer experienced, as it might have
been, in a kind of happy innocence.
Because it has been threatened, dis¬
qualified, often half destroyed, it is
henceforth thought out and desired as
the instrument of an intransigent and
impassioned self-assertion.
If we consider this culture as a value,
the West may, all unwittingly, have
contributed to it, not simply because
it has illustrated the value of its
own culture, but because after the
devaluing of the indigenous culture
by its conquerors, missionaries and
teachers it has, through its artists
and scholars, succeeded in revaluing it.
When Picasso becomes an enthusiast
for negro art, when ethnological
museums accommodate it and ethno¬
logists pore over it, the African
rediscovers his art. He sees it with
a stranger's eyes but not as a museum
exhibit regarded with lukewarm interest
or requiring, if it is to be understood,
a special effort of adjustment: he sees
it as his own art and that is what he
wants it to be.
This is a point on which all con¬
tributors agree: awareness of art is
linked to what Mulk Raj Anand, the
Indian writer, calls "the search for
national identity".
This search assumes a scientific
form in countries which are adequately
equipped for this purpose, as in India
where, says Mulk Raj Anand, "the
most enlightened students have been
concerned to relate the art expression
of the past and the present to the
practice of the arts. This has entailed
detailed studies of the archaeological,
anthropological, sociological and formal
aspects of our understanding within
the context of art expression. Most
of these studies are devoted to the
search for national identity."
(Among such studies from India are
"The Significance of Indian Art" by
Aurobindo (1951); "Arts and Man"
by Bardekar (1960); "Comparative
Aesthetics" by Pamday (1957); "Rabin-
dranath Tagore on Art and Aesthetics",
an anthology edited by P. Neogy
(1961), and a major study by Mulk Raj
Anand, "The Birth of Lalit Kala", due
to appear shortly in Unesco's new
international review, "Cultures").
Even when this identity is not
defined by scientific methods it is no
less passionately asserted. Thus
Leopoldo Zea the Mexican philosopher
and Carlos and Magis, the Argentine
writer, refer to the "search for Latin-
American genius and for its ability to
express itself" in Latin America at
the beginning of the century. The
Togolese sociologist, Ferdinand Agblé-
magnon reminds us of the reception
that the theme of négritude developed
by Senghor, Césaire and Sartre has
found in Africa. And Ali El-Rai, the
Egyptian writer, alludes to the literary
forms that "particularly suit the
aspiring Arab soul"
This unanimous assertion of a dis¬
tinctive spiritual identity is sometimes
all the more intransigent because it is
difficult to visualize it clearly and its
reality is clouded by ambiguity. Do
the roots of the South American
peoples lie in Europe or in America?
At the dawn of the twentieth century,
according to Zea and Magis, they
"demanded a return to that reality
which was previously regarded as
an obstacle: the particular Creole
synthesis (the indigenous basis re¬
modelled by the Iberian peoples)".
Furthermore, national identity cannot
be asserted pacifically it can only
define itself by opposition by opposi¬
tion to the western culture which
always risks alienating it, since it feels
challenged and menaced in its depths.
In regard to art the menace is even
more distinct, since art is more closely
integrated with daily life. This is cer¬
tainly so in respect of archaic cultu¬
res and is, in any case, exemplified
by Black Africa.
This "mixing" of art and life is very
well described by Ferdinand Agbléma-
gnon:
"It is not solely in grandiose events
or exceptional circumstances that ar¬
tistic expression in Black Africa is pro¬
duced or becomes apparent. It lies
in the rhythm of daily life, in the desire
to maintain a constant relationship
between the cosmic and the real, be¬
tween the exceptional and the banal,
and the art expressed in everyday ob¬
jects is the most pertinent and strik¬
ing illustration of this.
"We see, in objects of common
use ranging from chairs to scales
for weighing gold a series of signs
and geometrical figures which, apart
from their scriptural value, represent
a geometrical and architectural expres¬
sion sought solely for artistic pur¬
poses. To lose the secret of these
seemingly modest sources of expres¬
sion would be deliberate estrange¬
ment from the great traditional schools
of apprenticeship in artistic expres¬
sion."
HERE is a danger of this
secret becoming lost as soon as the
West stamps a new pattern on every¬
day life. What has a particularly cor¬
rupting effect on the genuineness of
art is its commercialization or, we may
venture to say, its prostitution. Mulk
Raj Anand has noted this clearly in
respect of India:
"But, whereas in the days of the
village republic, the craftsman was an
integral part of society, paid for and
CONTINUED PAGE 26

TRADITION
AMERICA
Tradition is married to new art techniques in this fingerprint painting by Malwankar, an Indian artist who
depicts figures, elephants and flying steeds in a manner all his own. These figures are from his cartoon
film "Swayamvar", based on the ancient custom of a Rajput princess selecting a husband by garlanding
the prince of her choice. Malwankar rose from desperate poverty to a successful career as an artist.
Through his fingerprint painting he evokes the delicate stylized figures of Rajasthani and Mughal miniatures.
©
OD
I
Q
25

ASIA, AFRICA, LAT. AMERICA (Continued)
Can one deny one's people and one's past?
26
recognized for his service for the
community, the artist today is not pro¬
ducing material goods of a specific
marketable value but cultural goods of
which the value has yet to be recog¬
nized...
"Therefore the artist turns to film
poster work or commercial design for
a living, or he paints pretty pictures
with plenty of local colour in them
which may appeal to a certain kind
of foreign tourist or procure him a
patron among the diplomats; or he
paints decorative pictures for the
more sophisticated drawing rooms of
the big cities.
"There are a very few artists who
are immune to these peculiar social
conditions and who seek to answer
the challenge of their vision."
Thus national culture feels itself
threatened, even when it is marked out
for a new life which will only really
be its own if it accepts the challenge
that the West has issued.
How, in turn, is western culture
seen? The attitude it produces is bas¬
ically ambivalent. This culture is seen
first of all as something foreign: it is
the "other", and this "otherness" is
even more keenly felt since the
"other" has too often imposed him¬
self by force. But this culture is also
regarded as possessing prestige it
is allied to the spectacular advance of
technology, and neither the distrust nor
the resentment that it may arouse can
hide the fact of its vitality and power
of expansion from shrewd eyes.
What is more, it appears as an in¬
evitable line of advance; just as, in the
developing countries, the economy
must assume the harness of indus¬
trialization, so the black Orpheus must,
as Sartre has stressed, sing in French
if his voice is to carry across fron¬
tiers.
But the voice Is then no longer en¬
tirely his own: "Africans", observes
Ferdinand Agblémagnon, "including
grammarians, admit the impossibility
of translating certain emotions for
which words exist in the vernacular
language of their village... The privi¬
leged persons who succeed in a
complete break-through of the lan¬
guage barrier are few and far be¬
tween."
This culture, furthermore, is not sim¬
ply the "other", it is also the enemy.
Must we allow ourselves, then, to be
haunted and fascinated by it? It some¬
times happens, in fact, that its pres¬
tige is denied and its purpose de¬
nounced, mainly by Marxist militants in
the Third World.
In regard to this confrontation of cul¬
tures three solutions are proposed and
three attitudes adopted.
The first and the most passive, if
one may say so, consists in accepting
or even sanctioning a division which
tends to impose itself naturally. "No
developing country can escape a cul¬
tural "dichotomy", says Shu ich I
Kato, who describes the situation as
exemplified by Japan at the beginning
of the century:
"After the Meiji Reform (1868),
Japan adopted western political insti¬
tutions (parliamentary monarchy), re¬
taining however the traditional author¬
itarian values of military dictatorship.
Western technology was systematic¬
ally introduced and heavy industries
developed in urban areas without
modification of rural life (e.g. the con¬
tinuation of the exploitation of tenants
by landowners), without much change
in the production of a large part of
consumer goods (e.g. food consump¬
tion and clothing).
"Around the turn of this cen¬
tury, the educated Japanese, living
in the rapidly growing cities, worked
during the daytime in the westernized
industrial and governmental offices
and went home to spend the evening
in the traditional way: wearing the
kimono, sitting on a mat, eating rice.
Efficiency in western technology dur¬
ing the day and a delicate aesthetic
life of traditional values in the evening:
indeed a precarious balance for a
person.
"Accordingly, the architecture in
Tokyo of that time was divided into
two categories: all public buildings,
such as government offices, banks,
railway stations, schools, and large de¬
partment stores, were constructed in
the "western style" with bricks, stone,
concrete and steel, while practically
all living quarters were houses built
of wood in the traditional 'Japanese
style'.
"This split was also evident in the
cultural and educational facilities. The
National Academy of Music was com¬
posed of two separate departments
which were totally independent of one
another: one strictly for traditional
music and the other for western
music.
"The same was true of the National
Academy of Arts: a department for
"Japanese painting" and another for
"western painting". As a matter of
fact the Japanese painter of the time
was obliged to specialize either in
working in Indian ink and the tradi¬
tional water-colours or with oil on
canvas.
"Also in the theatre one either spe¬
cialized in the traditional Kabuki, Nô
and Kyôgen or in the 'New Theatre'.
The masses were rarely attracted by
the Kabuki, while the young intellec¬
tuals of Tokyo were witnessing per¬
formances of Shakespeare, Chekhov
and a few Japanese plays written in
the 'western' style. Except for rare ins¬
tances, actors of the Kabuki never per¬
formed in the 'New Theatre" and,
accordingly, actors of the "New Thea¬
tre' did not play in the Kabuki."
This situation, which was that of
Japan yesterday, prevails today in
countries which, simultaneously with
the achievement of independence,
have set about the process of moder¬
nization. But, because it is artificial
and difficult to tolerate, it will not last
any longer than it has in Japan. One
cannot exist for long on two levels,
torn between a native ego and a wes¬
tern super-ego.
As, in particular, this dual system
has repercussions on social stratifica¬
tion, it is also unacceptable. Partici¬
pation in western culture is the privi¬
lege on an élite, while the people re¬
main necessarily faithful to tradition;
and this élite because it is sensitive
to this fact and feels itself to be res¬
ponsible experiences a feeling of
guilt and a sense of treachery: can one
deny one's people and one's past?

Japanese
catalytic
agent
"I sometimes compare tradition
to a chemical reaction", said the
famous Japanese architect Kenzo
Tange in an interview with the
"Unesco Courler" (Sept.-Oct.
1968). "It should act like a cata¬
lytic agent to create something
new, but the traditional form or
Inspiration should not be visible
in the finished product" Below
left, a garden created four cen¬
turies ago by the poet Sô-ami
at the Daisenin monastery, Kyoto,
where monks still rake the gra¬
vel beds in accordance with
a strictly established tradition.
Right, the elegant strength and
soaring lines of a modern build¬
ing conceived by Kenzo Tange.
And so, says Ferdinand Agbléma¬
gnon, "black French-speaking writers,
whether literally exiles or exiles on
the spot, regard themselves as out
off from the masses and from tradi¬
tional society. They have a sense of
guilt at living within another culture
and no longer feel exactly like their
illiterate brothers who are still in the
village; this mass becomes, for them,
the symbol of traditional society."
And he adds: "This new African lit¬
erature asks itself if it is only of signi¬
ficance in Paris, London or Washing¬
ton. It deplores being completely un¬
known in Africa itself. Does the artist
really achieve his goal when the peo
ple for whom the work is intended are
unaware of its very existence?"
For an artist, furthermore, playing
the western game does not mean that
he is sure of winning. Zea and Magis
have seen this quite clearly in Latin
America during the second half of the
nineteenth century:
"In Mexico, Chile and more espe¬
cially Argentina, leaders of the liter¬
ary and artistic movement sought inte¬
gration with European culture beyond
the Pyrenees, but this integration en¬
countered particular obstacles, due to
the circumstances in which the Latin
American peoples were living and the
deep imprint of the culture in which
they had been brought up.
For this reason the tendency for cul¬
ture to become the privilege of the
minority was, unfortunately, to grow
more marked while, at the same time,
the past inspired only a feeling of
aversion because of its symbolic iden¬
tification with the colony in the sense
of a synthesis of structures imposed
by the mother-cities of the Peninsula.
As a substitute for this past an
attempt was made to model trends of
thought, as well as literature and art,
on the pattern of trans-Pyrenean Eur¬
ope. But this substitution failed to
solve the problem, for the results of
this adherence so-called integration
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE-
27

ASIA, AFRICA, LAT. AMERICA (cont'd)
with the western world were regard¬
ed by the European artists themselves
as poor imitations of their own creative
works. And indeed they were right,
because the Latin American artists
did no more than reproduce the same
themes and use a similar technique;
these themes were in fact completely
alien to their world, the world of the
artists who sought to absorb them."
There is, then, a second solution
which, although finding supporters
everywhere, will also be seen to be
impracticable. This is the defence
and illustration of the indigenous cul¬
ture against western temptations and
its glorification or even resurrection
where, in countries which have ex¬
perienced colonial rule, it has been
at least partially destroyed.
This project implies the return of the
creative artist to his people and almost
always his political commitment to the
struggle of the people, in which the
stake is often both independence and
socialism. In the words of Ferdinand
Agblémagnon:
"This commitment has differing de- .
grees and depths according to authors.
There is the commitment of the artist
in regard to everyday life which
means accepting the lot of the writer
or artist today.
"Then there is the personal, political
commitment. Following this trend of
thought, we can set side by side men
who, both in origin and destiny, are
extremely different: we think of Frantz
Fanon who became the protagonist and
the hero of the Algerian revolution;
Stefan Alexis, killed during the internal
struggle in Haiti; Christopher Okigbo,
the Nigerian poet, assassinated during
Islamic heritage of calligraphy
The search for new art forms linking past with present has, over
the past decade, been the driving force behind a school of young
artists in Teheran. The young Iranian painter Zenderoudi, seen
above in his studio, draws inspiration for his paintings from the
masterpieces of calligraphy that form the central core of Iranian,
and indeed all Islamic, artistic tradition.
28
Morocco's anti-war artist
The anguished sufferings of man with all his problems of wars
and racial antagonisms are the major themes of the Moroccan
artist Farid Belkahia. Right, "Reflection", a painting produced
by Belkahia in 1961. While still a young teacher in a town of
south Morocco (he later became director of the School of Fine
Arts of Casablanca), his highly personal, clear-cut style soon
made him famous far beyond the frontiers of his native country.

the Nigerian war; Leopold Sédar Sen-
ghor, the poet-president who is ever
mindful of his political commitments
when he tries to reconcile his theory
of négritude with his country's imper¬
atives of economic development;
Mario De Andrade, head of a revolu¬
tionary party engaged in the struggle
for the liberation of Angola: Jomo
Kenyatta, who was a prisoner under
the colonial régime, and so on."
Commitment in aesthetic terms
the terms which concern us here
may also be total. It is accepted
today, or has been in the past, by a
proportion of the nation's intelligent¬
sia. In India, for example: "Some
part of it consciously fought back the
alien culture in defence of chauvinist
nationalism and tried deliberately to
revive the ancient ('spiritual') tradition
of culture and its artistic expressions
as against the 'material' forms of the
West," writes Mulk Raj Anand.
In Morocco, the appeal for a return
to the wellsprings is expressed in po¬
lemical terms by Allai al-Fassi, whose
words Zaghoul Morsy reproduces: "I
address my appeal to the writers of
this country, who spend their time ana¬
lysing aspects of human problems in
the light of foreign creative works... I
address my appeal to research
workers so that they may study our Is¬
lamic society, its civilization, thought,
philosophy and literature and no longer
follow the path of what they learned
at their French lycée... I am not for¬
getting those who sing of the achieve¬
ments of the socialists and others, and
of the sacrifices of Guevara and Lu¬
mumba... I ask them to glorify our
national struggle and Moroccan, Arab
and Moslem sacrifices."
In Black Africa we are aware of the
reception that the theme of négritude
has obtained sometimes expressed
in violent terms since it represents,
says Ferdinand Agblémagnon, "a kind
of cry for liberation."
He adds, however: "For some time
Blacks and non-Blacks have been ask¬
ing themselves about the value and
ambiguity of this theme and we have
heard a kind of anti-négritude theory
put forward." Why this change of
opinion?
The reason lies in the fact that the
search for one's identity cannot be
reduced to the glorification of the an¬
cestral past. It must look towards the
future and have due regard for the
sense of history. Marxist thinkers,
even if anxious to safeguard national
identity, refuse to adopt any line that
runs counter to internationalism. Non-
Marxist thinkers, such as Laroui in
Morocco, are just as sensitive to the
demands of historical circumstances,
the study of which argues against any
idea of Utopia.
The reality of the West is a fact
which cannot be ignored: "Whether
we try to refute it, liberate ourselves
from it or assent to it", says Zaghoul
Morsy in his comments on Laroui, "the
West is here with us as a prime fact,
and ignorance or imperfect knowledge
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
BY AND FOR AFRICANS OF TODAY. Far from remaining contentedly imprisoned in
the splendours of the past, African art, in all its 'forms, is branching out along a multi¬
tude of bold new paths. Examples of this new burgeoning are : above, "Racing Horses",
a linocut on rice paper by the 24 year old Kenyan artist Hezbon Owiti, and, below, a
colour-wash by the famous painter Iba N'Diaye of Senegal. Both as a teacher of art
and handicrafts and as a painter himself, Iba N'Diaye is involved in a constant struggle
against the facile perpetuation of a servile "primitivism" in art. What is needed,
he says, is "authentic African painting, by Africans of today, for- Africans of today".
r, ¿m» -f^Q

ASIA, AFRICA, LAT. AMERICA (Continued)
of it has a nullifying effect on all
serious reflection and genuinely
artistic expression."
Furthermore, the future of the non-
Western countries lies along the path
of Westernization. To reject western
culture en bloc is to reject develop¬
ment of science and technology as
well; and what country can expand
today without industrialization? If it
accepts this industrialization while re¬
solved to maintain the purity of its
traditions, will it not lapse into the
dichotomy described by Kato?
The sole alternative to intolerable
duality is synthesis, and it is towards
a solution of this kind that national
ideologies are heading today, in full
awareness, moreover, that it is easier
to label it than to define and intro¬
duce it. Synthesis is, however, the
very word that Mulk Raj Anand uses:
"The study of important problems in
relation to artistic expression in tradi¬
tional societies, which have received
the impact of modern industrial cultu¬
res, can only be fruitful if we consider
the clash between traditionalism and
modernity as part of a new emergent
synthesis rather than as research into
two fundamentally opposed attitudes
of East and West, which have nothing
to do with each other."
In the case of India, Mulk Raj Anand
observes:
"After half a century of affirmation
of a false myth and the revival of
ancient and medieval Hindu culture,
on the parallels of a political myth, the
intelligentsia has recently begun to
awaken to the fact that new industrial
civilization, which it has accepted on
the social plan, must be absorbed."
He adds:
"And yet very few members of the
top hierarchy wish to confront the
contemporary human situation openly
because the problems of technology
versus human survival in the West
have made a good many ideologies
of the West, from Schopenhauer and
Max Muller to the Neo-Yogis, con¬
sider Indian mysticism to be the
answer to everything."
This illustrates the phenomenon to
which we have already drawn atten¬
tion, namely that it is sometimes west¬
ern thinking that reveals the indi¬
genous culture to itself and gives it
value. But it still remains for the indi¬
genous culture itself to achieve the
synthesis of the East and the West.
Mulk Raj Anand draws our attention
to the fact that:
"India has made a distinctive contri-
30
"The Singer", 1930, oil painting by the
famous Mexican painter and engraver
Rufino Tamayo, now in the National Museum
of Modern Art, Paris. Rufino's works,
painted in brilliant colour and often inspir¬
ed by his country's folklore and traditions,
are profoundly Mexican, yet they have a
visual quality which gives them universal
appeal.
bution in the synthesis of the European
forms of the novel and the content of
Indian life, in the works of Indian-
English novelists, Raja Rao, Mulk Raj
Anand, R.K. Narayan, Namala Mardan-
daya, Attia Hussain, Bhabhani Bhatta-
charya and several others.
"In another form of artistic expres¬
sion, the dance-drama, the acceptance
of a certain aspect of European
choreography has made various new
contributions possible from Mrinalini
Sarabhai, Shirin Vajifdar, Krishna
Kutty, Parvati Kumar, Shanti Bhardan
and Maya Rao."
Another key-word that we find in
all writers is the "universal". To
overcome antagonism or contradiction
is to promote the universal. But we
must realize that this process cannot
be achieved without sacrifices. Shui-
chi Kato is very alive to this:
"With the changing of values, the
divorce from tradition has become a
serious problem. Gone are the days
when people differentiated between
western ability and the Japanese soul.
Western ability has become Japanese
ability. The dichotomy has disap¬
peared.
"But where can one find the Japa¬
nese soul when the people are driving
automobiles to air-conditioned offices,
or tractors in the fields or watching a
"Western" on television? The Japa¬
nese clothes of today are the same
styles as those of Western Europe.
The Japanese now eat the same
amount of animal protein as most
Europeans. Most households no longer
harbour miniature shrines of tradi¬
tional deities or souls.
"It is true that girls sometimes wear
kimonos, perhaps on Sunday, but this
CONTINUED PAGE 32
I

IS.
yn^ ~»" /»!»»« "'Í'' *fy /***
*/ -Ù '.... A*4*¿ut 'i- "'.
n
t.-
durata C. 30" 14
What's the score in the new music?
These are not works of modern gra¬
phic art, but musical scores by avant
garde composers, reproduced here
for the first time. Above, a thirty-
second extract from an unaccompanied
choral work, "Lux Lucet in Tenebris"
("and the light shineth in the dark¬
ness"), by the young Uruguayan com¬
poser Sergio Cervetti. The new nota¬
tion enables the composer to indicate
various intricate African or Balinese
modulations, etc., and to signal to
the performers changes of tone, rhyth¬
mic pace and volume. Right, an
extract from "Sonancias", a score for
piano and percussion instruments by
the Brazilian composer Marios Nobre.
The multiple key indications at the
left make the score easier to read.
The notations for percussion Instru¬
ments differ from those used In classic -
scores, , The world première of "So¬
nancias" took place in Munich, Fed.
Rep. of Germany, in 1972, at the
"Cultures of the World and Contem¬
porary Arts" exhibition, with Uruguay¬
an pianist Susana Frugone as soloist.
Photos © Michael Romann, Paris

ASIA, AFRICA, LAT. AMERICA (Continued)
Universality, keyword for the future
is an international phenomenon: Chris¬
tians too find their Christian soul
only on Sunday. The problem for
Meiji Japan was the dichotomy of the
culture; the problem for Japan today,
especially for artists and writers, is one
of regaining national identity."
Thus Kato demonstrates, not without
a hint of mockery, that sacrifices are
reciprocal in its modernization, pro¬
viding the example of industrialization,
the West itself has not remained un¬
changed. The advice to the develop¬
ing countries reads thus: to follow the
West is not Westernization but rather
"planetarization". And it is in this way
that what Hegel termed the "concrete
universal" can come to pass.
B
32
'UT not enough attention
is paid to this demand for universality.
Kato warns us about this again: if an
attempt is made, in order to save
national character, to reduce the syn¬
thesis to a more or less illegitimate
compromise, beware of monsters!
"In the 1930s, simultaneously with
the rising of nationalism, politically-
inspired architects who had already
mastered the construction techniques,
started designing buildings with the
conscious purpose of emphasizing the
Japanese national character... The
conscious search for national identity
in architecture in the Japan of the
1930s resulted in the production of
architectural monsters."
From which he concludes:
"There is no other way out of this
technological age. Those who con¬
tinue to speak a local dialect will fall
into regionalism. Nationalism as a
major motivation of artistic creation
will produce only monsters."
Does this mean, however, that the
sacrifice of a particular identity must
be pursued until its complete disap¬
pearance? By no means, and Kato
helps us again to understand this:
"Contemporary architects are no
longer striving for emphasis of Japa¬
nese character but are simply trying
to solve problems within the frame¬
work of the international architectural
grammar of the post-Bauhaus era. Yet
often enough there appears something
in their works which could be called
a sensibility of Japanese perception:
sense of colour, of form, of surface,
of line.
This Japanese character of architec¬
ture when it appears does so in res¬
ponse to the influence of the climate,
natural surroundings and the tempera¬
ment of the designer and not as some¬
thing conceived as the target of crea¬
tion. If the works of Kenzo Tange
are Japanese, they are so only in the
same sense that the works of Le Cor-
busier are French."
Hence his final remarks:
"The search for national identity
should not be a conscious motivation
for artistic creation. National identity
is something which results through the
unconscious tradition in the artist from
his search for the art beyond national
borders."
Art in every country is driven by a
great number of currents. Two exam¬
ples will suffice. Mulk Raj Anand has
identified five such currents in India:
"The phenomenon we see, and which
has been termed mutation of artistic
expression, displays several remark¬
able eccentricities
The search for influence from the
more fashionable styles of Paris, Lon¬
don, New York and Rome.
The research into the academic
realism of the West, borrowed by the
artists of the late nineteenth century.
The persistence of the revivalists of
the early twentieth century who had
sought to achieve spirituality in art by
borrowing the romantic forms of sixth
century Ajanta and Bagh Buddhist art
but within the framework of the seven¬
teenth century Mughal miniature.
The return to naive and primitive
expression as a more dynamic form
of revival.
The search for a synthesis between
the relevant inheritance of myth, love,
nature and human conflict in new con¬
temporary human forms, this itself
forming an inner content and thus ex¬
ploding into a new expression. This
becomes fused into the search for
personal authenticity."
In Egypt, Ali El-Rai distinguishes, for
his part, three schools of poetry:
"Today, the literary scene in Egypt
presents all three schools: the tradi¬
tionalist, represented by older poets
such as 'Aziz Abaza and 'AM Al-Guindi;
the romantic, by Mahmoud Hasan
Isma'il and Saleh Gawdat among
others; while a varying blend of social
realism and modernistic trends charac¬
terizes such younger poets as 'Abdel
Mu'ti Higazi, 'Afeefi Matar and Kamel
Ayyoub, to mention a few names.
"With varying intentions, forms and
techniques, we may safely conclude
that all the above-mentioned trends
concur in attempting to realize what
AI-'Aqqad and Al-Mazini stated (half
a century ago) as their goal: the crea¬
tion of a literature that is Arabic in
language (we may now add: and tra¬
dition), Egyptian in character, and uni¬
versal in appeal."
Furthermore, emerging everywhere
in this diversity, we find a subject of
major concern reflected in the ap¬
proach of creative artists: as AM El-Rai
has pointed out and as Ferdinand
Agblémagnon states in regard to Afri
can literature, art is, everywhere, "the
search for self and for genres". Agblé¬
magnon adds: "The search for self
arises inasmuch as it is necessary to
rediscover the ancient personality that
will provide the prop for the emergence
and full blossoming of the new; a
search, likewise, for genres and styles,
because the new language has not
been totally mastered."
It is not surprising that it is to
literature that this reflection refers. In
the practice of the non-Western coun¬
tries everywhere, literature is the pre¬
ferred medium, no doubt because it
facilitates expression of the ideology
underlying creative work.
Furthermore, even within literature
one genre seems, in turn, to have a
privileged place both because it at¬
tracts a really popular audience and
because it enables traditional themes
to be transposed into a modern form
the theatre. AM El-Rai notes: "Drama
in Egypt presents an even clearer case
than that of the novel of the way a
new form is transplanted into a coun¬
try's rich soil to become, before long,
a natural product of the land."
HIS is corroborated by
Agblémagnon: "We believe that the
new African literature and the new
African art will owe much to the thea¬
tre and it would seem that this genre
has a considerable contribution to
offer. We find in it all the elements
usually grouped in the traditional story
which is a continuous way of inter¬
preting and acting out life. We are
thus not at all surprised to see that
the African language theatre is winn¬
ing over a public whose existence was
unsuspected."
But this obviously does not mean
that other arts, such as architecture
in Japan or painting in Mexico, are not
displaying remarkable vitality. Indeed,
the quotations which we are using
testify that art and literature are every¬
where very much alive. The fact that
they may hold aloof from tradition or
become temporal rather than sacred,
as Mulk Raj Anand says, does not
weaken their vigour.
The western-inspired status that the
artist has acquired, coupled with the
individualization of aesthetic experien¬
ce, is giving art a new stimulus and
what Mulk Raj Anand has to say in
regard to India is no doubt applicable
to a number of countries: "The reali¬
zation by the individual of his potential
in the autonomous arts has introduced
a completely new factor of struggle
into a society through and within which
the fine arts had previously been part
of ritual."
