by
Eduardo
de Sousa Ferreira




Education
and discrimination
in the Portuguese
territories of Africa
The "Unesco Courier" is pleased to offer readers a preview from a
special Unesco report on the effects of Portuguese colonialism on
education, science, culture and information in African territories
under Portuguese control. Here, Eduardo de Sousa Ferreira, author
of the Unesco report, examines salient findings from his inquiry into
education today under Portuguese rule in Africa. His study is one
of several fact-finding reports on the current situation in southern
Africa which Unesco plans to publish (dates of publication not yet
announced) under its programme of "moral assistance" to African
liberation movements. The passage below is condensed from a chapter
in Mr. de Sousa Ferreira's book at present in preparation.
I^bDUCATION... cannot have
as its objective the mere spreading of
knowledge; its objective should be
the formation of citizens capable of
feeling to the full the imperatives of
Portuguese life, knowing how to inter¬
pret them and making them a constant
reality, in order to secure the con¬
tinuation of the Nation." This, as
stated in mid-1972 by the Portuguese
Minister of Overseas Territories,
Joaquim da Silva Cunha, is the basis
of Portugal's educational policy in its
African territories.
In the face of international opinion
as well as the pressure exerted by the
liberation movements in Portuguese
African territories, Portugal has since
the 1960s introduced important changes
in her colonial policy in Africa.
Education, as an integral part of this
policy, underwent fundamental modifi¬
cations.
Though this led to an expansion of
EDUARDO DE SOUSA FERREIRA, Portu¬
guese economist and specialist on Portuguese
economic and political questions, has made
a close study of current conditions in African
territories under Portuguese administration.
He is the author of "Portuguese Colonialism
from South Africa to Europe", published in
1972 by Aktion Dritte Welt, Freiburg (Fed.
Rep. of Germany).
education unprecedented in the Por¬
tuguese territories, the increase has
been quantitative and confined almost
exclusively to primary education. The
basic aim of the new policy is un¬
changed from the old: the inculcation
of Portuguese values and the pro¬
motion among African school-children
of a conscious identification with
Portugal.
Textbooks throw an interesting light
on the new educational policy. Unlike
those used before a reform of pri¬
mary education in 1964, textbooks are
now considerably Africanized. They
show African life in rural areas and in
the towns. Frequently pictures show
Africans in harmonious relations with
whites.
This depiction of African culture
and environment is, however, com¬
pletely swamped by pictures of whites
or of Portugal, while moral, religious
and historical issues are dealt with
from an exclusively Portuguese point
of view.
History in the fourth grade covers
Portuguese history only. History is
the only subject other than Portuguese
language and arithmetic on which the
student is questioned in the final
examination, and a certificate in history
is necessary for any Angolan seeking
any employment other than physical
labour. The history of the colonies is
mentioned a few times, but only in
relation to Portuguese history, e.g. the
"discoveries" of Henry the Navigator,
and the "liberation" of Angola from the
Dutch occupation.
The geography textbooks of the
fourth grade have a picture of the
Salazar bridge in Lisbon on the cover
and contain detailed information about
Portugal, including its ports, rivers
and mountains.
It will be useful to examine certain
immediately relevant aspects of pri¬
mary education, using Angola as an
example. Angola has made the most
comprehensive progress of all the
colonies and so represents the
maximum achievement. Secondly,
more up-to-date and detailed data are
available on education for Angola than
for the other colonies.
There has been a remarkable in¬
crease in primary school attendance
(from 105,781, in 1960-61, to 392,809,
in 1969-70). The rapidity of the in¬
crease is explained, however, by the
extremely low starting level in 1960-61.
In 1970-71 children of school-age going
to school still represented only little
more than half (53.43 per cent). As
regards Mozambique, the newspaper
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
25

EDUCATION AND DISCRIMINATION (Continued)
Noticias of Lourenço Marques (of 29
March 1972) gave the corresponding
percentage as 30 per cent.
Schools are mainly in cities or in
white settlements. For Africans living
elsewhere access to education is diffi¬
cult. An official inquiry was made in
all rural zones in Angola in 1971,
except for areas to which access was
denied by the liberation movements.
It showed that 48.5 per cent of the
children of shepherds and 20 per cent
of farm children did not go to school
in 1969-70 because no facilities were
available.
To extend schooling to the rural
areas where most Africans live, the
1964 decree established schools
which provide a pre-primary class and
the first three years of primary edu¬
cation. In general, only full primary
schools provide the fourth year,
Nevertheless all of the schools are
counted in the statistics as primary
schools.
Teachers for the full primary schools
(almost exclusively Europeans or
of mixed Portuguese and African
descent) attend a two-year teacher-
training course after completing five
years of secondary education; teachers
in the others need only four years of
primary school, and four years of
teacher-training.
During the rapid expansion in
Angola in 1962, the lower grades in
the latter schools were entrusted to
monitors, whose only qualifications
were four years of primary school
and a two-and-a-half month vocation
training class. How low this level of
training is can be judged from the
fact that only after ten years of
teaching ("always with good reports
at the annual inspections") can moni-
LEARNING
TO BE FREE
Below, the pilot school established
by the Guinea (Bissau) and Cape
Verde liberation movement (PAIGC)
at Conakry, in the Republic of Gui¬
nea, as an experimental education
centre and a training school for
teachers. Refugee children from
Guinea (Bissau) receive practical
education in agriculture (right) as
well as in the usual school subjects.
Unesco has provided some 60,000
arithmetic textbooks for the pilot
school and the more than 150
schools established in the liberated
areas of Guinea (Bissau).
Photos © Bruna Amlco, Rome
tors apply to take the examination for
teacher posts {though there too, the
standard is not high). In 1969-70,
most of the teachers in the three-year
schools, and all the monitors were
African.
The small proportion of properly
trained teachers partly accounts for a
high rate of failures, but it is not the
only cause. Portuguese is ihe only
language of instruction allowed. As
from pre-primary, African children have
first to learn Portuguese, and are thus
at a great disadvantage as compared
with Portuguese children. The higher
rates of failure occur in the initial
grades. Statistics for Angola are not
available but those for Mozambique
show a pre-primary failure rate of 67.1
per cent as against an average failure
rate of 57.8 per cent.
' However, transfer from pre-primary
to first grade does not depend exclu¬
sively on proficiency in Portuguese.
As a United Nations document points
out: "Recent events suggest however
that an African child who is already
7 years old, who speaks Portuguese

fluently and can count in Portuguese,
may not be able to enter first grade
as a Portuguese child would but may
have to go through the pre-primary
class, where he will be "made to
acquire the social habits necessary
for attending common schools with
the same success as children from a
European type of environment."
Of all students enrolled in Angola
in 1967-70, 4.4 per cent completed
primary education, i.e. passed the final
examination of the fourth grade. The
highest percentage (9.58 per cent)
was in Luanda, the lowest in Cuando-
Cubango (1.96 per cent).
The planners themselves comment:
"The conclusion does not vindicate
the system. Most of the population
(and nearly all the rural population)
attend only the first two, or at most
three, grades, leaving school with only
the sketchiest of knowledge, rudi¬
mentary to such a degree that within
a short while they fall back into
illiteracy; and the consequences for
the economy are those that result
from the almost total unproductivity
of the investment involved."
Most Africans are debarred by
selective processes from access to
any education beyond primary level.
Of 444,983 Africans being educated
in Mozambique 439,974 were at pri¬
mary level.
Post-primary education is mainly
technical and occupational, its object
being to produce more skilled Africans.
Figures for Mozambique show that
at secondary level in 1966-67, 70.2 per
cent of the 4,157 Africans were attend¬
ing technical or occupational schools
and only 29.8 per cent academic
schools, whereas most Europeans
attended academic schools.
The position is prejudiced still fur¬
ther by the fact that facilities are
available in only a very few places,
usually not very accessible to most
Africans. There is a strong concen¬
tration of schools and pupils in a few
districts and particularly in Luanda; in
1970-71, 87.46 per cent of all secon¬
dary first grade students lived in
eight of Angola's fifteen districts, with
38.79 per cent of them living in Luanda.
We have already seen from the
figures for Mozambique that there is a
high rate of failure at primary school.
The figures for Angola -show a rate of
failure in first cycle secondary of 40
per cent.
University education in Angola and
Mozambique is token with only 1,402
students in 1969-70, in Angola. Mo¬
zambique (1968-69) had 1,145 students
of whom 33 completed their studies.
Courses most attended were engineer¬
ing and medicine (75.94 per cent of
students in Angola in 1968-69).
Courses providing training for agro¬
nomists, veterinarians and social ser¬
vice (which would be very important
for rural people and rural development)
are less well attended mainly because
of the poor prospects open to those
who qualify.
In Mozambique, in 1966-67, of 614
students 9 were Africans. In 1967-
68, of a total of 748 students, 8 were
Africans (5 studying medicine and 3
engineering), corresponding to 1.1 per
cent of the total; 83.5 per cent were
whites. Among other obstacles, few
CONTINUED PAGE 32
27

Education and discrimination in 'Portuguese1 Africa
Continued from page 27
32
Africans can afford the basic annual
university fee of 1,000 escudos, plus a
further 400-650 escudos (depending
on the course taken).
If we accept the claim of Portugal
that Angola is a province of that
country, then, in primary education,
Angola not only falls far behind the
advanced countries, but also behind
some of the developing countries.
The higher the level of education, the
fewer enrolled. This trend accentuates
if we consider the African population
alone. Only a few get beyond primary
level, and practically none get to
university.
It seems reasonable to conclude
that the new educational policy in the
colonies (since the beginning of the
1960s) does not seek to advance the
African population; that the consider¬
able quantitative improvement during
the sixties has not been at all levels,
but only at the lowest, i.e. in primary
education; that the standard now
reached is still very low; that qualita¬
tive progress has been small, and par¬
ticularly so with regard to the edu
cation of the African population.
One may also conclude that Africans
are still discriminated against in edu¬
cation by social and financial barriers,
and that the access to education is
made especially difficult at the second¬
ary and higher levels; that there is
practically no African participation in
the scientific activities of the colonies;
that the State has done practically
nothing about research; and that the
extent of the State's financial invest¬
ment in education and science affords
little evidence of a concern for edu¬
cation in the colonies and, hence, for
the education of the African popu¬
lation.
Such efforts as Portugal made to
provide education for Africans were
imposed by the development needs of
Portuguese colonialism itself, by the
international situation, and in parti¬
cular by the demonstration the lib¬
eration movements provided of an
alternative to Portuguese domination.
Portugal did undoubtedly succed in
forming an African elite which, though
few in numbers, provided an African
petty bourgeoisie, and encouraged
African officials and managers of
small scale business to ally themselves
with Portugal. The need for such
managers could lead to a neo-colo-
nialist solution which could then be
regarded as a "success" for Portu¬
guese educational policy, but would
certainly do little to improve the status
of the African population.
Finally, we quote the Provincial
Secretary for Education in Angola:
"In the matter of relations between
Europeans and coloured people's, it
cannot be denied that we are the only
ones whose ideas and solutions have
remained unaltered overseas since the
very beginning. We have a mountain
of irrefutable historical documents
that prove this. Everything we have
done... in regards to teaching and edu¬
cation, everywhere we have set foot,
provides undeniable proof of this.
Indeed, it is from what a civilizing
nation does in regard to teaching and
education overseas that the true nature
of its intentions can be learnt."
Eduardo de Sousa Ferreira
