In April 1968, some 30 personalities from the worlds of
industry, science, economics, sociology, government, etc.
gathered in Rome at the Accademia dei Lincei, one of the
world's oldest academies of science, for an Informal dis¬
cussion on the present and future predicament of man. It
was from this meeting, instigated by Italian economist and
industrialist Aurelio Peccei and the Organization for Eco¬
nomic Co-operation and Development's Scottish Director-
General for Scientific Affairs, Dr. Alexander King, that the
Club of Rome was born.
Peccei has described the Club as an " invisible college ";
it has some seventy members from widely varied back¬
grounds who share a common conviction that it is urgent
to redress the world situation. The Club aims to acquire
and spread real understanding of the critical state of hu¬
man affairs and the uncertain prospects for the future and
to propose new policy guidelines for the intelligent
management of human affairs.
As a first step the Club commissioned a team of scien¬
tists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, under


THE LIMITS
TO GROWTH
Interview with
the President
of the Club of Rome
Aurelio Peccei
the direction of Professor Dennis Meadows, to study the
probable dynamics of the world situation with particular
attention to the problems of making a deliberate transition
from world-wide growth to global dynamic equilibrium.
Adopting the " systems dynamics " techniques originated
by Professor Jay Forrester, Professor Meadows and his
team produced a computer model of the complex, interlink¬
ed forces that affect man and his environment into which
they introduced a number of variables that affect growth.
They then proceeded to make projections of man's chances
of survival in the future. Their ultimate conclusion was
that all projections based on growth end in collapse.
This study, the first of a series commissioned by the
Club of Rome, was published last year in the form of the
now world famous book " The Limits to Growth". The
book has aroused enormous controversy (see for instance
pages 12, 14). In the interview accorded to Unesco recently,
extracts of which we publish below, Mr. Aurelio Peccei,
President of the Club of Rome, comments on some of the
criticisms with which it has been greeted.
QUESTION : What method did the
Club of Rome use for
such a complex, global
study ?
Aurelio PECCEI : We based our study
on five crucial trends of world concern
which, as a starting point, can be said
to represent the dynamics, complexi¬
ties and dangers inherent in the pre¬
sent world system. The first trend is
population growth. The second and
third are the parallel economic factors
of industrial and agricultural growth,
in other words, the ability to meet the
needs of the growing world population.
The fourth factor is pollution, the con
tamination of the environment with
unwanted by-products of industry and
agriculture. The fifth is the use we
make of our natural resources, the
inherited world resources we deplete,
all too heedless of the fact that we are
living on the capital, not the income.
Q. : Your model comprises
five highly complex varia¬
bles. Did you take into
account the variables
within these variables ?
A. P. : The five variables we chose are
interlinked and interact on each other.
After trying to take into account all the
data that could have a bearing on the
interactions, we drew up over a
hundred equations whose various cur¬
ves represent these interrelationships.
We fed them into a computer model
designed to accept as many world
variables as our knowledge or res¬
earch could identify.
Q. : What global conclusions
has the model helped you
to reach ?
A. P. : The model is largely indicative
in character. Within two to five years
we hope to arrive at much firmer
conclusions. But the conclusions we
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
11

12THE LIMITS TO GROWTH (Continued)
can draw already are alarming enough.
If present trends continue, exponential
growth of production, consumption,
pollution and depletion of raw mater¬
ials will lead to a completely imposs¬
ible situation: overpopulation of the
planet, impoverishment of our environ¬
ment with our atmosphere and water
supplies polluted.
Q. : An optimistic viewpoint
suggests that this alarm¬
ist attitude is exagge¬
rated.
A. P. : Our model is purely descriptive
of a situation as it exists today and of
the possible outcome if present trends
continue; the project was not intended
as a piece of futurology. The opti¬
mists say that the road ahead may
seem dangerous but that human in¬
genuity, science and tecnology will be
capable of solving many of the prob¬
lems we now face. To my mind, the
optimists fail to consider two funda¬
mental factors. The first is the accel¬
erating pace of history; our institu¬
tions and our ability to react to prob¬
lems are not fast enough for us to
master these problems in time.
Events move more rapidly than we do.
But the second factor is even more
fundamental; critical world problems
exist for which there are no technical
solutions. These are problems of
reaction, adaptation and values. Solu¬
tions for these problems will have
to be sought in the context of social
and cultural development. Thus, ra¬
ther than increase the rôle of techno¬
logy in the world, we should, perhaps,
attempt to humanize it. This means
that we must seek quite different solu¬
tions.
Q. : It is claimed that your
model corresponds to the
situation in industrially
developed countries but
not to that of the Third
World, since it does not
include social or political
factors.
A. P. : Such criticisms come closer to
the truth. The real need is for a fun¬
damental change in our political and
social standpoints. If present trends
continue we shall be heading for dis¬
aster. Yet we have no new models
of the world. We want people to
realize, now, that something must be
changed in the world. I must stress
that the model merely describes the
present world situation with all its pos¬
sibilities and problems. We wanted
to learn from our model what this old
earth of ours can provide globally and
then consider how to make better use
of it to eliminate inequalities and ten¬
sions.
I do not think it is possible today
to have both a global and a detailed
view of the world; we do not have the
necessary techniques to do this. So
our model must be improved in the
years ahead from only five para¬
meters today to ten tomorrow as
well as in other ways such as a re¬
appraisal of our institutions, etc. since
these represent the needs of an evol¬
ving society.
In a society that will be both fragile
and complex, when world population is
double what it is now, I fear that com¬
puters and other tools that expand the
capacity of the human mind will be a
necessary aid to life. But if man could
regain some essentially human qual¬
ities, if injustice were diminished, if
wiser generations should succeed us,
then perhaps we should have less need
of computers to guide us. In short,
the choice is between a raising of our
ethical standards or an ant-heap exis¬
tence. As men, I trust, our destiny
is not to be mere ants with no higher
aspirations than feeding ourselves and
achieving material well-being.
Cartoon by a young Turkish artist,
film cartoonist and book illustrator,
Ferruh Dogan (see also page 15)
whose work has won many interna¬
tional awards, including the "Grand
Prix" at the 1972 World Festival of
Humour in Knokke-Heist (Belgium).
