2a ART IN THE
" SOCIALIST
COUNTRIES
The many facets of Realism
by Bêla Köpeczi
'EVELOPMENT presents
certain common features in all types
of countries, but the situation of liter¬
ature and art assumes special charac¬
teristics in the Socialist countries.
The changes that have occurred in
means of presentation, reproduction
and dissemination influence art and its
function in these countries as else¬
where, but do not necessarily lead
to the same results as in capitalist
society.
The radical changes that have affect¬
ed the economic, social, political and
cultural structure play a decisive part
from the standpoints of the develop¬
ment of artistic and literary production,
the education of the public and the
use of the mass media.
In the Socialist countries art has its
place in that great undertaking that
Lenin called a cultural revolution, the
characteristics of which are as follows:
extinction of the cultural monopoly of
the former ruling classes; raising of
the cultural level of the worker and
peasant masses; creation of a new
intelligentsia; support from the State
for the development of the sciences
and the arts; conscious activity of the
14
BELA KOPECZI, Secretary-General of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, is an inter¬
national authority on trends In 20th century
thought in the Socialist and Western
countries and on questions of cultural policy
generally. He is professor of French lan¬
guage and literature at the Faculty of Letters
in Budapest.
Communist Party and of the Socialist
State, aimed at achieving these objec¬
tives. This programme implies the
existence of an art which appeals to
the broad masses and the democratiz¬
ation of its dissemination.
Under these conditions, a work of
art cannot be regarded as an article
of trade even if, in the present stage
of evolution, it does retain some of
the characteristics that this term
implies.
Guided by the principle of the
educational rôle of art, socialist cultu¬
ral policy endeavours to disseminate
and to make accessible, through the
grant of considerable subsidies, the
loftiest values of past and present.
This conception of culture can lead to
an over-simplified didacticism but,
even in that case, it is hardly possible
to deny the advantages offered by
selection based on value judgements.
The results obtained at the level of
the dissemination of classical literature
and art are undeniable; in this con¬
nexion there has been much talk of a
"conservative" policy, but we con¬
sider, on the contrary, that the "rebirth
of the classics" has led to a raising
of cultural standards and to the human
enrichment of the broad masses.
The difficulties of choice arise espe¬
cially in connexion with current pro¬
duction, where the demands of politics,
aesthetic concepts or simple ques¬
tions of taste may lead to erroneous
judgements.
Thus products of varying rigidity,
insignificance or bad taste can be
disseminated, especially in the field of
light entertainment, where we find
certain features of a "consumer cul¬
ture" inherited from the past or import¬
ed or imitated from Western Europe.
Whereas in Western Europe the
artist, even if he regards himself as
"committed", frequently lives on the
fringe of society, in the Socialist coun¬
tries he takes part in the life of the
community. The commitment of so¬
cialist writers and artists does not
mean in any way that they are obliged
to take a stand on matters of current
political interest, and it does not
necessarily involve the production of
illustrative works, as certain opponents
would have it.
Nevertheless, if one approves of
the aims of socialism one cannot
adopt the same opposing attitude
which, within a society dominated by
capitalism, would stem from one's atti¬
tude as an opponent of that particular
social order. The commitment of the
socialist artist is no more than a cons¬
cious identification with the cause of
the working class, and this stance
implies the creation of an art that is
democratic and humanistic in char¬
acter.
That being said, it must nevertheless
be recognized that this new attitude
of the intellectual in the community is
not easily achieved, for it is subject
CONTINUED PAGE 16

it m j" m mi i^ ii ¡¡y iii im^rn ïi
i!ii iiiHfir uy oAfflm' jm nifn
i iiififujin mtwm m nifiyrr tï
tt iiii. n ....
riiif ir II jIS
Jlif If lil^JlK II
MU iiif IMI n
ht.jiu c
nif If" If,nii
m m
jiif îf'iiri
TL!
HL
TT ilk m
m
ii
few intint \m v.\
1
^ mu i jjf Tyif a
mjd WW m
m mhi
L
jüinifariijí
niy iiifn
ilU m
ni
in
Photo Anatoli Garanln - Sovietskoye Foto © APN, Moscow
"Worker and Woman Collective Farmer", by the Soviet sculptor Vera Mukhina, Is an example of I Ü
Soviet Socialist Realism in art. A stainless steel sculpture, 25 metres high, It was first exhibited
outside the Soviet pavilion at the Paris International Exhibition of 1937. It is now a prominent
landmark in the Avenue of Peace, in Moscow, against a background of modern apartment buildings.

SOCIALIST ART (Continued)
to the misunderstandings of politics as
well as to those of the artist, and it is
often at the mercy of conflicts of an
objective nature that arise between
these two spheres of human activity.
Moreover, it does not necessarily
follow that an artist living in a Socialist
country is a Marxist: the problems that
we have touched on naturally assume
a different light for those who are not
Marxist, and the nature of the con¬
tradictions that these artists have to
contend with is also different.
It is primarily by their creative activ¬
ity that the writer and the artist take
part in the building of the new society.
In this task they are assisted by the
State, which places orders through the
intermediary of the cultural institutions,
establishments or factories and which,
through the same network of organiz¬
ations, undertakes to disseminate their
works.
Government bodies promulgate laws
aimed at ensuring effective protection
of the authors' rights, thus enabling
a considerable body of writers and
artists to live solely from their profes¬
sion. The State subsidizes artists'
funds which pay out advances and
grants to their members, deal with
problems of social security, maintain
homes for rest and creative work and
in some countries they may even have
their own publishing houses, sales net¬
works and so forth.
u
16
NDER the influence of
social reality and Marxist theory vari¬
ous literary and artistic trends of a
socialist character have come to light
during the past hundred years. Some
consider as "socialistically realistic"
only those works which extend the
classical tradition, whereas others refer
only to tendencies originating in the
avant-garde of the beginning of the
century.
Looking beyond this quarrel bet¬
ween schools, we believe that it is the
co-existence of these movements
which, from the beginning, has char¬
acterized the evolution of the new art.
The novels of Gorky, Alexis Tolstoy or
Sholokhov, the theatrical schools of
Stanislavsky, the paintings of Deineka,
Sarian or Favorsky, the statues of
Mukhina, the symphonies of Shosta¬
kovich and the ballets of Prokofiev
prove that it has been possible to
keep faith with a certain realistic trad¬
ition of the nineteenth century and to
achieve undeniable successes.
The poems of Mayakovsky, the films
of Eisenstein and the theatrical innov¬
ations of Meyerhold, to mention only
these, are there to show that the
movement which borrowed from futur¬
ism, expressionism or constructivism
was also capable of creating durable
works.
We find the same tendencies, with
national variants, among the other
peoples of the Soviet Union, in the
other Socialist countries of Central
Europe, Asia and America, and in the
works of Marxist writers and artists
in non-Socialist countries.
In some countries, such as France
(Aragon, Eluard) or Czechoslovakia
(V. Nezval), it is the avant-garde that
has been predominant; in others (as
in the case of the German writers
Bertold Brecht, Johannes Becher and
Anna Seghers) we observe the co¬
existence of several trends; in some
others we note an early attempt at
synthesis (as in the poetry of the
Hungarian, Attila Jozsef).
While admitting the importance of
tradition in the formation of the new
art, it should not be forgotten that its
representatives are seeking to assert
not only continuity but, above all, dis¬
continuity in the evolution of art. The
socialist artist is searching for novelty
in themes and forms and, at the
present stage, we are witnessing
experimentation in every sector of art
and literature.
In a note on literary and artistic
developments in the Soviet Union,
Mikhail Alpatov describes the present
situation in these words :
"It was towards the end of the
1950s that a new wave of artistic
research began to develop, especially
among the younger generation of
artists and poets. They were beginning
again to show an interest in the post-
impressionists and to rehabilitate the
Russian art of the beginning of the
century. Attempts were being made to
link up with folklore traditions and
those of ancient Russia.
"It cannot be said that all these
searchings have been crowned with
success. There always remains a dan¬
ger of eclecticism. By imitating fine

Recent
Soviet
painting
In the Socialist countries one
today finds different approaches to
art. In most of these countries
Socialist Realism is the accepted
artistic method that presupposes
that art should depict historically
concrete though changing reality.
Art in Socialist Realism is consi¬
dered as having primarily an edu¬
cative role to broaden the cultural
horizons of the people and Instil
in them feelings of humanity and
internationalism.
In certain Socialist countries, in
addition to Socialist Realism, there
are other methods of art which can
be said to approach artistic research
in Western countries.
Some examples are shown on
these two pages and the front cover
(Poland), the back cover (Cuba), as
well as pages 21 and 23. Here
we reproduce works by artists of
the U.S.S.R.: Left, "Young Girl with
a Little House" by Alexander Tys-
chler (1962); below, "Clown" by
Aleksei Anikeenok (1965); right, "The
Sumgait Synthetic Rubber Factory"
by Rasim Babaiev, of Azerbaijan.
Photos © APN, Moscow
examples one risks losing one's
originality and one's national char¬
acter. 'But however that may be, the
faults of the preceding stage are
disappearing in every realm of art and
above all in architecture and in the
decorative arts."
Let us add that in the other Socialist
countries we are witnessing a return
to certain manifestations of the avant-
garde in the 1920s and an increase
in the interest aroused by current
literary and artistic trends in Western
Europe.
True innovation, however, resides
not in the search for new forms, but
above all in the search for a new
content. During revolutionary periods
socialist art has presented man in his
struggle to bring about a radical
change in society.
Today, at least in some Socialist
countries, the forms of the combat
have changed: writers and artists are
seeking to define the characteristics
of socialist personality in conditions
of peaceful construction. What is on
the agenda is the expression of a
real humanism one that takes into
account the individual and is opposed
to .alienation, depersonalization and
nihilism.
As to their basic aims, art and
cultural policy in the Socialist coun¬
tries are determined by Marxist phil¬
osophy. The two basic ideas that
govern Marxist doctrine in this matter
can be summarized as follows: art is
a reflection of reality and, accord¬
ingly, a means of knowledge; sec¬
ondly, art has a social function, name¬
ly, it must help to change the world.
These basic notions have been inter¬
preted in very many different ways
under the influence of social, political
and cultural development. For an
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

SOCIALIST ART (Continued)
Where content is more important than form
understanding of the present debates
we have to go back to the sources
and compare what they convey to us
with the different interpretations that
have appeared over more than a
century.
According to the Marxist view the
various forms of social conscience are
the reflections of objective reality, of
which the knowledge, understanding
and change are the aims of all human
activity. Reflection does not mean
photographic reproduction, but rather
the building of a model serving to
bring out by strictly artistic means
the essence of human phenomena.
The founders of Marxism consider
that in literature as in art it is realism
that corresponds to their philosophical
view. "Realism", writes Engels, "sup¬
poses, in my view, in addition to accur¬
acy of detail, the exact representation
of typical characteristics In typical cir¬
cumstances."
Realism of this kind is not one
artistic tendency among others it is
considered as a method that makes
it possible to understand the complex
relationships that lie behind changing
reality.
I
20
I T is thus that tho problem
of the method leads to the theory of
reflection. This conception was appli¬
ed by critics and historians of art and
literature in the Soviet Union in the
1920s and in particular by Anatoli Luna-
charsky.
In the application of the theory of
reflection to the realm of art the
philosophy of György Lukacs is par¬
ticularly notable on account of its
content and of the widespread interest
that it has evoked. In Lukacs' phil¬
osophy the influence of Hegel's
aesthetics matches in addition that of
the ideas of Marx and Lenin on liter¬
ature. According to this theory artistic
mimesis consists in an "imitation" of
reality, made possible by a subjectivity
pushed to its extreme, which brings
into relief the essential moments of
the phenomena from the point of view
of the evolution of mankind.
Lukacs distinguishes between artis¬
tic and scientific knowledge. The aim
of science is to present a reality
independent of the knowing subject,
whereas art achieves unity of the sub¬
ject and of the object, which ensures
its specificity.
The work of art produces an affec¬
tive and mental shock that Lukacs
taking the old term used by Aristotle
and reinterpreting it in his own way
calls catharsis. Catharsis enables
man to go beyond the stage of indiv¬
iduality to reach that of the generic,
that is to say, to identify himself as
an individual with the cause of man¬
kind.
In the 1930s, writers and theorists
discussed the correctness of this
philosophy. Bertold Brecht among
others took the Hungarian philosopher
to task for the over-passive character
of his theory of reflection. For the
great German playwright, "Realistic
art is an art of combat. It combats
false conceptions of reality and im¬
pulses that go against the real interests
of mankind."
Although the majority of Marxist
thinkers accept the theory of reflec¬
tion, the aesthetic and historic aspects
of the problem continue to be discus¬
sed. The representatives of the "great
realism", while combating, and cor¬
rectly so, sectarianism, set up as an
¡deal the works of the classical writers
of the nineteenth century and of their
followers, the works of, say, Balzac,
Tolstoy or Thomas Mann.
The thesis that contrasts this real¬
istic art with anti-realistic art a label
under which it was intended to include
not only bourgeois decadent art, but
also innovating trends of the revol¬
utionary avant-garde (German expres¬
sionists, Russian futurists, surrealists
of central Europe, and the like)
implied an unduly simplified vision of
the true historical process.
At the present time there are various
contending philosophies, varying from
the theory of realism considered as a
general trend, illustrated by the works
of the great classics, to the theory of
"Réalisme sans rivages" ("unbounded
realism"), which is meant to include
all the trends of the twentieth century
and any work of value. This discus¬
sion touches on the very foundations
of the theory of reflection, since some
theorists contrast with it, in one way
or another, myth, activity and subject¬
ivity.
Marxist aesthetics postulates the
primacy of the content, while declar¬
ing its dialectical unity with form.
Here content and form should be
taken to mean two aspects of the
work of art that cannot exist indep¬
endently of each other: the content is
the reflection of the essential relation¬
ships inherent in a subject; form is, in
the last analysis, the image that
expresses these relationships and
ensures communication between the
creator and the receiver.
Generally, a distinction is made
between the inner and the outer form.
In the novel, for example, the inner
form is made up of the characters and
composition, the external form is
reduced to technique. Marxist aesthe¬
tics gave little attention to analysis
of questions of form, which has cer¬
tainly harmed its development and
suggested the idea that it is only
concerned with the content of works
of art, especially their political or
ideological content.
In The German Ideology, Marx and
Engels already stated that "it is not
consciousness that determines life,
but life that determines conscious¬
ness."
One of the forms of this conscious¬
ness is the aesthetic form which is
linked by a series of transitions to the
material basis. "Whether an individual
like Raphael", write Marx and Engels,
"is able to develop his talent depends
entirely on the demand, which in turn
depends on the division of labour and
the consequent conditions of men's
education."
The demand therefore depends on
the division of labour, i.e., on the
separation of the various activities that
lead to one another, a separation which
gives rise to the birth of classes and
social strata. This means that in defin¬
ing the demand Marx and Engels
attribute an important rôle to the
cultural situation of each society and
of each class or stratum of this
society.
ARXIST aesthetics recog¬
nizes that the relations between the
artist's class affiliations, his vision of
the world and his creative activity are
very complex.
Writing about Balzac, Engels already
underlined the contradictions that may
exist in this connexion: "The fact that
Balzac was forced to go against his
own class sympathies and political
prejudices, that he saw the inevit¬
ability of the end of his beloved arist¬
ocrats and that he described them as
not deserving any better fate; the fact
that he saw the true men of the future
only where they were to be found at
the time (i.e. among the Republicans
of the Cloître Saint-Merri, 5-6 June
1832), that I regard as one of the
greatest triumphs of realism and one
of the most striking characteristics of
Balzac in his later years."
With regard to Leo Tolstoy, Lenin
detects similar contradictions, but he
does not explain them solely by the
writer's individual vision of the world.
"The contradictions in Tolstoy's
views", he writes, "are not those of
his strictly personal thinking; they are
the reflection of the social conditions
and influences, of the historic tradi¬
tions complex and contradictory to

The explosion
of Spring
Photo © 1. Sagl, Prague
"The world batters, rends apart and re-fashions us; I felt that this process could be expressed
In a collage", declared the Czech artist Jiri Kolar, creator of this "sprung" or "exploded"
version of Botticelli's "Primavera". Kolar's technique consists in cutting an original work in
vertical (as here) or horizontal strips or in squares and reconstituting it on a vaster scale
with a multiple mirror-image effect Kolar's collages have earned him the Prize of the Säo
Paulo Biennale and were exhibited at the 1969 Salon de Mai and at Galerie La Hune in Paris.
the highest degree that determined
the psychology of the different classes
and different strata of Russian society
at the time following the reform but
preceding the revolution."
While stressing the determining rôle
of society, Marx did not deny the
relative autonomy of art in relation to
economic and social developments.
In his Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy we read: "In the
case of art we know that specific
periods when art has flourished are
in no way related to the general devel¬
opment of society nor, consequently,
to the material basis or, in a way, the
framework of its organization."
And Marx wonders without, how¬
ever, giving us any answer about the
causes of the survival of the great
artistic moments of antiquity; "The
difficulty does not consist in under¬
standing that Greek art and the epic
are linked to certain forms of social
development. The difficulty consists
in understanding that they can still
cause us aesthetic enjoyment and are
considered in some respect as a norm
and as inimitable models."
In taking this standpoint Marx draws
our attention to the dialectics of the
relationship existing between the evol¬
ution of art and the evolution of
society; he warns us in advance
against any attempt to reduce these
complex relations to a simple autom¬
atism.
Inspired by the general lessons of
Marxism and by the ideas of the
Russian democratic critics, such as
Belinsky, Chernyshevsky and Dobrol-
jubov, and of French positivists such
as Hippolyte Taine, G.V. Plekhanov
attempted to prove, in a logical step-
by-step manner and with the aid of
concrete analyses of certain works
and certain trends in French and Rus¬
sian literature, that "any ideology
including art and what is called belles-
lettres expresses the tendencies and
inspiration of a given society, or, in
the case of a society divided into clas¬
ses, of a given social class."
This conception, which disregards
Marx's warnings, profoundly influenc¬
ed Marxist aesthetics for quite a long
time and gave rise to a school of
vulgar sociologism. The sociologists
who adhered to it established too
direct a link between the artist's class
affiliations and his work, and above
all they stressed the political and
ideological importance of literature
and art.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
21

SOCIALIST ART (Continued)
Ideology and the creative artist
22
Invoking the radical change in
society the representatives of the
organization Proletarskaja Kultura
("Prolet Kult"), as also those of revol¬
utionary futurism, rejected the heritage
of the past and advocated the need
to create an absolutely new art, a pro¬
letarian art.
"As regards the questions posed by
culture, we are immediate socialists",
declare the proponents of Proletkult,
" we declare that the proletariat must
forthwith and without delay create in
its image socialist forms of thinking,
feeling and living." The futurist
Mayokovsky did not say anything
different, even if he contested the Pro-
letkult thesis whereby proletarian cult¬
ure can be created only by writers and
artists with a working-class back¬
ground.
In 1923, Mayakovsky declared that
it was necessary to "combat the
application of the working methods of
the dead to modern art." And in 1928
he attacked the worshippers of the
past who "under the pretext of educ¬
ation take us in the cemeteries to the
tombs of the classics."
IhENIN attacked this idea
vehemently, defending the principle of
continuity in the realm of culture and
rejecting the utopianism and illusionism
of the "leftists".
"Marxism", he states, "has acquir¬
ed world-wide historic importance as
an ideology of the revolutionary pro¬
letariat due to the fact that, far from
rejecting the most precious conquests
of the bourgeois era, it has on the
contrary assimilated by transformation
everything precious in the develop¬
ment of human thinking and culture
over a period of more than 2,000
years.
"Only subsequent work on this
basis and in this direction, animated
by the practical experience of dicta¬
torship of the proletariat, which is the
final struggle against all forms of
exploitation, can be recognized as
constituting the development of a
truly proletarian culture."
He was thus defending the funda¬
mental positions of Socialist cultural
policy, but abstained from intervening
in aesthetic matters. In conformity
with the standpoints of the central
committee of the Communist Party of
the U.S.S.R., Lunacharsky, who for
a long time was in charge of Soviet
cultural policy, favoured in the twen¬
ties the development of, and compet¬
ition between, the various movements.
The defence of the heritage of the
past was a just cause; dogmatic
policy, however, made use of it in
order to condemn avant-garde trends,
even revolutionary ones, thereby
limiting freedom of creation.
It was with a party resolution of 1932
that the struggle against leftist ten¬
dencies and against avant-garde trends
began. The proposed aim was to
organize single associations of writers
and artists, instead of having extrem¬
ely restive small-size movements, and
to promote a drawing together of
creators considered as "fellow travel¬
lers". In the beginning, this change
seemed likely to favour cultural devel¬
opment. Later it was realized that
unity meant uniformization in the ser¬
vice of a dogmatic policy.
Marxist theory, at the present time,
lays stress on continuity, but assigns
a more important rôle to innovation.
According to Marxist aesthetics, a
work of art is not solely an instrument
of knowledge (some critics of Marx¬
ism are wrong when they criticize
those writers for maintaining such a
view): it serves, in a complex way, the
conscious awakening of man and there¬
by influences his activity. Within the
workers' movement there was very
early evidence of a utilitarian trend
that wanted to attribute to literature
and art a direct educational rôle, above
all in political matters.'
While defending the reason for the
existence of "political" genres, Marx
and Engels rejected any kind of over-
didactic conception of art. "In my
view", Engels writes, "a novel that is
socialist in character, perfectly fulfils
its mission when, through the faithful
depiction of real relationships, it des¬
troys conventional illusions as to the
nature of these relations, shakes the
optimism of the bourgeois world and
forces people to doubt the lastingness
of the existing order, even if the
author does not directly indicate any
solution and even if, as the case may
be, he does not ostensibly take any
side."
In 1905, in an article entitled "The
Organization of the Party and the
Literature of the Party", Lenin defined
the function of socialist literature in
the following terms: "Literature should
become part of the general cause of
the proletariat, a small cog and a small
screw in the great social democratic
machinery, one and indivisible, set
going by the whole of the conscious
avant-garde of the entire working
class. Literature must become an
integral part of the organized, meth¬
odical and unified work of the Social
Democratic Party."
Much has been said about the
meaning that Lenin attributed to "the
party spirit", i.e., Marxist commitment
in the realm of art. There are some
(including Lukacs) who claim that this
article relates solely to the press
and that it has nothing to do with
literature proper; others insist that this
theory should be applied literally in
every situation.
It is certain that Lenin, in 1905, had
in mind socialist literature in general,
including belles-lettres.
After the October Revolution, the
party spirit meant for him the accep¬
tance of Marxist ideology and service
in the cause of the proletariat; but he
no longer insisted that all creators
should belong to the Party and he no
longer demanded, as he did in 1905,
that literature should be rigorously
subordinate to the demands of the
current political struggle.
The relationship between literature,
art and politics is therefore complex
and cannot be examined solely on a
theoretical plane. At any rate, both
on the aesthetic plane as in the realm
of the cultural policy of Marxism, there
are a great many contending stand¬
points. Some insist on the autonomy
of literature and art in relation to poli¬
tics, while others remain faithful to
utilitarianism and even to the dogma¬
tism of the past, two extremes rejec¬
ted by the majority of theoreticians.
Serving the cause of the prolet¬
ariat by artistic means signifies addres¬
sing oneself to the great mass of the
population and contributing to its
conscious awakening. This require¬
ment must have as a consequence the
birth of a literature and of an art of a
democratic or popular character.
B"UT how can this objective
be attained? After the discussions
of the 1920s, dogmatic cultural policy
imposed a certain cultural model, the
formation of which was also linked
with the social and cultural realities
of the Soviet Union, and later of the
other socialist countries. The chan¬
ges that took place after 1956 (with
the 20th Congress of the Communist
Party, three years after the death of
Stalin) made possible a more refined
view of the public and of the "folk"
character of literature.
In the theoretical discussions of the
1920s the different trends in socialist
literature and art including the avant-
garde hailed realism as their auth¬
ority. People spoke of a proletarian
realism, a dialectical realism, a roman¬
tic realism, etc. Finally, the expres¬
sion socialist realism was adopted at
the First Congress of the Writers of
the Soviet Union in 1934.
Socialist realism as an artistic
method regards as its aim the reflection
of the essential part of reality in a
historically concrete way. It implies
on the part of the artist adherence to
a materialist and dialectical concep¬
tion of the world and the undertaking

Hungarian
pop art
Wood carvings by Hunga¬
rian shepherds, decorative
spiced loaves prepared for
village fêtes, characters
from popular folk tales, all
these provide a well of
inspiration for Hungarian
artist Mihàly Schéner. In
his arrestingly original
works Schéner weds folk¬
lore to pop art, as in his
"Three Kings", a terra¬
cotta sculpture of a hand,
the palm embellished with
flowers and with three of
the fingers formed In the
image of the Magi, Baltha¬
zar, Melchior and Gaspard.
to serve the cause of the proletariat
and of socialism.
Socialist realism, illustrated by a.
considerable number of works of val¬
ue, is an artistic phenomenon and not
a figment of the mind nor the object
of a simple political directive, as some
people think. It is true that dogmatic
policy deformed this theory and that,
by its "aesthetic norms", it helped to
reinforce academic and schematic ten¬
dencies.
The ravages that were thus caused
were serious but the theory of socialist
realism is beginning to benefit from
the lessons of this evolution, as well
as from those of the development of
twentieth century literature and art.
The literary and artistic trends, the
aesthetic debates and the attitudes
adopted in cultural policy have given
rise during this half century, within the
socialist world and primarily in the
U.S.S.R., to an abundant theoretical
literature that is very badly known in
general and specially in Western
Europe.
During a certain period writings
stamped with the mark of dogmatism
received fairly wide circulation; for
some time now we have been witness¬
ing in Western Europe a renaissance
of the so-called Russian formalist
school, confrontations with the works
of Lukacs or Brecht, etc.; the other
aspects of this activity seem, however,
to be overlooked.
At the present time, thanks to the
social, cultural. and, in particular, artis¬
tic development, we are witnessing a
flourishing of a great many movements
and the development of very open
discussions between their spokesmen
in the various Socialist countries,
where the lessons of the past inter¬
national and national have their place
alongside the emerging forms of new
trends in literature and art.
23
