AN ABC
OF
METEO¬
ROLOGY
i
I
w,
HEN you hear the radio
announce that it will be sunny or that
it is going to rain, have you ever
wondered how these forecasts are
made? Do forecasters simply observe
the sky as our ancestors used to do?
It's quite true that a careful observer
can predict what the weather will be
like a few hours in advance. But
longer-range forecasts call for obser¬
vations of the atmosphere by weather
stations on sea and land covering a
very wide area (Europe and the Atlan¬
tic Ocean as far as the American
coast, for example).
Above all, weather forecasters need
to study the laws that govern the be¬
haviour of the atmosphere. Using this
information they can draw up meteo¬
rological maps and predict what the
weather will be like tomorrow or dur¬
ing the next few days.
THE EARTH'S The earth is
ATMOSPHERE enveloped in a
layer of gases
extending about 1,000 kilometres
above its surface. This layer is very
thin when compared with the earth's
radius (about 6,000 kilometres). The
upper limit of the atmosphere is not
clearly defined; it is the zone in which
molecules of air can reach high enough
speeds to be able to escape from the
gravitational pull of the earth, and is
called the exosphere.
The air composing the atmosphere
is a mixture of gases mainly nitrogen
and oxygen in fairly constant propor¬
tions. Water in the form of vapour is
mixed with these gases in widely vary¬
ing amounts. Together they make up
the air which we breathe and which
makes life on earth possible.
The four main features of the atmo¬
sphere are:
Temperature: measured with a thermo¬
meter;
Pressure: measured by a barometer;
atmospheric pressure is the force
acting on the surface of any object; a
thin-sided box in which a vacuum has
been produced would be crushed by
this pressure;
Humidity: measured by means of a
hygrometer or Psychrometer; it is the
proportion of water- vapour mixed with
the air;
Wind: measured by means of an anem¬
ometer; it is the speed of moving air
at a given point.
All these features vary according to
height and geographical location.
Variations due to altitude: pressure
falls the higher one rises in the atmo¬
sphere. At 5,000 metres it is only half
the pressure at the earth's surface, and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

IC OF METEOROLOGY (Continued)
at 12,000 metres only a tenth. Pressure
cannot be directly measured in the
exosphere.
Temperature varies in a more com¬
plex fashion. The atmosphere is
divided into layers in which the tem¬
perature either rises or falls as altitude
increases.
In the lower layers of the atmo¬
sphere, temperature decreases on
average six degrees centigrade per
1,000 metres of altitude, up to the level
known as the tropopause above which
it stops decreasing.
The tropopause is at an altitude of
about 6,000 metres at the poles and
about 15,000 metres at the equator.
The temperatures are about 50 de¬
grees centigrade and 85 degrees
centigrade respectively.
Below the tropopause is the atmo¬
spheric layer called the troposphere.
It contains four-fifths of the mass of
the atmosphere and almost all its water
vapour. Within the troposphere vig¬
orous mixing of air and other inter¬
actions take place. This layer has
been called the world's "weather-
sphere".
At altitudes of over about 100 kilo¬
metres changes take place in the
physical properties of atmospheric
gases and particularly in their electrical
charges, due to bombardment of rays
coming from the sun. They become
what is known as "ionized", thus giv¬
ing the name "ionosphere" to this
layer of the atmosphere.
Variations due to geographical posi¬
tion: pressure and temperature, at a
given altitude, vary according to geo
graphical location, but such horizontal
variations are far less marked than the
vertical ones.
To find out about these variations,
and to collect other vital information
for meteorologists, a network of sta¬
tions is needed to make observations
simultaneously and using the same
methods for accurate comparison.
The results of these observations
are then rapidly exchanged, and this
can only be done through close inter¬
national collaboration.
WATER IIM THE Water is found
ATMOSPHERE in nature in
three forms:
liquid (water), solid (ice), gas (water
vapour).
Water exists as very fine droplets
which are so small that they fall only
very slowly like the mist from a
vaporizer forming clouds. Larger
drops fall more rapidly as rain.
Ice exists as fine crystals in the
higher clouds (cirrus), groups of crys¬
tals in snowflakes, or pellets of ice in
hail.
Water vapour is a colourless gas
mixed with air. The amount of water
vapour in the air varies up to the so-
called saturation limit which depends
on the temperature. The higher the
temperature the more water vapour
there can be in the same volume of air.
If air saturated with water vapour
cools, this creates an excess of water
vapour which becomes liquid, condens¬
ing on a surface or forming droplets.
In winter, in a warm, humid kitchen,
the windows, which are colder than
the air in the room, become covered
with mist.
Birth
and death
of a cloud
Mapping atmospheric pressure
When you look at a weather map, you will see
a number of concentric circles. They indicate the
presence of low pressure areas (depressions) or
high pressure areas (anticyclones) which are a vital
factor in weather forecasting. The circles are formed
by drawing lines, called isobars, joining points of
equal pressure, just as on a geographical map
contour lines join points of equal height The
pressure becomes progressively lower towards the
centre of a depression and higher towards the
centre of an anticyclone (see drawings right). In
the northern hemisphere winds move in a clockwise
direction round anticyclones and anti-clockwise round
depressions. In the southern hemisphere these
directions are reversed.
Drawings © Editions Ophrys, Paris. Taken from 'Papa dis
mol, fera-t-il beau demain ?" by Roger Clausse

Clouds can form in many different ways. Moisture in the form of
water vapour is constantly being drawn up from the earth and the
oceans by evaporation to mix with the other gases of the air. Carried
by the wind, the vapour-laden air is forced to rise when it meets an
obstacle, such as a mountain (above left) or a mass of cold air (above).
As it rises the air cools and the water vapour condenses into tiny
particles of water which we see as clouds. Higher clouds (from 5 to
10 km. above the earth) are formed of minute ice crystals and these
are one of the most important causes of rain. In fact, at one time it was
thought that all rain, with the exception of some tropical rain, was
caused when these ice crystals, in dropping through a cloud, collided
with droplets below becoming bigger and bigger until they fell to earth
as raindrops, or as snow if it was very cold (right). Nowadays many
scientists believe that rain can form without ice crystals, even in non¬
tropical regions, when droplets collide forming larger and larger drops
which finally fall as rain.
In the troposphere, in addition to the
horizontal air movements which we
note as wind, important vertical move¬
ments occur which are more difficult
to detect. These movements may be
very extensive and cause a general
upward movement of a mass of air
over a whole region, or they may be
very localized, forming upward air cur¬
rents the "lift" used by certain birds
and by glider pilots.
Since pressure decreases with alti¬
tude, the air that rises becomes decom¬
pressed and as a result its tempera¬
ture falls. The same effect can be seen
in reverse with a bicycle pump which
heats up more and more as the air is
compressed.
If air is very humid, the water vapour
condenses into fine droplets and a
cloud forms. Under certain conditions,
the small droplets may come together
to form large drops which fall as rain.
THE CIRCULATION
OF THE
ATMOSPHERE
Atmo¬
spheric
press¬
ure is
such asnot uniform at a given level,
the surface of the earth. If we look
at pressure readings taken at the
observation posts of a chain of
weather stations we see that the
weather has its own "topography".
If we join the points of equal press¬
ure on a weather map by curves
known as isobars, we find that the out
lines resemble the height contours on
an ordinary relief map. Zones of high
pressure or anticyclones stand out like
hills, and areas of low pressure or
cyclones (depressions) correspond to
hollows or valleys. An isobar map is
thus a valuable aid for finding out
about the great movements of the
atmosphere, since isobars show the
pressure patterns which control the
way air flows.
Air does not flow directly from high
pressure to low pressure zones. Air
movement is influenced by the rotation
of the earth and the wind blows in a
direction parallel to the isobars. In
the northern hemisphere it turns in a
clockwise direction round the anti¬
cyclones and in the opposite direction
around cyclones (or depressions). In
the southern hemisphere, the direction
of movement is reversed. This move¬
ment can be observed by studying
wind observations reported by each
weather station.
Points of equal temperature are
linked by curves known as isotherms
which give us a general picture of the
temperature at a given level (ground-
level, for instance). Horizontal varia¬
tions in temperature are seen generally
to be minor except along certain lines
where they can be quite abrupt.
The atmosphere thus contains nar¬
row zones in which sharp contrasts in
temperature occur. The lines repres¬
enting these zones are called "fronts".
A front is described as "warm" if warm
air tends to displace cold air, and
"cold" if cold air replaces warmer air.
Various changes in the weather are
associated with these fronts, part¬
icularly the formation of clouds and
quite often showers of rain or snow.
A WEATHER A meteorologi-
OBSERVATIOIM cal observation
STATION station is the
basic unit of a
weather service network. Each station
is set up to conform to identical stan¬
dards: on an unshaded site, preferably
a grassy one so as to eliminate
reflected solar radiation.
It consists basically of a meteoro¬
logical shelter which shields the
various instruments inside from the
direct rays of the sun and from wind
and rain. It is like a large crate, well-
ventilated and with its open side facing
north. Thus conditions inside are
everywhere the same.
What instruments are kept inside
the shelter?
Thermometers. An ordinary thermo¬
meter; a minimum thermometer which
indicates the lowest temperature
reached; a maximum thermometer
showing the highest temperature; and
sometimes a thermograph, a special
thermometer which makes a conti¬
nuous record of temperatures.
A hygrometer. This instrument indica¬
tes the amount of moisture in the
CONTINUED PAGE 38

ETEOROLOG page 33)
m m
atmosphere by the use of catgut or
strands of hair which expand when
the air is moist and contract when it
is dry.
A Psychrometer, also used to measure
humidity.
An evaporimeter. This instrument is
used to measure evaporation.
Other instruments are placed just
outside the shelter:
A wind vane (the modern version of
the weather-cock often seen on church
steeples) which indicates the direction
of the wind.
An anemometer (four small cone-
shaped cups at the end of rods that
rotate on a vertical spindle) to measure
wind speed.
These instruments are electrically
linked to the observation hut where
the measurements are shown on dials.
A heliograph, which records on sun-
sensitive paper the amount of sunshine
during the day.
The station is also equipped with a
mercury barometer to measure atmo¬
spheric pressure and a recording baro¬
meter that gives a continuous graph
of pressures.
To measure wind speeds at high
altitudes, meteorologists release hydro¬
gen-filled "sounding balloons" whose
rate of climb is known. By tracking
their flight the speed and direction of
winds can be determined as well as
the altitude of the base of a cloud
layer at the moment the balloon pene¬
trates it.
A basket can be attached to larger
balloons containing a radiosonde that
transmits back to earth details of air
pressure, temperature and humidity.
CODED All these
WEATHER observa-
INFORMATION »ions are
sent in, as¬
sembled and retransmitted. Information
comes in from every corner of the
globe, from stations perched on the
peaks of exposed mountains, from
meteorological outposts deep in the
Arctic, from weather-ships, aircraft,
etc. They are sent to forecasting cen¬
tres in a condensed international code
consisting of five figure groups. Each
group and each figure represents a
different element of the weather.
SYNOPTIC Observa-
WEATHER MAPS tions made at
se hed u I ed
times are transcribed by figures and
symbols on an outline map to produce
what is called a "synoptic map".
The synoptic map gives, in schematic
form, a broad picture of the state of
the atmosphere at a particular time,
over a certain area of the globe.
If we compare a series of maps
drawn up at fixed intervals (at 6, 12
or 18 hour periods), we see that the
"weather picture" on the maps chan¬
ges very considerably during these
periods. Depressions and anticyclones
move at greater or lesser speeds,
either growing larger or tending to
disappear. Anticyclones may remain
stationary or may move, though
generally rather slowly. Although de¬
pressions are sometimes stationary,
they usually tend to be more mobile.
Fronts move in the direction of the air
currents in which they occur.
Generally speaking, these different
weather "ingredients" are carried along
in a larger current, at varying speeds,
from west to east. To complement the
surface maps, upper-air charts are
drawn up at different levels using data
supplied by sounding stations. These
charts contain only part of the data
used for surface maps (pressure for
charts at constant level or altitude for
charts at constant pressure, tempera¬
ture, humidity and wind).
FORECASTING Using a series
of maps it is
possible to estimate the movements
and developments of various weather
elements and thus to draw up a fore¬
cast map showing atmospheric condi¬
tions for some time ahead, usually
during the next 24 or 48 hours.
But to determine how the situation
will develop the meteorologist must
also apply a number of rules and
physical laws in his calculations.
Nowadays meteorologists use electro¬
nic computers to help them in making
forecast maps.
The meteorologist uses these fore¬
cast maps to draw up his weather
predictions for a particular area, while
taking local conditions into account.
The texts and diagrams in this children's
section are based on material drawn
from: 1. a "meteorology kit", prepared
and published by the Centre de Docu¬
mentation Pédagogique, Geneva, Switzer¬
land, under tfte direction of 1.1. Dessou-
lavy; 2. the "Unesco Source Book for
Science Teaching"; 3. "A Manual for
Improvised Science Equipment", by T.E.
Calvero and E.S. Sábado, under the
direction of Pedro Orata, Quezon City
Philippines.
The Beaufort
wind scale
To indicate the velocity of the wind
meteorologists use a series of
numbers known as the Beaufort
scale. The scale was devised in
1806 by a British admiral, Sir Fran¬
cis Beaufort who defined the num¬
bers in terms of the effect of various
winds on sailing vessels from a
calm, force 0, to a hurricane, force
12, "that which no canvas could
withstand." The scale was adopted
in 1874 by the International Meteoro¬
logical Committee for international
use in telegraphy. Today the Beau¬
fort scale is defined in terms of
wind speeds measured in some
countries at 10. metres above the
ground and in others at 6 metres.
Force Name Effect on Land Wind speed
km./h.
0 Calm Calm; smoke rises vertically. 0-1
1 Light Air Weather vanes inactive; smoke drifts with air. 1-5
2 Light Breeze Weather vanes active; wind felt on face; leaves rustle. 6-11
3 Gentle Breeze Leaves and small twigs move; light flags extend. 12-19
4 Moderate Breeze Small branches sway; dust and loose paper blow about. 20-28
5 Fresh Breeze Small trees sway; waves break on inland waters. 29-38
6 Strong Breeze Large branches sway; umbrellas difficult to use. 39-49
7 Moderate Gale Whole trees sway; difficult to walk against wind. 50-61
8 Fresh Gale Twigs broken off trees; walking against wind very dif¬
ficult. 62-74
9 Strong Gale Slight damage to buildings; shingles blown off roof. 75-88
10 Whole Gale Trees uprooted; considerable damage to buildings. 89-102
11 Storm Widespread damage; very rare occurrence. 103-117
12 Hurricane Violent destruction. 118 and
above.
