UNESCO AND THE STRUGGLE
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
by Pierre Juvigny
and Marie-Pierre Herzog
HE Universal Declaration
of Human Rights was proclaimed by
the United Nations in Paris in 1948.
As Unesco's Director-General, René
Maheu, has said: "It is Human Rights,
as defined in the Universal Declaration
of 1948, which inspire the whole of
Unesco's work, and give it its mean¬
ing..." ("In the Minds of Men Unesco
1946-1971"). In order to understand
this fundamental orientation it is
necessary to look back into the past.
If one goes back in this way to
4
PIERRE JUVIGNY, French jurist and member
of the French Conseil d'Etat, has been a
member of the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights since 1972. A former chairman of
the U.N. Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
he assisted In the drawing up of Unesco's
Convention Against Discrimination in Edu¬
cation. An extract from his study "The Right
to Privacy In the Modern World" was publish¬
ed in the July 1973 issue of the "Unesco
Cour;er".
MARIE-PIERRE HERZOG Is head of Unesco's
Human Rights Co-ordination Unit, set up in
May 1973. She was previously Director of
Unesco's Philosophy Division. A former
professor of philosophy and member of the
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifi¬
que, she is the author of a study entitled
'La Théorie de la Volonté de Kant à Scho¬
penhauer".
the historical sources, one finds that
since 1919, international life and the
way in which international institutions
are envisaged fall into two distinct
periods. The first has been marked
by an effort to institutionalize inter¬
national relations in order to avoid
new conflicts on a scale comparable
to that of the First World War.
This was what the League of
Nations, established in January 1920,
tried to achieve. But the essential
purpose of the League of Nations
was to regulate relationships between
States, with a view, as the French
jurist Georges Scelle put it, to "reduc¬
ing the frequency of wars".
However, the interests of individuals
or groups were not outside the pur¬
view of the Covenant of the League
of Nations; indeed, the League did
make a contribution to the protection
of minorities. The series of treaties
concluded after the First World War
contained recognition of the rights,
including the cultural rights, of ethnic,
religious or linguistic minorities.
In many cases such minorities
found themselves within states whose
frontiers had been redrawn by these
treaties. The League of Nations was
competent to consider petitions from
individuals or from minority groups
that believed their rights were being
infringed.
Furthermore, the Covenant of the
League of Nations, by setting up the
mandate system (conferring power
upon a State to govern other territo¬
ries), imposed certain obligations on
the mandatory powers including some
relating to economic, social and cultu¬
ral rights.
Some degree of international control
was exercised over these States in
the form of questionnaires, reports,
freedom to submit petitions, debates
in the Assembly of the League of
Nations and even the possibility for
a third-party State to bring a manda¬
tory State before the Permanent Court
of International Justice at The Hague.
This legal power held by the
League of Nations, incomplete as it
may have been in the field of human
rights, was by no means insignificant,
for it was also instrumental in promot¬
ing the protection of women and
children, in the fight against slavery
and the traffic in human beings.
Moreover, the International Labour
Organization, set up by the 1919
peace settlement and affiliated with
CONTINUED PAGE 35

,^
1=

UNESCO AND THE STRUGGLE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (Continued)
decision to proceed without delay to
a Declaration of Human Rights.
It was fully appreciated that the
¡deals professed In the various pream¬
bles were In need of clearer formu¬
lation in order to ensure that they
had the greatest possible intellectual
impact and practical effect.
On December 10, 1948 the General
Assembly of the United Nations pro¬
claimed the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
It Is true that the Declaration was
not binding and that, in the main, it
is not recognized by national legal
systems as having the same standing
as national law. It is also true that
the work of the United Nations and
of the Specialized Agencies may be
considered, to a large extent, as a
gradual process designed to enlist
the co-operation of States themselves
in transcending their inherent limita¬
tions and circumventing the legal and
political obstacle created by the prin¬
ciple of non-interference in internal
affairs.
In any event, the Declaration had
a considerable impact on governments
and on public opinion and has never
ceased to be a source of support and
guidance for all mankind, voicing its
hopes and aspirations.
We
36
HAT is Unesco's rôle as
regards Articles 26 (The Right to Edu¬
cation), 27 (The Right to participate in
Cultural Life) and 19 (The Right to
Freedom of Opinion and Expression)
of the Universal Declaration, which
concern Unesco directly, as well as
Articles 1, 2 and 7 which emphatically
proclaim the equality of all men
"without distinction of any kind, such
as race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political... opinion" and also the over¬
riding principle of non-discrimination?
A brief account of this rôle is given
below, and a more detailed account
appears in the book, "In the Minds
of Men", published by Unesco on the
occasion of its twenty-fifth anniver¬
sary (1). The reader who examines
the texts of this book and thinks
about the activities described in them
in relation to the principles set out
in Unesco's Constitution and in the
Universal Declaration, will be astound¬
ed by the magnitude of the fields
covered in which Unesco has endeav¬
oured to be true to its ideal.
The right to education, for instance,
involves many different things: non¬
discrimination, respect for the rights
of minorities, equality of opportunity,
special assistance for the least favour¬
ed members of the community, adult
education, life-long education, and the
essential quality of education capable,
(1) "In the Minds of Men", Unesco, Paris,
1972. An account of Unesco and its work over
25 years (1946-1971) by 15 international autho¬
rities.
by its aims, methods and content, of
ensuring the development of the indi¬
vidual within his own group, his
country and the world community.
But it also involves education for
Palestine refugees, educational assis¬
tance to African refugees, the struggle
for what are regarded as merely
"normal" rights such as the right to
attend school, in situations of crisis,
political upheaval and extreme poverty,
situations which Unesco has a duty to
face. The reader will also note that
as soon as a decisive move is made
in a new direction it is necessary to
go further, and at a faster pace.
Thus, the first two Unesco decla¬
rations on the racial question, publish¬
ed in 1950 and 1951, which marked a
significant advance by emphasizing
that the biological differentiation of
races was without foundation, had to
be supplemented by further statements
in 1964 and 1967 because biological
considerations were no longer ade¬
quate and because racial conflicts
were coming to be recognized as the
result of a combination of complex
social and economic factors.
Work is now in progress on a new
draft declaration on race which is due
to be submitted to Unesco's General
Conference in 1974 in order to extend
still further the detailed analysis of one
of the most formidable scourges of
the modern world.
There are many other fascinating
developments, along similar lines,
which could be described. When an
activity is well launched it contains
the seeds of its own development.
This has been the case with the Uni¬
versal Copyright Convention, revised
in 1971 to broaden its field of appli¬
cation for the benefit of developing
countries, and also with the pro¬
tection of man's cultural heritage,
including the magnificent achieve¬
ments of the campaigns to save the
monuments of Nubia and Venice, a
programme which now extends not
only to monuments but also to sites,
historic city areas and landscapes.
It may be asked whether such wide-
ranging activities are justified. Would
it not have been preferable to concen¬
trate the slender financial resources
available on one or two objectives?
The very absurdity of the question
affords sufficient reply.
How can one opt for culture in
isolation from education, or for commu¬
nication in isolation from science?
What significance would all these
undertakings have were it not for the
struggle against racism? How can one
conceive of the development of all
these rights if one does not see them
as a coherent whole, civil and political
rights on the one hand, social and
economic rights on the other? Lastly,
how can one isolate the sum total
of rights, and the duties which they
imply, from their context the building
of peace?
But if one adopts this point of view
which necessarily involves a moral
commitment in relation not only to the
past and the present but also to the
future, one becomes aware of fresh
difficulties ¡n the way of the interna¬
tionalization of human rights.
Such difficulties are numerous and
complex: the confused aspirations and
needs of all kinds that are to be found
in every human being; the clash
between individual liberties and the
requirements of States; the gap in
pace and level of development bet¬
ween industrialized and developing
countries; the conflict between cultu¬
res, systems of values, and modes of
life brought about by upheavals due
to movements of economy and of
trade, by the increased flow of commu¬
nications and by the faster pace of
scientific discoveries and technolo¬
gical development; and lastly the
difficulties experienced in placing Inter¬
national life on a firm and harmonious
footing owing to our universal igno¬
rance, in our rapidly changing world,
of what should be the nature of the
man of the future.
ERHAPS, it may be said,
the task is impossible and we should
settle for piecemeal, bilateral, regional
or even world-wide agreements based
on a pragmatic approach with the limit¬
ed aim of settling problems on a day-
to-day basis.
This is not the view which we take
at Unesco: for us, the Universal is
a reality and a declaration of rights
which is described as "Universal" is a
necessity close to the hearts of all
men. One has only to re-read the
selection of texts prepared under the
direction of Jeanne Hersch for the
20th anniversary of the Declaration
("The Birthright of Man", see page 39).
It will be seen to what extent these
rights, which may seem to us, in
moments of discouragement, abstract
or Utopian, are the deliberate express¬
ion of aspirations which in different
cultures, civilizations, religions and
creeds have survived the vicissitudes
of history, giving a specific form to
those realities we call respect for the
individual, freedoms, national identity
and independence, brotherhood.
Unesco is shortly to publish a
booklet entitled "Unesco and Human
Rights Success, Obstacles, Hope".
Let us hope that it will give to those
who fight for human rights a clear
view of the difficulties which stand
in the way of progress, and that it
will reveal the tremendous forces
engaged in this combat through the
insight it affords into the rôle that can
be played in this respect by a United
Nations agency with weighty respon¬
sibilities in this field.
Pierre Juvigny
and Marle-Plerre Herzog

BOOKSHELF
RECENT UNESCO BOOKS
The Teaching of Reading
Edited by Ralph C. Steiger. (A Unes¬
co source book on curricula and
methods.) Co-edition Unesco-Ginn
and Co.. 1973, 213 pp. (30 F)-
Planning Educational Assistance
for the Second Development Decade
By H. M. Philips. (No. 18 in the
series Fundamentals of Educational
Planning) 1973, 75 pp. (8 F).
Technical and Vocational Teacher
Education and Training
(No. VIII in the series Monographs
on Education) 1973, 240 pp. (20 F).
Annual Summary of Information on
Natural Disasters
No. 6, 1971. 1973, 82 pp. (14 F)-
UNESCO'S TRANSLATION SERIES
INDIA
A Death in Delhi : modern Hindi
short stories
Edited and translated by Gordon C.
Roadarmel. University of California
Press, Berkeley, Los Angeles, Lon¬
don, 1972, 211 pp. ($ 6.95).
IRAN
The Ship of Sulaiman
Translated by John O'Kane. Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1972,
250 pp. (£ 3.75).
The Successors of Genghis Khan
By Hashid Al-Din Tabib. Translated
by John Andrew Boyle. Columbia
University Press, New York and
London, 1971, 371 pp.
Vis and Ramin
By Fakhr Ud-Din Gurgani. Translated
by George Morrison. Columbia Uni¬
versity Press, New York and London,
1972, 357 pp.
JAPAN
An Outline of a Theory of Civili¬
zation
By Fukuzawa Yukichi. Translated by
David A. Dirworth and G. Cameron
Hurst. Sophia University, Tokyo,
1973, 205 pp. ($ 10).
KOREA
The Bamboo Grove : an introduc¬
tion to Sijo
Edited and translated by Richard
Rutt. University of California Press,
Berkeley, Los Angeles, London, 1971,
177 pp. ($ 7.50).
OTHER BOOKS
Geology and Engineering
(2nd Edition), by Robert F. Legget
(international Series in the Earth
and Planetary Sciences). McGraw-
Hill Book Company, New York and
London, 884 pp.
Japan, its Land, People and Cul¬
ture
(3rd Edition). Compiled by the Japa¬
nese National Commission for Unes¬
co. University of Tokyo Press, 1973,
702 pp.
El rp
D El ÜÜ GS
New Unesco
human rights unit
A special unit to co-ordinate Unesco's
work for human rights and the promotion
of peace has been set up at Unesco
headquarters in Paris. Its programme
includes participation in the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism, a proposed
international declaration on race, a peace
forum, and studies on violence, the
resolution of conflicts and the world role
of international organizations. It will be
associated with such activities as the
struggle against discrimination in education,
education for international co-operation and
peace, human aspects of scientific progress,
access to cultural life, codes of conduct
for the mass media, etc.
Borobodur rescue bid
With the inauguration of preliminary
works on the site by President Suharto,
of Indonesia, on August 10, Unesco's
campaign to save the ancient Buddhist
sanctuary of Borobodur took an important
step forward. Meeting in Paris a few days
earlier, Unesco's Executive Committee for
Borobodur noted that contributions totalling
two million dollars towards restoration costs
had already been pledged and urged an
intensification of fund-raising efforts.
Unesco inquiry
on women's opportunities
Unesco is carrying out an on-the-spot
inquiry into the educational facilities and
jobs open to women in five countries
(Argentina, Ivory Coast, Lebanon, Sierra
Leone and Sri Lanka) to find out what
barriers to the advancement of women
actually exist. Reports are being compiled
on occupations in which trained women
cannot find openings, jobs which women
normally do at a level lower than their
training fits them for, and on any
regulations limiting women's access to
technical or vocational training. Researchers
are also looking at the opportunities for
secondary and higher education for women
and girls aged from 15 to 24 and at both
men's and women's attitudes towards
women's education.
Tanzania's textbook
revolution
Tanzania has been rethinking and revamp¬
ing its educational system so as to make
primary education, in the words of the coun¬
try's president, Julius Nyerere, "a prepa¬
ration for life rather than simply for secon¬
dary school á complete education in
itself". New textbooks have been written
by Tanzanian specialists in their own lan¬
guage, Kiswahili, and teachers are being
re-trained for the new courses.
Music of the centuries
The article "Music of the Centuries"
which appeared in the June 1973 issue of
the Unesco Courier was attributed to Pro¬
fessor Maurice Freedman. This text will
form part of a section of a chapter on
Social and Cultural Anthropology by Pro¬
fessor Freedman to be published in 1973-
1974 by Mouton/Unesco in Part II of "Main
Trends of Research in the Social and
Human Sciences".
Professor Freedman asks us to make
clear that the above section on music was
based upon a special report prepared by
Professor Bruno Nettl of the University of
Illinois, U.S.A.
In the introduction to the chapter on
Anthropology Professor Freedman under¬
lines the fact that a large number of world
authorities in various fields of anthropology
collaborated with him in the preparation of
that chapter, which in effect is a notable
effort of international scholarship "resting
upon the labours of scholars in many parts
of the world."
The Editors regret that this information
did not accompany the article published in
our June issue.
U.N. operation
against drug addiction
Specialists from the World Health Orga¬
nization, the International Labour Organi¬
zation and thé United Nations are to help
fight the problem of drug addiction in
Thailand. The 5-year treatment and rehabi¬
litation programme to help the country's
estimated 400,000 drug addicts is the first
of its kind ever launched by U.N. specia¬
lized agencies.
Unesco films
for world TV
A new series of 15-minute colour films
for TV is being produced by Unesco's
Radio and Visual Information Division. The
films, scheduled for release later this year
and early in 1974, deal with population
problems of S.E. Asia, the historic route
in Ethiopia, saving the sea and the world's
cultural heritage. New co-productions
include a film on literacy in Tanzania (with
Swedish TV), on training and technology
(with Algerian TV), and Islamic influences
in Spanish culture (with Spanish TV).
New rabies vaccine
A new simple rabies vaccine being
developed in France and the U.S.A. may
soon replace the painful and sometimes
hazardous 21-day series of Injections with
which over a million potential rabies
victims are treated each year, according to
a report of the World Health Organization
Committee on Rabies (Technical Report
Series No. 523).
Flashes...
Gambia became Unesco's 131st member
state on August 1.
On December 10, 1973 25th anniver¬
sary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights the U.N. General Assembly will
launch a Decade of Struggle Against
Racism and Racial Discrimination.
During the past ten years 300 industrial
plants that polluted Moscow's air have been
relocated or rebuilt and equipped with air-
treatment equipment.
Well over 10 million persons suffer from
leprosy, according to the World Health
Organization: 3,868,000 in Africa, 385,000 in
America, 6,475,000 in Asia, 52,000 in Europe
and 33,000 in Oceania.
40 per cent of Iceland's 200,000 popu¬
lation live in homes heated by geothermal
energy from underground steam, geysers
or hot springs.
37
