i
J j
The terracotta figurines
found at Moenjodaro
have furnished invalu¬
able information
about the customs and
costumes of the per¬
iod. Right, a woman
carrying baskets on her
head and wearing a
short skirt held in
place by a belt with a
large buckle. Around
her neck she wears a
pendant with large
stones. The men and
women of Moenjodaro
seem to have had a
predilection for jewels.
8
©

MOENJODARO
MODERN METROPOLIS
OF ANTIQUITY
4,500 years ago in the valley of the Indus,
an extraordinary civilization flourished
covering a million square kilometres
by S.M. Ashfaque
and Syed A. Naqvi
_ HE Indus valley in Pakis¬
tan shares with Mesopotamia and the
valley of the Nile the pride of being
the cradle of one of the earliest civi¬
lizations of the world. Moenjodaro,
an important metropolis of that civi¬
lization, exposed by the archaeol¬
ogist's spade about 250 miles north of
Karachi, bears eloquent testimony of
a highly developed society.
The original inhabitants of the South
Asian sub-continent were described
in the Vedas as heathens and bar¬
barians speaking gibberish, living in
fortified cities and raising herds of
cattle. But excavations carried out
at the Indus valley sites of Harappa
and Moenjodaro in 1921 and the
subsequent years established that the
people living in these 4,500-year-old
cities were highly civilized and indus¬
trious, possessing a high standard of
arts and craftsmanship, and a well
developed system of pictographic
writing.
In area, the Indus Valley Civilization
was much more extensive than the
civilizations of Mesopotamia and
Egypt combined, being roughly 1,600
kilometres in length from north to south
and more than 800 kilometres in
breadth from east to west.
The economy of the cities of
Harappa and Moenjodaro was based
S.M. ASHFAQUE Is head of the Epigraphical
branch of Pakistan's Department of Archaeo¬
logy and Museums and was formerly head
of the Ethnological Department of the Natio¬
nal Museum of Pakistan In Karachi. Author
of many papers on archaeology and museo-
logy, he has made a special study of astro¬
labes and other astronomical .instruments
developed during the Moghul period.
SYED A. NAQVI (See note page 5).
upon the fertile valleys of the major
rivers of the Indus basin and the easy
means of transportation which these
rivers afforded. Agriculture was the
main occupation of the people. There
is evidence to show that wheat, barley,
sesame, dates and cotton were the
main agricultural products.
The vast quantity of burnt bricks
and common use of terracotta pottery
indicate that in the past, wood was
available in plenty in the countryside
to provide fuel for the kilns. The
brick-lined drains found in the remains
of the city and pictorial representation
on seals of such animals as tiger,
rhinoceros, elephant and buffalo,
which favour a moist habitat, go to
prove that the Indus valley enjoyed a
copious rainfall in its heyday.
The surplus of agricultural products
and the availability of easy means of
communication made it possible for
the people to barter their goods for
raw materials such as metals, semi¬
precious stones and spices from out¬
side. The trade links of the Indus
valley have been traced to central
Asia, Afghanistan, north-eastern Per¬
sia, south India, and nearer home to
Baluchistan, Rajasthan and Gujarat.
Trade was mostly carried over land
routes, but there is also evidence of
sea links.
Direct evidence of the use of sail¬
boats is confined to some pictures
on a seal, a potsherd graffito and a
terracotta relief found at Moenjodaro.
The picture of the boat on a small
steatite seal shows a craft with
sharply turned up bows and stern, a
central cabin, mast and steering oar.
Such boats appear to be mainly suit¬
able for river sailing, but possibly they
also ventured out along the coastal
waters up to Lothal at the head of the
Gulf of Cambay in the south-east and
to Sutkagendor on the Makran Coast
and the Persian Gulf in the west.
The ruins of Moenjodaro fall into
more or less two distinct parts: a
lower and upper city. The upper city,
close to the Archaeological Museum
of Moenjodaro, is an oblong mound
of which a considerable portion has
been exposed to view. It comprises
the Great Bath, the Great Granary, the
Pillared Hall and a number of other
structures arranged in rows divided
by lanes and by-lanes. The remains
of the ancient civilization are topped
by an imposing Buddhist stupa of the
second century A.D., rising 72 feet
above the surrounding plain to domi¬
nate the scene.
The lower city lying to the east is
an extensive mound of undulating
surface, three large portions of which
have been excavated. The exposed
areas show extensive remains of resi¬
dential quarters arranged in blocks
neatly divided by streets and lanes.
Excavations in the upper city have
revealed that for the most part, it was
rebuilt upon an artificial hill 20 to
40 feet in height, crowned by the
Buddhist stupa. The artificial plat¬
form of the citadel is built of mud-
brick and mud.
Evidence shows that a rising water
table and floods had plagued the city
even as they do today. Especially in
the lower city, closer to the river in ^
the east, there are traces of embank- U
ments and terraced structures built to "
protect the settlement from the river
erosion and inundation.
CONTINUED PAGE 11

EVERYDAY LIFE
IN THE CITIES
OF THE INDUS
The vestiges uncovered at Harappa and
Moenjodaro have provided a valuable
insight into the daily lives of the inhabitants
of these two cities 4,500 years ago.
Archaeologists have been able to recons¬
titute a picture of the architecture and
the function of many buildings. Above,
a reconstitution of the Great Bath, the
most remarkable building of Moenjodaro.
The 12-metre-long bath itself was made
completely watertight by the application
of a layer of bitumen between two layers
of brick pointed with lime mortar. Right,
reconstitution of a large house containing
a bathroom, a well and several rooms
giving on to a central courtyard. At
Harappa, archaeologists have also un¬
covered 17 threshing floors (opposite page)
placed at the base of the city's grain
silos. They consist of large, circular,
brick platforms with a central hole perhaps
used for crushing the grain with a pestle.
Above right, a shop or craftsman's work¬
shop at Moenjodaro. The cone-shaped
depressions in the floor were perhaps
dyers' vats or holders for oil jars.
\ I wBT^ s â
10

*
^Sfc^
_^*c
	
MOENJODARO (Continued)
The houses of Moenjodaro remind
one of the dictum of Francis Bacon,
"Houses are built to live in, not to
look at." It seems that the aim of
the city builders was to make life
comfortable rather than luxurious.
The ante-chambers, parlours, court¬
yards, toilets, staircases and wells
seen in almost every dwelling give an
impression of immaculate planning for
every convenience.
Within the exposed parts of the
upper city, the most famous structure
is that of the Great Bath, 39 feet in
length from north to south, 23 feet in
breadth, sunk 8 feet below a brick
paved floor enclosed in a courtyard.
The rows of rectangular pillars on all
four sides indicate a corridor or pav¬
ilion which shows that the Bath was a
place of some kind of social gathering
or, as interpreted by the archaeo¬
logist, a place of religious bathing on
some particular occasion. The com¬
plex of adjacent rooms and water
closets strengthens the latter infer¬
ence, and it may be concluded that
life in Moenjodaro was dominated by
some kind of priestly guardian or
authority.
From the technical viewpoint, the
masonry structure of the Great Bath
reveals the high degree of skill and
craftsmanship that went into its
conception and construction. The
floor of the bath is reached by brick
steps originally provided with timber
treads set in asphalt. To make the
basin watertight, its floor and sides
were lined with bricks set on edge in
gypsum. Behind the facing bricks
of the sides was a layer of bitumen
held in place by an additional lining
of bricks encased in a packing of mud-
bricks.
On the eastern, side of the bathing
pavilion, a well with a double ring of
brickwork undoubtedly supplied water
to the tank through a sluice connected
to the basin. Near the south-western
comer, there was an outlet by an
underground drain covered by a
corbelled arch through which the
water of the tank was flushed and
led down to the western side of the
city. All those details not only show
the technical ingenuity of the builders
but also reveal their deep preoccu¬
pation with matters of hygiene.
On the western side of the Great
Bath is a peculiar masonry structure
consisting of a number of square plat¬
forms of more or less uniform size
rising five feet in height. The blocks
are divided by a network of narrow
passages meeting at right angles.
On the eastern and southern sides
there are remnants of a superstructure
showing timber holes. Basing him¬
self upon the analogy of a granary
found at Harappa, the noted archae¬
ologist Sir Mortimer Wheeler advan¬
ced the view that this structure also
represents a kind of silo for grain
storage.
A series of solid masonry blocks
formed a podium supporting the timber
floor of the Great Granary. The
?Ä' Jfr
Photos © Papiqny Paris
narrow passages were the air ducts
to keep the bottom of the 'silo dry
and safe from the effect of ground
moisture. The external walls of the
podium were battered like that of a
fortress, and on the northern side
was an alcove with a brick pavement.
The presence of a granary at Moenjo¬
daro indicates that there was prob¬
ably a barter system for exchange of
commodities, the granary serving the
purpose of a state treasury.
Towards the north-east of the Great
Bath, there is an outline of a long
building the plan of which suggests
that it was the residence of the Chief
Priest, or perhaps a hostel for a
number of priests. This cloister-like
structure includes an open courtyard
enclosed by verandahs on three sides.
The structural alternations suggest
that once five doorways opened into
it from a lane on the eastern side and
one door each on the southern and
western sides. The floor throughout
the rooms is paved with bricks, and
there is evidence of two staircases
leading to an upper storey.
The presence of such buildings
besides the ordinary dwellings
suggests that the ancient people had
certain social institutions which pro¬
vided occasions for group activities.
It is just possible that this large build¬
ing might have been the "punchait"
or court of the city magistrate.
The three important buildings of the
upper city, the as yet unexcavated
complex of structures in the southern
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
11

Photo Guy Thomas (D J. Biltgen, Paris
TERRACOTTA
WONDERLAND
In the Indus Valley Civilization terracotta was widely used for a variety of purposes in
architecture (bricks and pipes), for household objects (vases and other containers), for or¬
naments (bracelets) and in sculpture (figurines of humans and animals). (1) A terracotta rhi¬
noceros found at Moenjodaro. The potters also made terracotta toys such as this solid-
wheeled, single-shaft cart (4) drawn by a pair of water buffaloes, identical with those still
used today by Pakistani farmers in the Sind. Many curiously fashioned human figurines have
also been unearthed at Moenjodaro. (2 and 3.)
12
MOENJODARO (Continued)
sector and the probability of peri¬
pheral towers suggest that it was the
residential sector of the élite and the
officials who controlled the secular
and religious administration.
The lower city of Moenjodaro is an
excellent example of scientific town
planning with its basic gridiron system
of main streets demarcating blocks
of residential houses. The principal
thoroughfare is the Central Street
running the whole length of the ruins
from north to south. The main streets
are about 30 feet wide joined by lanes
and side streets varying from 5 to
10 feet in width. The, doors of the
houses usually open on to the lanes
rather than the main streets.
Some of the houses have rectangu¬
lar windows, which might have orig¬
inally been closed by lattices of
alabaster and terracotta. To keep out
the scorching sun the number of
doors and windows was reduced to an
absolute minimum. The common
features are the courtyards, a range
of rooms of modest size, staircases
leading to the upper floors, and quite
frequently, wells to supply water.
The age of the lower city of Moenjo¬
daro can be clearly judged where
stack-like masonry columns are seen
standing on the floors of rooms in
the houses. These are the brick
linings of the wells dug in later times
when the houses below had already
fallen into ruins and been covered
with deposits up to the top of the
wells. Looking down into a well is a
common enough experience, but
seeing a well from the outside, like
a water jug, is intriguing and
irresistibly reminiscent of Alice in
Wonderland.
Walking south down the Central
Street one passes acres of the un-
excavated mound arriving at an area
with a community well. This area had
been the scene of the massacre of
the innocent people of Moenjodaro
when a horde of Aryans attacked the
city and rang the death-knell of this
most remarkable culture.
A short distance further south is the
dyer's shop where we see a number
of shallow pits capped with bricks to
hold the vats of chemicals and dyes.
From there the Central Street leads
to an area where the reduced size of
the residential quarters indicate it to
be the sector of the working class and
the poorer people.
South beyond that point the mound
extends much farther but has been
left intact for future excavations. On
the eastern edge of the lower city
there is considerable evidence of mud-
embankments and terraced structures
obviously raised to protect the metro¬
polis from inundation during monsoon
floods of the river Indus.
Various art objects have been

^H^^^^^flM
fl A
W . ^M
W^ «. - *- fl]
1 k *-
^^v flj
i> m
Hv Hfli
1 1 í5p fl
*^B flk i
^^i fli ^mw^ ^Tr fl ^'^J
m. ^* il ¿ fli
^^flJL ^^^flfl^^fl^^ _^flfl
2 ; Photo Frances Mortimer © Rapho, Pans ; 3 : Photo Guy Thomas © I. Biltgen, Pans ; 4 : Photo Dept. of Archaeology and Museums, Pakistan
found at Moenjodaro including a large
number of burnt clay male and female
figurines, models of birds and min¬
iature representations of animals.
The females figurines are bejewelled
and wear pannier-like head-dresses,
some of which are stained with smoke
perhaps because they served as
incense burners. These figurines are
supposed to represent the Mother
Goddess whose cult was widespread
in the contemporary cultures of the
Middle East.
The male figurines are usually
bearded and nude. They probably
also represent some kind of deity.
The terracotta figurines are modelled
by hand and painted flesh-colour.
Noteworthy among the male figurines
is a steatite bust of a nobleman or
King-Priest wearing a loose robe
engraved with a trefoil pattern in relief.
Such a pattern seems to carry some
divine or authoritative connotation as
it occurs on the Bull of Heaven found
at a Sumerian site, and dates to the
time of Gudea, ruler of Ur about
2200 B.C.
Trefoil patterns also occur on some
Egyptian antiquities of the second
millennium B.C. At Moenjodaro such
patterns can also be seen on a large
steatite head which might have been
an amulet or a protective sign against
the evil eye, worn by some priest or
a monarch. This enigmatic pattern
and the sedate bearing of the male
bust have impressed the archaeologists
enough to assign him the title of King-
Priest.
Sculptural art shows further diversifi¬
cation in the small bronze figurine of
a dancing girl standing with her right
arm akimbo, and her left hand resting
on her left thigh. She is naked, has
a rather ugly face and is wearing
a necklace with three pendants
hanging over her burgeoning breasts.
Two thick bangles are seen on her
right arm above the elbow while a
spiral ornament covers the whole
length of her left arm.
But the best examples of the plastic
art of Moenjodaro uncovered up to
now are no doubt the many magnifi¬
cent seals bearing life-like figures of
animals. These include the Brahmani
bull, the short-horned bull, buffalo,
tiger, rhinoceros, crocodile, and also
mythological creatures like the unicorn,
a human figure with horns and a tail,
and a horned tiger.
Besides these animals and goblins
depicted on seals, there are also
several miniature replicas of monkeys
and squirrels carved with a mastery
of natural detail. In their more light- . _
hearted moments the sculptors also 1 Q
modelled toy bullock carts and ' **
domestic animals for the amusement
of children.
The seals found at Harappa and
CONTINUED PAGE 38

MOENJODARO
MODERN METROPOLIS OF ANTIQUITY
(Continued from page 13)
Moenjodaro bear pictographic inscrip¬
tions which have so far defied all
attempts at decipherment. The in¬
terpretation of the script is one of
the greatest problems of the archae¬
ology of the Indus valley. The writing
consists of loops, circles, combs,
ladders, spoked wheels and a variety
of leaf, fish and other shapes.
Sometimes these symbols appear
tantalizingly within grasp, as a former
custodian of Moenjodaro narrating a
small incident pointed out. He once
asked a small boy visiting the Moenjo¬
daro Museum whether he could make
out anything from these inscriptions.
The boy replied after a moment's
thought that these could be the spare
parts of a bullock cart!
The Indus valley script consisting
of some 250 symbols, excluding
variants, is considered to be a picto¬
graphic writing, presumably read from
right to left and is judged to be a level
higher in precision than the hiero¬
glyphic script of Egypt, or the cunei¬
form script of Mesopotamia.
The signs do not appear to be
alphabetic and possibly may represent
either syllables, ideograms, or deter¬
minatives related to the class of things
to which the word belongs.
The script does not show any
relation with the ancient writings of
the Middle Eastern countries, but it
is just possible that its invention was
inspired by the example of the cunei¬
form script of Mesopotamia. At any
rate the discussion remains purely
academic as long as the script remains
undeciphered. (See article page 28.)
38
OST common ornaments
found at Moenjodaro are necklaces and
pendants of semi-precious stones.
Decorative faience and paste beads
also seem to have been fairly popular.
Some cornelian beads etched and
marked with designs in white are the
same as those found in Mesopotamia
and Iran, and they undoubtedly provide
evidence of trade relations with the
Middle East.
Gold necklaces, armlets, bangles
and finger rings were commonly worn
by both sexes, while long cornelian
beads, ear-rings and anklets were
meant for women only. Some of the
unusually long cornelian beads indicate
advanced techniques of drilling fine
and uniform holes through hard
substances. A feat of such great skill
might have been performed with some
delicate drill of high speed.
Among the many implements un¬
earthed at Moenjodaro are stone tools
lying alongside copper and bronze
tools and utensils. The stone tools
are mostly long chert flakes with worn
and serrated edges, evidently used as
knives for cutting meat and vegetables.
Stone vessels are few but there are
some alabaster dishes thick and
clumsy in appearance.
Almost a complete series of stone
weights have also been found which
bear a binary ratio. These weights
are made of highly polished pieces of
chert, quartzite, alabaster, limestone
and jasper. Their shapes are cubical,
half-cubical, cylindrical and spherical.
Very few weights are reported to be
defective in measure, a fact which
signifies a consistency of commercial
standards maintained by the state.
Among the other objects found at
Moenjodaro, the gamesmen of carved
stones for chess and games of dice
are particularly noteworthy. There is
also a terracotta saucer with a spiral
channel, which is certainly the
forerunner of the game of bagatelle.
These paraphernalia of indoor
recreation indicate that the ancient
inhabitants led a life of consider¬
able prosperity and pleasure.
There are some cooking pots,
agricultural implements, mirrors, sta¬
tuettes and ornaments made of copper
and bronze. The earthenware objects
include a wide range of pottery varying
in size from miniature containers for
perfumes and cosmetics to large
vessels for animal fodder, storing
other products, or for sanitary pur¬
poses.
The pottery is mostly wheel-turned
in plain shapes or with decorations in
paints, graffito, etc. The highly
specialized character is evident from
decorations on the red ware. The
patterns consist of geometric shapes,
as well as stylized human, animal and
bird forms and vegetation. Fish-scale
patterns, intersecting circles, pipal leaf
motifs and checkerboard designs are
fairly common, with some incised and
stamped pottery.
The Indus Valley Civilization thus
floats within the ken of knowledge
quite dramatically and disappears with
equal suddenness. Between it and
the next important phase in the
chronology of the sub-continent there
is a wide gap, which it is the hope of
archaeologists to fill one day.
Among the causes of the decline
and fall of this civilization, scholars
enumerate a progressive desiccation
of the climate of the Indus valley,
devastation by floods, some kind of
mysterious epidemic which wiped out
the population, and lastly, but strongly
emphasized, forays of marauding
bands of Aryans, pouring down in
waves from the mountain passes in the
north and west. Each possibility has
its own merits and arguments, but the
definitive answer has yet to come.
HE ruins of Moenjodaro,
buried beneath the accumulation of
thousands of years, remained in an
excellent state of preservation. But as
soon as they were exposed from
oblivion to the incredulous gaze of the
20th century, they were overtaken by
the plague of water-logging and the
leprosy of salinity. These two diseases
combined with the threat of erosion
by the Indus river, pose a grim danger
to the very existence of one of the
most remarkable cultural legacies of
the human race.
The present state of the archaeo¬
logical remains at Moenjodaro has
attracted the attention of specialists
and laymen alike. It is doubtful if any
other country, had it inherited Moenjo¬
daro, would have done more for its
preservation than what has been done
so far by Pakistan, despite her tight
economy.
But saving the ruins of Moenjodaro
from total obliteration is not the
responsibility of Pakistan alone. It is
in fact the combined responsibility of
the entire civilized world.
Tangible arrangements to tackle this
important task with the help of Unesco
are now in the offing and on completion
may in themselves be a monument to
modern technology and international
co-operation.
S.M. Ashfaque
and Syed A. Naqvi
