"Waiting in Quintuplícate" (Attente Quintuplée) is the
title of this work by a Greek artist, Yannis Gaitis, presented
at the Young Sculptors Exhibition held at Unesco in
July 1972.

THE
BRAVE WORLD
OF DATA
SURVEILLANCE
In September 1970, the International Commission of Jurists in
Geneva undertook on behalf of Unesco a comparative study of. the
laws relating to the legal protection of the right to privacy. This
Unesco inquiry was carried out in 10 countries and its results were
published in N° 3, 1972. of Unesco's quarterly magazine "Interna¬
tional Social Science Journal" ( * ). Below we reproduce a passage
on "Data Surveillance" and "Legal Safeguards" from that issue.
I T is likely that within the
next twenty years most of the recorded
information in the world will be on
computers and more than half the
telephone calls will be communications
to and from and between computers.
As a method of storing information
and making it available, computers
are not only cheaper and more efficient
than conventional methods such as
books or files. They operate on an
entirely different dimension and make
possible the collection, collation and
distribution of information on a scale
hitherto unthinkable.
The machines on which all this data
is recorded need not themselves be
large. For instance, with a certain type
of computer based on the laser system,
it would be possible to have the equi¬
valent of twenty pages of information
about every man, woman and child in
the world on ten tapes, each
1,500 metres long and 2i centimetres
wide. A match-box can contain
computer-recorded information which,
16 * "International Social Science Journal",
Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, 75007 Paris.
Price: single issue $2, 60p, 8F; yearly sub¬
scription $7, £2.10, 28F. Obtainable from
Unesco national distributers (see page 35.)
in print, could scarcely be contained
in a cathedral.
The benefits to mankind which can
flow from the use of computers are
immense. It is plain that not only will
their use continue to grow, but com¬
puters will so dominate the scene in
a few years time that nearly all
information will be collected in the
form required for its storage In
computers.
There are a number of ways in
which computers can pose threats to
the privacy of the individual, but the
central one is the fact that they will
make it possible for a person having
access to the coded data on computers
to bring together all the recorded infor¬
mation, often of a private and per¬
sonal nature, about a particular person
in a way that would never have been
practical before.
People have become accustomed
to making a lot of information about
themselves available for particular pur¬
poses. Each item of information does
not in itself reveal very much and per¬
sons are willing to disclose it, confident
that those to whom it is given will use
it only for the purpose for which it
is intended.
If one thinks about the matter one
may also conclude that it would not
be practical for anyone to bring
together the different items of infor¬
mation in such a way as would enable
a picture, however distorted, to be
constructed of one's private life and
activities. All that is now changed by
the computer.
Examples of the kind of personal
information given to public author¬
ities include records of births, mar¬
riages and deaths, medical records,
records of education, military service,
passport applications, employment
records, social-security records, decla¬
rations for tax returns, applications for
licences of many kinds, motor-vehicle
registrations, post-office savings-bank
accounts and telephone accounts.
These records are usually based
on information voluntarily given by the
individual concerned or his relatives.
In addition, there may be confidential
records compiled by police or intelli¬
gence authorities.
A second category of records are
those compiled for commercial pur¬
poses and include bank accounts,
demands for credit facilities, credit-
card accounts, travel records including
ticket purchases and hotel bookings,
and hotel registrations.
Equally, records can be and are kept
by private firms of information about

Photo Dominique Roger - Unesco
people's supposed credit-worthiness,
without their knowledge, and supplied
commercially to inquirers. In the
United States a number of firms have
computerized records of the financial
position of more than 100 million
people.
Many such records can be used by
anyone with access to the computer
for purposes quite different to those
for which they were compiled, and
above all for purposes of surveillance.
One of the main problems of surveil¬
lance is to find the person who is to be
kept under observation. Use of a
credit card will reveal in a matter of
seconds where the holder is at the
moment that he presents it. Again, if
hotel and boarding-house registrations
are filed on computers, the same result
can be achieved.
From records such as these an
"inverted file" can be compiled in a
few minutes of all the recorded infor¬
mation about the places to which a
person has travelled over a period
of time, where he stayed and with
whom, what purchases he made at
what places and so forth.
The computer has the ability to
reorganize a large quantity of infor¬
mation (each element of which is
separately harmless) into a new quality
of information which may reveal more
than a person wishes to be known.
Furthermore, this connexion which
may be established between different
items of information concerning a
given individual, may be used as the
basis for passing judgement on him, a
secret judgement from which there can
be no appeal and which, because it is
based on a computer, is thought to be
objective and infallible. But in fact the
information used may be inexact, or
out of date or of no real significance,
with the result that the final conclu¬
sion amounts to a "scientific sophism".
Some writers consider that there is
a danger of serious interference with
the personal development of the indi¬
vidual resulting from the way in which
he is "presented" by the computer;
in the last resort he may be driven to
the point where he modifies his real
personality to suit that presentation,
behaving not in fact as he wishes but
as he feels he is expected to behave
"objectively" and "scientifically".
There is a further danger that the
individual will become too conscious
of his past rather than of his future.
Such domination of the private life of
the individual by technology could lead
to a veritable pollution of the human
personality.
These anxieties have been well sum¬
marized by Prof. Arthur Miller of the
U.S.A.: "The computer with its in¬
satiable appetite for information, its
¡mage of infallibility, its inability to
forget anything that has been put into
it, may become the heart of a surveil¬
lance system that will turn our society
into a transparent world in which our
home, our finances, our associations,
our mental and physical condition are
laid bare to the most casual observer."
Other dangers to privacy from com¬
puter data banks are that there may
be errors either in the information fed
into the computer or in the reorganiza¬
tion or "evaluation" of the information,
or simply errors due to mechanical or
electrical faults. Errors once recorded
tend to remain, for the simple reason
that it is cheaper and easier to retain
records in data banks than to eliminate
them. Another feature of computers
is that it is very simple to erase an
entry and substitute another, and unlike
alterations in a conventional file, these
alterations cannot be detected.
In principle there are a number of
ways, other than by legal sanctions,
in which the individual can be protect¬
ed and these risks reduced. These
lie in establishing good professional
standards, building in technical safe¬
guards and adopting secure adminis.-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
17

DATA SURVEILLANCE (Continued)
18
trative procedures. Unfortunately the
present practice in all these respects
leaves much to be desired.
Attempts are being made in some
countries such as the United States
and the United Kingdom to establish
a professional code for computer pro¬
grammers but these are little more
than guidelines and programming is in
no sense a properly constituted and
disciplined profession. This is serious
not only because the information pro¬
grammers are handling is confidential,
but because they do not have the sta¬
bility of employment which might serve
as some guarantee that secrecy is
respected. An extreme example of
the lack of concern for privacy in the
computer world was seen when a
United States data system went out
of business and offered for sale to the
highest bidder its dossiers on three
million citizens.
On the technological level there are
a number of possible methods for
checking the "integrity" of the system,
for controlling access to the informa¬
tion (as by passwords or "keys") and
for controlling the processing of infor¬
mation. Many of these are expensive
to introduce, requiring elaborate "hard¬
ware" and "software" and are un¬
likely to be adopted except under
compulsion.
One specialist has compiled a list
of administrative safeguards which
could be introduced as a set of model
rules for operating computers contain¬
ing personal information. He proposes
that an independent advisory council
should have to be satisfied of the need
for the data and of the effectiveness
of the security measures before
authorization would be given to hold
personal data in computers.
He also proposes coded identifica¬
tions rather than names and addresses
and that personal files should be
erased at regular intervals of not more
than ten years. As far as is known,
there is no administrative code of this
kind in force in any of the countries
covered by the study carried out for
Unesco in 1970-71 by the International
Commission of Jurists, or indeed else¬
where.
Some of the dangers to individual
privacy from the operation of data
banks fall within the ambit of existing
laws, but very little legislation specifi¬
cally related to computers has yet
been passed in the ten countries dealt
with in Unesco's study.
Many countries have legislation
which make it an offence for public
servants to disclose without authority
confidential information acquired in
the course of their official duties. In
the United Kingdom, for example,
there are provisions of this kind in
the Official Secrets Act 1911 and in
the Taxes Management Act, 1970.
The recent legislation establishing
national data-processing services in
the United Kingdom imposes upon the
officials of the Post Office operating
the services an obligation of secrecy
with penalties of up to two years'
imprisonment for unauthorized dis¬
closure. The Federal German Penal
Code, which came into force in 1969,
provides for the protection of privacy
in automated information systems.
In the United States the Fair Credit
Reporting Act 1971 covers the acti¬
vities of credit reporting agencies. It
entitles an individual against whom
an adverse report is made to be told
about it. He is entitled to examine
the file maintained about him and to
have errors corrected.
It is known that the possibility of
legislation is being considered in a
number of countries, including Can¬
ada, Denmark, Norway, Sweden and
the United Kingdom. A private
member's Bill on the subject was
introduced in the United Kingdom
Parliament.
HE only country, however,
which has introduced any comprehen¬
sive legislation on this subject is the
Land Hessen of the Federal Republic
of Germany. The Land Hessen's Act
of 1970 contains provisions for:
Imposing the duty of protection of
confidentiality in the method of op¬
eration of all data banks;
Imposing a duty of secrecy on the
operators, with penal sanctions;
Establishing an effective enforce¬
ment and complaints procedure
through the Data Protection Commis¬
sioner;
Giving the individual the right to
have errors corrected. It may be
commented that there appears to be
no right for the individual to know what
has been recorded about him. The
"right to verify" may prove ineffective
without a correlative "right to know".
Finally it should be mentioned that
the Union Internationale des Avocats
has prepared for the Council of Eur¬
ope a draft convention and model law
on the right to privacy which deals
with the question of data privacy,
including the storage of data, the
theft or misuse of data and the
publication of data.
It is to be hoped that the reports
prepared on the intergovernmental
level as a result of the 1968 resolution
of the U.N. General Assembly and the
answers submitted by governments
may serve as the basis for the pre¬
paration of an international convention
for the protection of human rights
against the dangers arising from scien¬
tific and technological developments.
It is only through an international
convention that sufficient legal pro¬
tection is likely to be provided to
ensure that technological devices do
not operate to the detriment of legi¬
timate human rights.
CONFORM
OR ELSE...

Drawing (© Cardon, from "Satirix", No 13, 1972, Paris
"Wholesale invasions of privacy," says the United
Nations, "inhibit individual liberty... The commu¬
nity becomes fear-ridden, and no one can be
trusted... This destruction of trust is one of the
major dangers to a free society... The detailed
questionnaire for employment, housing or insur
ance, the hidden but suspected camera, psycho¬
logical tests, the lie detector all these devices u «
for ferreting out intimate details of our lives 1 Jl
produce a pervasive insecurity which suppresses
individuality, discourages responsibility and encou¬
rages frightened conformity... "
