Wind direction
WIND VANE
This instrument tells you which way the wind is
blowing. It is placed at the top of a pole. The vane
can be made of wood or metal in any shape or form,
ranging from the simple arrow on a cotton reel to the
perky squirrel shown here. But in every case the
tailor fin must be larger in surface than the head
or arrow point so that the wind can swing it around.
A large nail can be used as the axis. A bead makes
a good pivot to allow the vane to turn freely. Com¬
plete the wind vane by placing below it indicators
showing the four points of the compass.



BUILD YOUR OWN
How would you like to build and run your own weather station ?
It's not as difficult as you might think. You may have to buy or
borrow a few items of equipment but you can quite easily make
some of the instruments you'll need from odds and ends.
Another idea would be to make this a class project in your
school with the help of your teacher.
Some of the instruments must be housed in a well-ventilated
shelter or " weather box ". Others, including a barometer, should
be grouped in the open air. Instrument stands and weather box
should be painted white to prevent the sun's radiation from
affecting the readings. You can even give your "met station"
20 20 20
f\
L_-3
60
WIND CONE
This instrument also shows wind direction. It is also known
as a wind sock or wind sleeve. From a piece of lightweight,
white cloth cut out the shape shown in the diagram above at left
(figures show suggested size in centimetres). Then sew the two
straight edges (marked "50") together to form the cone. Take
a piece of strong wire and bend it into a circle to fit the big end
of the cone. Slip two small curtain rings on to the wire and
then fix them at opposite sides of the ring. Sew the cone to the
wire circle. Slip a thin metal rod through the two curtain rings
and attach the rod to the end of a pole fixed in the ground.
As with the wind vane, a small bead slipped onto the rod allows
the cone to rotate easily. If desired, the wind cone and the wind
vane can be fitted to the same pole.
HYGROMETER
Used to measure the humidity of the atmosphere, a hygrometer is quite
simple to make. Take an "L-shaped* piece of wood and cut a small
window in it Below the window fix a small cotton-reel in such a way
that it can rotate freely. Attach a pointer to the cotton-reel and mark
out a scale opposite the pointer.
The operation of the hygrometer is based on the fact that hair strands
lengthen when humidity rises and shorten when the air is drier.
Attach a human hair, free from grease, to a point above the window,
pass it two or three times round the cotton-reel and suspend a small
weight at the end of the hair to maintain tension.
Placing a container of boiling water under the apparatus will cause
the hair strand to lengthen and will send the arrow to the point of
100 per cent relative humidity. Mark this point on the scale and calibrate
the rest of the scale if possible by comparison with another hygrometer
that has already been calibrated.

WEATHER STATION
a really professional look by putting a decorative fence around it.
After you've built your weather station you can start noting and
recording the instrument readings. But you must do this as
regularly as clockwork if the records are to be meaningful.
Then you can try your hand at forecasting the weather in your
locality. Compare your own predictions with the radio and TV
forecasts. If they don't tally, try to work out the reasons. Building
and operating a do-it-yourself weather station can be an exciting
and fascinating hobby that wilt be richly rewarding for many
years to come.
WEATHER BOX
Two wooden boxes are
all you needone small
enough to fit inside the
other with a space in bet¬
ween. Remove one side of
each box (the one that will
face North) and pierce
airholes through the other
sides. Make sure that the
holes of the outside box
do NOT line up with the
holes of the inner box, so that the sun's rays can never penetrate
the inner box.
Thermometers and other instruments must be carefully
protected from the sun, the rain and the snow, in order to obtain
true readings, unaffected by the sun's rays or radiation reflected
from the ground or nearby buildings.
Cap the box with a double-sloping roof that gives good
protection on the open North side.
Fix the box in an open place on a post or picket 1è metres
from the ground (this is the internationally agreed standard
height). Hang the instruments on hooks to keep them from
touching the sides of the box.
C. U-shaped bracket
E. Metal flap
B.Scale platel
f. Slot
in flap
ANEMOMETER
This instrument is used to measure the force of
the wind. Take a piece of wood (about 30 cm. X
30 cm.) to form the base board A and fix it to the
top of a post. Take a rectangular piece of metal,
cut it out in the curved shape shown at B in the
diagram. Mark it to form a scale and attach at right
angles to the centre of the base. With three pieces
of wood make an inverted "U-shaped" bracket C
bridging the scale, having first cut a slot D in the
cross-piece of the bracket. Cut a rectangular flap E
from a piece of light metal (an empty food tin would
do) with a "U-shaped" portion cut out of one end
F. Fix a nail across the slot at the top of the
bracket and curve the end of the metal flap around
the nail so that it can swing freely. The other end
of the flap F will straddle the scale. Turn the
apparatus in the direction of the wind and the flap
will be tilted at an angle varying with the force of
the wind.
One way to calibrate the anemometer is to hold it
out of the window of a moving car (your school bus
driver may help you with this) and note the angle of
tilt of the flap at 10, 20, 30, 40, etc. kilometres per
hour.
Another way to calculate wind velocity is by using
the Beaufort scale (see page 38).
PSYCHROMETER
A. Diameter of funnel
RAIN GAUGE
A simple rain gauge to measure the amount of rainfall is very
easy to make. All you need is a straight-sided bottle and a
funnel. The funnel should have either a very sharp vertical edge
or a horizontal lip to prevent the raindrops bouncing out again.
The diameter of the mouth of the funnel (A) must be the same
as the diameter of the bottle (B). If you cannot find a bottle and
a funnel of exactly the same diameter, take a larger funnel and
cut away the top until it is the same diameter as the bottle.
With a ruler mark a scale
in millimetres up the side
of the bottle. Place the
funnel in the bottle and put
them both In a hole dug in
the earth so that the mouth
of the funnel is just a few
centimetres above ground
level. After a period of
rain, take the bottle out of
the earth and check the
water level against the
scale. If you get a reading
of, for example, 3 mm.,
then this is the rainfall for
your area. vtV-fc	 Is B. Diameter
.. iir» . CV|( -0j bottle
This is another instrument used for measuring the
humidity of the atmosphere (see hygrometer). Fix
two identical thermometers side by side on a board.
One of them (here shown at left) will record the
temperature in the normal way.
Below the thermometer at right attach a wide-
mouthed jar filled with water. Make a wick out of
a piece of cloth about 20 centimetres high. Wind
the wick round the base of this thermometer and
leave the other end soaking in the water.
If the atmosphere is very humid the two thermo¬
meters will show the same temperature. If the
atmosphere is very dry there will be a marked
difference between the two temperature readings.
In this way you will have a relative idea of how
humid the air is. Scientists use special tables
(called psychrometric tables) to obtain very precise
humidity readings.
