Photo Frederick Garfield. Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Washington DC (see caption page 3)

world fight
against drugs
uNESCO has taken the first steps in a long-term pro¬
gramme designed to combat drug abuse through education,
social science research and information. The programme,
it is hoped, will contribute to the concerted international
effort against the misuse of drugs launched by the U.N.
and its Specialized Agencies.
Unesco's approach to the problem was outlined by the
Assistant Director-general for Education, Amadou-Mahtar
M'Bow, when he addressed teachers, doctors, psychia¬
trists and social workers from 19 countries at a recent
Unesco meeting called to examine the role of education in
preventing drug abuse.
"Unesco neither looks upon drugs
as a specific problem of youth", he said
"nor does it consider that the many
serious problems facing youth in the
world today all bear a direct relation to
drug-taking as such. The use of educa¬
tional techniques as a weapon against
drugs should therefore be aimed at both young people and
adults."
The alarming increase in the misuse of drugs, he pointed
out, is often attributed to new factors linked to present-day
development in certain societies: the urban explosion,
growing acceptance of "consumer society" values, the
glorification of violence, social inequalities of all kinds,
the generation gap and the malaise affecting certain sec¬
tors of the youth population.
Unesco's inquiry showed that the problem of drug abuse
has increased ominously during the past few years. Grow¬
ing cause for concern is seen in the availability of a wide
variety of drugs and changes in the pattern of drug-taking.
.From being an escape route for certain adults, it has
spread alarmingly to young people in all levels of society;
from being the practice of a loner it has become a group
activity, from cases of addiction to a single drug, it has
become increasingly a problem of multiple addiction, with
a switch evident from minor drugs to major ones or the
use of several drugs at once.
Unesco's inquiry reveals two particularly disturbing
trends: the "epidemic" spread "of the drug habit and the
growing hold it has taken on younger persons, even
children.
Thus, surveys at the University of Maryland (U.S.A.)
showed that 15 per cent of students used marijuana in
1967, about 24 per cent in 1968 and about 36 per cent in
1969. In the U,K. in 1964, only 40 known drug addicts
were under 20 years old; in 1966, they numbered 329,
most of them heroin addicts. In France, between 1946 and
1949, a census of drug consumers included only one aged
under 20; in 1971, 90 per cent of nearly 1,900 consumers
arrested were under 25. In Costa Rica, ten years ago,
marijuana was an adult habit; now it has spread to 14 and
15 year-olds.
All the countries studied allow the production of drugs
only for medical purposes and most forbid cultivation of the
opium poppy, the coca bush and the cannabis plant. Use
and possession of drugs are also largely prohibited, but
not uniformly.
Penalties for drug offences vary. Drug
traffickers risk up to ten years'
imprisonment in Britain, France and the
Federal Republic of Germany, six years
in Denmark and Brazil, five years in
Jamaica and three years in Costa Rica.
In the U.S. a drug pedlar may be jailed
for life. Iran and Nigeria provide the death penalty for
drug producers.
Drug abusers are punished in most of the countries
covered by the Unesco inquiry, although it notes that
"infliction of penalties on drug users has not only proved
everywhere to be ineffective... it has even aggravated the
problem."
We should not overlook the fact, Unesco states in its
report, that in present-day societies, adults use and abuse
various "drugs" and especially pleasure-producing sub¬
stances or those which relieve anxieties due to the tensions
inherent in modern life. Coffee, tobacco and alcohol are
seen as daily essentials, we take amphetamines to stay
.awake and barbiturates to go to sleep, as well as various
"shock-absorbers" against the stress of daily life.
The latest report, in March 1973, of the U.S. Commis¬
sion on Marijuana and Drug Abuse termed chronic alco¬
holism "without question the most serious drug problem in
the United States today." While calling for severe punish¬
ment of drug traffickers, it urged greater emphasis on treat¬
ment rather than penalties for drug abusers and called for
a new approach to the whole problem. (See box page 20.)
As WHO reported in a pamphlet entitled "Youth and
Drugs", just published in Geneva, "The responses of society
to the non-medical use of dependence-producing drugs will
depend on how its individual members and institutions per¬
ceive the problems associated with such use. These per¬
ceptions and subsequent responses will also be much
influenced by prevailing attitudes and beliefs about (1)
why people take drugs; (2) the immediate and delayed
effects of doing so; and (3) certain aspects of the society's
broad value system."
A Working Group was recently convened by the WHO
Regional Office for Europe to explore "Measures for the
Prevention and Control of Drug Abuse and Dependence."
Referring to the educational approach to the problem, the
Working Group noted: "The risks from ill-considered health
education programmes for school-children may outweigh
the benefits if too sensational an approach glamorizes,
and increases morbid interest in the subject Programmes
should be judged by their effects and not by the intentions
of their sponsors."
This is, in effect, what Unesco set out to do in the inter¬
national inquiry it carried out on the prevention of drug
abuse by education and information.
5
