WHY
9 marriage age 16
civil majority 18
voting age 21
by Titos Patrikios
I N all countries, parents are
under a legal obligation to feed,
support and bring up their children
and also usually to meet the cost of
the children's education.
But the present trend is to extend
parental responsibilities to include
medical care, education beyond the
elementary level (as stipulated by law
in several States of the United States
of America), or even vocational training
(in Romania, the Code of the Family
stipulates that the parents shall bring
up the child and make provision for
health and physical development,
education, schooling and vocational
training).
These facts emerge from a Unesco
inquiry covering 45 countries (1) the
results of which were published re¬
cently in the Unesco booklet "Rights
and Responslbilites of Youth".
The duty of supporting the child
devolves upon the father and mother,
and also upon the grandparents.
There are some countries such as the
United States, Bulgaria and Turkey,
where this obligation exists between
brothers and sisters, while in Japan
the Family Court may, in special
circumstances, impose such duties
upon relatives of the third degree.
In countries such as Pakistan and
Liberia, the obligation devolves upon
the "family" in a broad sense.
As a general rule, these parental
responsibilities, together with the
24
TITOS PATRIKIOS, of Greece, Is a sociologist
and jurist and former director of a programme
of research in Greece on juvenile delinquency
and on economic and social development.
He has been a Unesco consultant on prob¬
lems of youth and education since 1968 and
from 1972 has been particularly concerned
with the prevention of drug abuse among
young people by educational means. He Is
the author of the Unesco study "Rights and
Responsibilities of Youth' (No. 6 in the series
Educational Studies and Documents, 1972),
prepared with the collaboration of the World
Assembly of Youth and the World Federation
of Democratic Youth. It Is on this study that
the article we publish here is based.
corollary rights of the children, cease
to exist when the young people come
of age. However, such responsi¬
bilities and rights expire in some
countries before the children come of
age and in others after.
In the United States the law of
certain States stipulates that, if a minor
of sixteen starts to work and earns
enough to keep himself, his father is
no longer obliged to support him. In
Australia too, parents are released
from their obligation to provide for
their children when the latter reach
the age of sixteen (Queensland,
Australian Capital Territory).
In Laos, on the other hand, the
parents' obligation lasts until the
children can earn their own living, but
if a child is later without a job and
cannot find one, the parents are again
obliged to provide support.
Discrimination between illegitimate and
legitimate children. In most countries
children born out of wedlock do not
have the same rights as legitimate
children despite the trend in favour
of greater equality between them.
As a rule, it is only when they have
been legitimized that children born out
of wedlock have the same rights and
obligations as the legitimate children
of the marriage. If they have merely
been recognized by the father, they
are entitled to be fed and brought up
at their father's expense, but they
cannot claim the same rights as
legitimate children, particularly in
matters of inheritance.
But in certain cases they may apply
to the putative father for maintenance
and education allowances. In Belgium
illegitimate children can exercise this
right up to the age of eighteen, in
Finland up to seventeen and in Guyana
up to sixteen.
A significant step towards the elim¬
ination of discrimination between
legitimate and illegitimate children was
taken in New Zealand with the Status
of Children Act of 1969, which provides
that "for all the purposes of the law
of New Zealand the relationship
between every person and his father
and mother shall be determined
irrespective of whether the father and
mother are or have been married to
each other."
Diminution of paternal authority. The
social functions performed by the
family, while still very important, are
undergoing radical changes as a result
of the economic, social and cultural
transformation which is taking place
in all parts of the world, especially in
the most highly developed countries.
Paternal authority, which is the basis
of a number of parental rights and
corollary responsibilities of children,
is being undermined, reduced and
weakened. However, the current
change in paternal authority (which
of course varies considerably from
country to country) can be seen in the
new parent-child relationship rather
than in new legislation.
Nevertheless, one finds a growing
number of countries now adopting
legislation recognizing, to some extent,
the weakening of paternal authority.
Responsibilities of society and rights
of children. It is now recognized in
all countries that it is the parents
alone who can ensure children and
adolescents the rights they are entitled
to within the family. This is particu¬
larly true for health matters and
physical and mental training. Although
this responsibility mainly concerns
parents, it is to an increasing extent
being assumed by society as a whole.
In the Declaration of the Rights of
the Child, unanimously adopted on
November 20, 1959 by the General
Assembly of the United Nations,
parents and all citizens, local and
national authorities were called upon
to recognize the rights set forth in
that Declaration and to seek, pro¬
gressively, to make them a reality
through legislative and other measures.
Under the principles set out in this
Declaration, "the child shall enjoy
special protection, and shall be given
CONTINUED PAGE 28
(1) The forty-five countries covered in this
study were: Algeria, Australia, Barbados,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cze¬
choslovakia, Denmark, Arab Republic of
Egypt. Finland, Ghana, Guyana, Hungary,
India, Iran, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan,
Laos, Liberia, Malta, Mauritius, Monaco, Ne¬
therlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Romania, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Sweden, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tur¬
key, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United States of America, Upper Volta, Repub¬
lic of Viet-Nam and Yugoslavia.

Today young people everywhere are claiming the right to
a bigger say in the organization and running of all aspects
of the political, educational, cultural, social and economic
life of their countries. Below, a youth demonstration in the
streets of Tokyo.
Photo Léon Herschtritt © Parimage. Paris

Early in 1973, just before the Irish general elections and at a time when the minimum
voting age in Ireland had just been lowered from 21 to 18, the students of Marion College,
Dublin, held their own mock elections complete with candidates, canvassers, political pam¬
phlets and rallies. Candidates were permitted to visit classes (left) to explain their platforms
and electioneering continued long after school hours (right). Student-officials supervised
polling (below) and candidates were elected under the proportional representation system
in force in Ireland. On one point the vote was unanimous everyone learned a great
deal about elections and throughly enjoyed themselves in the process.
By contrast, in the socialist countries,
where the minimum legal age of
marriage is the same as the age of
majority, the parent's consent is no
longer required.
In the United States, girls in most
States and boys in nine States
may marry without their parent's
consent upon reaching an age usually
eighteen lower than the age of
majority.
Emancipation by marriage. In most
countries where young people may
marry before attaining their majority,
minors achieve legal independence on
marriage. They then cease to be
subject to parental authority and enjoy
certain legal rights (Belgium and Italy)
or even the same as they would obtain
on attaining their majority (Finland,
Costa Rica, Guyana, New Zealand,
Japan, Singapore, Ghana). In the
United States, marriage does not
confer legal independence upon minors
except in four States.
Age of majority. The legal definition
of the age of majority varies little
from one country to another: it is the
age at which parental authority ceases
to be operative, and young people are
recognized as capable of carrying out
all acts of civil life on their own. In
most countries, this age is twenty-one.
As pointed out earlier, young people
in most highly developed countries
have already in many instances broken
away from parental authority practi¬
cally if not legally long before they
come of age.
On the other hand, in certain
countries where old traditions remain
in force, where the patriarchal family
pattern dominates and the father's
authority is still very strong, young
people often find that in practice their
legal incapacity extends well beyond
the age at which they attain their
majority in law.
Analysis of the legislation of the
countries studied, shows, however,
that although the age of majority is
still twenty-one in most of these
countries, there is an increasingly
pronounced trend towards a lowering
of this age. In a large number of
countries, and particularly in the
Socialist countries, it is already
eighteen, while in others, such as the
Scandinavian countries, it is twenty
(see table page 26).
We have a typical example of the
trend towards a lower age of majority
and the curtailment of parental auth¬
ority, which is evident in the de¬
veloping countries, in the reply to the
Unesco questionnaire supplied by the
Ministry of Education of Sierra Leone
(March 4, 1970):
"Up to about 20 years ago, young
people had very little say in the choice
of education, profession and disposal
of their leisure. The dictates of their
parents were regarded as final. Any
objection to these was regarded by
society as deviating from the norm.
The age of maturity then was much
higher than today (say between 25 and
30 years).
"But with the infiltration of western
custom and the increase and availab¬
ility of visual aids in the form of
cinemas, books, etc., young people
became mature much earlier and
assumed responsibility for their way
of living, around the age of 21. This
too, had taken a different trend in
society which had accepted this
change. Parents are aware of it and
this is gradually being reflected in
the relationship with young people."
Right to vote. In most of the
countries studied in the Unesco survey
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

WHY ? (Continued)
The three-pronged advance
towards an extension of the rights of youth
the age of political majority is still
twenty-one (Belgium, Italy, Malta,
Monaco, Turkey, Colombia, Jamaica,
Trinidad and Tobago, India, the Ivory
Coast, Mauritius, Liberia, Nigeria and
Sierra Leone, etc.). It is higher in
Italy for Senate elections, for which
the right to vote is not granted until
twenty-five. On the other hand, in
Belgium, the right to vote in local
elections is granted at eighteen.
In view of the earlier maturity
of young people today and their
increasing involvement in all fields of
social activity, this age limit seems
rather high and is one of the obstacles
to active participation by young people
in political, or at least parliamentary
affairs, and to their standing for
parliament. It is highly significant that
the age at which young persons are
considered responsible for their
criminal acts, liable for military ser¬
vice, or old enough to start work is
usually lower than the legal voting age.
The lowering, of the age of political
majority to eighteen is in fact a
common objective of many youth
movements and youth organizations
which have been campaigning in this
direction in several parts of the world
for some time.
Legislative reforms recently intro¬
duced to this effect in several
countries have gone some way towards
meeting these demands. Thus, the
voting age was lowered to twenty in
Norway in 1967, New Zealand in 1969,
and in Denmark in 1971; to nineteen
in Sweden in 1969; and to eighteen
in the United States in 1971. The right
to vote at eighteen has been
recognized in an amendment to the
United States Constitution which
applies to all elections, federal, state
or local. The age of political majority
in the United Kingdom has been
dropped to eighteen since 1970.
It is worth noting that surveys
conducted in certain countries of
western Europe, such as Belgium and
Norway, which are included in the
present study, indicate that in the
eighteen-to-twenty age group those
expressing themselves in favour of
lowering the age of political majority
to eighteen are still in the minority.
Some political youth organizations
would seem not to attach importance
to lowering this age limit, since they
look on it as little more than a formal
gesture which would not, in the
absence of other measures, enable
young people to play a larger or more
effective part in political life.
In the Socialist countries, the age
of political majority has in recent years
been lowered to eighteen.
Criminal law. In most countries
youngsters who break the law are
tried by special juvenile courts or, as
in the case of the Scandinavian
countries and Romania, by other
bodies which are even less formal and
in which there is a greater degree of
public participation.
Juvenile courts and other competent
bodies follow a procedure that is
relatively free of judicial formalities
and as a general rule they apply
protective, preventive and re-edu¬
cational measures, according to the
30
IN MORE THAN 40 COUNTRIES
EDUCATION STILL NOT COMPULSORY
In 42 countries and territories (1), most of them in Africa. Asia
and Oceania, education is not yet compulsory in law. Almost
all of them are developing countries without the resources to
provide schooling for all their school-age children. In many
other countries too, where education is legally compulsory,
lack of money and a sufficient number of teachers means that
the law is far from being fully applied. It is in these countries
that the minimum school-leaving age is the lowest. In the
developed countries, however, the general trend is towards
an extension of the period of compulsory education.
(1) According to information supplied by the various countries for the compila¬
tion of the 1972 Unesco Statistical Yearbook, these countries are: The Afars and
Issas (French territory of), Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei, Burma, Burundi,
Cameroon. Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gambia, Hong Kong. Indonesia. Ivory Coast.
Kenya. Lebanon. Lesotho. Malawi, Malaysia (West), Maldive Islands, Mauritius.
Netherlands Antilles, Nigeria. New Guinea. New Hebrides, Pakistan, Papua.
Quatar, Samoa (Western), Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore.
Solomon Islands (British), Somalia. Sudan, Swaziland. Tanzania, Uganda. United
Arab Emirates. Yemen, Zambia.
age of the minor, his or her character
and the seriousness of the offence
committed.
Above a certain age, prison sen¬
tences, usually light ones, or other
forms of restriction of liberty can be
imposed on minors who have com¬
mitted serious offences. This age, the
severity of the sentences permitted
and the re-educational measures
applied vary from country to country.
In most countries, minors below the
age of eighteen are not liable to capital
punishment. In Japan this age limit
is twenty, in Nigeria it is seventeen
and in Singapore sixteen.
In most countries the special treat¬
ment reserved for young offenders
continues up to the age of eighteen.
From this age onwards the young are
considered, from the penal point of
view, as adults and are subject to
normal jurisdiction, receiving the same
treatment as adults.
A comparison of these age limits
with those given in the table on
page 26 brings out clearly that in many
countries a gap still exists between
the age at which civil and political
rights are acquired (21) and the age
at which young people are considered
to be adults for the purposes of
criminal law (18) and are therefore
subject to the same penalties as adults.
Conclusion. The Unesco study dem¬
onstrates clearly that there is an
increasingly strong movement in the
world today towards the recognition,
extension and consolidation of the
rights of the young.
Within this general movement, there
are, roughly, speaking, three trends.
The first trend shows changes in two
directions: on the one hand a lowering
of the age at which young people are
considered adult in respect of civil
responsibility, and on the other hand
a raising of the age limit up to which
young people continue to benefit from
certain rights and protective measures.
The most typical example of the first
case is the lowering of the age of
majority and of the right to vote which
some countries admittedly only a few
so far have Introduced.
As to the second case, we may
point to the raising of the age levels
up to which young people receive
special social benefits or are granted
special treatment in penal matters, the
longer duration of studies and the
granting of material aid up to an
increasingly high age level, the raising
of the minimum age of employment,
and of the age limits up to which
young workers enjoy special protec¬
tion in regard to working conditions.
The second trend is the trend
towards recognition of certain rights

MILITARY
AND
CONSCIENTIOUS
OBJECTION
Military service is generally considered by the
State as an honourable duty required of all
citizens. Some countries in which military
service is compulsory recognize conscientious
objection, but this is true of very few of the
45 countries (see note page 24) studied in the
Unesco inquiry on the "Rights and Responsi¬
bilities of Youth". In Denmark, Finland, Norway
and Sweden, young men opposed to the principle
of military service on serious moral or philo¬
sophical grounds may, subject to various condi¬
tions, do some form of civilian service instead.
In the United States, conscientious objection is
recognized solely on grounds of religious belief.
Conscientious objectors are assigned to civilian
work or enrolled in non-combatant branches
of the armed forces. In Australia and New
Zealand, conscientious objectors may be exemp¬
ted from military service or assigned to non-
combatant duties. In other countries, such as
Belgium, France and Italy, young people who
have not claimed the status of conscientious
objector may be allowed to do civilian service
on technical co-operation projects in developing
countries. Right, a young Swede reads "A
manual for those opposed to military service".
which affect young people in parti¬
cular, without being directly dependent
on age.
Examples include the measures
adopted in some countries for the
democratization of higher education,
attempts, still limited, to obtain par¬
ticipation by pupils and students in
the running of educational establish¬
ments; recognition, in some cases, of
time spent by young workers in
vocational training as normal working
time; and the recognition in a few
countries of the right of conscientious
objection.
The third trend is the considerable
effort being made by all countries to
set up, strengthen or reform the many
institutions and services which are
helping to enforce the rights of the
young as laid down in existing legis¬
lation.
This movement is not, of course,
uniform in all countries and throughout
the world, but if we study the results
produced so far by this movement, we
have to recognize that most of what
are called "the rights of youth" consist
in most cases of measures of pro¬
tection, welfare and training which, in
aim to integratethe final analysis,
youth into society.
Seen in this light, the responsi¬
bilities of young people, instead of
meaning an opportunity for the young
to take the initiative in actions which
concern them directly and which
ultimately concern society as a whole,
seem more like obligations imposed
on them by adult society, more like
an obligation to receive education
devised essentially by adults or not
to receive it at all if they belong to
under-privileged groups; the obli¬
gation to go to work, often at a very
early age (see article page 6) and
under harsh conditions or, conversely,
to be the first to be fired; the obli¬
gation, finally, to respect a world
order established independently of
them and from which they feel
themselves increasingly alienated.
Without seeking to minimize the
considerable progress accomplished
in many countries in promoting the
rights of young people, it nevertheless
cannot be denied that this progress
has not resulted in any world-wide
change in the social and legal status
of youth.
The many attempts made to improve
youth participation in schools and
other institutions raised great hopes.
But we must recognize that to the
extent that participation remains lim¬
ited and fails to give youth the
possibility of taking part in fundamental
decisions, or is incomplete, in that it
does not allow young people to
develop their activities in all social
fields, it is increasingly rejected by
youth in many countries.
The need to promote the rights and
responsibilities of young people is now
generally recognized and the efforts
made in this direction are producing
more and more positive results, but
young people are still unable to assert
their rights in an independent and
comprehensive manner, or to assume
real responsibility.
It is clear today that a real possi¬
bility of achieving this transformation
in the status of youth does exist; and
it is towards this goal that efforts are
being made by the most progressive
elements among youth and by those
adults who have realized that this
transformation will have an emanci¬
pating effect on the whole of society.
31

SCienCe, SOCiety & raCISm (Continued from page 12)
32
do not really exist. As for ethnic
groups (tribes, peoples, nations), it
should be pointed out that by their
nature they differ from races above
all in that they are historically evolving
forms of the human community.
Mankind as we know it today con¬
sists of some 2,000 different nations,
peoples and tribes a reflection of the
different development stages of the
different parts of mankind, some of
which stayed longer at the stage of
comparatively small tribes while others
advanced further and formed the big
nations of today.
The way nations were formed in¬
volved the unification of different lands
inhabited by kindred tribes and peoples
and the formation of a common na¬
tional territory. It Involved the emer¬
gence of an economic community
founded, above all, on the formation
of a single national market, the emer¬
gence of a national language and
some common features of mental
make-up expressed in specific forms
of culture and so on.
All these ingredients of a nation
evolved historically, though not quite
simultaneously. They were first fused
into a single alloy in a definite epoch
of history, that of the decay of feu¬
dalism and the emergence of capi¬
talism. Thus, both historically and
from the point of view of their social
content, the development of tribes,
peoples and nations is a process
entirely different from that of the
formation of races.
'OME scientists consider
culture to be the basic attribute of race.
This is based on the notion that
evolution, continuity and stability of a
culture are rooted in the genetic
heredity of a race. Notions of this
kind, however, are entirely fallacious.
True, the inheriting of a culture, the
preservation of its specific charaeter,
of cultural traditions, are of great
importance for the development of
peoples, for awakening their sense of
dignity. But the mechanism of conti¬
nuity in history is quite different from
that of genetic heredity.
In the organic world the accumulation
and transmission of information from
one generation to another take place
mainly through the mechanism of
heredity, which underlies the innate
instincts, and, among higher animals,
also by transmitting the acquired
habits from parents to their offspring.
In social life, a fact of tremendous
importance is that each generation
inherits the means of production
created by the previous generations.
This also applies to social experience
which is embodied in language,
thought, culture and tradition.
Whereas biological transmission of
characteristics is confined to the stock
of information accumulated in the
genetic code, the inheriting of social
experience has no limits. Culture,
understood in its most general sense,
is an embodiment of this experience,
the totality of material and spiritual
values created in the course of human
history.
Since culture and the way it is
inherited are not connected with the
mechanism of genetic heredity, it is
evident that neither have they any
organic connexion with race, specific
features of the latter being transmitted
in a genetic way. Culture, with its
uniqueness, is not connected with race,
but with ethnic communities of
different kinds: tribes, peoples, nations.
Races, however they may be defined
(Mongoloid, Negroid, or Caucasoid,
etc.) have no common culture shared
by all the peoples that may be classi¬
fied as belonging to the same race.
Negroes in the United States, for
instance, have a certain stock of
cultural traditions and particular fea¬
tures inherited from African Negroes,
but their culture is to a much greater
extent connected with the conditions
of their present life.
Peoples of Europe that may be
referred to as belonging to the
Caucasoid race possess different
national cultures. The community of
cultures that exists among West
European peoples stems from its
social content, not from a racial
community of white peoples.
Cultural development is sometimes
associated with psychological qualities
of one kind or another, with intelli¬
gence, for example, which, in the
opinion of ideologists of racism, is
dependent on race. Some writers on
this subject, while formally acknow¬
ledging equality among races, attempt
to connect certain features of national
psychology, or even psycho-patho¬
logical complexes, with race. As a
result, whether intentionally or not,
they attribute mental inferiority to
certain peoples, thus subscribing in
fact to racist conclusions.
Repeated attempts to establish links
between race and intelligence exper¬
imentally by means of tests have failed
to provide convincing evidence of
connexions between the two.
The method of testing has itself
proved to be open to doubt. It is
impossible to evaluate test scores
without taking account of factors which
do not depend on race, such as the
social environment of those tested,
their income, educational level and
experience, degree of proficiency in
the language of the test papers,
cultural traditions and customs and
so on.
Comparison of scores made by
people who are in more or less similar
social conditions refutes the myth of
innate superiority or inferiority of one
race or another, as Otto Klineberg,
a leading world authority on race
relations, pointed out in "Race and
I.Q." (Unesco Courier, November 1971).
However, the decisive refutation of
racism is to be found not in psycho¬
logical tests but in the historical
experience of peoples that have rid
themselves of racial or national
oppression. Accelerated development
by these peoples, their ability to
overtake, in their cultural development,
more advanced peoples, the rapid
growth of educational standards and
of the number of specialists, all
provide a convincing rebuttal of the
reactionary conjectures of racists.
II N the struggle for liberation
the oppressed races and nations of
the Third World defend their rights
and dignity. Their national awakening
not infrequently manifests itself in
ideas of nationalism which are put
forward in opposition to the nationalism
of the dominant races or nations.
Nationalism of this kind is of some
significance for progressive develop¬
ment. It contributes to the unification
of the various democratic forces which
are able to wage the struggle for
national liberation.
Among the fighters against racial
and national oppression there are
those who put forward racism of the
oppressed as a counterbalance to the
racism of the oppressors. But the
outstanding Negro leader, Martin
Luther King, stressed that the way to
equality is not through separatism but
through integration which would
exclude judging the merits of people
by the colour of their skin.
A radical solution for racial and
national problems can be achieved not
by opposing peoples one against
another or dividing them, but by
uniting their progressive forces. This
view is shared by Shery Taki, a
delegate from Tanzania to an inter¬
national scientific conference on
racism, held in Moscow in December
1971, who rejected the idea that
"white" supremacy must be opposed
by "black" supremacy.
Comparing the status of the black
population in Cuba where it is a
minority with its status in Haiti where
it is the majority, he emphasized that
it was a mistake for coloured people
to aim at creating states with exclus¬
ively coloured governments, unless
social conditions are taken into
account in setting this aim.
"No doubt", he said, "we see the
tremendous difference between the
violence of the oppressors and the
violence of those who defend them¬
selves. The problem, however, cannot
be solved in this way. A search for
a solution to the race problem that fails
to take account of social conditions
is a road without end..."
Grlgory Glezerman
