by
Grigory Glezerman
Science
Society
and
The unequal development of people
of different races is a product
of history not of nature
12
lACE and racial oppression
belong to entirely different categories:
the origin of race is in nature; that
of racial oppression is social. Ideo¬
logists of racism tend in one way or
another to deny this distinction and
elevate racial inequality to the rank of
natural law. Anthropology, historical
sciences and sociology refute anti-
scientific notions of this kind.
Natural distinctions among people
do not in themselves give rise to
social distinctions and it is only in
certain social conditions that they may
be connected with social inequality.
Neither colour of skin nor structure
of hair nor any other characteristics
of race can ' possibly account for
unequal levels of social, economic or
cultural development of people be¬
longing to different races. This
inequality is a product of history, not
of nature.
In this connexion it is important
to define correctly the relationship
between biological and social factors.
One cannot deny the influence of bio¬
logical factors on social life. No
doubt, there are biological relations
between human beings united in a
society (like those connected with
the reproduction of mankind, for
example), but it is not these relations
that determine the structure of society
and its forms. Man's relationship
with nature is different from that of an
animal. Man produces the means of
his existence, and this fact alone
makes it inadmissible to extend the
application of laws valid for animal
life to human society.
An outstanding Russian scientist,
GRIGORY GLEZERMAN, Professor at the
Institute of Philosophy of the Soviet Academy
of Sciences, is a leading Soviet philosopher
and sociologist and has several times been
awarded the U.S.S.R. State Prize for his
work in these fields. Professor Glezerman
was a member of the committee of experts
which met at Unesco headquarters in Paris
in 1972 to study problems of racism. The
article published here is based largely on
the paper he presented at this meeting. He
is the author of a number of books including
"Historical Materialism and the Development
of Socialist Society' which has been publish¬
ed in English, French and German editions.
Kliment A. Timiriazev, who was a
follower of Darwin, once aptly ob¬
served: "the doctrine of struggle for
existence stops short at the threshold
of the history of culture. All reason¬
able, cultural activity of man is nothing
but struggle against the struggle for
existence."
Society develops in accordance
with its own social laws and therefore
the influence of biological factors is
always refracted through the prism of
social relations. Moreover, biological
relations themselves change under the
impact of and depending on social
relations.
Anthropologists have convincingly
demonstrated that race distinctions
concern only minor characteristics and
do not allow any sharply marked bor¬
derlines to be drawn between the
different groups of mankind. Some
scientists estimate that only one per
cent of the total number of genes are
responsible for transmitting charac¬
teristics that distinguish one race from
another. And those genes are res¬
ponsible only for such superficial
features as colour of skin and the like.
There was a time when these
features did play a part in man's
adaptation to natural conditions but
never did they determine the course
of history. Moreover, even their rôle
in the process of adaptation to
geographical environment gradually
lost its significance, as man changed
nature by his activity and at the same
time changed his own way of life (in
terms of urbanization, for example).
Furthermore, in the course of
history changing social conditions
have been exerting an ever increasing
influence on the biological aspect of
the development of races. The sizes
of race populations, their migration,
the process of mixing and so on
depend mainly on the conditions of
social life. This manifests itself,
among other things, in the fact that
there are no "pure" races now.
In spite of the obstacles created by
racial segregation in a number of
countries the process of mixing goes
on steadily. A leading Soviet authority
on genetics, Nicolai P. Dubinin, estim¬
ates that "on the whole, one may
assume that now about half of the
world population are the product of
race mixing... The year 1492, when
Colombus discovered America, was
the starting point of the present round
of the ever expanding genetic process
of pooling human heredity within a
single gigantic population."
HIISTORY has shown the fu¬
tility of attempts to regard the destinies
of peoples, their potential abilities and
patterns of behaviours as dependent
on racial peculiarities. First of all, it
should be noted that the main biolo¬
gical features of man which were the
prerequisites for the emergence and
development of his social life the
upright position of the body that freed
his hands in the process of moving
about, thus enabling him to work, the
structure of his skeleton, the develop¬
ment of the brain, etc. are common
to all human races. Therefore they
unite, rather than divide mankind.
The different destinies of peoples
in history are accounted for not by
their biological features but by ma¬
terial conditions of life, by their
historical circumstances. Many scien¬
tists, including the British archaeo¬
logist Gordon Child (in "Progress and
Archaeology") feel that the social
development of peoples is not iden¬
tical with their biological development.
Since man of the present type
appeared it has proceeded without
significant changes having taken place
in the structure of his body, and the
rate of this development is not
determined by biological factors.
The difficulties involved in defining
the notion of race have prompted
some scientists to propose that this
notion should be given up altogether,
and replaced by that of ethnic groups.
The absence of sharp borderlines,
however, does not mean that races
CONTINUED PAGE 32

13

HUMAN RIGHTS
AND THE
POSTAGE STAMP
On these two pages we present a selection of the
many postage stamps on human rights themes issued
over the years in all parts of the world.
"A little bit of paper... covered at the back with
a glutinous wash which might, by applying a little
moisture, attach to the back of the letter" was
how English civil servant Rowland Hill described
his scheme for a form of postage prepayment
which was to lead to the issue on May 1,
1840, of the world's first adhesive postage stamp,
the famous "penny black".
Since then the right to issue these "little bits
of paper" has been considered one of the symbols
of sovereignty and has remained a jealously guard¬
ed prerogative of government.
So it was a historic occasion when, on October
24, 1951, the United Nations Postal Administration
(U.N.P.A.), established with the approval of the
Universal Postal Union, became the first non-
national body officially authorized to issue its own
postage stamps.
These stamps, whose face value was expressed
in U.S. dollars, were placed on sale at the United
Nations Post Office at U.N. headquarters in New
York. On October 4, 1969, a second United Na¬
tions Post Office came into operation at the Palais
des Nations in Geneva at which United Nations
stamps in Swiss denominations were put on sale.
Despite the fact that since the creation of the
U.N. P.A. 103 million covers have been franked
with United Nations stamps, it is no part of the
U.N.P.A.'s purpose to set up as a rival to existing
national postal authorities. Its aim is to make the
ideals and activities of the United Nations and its
Agencies more widely known throughout the world.
For this the carefully selected designs that figure
on U.N. stamps are a perfect vehicle, using as
they do an easily understood international symbol¬
ism that transcends language barriers.
Among the many themes that have been illus¬
trated on United Nations stamps are: Human
Rights, the Fight against Racial Discrimination,
the World Refugee problem and, to mark the 25th
anniversary of the United Nations, Peace, Progress
and Justice.
Unesco, which was itself the subject of a 1955
U.N. stamp issue, does not issue its own stamps.
However, it runs a philatelic service which sells
U.N. stamps and encourages its Member States
to issue their own stamps to illustrate human
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
33
