"Wild duck arriving fat and prime,
long and cold will be springtime" (U.S.S.R.).
Woodcut taken from "De Gentibus
Septentnonalibus". by the Swedish «riter
Olaus Magnus, Rome, 1555
(see also engraving page 6)
Photo © French National Library, Pans

Every
proverb
has a silver lining
BIRDS AND INSECTS
When in spring storks northwards wing, two days later
rain will spatter (Arab countries, Germany, Italy)
If ducks shake and flutter their wings when they rise,
rain can be expected (Iran, U.K.)
A fowl spreading its wings is a presage of heavy rain
(India)
The lark soaring high heralds a blue sky (Japan, U.K.)
Wild geese moving south: cold weather ahead; moving
north: winter is nearly over (U.S.A.)
When thé cuckoo calls throughout the day, a cold year
is on the way (U.S.A.)
Hen on one leg, head under wing, wet weather will
surely bring (Iran)
When the curlew cries, expect wet skies (Ireland)
When crows take a bath, rain is in our path (Spanish-
speaking countries)
When the cocks crow and then drink, rain and thunder
are on the brink (Spanish-speaking countries)
Swallows fly high: clear blue sky; swallows fly low: rain
we shall know (China, France, Japan, Korea, Switzerland,
Turkey, U.S.S.R., etc.)
Shrill calling cranes flying high and slow, a pleasant
autumn we shall know (U.S.S.R.)
"Thunder before
the beginning
of spring
49 days of
bad weather
will bring" (China).
Inscription on
a stele of the
Han period
[206 BC to 220 AD)
Sea-gull, sea-gull sit on the sand, It's never good
weather while you're on land (U.K.)
When the barnyard goose walks south to north, rain
will surely soon break forth (Iran)
Ants that move their eggs and climb, rain is coming
anytime (India, Japan)
When gnats swarm in January, the peasant will have an
empty granary (Netherlands)
Mosquitoes in late fall, a mild winter for all (U.S.S.R.)
Ant-hills on dry river beds mark a full year of drought
(Brazil)
Spiders and mosquitoes in the month of May announce
a dry June is on the way (India)
Spiders webs at dawn, expect a fine morn (Japan, Uru¬
guay)
If bees stay in the hive, rain will soon thrive (Germany)
When spiders drop quickly down their webs, it is a sign
of rain (Spanish-speaking countries)
When bees close their hives, a cold winter arrives; if
they don't shut the door, a mild winter in store (U.S.S.R.)
Swarms of mosquitoes, a sign of rain (China)
MAMMALS, FISH, REPTILES, ETC.
Fish leap before a storm (France, Germany)
When pike lie on the bed of a stream quietly, expect rain
or wind (U.S.A.)
When grass-snakes hiss, the weather will be rainy
(France, Spanish-speaking countries)
When a frog croaks in the meadow, it will rain three
hours later (India)
When frogs spawn in the middle of the water, it is a
sign of drought; and when at the edge, it foretells a wet
summer (UK.)
When frogs croak much, it is a sign of rain (Iran, Japan,
Korea, Philippines, Iran)
When the leech comes out of the water to hide under
grass or stones, a storm is at hand (Germany)
When fish gather in the middle of a lake, soon the earth
will tremble and quake (Japan)
When the fisherman takes a very mixed catch, an earth¬
quake or a tsunami is heading down the hatch (Japan)
When asses their ears do toss and sway, rain before
, the end of day (France and Spanish-speaking countries)
When goats begin to sneeze and snort, soon comes
weather of another sort (Spanish-speaking countries)
When horses rub their backs on the ground, rain is sure
to come around (Norway, Switzerland) CI
When cows lick the walls, fine weather befalls (Norway) W '
As a dry cow bellows most, so a rainless cloud thunders
most (India)
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

EVERY PROVERB HAS A SILVER LINING (Continued)
When cats scratch the table legs, a change is coming
(UK.)
When cats wash themselves, rain will come (Belgium,
Netherlands)
When cats stand and lick their paws, it will soon be
sunny out of doors (Iran)
If a cat looks out of the window it is looking for ,rain
(U.S.A.)
When an elephant calves in the forest, it means rain
and sun (Cameroon)
When squirrels lay in a large store of nuts, expect a
cold winter (Finland, Greece, Norway, Sweden, U.S.A., etc.)
"The mouse dug a hole in the river bank before the
flood" (meaning seek shelter before disaster strikes) (An¬
gola)
When sheep constantly shake their ears, rain is coming
(Iran)
When donkeys walk crabwise, rain is on the way (Brazil)
Sheep butt and stamp before a storm (France, Iran)
When the hare's coat is thick the winter will be hard
(Germany)
When the jackal howls near the village, the wise man
prepares for rain (Iran)
THE DAYS AND SEASONS
If it rains at Pubba (Aug 30 - Sept 11), it will rain inces¬
santly; slight wind at Hasta (Sept 22 - Oct 8), no rain until
Chitta (Oct 9 - Oct 22); if it does not rain at Chitta, even
the ants will find the drought a torment (India)
A heavy November snow will last till April (U.S.A.,
France)
Snowy winter, rainy summer; icy winter, hot summer
(U.S.S.R.)
An icy May fills the granaries (U.S.S.R.)
The dews of April and May make August and September
gay (France)
A leaky May and a dry June brings in the harvest very
soon (UK.)
March winds and April showers bring forth May flowers
(U.K. and Spanish-speaking countries)
Spring without rain, abundant grain; a dry fall, no grain
at all (China)
White Christmas, green Easter; green Christmas, white
Easter (Belgium)
When the leaves of wheat are narrow and short there
will be much snow (Japan)
The evening red and the morning grey are the tokens
of a bonnie day (France, Italy, U.K.)
A yellow glare as the sun doth set foretells a night
both windy and wet (U.K.)
A good day can be told from its dawn (Syria)
A red sky in the morning means rain in the evening;
a red sky in the evening means fine weather (China, Finland)
Long icicles foretell a long spring (U.S.S.R.)
"When a black cow scrat¬
ches her flanks she fore¬
tells bad weather." (Nor¬
way.)
Mushrooms galore, much snow in store; no mushrooms
at all, no snow will fall (Germany, U.S.S.R.)
If your spittle floats on the surface of a pond, it will
be fine; if it sinks, rain will come (Japan)
When chilblains hurt, it will be windy (Japan)
Snow is the peasant's wealth (Norway, U.S.S.R.)
Frost year, wheat year (France, Italy, U.S.S.R.)
A year of snow a year of plenty (France, Byelorussia,
Germany, Italy, Ukraine, Spanish-speaking countries)
If the mountains seem near, rain you must fear (Austria,
France, Japan, Switzerland, etc.)
Morning rain does not delay the pilgrim (France)
SKY
When the sun is at home (encircled with a halo), it will
soon rain (Zuñi Indians of New Mexico, U.S.A.)
Large halo round the moon: heavy rain very soon; small
halo means, they say: it will not rain for many a day (India)
If the Pleiades stars rise fine they set rainy, and if they
rise wet they set fine (Kenya, Tanzania)
Sky clear just overhead, bad weather lies ahead (China)
A rainbow at night is a sailor's delight, a rainbow in
the morning is a sailor's warning (U.S.A.)
When no clouds mask the Milky Way, it will be fine
for a week and a day (Japan)
When the sun sets with a bright red blush upon the
clouds, the morrow will bring a fierce heat; when it sets
amid darkening clouds, the next day will surely be rainy
(China)
A rainbow in the eastern sky, the morrow will be fine
and dry; a rainbow in the west that gleams, rain tomorrow
falls in streams (China)
If the first thunder is from the east, the winter is over
(Zuñi Indians, New Mexico, U.S.A.)
Autumn thunder means a mild winter (Norway)
Fog leaves the weather as it found it (France, Italy)
Mountains covered in mist mean fine weather (Japan)
Thunder before the beginning of spring 49 days of bad
weather will bring (China)
A summer fog is for fair weather (U.S.A.)
Lightning under the north star will bring rain in three
days (UK.)
Cloudy mornings turn to clear evenings (U.K.)
Three foggy or misty mornings indicate rain (U.S.A.)
