A lute maker in Soviet Central Asia gives the final once-over to his latest product.



ON THE DELIGHTS
AND PLEASURES
OF MUSIC
Reflections, of a 10th century
Islamic philosopher
1,1 00 years ago. one of Islam's greatest philosophers. Mohammed Abu
Nasr al-Farabi, was born in ancient Transoxiana (today the Soviet
Turkmen Republic in central Asia). Writer, mathematician and astrono¬
mer, al-Farabi died in Damascus (Syria) in 850, having profoundly
influenced the cultural, artistic and scientific development of the Islamic
world. Al-Farabi, considered by many persons almost on a level with
the great Avicenna, was also a famed musical theoretician. We are
pleased to present, translated into English for the first time, a passage
from his celebrated "Treatise on Music".
by
Mohammed
Abu Nasr al-Farabi
HERE are three different
kinds of music. The first merely gives
pleasure, the second expresses and
gives rise to emotions, and the third
stimulates our imagination. Natural
melody (music) is that which as a rule
brings about in men one of these three
effects, whether it invariably affects all
men, or almost always most of them
in this way. The most natural music
is that with the greatest universality
of effect.
Music which brings us sensations of
pleasure is best suited to moments of
repose ; it provides restful entertain¬
ment. Music which provokes emotion
is played when we wish to cause
someone to act under the influence of
a particular passion or desire to instil
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

32
DELIGHTS AND PLEASURES
OF MUSIC (Continued)
in him a frame of mind dominated by
a specific emotion. Music which stimu¬
lates the imagination serves to en¬
hance poetry and certain other forms
of oratory, where the effect of the
words is accentuated by a musical
accompaniment.
The first type of music, that which
produces a pleasant effect, can also
give rise to emotions, and as in the
case of the music intended to produce
emotion, it can also stimulate the ima¬
gination. We have shown in other
treatises the manner in which emo¬
tions sharpen the attention and whet
the imagination. And when the words
of a poem are accompanied by pleas¬
ant music, they have a greater hold
over the listener's attention.
The music which most nearly attains
perfection is that which possesses at
one and the same time the three qual¬
ities of which we have just spoken.
Its effect upon us is similar to that of
poetry, although less complete, for it
fulfils only partially the function of
poetry.
When adapted to a poem, the music
will have a more powerful effect and
the words will in their turn have greater
force of expression. The most per¬
fect, excellent and effective music is
therefore that which possesses each
of the qualities we have named. Al¬
though instrumental music can have a
number of them, only the music of the
human voice possesses all these
qualities.
Talent in musical execution is hence
of two orders : one relates to the exe¬
cution of the perfect melodies produced
by the human voice, and the other to
the playing of musical instruments.
The latter order is subdivided accord¬
ing to the nature of the instrument in
question, whether it is a lute, a lyre
or another resonant instrument of the
same kind.
Sung music can also be divided into
different categories according to the
type of poetry to which the melodies
are applied and depending upon the
result desired. Different types of
talent are required for singing a ballad,
a lamentation or an elegy, just as for
the intoned delivery of a poem or any
other form of vocal art. The hida, or
camel-drivers' song, demands another
kind of skill.
Instrumental music provides res¬
ponses to song inasmuch as it is
capable of imitating the human voice.
It is used to accompany the voice, to
enrich it, or to serve as a prelude or
an interlude. The interlude allows the
singer to rest ; it also completes the
music by expressing whatever is
beyond vocal possibilities.
There exists another type of instru¬
mental music, whose conception is
such that it is difficult to make it imi¬
tate perfect (vocal) music, and it can
be of no assistance to the latter.
This kind of music can be compared
to a decorative design whose lines
do not represent any form of reality
but are simply pleasing to the eye.
Photo © Boudot-Lamotte, from 'Musique Antique-Musique d'Orierf
by Romain Goldron, Editions Rencontre, Lausanne, 1365
Examples of music of this kind are the
tarayiq and rawashin of Khurasan and
Persia, whose sound no human voice
can reproduce.
As we have pointed out, this type of
music lacks certain elements of per¬
fection, and in listening to it one seeks
those which are missing. In the end
it becomes wearisome and irritating
to the ear, whose demand remains
unsatisfied. Music of this style should
only be used to educate the ear, or
for the purpose of practising the art
of playing musical instruments : it can
also serve as a prelude or interlude
to a sung melody.
It is by virtue of natural, innate apti¬
tudes instinctive to man that he is
capable of composing and creating
music. Among these aptitudes let us
mention man's bent for poetry, the
instinct which drives him to produce
certain sounds when he feels joyful
and other sounds when in pain or
sorrow.
We must also mention the instinct
which causes him to seek rest after
hard work, and to find a way of divert¬
ing his thoughts from the fatigue of
his labours. For music possesses the
gift of absorbing our attention and
dispelling the weariness caused by
work. It casts from our mind all notion
of the time spent at a task, and helps
us to endure and withstand the fati¬
gue it produces.
Indeed, the notion of time calls to
mind the fatigue engendered by move¬
ment for is not time an essential
element of movement, just as, in fact,
movement is an element of time ?
Since fatigue is caused by movement
and time is inextricably linked to move¬
ment, loss of the notion of time also
means loss of the notion of fatigue.
It is also claimed that singing has
an influence upon animals ; this is
borne out by the hida, the song of
the Arabian camel-drivers, which
affects the behaviour of their beasts.
So much for musical inspiration.
Let us now consider the way in which
the various branches of instrumental
and vocal music came into being.
Music has grown into a science, thanks
to those innate aptitudes and instincts
we have mentioned.
People have sung to achieve pleas¬
ant sensations or relaxation, to forget
their weariness and to lose all notion
of time. Others have sought to height¬
en or to dispel an emotion or a state
of mind, to alter or intensify it, to
forget or find appeasement for it.
Others yet have used singing to give
greater force of expression to their
poetry and to stimulate still further
the imagination of the listener.
For all of these reasons men in
early times began to take pleasure in
humming, singing and the vocal arts,
and gradually throughout the ages,

from one generation to the next, from
one people to another, musical works
increased in abundance.
Especially gifted men acquired a
talent for composing music of all the
three types we have described. Each
one sought to surpass his predeces¬
sors and their determined perseve¬
rance in their work led them to great
fame. Among their followers were
those who, unable to compose original
music, produced imitations of the works
of their precursors while perfecting
certain technical aspects ; others
possessed a talent for composition,
drawing inspiration from the works of
their predecessors and contributing to
the enrichment of the art of music.
In this way musicians followed on
from each other, and their art was
handed from people to people from
one .generation to the next throughout
the ages. In the process, the distinc¬
tions between the three types of music
eventually became blurred until they
finally blended and merged into each
other.
It was recognized that if the aim
was, for example, to stimulate or soothe
a given emotion, the most satisfactory
means of doing so was to use music
that would achieve the desired effect,
adding some notes to produce a
pleasant sensation and others to excite
the imagination, while at the same
time associating them with words in
short, by using vocal music.
In the same way, when the intention
was to excite the imagination and give
greater impact to a poem, it was seen
that the most effective way was to
use not only the corresponding music,
but also music whose special quality
is its power to calm or provoke a
given emotion in the listener as well
as music pleasing to the ear.
This was the means of capturing his
imagination, helping him better to
understand the poem and stamping
the desired impression more durably
upon his mind, while at the same time
driving away fatigue and boredom.
The story has it that the poet "Alqamah
Ibn 'Abdih presented himself one day
at the court of al-Harith Ibn Shamr
king of Ghassan, to read him a poem
and request a favour. The sovereign
paid not the slightest heed to him ;
but when he put a melody to his poem
and began to sing, the monarch
immediately granted him his request.
When musicians realized that the
accompaniment of an instrument impar¬
ted to vocal music a richer sound,
greater resonance and brilliance and
that the association of poetry and
rhythm made it pleasanter and more
easy to learn by heart, they endea¬
voured to make the various instruments
produce notes comparable to those of
the sung melody.
In their minds they carried the notes
that made up the familiar, well-remem¬
bered melodies of their own regions
and they tried to locate the precise
part of an instrument that reproduced
each of these notes. Once this was
determined, reference marks were
made on the instrument.
Successive musicians selected those
instruments, whether naturally occuring
objects or artificially made, which
most perfectly reproduced these notes.
In this way they gradually improved
the various instruments. Faults were
slowly eliminated until the lute and
other instruments eventually acquired
their final form.
Once the art of musical perfor¬
mance was in this way perfected, rules
of melody were determined and it
became possible to distinguish bet¬
ween the notes and harmonies natural
to man and those which are not, and
to establish the degrees of conso¬
nance and dissonance.
The perfect consonance of the notes
produced by the human voice or by
some musical Instruments has been
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Unearthed at Ras Shamra,
near Latakia (Syria) this
piece of glazed earthen¬
ware (left) dates back to
between 1600 and 1400
B.C. Twin lutes replace the
nose. The lute, which ori¬
ginated in the Near East,
Is still widely used in Arab
countries.
For the people of Pakistan,
music figures prominently
In their celebrations, fes¬
tivals and cultural and folk
gatherings. Photo right
was taken at the annual
springtime National Horse
and Cattle Show In Lahore,
garden city and ancient
cultural centre of Pakistan.
To the rhythm of drums
and the sound of traditional
Instruments, polo matches,
epic feats of horsemanship
and displays by dancing
horses take place within
sight of the bazaars and
crowded streets of the city.

DELIGHTS AND PLEASURES OF MUSIC (Continued)
34
compared to the essential nutritive ele¬
ments, and the other consonances,
which have a lesser degree of per¬
fection, to superfluous nourishment.
Very shrill or deafening sounds are
not natural, and neither are the in¬
struments which produce them. These
sounds are used only in special cir¬
cumstances ; their effect can be com¬
pared to that of a remedy, or perhaps
even to that of a poison, in that they
are intended to benumb and stupefy
the senses.
Sounds of this kind were made by
the instruments reserved for use upon
the battlefield ; a king of ancient
Egypt ordered the use of rattling bells,
and a king of Byzantium other strident
instruments with the same effect.
When the kings of Persia set out on
an expedition they were accompanied
by men whose function was to shriek
and howl as they went along. Sounds
such as these are dissonant in them¬
selves, but when merged with other
sounds and slightly modified, they can
become consonant.
This was how the various practical
musical arts we have enumerated were
born.
As greater interest was given to
certain instruments, it was found that
they could create notes and melodies
of quite a different kind from those
produced by the human voice. How¬
ever, they shared with the latter the
capacity to have a pleasing effect, and
although they did not posess all the
qualities of the sung note, they appear¬
ed natural.
Far from rejecting these instruments,
musicians adopted them and, with
occasional departures from the rules
of sung music, used them to the great¬
est possible advantage. This was the
origin of purely instrumental music,
which the voice cannot imitate.
The ancient rawashin of Khurasan
and Persia are examples of music of
this kind. Instrumental music as an
accompaniment to sung melody streng¬
thens the song and throws it into relief,
and is also capable of replacing or
complementing the voice in various
circumstances. The two kinds of
music are therefore closely linked.
Tambourines and tabors, timbáis,
hand-clapping, dancing and rhythmic
mime can all be considered elements
of music.
The least perfect of these is cer¬
tainly rhythmic mime ; the play of
eyebrows, shoulders, head, legs and
arms is, in fact, no more than move¬
ment. Yet these movements suggest
an impression of sound. Furthermore,
since the movements of the body
occur at intervals of time identical to
those separating two beats, these inter¬
vals are measurable. Hence, though
consisting solely of movement, mime
is regulated by rhythm and has an
underlying musical intent.
The rhythm of hand-clapping or
stamping feet, the tambourine, timbáis
and dancing all belong to the same
category. These are of a higher order
Open-air music class high in the
Cordilleras of the Andes in South
America. The xylophone ¡s a
popular musical instrument in
many Latin American countries.
These youngsters learn to play
on miniature xylophones at a
tender age.
,>
/;
than mime, in that the movements they
require culminate in a percussive
sound. This sound cannot however
be considered as a note, for it lacks
the continuity and length of duration
which gives to a sound the quality of
a musical note.
The lute, the lyre, the zither, the
rebeck and wind instruments are
superior to those mentioned above in
that they produce a sustained note.
This sound has the quality of continuity,
but still does not possess all the pro¬
perties of the human voice, which
comprises all the qualities of these
sounds and is the most perfect among
them.
By comparison with the notes pro¬
duced by the voice, those of all in¬
struments are inferior. They can there¬
fore be used only to enrich the son¬
ority of sung music, to increase its
effect, add to its beauty, accompany
the voice and make the song easier to
memorize.
The instruments which produce notes
whose qualities are most akin to those
of the human voice are the rebeck and
the wind instruments, for those are
the ones which best imitate its sound.
These are followed by the lute, the
zither and other instruments of the
same family, and then the others we
have mentioned.
With regard to the lute, its sound
resembles that of the human voice to
the extent that it can produce vibrato
and sustained notes. Flutes, the ra-
bab and other similar instruments have
a more perfect resemblance to the
voice ; their notes possess certain
qualities which produce the same
impression as some vocal sounds.
Mohammed Abu Nasr al-Farabi

