Wood engraving by Yuri Kosmynin
after a portrait by M. Abdullayev

NASIMI
poet-philosopher
of Azerbaijan
Imadeddin Nasimi's name is famous as
one of the great poet-philosophers of
the Muslim world. Born in Shemakka,
Azerbaijan, 600 years ago, his anniver¬
sary has been celebrated in various
parts of the world this year. Special
international commemorations were
held in Baku and Moscow last Septem¬
ber organized by the Azerbaijanian
Academy of Sciences with the partici¬
pation of Unesco. "Nasimi's poems",
declared the President of the Azer¬
baijanian S.S.R., Kurban Khalilov,
"glorify the beauty and joy of life".
All his works "are permeated by this
indomitable belief in man and man's
ability to develop spiritually and assert
himself". "Nasimi", he said, "called on
man to reason, fight religious fanaticism
and deliver himself from the psychology
of slavery. "In the article published here
the Soviet writer Vagif Aslanov speaks
of the poetry of Nasimi and its meaning
in the world of today.
by Vagif Aslanov
IIMADEDDIN NASIMI, the great Azerbaijanian
poet and an outstanding figure in the poetry and philoso¬
phical thought of the Orient was the founder of philosophical
poetry in the Azerbaijanian language.
At the time he lived and wrote, at the turn of the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries, religious obscuranticism was
dominant and his homeland was ravaged by invasion.
Those propagating humanist views, opposing feudal
oppression and calling on men to trust in their own powers
were punished by death or imprisonment and all non¬
conformist writings were burned.
His surviving poems show that Nasimi had an ency¬
clopaedic grasp of the learning of his day. He was a
propagator and leading theorist of Hurufism, a mystic
pantheistic doctrine which emerged in Azerbaijan at the
dawn of the fifteenth century. Its name came from the
Arab word huruf, or letters.
Hurufism deified numerals, letters and the combination
of letters in words. It regarded letters as the basis of
the whole universe. It believed that all the letters of the
alphabet, the whole of Holy Scripture and even God
himself were manifest on the face of man. In Nasimi's
poems we often find such explicit statements as, Supreme
God is himself humanity's son. Nasimi says to his reader:
O you in whose face pristine substance is seen, your image
is merciful and gracious God.
Nasimi used the personal pronoun "I" in the generic
sense to mean "all men":
Since my ending is eternal and my beginning
[primordial,
Primordially and eternally I am the Supreme Being.
He ascribed to man all the epithets of God in the
Koran: The thirty-two immortal letters I am; no mate, no
like, no substitute have I.
The founder of Hurufism was the great Azerbaijanian
philosopher Fazlullah Naimi, who set out his doctrine
in the treatise entitled Djavidan-Nama (The Book of
Eternity). Fazlullah Naimi was executed by Tamerlaine's
son, Miran Shah in 1394. Nasimi then left Baku and went
to Turkey. For spreading Hurufi ideas he was prosecuted
and jailed. According to contemporary chronicles, Nasimi
spent the last days of his life in the city of Aleppo.
It is recorded that a pupil of his declaimed one of Nasimi's
Persian ghazels in the street: To see my face you need an
eye that can perceive True God. How can the eye that is
short-sighted see the face of God?
Hearing this heresy religious fanatics arrested the youth
and ordered him to name the author of the poem. The
youth said it was his own poem and he was promptly
sentenced to death. Learning of this, Nasimi went to the
place of execution and demanded the innocent youth's
release, saying that he himself was the author.
The religious fanatics resolved to flay Nasimi alive. He
faced this terrible death with characteristic dignity. During
the torture one of the divines present asked Nasimi: "You
say you are God. Then why do you grow pale as your
blood drains away?" To which Nasimi replied: "I am the
sun of love on eternity's horizon. The sun always pales
at sundown."
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
VAGIF ASLANOV is senior researcher at the Language Institute of the
Academy of Sciences of the Azerbaijan Republic, where he heads the
Dept. of Comparative Studies of Turk Languages. He recently
compiled and commented a two-volume edition of works by Imadeddin
Nasimi (published in Baku, capital of Azerbaijan). A one-volume
English edition has just been published in Moscow by Progress
Publishers.
39

NASIMI (Continued)
Thus Nasimi, whose poems praise truthfulness in man
and the nobility and beauty of the human heart and soul,
took his place in history as a hero who sacrificed his life
for a fellow-man, for the triumph of justice.
In his poems Nasimi summons man to know himself and
his own divine nature. He believed that only man can
grasp all the secrets of Creation. In oriental mythology
the legendary Iranian ruler Djemshid, or Djem, had a cup
which, when full of wine, showed all that was happening
in the world.
Nasimi often calls human reason the cup of Djemshid.
The essence of God is hidden in man, the wine in the
chalice of Djem is man. Knowledge and reason are the
greatest riches and knowledge gives man strength :
O you who thirst for pearls and gold, for knowledge
[strive.
For is not knowledge of man gold and pearls?
And again: He who masters knowledge, O man, is strong.
The man of reason who is aware of his divine majesty is
the most precious being in all Creation: O you who call a
stone earth a precious pearl, is not man who is so fair
and gentle also a pearl?
40
I OST religions regard God as the Creator at
whose command "Let there be . . ." the world was made.
Extolling man's beauty and powers, Nasimi regards man
as the maker of all things: Since I am primordial and eternal,
I am the Creator and the creature of the universe.
Nasimi deeply believed that God's command "Let there
be..." was prompted by the power of human speech:
This command by which all things were made possessed
the power of our voice and speech.
While proclaiming man to be God Nasimi does not idealize
man and elevate him to Heaven but, on the contrary,
placing God within man, he particularly stresses his material
origin: Why are fire and water, earth and air given the name
of man? Entranced by the beauty of man who embraces
"the four elements and the six dimensions", the poet
exclaims: Praise him who combines the earth with fire and
air. praise the artist who impresses this form upon waterl
In many of his poems he voices the thoughts and suffer¬
ings of a man gripped by earthly passion for a woman
by whose beauty he is entranced.
Nasimi used poetic forms widespread in the Near and
Middle East: the ghazel (love poem), rubai (quatrain), qasida
(ode), and mesnevi (rhymed couplets), forms of classic
Arabic and Persian poetry. His brilliant poems had a
decisive influence on the later development of these forms
in Turkish poetry.
Ghazels are traditionally love poems about a beautiful
woman, about the lover's anguish, the grief of separation
and the joys of meeting. Nasimi, however, treats social
and philosophical themes in his ghazels, which may run
to forty or fifty couplets. The distinctive features of his
poetry are its combination of lyric verse and philosophical
thought, its rich and bold rhythms, harmonies, alliteration
and internal rhymes.
Even in his love poems Nasimi boldly opposed religious
scholasticism and stated his own philosophy. Comparing
his beloved's dark locks to heresy or disbelief and her
fair face to belief, he notes how sweetly they live together:
If disbelief is not belief, how did I come to find the light of
faith within the circle of your faithless locks? And again.
/ say to him who does not know the secrets of your locks
and face, they are the very essence of belief and disbelief.
Praising nature's charms, man's power and nobility and
the grandeur of reason, fostering love of man and setting
a high value on human dignity, Nasimi raised to a new
height the ideas of humanism in oriental poetry? He strove
for man's moral purity, taught norms of humanist morality
and called on man to reject duplicity, villainy, ignorance,
greed and conceit and to do good deeds and to respect
his fellow-men. Nasimi proudly proclaimed: / have no share
in the enslavement of man. God knows I speak the truth.
Nasimi's poetry affirmed life and urged man to relish
all the joys in this world. He categorically rejected the
world beyond and considered it Heaven to merge with
one's beloved in this world:
Do not thirst for happiness in the world beyond the
[grave,
For Paradise and its fair maidens is to meet your
[lovel
For this reason he reproached the preachers and legis¬
lators:
O preacher, do not seek to scare me with tomorrow!
The sage for whom tomorrow comes today, is
[unafraid.
Although they promise us God's wine and honey in
[Paradise,
It is your lips I need for there I find both honey and
[wine...
The freedom and happiness, dignity and majesty of man
form the leitmotif of Nasimi's poems. Of the grandeur
and dignity of man he wrote: Both worlds within my
compass come, but this world cannot compass me. The
poet was in love with the world in which he lived and in
which his poetry lives on. Not for one moment did he wish
to exchange for Paradise the moments of joy with his
beloved in this world:
My rival says: Give me today's lovel Take tomorrow
[for yourself!
An hour spent with my love for a whole epoch I shall
[not exchange.
Nasimi urged people to place no trust in empty promises:
O heart reject vain promises! Let us spend this moment
in pleasure I Yesterday has gone, tomorrow is unknown,
and so this moment is pleasure.
NlASIMI's poetry is rooted in the social, political
and cultural development of the countries of the Near and
Middle East, and especially of his homeland of Azerbaijan.
It expresses the poet's own extremely complex outlook.
There are occasional notes of pessimism; alongside his
faith and confidence in man's might and goodness there
are expressions of distrust. Nasimi complains that in this
deceitful world there is no true friend and no true love:
Where is the friend who is true to his promise, where the
beloved who utters the truth? In one quatrain he says:
The men of this world have become scorpions and snakes.
Evil is widespread throughout the world. Where shall one
find a true friend of pure heart? Where is the man of
conscience and justice?
Sometimes he curses the world, observing that unworthy
fools hold the reins of government while men of learning
and noble ideas have no say. Nevertheless the poet does
not lose hope and he trusts that justice will triumph: O
nightingale, do not grieve on parting from the rose! Be
patient!. Winter shall- pass, the garden fill with blossom
and spring shall come.
Many of his verses are aphoristic, expressing moral sen¬
timents and maxims. Do not grasp the hand of foes, though
sweet as honey it may be... How can a man who is corrupt
your proper worth assess?... It is hell with villains to
converse.
Nasimi was fully justified in ranking himself alongside the
unsurpassed lyric poets of Persian literature, Salman
Saveji and Faridaddin Attar. Valuing riches of the
spirit above all else, Nasimi declares: / am he to whom as
servants shahs and sultans come, I am he whose watchman
and custodian is the sun.
Addressing his readers Nasimi declares:
Call me a man who has immortal life,
For I immortal am and ever alive.
