Photos © Alain Gheerbrant
MUSIC HATH
CHARMS...
Indians of the Maquiritare
tribe listen entranced to a
recording of Mozart's 26th
Symphony. The Maquiri¬
tares live in complete isolat¬
ion on the borders of
Venezuela and Brazil.
Photos are stills from a
film by the French explorer
Alain Gheerbrant made in
1950 during an expedition
to the unexplored upper
reaches of the Amazon.
The tribesmen preferred
Beethoven to boogie-
woogie and Ravel to rock,
but Mozart, reported
Gheerbrant, could move
them almost to ecstasy.

BEETHOVEN
TAMES THE JUNGLE
by
Dmitri
Shostakovich



A great Soviet composer
presents his views
on music without frontiers
HE interaction and the play
of mutual influences between the mu¬
sical cultures of West and East, of
peoples brought up in the traditions of
European musical thought and the peo¬
ples of the rest of the world, con¬
stitutes a key factor for the under¬
standing of the evolution of national
musical traditions.
In this connexion, I fully agree with
those who rightly point out how wrong
it is to use the term "developing
countries" with regard to the ancient
and great cultures of the Asian, Afri¬
can and Latin American states. Where¬
as these countries may lag behind
Europe and North America industrially,
it is highly inappropriate to speak of
them patronizingly as "developing" in
the sphere of the arts.
To what extent can the means of
expression accumulated over the cen¬
turies by one people be used or sub¬
ordinated to the artistic norms of
another national culture ? To me the
question of the so-called "incompati¬
bility" of modal and harmonic sys¬
tems, of the "harm or benefit" which
the polyphonic or harmonic devices
characteristic of European music bring
to the cultural heritage of the coun¬
tries of the East, is not entirely clear.
But of one thing I am firmly con¬
vinced, namely the basic equality in
human culture of all the various natio¬
nal musical traditions, the whole rich
fund of melodies, rhythms, timbres and
subtle poetic discoveries created by
folk singers, instrumentalists and pro¬
fessional composers.
To my mind, the point is not the
DMITRI SHOSTAKOVICH Is the world
famous Soviet composer. He has written
more than a dozen symphonies as well as
ballets, operas, chamber music, choral works
and film scores. The article presented here
is an address given by Shostakovich at an
international music congress held in Moscow
in 1971 on traditional and contemporary
music, organized by the International Music
Council and the Soviet National Music Com¬
mittee.
"compatibility" or "incompatibility"
of the various musical systems, but
how and by which methods the prob¬
lem of the interaction and mutual in¬
fluence of the cultures of peoples dif¬
fering from one another ethnically and
geographically is solved.
Here everything depends on the
artistic tact and talent of the people
concerned the composer, performer,
teacher or theoretician their sense of
responsibility to the art and their pro¬
fessional honesty.
They may, of course, encounter
many a stumbling-block. There is
always the great danger of standardi¬
zation, of reducing the musical cul¬
tures of various peoples to the
"average European level".
And one can well understand the
concern of people who are closely in
volved in guiding these processes,
who are connected with training pro¬
fessional musicians for their country,
and who are familiar with all the forms
of propagating music.
One cannot allow of a thoughtless
or, worse still, commercial approach,
a disregard for the great humanist tra¬
ditions of all the peoples of our planet.
Such a course could lead to the des¬
truction of century-old artistic values
and to the burying of one's own natio¬
nal heritage in oblivion.
But nor should one attempt to iso¬
late the art of this or that people from
the natural exchange of creative
achievements between nations, from
the mutual borrowing of elements in
the various systems of musical
thought and musical speech.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Dmitri Shostakovich, left of photo, holding fire-hose to extinguish incendiary
bombs in Leningrad during World War II. Shostakovich wrote the first three
movements of his 7th Symphony ("Leningrad") in 1941 during the siege of the city.

Caruso and
Chaliapin:
the centenary
of two
'Mastersingers'
This year the whole world is celebrating the
centenary of the birth of two great singers
the bass Fedor Ivanovich Chaliapin and
the tenor Enrico Caruso. Born at Kazan
(USSR), Chaliapin quickly won inter¬
national fame not only for his stupendous
voice, but also for his skill as an actor which
enabled him to interpret such great roles as
Strauss' Don Quixote (left) and Mussorgsky's
Boris Godunov, on the principal stages of
the world. Caruso was born in Naples
(Italy). The exceptional purity and power of
his voice earned him world-wide acclaim
and a reputation as one of the greatest
tenors of all time. His prestige is still so
great that a London street-musician (right)
can attract an audience merely by advertising
"songs of Caruso".
BEETHOVEN TAMES THE JUNGLE (Continued)
14
One of the natural and logical forms
of development of the national tradi¬
tion is not only its direct link with the
life around it, with new social condi¬
tions and the growth of people's
awareness but also its ability to
absorb and enrich itself from every¬
thing that is genuinely progressive in
the ideological and technological
sense, which is created by other tradi¬
tions, sometimes even very remote
ones.
Naturally, this process must take
the form of mutual exchange and not
be imposed from outside. To illustrate
these remarks I should like to men¬
tion a few well-known facts from the
history of Russian music.
Did not Borodin, Balakirev, Mus¬
sorgsky and Rimsky-lKorsakov enrich
their work by turning to individual spe¬
cimens or elements of the folklore of
the peoples of the East? How much
poorer Russian music would be
without Borodin's Polovtsian Dances,
Balakirev's Islamey, Mussorgsky's Per¬
sian Dance and Rimsky-Korsakov's
Scheherazade and many other pages
of Russian music about the East.
And then there is the dedicated
work of a number of Moscow and
Leningrad composers in the Central
Asian republics, where an incredibly
short period of time saw the emer¬
gence of national schools of compo¬
sition using the experience of Russian
and West European music to build their
own national cultures.
The experience, of my country I
have in mind the period after the vic¬
tory of the Great October Revolution
testifies to the fact that the efforts of
several generations of Soviet musi¬
cians to build a musical culture for all
the peoples of the U.S.S.R. were
directed along the right lines.
In order to appreciate the greatness
of this task presented by history it¬
self one must be able to envisage the
vast size of our country and the great
variety of geographical and ethnic con¬
ditions which mould the life and cha¬
racter of its peoples, who speak and
sing in a hundred and five languages.
In the complex process of founding
a musical culture for the Soviet peo¬
ples an important part is played by
Russian classical music and the fine
traditions of the Russian school of
composers. These traditions are
deeply rooted in the everyday life and
culture of the Russian people. They
have been further developed in the
new conditions of socialist life in our
multinational state.
The last thing I should want is that
the development of our musical cul¬
ture composition, performing, teach¬
ing and musicology should appear
to be smooth and entirely free from
contradictions and difficulties. We
have also had our difficulties and mis¬
takes and irritating failures.
Nevertheless I am convinced that
the direction of our searching was and
remains a correct and fruitful one.
This may be seen from the truly his¬
toric accomplishments in the building
of a progressive culture and art in the
Soviet Asian republics which can be
measured by quantitative and, more
importantly, qualitative data of an in¬
disputable kind.
The intensive advance of Soviet
musical culture in breadth, embracing
millions of people in all parts of our
country, has developed and is still

developing in depth, enriching our
lives with bold, truly innovatory finds
and discoveries.
It should suffice to mention here the
name of the great composer Sergei
Prokofiev, who has given a mighty im¬
pulse to the creative searchings of
many composers and performers all
over the world. Another of Prokofiev's
great contributions is his profoundly
original discovery of the riches of Rus¬
sian, and not only Russian, folk music.
I should just like to mention his fine
second string quartet on Kabardinian-
Balkar themes.
The world-famous composer Aram
Khachaturian, who has delved deep
into the music of the Transcaucasian
peoples, has succeeded in using this
basis to create symphonic works
which have greatly influenced the
development, first and foremost,
but not exclusively of his native Ar¬
menian music.
The same can be said of the crea¬
tive role of the talented composer
Kara Karayev who stands at the head
of an interesting and most promising
school of composers in Soviet Azer¬
baijan.
To my mind, those who support
"protective tendencies" with respect
to the musical cultures of non-Euro¬
pean peoples, are somehow ignoring
the realities, the generally recognized
artistic values which have been and,
I am convinced, will be created as a
result of the bold, creative interven¬
tion of the composer in a sphere
which is at first alien to him.
While rejecting the crude repression
of one culture by another and the
views current in the West about cul¬
tural genocide and the implanting of an
alien musical culture, we cannot never¬
theless agree with the appeals for
complete isolation of one musical sys¬
tem from another for the sake of pre¬
serving these cultures in their original
purity.
HhET the Asian and African
peoples who have created a high
culture and a rich original folklore,
develop their art and perfect their
musical speech, but at the same time
let them not close their ears to the
great achievements in the music of
other peoples.
I remember the unforgettable im¬
pression which a certain documentary
left on me. It was a film about the
life of what appeared to be a very
primitive Indian tribe living in an
almost inaccessible area somewhere
in the upper reaches of the Amazon.
There was a really moving scene in
it, where the chief and several of the
tribesmen listened to a tape-record¬
ing of the Beethoven violin concerto.
On the faces of these people, who
had just been shown at work, hunt¬
ing, in their primitive everyday life,
one saw extremely strong emotions
verging on shock. Beethoven was
addressing himself to a person from
another world and that person was lis¬
tening to his speech and understand¬
ing it.
This seems to me to suggest the
following conclusion. Music does not
allow of national limitations and does
not need protective measures aimed
at isolating one culture from another.
On the contrary, what is required
is that countries possessing more
developed means of spreading musi¬
cal culture, highly qualified specialists
and teachers should come to the aid of
peoples who suffered centuries of
colonial rule without the opportunity to
develop their national culture freely.
Of course, this help should not turn
into cultural "aggression". And musi¬
cians who are sincerely concerned
about the fate of music the whole
world over, must try to find a common
language for affirming and preserving
the great cultural values, those which
the peoples of the world have already
created and those which they are sure
to create in the future.
15
