'It seems to me quite absurd", writes Josué de Castro,
"to propose a zero economic growth rate for the Third
World when the peoples of these areas consider economic
development to be their last hope of emerging from their
crushing burden of poverty."

POLLUTION PROBLEM N° 1
UNDERDEVELOPMENT
by Josué de Castro
W
20
HY should the so-called
"underdeveloped" countries be con¬
cerned with problems of the environ¬
ment? At first sight, these problems
seem much more serious and more
complex in the "highly-developed"
countries, where intensive industriali¬
zation and urban growth damage or
upset the balance of the natural envi¬
ronment. Pollution would thus seem
to be almost exclusively a problem
for the highly industrialized countries
and to be of little interest to the poor
ones, which supply the world's raw
materials.
This analysis is quite wrong. It
results from the vagueness of certain
basic concepts, particularly the current
concepts of "environment" and "dev¬
elopment".
JOSUE DE CASTRO, of Brazil, is famous for
his efforts in the world struggle against
hunger. He Is the author of "The Geography
of Hunger", 1952 (translated into 24 langua¬
ges) and "Of Men and Crabs", 1970 (see also
page 33). President of the World Association
for the Struggle Against Hunger and former
Chairman of the Council of FAO, he was
Brazilian Ambassador to the U.N. in Geneva,
from 1961 to 1964. Professor of Human Geo¬
graphy at the University of Brazil (Rio de
Janeiro) since 1939, he is at present Asso¬
ciate Professor of Geography at the Univer¬
sity of Paris (Vincennes) and President of
the International Centre for Development, in
Paris. He took part in the Environment
Forum held concurrently with the 1972 U.N.
Environment Conference In Stockholm, where
he spoke on "Problems of Development and
Environment in the Third World".
The environment is not only the
sum of all the material things that
make up the mosaic of the country¬
side or landscape, and constantly
interact with each other. It is much
more than this. It also includes the
economic structures and the outlook
and habits of peoples in different
parts of the world.
The environment as a whole there¬
fore includes not only physical or
material factors but economic and
cultural ones as well.
An accurate analysis of the environ¬
ment must always consider the total
impact of man and his culture on all
the surrounding elements, and also
the impact of ecological factors on
every aspect of human life. Viewed
in this perspective the environment
includes biological, physiological, eco¬
nomic and cultural aspects, all linked
in the same constantly changing eco¬
logical fabric.
This concept is much wider and
more objective than that of the
environment considered merely as a
system of mutual relations between
living creatures and their natural envi¬
ronment.
The concept of "development" as
measured only by statistics and
increased material wealth by econo¬
mic growth is just as false. Dev¬
elopment also involves far-reaching
and successive social changes which
inevitably accompany the techno
logical transformation of the natural
environment.
The concept of development is not
only a quantitative one, measurable
in dollars, but also one that includes
qualitative aspects of the communities
concerned, in other words their qual¬
ity of life.
To grow is one thing; to develop
another. To grow is, generally speak¬
ing, relatively easy. To develop in a
balanced way is much more difficult.
So difficult, that no country has yet
managed to achieve it. From this
point of view, the whole world is
more or less underdeveloped.
Yet it is the fashion today to speak
of the harmful effects of economic
growth on the environment and on
nature in general. And people talk
above all of the effects that are not
the most threatening ones for the
future of mankind. The most frequent
cries of alarm condemn the population
explosion, the pollution of air, rivers
and seas, the degradation of animal
and plant resources in the most highly-
developed regions of the world.
This attitude reflects a limited view
of the problem that takes into account
only the direct effects of economic
expansion, overlooking the insidious,
indirect yet much more determinant
action of development on all human
societies.
The first serious mistake, the first
CONTINUED PAGE 22

J
i

POLLUTION PROBLEM No. 1 (Continued)
The danger of ecological disintegration
false conclusion arising from this par¬
tial view of the problem, is the idea
that it is the richest areas that were
first affected by the pollution and
destruction of the natural environment
caused by economic growth.
The reality is quite different. The
earliest and gravest effects of dev¬
elopment were to be found precisely in
the regions which are today economi¬
cally underdeveloped and which were
yesterday under colonial rule. Under¬
development in these regions was the
first result of the unbalanced dev¬
elopment of the world as a whole.
Underdevelopment itself represents
a type of pollution and human degra¬
dation localized in certain regions
unjustly exploited by the great indus¬
trial powers.
u
22
' NDERDEVELOPMENT is
not, as is often supposed, the lack or
absence of development. It is a
product or by-product of development,
an inevitable result of the colonial
system of economic exploitation that
is still in force in several parts of the
world.
Many people are convinced that the
whole question of environmental
problems in developing countries is
totally different from that in the rich
industrialized countries, and should be
viewed in quite a different way. In
the poorer countries, they say, people
do not concern themselves with the
quality of life, but only with the
chances of survival, with the struggle
against hunger, disease and igno¬
rance.
But these things are none other
than the symptoms of a serious
social malady underdevelopment
which is itself a product of develop¬
ment. The underdeveloped countries
which are struggling to survive need
to take a direct interest in world-wide
development and environmental prob¬
lems so as to defend themselves
against the aggressions their own
environment has undergone for cen¬
turies on the part of the colonial
powers.
If it is only recently that people
have come to talk so insistently about
the pollution and degradation caused
by economic growth, this is because
Western civilization, with its scien¬
tific and ethnocentric approach, has
always refused to see what is
obvious: that the hunger and poverty
of certain far-off regions form part
of the social price mankind pays so
that economic development may ad¬
vance in a few economically and
politically dominant regions.
The blurring of this basic truth led
to the institution on a global scale
of a development strategy which
inevitably resulted in the failure of
the 1960-1970 Development Decade.
This will happen again and again so
long as the economic structures of
the world continue to depend on the
false foundations of its social struc¬
ture: a war economy, a maximum
profit economy, and a policy of eco¬
nomic oppression of the Third World.
To succeed in their struggle for
emancipation and survival, the under¬
developed countries must obtain at
all costs a marked reduction of the
negative economic impact the market
economy has had on their systems
of economic dependence. These coun¬
tries will have to fight hard against
the indirect action of the great cen¬
tres of accumulated capital, which
perpetuate the underdevelopment of
the world's economic fringe by every
available means, including the refusal
to stabilize the cost of raw materials.
To eliminate any doubt that in a
consumer civilization underdevelop¬
ment is a product of development, it
is enough to remember that before
the capitalistic and industrial explo¬
sion of our century, there were no
developed and underdeveloped coun¬
tries separated by a wide economic
gap. It was only after the second
industrial revolution that the extreme
disparities of growth rates and econo¬
mic levels between the two groups
of countries came into existence.
Let us take a concrete example:
the average income per inhabitant of
countries representative of the two
groups the U.S.A. and India. Before
the first World War, the average
income per head in India was 8 times
less than that of the U.S.A.; before
the second World War it was 15 times
less; today it is 50 times less...
The economic degradation of the
underdeveloped countries must be
considered as .a pollution of their
human environment by the economic
abuses of the dominant areas of
the world economy. Hunger, poverty,
widespread disease that would be
avoidable with a minimum of hygiene,
a short average life-expectancy: all
these are products of the destructive
effect of world exploitation under a
system of economic domination.
Starvation in India, Peru, San Do¬
mingo or the North-East of Brazil may
look like a local symptom of under¬
development, but in reality it repre¬
sents a paradoxical aspect of the
diseases of civilization. Hunger is
an indirect result of unbalanced eco¬
nomic growth, just as cardio-vascular
and degenerative diseases are else¬
where.
Ultimately, the two groups of mala¬
dies the so-called diseases of civi
lization and the diseases of poverty
are products of the same despotic
and frenzied civilization of profit. The
first ones are produced directly, on
the spot; the others indirectly, at a
distance.
A development strategy that envi¬
saged the social reality of the Third
World as something apart from the
rest of the world doomed from the
start any hope of improving environ¬
mental conditions. In reality, the whole
biosphere is a single ecosystem com¬
posed of a multitude of sub-systems.
The ecosystem of the biosphere is
given an enormous structural elasti¬
city by mechanisms which compensate
and counterbalance the negative
impact of man's actions. This elasti¬
city gives an important advantage
to man, since it allows him to
transform the biosphere and use its
elements to satisfy his own needs.
But the process cannot continue
beyond certain limits fixed by the
laws of natural balances (nuisance
thresholds) without causing serious
breakdowns, which may be fatal for
the ecosystems.
HROUGH the play of
ecological interactions, the serious
imbalances to which the Third World
has been condemned threaten the
whole biosphere and with it all
mankind. Starvation in the Third World
could one day lead to world-wide
pestilences; the revolt of the hungry
could lead to war on a planetary scale.
Starvation and war are themselves
symptoms of a dynamic disequilibrium
in the social and economic environ¬
ment of our planet.
But it is not enough to consider
only the indirect effect of develop¬
ment on the Third World's environment
an effect which is economic or
cultural rather than purely physical
or natural. We should also consider
the threat of direct action: the
thoughtless waste of non-renewable
natural resources and the biological
unbalancing of ecological sub-sys¬
tems.
The Third World lives under the
permanent threat of the on-the-spot
installation of types of technological
development which fail to take the
ecological dimension into account
and which could therefore cause the
total disintegration of ecological struc¬
tures. And if we consider the relative
fragility of certain equatorial and
tropical ecosystems, where most of
the Third World is situated, the
danger appears even greater.
It is well known that the soils in
these areas are easily eroded when
their covering layer of vegetation is

Drawings © Mas, Paris
over-exploited; and that the upsurges
of tropical rivers are curbed by
barriers composed of certain types of
plants, which to some extent regu¬
late and direct their flow. The des¬
truction of this vegetation may lead
to floods or to stagnation and other
serious disasters such as the loss
of flooded crops or the spread of
endemic diseases carried by insects
proliferating in stagnant water.
Does the fact that technological
progress and economic growth are
at present destroying the Third
World's environment justify the halt¬
ing of growth in these areas, as
some people insist? I do not believe
so. It seems to me quite absurd to
propose a zero growth rate for the
Third World when the peoples of
these areas consider economic dev¬
elopment to be their last hope of
emerging from the crushing burden
of poverty. I do not think those who
oppose development are right to call
a halt, when the urgent need is for
a reconversion of development.
Technology in itself is neither good
nor bad. It is its use which gives
it an ethical meaning. If technology
has worked against the Third World,
this is because it has been used with
one aim in view: maximum advantage
and profit. It is neo-colonialist exploi¬
tation that has led these countries to
their present state of despair, now
aggravated by the new threat of stop¬
ping the little progress they have made
in recent decades.
A great deal has been said about
the report drawn up for the Club of
Rome by the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, with the help of com¬
puters. The report establishes the
limits of future growth with regard to
the harmful effects of technology and
industrialization as zero-growth for
the world economy as a whole.
While, superficially, the report
appears to be right for we are all
alarmed by the pollution and des¬
truction of the human environment it
cannot be accepted outright because
its conclusions have been distorted
by methods that can hardly be called
scientific.
The report supposes that the dev¬
elopment model it presents, which
paints the portrait of the world in a
century's time, is the only valid one
that can be built with available data
on present world realities. This exclu-
siveness, typical of the ethnocentric
culture of the highly developed coun¬
tries, reveals the unscientific nature
of the report.
One cannot forecast a single model
of the future. All those who study
futurology are well aware that one
cannot envisage a unique future
determined by the various conditions
prevailing at the time of the study.
All that can be done is to imagine a
series of probable futures according
to the Theory of Probability, which has
replaced the deterministic attitude that
was the rule before the adoption of
the Theory of Relativity. So one can
very well project several models of
the world of tomorrow.
One can estimate, with a high risk
of error, the probability of any of
these models becoming a reality. But
it is quite impossible to limit a scien¬
tific forecast to one single model. To
make linear projections, as was done
for the report on the limits of growth,
is a naive procedure which does not
take into account the structural break¬
downs which are a characteristic
feature of modern times. We live in
a period of discontinuity, not one of
continuity.
The worst mistake of the M.I.T.
report is not to have included the
problem of economic, social and poli¬
tical structures among the factors
determining growth. In the introduc¬
tion to the report the authors only
consider five development factors:
population, agricultural output, natural
resources, industrial output and pollu¬
tion.
There is not a word about the
problem of social and economic struc¬
tures. Yet everybody knows that the
level of production and the level- of
pollution i.e. the state of develop¬
ment and the state of the environment
essentially depend on the type of
structure dominant at a given place
and time.
By leaving out man and his culture,
the project has become alienated, for
it does not take into account the
realities of the modern world and
therefore the realities of the future.
If the majority of Third World coun¬
tries reject the conclusions of this
report, it is because they are suspi¬
cious of this proposal to stop growth,
which risks affecting the poorer re¬
gions of the world alone, since the
rich ones will obviously not obey it.
So the gap between the two worlds
will increase.
If this is true, all the charitable
paternalism of the Club of Rome
towards the countries of the Third
World will turn out to be a trap. Far
from being helped by this kind of
recipe, they will be enchained for
ever in underdevelopment and pov¬
erty.
The reaction of these countries
should be to try to find a type of
development that would be indepen¬
dent of neo-colonialism, applying tech¬
niques created on the spot the only
ones that would be valid and rational.
The present type of development, as
I see it, is obviously a failure; but
the world could be developed if it
were given social and economic struc¬
tures and means of production
different to those which exist today.
But before this can be done, the
war economy in which we live must
be reconverted into a peace economy,
and the enormous savings resulting
from partial disarmament must be
used to obtain a type of pacific dev¬
elopment that would be not only more
equitable but also non-polluting.
23
