What we saw
in liberated
Guinea-Bissau
An on-the-spot report
of a special
United Nations mission
Amilcar Cabrai

by
Horacio
Sevilla Borja
The article published here is based on a report by Horacio Sevilla Borja, head of the United
Nations Special Mission which in 1972 visited the liberated areas of Guinea (Bissau). The
team consisted of Horacio Sevilla Borja (Ecuador), Folke Löfgren (Sweden) and Kamel Belkhiria
(Tunisia), all three representatives of their countries at the United Nations. At the end of 1971,
Amilcar Cabrai invited the United Nations to send a fact-finding mission to Guinea (Bissau).
From April 2 to 8, 1972, the Special Mission travelled throughout the liberated areas observing
social, health and educational programmes put into effect by the liberation movement. In Nov¬
ember 1972, the United Nations recognized the African Party for the Liberation of Guinea
(Bissau) and Cape Verde as "the only and authentic representative of the people of the terri¬
tory" and reaffirmed "the inalienable right of the people of Guinea (Bissau) to «elf-determina¬
tion, freedom and independence."
UR first and main impres¬
sion was that the existence of the
so-called "liberated areas" is an
undeniable fact of life, despite the
persistent denials of the Portuguese
which have created doubts among
their closest allies and in spite of the
innumerable reports by journalists and
non-governmental delegations from
various quarters who have visited the
Territory of Guinea (Bissau).
The military forces and administra¬
tive officers of PAIGC (African Party
for the Independence of Guinea
(Bissau) and Cape Verde) are actually
in control of the situation and they are
the real masters of the extensive areas
we visited.
Using various means of transport,
we were continually on the move.
We found the same situation every¬
where: the established presence of
well-organized guerilla forces; over¬
whelming support among the people
of the villages, hamlets and settlements
for those who are fighting to free them;
comprehensive administrative organ¬
ization covering every facet of com¬
munity life.
It is commendable that, after only a
few years of a struggle recognized as
legitimate by the United Nations,
PAIGC, although considerably inferior
to the enemy in material and military
potential, has been able to gain control
over vast areas of the Territory of
Guinea (Bissau) which are being
wrested from the domination of their
illegal occupiers.
Even more admirable is the work
being done by PAIGC to organize the
civil life of the community and, while
in the throes of the struggle, to create
a new society, with its own institutions
suited to the characteristics of the
Guiñean people rather than foreign
cultures forcibly imposed.
This new society dignifies its
basic component, the human being, by
providing equal opportunities, commu-
nity work and social justice and by Y|
eliminating traditional antiquated cus- '
toms and tribal differences fostered by
the colonizer.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

.
J
mt
22
MISSION TO GUINEA-BISSAU (Continued)
The new society is emerging with
great speed from the Dark Ages of
inept and unjust colonial domination
into the dawn of a future in which there
will be dynamic progress free from
exploitation.
We shall not forget our visit to
day-schools and boarding-schools
where, under the direction of PAIGC
and with a team of teachers trained
abroad, comprehensive education is
given to children, many of whom were
born in liberated areas and have
never seen a Portuguese soldier or
civilian.
It is true that the smiles and gaiety
typical of their age seem for the
present to have departed from the
faces of those children. But it must
be remembered that, at the same time
as they are being educated, they have
to take part in defence and recons¬
truction work and they even have to
bring their own school materials from
the frontier on long and dangerous
treks.
The school-children of Guinea
(Bissau) live in constant fear of bomb¬
ing, because the schools seem to be
favourite targets for the indiscriminate
Portuguese bombardments which have
already taken many young lives.
While on the subject of education,
I must mention the tremendous value
of the bilateral international co-opera¬
tion given by different countries. For
example, we were pleased to see
children learning their lessons from
textbooks in Portuguese printed in
Sweden and donated by the Swedish
Government.
PAIGC has set itself the goal of
providing education for all children of
school age and completing a literacy
programme for adults in the liberated
areas, which would never even have
been dreamed of under the colonial
system.
PAIGC has several hospitals and
health posts scattered over the lib¬
erated areas; these not only care for
people wounded in the war, the maj¬
ority of whom are civilians, but also
carry out curative and preventive
campaigns against diseases endemic
in those regions and give intermediate-
level personnel medical training,
thereby creating a new kind of soldier
for peace working for his people.
Here, I should also stress the value of
existing international co-operation
provided in the form of experts, drugs
and equipment, which helps to meet
the tremendous needs.
Throughout the areas under its
control, PAIGC has also organized
people's stores where goods are bar¬
tered, a system that helps the people
to overcome the problems of over¬
production of traditional products such
as rice and provides them with con¬
sumer goods and prime necessities
which they could not afford under the
colonial administration.
Much could be said about the re¬
construction work being carried out,
about the administration of justice
based on people's courts, about the
system of community administration.
It is particularly important to note
the attitude adopted by the Portuguese
Government on the occasion of the
visit of the Special Mission which was
approved by an overwhelming majority
in the General Assembly. Not only
did Portugal try to prevent the visit
at the diplomatic level but it also used
its military might in an attempt to
prevent the visit and destroy three

delegates who were carrying out an
official United Nations Mission.
It was painful for us to see with
our own eyes the atrocities committed
by the Portuguese troops. Villages
had been burned and their inhabitants
were sleeping in the open with the
stench of the recent fires in their
nostrils. Crops had been destroyed
by bombing raids. Cattle had been
killed and there were constant re¬
connaissance flights. We also saw
unexploded bombs that had been
dropped by planes in the fields of the
liberated areas.
I should like to express the gratitude
of my colleagues on the Mission and
myself to the members of the Special
Committee for having given us the
opportunity to serve on this Mission
and thereby to offer material and spe¬
cific proof of the dedication and
support of our countries and govern¬
ments for the cause that is closest to
the hearts of the African people. The
first experiment by the United Nations
in its search for new ways of assist¬
ing peoples in their struggle to free
themselves once and for all from the
colonial yoke was an unforgettable
personal experience for us.
A historic photo taken on September 24, 1973, on the occasion of the
proclamation of the "Republic of Guinea-Bissau". Aristides Pereira,
Secretary-General of PAIGC and the late Amilcar Cabral's companion of
many years, joyfully embraces a colleague.

