SCIENCE AND MYTH
by
Pierre Auger
Talk of machines that "think", computers
having "nervous breakdowns" "flying
saucers" is creating a new kind of myth
hiding behind the cloak of science.
Here a leading French scientist discusses
modern myths in relation to a true
understanding and popularization of science.
_ O the sensational progress
of science and of physics and biology
In particular what Is generally called
the general public reacts in three
different ways.
Some admire and even wax enthus¬
iastic about the daring exploits of
astro-physics and molecular biology.
Without being really able to add to
their own knowledge, they sense the
grandeur of this amazing adventure
of the human mind.
Others are struck, above all, by the
technical achievements which follow
in the wake of scientific progress, such
as communications satellites, super¬
sonic flight, and exploration of the
moon and of the ocean floor. The
power of man equals, and in certain
fields surpasses, that of the gods of
antiquity.
There ¡s a third attitude, however,
which is wholly compounded of the
anxiety and distrust inspired by
scientific progress and at the same
time perhaps even primarily by the
attendant technical progress. Where
are we heading with these machines
and computers? Can we be sure that
these atomic, space and genetic
adventures are not going to end in
disaster?
Thus, if the writer on scientific sub¬
jects is to cater for every category of
reader, he must not take the easy
path and be content with tending and
feeding the sacred fire of the first
group we have described, and with
providing fresh grounds for the enthus¬
iasm of the second group. He must
take care to reassure the third group,
4
PIERRE AUGER, is a leading French physicist
and former Director-General of the European
Space Research Organization (ESRO) which
he helped to set up. He was head of
Unesco's Department of Natural Sciences
from 1948 to 1959 and is the author of
"Current Trends in Scientific Research", a
comprehensive survey of world scientific and
technological research published by Unesco
in 1961, 3rd edition 1963 (see also article
page 1 1).
and this he must do by re-establishing
the truth, not the truth pure and simple,
for the truth is complex and often
abstract, but the naked truth by
which I mean stripped of the fantastic
trappings with which it is all too often
embellished by publicists I dare not
call them writers who are either naive
and ill-informed themselves or else
unscrupulous popularity-hunters.
There is no denying that this is a
very difficult task. It is even regarded
as an impossible one by some people
of sound judgement who see the
attempts of science writers to acquaint
the general public with certain fields
of knowledge as leading simply to the
creation of a new kind of mythology.
I can be quite frank here and admit
that they are often right. This is certainly
one of the main rocks on which the
efforts of those known as popular
science writers come to grief. It is a
rock never struck by the writers of
those works of fiction in scientific garb
which fill library-shelves labelled
"science-fiction". Here, the creation
of myths is the avowed aim.
A word of warning however. It is
essential that the mythical nature of
such books be clearly indicated so
that there is no mistake about what
is being offered for public consumption.
There has been too much talk of
machines that think, computers that
get nervous breakdowns and flying
saucers with little green men from
outer space. From all this there
seems to have been born a kind of
myth which people, are beginning to
take as scientific fact.
But let us look at what the popular
science writer can do to communicate
knowledge instead of new myths. First
of all, what distinguishes a scientific
theory from a myth?
Here I am using the word myth to
signify an explanation or theory of
natural or human phenomena and
events, like those handed down by
tradition in ancient times and those
still transmitted in this way by so-called
uncivilized peoples following the
thought processes of "the savage
mind" described by Claude Lévi-
Strauss.
These myths make use of figures
with human characteristics and animals
gifted with supernatural powers, but
they also present abstract forces such
as Fate or mana, particularly those
secreted in certain objects.
The expression "scientific theory"
is also used to signify explanations of
natural and, if need be, human
phenomena, and although these explan¬
ations do not make use of human
figures or animals, they nevertheless
attribute specific properties to certain
objects which secrete forces and are
capable of generating phenomena and
bringing about events.
Examples of such objects are
magnetized or electrically charged
bodies, and radioactive or fissile subs¬
tances. The analogy is so strong as
to cause confusion in some cases and
myths then grow up around machines,
magnets, high-tension cables and
ships. A good example is the cargo-
cult that grew up around the steamers
bringing wealth to the islands of the
Pacific.
I shall be told that the educated
public of the developed countries will
not fall a prey to such confusion. But
it is precisely on this point that I would
be tempted to share if only very
partially the pessimistic opinion I
mentioned earlier.
Are we quite sure, in fact, that the
information given by the popular
science writers is always properly
understood in the scientific sense?
Is there not a tendency among the
general public, or a large section of
it, simply to trust the presumably
competent dispensers of information
and to be content with metaphors and
rather vague analogies.
To give an example, it is said quite
commonly that space engineers have
managed to put a satellite in orbit, or
CONTINUED PAGE 6

These soaring spires and towering skyscrapers are not part of a mythical lunar landscape, but anomalous crystals
of a lead, tin, telluride alloy, about 2 millimetres high, as seen by a stereoscan microscope. These and similar crystals
are used in infra-red lasers and experiments are being made on their use in earth-satellite, satellite-satellite space
communication (see also story on Unesco and communications satellites page 21) as well as in blind landing systems
for airports.
5

The legend of the magnetic mountain Magnetism was such a mysterious phenomenon that It gave
rise to a whole mythology among the Ancients. The
geographer Ptolemy wrote that, near present-day Borneo,
there existed mountains "of such great powers of attraction
that ships are built with wooden pegs, lest the iron nails
should be drawn from the timbers" with disastrous results
(left). The legend of the magnetic mountain was repeated In
"A Thousand and One Nights" and was accepted as true
until early In the 17th century when men such as William
Gilbert, "the Galileo of magnetism", laid the foundations of
modern theories. Below, the lines of force in a magnetic
field as drawn by James Clerk Maxwell In 1865. Iron filings
attracted by a magnet (right) form patterns which enable us
to "see" the magnetic field. Curious patterns can be built
up in this way in photo right one can imagine the head of
an otter or a beaver and some contemporary artists make
use of the properties of magnets in works of kinetic art.
6
SCIENCE AND MYTH (Continued)
that it has gone off its trajectory and
fallen into the sea. In this case, it
seems clear that the orbit and the
trajectory are thought of as abstract
objects which the satellite may follow
or leave just as a train does the track,
or a car the road. This is under¬
standable since we model our con¬
ceptions on familiar facts and events.
Unfortunately, the model in this case
is a bad one and leads to false ideas
about space mechanics. It is perhaps
appropriate to use the term myth, in
this instance, by comparison with
those myths about the planets or the
sun in which the heavenly body
followed real paths laid down by the
gods.
We have another example in radio¬
activity and radium. A veritable myth
had grown up around these glamorous
words, and every mineral water and
even some beauty creams used to
boast of being radioactive, for this was
a guarantee of efficacy. We have
recently witnessed a spectacular
reversal of the myth, since radioactivity
is now considered dangerous because
of fallout and the labels on the
mineral water bottles and jars of
beauty cream have been surreptitiously
brought up to date.
What has to be done, people will
say, is to give more detailed informa¬
tion, explain the laws of celestial
mechanics, and throw light on the real
nature of radioactivity, striking the
balance between its benefits, as in the
treatment of cancer, and its dangers.
They are right of course, and this is
what many serious popular science
writers are doing, backing up the very
effective and, it must be said, even
essential efforts being made at all
levels of the education system.
Only piecemeal improvements will
be made in this way, however, when
the subjects being dealt with are
particularly in the news. A more
general strategy must be adopted if
we are not to rest content with small
tactical victories.
In this connexion, I would like to
make a suggestion based on the
concept of a "model". A model, which
is basically nothing more than the
concrete representation of an abstract
theory, is a tool for thought and even
for discovery which is very useful
both in making scientific progress and
in giving an account of such progress,
scientists being no different from other
men in the way they think. To make
myself clearr I shall draw a parallel
' *. . ,'*
Photo Bibliothèque de Genève
between myths and models, and first
of all, I shall recall a few facts from
the history of science.
Scientists usually take pride in
presenting their results In the most
perfect and most elegant form, without
giving any idea of the gropings, the
false starts, and the hard intellectual
and experimental work which led up
to them.
It is understandable that they should
wish not to overburden their writing
with details which have ceased to be
of current interest. On the other hand,
how worthwhile it would be to follow
step-by-step the thought and the
labour of this or that great discoverer
in his exploration of new scientific
fields.
In the few cases where this has
been possible thanks to an auto¬
biography or a series of published
papers, it has made an exciting and
instructive study. We can see the
part played by models and preliminary
plans which are like scaffolding to be
removed when the building has been
completed.
These models are often concrete
ones, sometimes visualized as im¬
provised mechanisms. This was so

i
i * i
&
Photo © Le Cuzlat, Levallols, France
in the case of James Clerk Maxwell,
for example, who had experimented
with models of rollers centred on the
lines of magnetic force and represent¬
ing the movements of electricity.
Once his equations had been estab¬
lished, all the apparatus was discarded
and the equations are now elegant,
perfect and abstract. They are
also completely incomprehensible to
anyone who has not undergone a
lengthy initiation.
Many models remain very useful,
however, even when the knowledge
they represent has been outdated by
more general theories. Bohr's planet¬
ary model of the atom, for example,
still serves quite adequately to inter¬
pret many properties of the atom and
the molecule. It has the further
advantage of being sufficiently visual
to be easily accepted by non-
specialists.
The even older model of the elastic
atoms of the kinetic theory of gases
continues to be employed. A great
English scientist admitted that he still
used it to help him think out his ideas.
"When I think of the thermic agitation
of the atoms of a gas", he said, "I
cannot help seeing little red and white
balls knocking against each other."
Of course he knew very well that the
model was inadequate.
This is the heart of the matter and
one of the big differences between
models and myths. The model is
partial, incomplete and provisional,
constructed to be useful for a time
(sometimes a very long time!) and then
superseded. The myth, on the other
hand, is total and definitive from the
outset and in this draws close to belief.
We shall find other characteristics
which carry it at the same time farther
away from scientific theory.
But do not theories themselves run
the risk of changing into myths if they
are treated too much as if they were
absolutes? We have the old example
of phlogiston which gave metals their
sheen and hardness and which
resisted the theory of oxidation so
stubbornly.
Are we not also justified in saying
that absolute time has become a myth
still perpetuated by many educated
people although it is nothing more
than a model which is very adequate
on most occasions but must yield to
the four-dimensional universe of
Minkowski and Einstein.
There is an obvious defence against
myths: it is built into the scientific
method itself which considers theories
good as long as they account for
phenomena in the best possible way
and especially when they represent a
minimum number of arbitrary rules and
parameters for a maximum number of
facts explained. In the realm of myths,
on the other hand, there is one myth
for each fact or occurrence to be
explained, just as the ancient Romans
had a different god for each of life's
events, no matter how insignificant.
Here we come to the most sensitive
point the one which Is the chief
worry, not to say nightmare, of the
modern lovers of myth the touchstone
of experiment. A theory, however fine
it may be, gives way when confronted
with a contradictory fact established
by experiment. A myth does not give
way but argues, evades and finds
often purely verbal loopholes.
This is true of the myth of the waves
which are emitted by thinking minds
the thought waves in telepathy the
fluids or waves operative in water-
divining, "second sight", extra-sensory
perception, and so on. Experimental
demonstrations to the contrary have
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

SCIENCE AND MYTH (Continued)
8
no effect on myths and this is an
excellent way of distinguishing them.
This is not to say that theories
must be immediately confirmed by
experiment if they are to be consider¬
ed scientifically respectable. Experi¬
mental confirmation might not come
for some time. Researchers will
devote all the more effort to this task
if the theory has internal logic, is
linked with other scientific fields, and
synthesizes numerous facts already
known, all these being the character¬
istics of a good theory.
One example is Pauli's hypothesis
of the existence of the neutrino, a
particle having no mass, no magnetic
field, no electric charge and hardly
any effect in its passage through
matter but which made it possible to
restore to their place under the general
laws of the conservation of energy and
the quantity of movement, absolutely
sure experiments lying apparently
outside their scope.
"The neutrino is a myth", said some
physicists. Experiments have never¬
theless shown that it exists, and it
plays a fundamental role in nuclear
physics. Two or three other hypo¬
theses of this kind are currently being
tested, namely the quark, the parton
and the intermediate boson. They
are good hypotheses which are
awaiting the verdict of experiments.
They are not myths.
If we wish to explain this to a wide
public which is so often impressed by
the romantic aspect of the myths we
spoke about earlier, and also of the
myths concerned with vitalism, vital
force and vital impulse, we must lay
stress on the quantitative, measurable
and calculable aspects of correct
theories, as opposed to the resolutely
and purely qualitative character of
myths.
The rotational force of spiritualists'
turning tables has never been mea¬
sured nor the speed of propagation of
telepathic waves and for very good
reasons. Calculations of the neutri¬
no's precise energy and velocity (that
of light) were made even before it was
found and they proved to be correct.
The case of the neutrino is obvi¬
ously a perfect example. There is no
reason, however, why the serious
popular science writer should penalize
himself by disregarding the fact that
all classes of readers are attracted
by accounts sometimes full of the
unexpected and even of a kind of
romanticism of the great scientific
discoveries and movements, of the
opening up of the great avenues of
science.
Several books could be quoted
which tell of adventures in connexion
with the life of a scientist or the
development of a school or laboratory,
and which are full of memorable
anecdotes, some of which have a
genuine scientific interest since the
real life situations they describe show
how scientific thought develops.
What a lot there is to learn from
books like these, either for young
people attracted towards science or
even for the general reader seeking
a better understanding not only of the
findings of research but also of "how
it was done" and how such discov¬
eries are made.
Books like these bring out the rôle
of scientific information, in other
words, of knowledge of what has
already been done, the rôle of the
imagination which makes it possible
to get out of the rut and discover
new paths, and the rôle of chance
or of luck, as some would say a
rôle which has often been grossly
exaggerated by sensation-mongering
commentators, and "forgotten" by
those who have benefited from it.
They are wrong, anyway, for there
is nothing more superbly human than
the power of the mind to launch a new
train of thought from facts or remarks
which will be overlooked by people
who are incapable of wonder. The
classic examples are Henri Becque-
rel's discovery of radioactivity, the
result of choosing a uranium oxide salt
as a fluorescent substance, and Don¬
ald Glaser's bubble chamber inspired
by a glass of beer.
The "personalized" history of scien¬
ce can also be a way of admitting the
general public into the laboratory and
showing the amount of work, thought,
experimental skill and, finally, patience
ZEUS,
BY JOVE!
Left, Zeus, or Jupiter or
Jove, thunderbolt in hand, as
depicted on a 5th century
B.C. Greek amphora. The
Greeks and other ancient
peoples believed that the
"god of gods" expressed his
anger with men by hurling
thunderbolts down on earth.
It was not until the time of
Benjamin Franklin (and his
Russian contemporary Mikhail
Lomonosov) that this natural
phenomenon was linked with
the new discoveries being
made about electricity. In
1752, Franklin conducted his
famous experiment of flying
a home-made kite in a thun¬
derstorm (right) to prove that
lightning is electricity, which
was to lead him to invent the
lightning conductor or rod.
Far right, an artist's none too
serious impression of a possi¬
ble application of the new
invention, drawn In 1778.
The world's first journal devoted to the
popularization of science was the "Scien¬
tific American" which began publication in
newspaper format in August 1845 and later
adopted magazine format. Gerard Piel, its
present publisher, was awarded the Unesco
Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of
Science in 1962.
>
ï
to
Z
fPÊH
curas»
MC
m=. ge«

that underlies great discoveries and
breakthroughs. Pasteur defined genius
as endless patience and Newton said
that he had discovered the law of
gravity by thinking about it.
I believe that a great effort must be
made to bring people who have never
been inside a research institute to
appreciate the true value of the work
done by all those research workers
whose names will never get Into the
headlines but who make a vitally
important contribution to scientific pro¬
gress.
The danger of presenting the daily
life of research workers in this way
particularly on television lies perhaps
in the contrast with the descriptions
given in science fiction, which, need¬
less to say, depict only dramatic
situations.
There is a risk of taking the poetry
out of science or at least out of
research thus serving the cause of
those who place in opposition the
famous "two cultures" of Lord Snow
(1). To my mind, the remedy lies in
the fullest possible integration of all
the activities of the human mind and,
I should like to add, good taste and
sensitivity.
(I) In his book "The Two Cultures", Lord
Snow compares humanistic and scientific
cultures through interviews with engineers,
scientists and men of letters which he uses
to show the cleavage between them.
Who is going to write the "Works
and Days" of the scientific research
worker? Possibly this is asking too
much, but it is certainly worthwhile to
describe the aspects of science's
current values which have a high
intellectual and even artistic quality.
One of the characteristics of Scien¬
ce with a capital S which has
become more and more obvious over
the last fifty years is its unity. The
general public must realize that in
science there no longer exists a juxta¬
position of subjects classified accord¬
ing to the order introduced by Auguste
Comte or following a less strictly
linear order, but instead an immense
network of facts and theories forming
a pattern from which there emerges
the outline of a veritable structure
encompassing the whole of nature,
from the universe to living beings.
This structure cannot be understood
unless it is analysed down to the
components of matter and energy, for
it is at the level of atoms and mol¬
ecules that physics, chemistry and
biology meet. We must penetrate as
far as the nucleus of the atom and
its constituent elements in order to
add astronomy and cosmology to the
other sciences.
Mathematics, of course, are every¬
where and our world is indeed the one
which Pythagoras had imagined. "All
things are numbers", he said, but what
would he have thought of the vast
field now covered by numbers?
Beginning with the simplest, there
is the number 2, following unity and
introducing diversity; it might be said
to be the atom of diversity from which
it is possible to build up the most
extreme complexities, just as all the
matter of the universe can be derived
from the hydrogen atom and the neu¬
tron.
Then there are the quantum numbers
which are small integral numbersor
half-integral or even third-integral num¬
bers, at the extreme limit while at the
other end of the scale of complexities,
the chains of macromolecules of
chromosomes offer possibilities of
combinations numbering thousands of
millions. Here, too, the structure is
simple, however, because we need
only four symbols to write the great
book of the anatomy and physiology
of Manl Mathematicians will say that
two would be enough, but the chains
would then be much longer and
perhaps too long to remain stable.
Here, then, are two of the great
ideas which are shaping the future
development of science: the quest
for a structural unity which is no
longer just an intellectual need but is
gradually becoming discernible and
definable and the quest for a complex¬
ity which underlies the extreme variety
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
9

Photo Erich Lessing © Magnum, Paris
THE TIME-SPACE
CLOCK
Einstein's theory of relativity completely changed man's notions of space and time. Einstein
himself wrote, "There are only local times. On earth, for example, everyone is catapulted
through space at the same velocity the velocity of the earth. Thus all the clocks on earth
run on equally, and record "earth" time. For a body In motion like the earth, this Is its
own time... Now when two events take place far away from each other spatially, enormous
periods of time are involved. It is no longer possible to say which event took place first
and which second. Depending on the velocity of the observer vis-à-vis the event, either
answer might be made; and either would be true for a given case."
10
SCIENCE AND MYTH (Continued)
of beings (or objects) and phenomena
in the universe.
The first trend has often been called
reductionism, and it cannot be denied
that it has been dazzlingly successful,
although, it has not led to the discovery
of unity in some areas of research,
even when followed by geniuses like
Einstein. There are still four forces
which cannot be expressed in terms
of each other and these are the Strong
Nuclear force, the Weak Interaction,
Electromagnetism and the Force of
Gravitation. Nevertheless fresh hopes
are raised every day.
The second line of research has
recently been extremely successful in
the field of biology with genetics and
molecular biology, and is gaining
ground each day. It holds out the
hope that we may come to understand
the mechanisms of cellular differentia¬
tion, immunity, and perhaps cancer.
The small and, especially, the very
big molecules forming the links of the
chains of these systems of reaction,
catalysis, energy exchange, electrons
and protons, are more and more fre¬
quently the subject of scientific trea
tises and articles. They represent a
world which is enclosed within the
living world but Is generally imper¬
ceptible.
In fact, until the end of the last
century it was virtually only in hand¬
ling plants that this arsenal of complex
and active substances, which compos¬
ed the pharmacopoeia of antiquity and
were also the preserve of the cook,
dyer and perfumer, had been recog¬
nized and used. Today, as well as
these essences and alkaloids, there is
a growing list of the proteins compris¬
ing the various enzymes and co¬
enzymes found in this protoplasm
which used to be compared to a drop
of egg-white!
To bring the non-scientific public to
appreciate the value of such research
work, we must, of course, highlight
the two characteristics of science:
knowledge and utility. There must be
a better understanding of the world
around us, and thus a link-up with the
intellectual mission of humanism. Peo¬
ple must also learn how this know¬
ledge -is used in technical applications
and 'inventions calculated to improve
man's lot, so that science is seen in
its social rôle. This rôle is not a
straightforward one, as the current
problems of industrialization show, but
knowledge ¡s a prerequisite.
This brings us back to the origin
of the three attitudes which we
mentioned at the beginning: the beau¬
ty, utility and dangers of science. We
have to sail a stormy sea, guided by
the stars, taking advantage of favour¬
able currents and avoiding reefs.
This is possible only if the crews,
ratings as well as captains, retain
confidence in themselves, their reason
and their vigilance and, like latter-day
Ulysses, allow themselves to be led
astray neither by the siren voices of
all the mythologies nor by the risk
of avoiding the Charybdis of Herme-
tism and the ivory tower only to
founder on the Scylla of defoliations
and nuclear explosions.
I am not a believer in the religious
sense of the word, but I nevertheless
think, like the Church, that the greatest
sin is despair, and for Man to despair
of science and knowledge would be to
despair of himself. '
