EXODUS TO
THE CITY
The problem
begins
where?
by Ashish Bose
HE crisis of human settle¬
ment is no less acute than the crisis
of population explosion and the need
for controlling human settlement is at
least as great as that for controlling
population growth rates. And yet in
the massive literature on population,
the attention given to the settlement
pattern is utterly inadequate.
Demographers have usually relied
on geographers to study the subject.
Of late, however, because of rapid
urbanization, increasing rural-urban
migration and the consequent ecolog¬
ical problems, demographers have
been forced to devote more attention
to urban growth, internal migration
and population redistribution.
But the perception of the problem
of settlement Is still heavily biased by
an almost exclusive concern for the
metropolitan areas and big cities. It
is still rare to find demographers
studying the settlement pattern from
the rural angle in spite of the obvious
fact that the great majority of the
countries are predominantly rural and
most of them will continue to be so
even at the end of this century.
ASHISH BOSE, of India, is professor at the
Demographic Research Centre, Institute of
Economic Growth, in Delhi, and Secretary-
General of the Indian Association for the
Study of Population. A specialist on ques¬
tions of urban growth, he is the author of
"Studies in India's Urbanization (1901-1971)",
published in 1972, and editor of several demo¬
graphic studies of which the latest is "Popu¬
lation in India's Development, 1947-2000".
The growing concern for environ¬
ment has introduced a new dimension
to demographic studies, and for that
matter, to all studies. It cannot be
denied that some of the environmental
problems are most acute in the big
cities, but the obsession with pollution
problems in big cities tends to under¬
estimate the urgency of environmental
problems like floods, deforestation,
soil erosion, primitive sanitary condi¬
tions, and a host of allied problems in
rural areas. This gives rise to the
tendency of most people to equate
environmental problems with pollution
problems of big cities. And yet the
majority of the world population lives
in rural areas afflicted by serious
environmental problems.
One of the pioneering studies on
environment Only One Earth by Bar¬
bara Ward and René Dubos begins
the chapter on "Problems of human
settlements" as follows: "The first
need is to take the strain off existing
cities", and proceeds to give some
figures indicating the deplorable hous¬
ing condition in Indian cities. But one
could argue with equal force that "the
first need is to take the strain off rural
areas the strain of poverty, unem¬
ployment and economic and social
stagnation." One could also give
figures for the deplorable state of the
productive base of the rural economy
in countries like India.
An overemphasis on the problems
of big cities created by "the human
avalanche" of migration, to use the pic¬
turesque phrase of Ward and Dubos,
underestimates the positive role of
migration in relieving rural poverty.
There is inadequate realization of the
role of cities as reception centres for
the rural poor in countries like India.
The tendency to look upon rural-urban
migration as a nuisance and urbaniza¬
tion as an evil and to dream of pure
air and the picturesque landscape in
the countryside is to shut one's eyes
to economic reality.
This is not to deny the urgency of
positive measures to regulate rural-
urban migration. But the popular view
that as rural to urban migration is
creating serious problems, such migra¬
tion should be curbed, is an over-sim¬
plification. One should ask: Serious
problems for whom? Certainly not for
the rural migrant in spite of all the
hostilities of the urban environment.
In fact, rural poverty and unemploy¬
ment drive the migrant to the city.
Can one look upon the cities as the
exclusive preserve of only those who
are already there and ask for an
internal passport system in the name
of orderly urban development? As a
recent study of poverty in India points
out: "Urban poverty is an outflow of
rural poverty. Hence action against
poverty has to be initiated in the rural
areas."
It is important to realize that the
success of urbanization policies in
developing countries depends to a ^
39

The world's largest
cities
and
the world's fastest
growing cities
40
W considerable extent on the success of
modernization of agriculture and trans¬
formation of rural areas. Under condi¬
tions of rapid population growth and
agricultural stagnation, the flow of
migration from rural to urban areas
cannot be stemmed merely by restric¬
tive policies. The best deterrent to
migration in such a situation is accele¬
rated rural development.
Gunnar Myrdal has discussed the
problem of agricultural development
at length in his Asian Drama. Analyz¬
ing the main difficulties involved in
formulating policies in South Asia, he
refers to the urgency of making greater
use of a labour force today largely
underutilized and rapidly increasing in
size if a much higher volume of
aggregate output is to be achieved.
A common feature of developing
countries in Asia is the excessive
dependence on agriculture, and one of
the primary objectives of development
planning is to reduce this dependence
and to evolve a more diversified
occupational structure. However, both
on account of excessive population
growth and the colonial background
and related factors, there has been a
structural stagnation in these countries.
The population problem cannot be
viewed merely in terms of an accelerat¬
ing growth rate on account of a per¬
sistently high birth-rate and a rapidly
declining death-rate. The population
problem in the developing countries
of Asia is much more a problem of
structural stagnation on account of a
persistently high proportion of the
working force having to depend on
traditional agriculture.

Considered from this viewpoint,
improvement in agricultural technology
and the modernization of agriculture
will have a bearing not only on agricul¬
tural productivity but will also release
forces of modernization which will
affect the attitude towards family size.
It is curious that in the massive dis¬
cussions on the population problem
in recent years so little has been said
about the relevance of land reforms.
Once we look upon the population
problem as a problem of structural
stagnation, any measure which can
break this stagnation should be con¬
sidered as a development measure.
Further, if such a measure encour¬
ages occupational mobility, it is direct¬
ly relevant to family planning in terms
of a higher motivation to practise
family planning.
To the extent that land reforms
succeed in giving land to landless
agricultural workers, they generate
occupational mobility and can there¬
fore be considered as both a develop¬
mental measure and a fertility influenc¬
ing measure.
In any case, in countries where a
predominant majority of the population
depends on agriculture and the major
share of the national income is derived
from agriculture, it is natural that any
demographic policy which seeks to
influence fertility behaviour must take
note of this basic economic reality.
Unless the social and economic life of
the rural masses is touched by our
policy measures, economic and social
stagnation cannot be broken.
Ashlsh Bose
41
