ri*0
Drawings © 1974 Giunti-Barbera, Florence and Johnson Reprint Corporation. New York
by Eugenio Garin
LEONARDO da Vinci spent many
years of his life as a restless
wanderer. After his early years
in the stimulating artistic climate
of Florence, his life reads like a
travelogue.
In 1482, at the age of thirty, he
moved to Milan to enter the service
of Lodovico il Moro as an engineer,
for in those days artists were
considered craftsmen and technicians
and it was common practice for them
to be interested in and work on
technical and scientific questions.
Then in the 1490s a period of change
and instability began in Italy. Lorenzo
the Magnificent died in Florence.
France (and later Spain and Austria)
invaded Italy. There was crisis in the
Duchy of Milan. And in Florence Savo¬
narola was organizing his Republican
experiment.
Amidst all this turmoil Leonardo first
went to work for the French, then
wandered from one Italian city to
another: to Mantua and the splendid
court of Isabella d'Esté, back to
Florence, to Urbino where he was
received by Cesare Borgia and then to
Rome. Finally in 1516 he moved to
France at the invitation of King
Francis I. When he died three years
later he had met and worked for some
of the most exceptional men of his
time and had lived through a period
of renaissance art and culture in Italy
and France, which was without parallel
in Europe.
EUGENIO GARIN, professor of the history
of philosophy at the University of Florence, is
internationally known for his studies on the
culture of the Renaissance and medieval
thought. He is the author of major works on
tenth-century Italian culture.
Yet, it would not be incorrect to say
that in many ways Leonardo was a
tragic figure. He was a man alone.
He had no family (he was an illegitimate
child) and had no social standing. He
knew that the world was breaking up
around him and that its values were
being swept aside by the blind force
of events. Amidst the wars and turmoil
surrounding him, he plodded on with
his eternal search for a supreme
harmony. Death cast its shadow over
everything: "I thought I was learning
how to live," Leonardo wrote, "but
I was learning how to die."
The lifeline which had once bound
the intellectual to the city was broken.
The idea of civic pride was on the
wane. Political power in Italy had
passed into the hands of rich
oligarchies and tyrants, some mean-
spirited, others able men. The in¬
tellectual was no longer a churchman.
In Leonardo's time he was a layman
who thought of himself first and fore¬
most as a technician ready to offer
his services to any ruler who was
interested. Leonardo would offer to
build a bridge across the Golden Horn
for the Sultan.
Referring to himself as "the infidel
called Leonardo," he wrote to the
Sultan as follows: "I, your servant,
have heard it said that you intended to
build this bridge but that you could not
do so because you could not find men
capable of doing it. Now I, your
humble servant, know how to build this
bridge and will build it."
Leonardo also undertook to build
a fortress for Cesare Borgia and a
model city for the ruler of Milan, duke
Lodovico il Moro. He set to work
designing all kinds of machines, such
as a device for flying from a mountain
top and a means of underwater
transport. He Invented ingenious
machines for use at court entertain¬
ments, and made elaborate war engines
to put paid to his patron's enemies.
(It didn't really matter to him who the
enemies were.) As an engineer, he
had a lot in common with the politician
of that period who was also scientist
and expert, chief among them being
Machiavelli.
The legend surrounding Leonardo,
as an expression of his own time and
a model for all ages, began to take
shape almost with Leonardo's death.
Its outlines are eloquently drawn by
Giorgio Vasari in the first edition of
his Lives of the Painters, published
in 1550, only thirty years after Leo¬
nardo died.
Vasari's Leonardo was a man fas¬
cinated by science, a passionate
enquirer into the mysteries of science
and nature, a man driven by the
curiosity of a magician oran astrologer.
"His capricious research led him to
natural philosophy," Vasari wrote, "to
study the properties of herbs and to
observe the movements of the heavens,
the moon's orbit and the progress of
the sun." And in this first edition of
his Lives, Vasari also added: "He
developed such a heretical stance that
he lost interest in religion of any sort,
perhaps more interested in being a
philosopher than a Christian."
However, Vasari, who was being
perfectly faithful to what Leonardo had
written about himself, omitted this
sentence from the second edition of
his Lives, published in 1568, in the
straitened atmosphere which set in
after the Council of Trent.
For Vasari, Leonardo had been the
incarnation of the Ideal man as de¬
lineated by the philosophical dis¬
cussion group centred on Lorenzo de
Medici. "The heavens often rain down
the richest gifts on human beings
naturally," Vasari wrote, "but some¬
times with lavish abundance bestow
upon a single individual beauty, grace
and ability, so that, whatever he does,
every action is so divine that he out¬
distances all other men, and clearly
displays how his genius is the gift of
God and not an acquirement of human
art. Men saw this in Leonardo da
Vinci."
Thus Vasari was simply depicting,
in his own way and according to the
perspective of his times, the man that
Leonardo had wanted to be. Not so
much the ¡mage of himself that Leo¬
nardo presented as the character
which he had delicately yet carefully
fashioned for himself.
The basic premise underlying all
Leonardo's work is that the artist, and
above all the painter (which is how
Leonardo primarily thought of himself),
must understand every object he
depicts if he is to be worthy of his
art, since his task is to represent
reality in all its facets. In other words,
40

Photo Unesco Courier
Leonardo sketched
this set of ball
bearings in
Codex Madrid I
almost 500 years ago.
It bears a remarkable
resemblance to the
modern set of ball
bearings shown above
left. Leonardo
understood that
"if balls or rollers
touch each other in
their motion, they will
make the movement
more difficult." To
solve this problem,
says "The Unknown
Leonardo", he put
the bearings in
the ring-shaped race
shown here so that
they could rotate
freely. Top of opposite
page, drawing in the
Codex> Atlanticus
for studying
tractive effort.
Drawing © 1974 by McGraw-Hill Book Co.
(UK) Limited, Maidenhead, England
and Taurus Ediciones, S. A Madrid, Spain
he must know the whole world around
him: its Innermost secrets, its fun¬
damental laws, its origins and causes.
If we fail to understand this essential
fact about Leonardo then we risk
missing the point of his life's work.
Leonardo himself was perfectly
clear on this point. He declared that
the painter should be a "universal
master", capable of "imitating" through
art "all the different shapes which are
produced by nature." "The artist must
"first have a mental picture" of every
form. He must know the reasons for
everything. He must use his intellect
to master the brute force of the
elements, and he must learn how to
construct all kinds of machines and
devices which will enable him to
reproduce reality and triumph over it.
"The painter," Leonardo proclaims, 'is,
in conflict and competition with Nature; r
41

he is the Lord and Master of Nature."
It has been said that the enormous
mass of material in Leonardo's note¬
books gives the impression that he
intended to produce an encyclopaedia
of human knowledge. It is most pro¬
bable that this was indeed his purpose.
The idea was not a new one: Leo¬
nardo was acquainted with the en¬
cyclopaedias of the Middle Ages and
knew Pliny's Natural History, which
was widely read and admired during
the Renaissance. And Leonardo was
apparently much more aware than he
lets on of what was going on in the
"sciences" during this time.
The real novelty lay in his line of
approach. He did not simply seek to
accumulate facts and data or examples
of strange occurrences for his own
edification and contemplation. His
purpose was action: he wanted to
create, to become "Lord and Master"
over Nature. And so he strained to go
beyond what the senses observed and
sought to apprehend the deeper forces
which act on the senses.
It was precisely because he wanted
to produce in the eyes of the beholder
the effects that the real world
produces, and because he wished to
do so in a fresh, transfigured way, that
Leonardo felt that he had to reach
down into the roots of the visible world
and that he had to comprehend the
impulses which produce optical images.
If an artist wants to render all the
possible effects of light, Leonardo
reasoned, then he should learn what
light actually is, study light rays and
the laws governing their diffusion, the
structure of the eye and the charac¬
teristics, of sight. Before undertaking
to carve the human form, an artist
should have long practice in the
dissection of dead bodies. He should
be an expert in anatomy, have a good
knowledge of muscular movement, and
the whole process of movement in a
living body.
Drawing © 1974 Giunti-Barbera, Florence, and
Johnson Reprint Corporation, New York
Similarly, to paint the macrocosm
that is, the world around us the artist
must study the anatomy of the uni¬
verse, scrutinize its subtlest fibres and
examine its every movement and
manifestation.
Leonardo's notebooks are the ex¬
traordinary fragments of this great
new-type encyclopaedia, based not on
texts or scholastic disputes, nor
indeed on superficial experiments, but
instead on studies in depth into the
unknown, using calculations, measure¬
ments, laws and elementary forms
which then make it possible to work
back to the surface of things, to
phenomena which we can understand
and thereby dominate, transform and
mould to our needs.
Such an encyclopaedia, as conceived
by Leonardo is not unlike a great
anatomical or physiological study of
the universe. Just as man is a world
in miniature (a microcosm) and in¬
corporates everything contained in the
universe (and hence is capable of
knowing everything, and can do and
become everything), so the world is
like a great living organism (a macro¬
cosm) with water. instead of blood as
its life-giving force, and its "causes"
that is, its mathematical laws are its
soul.
Light, motion and life these are the
fabric and structure of the universe.
We see that the chapters of the en¬
cyclopaedia fall naturally into place
with sections on optics, mechanics,
hydraulics, anatomy, biology, physi¬
ology and cosmology. Then come the
machines which enable man to rival
Nature. And finally we have the crown
and summit of It all, the science of
painting, which Leonardo saw as fun¬
damental and basic to the whole work.
For through art, according to Leonardo,
a new world is created inside the
world. This is the world of man the
"creator" and poet, a world which
triumphs over the existing world.
The world-view which found its most
extraordinary outlet in Leonardo cannot
obviously be considered his own
unique creation. The circles in which
he moved during the first thirty years
of his life had seen other distinguished
artists with a broad cultural back¬
ground including training In scientific
as well as literary disciplines.
Filippo Brunelleschi, for example, is
known to have carried on an intellec¬
tual exchange for many years with one
of the greatest mathematicians and
scientists of the century, Paolo Tosca-
nelli.
Italy had also known other en¬
cyclopaedic minds before Leonardo,
such as Lorenzo Ghiberti and Leon
Battista Alberti. Alberti, like Leonardo,
The famous needle-sharpening machine
drawn by Leonardo in the Codex Atlanticus.
He hoped that this machine would
bring him "60,000 ducats a year", but
it is unlikely that it was ever constructed.
was a skilled artist. He had made a
special study of physics, mathematics
and optics because he felt they were
indispensable for an artist.
But throughout their lives these men
had preserved an attachment to their
cities. Leonardo on the other hand
is totally detached from the idea of
the city-state (Florence, Milan); his
science transcends civic and national
boundaries and has no ideological or
national loyalty.
Leonardo had nothing in common
with the humanist "dignitaries" of his
time or with the scholastics entrenched
in their cities, nor for that matter with
the artists attached to a particular
court or belonging to a specific school.
His patriotism extended quite simply
to the universe, to which he belonged
entirely, like his mathematics, science
and philosophy.
His architectural projects fired the
imagination of rulers such as Cesare
Borgia, Lodovico il Moro, the King of
France, and the Sultan of the Ottoman
Empire. Leonardo's work is inscribed
in great geometrical flourishes across
the open book of the universe.
Science and technology owe allegiance
to neither church nor country.
To understand Leonardo's detached
attitude, his wanderings from city to
city, his readiness to offer his
"secrets" to the sovereigns of so many
different lands, the above remarks
must be kept constantly in mind.
Leonardo's "secrets" were not, or not
only, his exquisite paintings; they were
weapons and instruments of war. But
for Leonardo they were nothing more
than machines that reflected man's
scientific Inventiveness, his drive to
interpret Nature and bend it to his
will. For him, these "instruments",
were neither good nor evil but simply
effective in other words, they did the
job required of them.
It is here, in his "detachment" as a
scientist and engineer, that Leonardo
parallels Machiavelli, an affinity much
more significant than the fact (not
without its own importance) that both
men passed briefly under the aegis
of Cesare Borgia in his court at Urbino.
The extraordinary synthesis achieved
by Leonardo reached its culmination,
as we have pointed out earlier, in
"painting", which for him, was charged
with very special meanings. Leonardo
saw the work of the painter as
dominating the process of human
knowledge. It was the ultimate goal
of scientific enquiry and the starting
point of creative endeavour. Creativity
and scientific research are not two
separate activities but part of the same
circular process with the artist standing
at the critical juncture. He is the
meeting point between knowledge and
action. More precisely, where know¬
ledge is transformed into creation.
It is no accident if Leonardo extols
the painter for he always attributes
special importance to the eye and the
act of visual perception, as well as
anything having to do with the world
of images.
Leonardo always tended to express
42

Leonardo's notebooks
contain many drawings,
diagrams and architectural
plans for an "Ideal City"
In a manuscript now at
the Institut de France,
Paris, Leonardo writes
that "A building should
always be detached on
all sides in order that
its true shape may be
seen." Leonardo wanted
the inhabitants of his
ideal city to enjoy as
much privacy as possible
and to this end devised
ingenious access systems
by staircase: above
right, building with
quadruple staircase, and,
above, a double spiral
staircase designed for
the "Ideal City". In
Codex Madrid II Leonardo
drew many architectural
studies and sketches,
using his ideas on private
corridors and staircases
to design a castle in
which the lord could see
what was going on
in the building.
his ideas in visual terms: "The
painter," he wrote, "should resemble
a mirror." He should welcome "the
multiplicity of things," not just their
external forms, but also their inner
properties and essence, and their
elementary geometric patterns, which
stand at the roots of perceptual ex¬
perience and allow us to understand it.
Hence the primacy of mathematics
over the evidence of the senses: "no
human enquiry can properly be called
science unless it passes by way of
mathematical reasoning," said Leo¬
nardo. Hence too the "philosophical"
importance of painting: "Anyone who
feels contempt for painting has no real
affection for philosophy . . . Painting
itself is philosophy because it captures
the movement of bodies through space
in their full spontaneity. And philos¬
ophy does exactly the same thing ..."
These two aspects of human activity,
knowledge and action, "seeing" and
"creating", cannot, therefore, be sep¬
arated. The circular process science-
engineering-art and seeing-doing is a
single unique activity.
For Leonardo, the invention and
construction of machines underscore
a number of important considerations:
(1) that technology and science are
inseparable, the two being linked by
the "mathematical" structure of all I
Photos Institut de France, Paris Leonardo designed a stable with
automatic mangers which would not
be out of place on a 20th-century farm
(drawing below is from a} manuscript
in the Institut de France)j The hay. in -
the loft Is fed "to the mangers, by
means of funnels, narrow at the top and
wide over the manger". Leonardo
also designed a 220-feet-long stable
capable of housing 128 horses.

Below, detail of Leonardo's drawing
of the "Ideal City" which appears in
a manuscript now at the Institut de
France, Paris, showing its high and
low level roads. Lower photo, model of
the Ideal City in the Milan Science
Museum, reconstructed from Leonardo's
drawings and notes. Leonardo wrote
that "By the high streets no vehicles
and similar objects should circulate,
but they are exclusively for the use
of gentlemen. The carts and burdens
for the use and convenience of the
inhabitants have to go by the low
[streets]." In his plans for the city,
Leonardo is exclusively concerned with
social and hygienic goals, unlike most
architects of his time.
uûûûQûûtt
One of Leonardo's grandiose projects
was the bridge across the Bosphorus
from Constantinople to Galata which
he offered to build for the Sultan
of the Ottoman Empire. Right, above,
drawing of this bridge from above
and in elevation, from a manuscript
in the Institut de France. Leonardo
notes the length, 1,150 feet Model,
right, below, by a modern Swiss scientist,
D.F. Stussi proves that the plans
were technically feasible.
k things; (2) that the skeletal framework
of physical objects can be reduced to
a mechanical model; (3) that there is
a fundamental connexion between
mechanics and real life; (4) that
research into models based on visual
observation shows that "the eye is the
least fallible of all the human senses."
From all this we can clearly see the
perfect unity that existed in Leonard
encyclopaedia, in which it is absuiv.
to separate science, technology and
art. Vasari's mistake was to break, or
rather misunderstand, the close link
between these three domains, with the
result that he failed to see the real
significance of the work, and finally
concluded that it was an example of
Leonardo's madness and incoherence.
"He perpetrated many such follies,"
Vasari wrote, "he studied mirrors and
made curious experiments to find oil
for painting . . . His knowledge of art,
indeed, prevented him from finishing
many things which he had begun, for
he felt that his hand would be unable
to realize the perfect creations of his
imagination, as his mind formed such
difficult, subtle and marvellous
conceptions that his hands, skilful as
they were, could never have ex¬
pressed them ..."
Vasari referred to these activities
of Leonardo as "caprices". But in
reality they were part of an unending
search for the unifying factor in human
experience, for a meaning of the
created universe, for man's place
in the world. Here was the restless
beginning of a new era, a new way
of understanding art and science.
Each of Leonardo's thousands of
manuscript pages, with their awesome
entwining of fragments of minutely
detailed prose and delicately refined
illustrations, strange machines and
precisely sketched anatomy, not only
symbolizes man's perennial dreams
and aspirations but also expresses
a totally new way of considering man's
task on earth as an endless search
to master the transient stuff of reality.
I have taken care to stress Leo¬
nardo's extreme refinement in every¬
thing (whether it be his hand-writing
or the disdain he showed for the
literati). He was an exquisitely literate
man, and we know from the Madrid
notebooks that he possessed a rich
and widely diverse library.
All of Leonardo's "caprices" are
justified by an awareness that man
and his works are fragile. And here
perhaps is the sign, and the secret,
of Leonardo's relevance for all of us
today: the fact that he understood
and expressed with superlative skill
the enigmatic insecurity of man and
the mystery of his destiny and condi¬
tion, at a time when unforeseen and
unforeseeable possibilities were open¬
ing up in art and science.
Eugenio Garln
¡S.*«r rfWoJJVrV» -^f^*? VKroflf
Photo © Science Museum Milan
44
