Illyria of yesterday
Albania of today
Archaeological excavations over the past 30 years
at hundreds of ancient sites have thrown new light
on the earliest ancestors of the Albanian people
by Muzafer Korkuti
I
MUZAFER KORKUTI, Albanian historian end
archaeologist, Is a leading authority and the
author of many studies on Albanian antiquity.
The article we publish here is based on a
special study by the author entitled in Alba¬
nian. "Shqiperia Arkeologiike' (Archaeolo¬
gical Albania), recently published in a tri¬
lingual {Albanian. French and English) edition
by the Archaeological Section of the Institute
of History and Languages at the National
University of Tirana (Albania).
|N 1948, workers draining
the Maliq marshes in southeast Albania
discovered potsherds, horn tools and
small flint knives embedded in the
mud of a drainage channel. Quite by
chance they had stumbled across an
important prehistoric site.
To appreciate the significance of
their find it is essential to under¬
stand the existing state of Albanian
archaeology and current theories on
the history and civilization of the
lllyrians and their direct descendants,
the Albanians.
At the beginning of this century, the
archaeological map of Albania was
virtually blank. The limited amount of
research that went on was the work of
foreign scholars who were mainly
interested in Greek and Roman civi¬
lization and hence confined their
attention to the Albanian coastal towns
which the Greeks and Romans had
colonized. Even those whose interests
ranged wider did not go into the fun¬
damental questions of lllyrian history.
Yet Albania is a country of ancient
culture and its soil has been inhabited
since prehistoric times. The lllyrians
were formidable warriors, as we know
from their stiff resistance to the
Romans between 6 and 9 A.D. They
were also skilful metal-workers and
potters.
Archaeological research
in recent years has shown
that Albania can boast
a continued period of
inhabitation going back
to prehistoric times. Left,
an early Iron Age burial
mound after its excavation
in the region of Këneta
in north east Albania.
Above right, a striking
sphinx-like creature with
a woman's head and
bust, a bird's wing and
the talons of a bird or a
lion. It was discovered
in the ruins of Antigonea,
in southern Albania.

:>**"
+*>y.
Photos Mehmet Kallfa. Tirana
Nevertheless, the culture and civi¬
lization of the indigenous population
of Albania continued to be largely
ignored until the end of the Second
World War, which saw the birth of
Albanian archaeology as a scientific
discipline.
Albanian archaeologists began to
delve into the history of their country.
Some of their finds have been
sensational, and today they can look
back on nearly twenty-eight years of
systematic work which has illuminated
many previously obscure aspects of
lllyrian history.
They have excavated a large number
of settlements, fortresses and necro¬
polises from various periods, and the
fruits of their work can be seen in the
ancient castles which tower over the
city suburbs of modern Albania, in
fortified settlements deep in the heart
of the countryside, and in a host of
museums scattered about the country.
Albania currently boasts over 170
archaeological sites and new ones
open each year.
It had long been believed that the
lllyrians brought Iron Age civilization
to the Balkans, which they reached as .
part of a great wave of migrations from
Central Europe durino the second half
of the second millenium B.C. The
excavations at Maliq and elsewhere
were to disprove this.
For six years archaeologists worked
at Maliq. They discovered that the
site consisted of several layers, and
that it had been inhabited from the late
Neolithic Age (the first half of the
third millenium B.C.) until the late
Bronze Age (the end of the second
millenium B.C.).
The late Neolithic layer revealed the
remains of rectangular huts with wattle
and daub walls and clay floors. Each
hut had a space set aside for an oven.
Containers and potsherds of various
shapes and decoration were also
unearthed from this layer.
During the Aeneolithic Age (the
transitional period between the Neo¬
lithic Age and the Bronze Age), the
inhabitants of Maliq lived in l£\'<e
dwellings built on piles,- hundreds of
which were dug out during the exca¬
vations. Aeneolithic copper axes also
came to light, along with a rich
collection of pottery decorated with
geometric patterns on black and grey
glazes.
The Maliq site was inhabited right
through the Bronze Age, but by this
time the water level had dropped and
the huts were being built on the ground.
Most of the Bronze Age specimens at
Maliq were pots which had several
features in common with those from
the previous period, although some
new forms and designs had also been
developed.
Meanwhile, archaeologists were
learning more about the Bronze Age
population of present-day Albania from
excavations of tumuli on the Pazhok
plain near the city of Elbasan. Tumuli
earth and stone burial mounds
standing anything up to four metres
high have revealed a great deal of
information about lllyrian civilization,
for the lllyrians believed in a life after
death and were buried with objects
such as weapons, jewellery, pottery _.
and tools which would help them in **
the after-life. *>
After meticulous examination, it was
discovered that the Bronze Age tumuli
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

l*-^*í .
fte
"i*s&
&
y**
fe !
& Jt>í.
6
FROM ILLYRIA TO ALBANIA (Continued)
on the Pazhok plain bore a remarkable
resemblance to later, lllyrian Iron Age
tumuli at Kruma and Këneta in northern
Albania and at Vodhina and elsewhere
in the south. Both Bronze and Iron
Age tumuli had been built in the same
way and identical funeral rites had
been performed in each period.
Furthermore, there was a close simi¬
larity between the contents of the
Bronze and Iron Age graves. All this
indicated that the people buried in the
tumuli at each period belonged to the
same tribe.
Some extremely important middle
and late Bronze Age objects were
unearthed at Pazhok: bronze swords,
spears, daggers, oold and bronze
ornaments, and earthenware. The
pottery revealed several features of
the earlier Aeneolithic tradition and
suggested that the people who lived
there during the Bronze Age were
indigenous.
The experts' observations and con¬
clusions from their discoveries at
Pazhok and Maliq may be summed up
as follows.
First of all, the late Neolithic civi¬
lization discovered at Maliq (and at
another prehistoric site at Kamnik in
the Kolonja region) is in many ways
similar to contemporary cultures in the
nearby south and must be seen as
part of the great Balkan-Anatolian
cultural complex. This means that the
Maliq Neolithic civilization originated
in the southeast.
Secondly, the Aeneolithic popu¬
lation of Maliq also came from the
southeast. Thirdly, the Bronze Age
inhabitants of the region were the
direct descendants of the Aeneolithic
Age population, and the distinguishing
feature of their culture, their pottery,
inherited many characteristics from
that of the previous era.
Finally, this pottery has many new
features which have been found on
other Bronze Age sites in Albania and
which are also characteristic of lllyrian
Iron Age pottery.
All this evidence supports the
hypothesis that the Bronze Age civi¬
lization discovered in Albania is lllyrian,
and that the lllyrians were formed in
the Balkans and already existed as a
people by the beginning of the Bronze
Age. In other words lllyrian civilization
in Albania is much older than had been
thought.
One of the main fields in which
Albanian archaeologists have been
active has been research into lllyrian
civilization during the Iron Age, when
it reached its apogee. They have
concentrated mainly on excavating
necropolises and fortified settlements
and have made particularly important
discoveries in tumuli on a site in the

DEER HUNT
MOUNTAIN ROCK
Albania's oldest rock painting (left,- circled) dating back
to the beginning of the Iron Age was recently
discovered on the face of "Spile Rock" in the course
of archaeological work which unearthed a prehistoric
settlement near the village of Tren in eastern Albania.
Below, enlarged detail of rock painting depicting
mounted hunters and dogs in pursuit of a deer.
Photos Mehmet Kallfa, Tirana
Mati river valley, at Vajza in the Vlora
district and at Upper Dropull near to
Gjirokastra.
In the Mati valley archaeologists
excavated thirty-five tumuli while a
dam was being built for a hydro¬
electric power station. Most of the
tumuli dated from early in the last
millenium B.C., although others were
more recent and some were even put
up during the Roman Empire.
The necropolis belonged to an
lllyrian tribe known to history as the
Pirusts. They were renowned as
tough fighters, and the excavations
produced evidence that they were
equally proficient as metalworkers.
For the Mati valley tumuli yielded a
surprisingly large number of bronze
and iron objects: spearheads of
various sizes, swords, daggers, helmets
and other weapons, as well as
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

Terracotta figurine of a woman
carrying a water pitcher. It was
unearthed close to the monumental
fountain of Apollonia (4th-3rd
century B.C.), one of the great
cities of ancient Albania, on the
Adriatic coast
The ancient inhabitants of
Albania (the lllyrians) showed
great skill and imagination in
the fashioning of their pottery
and particularly in the shapes
and sizes of their earthenware
handles. Right, large-eared
urn found in a burial mound in
the valley of the Mati river in
northern Albania.
Photo Albanian Embassy, Paris
FROM ILLYRIA TO ALBANIA
(Continued)
ornamental objects clasps, necklaces,
buttons, bracelets and diadems.
The earliest fortified settlements in
Albania date from the transitional
period between the Bronze Age and
the Iron Age. Their ruins can be seen
scattered throughout southern Albania.
These early fortresses are usually
found in strategic positions on high
ground, dominating fertile plains and
river valleys and surrounded by good
pasture land. They conform to no
standard layout since they were skil¬
fully adapted to local topographical
conditions so that building was reduced
to a minimum. Remains of wattle and
daub huts have been discovered
within walls made of huge blocks of
rough stone put together without
mortar, and in some places more than
ten feet thick.
Detailed study has revealed conclus¬
ively that the early Iron Age forts at
Gajtan, Tren and Rosuja were used
by lllyrian tribes for defensive pur¬
poses. There is no evidence of any
economic activity worth speaking of;

they were simply strongholds where
the people and their flocks could take
refuge in time of war.
The second half of the Iron Age in
Albania saw the birth of a group of
lllyrian kingdoms and the development
of a system of economic production
based on slave ownership. A number
of castles and fortified settlements in.
southern lllyria date from this period.
Many of these settlements have now
been discovered and studied. Some
of them were added onto existing
forts; others were entirely new. The
walls of these late Iron Age forts were
built with remarkable technical sophis¬
tication of rectangular blocks of skil¬
fully hewn stone laid perfectly flush
without mortar.
A major discovery was a rectangular
stadium dating from the 3rd-2nd cen¬
turies B.C. It was found in the ruins
of the ancient lllyrian city of Amantia,
which is mentioned by fourth-century
Greek geographers and stood on the
site of the present-day village of Ploça.
Seventeen tiers of stone seats have
been uncovered on one side of this
well-preserved stadium, eight on the
other.
In the ruins of the ancient lllyrian
city of Dimale (present-day Krotina),
a portico with seven entrances has
been excavated, and at Byllis, once
so powerful that it minted its own
coinage, the remains of a theatre have
been found.
For several years now work has
also been going on in the imposing
ruins of Antigonea in the Drino valley
in southern Albania, near the modern
town of Gjiroka'stër. Visitors to the
excavations can stroll along the
straight streets and walk into the
houses of this once-great lllyrian city.
In Lower Selenica four monumental
graves hewn into the rock have been
discovered among the remains of an
lllyrian settlement whose name is still
unknown. The burial vault of one of
the graves contained dozens of
weapons, bronze and earthenware
vases, and many gold and silver
ornaments, including a remarkable belt
made of a thin strip of silver carved
with three horsemen and a warrior.
In the same grave was a pair of iron
shackles attached to the legs of a
skeleton a slave who had been put
there to serve his master in the next
world.
Although there is relatively little
monumental building in lllyrian cities,
they have yielded an abundance of
objects which have given historians
a profound insight into the economic,
social and cultural development of
lllyria.
Numerically, pottery such as con¬
tainers large and small for storing and
transporting wine, oil and grain takes
pride of place among the findings,
along with metal tools and building
materials. There are fewer weapons,
ornamental jewellery and other decor¬
ative objects.
An interesting feature is that some
pithoi, or wine-jar's, bear their makers'
seals, and we can still read on them
lllyrian names like Trito, Bato, Pito,
Genthios and Plator. Metal picks,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
MYTHOLOGY
AND PREHISTOR
Excavations in Albania have produced a
wealth of artifacts that throw new light
on its mythology and ancient cultures The
5,000-year-old Neolithic earthenware figu¬
rine (1) found at Kamnik, in south-east
Albania, is a symbol of the earth-mother
cult. In burial mounds at Kuçi Zi, in the
same region, many bronze objects have
been found In the form of birds (2) and
human figures (3) as well as bracelets and
clasps. They are believed to have been
used as amulets and ornaments. They
reveal the skill of Albania's metal crafts¬
men in the 8th century B.C. The small
bronze figurine (4) portrays Poseidon,
Greek god of the sea. It dates from the
2nd century B.C. and was unearthed at ft
Antigonea, in southern Albania. Jj
Photos Mehmet Kallfa. Tirana

MARBLE CITY OF ANCIENT ILLYRIA. Right, colonnade of white marble
statues discovered at Apollonia, western Albania, a coastal city inhabited
during the 4th century B.C. by lllyrians and by Greek settlers from
Corinth and Corfu.
5,000-YEAR-OLD LAKE-DWELLING COMMUNITY. Workers draining a
swamp In south-east Albania several years ago discovered a five-
thousand-year-old lake-dwelling community. Five years of excavation
brought to light a culture extending from the late Neolithic era up to
the end of the Bronze Age. Below, remains of the dwelling site,
showing the piles on which were built rectangular-shaped huts with
walls of wattle and daub. FROM ILLYRIA TO ALBANIA
(Continued)
sickles, scythes, pruning knives and
ploughs have also been discovered in
these late Iron Age fortified towns,
along with tiles and bricks in such
enormous quantities that given the
transport difficulties obtaining at that
time we can conclude that they were
manufactured locally.
The rise of lllyrian cities during the
4th century B.C. was followed by a
period of prosperity which lasted
roughly from the 3rd to the middle of
the 2nd century B.C. This was a time
of intense political, economic and
cultural activity in lllyria. Several
settlements which had hitherto been
little more than villages now expanded
and became in a real sense cities.
The great coastal cities of Dyr-
rhachion, Apollonia and Bouthroton
became the main centres of Hellenistic
culture in southern lllyria and as such
they boosted the region's economic
and cultural development. Commercial
and other contacts between the
lllyrian tribal aristocracy and these
Greek cities further accentuated
the economic inequalities and social
differences in lllyria. But at the same
time, trade expanded and the new
society based on slave-ownership
began to forge ahead.
The great age of lllyria stretched
from the 4th to the 2nd centuries B.C.,
and during this period she made a
sizeable contribution to the life of the
Greek cities on the coast.
The sequel to the dynamic expansion
of lllyrian society between the 4th and
2nd centuries B.C. came with its
vigorous resistance to the impact of
the Roman world. After a bitter
struggle, the Southern lllyrians manag¬
ed to maintain their individuality as a
people virtually intact, although from
this time their culture begins to bear
the marks of Roman influence. The
Northern lllyrians were less fortunate:
they lost their ethnic identity and were
assimilated by the foreign invaders.
The course of lllyrian history cannot
be properly understood without detailed
knowledge of the Greek and Roman
civilization of Albania's coastal cities,
a subject on which Albanian archae¬
ologists are currently concentrating.
It is a mistake to consider the
Hellenistic civilization of the slave-
owning cities of Apollonia, Dyrrha-
chion, Bouthroton and Orichon in
isolation from the lllyrian territory
which surrounded them. As time
Photo Albanian Embassy, Parle

went by, more and more lllyrians went
to live in these cities and made a
distinctive contribution to their life.
The architecture of Apollonia is that
of a typical slave-owning city. The
aristocracy led a life of ease and
luxury, as we can see from the
sophisticated 1st-century B.C. houses
excavated in the northwest of the city
opposite the modern village of Pojan.
There are floors of brightly-coloured
mosaics, some of which are decorated
with geometric and floral motifs, while
others depict mythological scenes,
such as Achilles fighting the Amazons.
One of Apollonia's most magnificent
and best-preserved monuments was
unearthed during systematic exca¬
vations carried out north of the city
between 1964 and 1968. This is the
nympheum, or monumental fountain,
which was put up during the city's most
prosperous period, around the end of
the 4th century B.C.
Recent work in Dyrrhachion has
also brought to light a number of
important buildings, including the city's
amphitheatre, which is comparable in
style and size to the biggest Roman
amphitheatres found elsewhere in the
Mediterranean world. Excavations at
Bouthroton and Orichon have like¬
wise provided information about Alba¬
nia's ancient history and lllyrian in¬
volvement in the life of the Greek
cities on the Coast.
During the last 28 years, Albanian
archaeologists have also made a
detailed study of early medieval Alba¬
nia and have drawn particular attention
to two points. Firstly, they stress that
although Albanian civilization extended
over a wide area, it had a pronounced
degree of cultural unity. Secondly,
they point to the persistence of lllyrian
influences, particularly as reflected in
metal ornaments of the period.
The lllyrian tradition mainly survived
where mining and metal-working contin¬
ued without a break, and in fact traces
of the lllyrian cultural heritage still
exist today in those parts of Albania
where there are rich mineral deposits
and where metals are mined and
worked on the spot. But ¡t is hardly
surprising that the medieval Albanians
should have Inherited this and other
traditions. They were after all the
direct descendants of the lllyrians.
This is not to say that early medieval
Albanian civilization was Immune to
outside influences. It was not. Alba¬
nians learned much from their contact
with the Roman and Byzantine worlds.
Yet the crucial fact remains that the
medieval Albanians were the direct
descendants of the ancient lllyrians.
They even owed their name to their
lllyrian ancestry, for Byzantine chroni¬
clers used the name of one small llly¬
rian tribe, the Albanoi, to describe the
whole lllyrian people.'
During the early Middle Ages this
term and its derivatives such as
Alban, Arban and Arber gradually came
to denote the whole area occupied
by the old Indigenous lllyrian popu¬
lation. It is just one more proof to
add to the multitude unearthed by
archeologists, of the ancient roots of
the Albanian people.
11
