Photos © Comet Zurich, Switzerland
4
Twenty - five
years ago a
doctor dreamed
a dream. And,
In this dream, he
saw thousands
of severely para¬
lyzed people
united in an
Olympics of the Paralyzed, the like of
which could hardly be believed in a
world which at the time wrote off these
unhappy victims of Injury and disease
as incurable cripples and outcasts.
Today this Is no longer a dream
but a reality, and those same paralyzed
men, women and children have ins¬
pired other disabled amputees, blind,
cerebral palsy cases to become
sportsmen and sportswomen in their
own right.
The doctor whose ideas launched
this world-wide movement of sports
for the disabled is Sir Ludwig Gutt-
mann. During the Second World War,
he first introduced sport at the Spinal
Injuries Centre, Stoke Mandeville Hos¬
pital, In England, as part of the medical
treatment of men and women with
injuries of the spinal cord who were
paralyzed from the waist or chest
downwards. His reasons were two¬
fold: first to train the body, and second,
to prevent the boredom of hospital life.
Sport is of much greater significance
for the severely disabled than for the
able-bodied person. Serious physical
handicap Interferes to a greater or
lesser degree with bodily function and
co-ordination and leads to abnormal
patterns of movement. These often
induce psychological tensions that
make social contact with the outside
world difficult or even Impossible.
If the paralyzed person is continually
stared at, he may develop an inferior¬
ity complex characterized by anxiety
with loss of self-confidence and per¬
sonal dignity; the result is self-pity,
self-centred isolation, and anti-social
attitudes. Taking an active part in
sporting activities restores his psycho¬
logical equilibrium and enables him to
face up to life In spite of his physical
disability.
The final, and possibly the noblest,
aim of sport for the disabled person
is to help him regain his contact with
the world around him. Sport develops
mental attitudes that are essential for
successful social re-integration and,
in particular, .for useful employment.
These were the reasons which led to

OLYMPIC
GAMES
FOR THE
PARALYZED
Triumph of the handicapped
thanks to one man's
vision and determination
Left, woman javelin thrower in the
finals of the Olympics of the Paralyzed,
in Heidelberg (Fed. Rep. of Germany,
1972); far left, putting the shot at the
first Swiss National Contest for the
Handicapped, at Kriens (1973). Oppo¬
site, emblem of the Olympics of the
Handicapped, whose entwined wheels
of a wheel-chair have been incorrectly
interpreted by some to be an attempt
to copy the five-ring symbol of the
World Olympics.
Sir Ludwig Guttmann,
founder of the Olympics of
the Paralyzed.
the founding of the Stoke Mandeville
Games by Sir Ludwig in July 1948,
when a small party of 16 paralyzed
ex-servicemen and ex-servicewomen
took part in archery competitions. In
the ensuing years the Games grew
and the number of events were In¬
creased to include, as well as archery,
bowls, basketball, field events, fencing,
track events, snooker, swimming, table
tennis and weight lifting.
Today these Games are an Interna¬
tional Sports Festival (the Olympics of
the Paralyzed) which are held annually
for three successive years at Stoke
Mandeville Sports Stadium and every
fourth year In close connexion with
the Olympic Games.
It was this outstanding sportsman¬
ship that prompted the International
Olympic Committee, during the Olym
pic Games in Melbourne in 1956, to
award the Fearnley Cup to the organ¬
ization of the Stoke Mandeville Games.
This is an Olympic Award which any
sports organization can win for out¬
standing achievements In the ¡deals
of the Olympic movement.
In 1960 the Games were held in
Rome, in 1964 In Tokyo, in 1968 in
Israel (as Mexico was not able to
accommodate them as well as the
Olympics) and In 1972 in Heidelberg.
In Heidelberg, as in Munich, these
Games were opened by the President
of the Federal Republic of Germany,
Dr. Gustav Heinemann, who, at the
same time, bestowed on Sir Ludwig
Guttmann, the founder of the Games,
the Golden Star of the Grand Cross
of the Order of Merit of the Federal
Republic.
Who would have thought when the
Stoke Mandeville Games started in
1948 that one day paraplegics and
even tetrapleglcs from all parts of the
world would fly as sportsmen and
sportswomen in their own right, just
as do the able-bodied, ten thousand
miles and more to represent their
countries in international sports fes¬
tivals?
The whole concept of the Games is
embodied In a message written by Sir
Ludwig in 1956: "The aim of the Stoke
Mandeville Games is to unite paralyzed
men and women from all parts of the
world In an international sports move¬
ment, and your spirit of true sportsman¬
ship today will give hope and inspira¬
tion to thousands of paralyzed people."
In 1960, this dynamic man founded
the British Sports Association for the
CONTINUED PAGE 8
5

Photos © I.S.M.G. Committee, Frankfurt, Fed. Rep. of Germany
Above, a team from one of the 41 countries at
the 1972 Olympics of the Paralyzed during the
opening parade ceremonies held at the Heidel¬
berg University sports stadium. Left, thrust and
parry in fencing. Right, basket-ball match.

Left, Competitors on their marks for the 100 metre race in last year's Swiss Natio¬
nal Contest at Kriens, Below, Jamaican team member in the final sprint before the
finish line at the Heidelberg Olympics.
WHO WOULD
HAVE THOUGHT?
Who would have thought that,
as a result of the Olympics of
the Paralyzed, held in Tokyo
in 1964, and after seeing the
performance of the handicapped
in sports, the Japanese Govern¬
ment would set up within six
months a factory specially desi¬
gned for employing paraple¬
gics? By 1968 Japan had
opened three such factories for
the disabled. This fact alone
proves the immense effect which
sport for the disabled has on
society as a whole to give their
paralyzed fellow-men a fair
chance for their integration
into society.
7

OLYMPICS FOR THE PARALYZED
(Continued)
Disabled, which is an umbrella orga¬
nization for all types of disabled
amputees, blind, cerebral palsy cases
and paraplegics.
Towards the end of 1967 his dream
of building a huge sports complex
for all disabled began to take form,
and in July 1969 the Stoke Mandeville
Sports Stadium for the Paralyzed and
other Disabled was opened by Queen
Elizabeth.
Four major Games are held at Stoke
Mandeville annually: The Multi-disabled
Children's Games, the National Stoke
Mandeville Games, the International
Stoke Mandeville Games and the Adult
Multi-disabled Games. The stadium Is
also used by disabled sports clubs for
week-end training, and by mentally and
physically handicapped people during
the week.
It is due to the loyalty and devotion
which Sir Ludwig inspires that this
stadium was built by voluntary contri¬
butions (with a small government grant)
from young schoolchildren and old age
pensioners and people from all walks
of life and the disabled themselves.
This brain child of Sir Ludwig's is
a monument to the devoted work he
has done throughout the years for
disabled persons all over the world so
that, through the medium of sport, they
may be reintegrated into the com¬
munity as equal and respected
citizens.
® TQAQ3Q ri

All above skiers are blind. They are participating in a contest
run by the French National Ski Federation. The skiers negotiate
even difficult slopes with ease thanks to a code language based
on the position of the hands on a clock called out to them by
sighted guides. "Eleven o'clock" means turn a bit to the left;
"one o'clock" turn a bit to the right. "Three o'clock" 45 degrees
to the right, etc. Left, three one-legged skiers whiz down a
mountain-side. Mini-skis on their ski poles aid balance.
Opposite, bottom photo: Hockey on wheel-chairs and tricycles
in a U.S. kindergarten for handicapped youngsters.
Right, using his crutch for leverage a young rider swings up
into the saddle. "It is ABILITY NOT DISABILITY that counts-
reads the motto on the stable of this riding centre for the
disabled in England.
Photos below: Tony Willis, 18-year-old, one-legged British
athlete clears 1 m. 83 in the high jump. On left, he approaches
the bar in a series of powerful hops and right, jack-knifes over
it. Tony is also an expert swimmer, football goal-keeper and
basketball player. Photo © Panmage, Paris
9
