THEY
CALLED ME
'APE MAN
HENRY VISCARDI Jnr. of the United States was born legless. He paid
his way through university =by refereeing basketball games from a wheel¬
chair and working as a sports reporter. "Abilities Inc.". a company he
founded in 1952 to demonstrate that disabled men and women can become
skilled workers, has since grown into a unique complex of educational and
vocational training centres. He has written seven books on the rehabi¬
litation of the disabled including an autobiography, "A Man's Stature" (John
Day, New York. 1952), "Give Us the Tools" (1959), "The School" (1964) and
"The Abilities Story" (1967) all published by Paul S. Eriksson Inc., New York.
by Henry Viscardi
I| was born without legs.
I lived most of my early life without
them, horribly deformed, an object of
pity and sometimes scorn. I was so
different that other children called me
"Ape Man". Something happened
over the years to change this.
Many years- have passed since my
childhood as a crippled boy. Edu¬
cation and rehabilitation were not
formalized then. They occurred in the
daily struggle of life. If anyone helped
you it was on an individual basis.
Some people have a proven flair
for transmitting powerful invitations to
others to regard life as pointless and

i
Photo © USIS, Pans
hopeless. They seem to be gifted at
getting others to give up, yield, give
in. They kill the dream, paralyze the
hope, cripple the joy. We all know
people like that and we are undone in
their presence.
Helen Keller, although blind and
deaf, was not one of these. She was
one of those splendid unforgettable
people who Invite us to life.
Thirty-five years ago when I was 27,
I received my first set of artificial limbs
in New York City where I was
born. War started shortly afterwards.
I became a field officer in the American
Red Cross. As an experience it is
one for which I can never give enough
thanks. For one thing, starting a new
life on artificial limbs where I stood
straight and tall for the first time, I was
born anew. It was a whole new life.
I was like a child.
After the war I turned to the world
of work and was well on my way to a
Vice-Presidency in a large national
organization. I could not resist the
urge to return to the world of the
disabled and in 1952 "Abilities, Inc."
was founded as a workshop for the
disabled.
It supports itself out of earnings,
pays prevailing wages, engages In
complex electronic work, banking and
clerical tasks and glass engraving of
exquisite beauty. Since its beginning
over 20 years ago, thousands of
disabled persons have come to be
trained, to work and, for many, to pass
on to other rewarding careers in
private industry. Many have remained,
some for 15 or 20 years.
All are covered by complete
medical, surgical benefits, sick leave
and vacation policies, life insurance
and disability benefits for total and
permanent disability and all are covered
by a retirement plan which will allow
retirement on 50 to 90 per cent of
salary in addition to social security
benefits of approximately $300 a month.
Yet all were so disabled at the time
of employment that they could not find
a job.
This remarkable record Includes
surpassing economic achievement
over a period of less than 20 years.
In that period of time these disabled
workers manufactured goods valued at
$48,000,000. They received salaries
totalling $25,544,000 They as workers
paid $5,749,000 In taxes. In insurance,
rehabilitation, public education and
benefit programmes a total of
$21,280,000 was invested.
If these same people had remained
on welfare rolls or had been otherwise
supported, it would have cost over
$11,000.000. Add this to what they
earned and produced and the total of
new wealth which they returned to the
community because they worked and
produced would be $112,000,000 over
a period of less than 20 years. I find
it difficult to estimate what they brought
to their lives In dignity and personal
happiness through working and pro¬
ducing instead of being supported.
In a recent study of the Human
Resources Center, set up by "Abilities,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

THEY CALLED ME 'APE MAN' (Continued)
Inc.", conducted In co-operation with
industry, 138 physically disabled per¬
sons were placed In jobs after
evaluation and training. Not sedentary,
unrewarding jobs, but jobs of tomorrow
related to data preparation and data
analysis and to the new era of com¬
puter technology. These were jobs
in which workers were needed and for
which these handicapped persons had
the necessary physical, mental and
emotional capacities.
It Is Interesting to recognize that
both the worker and the work can be
changed to adjust to each other. The
worker can be better educated,
rehabilitated, fitted with prosthetic
devices to meet the capacities he
needs for work. Likewise, the job can
be modernized and simplified, its
requirements modified to match the
capacities of the worker. It Is not a
one-way street. Both are changeable;
they can and should be changed to
complement one another.
There has been in the past a lack
of career awareness in U.S. schools.
For the disabled student and in fact
for all students we must change the
attitude in education that the non-
academically Inclined are considered
second class citizens.
In the Human Resources School a
recent survey of 65 severely disabled
students who graduated from our high
school showed that 47 went on to
further education. These were students
who prior to coming to the school
were so severely disabled that they
were homebound and received a
minimal education from a visiting
teacher. Eighteen of these graduates
went on to four-year colleges and
20 to two-year colleges.
One alumnus has gone on to law
school after college graduation. One
is employed as a computer programmer
and working for his master's degree.
Another is attending graduate school
and working for his master's degree.
Education has made it possible to
increase the level of independence of
these disabled young people. Career
awareness must begin in the early
childhood grades of schooling. It
prepares the disabled child for the
competitive world of work and supplies
the basic skills too for job maturity.
Without career education, rehabilitation
Is meaningless.
From its humble beginnings in 1952
as a workshop for the disabled, Human
Resources Center has now become a
place where learning and growth are
passwords to the future. Its Research
and Training Institute conducts studies
in psychology, special education,
vocational rehabilitation, and bio-
engineering. In its evaluation and
training programmes over 250 persons
each year are placed in jobs. Ten
thousand persons each year attend
Its seminar and training programmes.
Human Resources School with
200 severely disabled students from
preschool through high school is fully
accredited and recognized by the State
of New York.
"Abilities, Inc." with 185 workers is
a living laboratory in which the belief
in career education and rehabilitation
provides the opportunity for inde¬
pendence and productive dignity.
ULTRASONIC SPECTACLES
Below, "radar" spectacles for the blind devised by a British
scientist working at the University of Canterbury, New Zealand.
A mini transmitter-receiver between the lenses emits an ultrasonic
signal and picks up its echo, enabling the blind person to locate
and avoid obstacles.
Photo © Parlmage, Paris
ELECTRONIC SIGHT'
Researchers at the University of Utah (U.S.A.) and the University
of Western Ontario (Canada) have successfully stimulated arti¬
ficial sight in the blind with an electronic system that bypasses the
retina of the eye and the optic nerve. Sixty-four electrodes
Implanted in the visual cortex of the brain were connected to a
computer and to TV cameras. Dots of light projected on the TV
screen were transmitted to the brain via the computer. Two blind
patients could see the dots and one of them could make out
different patterns. Above, artist's impression of how the system
may ultimately help the blind to "see". A minute TV camera in
a glass eye would be placed in each eye socket and a mini¬
computer would be concealed in the spectacles' frame. Signals
would go to a tiny transmitter in the scalp and be passed into
the brain via an implanted receiver and electrodes.
