99
m
it*
THE Romany people, or as they are
sometimes known, Gypsies, are
a nomadic race which originated
in India. Leaving the Indian sub¬
continent around 1000 A.D. they migrat¬
ed westwards and are found today all
over the world. It is estimated that
they now number around eight million.
During their history they have suffered
much persecution as a minority group.
In the 20th century many of them have
settled down, but considerable num¬
bers still travel like true nomads. On
account of their nomadism and
minority status, few have been able to
benefit from educational opportunities.
In recent years, however, much has
been done to try to bring education and
other social benefits to the Gypsies.
"Wanderers over all the earth" is
how a young poet, E. Irving, started his
poem about the Romany people, and it
is certainly true today that Gypsies are
to be found in many areas of the
world. Wherever they have been in
their long history, they have not failed
to interest all manner of people from
kings to peasants an interest stemm¬
ing from both fear and enchantment.
But whatever has been the social
or political response to these wander¬
ing people, there has always been a



GYPSIES :
A MINORITY
AT THE
CROSSROADS
Education opens new horizons
for children of nomad families
by Arthur R. Ivatts
ARTHUR R. IVATTS, British sociologist and
educator. Is EducationalAdviser with the Advisory
Committee for the Education of Romany and
other Travellers, in London. In this capacity he
advises educational authorities on the education
of nomads, particularly Gypsies and other
travelling families, and oh their integration into
community educational programmes.
4

Photo © Silvester - Rapho, Paris
curiosity to know more about their
customs and origins. Enquirers were
to be denied authentic information
concerning these matters until the
18th century when extensive and
scholarly research was carried out by
the first Gypsiologists. Their investi¬
gations indicated clearly that Gypsies
originated in north-western India and
started their long migrations during
the period 950-1000 A.D.
Prior to the eventual enlightenment
provided for us by early scholars,
societies visited by the Gypsies
believed all manner of stories regarding
their mysterious origins. . The Gypsies
themselves were not above supplying
interesting and bizarre reasons for
their presence. Their dark hair and
swarthy skins, their novel and colourful
dress together with their noble titles,
gave immediate credibility to their
claims of authentic cultural and terri¬
torial origins.
The Gypsies initially said that they
had come as Christian exiles from
a country known as Little Egypt.
Documents were often produced which
bore witness to a penance granted by
the Pope which allowed them to wander
for seven years. With such credentials
it was not surprising that they were
readily accepted by the communities
they visited in the course of their
migrations.
It can be appreciated that at a time
in history when nomadism was not
a characteristic of European peoples,
and when transport and communi¬
cations were comparatively primitive,
the arrival of small nomadic and non-
warring groups would probably have
been a welcome occurrence generating
great curiosity and excitement. Be¬
cause of their explicit statements of
origin, they came to be called
"Egyptians", and "Gypsy" is but a
shortened version of this term.
Found now in almost every continent
their numbers collectively must be very
large. There are no accurate statistics
but estimates seem to suggest that
outside of India and south-east Asia,
there are between seven and eight
million. Approximately half of this
number lives in Europe and of these
two-thirds are to be found in eastern
Europe. The Gypsies are present in
considerable numbers in north Africa;
Egypt, Algeria, and the Sudan. They
are found in America, from Pictou in
Canada to Rio de Janeiro in Brazil;
and also in New Zealand and Australia.
It is suggested that small groups exist
in China, the Philippines, West Indies
and Hawaii.
Numerous books have been written
about the Gypsies but many contain
gross misrepresentations of their
culture. However, there are certain
common characteristics which do
identify Gypsies throughout the world.
Nomadism has been and still is a very
important part of their lives, and
although many are now settled in
houses the desire to travel is often too
strong to resist and wandering habits
are resumed. It is, of course, this
particular characteristic which has
resulted in their global dispersal.
Language is perhaps the strongest
cultural factor which links Gypsies to
a common heritage. . The Romany
language is one of the Indo-Aryan
languages and is the strongest indi¬
cation that the Gypsies originally came
from India. Gypsies from different
lands can communicate with each other
by the use of this common tongue.
It is interesting to note that over the
centuries, although Gypsies have
always adapted their occupations to
suit changing economic conditions,
there has always been a number of tra¬
ditional and ubiquitous occupations.
Music making and dancing have always
been their custom as well as forms
of travelling entertainment such as fairs
and circuses. Other occupations in¬
clude horse dealing, a number of
handicrafts, and the women in par¬
ticular indulge in fortune-telling.
Gypsies have a strong sense of self-
identity, as a people with a distinctive
cultural heritage.
In recent years, with the improvement
of educational opportunities for people
in many countries, and with the in¬
creasing importance of literacy as an
essential means of communication in
the modern world, the Gypsies have
found that their illiterate status .has
often proved a disadvantage. Although
they may , have managed for many
decades by the use of scribes within
their community, there is certainly now
a widespread desire for their children
to go to school to acquire the skills
of reading and writing.
It is perhaps useful to isolate one
or two examples of their need for
education. In many countries a large >.
proportion of Gypsy families have r
5

settled down and taken to house
dwelling. In some countries this has
been a forced settlement and not
always successful. Change from a
nomadic life inevitably involves them
In the life and community of the settled
society. For reasons of employment,
safety, and information about that
society, literacy is paramount. Without
it one is a social invalid, handicapped
in the thousands of details of daily life.
Education should provide both settl¬
ed and nomadic Romanies with the
tools necessary for reading and un¬
derstanding the fundamentals of their
legal rights, and of traffic regulations
associated with driving a vehicle. It
is hoped that education will allow
them the opportunity to study and
know more of their history and lan¬
guage. Their right to education is
secured both by national legislation
and international declarations on Hu¬
man Rights. It is surprising, therefore,
that so few seem to have been able
to participate in normal educational
provision.
Traditionally, nomadism has been
the main reason why Gypsies have not
taken full advantaqe of educational
opportunities. Boarding school edu¬
cation is one way to overcome the
problems of nomadism, but experience
shows that families strongly resist
such moves for they do not like being
separated. Nor can teaching by
correspondence be considered a
practical proposition when the adults
are illiterate and unable to guide the
child's learning.
But it would be a mistake to think
that any one factor alone has been
responsible for Gypsy children not
going to school. In most cases there
is a web of inter-related factors, many
of which are common to minority
groups. In a society where most of
the population is settled, it is clear
that the educational system will match
that living pattern and thus a nomadic
minority will, by way of their own life
style, be at a disadvantage. Irregular
attendance at many different schools
is not conducive to successful learning.
Many ethnic minorities with modes
of life which differ from those of the
majority often find themselves excluded
from social benefits such as schooling.
This social disadvantage is often
aggravated by discrimination and pre¬
judice which really stems from a lack
of understanding of groups about each
other. In practice this has resulted
in some schools being reluctant to
enrol Gypsy children. In a wider
historical context, Gypsies have suf¬
fered greatly from prejudice and
persecution and this, in turn, has
often hardened their attitudes against
accepting social benefits such as
schoolinq which the wider society
might offer.
A further effect of misunderstandings
between peoples is that fear usurps
curiosity and makes both groups feel
threatened by each other, and so the
normally rewarding exchanges of life
between one culture and another are
daunted by fears and suspicions that
the way of life of the minority will
succumb to the cultural prescriptions
of the stronger group. For this reason,
Romany parents have avoided sending
their children to school.
Parents' reluctance has sometimes
reflected their pride; they have made
a success of life without literacy, "so
why do our children need it?" When
children have gone to school, their
attendance has been spasmodic and
their progress correspondingly limited.
Coming from an illiterate background,
as so many do, these children find
school bewildering and difficult.
Occasionally parents think that schools
can "hand out" reading and writing
to their children and find it difficult to
understand why it is such a long and
hard job to acquire the basic skills.
Children need constant help and
encouragement if their own efforts are
to succeed.
Attempts to force Romany children
into school, which has been the
practice in many countries, have too
often resulted in the experience
proving traumatic for both schools and
children. The school environment is
so unfamiliar and in a tragic number
of cases Gypsies have suffered hostility
from other children. Most classroom
situations have little to offer the
Romany child which would allow him
to feel at home; teachers do not
always understand or feel empathy
with his way of life; and reading
materials are more related to the in¬
terests and backgrounds of the house-
dwelling pupils. Unhappy experiences
of this nature act as a further disin¬
centive for nomadic children.
In other countries, such as France,
efforts have been made to secure
regular school attendance by linking
financial benefits, such as family
allowances, to the child's attendance.
Although this may obtain the desired
6

results it may be at the expense of
the child's happiness because of the
family's pecuniary needs and interests.
Similar financial inducements have
been the basis of some schemes for
adult literacy, as in Sweden. Another
factor militating against education is
that many nomadic Gypsies live on
temporary, illegal encampments with
the inevitable lack of basic amenities
such as water and sanitation. With
the insecurity of these locations and
their lack of facilities, it is hardly
surprising that going to school is often
seen as of little importance.
The nomadic family generally works
together as an economic unit, and it
is perhaps for this reason that Gypsies
often consider education a weakening
element in their culture. Older children
may find school attendance conflicts
with their economic roles within the
family. Gypsies feel that their nomadic
life demands physical robustness and
often see prolonged schooling as
In many countries the authorities are taking
steps to see that Gypsies enjoy full rights
as citizens, providing for schools and
decent housing. Special classes for nomads
have been set up in many parts of the world where
there areJarge Gypsy communities.
Gypsy children often cannot attend school
regularly, and to help them new teaching
methods and specially adapted reading books
are being used. Scene in a Gypsy
camp in Greece, left, and guitar-playing
by the camp-fire in Spain, right, illustrate
two Romany characteristics love
of children and love of music.
preventing their children from adapting
to a hard and vigorous way of life.
There seems no good reason why
educational systems and schools in
particular should not be able to adapt
sufficiently to accommodate a minority
group like Gypsies. What it does
require is a sensitive and flexible
approach by all concerned. It is often
the case that when Gypsy children are
presented to a school they have had
little previous education and will be
backward compared with their peers.
If their numbers are small, a school
should be able to make available the
necessary resources so that intensive
individual attention can be given in
order for them to catch up with the
rest of the class. With large numbers
of children, however, the burden may
be too great for the existing school
both in terms of staff and buildings.
In this situation, extra accommodation
and teachers are needed for the
establishment of a bridging or induction
unit. This can either be provided at
the local school or in the initial stages
at the Gypsy encampment itself. The
latter policy certainly allows the settled
community to demonstrate their genu¬
ine concern for the children.
Educational experiences in an in¬
formal and friendly atmosphere will
go a long way to increasing the
confidence of the children in their
eventual integration into ordinary
schools. In some situations where
whole residential areas are occupied
by Romany people, as in some parts
of France, then an all-Romany com¬
munity school is perhaps the answer,
as opposed to bussing children to
different areas of a city.
But whatever policy responses are
made by the community to the needs
of minorities, it is essential that care
is taken in making provision in terms
of what the recipients want education¬
ally for their children. Parents should
be involved at all levels of decision
making and, if possible, also in the
teaching. In this way, it is ensured
that they are taking part in shaping
their own destiny in harmony and
co-operation with the rest of society.
In communities where schools are
composed of many different social and
racial groups, it is important that the
Photos © Silvester-Rapho, Paris
syllabus, and if possible the teaching
staff, should reflect this diversity of
cultural background. In these multi¬
racial institutions, it is also important
that teaching materials are related to
the interests of the pupils, and that
a balanced emphasis is given to the
culture, both historic and contempor¬
ary, of each group represented.
This adds to the positive enrichment
of school life and, fosters under¬
standing and friendship among its
members. The necessity in these
situations for in-service training for the
staff is obvious. Books and school
materials toqether with teaching tech¬
niques have to be developed in relation
to differing needs and interests. The
Romany culture is rich in tradition and
this can make a positive contribution
to the life and work of any school.
One difficulty associated with multi¬
racial education is that the interest of
a minority may conflict with the in¬
terests of the wider community. For
example many twelve- and thirteen-
year-old Gypsy children are expected
to take an increasing responsibility in .
the social and economic life of ther
7

> family. This may, in some countries,
clash with the minimum school leav¬
ing age of sixteen or seventeen.
A sensitive approach is needed for
it could be argued that children
learning their adult roles is an im¬
portant education in itself, and to
deprive them of this opportunity by
keeping them at school might be
counterproductive to their success in
adult life. This applies not only to
minorities but also to other social
groups in a society. At the same time,
however, advanced academic achieve¬
ment, if required, should not be denied
to those who seek it.
Keeping all these considerations in
mind, I conclude by giving a few
examples of educational schemes
which are currently being run for
Gypsy children in different parts of
the world. In France, more and more
sites are being provided and the
Gypsies are being encouraged to
stay for longer periods so that they
can take advantage of the social-edu
cational centres adjacent to the sites.
Regular attendance is also encour¬
aged, during their long winter stays,
at ordinary state schools and financial
incentives have been included in these
schemes. Government policy towards
Gypsies in France is concerned with
their social development which is
hoped to be achieved through school¬
ing, education in hygiene, "domestic
science", vocational training and the
organization of leisure activities.
In Spain, a Centre of Gypsy Studies

Gypsies are known by many names :
Romanies, Travellers, Bohemians.
But they all belong to the same
people which originated in India and
then spread thoughout the world.
Skilled coppersmiths, horse-dealers,
tinkers and goldsmiths, their
community spirit is strongly evident
even when they settle
down and cease to speak their
language, Romany. Some Gypsies
have abandoned nomadic life
completely; others have settled
temporarily in one place between
spells of wandering. For many
Gypsies home is still likely to be a
shanty-town outside a big city or a
dilapidated shack on a piece
of waste ground (photo left).
Photo Joseph Koudelka, taken from "La fin du voyage" (Journey's End) © Editions Delpire, Paris, 1975
was set up a few years ago in Madrid.
Its purpose is to make a scientific
study of the Gypsy way of life and to
find ways of improving their social
conditions. Most social work among
Gypsies in Spain is carried out
privately under the auspices of the
Spanish branch of the Catholic
philanthropic organization Caritas.
In towns with large Gypsy popu¬
lations various organizations have been
created to deal with Gypsies' needsi
in housing, schooling and work, and to
tackle the whole problem of integrating
them into the community. A magazine
entitled "Pomezia" reports on all these
activities.
In Sweden, most of the families are
now housed and the children go to
ordinary state schools, but often have
their own teacher who gives them
extra remedial help and allows them
to pursue their particular cultural
interests. . There are also extensive
programmes for adult literacy.
The Netherlands has a system of
very large régional camps which
include in their provision schools,
clinics, churches, club-rooms and
sports fields, but it is felt by many
that the camps are socially isolated
and often too far away from a town.
In the Irish Republic, some special
schools have been set up. with both
voluntary and official co-operation.
In the U.S.A., a special school for
Romany, children is .being" run in
Richmond, Virginia. It is financed by
voluntary resources and mainly con- y
9

centrâtes on teaching the basic skills
of reading and writing. Gypsy children
in New York are encouraged to attend
state primary schools.
In the United Kingdom, where the
government has shown its interest and
concern by helping the Advisory
Committee for the Education of
Romany and Other Travellers, there
has been a wide response to the social
and educational problems of Gypsies.
In one area where the families are
camped illegally in different parts of
a ïown, a school bus picks up a
teacher who tells the driver where the
families are. The children are taken
to a separate school where they have
intensive and individual attention with
reading, writing and mathematics and
other subjects. When they have
sufficient skills and confidence, they
enter the local primary school.
In another example, the children
have their own caravan classroom on
the playground of the primary school
where they receive extra help with
literacy and other work, and integrate
with the rest of the school for play,
games, swimming and outings. They
attend normal classés when it is
agreed by parents and teachers alike
that such promotion is desirable. In
some areas, mobile pre-school play¬
groups have been developed as well
as schemes for adult literacy. There
are, of course, many Romany children
in the United Kingdom who are happily
attending ordinary schools where great
care is taken to ensure their social and
educational progress.
In Italy, some voluntary and official
projects were set up for Gypsy
children in the early 1960s. In 1965 the
Ministry of Public Instruction decided
on the setting up of eleven classes
for children of nomads. It was called
"Opera Nomadi" (Exercise Nomad).
The schools are called "Lacio Drom"
(Pleasant journey) and in 1972 there
were sixty such schools with approxi¬
mately a thousand pupils of whom one
half attend regularly.
Providing the right education for
minority groups is a difficult task and
requires much thought and con¬
sultation. Education for minorities is
of increasing importance and success¬
ful policies should lead to a greater
understanding and mutual appreciation
among different peoples who have to
co-exist in an ever shrinking world.
It is in the schools that the foundations
for future understanding and co-oper¬
ation should be laid.
Arthur R. Ivatts
10
Photos © Silvester-Rapho, Paris
Above left, a Gypsy family around the cooking
pot near Belgrade, Yugoslavia. Left, on the
road in Greece, a Gypsy and his tame bear,
trained to dance to the sound of the
tambourine. Gypsies are renowned horse
breeders and dealers, and many of them excel as
trainers of bears, dogs, monkeys and goats, which
they exhibit in travelling fairs.
Some Gypsies own small travelling circuses,
performing as jugglers and acrobats.
Right, on a Spanish road, a " verdine ",
the traditional Gypsy caravan which houses
the family and all the tools of their trade.
In Western Europe today, the horse-drawn
" verdine " is being replaced by the motorized
caravan, but the Gypsy way of life goes
on almost unchanged. Most Gypsies care little
about accumulating material possessions.
In the words of a Gypsy proverb, " Man makes
money, but money doesn't make the man. "

*
