The hour
of
decision
by Boris Urlanis
The U.S.S.R/s leading
demographer
declares that the
reduction of birth-rates
is now an urgent task
for certain countries
26
BORIS URLANIS is probably the most
famous name in Soviet demography. A mem¬
ber of the International Council on Population
Studies and the World Society for Population,
he is Vice-Chairman of the Scientific Council
on Social and Economic Problems of Popu¬
lation, of the Economic Department of the
USSR Academy of Sciences. His many
books published in Russian include "Popu¬
lation Growth In Europe" (1941), "Population
Dynamics and Structure in the USSR and
USA" (1964) and 'Dynamics of Soviet Popu¬
lation" ((1974). "Wars and Population" a
historical analysis, has been published in
English (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971).
HE United Nations decision
to designate 1974 as International
Population Year testifies to the critical
nature of the world's population
problems. As with the problems of
eliminating the nuclear threat, stopping
the arms race and safeguarding the
environment, the future of mankind
depends on their solution.
In speaking of population growth,
we should note at the outset the
complete polarity of the tasks needing
resolution. Two starting points are .
possible; the need to raise the birth¬
rate, the so-called pronatalist position,
and the need to reduce the birth-rate,
the so-called antinatalist position.
Social and economic and physical
and geographic conditions differ
sharply, and this determines the
differences in the tasks facing the
countries of the world. In some
countries, the birth-rate has fallen to a
low level, in certain areas even to an
excessively low level; in others the
birth-rate is at a high level, even
excessively high. The governments of
these countries should not look upon
the situation passively; influence must
be brought to bear on it, actively and
effectively. This means pursuing a
definite demographic policy.
In the Soviet Union and the European
socialist countries such a policy is
expressed in measures for stimulating
the birth-rate. Some people are scep¬
tical of such measures, believing that
they cannot have any noticeable effect
on demographic processes. The past
few years, however, have definitely
proved the groundlessness of such
scepticism. In Czechoslovakia, for
example, the birth-rate was 14.9 (births
per 1,000 persons) in 1968, 15.5 in 1969,
15.9 in 1970, 16.5 in 1971, 17.8 in 1972,
and 19.2 for the first nine months
of 1973.
Thus, in the past five years, the birth¬
rate in Czechoslovakia increased
nearly one third. This was the direct
result of important government efforts
aimed at helping women and making
it easier for them to combine mother¬
hood with social labour. Czechoslo¬
vakia has now surpassed all the
European socialist countries (except
Albania) in terms of birth-rate.
Appropriate efforts are also being
made in the Soviet Union. Apart from
general legislative measures and the
broadening of the network of pre¬
school institutions, factors which
should ensure a rising birth-rate are
improvements in the standard of living,
housing and public services. These
factors have apparently begun to
operate. In 1970 and 1971, there were
170 births per 1,000 women between
the ages of 20 and 24, and in 1971 and
1972, the figure rose to nearly 174.
The figures for women between the
ages of 25-29 were, respectively, a
little over 132 and 137.
None the less, this by no means
disposes of the need for a more
vigorous demographic policy aimed at
making it easier for working women
to bring up children. Many regions of
the Soviet Union at present experience
a shortage of manpower resources,
and with the future in mind society
must be concerned with making up this
deficit. Developing the vast expanses
of the U.S.S.R. and its massive natural
resources will benefit not only the
Soviet Union but all mankind.
The question is fundamentally dif¬
ferent in the developing countries and
even in the economically advanced
Western countries. The high birth-rate
in many countries has become a
serious obstacle to economic growth.
In some countries the economic growth
rate in fact cannot keep up with the
population growth rate. ' Their econ¬
omies are like a lorry trying to climb
a slippery incline: the wheels spin
around, but the lorry stays in one place
and sometimes even slides backward.
It would be wrong, of course, to
conclude that a high birth-rate is the
main or only reason for the difficult
<'^ ¿^ Ä> »lAV*

food situation in many countries. It
cannot be denied that rapid population
growth in these countries hampers the
solution of economic problems and
slows down development. But the
birth-rate is the result of the social and
economic conditions in which the
people live: illiteracy among hundreds
of millions of people, a low cultural
level, the absence of social insurance,
backward forms of economic develop¬
ment, the feeble use of women's labour
in social production.
Meanwhile, under circumstances of
changing social and economic con¬
ditions, with the elimination of feudal
vestiges and neo-colonialism, these
countries, having gained freedom and
independence, have effected the eman¬
cipation of women and a growth in
their culture. In drawing women into
social labour they must take advantage
of the opportunities that modern
science offers for achieving wanted
motherhood and family planning, that
is, for practising so-called birth control.
Over a half century ago, the eminent
American writer, Upton Sinclair, said in
The Book of Life: "Birth control is a
great achievement of the human intel¬
lect, equalling the discovery of fire
and the invention of the printing press.
Birth control means freeing women and
all mankind from the blind and irrational
fertility of nature, which created us as
animals and would gladly have left us
in such a state had we not rebelled
against it."
The great Indian philosopher and
educator, Rabindranath Tagore, stated
it more categorically when he said:
"The birth control movement is a great
movement."
In the deep past, peoples who
needed to limit their numbers did so
barbarically by infanticide. That dark
period of history is long past. By the
Middle Ages, most countries no longer
used artificial means for controlling
population size. Then, at the close of
the Middle Ages, the European aris¬
tocracy began practising birth control
within the family. This practice steadily
became more and more widespread,
until it extended to the majority of
married couples.
The first to embark on this road were
Finland and France, whose populations
by the end of the 19th century made
up approximately three per cent of the
world population. If it can be assumed
that perhaps one-third of the married
couples in these countries were limiting
the number of their children, it may be
concluded that at that time birth
control was practised by no more than
one per cent of the married couples
of the world.
At the beginning of the 20th century,
a large proportion of the population of.
Western Europe and the western
regions of Russia was regulating the
number of children in the family. We
estimate that at that time about eight
per cent of the world's married couples
limited themselves to wanted children.
The tumultuous 20th century, the
century of world wars and social
revolutions, has sharply changed the
position of women. An ever growing
proportion of them is being drawn into
social labour, and this "new" function
of women is beginning to compete
more and more with their maternal
functions. The patriarchal family is
giving way to a new type based on
small families and the participation of
women in production. By the middle
of the 20th century, about one-fourth
of all married couples were inten¬
tionally limiting the number of children
in their families.
During the third quarter of our
century, this process will become more
intensified. Many countries, large and
small, now fall within its sphere of
influence. Birth control is practised
almost universally in Japan and is
becoming increasingly widespread in
India and some other Asian countries.
The available information indicates
that measures to reduce the birth-rate ^
have also embraced part of the r

28
population of the Chinese People's
Republic. It may be considered that
today about 45 per cent of the world's
married couples limit the number of
their children. It is not impossible that
this figure will continue to grow so
that by the end of this or sometime
in the next century it will reach a full
100 per cent.
However, even 100 per cent family
planning would not mean that the
problem was solved. It is extremely
important to know how many children
married couples are likely to have
before they begin limiting the number
of births. If they began, say, after the
birth of the fifth child, the effect would
be insignificant. Therefore, along
with birth control, the governments of
a number of countries also encourage
the concept of small families. Thus
in India young women are advised "not
to rush with the second child and to
think twice before having the third".
With cultural growth, the increase
in the share of women's labour, the
reduction of infant mortality, the
expansion of social insurance and the
disappearance of vestiges of the past,
the attitudes of married couples will be
oriented to small families.
If half the married couples limit
themselves in the future to two children
and the other half to three, the number
of births would in time approximately
equal the number of deaths, and the
world's population would in due course
become stabilized. Only then can it
be expected that the urgency of the
population problem will disappear.
This stability will not drop from
heaven. It must be achieved and
organized. Many people imagine that
Marxists have always and everywhere
stood and continue to stand for
maximum population growth. In fact,
this is not the attitude of scientific
socialism, but of Utopian socialism.
The English scholar and Utopian
socialist, William Godwin, for example,
wrote in his Enquiry Concerning Social
Justice (1793) that "The population
could grow for a myriad of centuries
and the earth would not fail to provide
it with food."
Fredrick Engels stated the question
another way. After reading Karl
Kautsky's book on population prob¬
lems, he wrote the author a letter in
which he said: "The abstract possi¬
bility of such a numerical growth of
humanity as would raise the necessity
of placing limits on this growth nat¬
urally exists." Engels' letter was dated
1 February, 1881. Over 90 years have
passed, and with the enormous changes
that have taken place this is a long
enough period for the "abstract possi¬
bility" which Engels foresaw to become
a concrete necessity.
To bring about the necessary limits
foreseen by Engels, changes in the
social and economic conditions under
which peoples live are essential and
along with these changes a corres¬
ponding demographic policy. Borrow¬
ing the idea of a traffic light, we
could say that in today's demographic
situation a red light means "panic", a
green light, "no problems", and a
yellow, "be prepared for a stop".
Sowing panic only means compli¬
cating the situation. A green light is
also inappropriate since there are no
grounds for unconcern. The only wise
position is to make a sober evaluation
of the situation and take the necessary
steps in time. To change the colour
metaphor, we might say that in¬
temperate, unconcerned optimists look
at these problems through rose-
coloured glasses, and over-concerned
pessimists, through dark glasses.
However, we feel that the glasses
should be removed altogether in order
to see life as it is. In other words, we
should be realists.
The "Green Revolution" in India,
Mexico and other countries has made
it possible within a short period to
increase grain harvests, and this has
somewhat mitigated the food problems.
It is essential to take full advantage
of this respite and to work for a
reduction in the population growth rate
in countries where it is excessive.
Besides using the short variety of
wheat that gives less stalk and more
grain, there are many other ways to
increase harvests. While the average
yield in the U.S.S.R. was 1,020 kilo¬
grammes per hectare between 1961
and 1965, and 1,370 kg. between 1966
and 1970, it rose to 1,760 kg. in 1973,
or 26 per cent higher than in the
preceding Five Year Plan period.
Fertilizers, mechanization and land
improvement are all means of increas¬
ing agricultural output, but one must
not conclude that there is no food
problem in the world. According to
the Food and Agriculture Organization,
nearly one billion people are starv¬
ing or are seriously undernourished.
However, an increase in agricultural
output in many countries requires
material resources and a social system
which they do not have. Under these
conditions, their population problems

are especially acute, and along with
them is the problem of birth control.
The neutrality of the United Nations
in this matter reflects respect for all
beliefs and views, but in the long
run it can bring peoples only harm.
The role of the United Nations and
its specialized agencies, including
Unesco, in solving population prob¬
lems can be distinctly traced at inter¬
national demographic congresses. At
the first (Rome 1954), only timid steps
were taken towards expanding res¬
earch and gathering statistics and esti¬
mates of the future world population.
The second congress, held 11 years
later (Belgrade, 1965), provided a
broad forum at which population ques¬
tions were subjected to all-round and
penetrating discussion, since they had
by then assumed the dimensions of
problems demanding solution.
Various opinions were expressed,
different positions were brought to
light, various ideas were suggested.
Nearly nine years have gone by
since then. The time for talking has
passed; it is now time for action. It
is clear that in a number of countries
the reduction of birth-rates must be¬
come a task of national urgency. The
accomplishment of this task, however,
should not encroach on the sove¬
reignty of governments and families.
Firm recommendations are needed on
how to carry out a demographic policy
which would have a decisive effect on
the reproductive habits of married
couples in the respective countries.
This, in turn, requires considerable
funds and clear legislation.
State finances are handled by
governments, and government insti¬
tutions pass the laws. Therefore, the
U.N. was wise to convene a third
congress at government level, for
August, 1974, in Bucharest, the capital
of Romania. This congress, it is hoped,
will mark a new stage by studying
population problems in terms of
concrete measures for their solution.
An active demographic policy invol¬
ves not only control over the birth¬
rate or, conversely, its stimulation,
but also measures for reducing the
death-rate.' There has been unques¬
tionable progress in the fight against
infant mortality in nearly all countries.'
But the situation with adult mortality
has in some respects worsened: at
least two million people die each year
from accidents alone.
Perhaps at the Bucharest Congress
it would be useful to raise the ques¬
tion of establishing an international
accident prevention centre to fight
against all forms of accidents: street,
home and industrial. It should also
be remembered that in many countries
there is a growing proportion of old
people who see poorly and hear poorly
and are therefore more accident-prone.
I am reminded of a parable. Once
upon a time an Eastern ruler sum¬
moned his wise men and ordered them
to write the history of mankind. Being
unequal to the task, they decided to
answer him in brief: "People were
born, suffered and died". The Inter¬
national Population Year should add a
sizeable contribution to the great
common fund of achievements in the
natural and social sciences, so that
a brief history of mankind would go
like this: "People were born, did not
suffer and lived a long and happy life."
Boris Urlanls
29
