i
PHILAE
12

A masterpiece of architecture reborn
thanks to Unesco's
international rescue operation
PHILAE has been dying for the
last seventy-five years. At first
the waters of the Nile crept slowly
upward, then they rose higher and
higher until, with the recent construc¬
tion of the High Dam upstream, the
island was permanently submerged.
The French author, Pierre Loti, had
mourned for Philae and her temples
in The Death of Philae when the first
Aswan Dam was built downstream at
the beginning of this century. But
the island continued to make a brief
annual reappearance when the sluices
of the Dam were opened. Philae was
finally drowned 10 years ago.
Only two alternatives remained
open: either the temples must be
abandoned to their fate, or they must
be saved. Lovers of art could not
resign themselves to seeing the
"Pearl of Egypt" disappear. They
decided that a long and costly oper¬
ation should be put in hand to save
the island of Isis the Merciful, just as
the temples of Abu Simbel higher up
the Nile had been saved. The opera¬
tion to save Philae began two years
ago and should be completed in about
three years time.
The submerged temples of Philae
have thus been brought to light again,
at the cost of enormous effort,
including the construction of the coffer¬
dam, nearly one kilometre long, which
now girdles the island. Philae was
drowned. Today, her corpse has been
brought up, almost intact, but covered
with a shroud of Nile silt, itself a
Philae in April 1974 girdled by a cofferdam
of two rows of sheet steel piling packed
with a million cubic metres of sand
(photo right). The island is totally
submerged and its monuments flooded
to about a third of their height.
Monuments seen in photos are the Temple
of Trajan (left) and the Temple of Isis
(right). These photos were taken by
Unesco staff photographer Alexis N.
Vorontzoff, who carried out missions
to Philae in April and September
this year. Most of the other photos are
by the author of this article, Henri Stierlin,
who visited Philae in August as a special
correspondent of the "Unesco Courier".
Photos > Alexis N. Vorontzoff-Unesco
symbol of life and resurrection, since
it provides a rich fertilizer for the land.
From one of the little planes which
fly between Cairo and Abu Simbel,
one can today view the ensemble of
sanctuaries surrounded by the coffer¬
dam which made it possible to dry
out the site. Seen thus, from the air,
the temple of Isis appears to be
contained in a sarcophagus floating on
the water.
Before the buildings could be dis¬
mantled and the gigantic work of
dissection could begin, the corpse had
to be made ready. I was able to watch
this operation: hundreds of workmen
carrying away on their heads baskets-
ful of silt10,000 tons in all, two
by Henri Stierlin
HENRI STIERLIN, of Switzerland, is a his¬
torian of art and architecture, photographer,
critic, radio broadcaster and T.V. film-maker.
He is editor of the major series "Architecture
Universelle" (a history of world architecture)
published by Editions de l'Office du Livre,
Fribourg, Switzerland, with simultaneous co-
editions in English, Dutch, French, German,
Italian, Japanese and Spanish. He is currently
preparing a book, in collaboration with Serge
Sauneron, on the Pharaonic temples of Edfu,
Dendera and Philae.

w metres thick, and black or yellow
* according to the season which choked
the rooms, courtyards, stairways,
passages and chapels.
When this had been completed,
technicians of the French National
Geographical Institute were able to
begin their survey (or anthropometric
record of the corpse) by means of the
marvellous process known as photo-
grammetry. Only by this means can
the temples be given back their original
appearance when they are recon¬
structed on the neighbouring islet of
Agilkia, to stand once more in all their
splendour under the harsh sun of
Aswan.
The second half of the present
century represents a vitally important
stage in our understanding of the role
of nature in our lives and of the
preservation of our environment. It
is also characterized by a new and
acute awareness of the necessity of '
saving the "historical environment" in
which we also live.
We seem to have become conscious
of the fragility not only of civilizations,
but also of the whole human race. We
seem to realize at last that every
scrap of evidence of man's history is
invaluable in interpreting the various
aspects of world culture. Thus govern¬
ments sometimes have to provide
considerable sums when it is decided
to protect some edifice which has
come to be considered as part of the
"heritage of mankind".
In this context, Unesco has alerted
world opinion and has made people
aware of what is at stake. An enter¬
prise such as the dismantling and
reassembling of Abu Simbel, a symbol
par excellence of international co¬
operation, mobilized support and stirred
public opinion in the most diverse
countries.
The salvage of the temples on the
island of Philae, between the old
Aswan Dam and the new High Dam,
is a. spectacular operation quite as '
significant as that of Abu Simbel.
Warning the world that a cultural
treasure of the greatest importance
would be lost, Pierre Loti drew
attention to the fate of the great sub¬
merged temple nearly 70 years ago,
when he entitled his account of his
travels in Egypt The Death of Philae,
from the subject of the last, dramatic
chapter of the book. These pages are
a lucid warning of the threatened
destruction of "what was once the
island of Philae, one of the wonders
of the world."
Loti knew that technological progress
was a vital necessity for the inhabitants
of the Nile Valley. He balanced this^
fact against the damage caused to*
PILLARS OF SURVIVAL. At the time of Napoleon's Egyptian Campaign in 1798
the magnificent polychrome wall paintings in the Temple of Isis were still intact, as shown
by illustration (right) from a book entitled "Description de l'Egypte" published in France,
in 1809. Then in our century, following the construction of the first Aswan Dam,
the waters of the Nile invaded Philae and the wall paintings were destroyed.
Photos above and below right show two stages of the rescue operations only a few
months ago. Above, the Temple of Isis as it was in April, its lower part still
submerged. By August of this year when photo below right was taken, the water .
had been pumped out from within the cofferdam, and workmen had begun to remove
basketfuls of the silt which enveloped the monuments in a layer two metres thick.
When the mammoth rescue operation is completed, treasures like this bas-relief
(below) of a pharaoh making a sacrifice will stand in safety on a new site.
14

im*
fa
M
par
B lit]
'ntyJÊt 1 'i I

y works of art 2,000 years old, and
realized how crucial was the choice
which must be made.
Today, we understand that there
could be no choice between the temple
of Isis and the dam. The dam must be
built in order to fertilize millions of
hectares, and at the same time, the
temple must be preserved. It is the
duty of our twentieth-century techno¬
logical civilization to discover remedies
for the destruction and pollution it
causes.
Technology becomes most accept¬
able when it rejects the idea that
economic growth must inevitably lead
to environmental pollution. Technology
should be used to preserve and
restore our cultural and artistic
treasures, as well as for promoting
economic development. It has taken
several decades for public opinion to
accept the need for this balance we
are now trying to achieve.
It will be several more years before
the splendours of Philae stand once
more under the Egyptian sun. Just
as the body of Osiris was restored
to life when Isis lovingly reassembled
the pieces torn apart and cast into
the Nile by Seth, so the temples will
be reborn, stone by stone.
The symbolism is even more striking
when we remember that the goddess
Isis, wife of Osiris, was worshipped at
, Philae. Thus will she again become
part of this eternal myth with its cycle
of death and resurrection.
This region of Philae seems pre¬
destined to divine metamorphoses and
their accompanying rites. The Abaton
the unapproachable tomb of the god
Osiris, whose cult prefigured those
religions of salvation which were to
spread over the ancient world was
venerated at Biga, close by the sacred
island. The last communities dedicated .
to the rites of Pharaonic paganism
survived on the islet of Philae. These
rites continued in the Sanctuary of
Isis the Merciful till the middle of the
6th century (one hundred and fifty
years after the Edict of Theodosius had
ordered the closing of the pagan
temples).
It was not till the year 550 that a
decree of Justinian finally destroyed
the 4,000-year-old Egyptian religion,
which had been rejuvenated by im¬
mortality rites available to all and a far-
reaching democratization of salvation.
Philae thus represented the ultimate
refuge of the old religion in a land won
over to Christianity and Gnosticism.
It was a fortress watched over by the
last priests and scribes guardians of
Egypt's ancient wisdom and the last
men capable of deciphering the hiero¬
glyphic texts. They were dispersed,
the sanctuary was looted and des
ecrated and their secret disappeared
with them. After that, the sacred texts
were to remain mute . for thirteen
hundred years, till Champollion re¬
discovered the key to them.
Philae thus seems predestined to the
great dismantling process which will
restore her to life.
At the end of the Pharaonic era, the
temple of Isis at Philae held an im¬
portant place in the Egyptian religion,
which was then undergoing a profound
transformation.
The sanctuaries date from the days
of Nectanebo (4th century B.C.)
through the Ptolemaic and Roman
periods, and the island on which they
were built lies south of the First
Cataract of the Nile. In this wild and
splendid region of Upper Egypt, the
Egyptian civilization, there was a
proliferation of monuments on this
green little island, surrounded by
sombre granite cliffs. Besides the
great, sixty-metre-long sanctuary of
Isis, with its two pylons, its colonnaded
hall, its chapels and crypts and its
vast courtyard bordered on the west
by the mammisi (or "birth house")
devoted to the annual mystery of the
birth of Horus, the sun-god, there are
a whole series of secondary buildings.
These include a chapel dedicated to
Osiris, a temple to Hathor, Trajan's
famous Kiosk, a chapel dedicated to
Imhotep, as well as the long colonnaded
path leading to the temple of Necta¬
nebo. There are quays, landing stages
on the river and obelisks, besides
several sanctuaries of which only the
outlines on the ground remain visible.
PHILAE'S STEEL CORSET. Overall view of Philae's cofferdam (above and right)
in August 1974, like some heavily laden vessel floating in the Nile. The water has been .
pumped out and the monuments are being cleaned. The next stage of the work will be a series
of special measurements and recordings known as photogrammetry, which enables
technicians to photograph objects stereoscopically and later, by use of a special machine,
to reconstitute their every feature down to the last millimetre. This will mean that
the monuments can be reconstructed exactly as before. The temples will be dissected
into some 40,000 stone blocks, weighing up to 25 tons each, in an operation similar to that
of Abu Simbel but on a much smaller scale. They will then be transported to the new site
on the nearby island of Agilkia, which rises well above the water level of the Nile.
The whole rescue operation, launched and sponsored by Unesco, will cost around $15 million.
river beats around granite reefs and
the rocks have been polished and
eroded by its waves for thousands
of years.
The valley, hemmed in by the desert,
seems to be closing in on the life-
giving Nile which flows down from the
mountains of Ethiopia five thousand
kilometres to the south. For the
Ancients, the First Cataract thus
symbolized the gate to the waters of
life and this was guarded by Isis in
her sanctuary at Philae.
Thus it was natural that, when the
first religions of salvation dawned on
the Roman world, she should be
venerated there as the goddess of
fertility, goodness, love and charity.
In this way the cult of Isis became
widespread and this extension was
reflected in the temples of Philae.
During the last five centuries of
Such is the great ensemble which,
until only a few months ago, was half
submerged all the year round, so that
its monuments, with their decoration
of bas-reliefs, were not, only hidden
from view but threatened with destruc¬
tion.
This threat has been hanging over
Philae since the first Aswan Dam was
built in 1899. The dam was raised in
1907 and again in 1929, with the result
that the temple was gradually sub¬
merged. The island became visible,
however, each August and September
when the water level dropped.
The temple of Isis thus appeared and
disappeared according to the rise and
fall of the river. These fluctuations
had already caused considerable
damage. The rich polychrome paintings,
for instance, which were still in
existence at the time of Napoleon's
16

expedition to Egypt in 1798, completely
disappeared, though the building
remained intact.
Since the construction up-river of
the High Dam, or Saad-el-Aali, the
water in the stretch of the Nile in
which Philae is situated, between the
old and new dams, rose so high that
the temples were immersed to half¬
way up the pylons.
Moreover, the erosion caused by
the daily rise and fall of the waters,
by as much as two to three metres,
threatened to dislocate and eat into
the sculpted blocks of granite.
The Egyptian Government which
had salvaged the Nubian monuments
south of the High Dam thanks to the
International Campaign launched by
Unesco, decided to call again on
For the temples will be dismantled
stone by stone, from their copings to
their foundations. The blocks pre¬
viously numbered and stored on dry
ground will then be removed to the
site where the Philae ensemble is to
be rebuilt on the nearby island of
Agilkia which remains above water
level all the year round.
This island had first to be prepared,
its surface levelled and its jagged
rocks razed. Thousands of tons of
granite had to be blown up and tipped
into the lake before the new foun¬
dations of the temples could be laid.
The operation will take four years
to complete and will cost about
15 million dollars. Of this sum eight
million dollars have already been
raised through contributions pledged
or received' by Unesco for the Inter-
pected. At Philae this does not seem
to have been the case, perhaps
because the foundations were explored
in 1907 when the Aswan Dam was first
raised. The gigantic undertaking at
Philae has in fact taught us little,
except about the art of building in
the Ptolemaic era.
Nevertheless, these operations,
together with the photogrammetric
surveys carried out by the French
National Geographic Institute and a
study of the texts engraved on the
stones, have drawn attention to the
quality of Egypt's Late Period monu¬
ments.
The Ptolemaic temples of the Nile
Valley, too often despised for being
"2,000 years too young", deserve to
be more highly thought of. Edfu,
Dendur and Philae the triad of great
Photos © Henri Stierlin, Geneva
Unesco's help in saving the temples
of Philae.
Various schemes were suggested.
One in particular proposed the building
of several dykes to isolate the island
so that the water could be lowered to
its original level. This solution
was eventually abandoned as being
too costly, particularly because the
pumping stations controlling the water
level would have had to function
constantly. Moreover, the site would
then have been in a hollow and cut off
from the surrounding landscape by the
high walls of the dykes.
The plan finally adopted, on- which
work started two years ago; required
the construction of a temporary coffer¬
dam of steel sheet piling» isolating the
islet from the artificial lake while the
monuments were being removed.
national Campaign to Save the Temples
of Philae, launched by Unesco's
Director-General, René Maheu, on
November 6, 1968. The rest of the
sum will be found by the Egyptian
Government.
The operation involves the collab¬
oration of engineers, technicians,
archaeologists, and above all, of
workers specialized in the dismantling
and rebuilding of ancient monuments.
Luckily there is no shortage of such
skills and manpower in Egypt, where
teams have carried out similar work in
the operations to saveKalabsha, Dakka
and Wadi-es-Sebua, as well as that of
Abu Simbel, which called for the
largest labour force of the: whole
Nubian campaign.
When ah ensemble. as large. as a.
cathedral is to be dismantled, some
spectacular discoveries might be ex-
latter-day sanctuaries are perfect
constructions.
They have an advantage over other
Pharaonic temples in that they are
intact, even to their roofs. Through
them we can understand exactly how
the Egyptian architects worked. The
harmonious handling of space, the
manner in which they made use of
natural lighting, the function of the
different rooms, as indicated by the
engraved texts all reveal the spatial
genius of these creative builders of
twenty-five centuries ago.
Philae is one of their masterpieces.
It deserves to be reborn.
Henri Stierlin
17
