FREE-WHEELING
PHILOSOPHER
Al-Biruni was a model of the thinker
who could harmonize various forms
of knowledge without becoming
the slave to a particular method or school
It was a custom of Islamic
culture that thinkers and phi¬
losophers delivered their dis¬
courses leaning against a
pillar or a column of a mos¬
que, surrounded by disciples
and students, as shown In this
illustration from an ancient
manuscript
Photo Bibliothèque Nationale,
Pans, from "La Civilisation de
l'Islam Classique", by D. and
J. Sourdel (Ed. Arthaud, Paris)
by Seyyed
Hossein Nasr
I
38
N classical Islamic civiliza¬
tion the name "philosophy" (al-falsafah
or al-hikmah) is reserved for a particu¬
lar set of disciplines associated with
various schools of "Islamic philoso¬
phy".
SEYYED HOSSEIN NASR.
note, page 27.
See biographical
Therefore the title of "philosopher"
(al-faylasuf) is usually reserved for
those who are masters of the doctrines
of one of these "philosophical"
schools. Considered in this light al-
Biruni has never been classified by
classical authors as a "philosopher",
nor associated with one of the well-
known schools of traditional Islamic
philosophy.
But If we understand philosophy in
its more general sense as logical and
rational discourse upon the nature of
things, then al-Blruni must certainly be
considered as a philosopher of note to
be studied for his significance In the
general context of Islamic Intellectual
history and also for the innate value
of his Intellectual vision.
Al-Biruni was a scientist, scholar,
compiler and philosopher for whom
the quest for knowledge was held as
the supreme goal of human life. He
respected knowledge in all its forms
and hence sought It wherever and In
whatever form possible. He saw In
knowledge an almost divine quality
very much in conformity with the fun¬
damental tenets of Islam.
Hence, al-Blrunl, with the universal
vision and the remarkable intellectual
qualities which he possessed, turned to
Greek as well as to Persian and Indian
sciences, to both the religious Islamic

sciences and the Intellectual ones. He
holds the rather unusual distinction of
being at once one of the greatest ma¬
thematicians and historians of hu¬
manity. And he wrote in nearly every
field, from astronomy to pharmacology.
But strangely enough, unlike his con¬
temporary scientist Ibn al-Haytham, al-
Biruni has not left behind independent
philosophical works of a systematic
nature. The only exception among his
extant works is the Questions and
Answers exchanged with Avicenna (Ibn
Sina), which deal with cosmological,
physical and philosophical problems
(see article page 27).
As for his lost works, he apparently
wrote several philosophical narratives,
including Qasim al-surur wa ayn al
haya and Ur-muzdvar wa Mihryar
which if found would be very signifi¬
cant, considering the importance of
this kind of philosophical narrative
romance in the writings of Avicenna,
Suhrawardi and many other Islamic
philosophers.
IIN order to understand al-
Biruni's philosophical thought, it is
therefore necessary to turn to his other
writings dealing with history, geography
or even astronomy, for in nearly all of
these works, one will find elements
dealing with philosophy, cosmology
and metaphysics interspersed within
the main scientific or historical discus¬
sion at hand.
In his encyclopaedic work, India, not
only does al-Biruni describe Indian
doctrines, but often comments upon
them and offers his own metaphysical
and philosophical Ideas and interpre¬
tations. In his Chronology of Ancient
Nations profound observations are
made about the nature of time and
the cycles of human history as well
as the origin of the order observed
In nature. In The Determination of the
Co-ordinates of Cities, the origin of
science and its classification are dis¬
cussed as are themes related to the
question of the origin and creation
of the universe.
One could go on In the same vein
with his other writings. Moreover, the
very fact that he chose to translate
into Arabic a work on Indian yoga such
as the Patanjali Yoga shows his intense
interest in metaphysical and spiritual
matters.
When all of these sources are ex¬
tracted and studied it becomes clear
that al-Biruni was neither a follower,
nor a member of any of the established
philosophical schools of his time.
The well known schools of "Islamic
philosophy" included the Peripatetic
(mashsha'i) (1), the Illuminationist (ish-
raqi) (2), and also that of theology
(kalam).
The most noteworthy aspect of al-
Biruni's philosophical views is his
strong and often original criticism of
Aristotelian philosophy, which is re¬
flected in the questions and answers
he exchanged with Avicenna and his
student Abdallah al-Ma'sumi.
Al-Biruni thus belongs to a series
of independent anti-Peripatetic thinkers
of the early period of Islamic history
who were also scientists, such men as
Mohammed Ibn Zakariyya'al - Razi,
whom al-Biruni both admired and cri¬
ticized.
Al-Biruni did not oppose all of the
teachings of Peripatetic philosophy en
bloc. Rather, basing himself on firm
religious faith in Islam on the one hand
and the tool of logic, rational analysis
and observation on the other, he refut¬
ed many of the theses of Peripatetic
philosophy, such as the eternity of the
world and the possibility of indefinite
division of matter.
What is important for an understand¬
ing of Islamic intellectual history is
that such a strong and rigorous criti¬
cism of Peripatetic thought did not
come from a rationalist, as was to
happen from the end of the Middle
Ages to the 17th century in the West,
but that it came from a man like al-Bi¬
runi who was deeply immersed in both
the life of faith and metaphysical and
cosmological doctrines of Islam and
other traditions.
It is of great significance for an
understanding of the reason for the
different paths that Islamic and Chris¬
tian civilization were to take at the end
of the Middle Ages that one of the
foremost critics of the Aristotelian
world view in Islam should also be the
person who introduced the Patanjali
Yoga to the Islamic world and one of
the Muslim figures really well-versed
In the Hindu Vedanta philosophy.
In questions of cosmogony and
creation, al-Biruni rejected violently the
Idea of the "eternity" of the world.
Like the Islamic theologians, he held
that to believe in the eternity of the
world is to negate the need for a
cause for the world and therefore to
negate indirectly Divine Unity, which
was the principle most dear to him.
In fact the whole of al-Biruni's works
can be interpreted as a quest for the
realization of unity in various forms of
knowledge and planes of existence. It
was most of all with the aim of preserv-
(1) Muslim school of philosophy influenced
by the philosophy of Aristotle.
(2) A philosophy with origins in Ancient
Persia, postulating inward spiritual enlighten¬
ment and mystical experience, and contrast¬
ing with the philosophy of Aristotle based
on reasoning and logical argument.
ing the inviolability of the doctrine of
unity that he criticized the Peripatetic
view of the eternity of the world In the
second of the questions he posed to
Avicenna.
The debate between al-Biruni and
Avicenna as well as al-Ma'sumi on this
subject concerns one of the most
important questions of Islamic philoso¬
phy, namely the condition under which
something needs a cause. Al-Biruni
identified the idea of the eternity of the
world with its not being created. For
him, in contrast to Avicenna, the "new¬
ness" of the universe implied its being
created and the denial of this "new¬
ness", or an acceptance that the world
does not have an origin in time, des¬
troyed the conception of creation and
ultimately the unity of the Creator and
his power. Hence In other works such
as The Determination of the Co-ordi¬
nates of Cities he affirmed his belief
in the created nature of the world and
tried to provide both scientific and
theological reasons for it.
As a result of his vast and varied
study of nature, history and various
traditional doctrines of time and of the
world, al-Biruni became clearly aware
of the qualitative nature of time, of the
fact that it is not uniformly stretched
out like a mathematical co-ordinate. He
also strongly denied the idea of uni-
formitarianism so dear to modern geo¬
logy and paleontology and provided
both scientific and philosophical argu¬
ments to disprove it.




B^ OR al-Biruni time has a
cyclic nature, but not in the sense of
returning to the same point again,
which is a metaphysical absurdity and
a modern caricature of the real tradi¬
tional teachings. Rather, by " cyclic "
al-Biruni understands qualitative chan¬
ges and correspondences between
various elements of time within each
cycle.
Without doubt his profound study
and intimate knowledge not only of the
Koranic conception of time, which is
based on cycles of prophecy, but also
of the teachings of the Puranas, the
18 Hindu epics, and of many other
traditions on the meaning of time and
history, helped al-Biruni develop per¬
haps more profoundly than any other
Islamic philosopher and scientist the
meaning of qualified and cyclic time
and Its implications for the study of
nature and of man.
A basic aspect of al-Biruni's thought,
which is closely related to his
treatment of time, concerns the dev¬
elopment and becoming of things, OQ
which many have by mistake identified ***»
with the modern theory of evolution,
the latter being no more than a parody
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

FREE-WHEELING PHILOSOPHER (Continued)
40
of the traditional doctrine of grad¬
ation (3).
Al-Blruni was fully aware of the long
history of the earth, of the cataclysms
which changed mountains Into seas
and oceans into continents, of the
fact that certain species preceded
others on earth and that each species
has its own life cycle.
Pondering over the vast panorama
of nature In both time and space and
the teachings of various sacred writ¬
ings on the creation and subsequent
history of the Universe, al-Biruni
became aware of the basic principle
that the development and becoming of
things in this world is the gradual
unfolding and actualization of all the
possibilities that are inherent within
each being.
Nothing evolves from one form into
another as a result of external addi¬
tions or accretions; rather whatever
transformation does take place is no
more than the manifestations of pos¬
sibilities already present in that being.
In the same way, what becomes mani-
(3) The principle that the universe is com¬
posed of an infinite series of forms ranging
in order from the barest type of existence
to ultimate perfection.
fested at a particular period of history
is no more than the unfolding of possi¬
bilities inherent 'in that particular cycle
of time.
This principle, which is one of the
cornerstones of al-Biruni's thought and
is a crystallization of well-known tradi¬
tional doctrines, is applied by al-Blruni
to his study of various domains of
nature, both animate and inanimate, as
well as to history and man.
Being an outstanding physicist, al-
Biruni was deeply interested in the
general principles of natural philoso¬
phy, in such questions as motion, time
and matter, as is again seen in his
criticism of Aristotelian natural philoso¬
phy presented in the series of ques¬
tions and answers exchanged with Avi¬
cenna.
As far as the nature of matter is
concerned, he sided with the Islamic
theologians.
It is somewhat strange that a scien¬
tist such as al-Biruni should support
the view of the theologians concerning
the structure of matter, for usually the
Muslim scientists believed in the conti¬
nuity of matter.
Of paramount importance for an
understanding of al-Biruni's philosophi-
Photo H.W. Silvester © Rapho, Paris
cal ideas is his view of knowledge and
the methods used for Its attainment.
Al-Biruni held a view of knowledge
which was at once dynamic and static,
that Is, he believed clearly in the
gradual development of particular
forms of knowledge and at the same
time in the immutability of principial
knowledge derived from revelation.
In addition to being the founder of
the discipline of comparative religion
or the history of religion he must also
be considered as one of the founders
of the history of science. Yet, he
never lost sight of immutable know¬
ledge, which for him is always the
revealed Scriptures and which provides
the matrix for all the human sciences
which change and develop.
Moreover, al-Biruni was the great
champion of pure knowledge and its
value for the perfection of man. In
Islam there has never been the idea
of "science for science's sake" as is
found in the West. But within the
context of Islamic civilization al-Biruni
emphasized the importance of pure
knowledge and the pursuit of know¬
ledge for the sake of the perfection
of man as against those who stressed
the importance of its utility.

THE FIRST
MUSLIM
TO MAKE
A DEEP STUDY
OF HINDU
PHILOSOPHY
Left, 14th century Persian manuscript illus¬
tration shows Sultan Mahmud of Ghazna
crossing the Ganges, the sacred river to which
Indians go on pilgrimage (above), to pray
and meditate on its banks (opposite page).
Al-Biruni studied India at first hand during
his journeys in that country with Sultan
Mahmud. This permitted him to write his
monumental book on India. The breadth of
vision and depth of understanding he revealed
in this work were unprecedented in the
Muslim world of his day. It remains a model
of exact observation and objective analysis.
As George Sarton writes in his "Introduction
to the History of Science" "He was the first
Muslim to make a deep study of Hindu philo¬
sophy and became the most important link
between two great provinces of mankind,
India and Islam."
Photo Edinburgh University library, U.K.
Of course, inasmuch as al-Biruni
spoke within the context of the tradi¬
tional world view, his defence of pure
knowledge and the view of those who
emphasized its utility met at the
highest level. For what can be more
"useful" to man than the knowledge
which is an adornment for his soul
and the means for Its attainment of
perfection?
Al-Biruni himself was aware of these
two poles and attitudes involved and
in his own writings combined the
pleasure aspect associated with the
attainment of knowledge with its aspect
of utility. For him the two were not
completely divorced from each other
but were complementary in the deep¬
est sense.
Al-Blruni never became the slave of
a particular method nor accepted that
kind of tyranny of methodology charac¬
teristic of so much of modern science.
He used different methods in different
sciences in conformity with the nature
of the science in question. Where it
was necessary he used induction, or
observation, or experimentation, or
deduction or had recourse to intellec¬
tual Intuition.
He was the most exact of scientists
without ever being fooled into believing
that the methods of experimental
science could he applied to the domain
of religion or the sciences of man. That
is why In al-Biruni, who in a sense
summarizes the whole history of Isla¬
mic science, there is no single method,
but methods for acquiring various
forms of knowledge in conformity with
the innate nature of the sciences in
question.
The basic significance of al-Blruni
for the modern world, and especially
the contemporary Islamic world, in fact,
is not only in that he was the father
of geodesy or that he weighed several
precious stones and metals carefully
or even that he criticized Aristotelian
natural philosophy profoundly. It is
above all in his success in being an
outstanding scientist, in being scienti¬
fic without being scientlstic. It is in
being logical without losing sight of the
spiritual empyrean, the knowledge of
which is not irrational nor illogical but
unattainable through logic and reason
alone.
It is also in his remarkable sense of
discernment which was able to give
each form of knowledge its due, to
assign to each element the place to
which it belonged by nature, so that
he could practise mathematics with
the rigour of the greatest of mathema¬
ticians and at the same time write of
human affairs with a vision that is
much more profound than the view
of those in the modern world who try
to ape the methods of the exact scien¬
ces in the field of the humanities and
who do not possess a fraction of
al-Biruni's scientific knowledge.
Al-Biruni stands as the model of the
thinker who was able to harmonize
within his own intellectual vision
various forms of knowledge, from the
sciences of nature to religion and phi¬
losophy.
He also stands as proof that it is
possible within a traditional world-
view to develop and even found
various branches of the sciences
without becoming enslaved by them
and without falling under the deadly
influence of belief in the unilateral and
tyrannizing power of science so preva¬
lent today, a belief whose end cannot
but be the stifling of the human spirit
and the destruction of the natural envi¬
ronment which itself serves as support
for man's terrestrial journey.
Seyyed Hossein Nasr
41
