Detail of a 7th-cen-
tury stone sculpture
of the God Vishnu,
who is venerated by
Nepalese Hindus.
The five-metre-long
statue lies in the
waters of a huge arti¬
ficial pool in a beau¬
tiful setting at Bud-
dhanilkhantha near
Kathmandu. Show¬
ing Vishnu on the
coils of the serpent
Ananta, symbol of
eternity, the sculp¬
ture is a centre of
pilgrimage for Hindus
who bring offerings
of flowers, rice, and
the leaves of the
basil plant, consid¬
ered sacred.



AN ART THAT
CONCILIATES
GODS AND MEN
...but countless Nepalese
masterpieces are now
threatened by the ravages
of time, pilfering
and modernization
16

by Ernest A. Connal/y
NEPAL remained an enigma to
most of the world until it was
opened to foreign visitors less than
two decades ago. A land-locked
kingdom stretching 500 miles along
the southern slopes of the Himalayas,
it is bordered by China (Tibet) on the
north and India on the south. Its
terrain varies from the jungles of the
Terai to the snowy peak of Mount
Everest. Kathmandu, the capital city,
ERNEST A. CONNALLY is head of the office
of Archaeology and Historic Preservation of
the U.S. National Park Service, in Washington
D.C. In 1968 Unesco sent him to Nepal to
advise on the preservation of Nepal's historic
monuments and the promotion of cultural
tourism. The author has written a more extensive
presentation of the subject in a report on his mis¬
sion which he prepared for Unesco entitled
"Nepal Cultural Tourism."
stands in a valley at an elevation of
4,500 feet.
Unified as a kingdom just two
centuries ago, Nepal is a geographic,
ethnic, and cultural combination. With
a population approaching 12 million,
its peoples represent six or seven
major ethnic strains. It is a land of
regional distinction in social custom
and dress. It is a land of three
languages, a dozen dialects, and two
major religions.
Officially Hindu, the country is also
heavily Buddhist. Temples of both
often stand side by side, with some
practices of faith tending to mingle.
Inscriptions on the monuments are
usually rendered in a version of
Kiranti, the old Sanskrit-derived
literary language. The major modern
tongues are Nepali and Newari, while
some dialects of Hindi are spoken
along the Indian border. Although
Nepali is now the lingua franca, it is
less than 200 years old, having dev¬
eloped, with the unification of the
kingdom, from Gurkali with borrow¬
ings from Hindi. Newari is the old
language of the people of the Kath¬
mandu .Valley, who knew themselves
and their speech as Nepali. The term
Newari came into standard use only
after It was adopted by missionaries
in the late 18th century. A synonym
for Nepali, the name was merely
spelled according to a dialectical
pronunciation.
The modern name Newari therefore
denotes not only the language but also
the people of the Kathmandu Valley.
Their ancestors were the original
Nepali, whose cultural hegemony pro-
vided the kingdom with its name, its
most important style in art and
architecture, and its major monuments.
The Kathmandu Valley is the cultural
and historic heart of the kingdom. In
this valley rises the sacred Bagmati
River, flowing down to India. In this
valley stand the important cities of
Kathmandu, Patan, and Bhadgaon.
The early history of the valley is
obscure. It is certain, however, that
Its ancient inhabitants absorbed
several waves of Indian immigration.*
Indian influence is strongly evident,*
17

, and it is possible that the valley was
subject to the Indian Emperor Asoka
in the 3rd century B.C. Although
Siddhartha Gautama, eventually known
as Buddha, was born (c. 563 B.C.) at
Lumbini on the southern frontier of
modern Nepal, he made his career
in India. And It was from India that
the gods of Buddhism and Hinduism
came ready-made to Nepal, where they
assumed each others' attributes and
assimilated virtues of the old animistic
belief. Nevertheless, ancient fetishes
are still venerated and blood sacrifice
persists.
Apparently the gods gradually pen¬
etrated the valley through commercial
and dynastic connexions with India.
From the middle of the 4th century
to the middle of the 8th the valley
was controlled by the Licchavi and
other dynasties related to princely
Indian clans influenced by Gupta
civilization. It was in these centuries
and under that cultural stimulus that
Nepalese art emerged.
The earliest existing pieces of figure
sculpture are dated to the 5th century.
In the 7th century Chinese travellers
remarked the skill of Nepalese artists.
They mentioned the temples of both
faiths standing side by side, as we
see them today; and they described
a seven-storied tower of the royal
palace at Deopatán and multi-storied
temples on the hills.
It is possible that the Chinese
travellers were describing pagodas,
which they regarded as novelties. In
any case, it Is certain that basic forms
in art and architecture had been
established by the mid-7th century,
from which time the Newari style
radiated its influence beyond the valley
to Tibet and finally to China. In the
13th century, Newari artists were
summoned to the service of Kublai
Khan.
Evidently the cities of Kathmandu,
Patan, and Bhadgaon had not come'
into existence at the time of the
Chinese visit in the 7th century,
although by that time each may have
had a nucleus in the form of a religious
shrine. The cities came into im¬
portance only under the Malla dynasty
in 1200 A.D.
In Nepal religion is more than a
faith; it is a way of life, integrated
with all human action and always
visibly evident. Thus an early English
traveller to this remote, enigmatic land
was prompted to observe that there
were as many gods as men and as
many temples as houses. Among the
multitude of temples are three readily
recognizable types: pagoda, stupa,
sikhara.
The pagoda is by far the most dis¬
tinctive and most numerous type. In
all the variety of sizes in which it is
found, the pagoda-temple characteris¬
tically consists of a square chamber
containing the cult ¡mage, above which
rises a series of progressively dimi¬
nishing hipped roofs. The tiers of roofs
vary in number from two to five, three
being commonest. The chamber is
18
usually constructed of brick, while the
roofs are covered with small tiles or,
in some cases, sheet metal. In a
few extraordinary instances the sheet
metal is gilded.
The roofs are usually supported by
wooden struts, carved and polychrom-
ed, and the eaves are graced with
a fringe of small bells. In larger exam¬
ples the cult chamber is surrounded
by a colonnade of carved wood. The
temple stands upon a paved terrace
or platform. It is sometimes situated
within an enclosed courtyard, spacious
or restrictive; often it rises solo on a
high stepped platform located at some
irregular plaza within the town.
As an architectural form, the pagoda
may have been developed before the
7th century; however, It Is doubtful
that any existing example can be dated
earlier than the year 1400. The Temple
of Changu Narayan at Changu, the
construction of which is dated to 1401,
may be the oldest existing pagoda.
While the pagoda Is used by Hindus
and Buddhists alike, the stupa is pecu¬
liar to Buddhism alone. Characteristi¬
cally, the stupa is an artifical mound
of hemispherical shape and symbolic
meaning. Scattered throughout the
kingdom are numerous stupas that are
mere mounds of earth of varying size.
Others are regular architectural cons¬
tructions in brick and stucco, also of
various sizes.
The two largest and most Important
examples in the valley are Bodhnath at
Baudha and the Swayambhu or Swa-
yambhunath stupa at Sengu west of
Kathmandu. The latter consists of the
characteristic large mound finished
with stucco and periodically white¬
washed. Atop the mound ¡s a cubical
tower painted on its four faces with
pairs of all-seeing eyes. It is surmount¬
ed by a spire of successively diminish¬
ing rings of burnished metal culmi¬
nating jn a delicate gilded umbrella.
The stupa is situated on a platform
on a hill. It Is surrounded by a host
of small temples and lesser monu¬
ments, some in cut stone, and a num¬
ber of monastic buildings.
The Introduction of the stupa into
Nepal Is claimed as early as the 3rd
century B.C. However, the dates of
existing stupas are very uncertain.
The sikhara is a North Indian temple-
form, an apparently recent importation,
clearly revealing its origin. It is char¬
acterized by a tall slender dome, sug¬
gesting the shape of a folded umbrella,
usually rising above colonnaded plat¬
forms. The umbrella-like dome is built
hollow, the shell being laid in corbel¬
led masonry, stone or brick.
The brick examples are plastered on
the exterior. Fairly common, they can
be found here and there among the
pagodas. A conspicuous, rich example
in cut stone Is the Temple of Krishna
Mandir (dated about 1630) in Durbar
Square, Patan. Although the sikhara
is most readily identified with Hin¬
duism, the form is used by Buddhists
as well. The Mahabaudha Temple in
CONTINUED PAGE 27

AN ART THAT CONCILIATES GODS AND MEN (Continued from page 18)
Patan (south of Kathmandu) is an
extraordinary version in moulded terra
cotta.
The temples rarely stand isolated
from their surroundings. They are in¬
tegrated into the neighbourhoods of
the cities and towns, and they are
found In monumental groupings both
urban and rural. The sensitive compo¬
sition of these ensembles, which are
particular expressions of an old and
unique civilization, clearly demons¬
trates the Newari genius In ordering
the environment.
Everywhere one sees evidence of
that thrifty regard for the land that
suits the needs of a long-established,
agriculture-oriented society. Every¬
where one sees terraced fields lying
at the foot of surrounding hills, forming
the picturesque scenery that Is
characteristic of the valley.
One can see the same attitude
expressed in the stepped platforms of
the temples, which figure so impor¬
tantly in community life, and in the
compactness of the temple groups and
their overall terraced structure.
In Patan, the Temple of Red Mach-
hendra, venerated by both Buddhists
and Hindus, is a rich pagoda standing
on a low platform near the centre of a
large grassy quadrangle enclosed by
secular buildings. The temple precinct
serves as a public space, and play¬
ground, in the daily life of the people.
On the platform about the temple are
low columns supporting some of the
valley's finest and most delicate bronze
sculptures.
The ground plan of the temple group
at Changu shows temples of several
sizes and lesser monuments on a
terrace enclosed by low colonnaded
structures, with approaching stairs and
a pool. Pools are often conspicuous
features in temple complexes, the use
of water having been remarked by
travellers since the 7th century.
The Newari's strong sense of com¬
munity, together with their sensitive
RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE. Buddhism
and Hinduism in Nepal are practised
side by side and even draw on each
other's spiritual traditions. An example
of this spirit of harmony is
the religious festival shown here, where
a Buddhist lama from the stupa of
Bodhnath occupies a place of honour
before a Hindu temple at Bhadgaon.
Seated at right of photo with a prayer
wheel in his hand, he watches two
masked dancers, representing demons
in the Buddhist pantheon. A long
serpent hangs down from the roofs of
the Hindu sanctuary, the worship of
Nagas (serpents) being an ancient
Nepalese and Hindu cult.
Photo Marilyn Silverstone © Magnum, Paris
regard for the landscape and their
thrifty use of space, produced a sus¬
taining balance in the building of
towns, which was achieved through
physical devices.
The irregular pattern of circulation
indicates a process of organic growth,
with consequent variety of view and
spatial transition. The uniformity of
house design, however, provides con¬
sistency, while throughout the overall
pattern there is an even balance bet¬
ween built-up and open areas.
Among the open areas are walled
green spaces for private use and
accessible public spaces of varying
size for community purposes. And
finally there is the rectangular temple
square, with its rich monuments inte¬
grated near the centre, and on the
edges of the settlement the usual
water tanks and terraces.
An important visual aspect of the
Newari legacy are the townscapes,
resulting from the natural terrain and
appropriate ways of building on it.
Although individuality is not lacking
among the towns, there are many
common characteristics which are per¬
ceived on approach, as to Chapagaon,
by traditional paths that were never
meant for means of transport other
than pedestrian.
The rush to modernity poses a
serious threat. Immediate effects are
already evident in the city of Kath¬
mandu and the Kathmandu Valley.
Serious intrusions into the compact
consistency of the historic core of
Kathmandu followed the earthquake
of 1934, which provided the occasion
for opening several wide straight
streets and rebuilding in a dull aca¬
demic style, the white stucco of which
stands in sharp contrast to the tradi¬
tional buildings of natural brick and
carved wood. Because of their increas¬
ing size, concrete construction, and
stucco finish, the new buildings intro¬
duce a jarring note in the historic
urban core.
Industrial development threatens to
conflict with cultural values. Road
construction is often undertaken with¬
out sufficient regard for the old
traditional balance between the natural
and the man-made in the countryside,
or without sufficient respect for tra¬
ditional built-up areas.
At Baudha, the main street has been
widened by the removal of houses
along one side of the old road. Their
replacements are unsympathetic to the
old houses on the opposite side, which
were suffered to remain and need res¬
toration. Furthermore, the old gateway
to the Important Bodhnath stupa was
destroyed. Small and restricted, like
a keyhole, it provided a sudden and
dramatic revelation of the monument
as one entered the sacred precinct
from the road. Now there is an open,
axial approach and the old spatial
control is gone.
Although some restoration work is
being done on the temples, the great
majority suffer steady decay. It Is
estimated that some wooden construc¬
tions will be lost through structural
failure within ten or fifteen years.
Meanwhile on many temples we can
see makeshift protective devices in
the prevalent corrugated iron roofs
and the stiffeners added to the carved
wooden struts that support the eaves.
Apparently it is the rise of tourism
that has prompted the pilfering of carv¬
ed wood, metal work, inscriptions,
and other decorative Items from the
temples. Presumably these objects are
destined for the clandestine curio
market. The problem seems to be
growing and is serious for a number
of reasons.
Among them is the loss of those
small metal plates, so easily portable,
bearing inscriptions pertaining to the
construction of the temple, which may
be otherwise unrecorded. Once it is
detached there is practically no way
to determine to what specific temple a
plate may belong.
Another loss, of course, is artistic.
For example, the temple of Vishnu in
Patan has been stripped of its copper
repoussé door surround and other
metal work. Other monuments have
suffered the same indignity, and the
problem of adequate control is very
difficult.
Several important steps have been
taken by His Majesty's Government
for the preservation and development
of historic sites and monuments. A
National Planning Commission has
been created at the ministerial level.
It is composed of five members, all
recognized as leading professionals,
including a member for regional deve¬
lopment.
The formation of the Planning Com¬
mission provides the most promising
means for ensuring inter-ministerial
coordination in all phases of economic
and physical development, Including
the preservation and development of
the Kingdom's rich and unique legacy
of historic cities, towns, sites, and
monuments.
Ernest. A. Connally
27
