the Ghanaian
experiment
by Robert Plant
HE Ghana National Family
Planning Programme was launched in
May .1970, following growing concern
over trends revealed by the 1960
census. Successive governments
have supported the project. Its stated
purpose is to make information and
services available to every Ghanaian
couple, so that they may have the
number of children they themselves
want.
In announcing the programme, the
government summarized the case for
action in these terms:
"The rapid growth of Ghana's popu¬
lation poses the greatest threat to
our economic development and to the
welfare of our people. Our population
56
ROBERT PLANT, Uganda-born editor and
journalist, is a specialist in social and
economic problems of developing countries.
He was senior economics lecturer at the
International Labour College, Kampala (Ugan¬
da), and Is author of 'Population and Labour",
a study of the consequences of rapid popu¬
lation growth for workers in developing
countries (ILO, 1973).
increases by 5,000 every week and
this rate of growth far exceeds the
rate of growth of our economy.
"As a nation, we are increasing in
numbers faster than we can build
schools to educate our youth, faster
than we can construct hospitals to
cater for the health needs of our
people and faster than we can develop
our economy to provide jobs for the
new workers who enter our labour
force each year."
Each year in Ghana more than 4,000
mothers die as a result of childbirth
and as many as 40,000 of the children
who are born do not survive to their
first birthday. The government states
frankly that the main reason for these
appalling figures is the high number of
closely spaced pregnancies which are
the lot of many Ghanaian women. The
government's aim is to ensure that
each mother has strong healthy babies
who will flourish.
Ghana's population increases at
about three per cent a year. At this
rate the population will double in little
more than 20 years. If the rate of
population growth could be cut down
to two per cent per annum, it would
take 12 years longer for the population
to double. "This", says the govern¬
ment, "would give us much needed
time to plan and provide for the future."
The promotion of the programme has
called for the greatest circumspection.
In Ghana, as in most African countries,
established cultural practices are pro-
natalist in their appeal. Desired family
size is still high and the motivation for
family planning is generally low.
National problems resulting from popu¬
lation pressures appear remote to the
present generation of Ghanaians.
In his first annual report, the
Executive Director of the National
Family Planning Programme, Dr. A. A.
Armar, pointed out that : "There is
also the fact that, in the face of
growing nationalism after long periods
of colonialist domination, many view
foreign assistance for family planning
activities with suspicion. They declare
that it has the sinister motive of
corrupting the youth, destroying long
cherished cultural practices and
leading to moral depravity."
These constraints notwithstanding,
the programme has made significant
strides in its efforts at making family
planning an acceptable life style. By
the end of June 1972, 140 clinics had
been established. Over 2,000 licensed
chemical retailers were distributing
approved contraceptives of various
types. The total number of acceptors
was just under 46,000 and the number
is steadily growing. New acceptors
are now coming in at a rate of 2,500 to
3,000 a month. This is a good start.
The programme makes full use of
the many resources, both private and
public, that exist in Ghana. Thus the
Ministries of Health, Information, and
Social Welfare, along with private
agencies such as the Planned Parent¬
hood Association and the Christian
Council of Ghana, are playing an
important role . The Trades Union
Congress on its own initiative organ¬
ized a seminar in 1970 to educate mem¬
bers on the need for family planning.
There are still those who say that
the existence of undeveloped land in
Ghana invalidates the argument for the
regulation of population growth. "They
do not realize", says Dr. Armar,
"what an enormous investment of
capital would be required over a long
period before this land could be effec¬
tively developed to support a large
population. Countries like Ghana
simply do not have this capital."
There is still also some concern,
sincerely felt in many quarters, that
family planning will lead to a break¬
down in morality.
On this point, a promotional leaflet,
issued by the Ghana National Family
Planning Programme, had the following
to say:
"The truth of the matter is that lack
of family planning, with its attendant
evils of overpopulation, overcrowding,
unemployment, lack of social services
and inadequate food, leads not only
to a breakdown of moral behaviour
but to many other social ills which
eventually lead to a deterioration of
society. Family planning is indeed a
factor which can help build a strong
and healthy nation."
The government does not claim, and
never has claimed, that family planning
will solve all Ghana's economic
problems. Family planning is only one
of the measures required to ensure
development of the country's economy.
Other measures include agricultural
development, economic planning, the
construction of roads, schools and
hospitals.
The state of the nation's economy,
says Dr. Armar, is reflected in the
degree to which prosperity and health
are enjoyed by individuals. "If our
population continues to increase at the
present rate, improvement in our living
standards will be retarded. That is
why, within the broad framework of
the national development effort, the
Ghana National Family Programme
can be described as one of the most
promising programmes the govern¬
ment has undertaken."
The right balance was perhaps
struck by Ghana's Head of State,
Colonel Ingatius K. Acheampong, when
he said in December 1972:
"It is doubtful whether over-popu¬
lation is the major problem facing
Africa today. Africa is the least popu¬
lated of the continents and taken as
a whole the temptation to argue for
more people may indeed be great.
But we live in a world of planning and
we have a duty to ensure that we
plan as much for the mouths we are
going to feed as for the means by
which we shall feed them."
The nation should aim, he said, at
"the right ratio between the rate of
growth of the economy and the rate
of population growth."

'v/'^
*8p
« 1 >í
¡tf' 1
\
L* m
Hl íjV
m i 9
1 3
1 "
fenw
PiV
**> j * »> 3
m~--¿ ^ *êS iTÊÊHk
/^ YOU TOO. 60 TD YOUR
( FAMILY PLANNING CUNIC.
V YOU'LL BE GLAD X>U DID.'
DISTRIBUTED BYT
THE GHANA NATIONAL FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAMME
While certain African countries are opposed to the Idea of
birth control, others have launched national family
planning programmes (see page 47). The Ghana National
Family Planning Programme employs every means
of popular education to spread the family planning message.
The slogan "Family Planning Better Life" is to be seen
everywhere on pencils, calendars, posters, booklets, newspaper
advertisements, car stickers, at the cinema, on the television
screen. The emphasis is always on human happiness. The
smiling couples above are depicted on the back of a book of
strip cartoons entitled "Poverty was my Shadow" which portrays
how one couple advised their friends to break out of the
vicious circle of poverty by limiting their family. Top,
the beginning of a similar story in a play presented by
travelling actors. Husband and wife fight over money while the
terrified children try to separate them. The overburdened mother
already has three children and is expecting a fourth.
In this way, the population debate Is brought down to the grass
roots and the homes of the people.

