A mother
from Kenya
explains:
y people
are frightened
of family
planning
by Sarah Lukalo
m AMILY planning is nothing new to Africa and
definitely not to Kenya. For example, my own family
although there were ten of us was very evenly spaced
out, and in Kenya this was almost universally the case.
We were all about three years apart, and in fact it was
considered shameful for women to have children one after
the other. There was a number of taboos to discourage
this; one of them being that if you had any sexual relation¬
ship with your husband when you were breast feeding
your baby, you polluted the milk and you believed that
your child might die.
Perhaps one of the reasons why modern family planning
has become a problem in Kenya concerns methods of
approach. Traditionally, there are certain topics that one
can discuss with older people and others one can discuss
with younger people. But the only people with whom one
can discuss almost anything are people of one's own age.
When modern family planning came to Kenya and I think
to almost all African countries young people were picked
to be family planning educators, to go and talk to people
much older than they, people who probably commanded a
great deal of respect in their own communities. The elders
were insulted at having to listen to young people talk about
such issues.
Another problem is that there was too much discussion
of family planning, as though it were a new thing. The
result was that people tended to think that it was indeed
a new thing.
I know quite a number of individuals who would refer to
family planning field educators as "those girls who kill
babies", and there was a belief that birth control methods
made one sterile. Many felt that if it were the kind of
family planning they already knew, there would have been
some connexion between the traditional way of doing things
and the new ideas. I think that these are two main reasons
underlying the difficulties we face today.
In my view, rather than speaking to people about popu¬
lation growth rates and how much money will be spent to
lower them, a human approach would be more effective.
Every woman is touched by what she can see: her own
family unit. If, for example, her children are continually
falling sick and she goes to the hospital almost every
day, she will be likely to accept the idea of family planning
if it is suggested, say, as a way of helping her. She will
surely realize that in spacing her child-bearing more
rationally, she would be better able to look after her
children. Perhaps her children face malnutrition, or perhaps
she herself is simply overworked and cannot give them
adequate care. In any event, she would be bound to see
the advantages of family planning.
On the other hand, information about the national popu¬
lation growth rate is so remote that although she may
be educated, she will conclude that it is the govern¬
ment's problem and not her own. However, she may feel
that although she cannot do much about national population
planning, she can do something about her own planning
and thereby help improve the well-being of her family.
57
