' ¡H
.S
'$
:XBrunos Nardini
ii .
I
ARDO
3-VI.N'CI

Stretched out in the grass behind
his grandfather's house a young
lad, who was to grow up to be one
of the greatest painters and sculptors
the world has ever known, waswatching
the circling flight of a birda kite-
round the main tower of the castle in
the town of Vinci. His uncle was lying
in the grass next to him, trying to
explain the mechanics of the way a
kite flies, soaring round in circles so
as to exploit the slightest breath of a
breeze. But the young lad was tired:
his eyes were already closed and he
had fallen asleep. His name was
Leonardo da Vinci.
It was an afternoon in May, the
earth was sweet with the scent of hay
and crickets sang out from their
hiding-place in the grass. Leonardo
had a strange dream about the kite: he
dreamt that he was still in his cradle,
but no longer at home. Lucia, his
grandmother, had carried the cradle
into the field and then gone away.
The kite made ever-narrowing cir¬
cles until it plunged from the sky and
dropped on top of him; however, the
bird did not scratch Leonardo with its
claws or peck him with its beak. It
simply flapped its wings and tried to
open the boy's mouth with its forked
tail. When Leonardo's mouth was
opened in this way, the kite struck
his lips and his tongue with its tail.
Suddenly Leonardo woke up with a
cry and found himself sitting on the
grass with his uncle, Francesco.
"What's the matter with you?" asked
his uncle.
"That kite", stammered the lad, still
not quite sure that he had woken up
from his dream, "Uncle, I had a dream
about that kite!"
Many years later, when Leonardo
was grown up, he wrote in the city of
Milan that this was his first childhood
memory, a striking one which he had
never forgotten. Now that he was
studying the mathematical laws that
had to do with birds' flight, that kite
seemed to him to have been some
kind of messenger telling him his
future destiny.
BRUNO NARDINI, publisher and founder of the
International Book Centre in Florence, is the author
of "Vita di Leonardo" ¡Life of Leonardo), written for
children and illustrated with stills from an Italian
television film on Leonardo directed by Renato Castel-
lani (Nardini and Giunti-Bemporad Marzocco Publi¬
shers, Florence, 1974). He has adapted the fables
and legends which Leonardo ¡otted down in his
notebooks into two books for young people: "Favole
et Leggende", to be published in English as 'Fables
of Leonardo da Vine' (Collins, U.K.; Hubbard Press,
U.S.A.), and "Animali Fantastic/" (Nardini and Giunti-
Bemporad Marzocco, 1974). He has also published
a book for youngsters on the life of Michelangelo.
In this house, on the slopes of the Tuscan
hills near Vinci, Leonardo was born on
April 15th. 1452.
And what a splendid destiny it
would be! Born in a poor village of
Tuscany in central Italy, near the River
Arno, he never had a mother of his
own like other children, or a loving
father. Instead he had a step-mother
and a strict grandfather. His only
real friend and teacher was his uncle
Francesco, who was seventeen years
older than Leonardo. '
Leonardo was born on the 15th of
April, 1452. The Middle Ages, a long
period of gloomy tower-keeps and
independent communes, were coming
to an end. The period of local lord¬
ships, government by the richest and
strongest, was coming in their place.
The gloomy old keeps were giving
way to luxurious palaces.
Leonardo arrived at Florence with
his father, Ser Piero, on their horse-
and-cart, for his father had decided
to move to the big city for good, to
work as a notary like his ancestors.
Leonardo was also accompanied by
Ser Piero's second wife, a young
woman called Albiera who took the
place of his mother.
We have no record of what hap¬
pened during that first period of
Leonardo's life at Florence. All we
do know is that Ser Piero sent his son
to do music arid grammar classes;
music consisted of learning to play
the flute and grammar meant learning
how to write. Then, in 1465, step¬
mother Albiera died and Ser Piero
married again. Leonardo's new
"mother" was called Francesca. By
now he was thirteen years old and
he had already decided what he was
going to be when he grew up: not a
notary, like his father, or his grand¬
father Antonio, but a painter.
It was quite by accident that Ser
Piero found out his son's secret am¬
bition. One day he went into Leo¬
nardo's room and came across a pile
of neatly rolled up papers and realized
that they were drawings. "Not bad at
all", Leonardo's father said to him¬
self. "In fact, they are pretty good."
Without wasting any further time
Ser Piero put the rolls of paper under
his arm and took himself off to show
them to Andrea di Cione, whom we
know as the painter Verrocchio.
"Listen, Maestro," said Ser Piero,
"I found these drawings done by my
son. What do you think of them?"
Verrocchio looked at Leonardo's
drawings one after the other, paying
ever more careful attention, then he
asked: "How old is this lad?"
"Just seventeen", was the answer.
"Then bring him round to me. He
can live in my house. I'll turn him
into a great painter."
The next day young Leonardo,
accompanied by his father in abrusque,
20

Sketch for the Madonna with the Cat
executed during Leonardo's first
Florentine period.
Florence, the city of towers, as it looked
when Leonardo lived there until the age of
30 in 1482, when he left for Milan.
serious mood, entered Verrocchio's
workshop as an apprentice. He did
not feel out of place or nervous, and
he didn't have to face his strict new
teacher on his own. A crowd of young
pupils welcomed him noisily among
them: these were all young boys of
his own age, and they too were to
become famous in their own ways.
The oldest were Sandro Filipepi,
also known as Botticelli, and Pietro
Vannucci, known as Perugino. Amongst
the younger pupils of Verrocchio were
such names as Lorenzo di Credi, Fran¬
cesco Botticini and Francesco di
Simone. Surrounded by friends like
these, in those enormous studios full
of blocks of chalk and marble, with
tables loaded with brushes and paints,
Leonardo felt happy in the constant
atmosphere of hard work and creation.
He willingly carried out the most
humdrum tasks, sweeping the floor,
washing the dishes, grinding the colour
substances, preparing the paints,
cleaning the brushes and posing for
his master who was working on a
statue of David.
But what occupied him more than
anything else was keeping his eyes on
everything that was going on around
him, soaking in every experience so
that he would soon know the tricks of
the trade. A little later he was en¬
trusted with the task of preparing the"
plaster for the frescoes; then he was
allowed to transfer some of the "car¬
toons" (the word used to describe the
plan the painter works from) on to
the wall; finally he was given the
brushes and told to touch up some of
the work on the wall which Verrocchio
had done himself.
One day Verrocchio had assigned
Leonardo the job of painting an
angel's head on a large canvas which
represented "The Baptism of Christ".
He noticed that the angel's head which
he had already done on the painting
wasn't so impressive as Leonardo's.
The story goes that Verrocchio picked
up his brushes and broke them, as if
he was declaring that from then on
he wouldn't have anything more to do
with painting.
From this period in Leonardo's life
come many sketches and studies of .
the horse; Verrocchio was working on r
21

Leonardo's earliest work is a kneeling
angel (detail below) which was his
contribution to Verrocchio's Baptism of
Christ (1473-78) shown at right.
Leonardo painted it in Verrocchio's workshop
where he was apprenticed at the age of 17.
Head of Verrocchio's David, a bronze
sculpture dating from about 1473, for
which the young Leonardo, then aged 20,
may have been the model.
22
Photo taken from "Vita di Leonardo" by Bruno
Nardini, Giunti-Nardini Publishers. Florence
a monument of Bartolomeo Colleoni,
the military captain, seated on his
steed. Leonardo often amazed his
fellow-apprentices by drawing with
his left hand, and he always wrote
from right to left, back to front, like
a wizard scribbling out his spells.
One day, when he was twenty-two
years old, he decided to join the Guild
of San Luca, an association of artists;
so he left Verrocchio's workshop to set
up in business on his own, as we
would say nowadays. Lorenzo the
Magnificent gave him a contract to
draw a Madonna, another patron
asked him for an "Annunciation", then
he was asked for a Saint Jerome, and
an "Adoration of the Magi".
His own father asked him to paint
the wheel of a cart for a peasant from
his home town of Vinci. He never
refused anybody, he took all his jobs
seriously, even the wheel, which he
adapted into a kind of grotesque
monster. With every task he under
took, Leonardo aimed to arrive at an
even greater perfection, until eventu¬
ally he had to give up and leave his
works unfinished. This was the hidden
drama of Leonardo's whole life.
Leonardo, however, was not just a
painter. He also did sculpture. Earlier
on he had modelled a number of
human heads and a Via Crucis. Later
on he was to sculpt an enormous horse.
He was also a musician. He could
play the flute and the lyre, and people
who knew him have recorded that he
"sang exquisitely".
At Vinci he had learnt from his uncle
Francesco to distinguish the different
plants and the effects they had: this
means that he was also a skilled botan¬
ist and knew about herbs. At Florence
he had come to know a number of
famous doctors, and even started to
study anatomy. At night he would slip
into the hospital's mortuary to dissect
the dead bodies and then sketch the
various organs of the human body.

He studied the way rivers flow, and
made plans for canals that ships could
sail down. He read history books and
books about the art of warfare, then
he promptly sat down to invent strange
new war engines. He studied buildings
closely, among them the Cathedral of
Florence where Verrocchio had placed
an enormous ball of copper on the
lantern (the open structure on top of
the dome) designed by the great archi¬
tect Brunelleschi, and he thought up
extraordinary machines that could lift
and transport huge weights in the air.
He watched the way that birds fly and
dreamt of a machine that would allow
men to fly through the sky.
He analyzed the sea-bed and could
already picture a frogman's suit and
mask in his mind's eye. He watched
men at work, and anticipated modern
cybernetics and "time and motion"
studies by working out machines that
could cut out some of their movements
and save them trouble.
He read the works of Greek and
Latin philosophers, until he could
discuss their ideas in such a way as to
impress his listeners. He was not rich,
but the generosity of those who ap¬
preciated his genius meant that he
could live in the style of a prince. He
was handsome, tall and strong: with
his hands he was capable of bending a
horseshoe. Yet he was also' gentle and
refined, full of help for others and never
boastful.
He appreciated everything about life,
and knew how to pick out the good side
of things, the most noble and attractive r
The Adoration of the Magi, a painting
begun by Leonardo about 1481 but never
completed (Uffizi Gallery, Florence).
mmn
The Annunciation, the first full painting
completed by Leonardo (Uffizi Gallery,
Florence).
Photos © Anderson-Giraudon, Pans
23

This unfinished portrait of St. Jerome by
Leonardo (about 1481) illustrates one of the
great painter's theories: men and animals
experience the same emotions.
k side to life. He was a great lover of
Nature: nowadays we would call
him an "ecologist". He even planned
an ideal city with lots of greenery and
criss-crossed by canals, the streets
carried overhead and the houses
tucked underneath.
He also loved animals. Whenever
he saw birds in a cage, he would buy
them in order to let them go. He
considered everything to be a "wonder
of the universe", and whatever he set
eyes on seemed to him to reveal the
hand of its creator, God, whom he
called "The Prime Mover".
Leonardo, then, was a man of the
future, the first and most deeply
convinced citizen of the world.
At the age of thirty Leonardo went
to Milan, to the court of Lodovico il
Moro, who had asked Lorenzo de
Medici for a sculptor to carry out a
monument in memory of his father
Francesco Sforza.
There is an extraordinary letter
which Leonardo sent to the Duke of
Milan just after his arrival in the
Lombard capital. In this letter he
makes a list of all the things he knew
how to do, like making giant slings
and gun-shot for bombardment, self-
propelling cannons, tanks, multiple
machine-guns and siege platforms.
24
At the end of the letter he even states
that he can out-class all others at
architecture, painting and sculpture,
and challenges the Duke to put these
abilities to the test.
Leonardo was taking quite a risk.
Lodovico il Moro could have simply
locked him up as a starry-eyed lunatic.
Instead, the Duke summoned Leo¬
nardo to his presence, listened to what
he had to say and gave him the task
of raising the monument to his father.
He also gave him the official title of
"Engineer to the Duke."
It was at Milan that Leonardo
revealed another ofhis secret passions:
the art of staging elaborate shows,
making him the equivalent of what we
understand by the word "director".
He produced an allegorical represent¬
ation called "Paradise" for the mar¬
riage of Gian Galeazzo Sforza to
Isabella of Aragon, as well as the
"Joust" for Lodovico's wedding to
Beatrice d'Esté, and both perform¬
ances have become legendary.
In the first show the seven planets
were seen following their orbits
round a star-studded sky, accompanied
by music and singing, while the
chariot of the sun, drawn along by
steaming horses (an extraordinary
example of self-propelling machinery),
slowly crossed the stage. In the other
show, the "Joust", a live horse
covered with golden scales stole the
scene, with a ram's head and a fitted
tail that would have suited a serpent.
From this period which Leonardo
spent at Milan there remain famous
works like the painting The Virgin of
the Rocks, of which a version by
Leonardo's sole hand is in Paris, and
a version by both Leonardo and the
Milanese artist De Prédis in a gallery
From an early age Leonardo carried out
meticulous studies of human anatomy.
He made this drawing (about 1 508) of the
dissection of the principal organs of a woman.
Photo © Royal Library. Windsor, U K.

A charcoal, pencil and crayon portrait of
Isabella d'Esté, made at Mantua in 1500.
(Louvre Museum).
in London. He also did a "Madonna"
for Matthew Corvino, the King of
Hungary, and a portrait of a girl with
a stoat in her arms, as well as a
portrait of a woman in profile, who
may well be Beatrice d'Esté.
Lastly there is the stupendous
Cenacolo (painting of Jesus' Last
Supper), which has its own tragic
story. What happened is this: Lodo¬
vico il Moro gave Leonardo the task
of painting Christ's Last Supper with
his Disciples .on to a wall of the
dining-room in the Dominican convent
One of Leonardo's secret passions was the
staging of elaborate spectacles or shows on
festive occasions. For the marriage of Gian
Galeazzo Sforza to Isabelle of Aragon he
put on an allegorical representation called
"Paradise", in which a chariot of the sun
crossed the stage drawn by a fuming,
snorting horse, shown in photo below.
The scene is taken from a seven-hour
Italian television film, "La Vita di
Leonardo", directed by Renato Castellani
and to be screened in 120 countries.
Lady with an Ermine, a portrait of Cecilia
Gallerani, painted by Leonardo at the court
of Lodovico il Moro, in Milan about 1483.
(Museum Czartoryski, Cracow.)
Photo from the film "La Vita di Leonardo"
25

Leonardo contemplates the Last Supper, the
monumental composition he executed in
Milan, on a wall of the refectory of the
Dominican Convent of Our Lady of the Graces
in a scene from the Italian film on Leonardo.
Around Leonardo are the sketches from
which he worked to complete the painting.
Below left, one of Leonardo's preliminary
studies for the Last Supper.
L of Our Lady of the Graces (Santa
Maria delle Grazie). Leonardo went
straight to work: he even stopped
passers-by in the street so as to fix
some detail of movement or facial
appearance in his mind's eye.
Night and day he worked on sketches
and plans for the various characters
in his mural, until the cartoon was
ready in every detail. Unlike other
artists, who had always tended to
depict the Last Supper as a gloomy
meeting before the final Passion, Leo¬
nardo's plan was to paint the exact
moment when Christ uttered the words
"One of you will betray me!" Horror,
indignation and amazement were to
be expressed on the faces of the
Apostles, while Jesus would be seated
motionless in the centre, isolated and
detached from the passionate reaction
ofhis followers.
But the ever-scientific Leonardo
wanted to test out a new kind of
plaster, made up out of three separate
layers of stucco. When he had finished
the painting, and the people of Milan
crowded into the refectory to admire
the completed masterpiece, Leonardo
sadly realized that the layers of stucco
were not capable of resisting the out¬
side temperature to the same degree.
This meant that his great painting
would not last for very long. Fifty
years later it was already wrecked,
though we can still gain an idea of the
original when we look at it today.
As soon as the painting was finished
Leonardo had to leave Milan for Venice.
The French troops of King Louis XII,
under the command of Trivulzio, had
entered Milan after the retreat of Lodo-
Leonardo devoted two compositions to the
theme of The Virgin and Child with Saint
Anne. The first version, shown here, is
known as the Burlington House Cartoon from
the collection to which it formerly belonged.
Most authorities date it from about 1498-99.
Study in silverpoint for the angel's head in the
Louvre Museum version of 77»e Virgin of the
Rocks (see page 2). Deceptively simple in
appearance, it is in fact one of Leonardo's
most polished drawings, its subtle shading
of slanted parallel lines creating an impression
of depth and softness (from about 1483).
26

ÖO?
«.--*..
I

k vico il Moro. A number of Gascon
crossbowmen found an immense horse
fashioned out of clay in a courtyard.
They had no way of knowing that it
was Leonardo's model for the monu¬
ment to Francesco Sforza, ready for
its final casting into bronze. For that
matter they would not even have
known who Leonardo was. They play¬
ed a game of knocking it to pieces,
aiming at it with their crossbows to see
who could hit it most often.
From Venice Leonardo moved back
to Florence again, but this time he
was returning to his city with a solid
reputation built up over twenty years.
He took lodgings with the Servants of
Mary, in the Convent of SS. Annun-
ziata, for he had promised them a
painting of St. Anne and the Madonna
for the main altar.
Everyone wanted something from
him, every organization wanted his
advice and recommendations. The
Secretary of the Florentine Republic,
Niccolô Machiavelli, even asked him
if he could divert the waters of the
river Arno, which flows into the sea
at Pisa, in order to starve out the
Pisans who were at war with Florence
*vtH '**Hf**»1 »iv-wWJ
"»r4*iJ<tf*ï*y
Leonardo sketched this dredger
resembling a twin-hulled catamaran.
"This plough will be able to dislodge
the mud from the bottom," he wrote,
"and unload it upon the barge
which is placed underneath it."
Model of a car driven by springs, constructed
from a drawing made by Leonardo da Vinci.
Photo © Mario Carrier!. Florence
A~' -^¡M-p
28

Photo © Royal Library. Windsor, U K
at that time.
Leonardo never felt like refusing; his
favourite motto was "I am never tired
of serving others". But the friars of
SS. Annunziata were impatient, so
Leonardo locked himself in a room of
the convent to work on the St. Anne
and Madonna painting, and in less than
a month the cartoon was ready.
For three whole days the people of
Florence filed past Leonardo's design
in a solemn procession. Amongst
them was Pier Soderini, the ageing
Chief Magistrate for life of the Floren¬
tine Republic, and also a young
Leonardo was a skilled and ingenious
cartographer far ahead of his time.
He drew this plan of the town of Imola.
near Bologna, in 1502.
Drawing of a bombard for firing
explosive shells, designed by Leonardo.
Leonardo's giant ballista, or catapult.
The bow is built with laminated sections
for greater flexibility and firepower.
The inclined carriage wheels are a feature
later incorporated in the wheels
of artillery pieces.
Drawing© 1974 by McGraw-Hill Book Co lu M Limited,
Maidenhead, England and Taurus Ediciones, S A. Madrid, Spain
Well over four centuries before
the invention of the helicopter,
Leonardo made a drawing of such
a machine designed to lift off vertically
from the ground. Here a 3-dimensional
model built from his sketch.
Horse's head. Leonardo loved all animals
and especially the horse to which
he devoted many studies
(see also pages 36-39).
Photo taken from "Vita di Leonardo" by Bruno
Nardini. Giunti-Nardim Publishers, Florence
The discovery in Madrid of two
lost manuscripts of Leonardo's
(called Madrid Codex I and II)
has revealed new aspects of his
achievements as an inventor
and engineer.
This meticulously drawn model
of a spinning frame is from Madrid Codex I.
Photo © Science Museum, London.

Photo © Musée du Mans. Le Mans, France. Photo © Institut de France, Paris
The earliest free-flying "whirlibird"
dates from about 1320: pull a string
and a spinning propeller will soar free.
The one shown above is from
a 1460 painting. Above right,
Leonardo's design for a helicopter.
Beside it he wrote: "If this instrument
be well made... and be turned swiftly,
the said screw will make its spiral
in the air and will rise high."
Model of the articulation of a wing
based on a drawing by Leonardo.
His study of wings was astonishingly
precise, particularly with respect
to their curve, flexion and distention,
and their rotation.
Photos taken Irom "Vita di Leonardo"
by Bruno Nardmi, Giunti-Nardini Publishers. Florence
k sculptor who had recently returned
from Rome where he had completed
a stupendous Pietà. His name was
Michelangelo Buonarroti.
Writers of the time tell us that the
rivalry that developed between Leo¬
nardo and Michelangelo was intense.
It began when Soderini assigned
Michelangelo a block of marble which
had been lying behind the Cathedral
for more than sixty years and had
already caught Leonardo's interest.
While Michelangelo was chiselling
away at that marble to create his
famous David, Leonardo had gone to
Romagna with the rank of "Architect
and general,, engineer" to its duke,
Cesare Borgia.
When he got back to Florence he
found that he had been chosen as one
30 Drawing of a ribbed wing by Leonardo
with a crank device for manipulating it.

rY
of the committee who were to decide
what to do with Michelangelo's David.
Michelangelo was irritated by Leonar¬
do's presence on the committee, and
they spoke rudely to each other.
When Soderini offered Leonardo a
wall of the Great Council Hall of the
Palazzo Vecchio to paint a battle
scene, Michelangelo asked for the
other wall to paint another battle
scene on. This request was granted,
and an. elegant contest developed bet¬
ween the two great artists, which was
watched and followed by the whole of
Florence.
Both painters sought to excel them¬
selves, rather than each other. Leo¬
nardo's cartoons, depicting the battle
of Anghiari, and those of Michelangelo,
dealing with an incident from the
battle of Caseína, were shown to the
general public at different times and
places. The Italian artist and metal¬
worker Benvenuto Cellini was later to
call them "the school of the world."
In the meantine Leonardo was
working on the portrait of a beautiful
but rather melancholy woman, the
celebrated "Gioconda", or "Mona Lisa."
After he had completed the cartoons
for his battle scene, Leonardo began
to paint his subject on to the wall
of the Palazzo Vecchio. Yet once again
the demon temptation of experiment
led him astray. He had found in a
work by the Latin writer Pliny a for¬
mula for a special plaster used by the
ancient Romans called "encaustic".
It was a kind of paste, based on a
mixture of oily substances and Greek
pitch, dried out against a flame to
make the colours sharp and brilliant
like enamel.
Leonardo made a series of successful
tests, then decided to use the encaustic
process for his Battle of Anghiari
mural. But when his ambitious project
was already nearing completion and
only the upper half remained to be
done, Leonardo discovered that the
flame was too far away and the colours
could not be hardened into place.
It was a desperately sad night for
him: the colours were beginning to run,
and Leonardo anxiously ordered more
wood to be burned in the large brazier
which was suspended by a pulley near
the painting. But by now it was too late
and the flame failed to harden the
colours: by being brought too close to
the wall it even spoiled the colours
which had already dried. In the space
of one hour Leonardo's planned mas¬
terpiece was ruined.
With an icy feeling in his heart
Leonardo fled to a friend's house in the
nearby village of Fiesole. But here he
was destined to meet with another
failure. After years of study he had
finally rigged up a mysterious "flying
machine". Everything was ready for an
imposing test run, and this took place
on Mount Ceceri (which means
"swan"). But the human swan (an
assistant of Leonardo's) could not get
up into the air with the machine and
LEONARDO AND FLIGHT
Leonardo was one of the great forerunners
of modern aviation. On these pages
we can see a few examples
of his revolutionary ideas.
One of his most cherished dreams was
to enable men to "take to the air"
by various means. After years of study
he built a "flying machine", but its
test-flight, like that of Icarus.
was a failure, and Leonardo's hopes
were dashed. Photo, the start of the ill-fated
test, is from the Italian film on Leonardo.
Photo taken from the film "La Vita di Leonardo".
stay there. He managed to cover a few
metres and then plunged into the
bushes underneath him. Thus another
long-cherished dream was shattered.
By now he was happy to leave Flo¬
rence, and went back up to Milan. The
King of France, Louis XII, wanted him
in his court, and the Governor of
Milan, Charles of Amboise, heaped
him with honours and favours. Leo¬
nardo recovered his nerves again,
started enjoying his friends' company,
and went back to his scientific research.
He painted a series of Madonnas for
the King, which are now unfortunately
lost.
But political upheavals made it
necessary for Leonardo to leave Milan.
Lodovico's son was returning to .
recapture Milan, and the venture was *
One of Leonardo's earliest aircraft
designs (1486-90). The aviator lies
on the board with his head through
the front hoop. The wings, pivoting
above the head at "m", are raised
by the left foot and lowered by the right.
31

^ backed by troops of Swiss cavalry.
The French thought it best to retreat
back over the Alps, and Leonardo took
refuge in Vaprio d'Adda, at the home
of his young pupil Francesco Melzi.
Meanwhile Pope Julius II had died
at Rome, and Cardinal Giovanni de
Medici, son of Lorenzo the Magni¬
ficent, had been elected Pope with the
title Leo X. Gradually the artists began
to flock to Rome from all over Italy,
and Leonardo decided to go too. Giu-
liano de' Medici, the youngest of
Lorenzo's sons, put him up as a guest
in his palace and gave him various
commissions: a portrait of a woman,
research into optical mirrors, and a
project to reclaim the Pontine marshes.
France, however, was planning to
recapture Lombardy, which now had
an alliance with the Pope. Louis XII
was dead, and his successor, the youth¬
ful Francis I, made a quick move
across the Alps and defeated the
defending Italian force at Marignano.
Leonardo had left Rome with the
court of Giuliano de' Medici, who was
commander in chief of the Pope's
army. But Giuliano fell sick and
stopped at Florence, where he died.
Leonardo continued with the army
as far as Piacenza. The Pope then
came up to Bologna, in an attempt to
counter-balance the military defeat
Photos ©Giraudon. Paris
by a diplomatic conference with the
French monarch. Because he knew
that Francis I was a great art-lover,
the Pope called for a number of
artists, including Leonardo, to be
present at the conference.
When Leonardo was presented to
the French king he was as amazed as
everybody else when the king came
up and embraced him with the words
"My father...!"
Two days later Leonardo accepted
the king's invitation to go to Amboise
in France, where His Majesty would
make a whole castle, Clos-Lucé, per¬
sonally available to him.
Now begins the long slow twilight
of Leonardo's life. Helped by his faith¬
ful pupil Francesco Melzi, the ageing
artist began to reorganize his writings
and drawings in order to collect all his
research into a "corpus", or grand
encyclopaedia containing ancient, med¬
ieval and contemporary knowledge.
The French king never asked for
specific paintings from Leonardo, he
was content just to go and see him
and hear what he had to say about
things. Later on Cellini would say:
"I heard the king declare that he did
not believe there could be a single man
in the world who knew as much as
Leonardo... and that Leonardo was a
supreme philosopher."



As a favour to the king, Leonardo
drew up an astonishing project for a
canal system in the Loire. He planned
a castle for the king's residence and
organized an enormous festival mar¬
ked by the appearance on stage of a
roaring lion which hears the king's
name and then tears its breast with its
talons, causing a cascade of French
lilies to come out of it. W
The second version of Leonardo's painting
of the Virgin and Child with Saint Anne (Louvre
Museum) dating from between 1500 and
1510 (the first version appears on page 27).
In the two compositions, Leonardo used
entirely different techniques and styles.
Can you spot the eagle that Leonardo
included, perhaps unwittingly, in the drapery
of the leaning figure of the Virgin?
The Mona Lisa is undoubtedly
the most famous painting in the world.
Painted by Leonardo in the early years
of the 16th century, it now hangs
in the Louvre, in Paris. Mona Lisa
has recently been on a world tour,
attracting long queues of people willing
to wait for hours to catch a few seconds'
glimpse of her enigmatic smile. |
32

WÊà
HESg %3¡fcfá. WMWMWÊ
'- smm
mm
-^
:
J
*vj
v|
^^^^ÊÊ/BL
1
WL>
--" " ^*fc
' ' .
.
1 1
1
,%1
i
.
SL^WE^3^ J*
Ktf^^nL^*y^y!
mmmmmmmmmmmmmWSSS^BSi
WmmmmmmmMxdmPtSSm
mmMm^Bmmmm^BstImtËKi&
ni
'.-*'.--
1 ", 'r' 1 i
1 v -- .'
Wa WS¿íT\z
.'
-2¿ B^S By

In his death agony, on May 2, 1519,
Leonardo imagined that King Francis
of France had entered his bedroom.
at Amboise. This legend has been
immortalized in this famous drawing
by the French painter Ingres.
k In the peaceful surroundings of
Amboise Leonardo relived in solitude
his long life of toil, and wrote in his
diary: "A well spent life is a long one."
A kite flew above the castle of
Amboise. It was spring, May 2nd in
the year 1519. In his ill-lit room
Leonardo was dying. He had a vision
of the king hurrying to be with him,
already arriving down below in the
CANON OF PROPORTIONS
The ¡deal proportions of the human
body as Leonardo saw them.
courtyard, and yet nobody came to
his side. He wanted to call out aloud,
but his voice would not obey him.
Finally a rough, indistinct sound
emerged from his lips. His pupil Melzi
heard him, and rushed in to lift Leo¬
nardo onto the pillows and arrange
round the dying man's shoulders the
fine cloak which he always wore when
Francis I came to visit him. In his
feverish delirium Leonardo then im¬
agined that the king was coming into
the room, approaching his bedside
and embracing him in tears.
Leonardo was overcome by his
emotion and closed his eyes.
This legend, for that is all we can
call it, has been immortalized in a
famous drawing by Ingres. But if
Leonardo did not die in the arms of the
King, it was only because Francis I
was far away from Amboise at the
time. Otherwise he would have rushed
like a son to Leonardo's bedside, and
the legend would have been made into
reality. Bruno Nardini
Photo © Anderson-Giraudon, Paris
34
