UNESCO and special education
for the handicapped
by
Nils-lvar Sundberg
WITH the passage of years
education of the handicapped has
been taking an increasingly important
place In the work of Unesco. The
vastness of the problem and the need
for international co-operation to get to
grips with it have become progress¬
ively clearer with the publication of
data on the number of handicapped In
the world.
It is now estimated that on earth
there are about 400,000,000 handi¬
capped people, that Is to say nearly
the combined population of the United
States and the U.S.S.R. Most of these
handicapped people are uneducated
and unskilled, but the work of Unesco
to help educate them and improve their
lives has been growing over the years.
Unesco, with comparatively small
funds at its disposal, is making a
world-wide Impact on the problem.
One of its main objectives has been
to convince the nations that education
of the handicapped is not merely an
ethical duty but that it pays. For
instance, in the United States it is
estimated that every dollar paid for
rehabilitation gives a return of 35 dol¬
lars. The cost of rehabilitation is
usually repaid by the taxes of the
rehabilitated person within ten years
(see article page 28.)
In Central America disabled persons
living in remote agricultural com¬
munities were brought to the capital
and trained in such jobs as hair-
dressing, tailoring, woodwork and
radio-repairing. When they returned
to their villages they usually earned
three or four times what they would
have obtained had they been able-
bodied agricultural workers.
Unesco began shortly after it was
founded in 1946 to grapple with the
problem of educating the millions of
innocent victims of World War II. It
appreciated the need for special
education not only for the blind, the
deaf, the maimed and the mentally
NILS-IVAR SUNDBERG, of Sweden, has di¬
rected Unesco's programme of Special Edu¬
cation for Handicapped Children and Young
People since it started In 1968. Formerly
Director for Special Education in Stockholm
and lecturer at the Stockholm School of Edu¬
cation, he was for nine years Advisory
Officer at the Swedish National Board of
Education on questions of special education
for the handicapped, including teacher train¬
ing and curriculum planning.
retarded but also for the countless
children whose nervous system had
been shattered by the war. During
those early years Unesco published
a series of studies for the guidance of
educators in all countries on the
national and international measures
needed to face the challenge.
Unesco gave particular attention to
international co-operation in teaching
the blind. Shortly after its foundation
it decided to promote a survey of
problems aimed at establishing world
Braille uniformity. It obtained the
services as consultant of Sir Clutha
Mackenzie, of New Zealand, an inde¬
fatigable worker for the blind who had
lost his sight during World War I.
His goal was to produce a univer¬
sally acceptable plan for the application
of Braille to all languages, thus
fulfilling the hopes of Louis Braille, the
blind French professor, who in 1829
invented his alphabet of raised dots
for finger-reading. Louis Braille was
convinced that his method could be
applied to any language, but since
there was no international body at that
time to achieve world-wide uniformity,
a chaos of dissimilar Braille prints
developed in the various countries
over the years.
As a "Unesco Courier" article
pointed out in March 1952, "almost
from the start, enthusiasts of the
Braille idea in many countries began
juggling the dots around in different
combinations. Soon the same patterns
of six dots came to be used to express
different letters not only in different
languages but even in the same lang¬
uage.
"In Great Britain, for example, the
Bible had already been printed in no
fewer than five systems by 1868, and
that year the British and Foreign Blind
Association (now the National Institute
for the Blind) decided in favour of the
original Braille. In the United States,
three arrangements came into use.
One group adopted French Braille, as
Britain had done. Another modified
many of the signs on the principle of
the fewest dots to the most frequently
recurring letters. A third group turned
the axis of the Braille rectangle from
the vertical to the horizontal.
"Only in 1932 did an agreement
between the United Kingdom and the
United States fix "Standard English
Braille" as the contracted or abbrevi
ated form for everyday use throughout
the English-speaking world.
"Similar divergent systems intro¬
duced In German, modern Greek and
Hebrew Brailles also yielded in due
time to a return to the original French.
"But variations existed in Braille
used in Spain and Portugal and the
different Latin American countries.
Because of the added factor of varied
scripts and the absence of any
recognized symbols for letter-sounds
not used in the Latin alphabet, Asian
and African language Braille systems
were even more erratic in those parts
of the world.
"These were the circumstances
which in 1949 led Unesco to take up
the question of a single universal
script for the blind."
In 1954 Unesco published in English,
French and Spanish a standard work
by Sir Clutha Mackenzie entitled
"World Braille Usage". It was a land¬
mark for the blind of the world. In the
words of Helen Keller, the American
deaf-blind heroine who wrote the pre¬
face, it "lifted Braille from a jungle
of punctographic codes to a universal
medium." The possibility of producing
a new work outlining the latest
research and thinking on this sub¬
ject is now being studied.
HE wider aspects of Unes¬
co's work on the education of the
handicapped began to take more
concrete form as of 1966. The General
Conference of Unesco that year unani¬
mously adopted a resolution which in
a few clear sentences stressed the
need to promote collaboration among
educational research institutions in
studying the special problems of the
handicapped.
It emphasized the necessity to
exchange information internationally,
to establish educational research insti¬
tutions and to continue to publish
widely all information on educational
systems for the handicapped.
A special education programme was
launched by Unesco in 1968. Since
then, Unesco has been in liaison with
other international and also national
bodies working for the handicapped, äj
It is carrying out a global programme jl
for the publication of studies on the " '
education of the blind, the deaf, the
physically impaired and the mentally
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

UNESCO AND SPECIAL EDUCATION (Continued)
deficient. It Is promoting co-operation
among nations by sending out special¬
ists and advisers on the education of
the handicapped, by granting fellow¬
ships for teacher-training and by acting
as the channel through which much
needed equipment for the handicapped
Is provided: Since 1968 some
100 projects in special education have
been launched In some 50 countries,
often financed through voluntary
contributions.
For instance, the Danish Government
organized in 1968 a Unesco training
seminar for teachers of the handi¬
capped in African countries and in
1969 it did the same for Arab teachers
of the blind. A year later a Unesco
six weeks' course for teachers of the
blind, financed partly by a gift of
$10,000 from Denmark, and partly by
Tanzania, took place at Tabora in
western Tanzania. The participants
learned the best methods of teaching
Braille In Swahili and English. The
funds also made it possible to pur¬
chase Braille frames, typewriters and
other equipment.
The Netherlands Government has
given fellowships to four of the Tanza-
nian teachers to study the education
of the blind and of the deaf in the
Netherlands. Travel costs were met
from Unesco's Special Education
Voluntary Contribution Fund. Similar
fellowships have been granted to
administrators and teachers of the
handicapped in some other countries
of Africa and of Asia.
u
32
NESCO'S Special Education
Voluntary Contribution Fund, set up in
1968, has so far received a total of
$62,600. Support has come from the
governments of Cambodia ($1,000),
Denmark ($10,000), Finland ($10,000),
Ghana ($500), India ($6,000), Iran
($3,000), Israel ($1 ,000), Malta ($ 500),
Morocco ($2,000), Norway ($10,000),
Sweden ($10,000), Yugoslavia ($500),
from Her Majesty the Empress of Iran
($2,000), from the Sovereign Order of
Malta ($6,000) and a smaller amount
from Danish and French donators.
Unesco has used this aid to sponsor
projects in Costa Rica (seminar on
education for the mentally retarded),
Cuba (training course for teachers of
the partially sighted), Arab Republic of
Egypt (fellowship to study the pro¬
duction of educational equipment for
the handicapped), Ethiopia (equipment
for the blind), Ghana (fellowship in
planning special education), Indonesia
(fellowship In speech-correction), Iran
(planning education of the mentally
retarded), Iraq (training of teachers
for the mentally retarded), Liberia
(teaching equipment for the deaf).
Sierra Leone (fellowship in education
of the physically handicapped), Tanza¬
nia (training course for teachers of the
blind and fellowships in education of
the blind and the deaf), and Venezuela
(training of teachers for the mentally
retarded).
In response to requests from its
member countries, Unesco has sent
out consultants to all parts of the
world. For, example a consultant
mission was sent to Guatemala for
three months to advise on the develop¬
ment of special education In all
Central American countries and Pana¬
ma. A consultant was sent to Syria
to assist in organizing a training
course for teachers of the deaf. A
Swiss specialist went to Madagascar
to direct a seminar for teachers of the
deaf from that country, Reunion and
Mauritius. His mission has resulted
in continuous contact between the
deaf communities in Madagascar and
Geneva.
At present contributions for helping
the handicapped are also being
channelled to some 20 developing
countries through Unesco's ingenious
Gift Coupon Programme. Groups and
institutiona in these countries are
purchasing with the coupons, teaching
equipment from hard currency nations.
Gift coupons are a form of inter¬
national cheque or money order issued
by Unesco. Donors purchase them
from Unesco headquarters in Paris
and send them to groups in other
countries which use them for buying
books and equipment for approved
projects from suppliers in any part of
the world. The suppliers send the
coupons back to Unesco to have them
converted into their own currency.
One of the recent Unesco gift
coupon campaigns was conducted by
the World Association of Girl Guides-
and Girl Scouts In an appeal to its
members to support a school for dis¬
abled girls being set up by the Nige¬
rian Girl Guides Association in Lagos.
Gift coupons are also being put to
good use In Mexico City, contributing
to the purchase of the most modern
equipment by the Escuela Normal de
Especialización, which promotes train¬
ing of teachers for the deaf, the blind
and the physically or mentally handi¬
capped. The teachers trained at the
college will then train others to
educate handicapped children through¬
out Latin America. In Ghana the cou¬
pons have enabled the director of the
Training College for Teachers of the
Deaf to buy group amplifiers and
hearing aids from Europe and America.
In 1972 Unesco set up a special
"Books for the Blind" programme in
co-operation with the World Council
for the Welfare of the Blind. This led
to one of the most successful fund-
raising ventures for the handicapped.
A gala performance jointly sponsored
by Unesco and the United States Na¬
tional Commission for Unesco was
given in Paris by the internationally
famous American singer and enter¬
tainer, Sammy Davis Jr. The $35,000
raised by the benefit performance went
to provide Braille books and educa¬
tional material for the blind. Among
the countries which have already be¬
nefited are Cyprus, Ghana, Iran, Mali,
Mexico and the Syrian Arab Republic.
THE RI6HTS
OF THE
MENTALLY RETARDED
The UnitedNations General Assembl,
on December 20. 1971. proclaimed the
rights of mentally retarded persons
and called for national and internatio¬
nal action for the protection of these
rights.
The U.N. Declaration on the Rights
ofMentally Retarded Persons affirms,
in part :
1. The mentally retarded person has, to
the maximum degree of feasibility, the
same rights as other human beings.
2. The mentally retarded person has a
right to proper medical care and physical
therapy and to such education, training,
rehabilitation and guidance as will enable
him to develop his ability and maximum
potential.
3. The mentally retarded person has a
right to economic security and to a decent
standard of living. He has a right to per¬
form productive work or to engage in
any other meaningful occupation to the
fullest possible extent of his capabilities.
4. Whenever possible, the mentally re¬
tarded person should live with his own
family or with foster parents and par¬
ticipate in different forms of community
life. The family with which he lives
should receive assis. anee. If care in an
institution becomes necessary, it should
be provided in surroundings and other
circumstances as close as possible to
those of normal life.
5. The mentally retarded person has a
right to a qualified guardian when this is
required to protect his personal well-being
and interests.
6. The mentally retarded person has a
right to protection from exploitation, abuse
and degrading treatment
Education is mainly a national but
also an international responsibility.
This applies equally to special edu¬
cation for the handicapped. The
serious situation of the world's handi¬
capped is best shown by quoting
U Thant, then Secretary-General of the
United Nations, when he spoke in New
York on October 20, 1971: "While so
much has been done, so much more
needs be done to help those 300 mil¬
lion disabled persons in the develop¬
ing world in their struggle to overcome
their handicaps and become active,
useful members of society. If 'we
break down to a per capita figure the
total sum being spent by the United
Nations system on rehabilitation, and
include all other International support,
governmental and voluntary, the figure
amounts to only one cent for each
disabled person, or a total annual
expenditure of $3 million on the
disabled in the developing world."
Nils-lvar Sundberg
