Here is the biggest challenge
facing mankind in our time
CAN THE EARTH
FEED THE
GROWING MULTITUDES ?
Roger Revelle

8
HlUMAN beings use both
water and land for food production;
that is, the transformation of matter and
energy principally solar energy
into a form that can be utilized for
the growth and replacement of human
tissue and to supply energy for human
metabolism. With a high level of agri¬
cultural technology, such as that ap¬
plied to corn growing in Iowa, this
process is about 0.4 per cent efficient.
In other words, the food energy
contained in the portion of the crop
edible by humans is about 0.4 per cent
of the solar energy received on the
planted area in the growing season.
A nearly minimum subsistence diet'
for human beings averages about
2,500 kilocalories per person per day
(a kilocalorie being the amount of heat
required to raise the temperature of
one kilogramme of water one degree
centigrade).* From the amount of solar
energy received by an Iowa cornfield,
it can be calculated that the food
. energy required by 24 human beings
can be provided from one hectare at
the level of agricultural technology
employed in that region.
To provide an adequate diet, in¬
cluding high quality protein and pro¬
tective foods such as fruit and vege¬
tables, the equivalent of 4,000 to 5,000
kilocalories per person is desirable. At
the Iowa level of technology, therefore,
every hectare of land might be
expected to sustain, in principle, 12 to
15 persons on an adequate diet. These
figures are for a typical human, an
* The prefix kilo is commonly omitted
from the term kilocalorie, and the "calories"
counted by dieters are in fact kilocalories.
ROGER REVELLE is professor of Population
Policy and director of the Center for Popu¬
lation Studies at Harvard University, U.S.A.
He is president of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science and a
member of the U.S. National Academy of
Sciences. He has long been interested in
problems of world population, food supply,
and development of natural resources.
¡ft
WM'
im
/r>
Ql
average for men, women and children.
In the world as a whole at the pre¬
sent time, there is one hectare of
farm land for every 2.5 living persons,
or nearly ten times the hypothetical
minimum required for a subsistence
diet. Several reasons explain this
apparent excess. Allowing for fallow
periods, the land actually harvested
during any particular year is only about
a half to two-thirds the total cultivated
area. About ten per cent is devoted
to non-food crops such as cotton,
tobacco, rubber, coffee, tea, jute, etc.
Another large fraction is needed to
produce food for livestock, which
from our standpoint are only 10 to
15 per cent efficient; that is, they use
seven to ten times as much food
energy as the energy contained in their
edible products. Also, from 10 to
20 per cent of food crops are destroyed
by pests.
The principal cause, however, is the
low level of agricultural technology in
most parts of the world. Instead of
the 6.4 metric tons grown on a hectare
in Iowa, the average Indian or Pakis¬
tani farmer produces only a little more
than one ton of wheat or rice.
Large parts of the earth's surface
are not now cultivated. The land sur¬
face of the earth outside the ice-cov¬
ered areas of Antarctica and Green¬
land contains about 13 billion hectares.
Climatic and other conditions limit the
potentially arable land to 2.9 billion
hectares, or 22 per cent of the land
surface of the earth, but this is still
more than twice the present cultivated
area, and more than three times the
area actually harvested in any year.

Without irrigation, three crops, in
principle, could be grown each year
in the humid tropics, and two crops in
sub-humid regions. Elsewhere only
one crop can be grown without irriga¬
tion. In all, the potential gross cropped
area per year (the cultivated area times
the number of crops), without irrigation,
is 4.5 billion hectares. With irrigation,
the gross cropped area could be
considerably expanded.
At present, irrigation takes little of
the available supply. Less than four
per cent of the total river flow in fact
is used, to irrigate about one per cent
of the land area of the earth. Most
river waters flow to the sea almost
unused by man, and more than half
the water evaporating from the cont¬
inents plays little part in human life.
The potential for irrigation is thus
very large, but it is limited by the
uneven distribution of river runoff
between the different regions. About
a third of the total comes from South
America with less than 15 per cent of
the earth's land, while Africa, which
contains 23 per cent of the land, yields
only 12 per cent of the runoff. Runoff
from south-west Asia, North Africa,
Mexico, the south-western United
States, temperate South America and
Australia is less than five per cent of
the total, yet these regions contain
25 per cent of the land area. As a
result, only 30 per cent of the potential
can actually be irrigated, or about
1.1 billion hectares. This would raise
the potential gross cropped area to
5.6 billion hectares.
If all this land were cultivated, how
many people could the earth feed?
About 10 per cent of the gross
cropped area would still be needed to
grow non-food crops. With appropriate
technology and inputs of production
equivalent to those used in Iowa
(irrigation water, fertilizer, high-yield¬
ing seeds, plant protection, farm tools,
farm machinery and scientific farm
practices), it can be simply calculated
that the remaining hectares could
provide a minimum subsistence diet of
2,500 kilocalories a day for 100 billion
people. That is after allowing 10 per
cent for unavoidable losses and
another three per cent for seed. To
provide an adequate diet equivalent
to 4,000 to 5,000 kilocalories, the po¬
tential gross cropped area would be
sufficient for 50 to 60 billion people, or
about 15 times the present human
population of the earth.
Setting aside the question of
whether such a large population would
be desirable or even possible from
other points of view, we may ask what
the obstacles are to such an expansion
of the earth's cultivated area. These
are of several kinds.
Firstly, some 1.5 billion hectares of
the potential gross cropped area lie
in regions where rainfall is more or
less continuous throughout the year
the humid tropics. No technology
exists today for intensive cultivation of
these lands for food production. With
few exceptions, farmers must still
practise the ancient technique of
" slash and burn " agriculture.
The available evidence, however,
supports the belief that with appro¬
priate technology the humid tropics
could have a tremendous potential for
food production. In the Congo (as it
then was), an oil palm was developed
which when properly grown yielded
about 4,000 kilogrammes per hectare,
whereas the ordinary palm yielded
about 500 kilos. In the Amazon Valley
peppers have been grown successfully
by Japanese immigrants for at least
20 years.
Secondly, much potentially arable^
land is of poor quality. The savannas*
9

Right, the geometry of farming. The extraordinary
pattern of fields seen here is formed by different
crops grown in narrow strips so as to check wind
or water erosion. Wider use of such techniques
would enable millions of hectares of the world's
wasted land to be used for growing food. Bottom
of page, where every morsel counts an Asian
woman receives a carefully-weighed-out ration
of oil cake to feed her livestock.
^ of South America, and the broad belt
that extends across Africa just south
of the Sahara, contain large areas of
some of the most severely weathered
and leached soils in the world. Their
meagre supply of nutrients is barely
enough to support cropping for two to
four years, after which six to 12 years
or more of fallow are needed.
On the other hand, many of these
soils are permeable to both air and
water, easily penetrated by roots to
great depth, easy to keep in good
tilth and have at least" moderate water
holding capacity. With adequate irri¬
gation, chemical fertilizers and soil
conditioners, they could be made
highly productive of a wide variety of
food crops.
Thirdly, large capital investment is
required. Any major extension of the
earth's cultivated area, even for sub¬
sistence farming, would require a huge
capital input, of the order of $500 to
$1,000 per hectare. The cost of putting
all the potentially arable land outside
the humid tropics into cultivation would
thus be 500 to 1,000 billion dollars.
The latter figure is about equal to the
annual gross national product of the
United States and twice that of all the
less developed countries combined.
Finally, population and potentially
arable land are unevenly distributed.
Most of the uncultivated but arable
land outside the humid tropics is in
the more sparsely populated cont¬
inents. In Europe, 88 per cent of the
potential is already cultivated, in North
America 53 per cent and in the
U.S.S.R. 66 per cent. In Asia the
figure is close to 100 per cent. On the
other hand, only 16 per cent is as yet
under the plough in thinly populated
Australia and New Zealand, 21 per
cent in South America and 32 per cent
in Africa.
These are the lands designated by
the U.N. Food and Agriculture Orga¬
nization (FAO) as " arable land and
land under permanent crops. . . includ-
10
ing land under crops, temporary fallow,
temporary meadows for mowing and
pastures, market and kitchen gardens,
fruit trees, vines, shrubs and t rubber
plantations ".
If one sets the areas cultivated
against the number of mouths to feed,
these disparities take on a grim sig¬
nificance. In Australia and New Zea¬
land, 1.4 hectares are farmed for
every person; in Asia, only 0.3 of a
hectare. In between come the U.S.S.R.
with one hectare per person, North
and South America with 0.9 and 0.4,
respectively, Africa with 0.5 and Europe
with 0.3. That is the position today,
or rather in 1965. Twenty years later,
anticipated population growth will have
reduced the cultivated area per person
in Asia to 0.2 of a hectare, even if
every potential square inch is cropped.
And the population will still be growing.
This anticipated squeeze in Asia
reflects the heavy population density
of a continent containing more than
half the world's people and the already
high percentage of the land under
crops. If the Asian peoples are to
obtain enough food, it will be necess¬
ary therefore to increase yields and
wherever possible to grow two or
three crops per year on each cultivated
hectare, a development that will entail
extensive irrigation. In Europe, too,
the spare land is not there to counter
the projected population increase, but
here demographic growth is relatively
low and the population in any event
is less than a quarter of Asia's.
In other regions, the mobilization of
unused land could more than offset
population growth over the 20 year
period. Australia and New Zealand,
for example, could have 4.8 hectares
per person cultivated by 1985 if all
available land was put to use. Africa
could have one hectare, North America
1.4 hectares, South America 0.9 hec¬
tares, and the U.S.S.R. 1.2 hectares.
These figures allow for projected popu¬
lation growth and do not include the
humid tropics, but again, it should be
remembered, the population will not
stop expanding in 1985.
The largest areas of potentially
arable land are in Africa and South
America. Outside the humid tropics,
630 million hectares with adequate
water remain uncultivated in these
continents. The limiting factors are
not natural resources but economic,
institutional and social-political prob¬
lems. In addition, over 300 million
potentially arable but as yet uncultiva¬
ted hectares exist in North America
and Australia.
Higher technology depends on the
ability of the farmers and the food
industry to purchase many " inputs "
or factors of production from outside
the farm. At the Iowa level of tech¬
nology, energy must be used from
fossil fuels equal to about three-quar¬
ters of the food energy in the crops,
about half of this energy consumption
being represented by irrigation water
and chemical fertilizers. At present,
the less developed countries use, for

all purposes, an average of about
400 kilogrammes of coal equivalent
per person per year, corresponding to
an annual use of three million kilo¬
calories per person.
We have already seen that the aver¬
age human requires the equivalent of
4,000 to 5,000 kilocalories a day for
adequate nourishment. Hence, to meet
his dietary needs adequately with high
agricultural technology, a citizen in a
less developed country would need
to use for food production about a
third of all the energy now available to
him. The average person in developed
countries already uses 14 times the
fossil fuel energy required to meet his
agricultural needs.
For the next 20 to 30 years, a
combined three-pronged strategy for
the less developed countries of in¬
creasing multiple cropping, total culti¬
vated areas and yields from each crop,
has been proposed by the FAO. It is
estimated that with a total expenditure
of 48 billion (1970) dollars, the gross
value of crop production could be
increased overall by 124 per cent
between 1962 and 1985 in four devel¬
oping regions: Africa south of the
Sahara, the Near East and north-west
Africa, Asia and the Far East, and
Latin America.
The People's Republic of China and
other centrally planned economies
were omitted from the FAO study, but
even so it covered 44 per cent of the
world's 1962 population. This popula¬
tion was estimated to rise by 80 per
cent through the plan period. Thus the
projected increase in food production
could forge well ahead of population
growth during the 20 years.
During the first eight years of the
FAO plan period, between 1963 and
1971, total production of wheat, rice
and maize in Asia, including the
People's Republic of China, and Latin
America did indeed increase at an
annual rate of 3.5 per cent, or exactly
the rate projected by the FAO for the
23 year period 1962 to 1985. (The
figures for Africa are incomplete). The
corresponding annual rate of popu¬
lation growth in these regions was
2.25 per cent.
The per capita increase in cereal
production in Asia and Latin America
worked out at 15 per cent between
1963 and 1971. Thus, average diets
in those countries, although they are
still close to subsistence level, are
slowly improving.
In the final analysis, we must
recognize that not all land and water
available for human use can be
allocated to agriculture. Cities and
their industries are also consumers of
water. In India, for example, the
Irrigation Commission estimates that
17 per cent of the usable water will
be needed for industrial and municipal
use. The Commission's estimate of a
total water use of 616 billion cubic
metres for irrigating some 80 million
gross cropped hectares is probably
low and there may ultimately be a^
11

12
serious conflict for water between
agricultural and industrial and muni¬
cipal users.
To give another example, an intrinsic
feature of the Aswan High Dam is that
the water can be used for another
principal purpose beside irrigation
hydro-electric power. For electric
energy to be used effectively for
industrial production, it must be gen¬
erated at a fairly steady rate throughout
the year. In contrast, agricultural needs
for water vary widely from one season
to another. Hence, if water is released
from the Dam in such a way as to
provide optimum economic benefits for
agriculture, the large fluctuations would
be far from optimum for industry. On
the other hand, if the water is
released in accordance with industrial
demand, there would be too much for
agriculture in winter and not enough
in summer.
In this case, the Dam appears to be
well adapted to satisfy a relatively
high proportion of both needs. In
Lower Egypt, there is an enormous
reservoir of fresh underground water,
equal in volume to several years flow
of the Nile. Some part of this great
underground store could be used for
irrigation to supplement the water
coming from Lake, Nasser.
Conflicts in land use must also be
taken into account. In regions of tra¬
ditional nomad grazing such as the
northwest frontier of Pakistan and the
sub-Saharan savanna belt of Africa,
establishment of modern high-intensity
agriculture encounters serious difficult¬
ies, both from the cultural patterns of
the people and the conflicting needs
of cattlemen and farmers.
Timber industries and agriculture
also conflict in ways that may have
serious economic consequences. A
large fraction of present uncultivated
land is now covered by forests, the
clearing of which for low-yielding
subsistence agriculture may represent
a serious economic loss.
All over Africa the rising generation
is learning to make fuller use of the rich
resources of the continent This boy
has been taught the new skills of farming
in his school-club as part of a swamp
rice improvement project launched in
17 Liberian villages by the U.N. Food
and Agriculture Organization.
Many major irrigation projects, again,
involve the construction of large dams
and reservoirs, which often flood
valuable lands with a high actual and
potential agricultural value," apart from
creating grave problems of resettling
the agricultural peoples displaced.
The growth of cities also commonly
utilizes prime agricultural land. Fortu¬
nately, the total area of cities is usually
under five per cent of the land area
of even a highly urbanized country.
Finally, the social consequences of
an agricultural revolution cannot be
ignored. National farm prices generally
will almost certainly fall because of
greatly expanded production in the
regions in which the new technology
has been successfully applied. The
farmers in other regions may then be
unable to obtain prices sufficient to
pay for the water, chemical fertilizers
and other inputs needed for high-
productivity agriculture. In these
circumstances, they could be forced
back on subsistence farming, but this
would be insufficient to provide for
the growing populations of their
own villages.
If that happens, large numbers of
unskilled countrymen will migrate
either to the towns or to the more
favoured agricultural regions, where
most of them will become landless
labourers. Already, there is mass
unemployment in the towns and no
developing country has solved the
problem of raising employment in the
industrial sector as fast as the growing
labour force. The challenge to policy¬
makers, either to develop new agri¬
cultural technologies for non-irrigated
land, or to provide employment and a
new way of life for these people, will
have to be faced.
Roger Revelie
