These young fishermen,
in Thailand, are pupils
of two special schools
for deaf children set up
in suburbs of Bang¬
kok in 1953 and 1961.
The schools give nor¬
mal education and pre-
vocational training to
600 boys and girls,
who also enjoy arts,
crafts and sports, and
are able to join in the
life of the local com¬
munity like any other
children. Unesco is
seeking aid for the
schools through its Gift
Coupon Programme
(see article page 31).
Photo Thailand National Commission for Unesco <.




ABOLISHING
THE GHETTOS FOR
DISABLED CITIZENS
Physical and social barriers
still prevent the total integration
of the handicapped in society
by Norman Acton
NORMAN ACTON is Secretary-General of
Rehabilitation International, the world's
largest federation of organizations providing
services for the disabled. He is also chair¬
man of the Council of World Organizations
Interested in the Handicapped, a co-ordinat¬
ing group of 37 major International non¬
governmental organizations. Founding Presi¬
dent of the International Sports Organization
for the Disabled, he has been a consultant
on problems of the handicapped to the U.N..
Unesco and UNICEF.
LT least one out of every
ten children requires what is called
special education. These are the
children who are called "disabled" or
"handicapped" or sometimes "excep¬
tional". They need specialized guid¬
ance, technical aids, modified physical
arrangements of the school and class¬
room and programmes designed
specifically to enable them to achieve
the goals of education.
The Declaration of the Rights of the
Child, adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly in 1959, states that
each child shall be given an education
which will enable him to become a
useful member of society. That goal
is especially important for the handi¬
capped child and much more difficult
to achieve. The difficulties are to
varying degrees consequences of the
individual disabilities, but also they are
products of society's attitudes towards
handicapped persons.
Active involvement of the community
in its special education programme is
one of the key ingredients of the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
23

ABOLISHING THE GHETTOS
FOR DISABLED CITIZENS (Continued)
effort to overcome these difficulties.
Let us look at some of the details
on which the above generalizations
are based.
What do we mean by community
involvement?
The basic function of the community .
In this field Is, of course, to provide
special education facilities; to finance
them through taxation and other means;
and to incorporate them in the general
educational scheme. The methods and
structure may vary, but there is wide
international acceptance of the concept
that the provision of special education
is a public responsibility of the
community and its government.
Conclusions of the First International
Conference on Legislation Concerning
the Disabled, organized by Rehabili¬
tation International In Rome In 1971,
were that "governments must accept
major responsibility and play a main
role in the development and provision
of rehabilitation services for all persons
with physical and mental disabilities,"
and that "education should be provided
without cost to the individual or the
individual's family."
This is not to overlook the vital role
played by voluntary organizations in
starting and providing special edu¬
cation services. In many countries
parents' groups and other private
bodies have been the first to be aware
of the problems which exist when
there are no special educational
facilities. They have themselves
provided the first services and have
been instrumental in persuading their
governments to either launch official
programmes or support private efforts.
LN interesting example of
the progression from private initiative
to governmental services is found in
the experience of the Zurich School
Programme for the Mentally Retarded.
Despite a highly developed general
educational system, Switzerland in the
1930s had no public facilities for the
education of the severely mentally
retarded. They were either kept at
home or placed in residential Insti¬
tutions. In 1937, Dr. Maria Egg started
with private support a day school for
children who were not admitted to the
regular schools because they were
classified as "ineducable".
For ten years, Dr. Egg and her
associates demonstrated that these
children could be trained to have good
habits and social behaviour, they could
learn self-help and various manual
skills, they could be taught to express
themselves through speech, music and
art, some could master simple scholas¬
tic skills, and all could be helped to
a happier life. Living with their
families, their growth was as nearly
normal as possible; living in the
community, their progress was a public
testimony to the success of Dr. Egg's
initiative.
After a decade of this remarkable
work under private auspices, the
Zurich Municipal Council recognized
its value and incorporated the school
in the public school system. Sub¬
sequently, inspired by the accomplish¬
ments in Zurich, more than 50 com¬
munities in Switzerland have opened
similar day-care schools for the
severely retarded.
Community involvement should also
mean that the population in general is
informed of the need for and the value
of special education facilities. Its
support should be forthcoming not only
through taxation and the general
approval implied by public education
systems, but in much more specific
understanding of the problem. Special
education for a useful life must be
given in the atmosphère of the com¬
munity, and can succeed only when
the members of the community are
informed enough to accept and deal
with its handicapped members in a
mature manner.
This requires broad community
education through all of the usual
channels: the press, radio, television,
public meetings, service club projects,
adult education courses and others.
Understanding is advanced by success¬
ful examples, as was the case In Zurich
when Dr. Egg's pupils demonstrated
to the public that their abilities could
make them acceptable.
Why Is community involvement
essential to the success of a special
education programme?
CONTINUED PAGE 26

Signpost to special access for wheel¬
chair users and other disabled persons.
1
HOW
ABOUT US,
MR. ARCHITECT?
Drawing, right, shows how far (in centi¬
metres) a wheel-chair user can reach out
with back erect (inner semi-circles) or with
body Inclined (outer semi-circles). With
-such basic dimensions designers can plan
for the needs of the handicapped.
* ^ ico
¿ y7'
/ / V J. 1Ä")
1 -1 P
I.I \ ' « \*nr\
/ jf-t *-l t_l il r
1 i= = s^-- ^""""T J" V°
\ 	A T jL..
\ \ A
K \ riB*! rWWn / / Fin
r>^ S 1 J
r ^*\^ Stv- III ^ ..s ..an
	 1
¡JX I TO
Designed for the use of the able-bodied, our
cities and buildings are full of major and even
insurmountable barriers for the disabled. Steep
stairways, narrow doorways and corridors, high
street kerbs are only a few of the obstacles that
plague the physically handicapped. Today how¬
ever, at the urging of many public and private
organizations which have been studying the pro¬
blem, architects and planners have begun to
design buildings with the requirements of the
handicapped in mind. Unesco, for instance, has
foreseen such needs in the design of an additional
building for its Paris H.Q. Photos on this page,
illustrating some aspects of the problem, are taken
from a special issue of " Les Cahiers de la Vie
Quotidienne " (April-June 1973) on housing and the
handicapped. Published in Paris by the French
National Liaison Committee for the Rehabilitation
of the Handicapped, the issue presents an inter¬
national cross-section of projects for making life
easier for the disabled.
Stairways need no longer be a hazard for the disabled. Stair treads
should never have protruding edges (top right). Aids to safety are
stair risers inclining outwards and anti-slip material on stair edges
(bottom right). Hand rails, following the incline of the stairs, should
be 85 cm. above them and 90 cm. above landings.
Left, recently designed pe¬
destrian crossing that helps
the handicapped to get down
from the kerb and cross the
street safely. Easily identifi¬
ed paving material enables
the blind to locate the cross¬
ing point and a non-slip sur¬
face helps the disabled to
maneuvre wheel-chairs. The
crossing has gently sloping
ramps to the street and a
clear passage through the
traffic island.
Above, passages in a building should be at least 1.20 m. wide and
1.30 m. at corners to allow wheel-chairs to manoeuvre. Below,
slope of access ramp should not exceed 1 in 20 and the handrail
should be no higher than 96 cm. above the ramp.
V 7=^--/-



ABOLISHING THE GHETTOS
FOR DISABLED CITIZENS
(Continued from page 24)
Special education facilities can
succeed only when they are used. It
is a distressing fact that, even today,
too many parents are reluctant to admit
that they have a disabled or retarded
child. Others are unaware of the
existence of the means of help, or
unconvinced of the merit of permitting
their child to leave the shelter of the
home or of an institution.
Here, then, is a vital function for the
community and its organizations. To
locate such children and their families,
to persuade them to take advantage of
educational opportunities and to help
them to do so. These functions can
be performed much more easily in an
atmosphere where the members of the
community are giving and receiving
helpful actions, where there is com¬
munity Involvement.
u1 NTIL recently in Latin Ame¬
rica, the problem of cerebral palsy was
of unknown prevalence because so
many afflicted children were hidden
from public knowledge. Now, however,
there is general recognition that the
numbers suffering disability because of
cerebral palsy are large and that
effective rehabilitation programmes, in¬
cluding, particularly, special education,
are essential if these people are to be
able to live useful lives. The reason
for this change is primarily the activity
of groups of parents of cerebral palsied
children in various countries in the
region.
Coming together first in an effort to
solve their individual problems, these
parents quickly realized the need for
special educational and other facilities
and set about creating them. As
word spread that something could be
done to assist children seriously handi¬
capped from this cause, many more
parents came forward with their
children. As the numbers of recog¬
nized cases grew, it was possible
to establish better schools and training
centres, to attract experts in the
needed fields and eventually to
convince governments to assist or
establish rehabilitation programmes,
including special education for the
cerebral palsied.
Today, in Caracas, in Bogota, in
Lima, in Buenos Aires, in Rio de Janeiro
and elsewhere, it is possible to find
active and effective services to assist
children with cerebral palsy and, in
every case, organizations such as
parents' groups have played a major
role in the Inception of the programme
and continue to be active in the work.
The challenge of spreading their
attitudes, knowledge and methods to
the rural areas and to the less
developed countries remains.
CONTINUED PAGE 34

ABOLISHING THE GHETTOS
FOR DISABLED CITIZENS
Continued from page 26
The importance of community in¬
volvement also emerges from the
requirement that special education,
even more than general education,
should be designed to help prepare
the handicapped child to live a useful
life in his community and society.
This means that the training must
not be In isolation, but in an atmo¬
sphere of interaction between the
people of the school, teachers, pupils
and parents, and the other people of
the community. It means that the
curriculum must be planned with the
characteristics of the community in
mind and with opportunities to observe
and participate in its work and play.
All of this can be accomplished only
when the organizations and individuals
of the community are effectively
associated with the special education
programme.
In any discussion of the relationships
between special education and the
community a central issue is the
respective functions of special schooîù
for the handicapped and of provisions
for participation of the handicapped
in regular schools. There is a role for
each, but greater emphasis can be
placed on the Integration of disabled
students In general educational facili¬
ties.
Dr. Herbert Goldstein, of Yeshiva
University in New York, Chairman of
the Rehabilitation International Edu¬
cation Commission, says, "The concept
of normalization as it applies to the
education of handicapped children
underscores the role of the community
as it never has before. Historically,
it has been the practice to exclude the
handicapped from the benefits of com¬
munity life and participation by sending
them off to special schools or insti¬
tutions far from community life.
"Explicitly, the rationale for thus
segregating the handicapped by their
handicaps, i.e., by building and activat¬
ing special schools for blind and for
deaf children, was to provide an
educational setting that would be
advantageous for their living and edu¬
cation. It was felt that they could get
along better and profit more from an
environment designed to accommodate
their handicapping condition...
"Implicity, however, the motivation
to segregate handicapped children
was, and often still is, based on their
'differentness'; they sometimes don't
look and act like ordinary children and
34

thereby make for feelings of discomfort
and anxiety in members of the com¬
munity (see article page 15).
"Normalization in education does not
mean providing handicapped children
with exactly the same kind of education
and educational facilities available to
normal children; this would only make
the handicapping condition more pro¬
minent. Instead, normalization in edu¬
cation means that educational pro¬
visions are such that the handicapped
child is given the same opportunity to
realize his potentialities as is given
normal children.
"In some instances, very minor
changes in the school building ramps,
so that they can get into the school
building, for example, is all that some
physically handicapped children need.
Once in the building, they are compe¬
tent in all other ways so that they can
capitalize on the school offerings.
Other children require more complex
adaptations In order to minimize the
impact of their handicap on learning
and social Interactive conditions In the
school."
An understanding of the educational,
as well as of any of the other problems
of physical or mental disability must be
based on the knowledge that many of
these problems are created or made
more damaging by society and by its
attitudes.
Historically, we have stigmatized
those who are different and excluded
them from the so-called normal life of
our communities. We have built our
buildings and our cities in ways that
exclude people with limited mobility.
We have not yet learned to regard
people in terms of their abilities, rather
than of their disabilities when those
exist In the stigmatized forms. We
have created educational, vocational
and social ghettos in which our dis¬
abled citizens are supposed to live and
learn and work.
Special education Is designed to
help handicapped individuals in making
the fullest use of their capabilities, but
it cannot succeed without the under¬
standing and the support of the com¬
munity in which it is placed. It cannot
finally succeed until society has done
its part in eliminating the physical and
social barriers it erects in the paths of
our disabled citizens.
Norman Acton
z
u
oí
O
