by Han Suyin
the Chinese
experiment
Text Copyright ©
Unicef and Han Suyin
Reproduction prohibited
52
HAN SUYIN Is the noted novelist who for
17 years has paid yearly visits to the People's
Republic of China. She is the author of a
dozen works on China and Asia including
"China In the Year 2001" (1967). "Asia today"
(1969) and numerous novels. An ardent femi¬
nist and medical doctor, she has observed
family planning In China (where she was
bom) since 1956. In this article, originally
published in "Unicef News' (No. 78). she
sums up her 17-year research and reports
the latest facts based on her visit to China
In the summer of 1973.
EDUCATION is the key."
"All policies must be understood
by the masses, carried out by the
masses, and be in their interest."
In these two sentences, we find the
clue to understanding family planning
in China. For it is through a pro¬
gramme of public education that peo¬
ple are being influenced to practise
birth control voluntarily as part of
community life. The special lesson
that the Chinese experiment offers is
that family planning must not be
something dictated by fears, economic
pressure, or coercion; but that it must
be thought of as being essential to
the personal development of both
woman and man.
The first family planning drive oc¬
curred in 1956 in the cities and af¬
fected only about 15 to 20 per cent
of the population. In the parks, peo¬
ple queued up for contraceptive dis¬
tribution; pharmacies exhibited con¬
traceptives openly; films on the birth
process and family planning tech-:
niques were shown. This was already
a break with past prudery and the
taboos of tradition.
In rural areas, agricultural co-opera¬
tives began in 1956, followed by
communes in 1958. For the first time,
women worked in the fields, as indi¬
viduals, not as part of a male-gov¬
erned family. They were paid wages
according to work done, and were
voting in the co-operatives on com¬
munal projects. Great infra-structural
works (road building, dams, reservoirs,
canals) to transform the land caused
labour shortages in the rural areas
and millions of women came out to
work and thereby to acquire status
as independent individuals.
At the same time the Woman's Fed¬
eration also sponsored family planning
education in rural areas. The Federa¬
tion had been instituted in 1950 to
achieve countrywide education of
women, to promote emancipation and
equality, and the new marriage based
on individual choices.
But there was a great deal of tradi¬
tional superstition and ignorance to
overcome. In the peasant families I
interviewed, husbands were against
family planning. One of them, previous
to liberation in 1949, had had eight
children who had all died of disease
and starvation. Now he had remarried
and wanted another eight. "We have
so much more to eat, why should we
not have more children?"
For the first time, as a result of an

A cluster of Chinese children poring
over comics in Peking. Most of the
stories recount the exploits of
revolutionary heroes.
increase in crops, there was no star¬
vation in China's countryside, and the
peasants wanted more children as
"labour power" to care for them in
old age. Also, mothers-in-law, afways
despotic over their sons' brides,
wanted grandchildren quickly and es¬
pecially grandsons. And finally, ig¬
norance made many people fear
contraceptives. "The man becomes
impotent"... "the woman's skin be¬
comes yellow..."
On the other hand, the younger
women, aware of the crippling effect
of numerous and repeated childbirths
would ask, "Why should we stay at
home and just have baby after baby?"
In those days, however, the conser¬
vative element was far more prominent.
As a result, in the countryside, family
planning had an adverse "shock"
effect upon the peasantry. They really
felt it was wrong even to discuss the
matter. The women were too shy to
talk about it.
In 1959 and 1960 I was in many
industrial cities interviewing women
workers in factories, and it was there,
for the first time, that I felt the thrill
of woman's emancipation. During the
Great Leap Forward of 1958, when
a stupendous effort was being made
to step up industrialization, 80 mil¬
lion women who had never worked
before came out to participate in this
enormous movement.
I interviewed a woman of 37, with
four children, whose husband was a
worker. She herself had stayed at
home "to look after the family" until
in 1958, against her husband's wish¬
es, she mobilized four other house¬
wives, her friends, and all five of
them started a small "street factory",
making pots and pans for the daily
use of people. Within two years,
their small factory was producing
thermostatic equipment for a large in¬
dustrial complex in the city.
In the years to follow, I found hun¬
dreds of such examples, including
grandmothers starting "neighbour¬
hood" workshops and street factories.
Today, there is not a city in China,
not a street, without its small work¬
shops where self-employed house¬
wives are turning out daily goods,
including many necessary items and, in
some cases, complicated equipment
and spare parts for larger factories.
A young woman worker I spoke
with in 1966, now a member of the
Central Committee, told me that every
prospective couple in her factory was
instructed in family planning. She and
her fiancé had already decided on the
number of children they would have.
Among industrial workers, in China's
expanding industrial sector, family
planning is being implanted as a nor¬
mal accompaniment to marriage.
Everywhere in the cities, the un-
der-thirties mentioned family planning
as an essential part of their lives
and of their emancipation. "Of
course we want children, but not to
be tied down to nappies and the kit¬
chen all the time ... a woman is as
good as a man in work ... we must
also contribute to the transformation
of society ... it is good for our
health ... I saw my mother and father
quarrel all the time because of too
many babies . . ."
Regulations for mother and child
care have also helped to establish the
value of a woman's function as mother.
A woman is entitled to 56 days of
resting time away from work before
giving birth, for which she receives
full pay. In each factory there are
nurseries, and mothers are given
breast-feeding time for which they are
also paid. I visited textile mills where
one can see women leaving their
spinning machines and being replaced
automatically by spare workers, while
they walk to the nursery nearby to
feed their baby. During an 8-hour
work day, each woman may leave the
bench three times to feed her baby
for a period of about a half hour.
Nurseries are placed next to each
workshop so that women are only
two or three minutes walk away from
their infants.
To relieve working mothers in the
cities, there are street nurseries.
Every morning and afternoon, one can
see quaint little bicycle carriages with
8 or 10 toddlers being taken to the
nurseries, by older men, who are called
"grandfathers".
However, about 50 per cent of the
toddlers are still being cared for at
home by grandmothers, for in China
the family still largely consists of
"three generations living together".
Grandmothers thus become an im¬
portant social force, which has its _ft
good and bad features. On the one Hj
hand, it makes for a united family;
on the other, the chief dissent to fam-
ily planning comes from older women, r

L who often insist, especially in rural
areas, on getting their sons married at
an early age and on having ."grand¬
sons" as soon as possible.
But there are exceptions. In 1966,
I saw a grandmother in a commune
who had called on the doctor to have
her son's wife fitted with a contracep¬
tive, and who went around spreading
family planning education.
Today, after the Cultural Revolution,
family planning has been solidly
organized as a nationwide movement,
under a family planning council direct¬
ed by the Ministry of Health. Branches
are established at every level, right
down to the smallest village. Both
men and women participate in this all-
out mass drive. The work is unpaid
and voluntary, with the chief emphasis
on direct contact: house-to-house
visits, street meetings of housewives,
direct talking and persuading.
Over the last two years this direct
approach has been used most exten¬
sively. In Peking and other cities,
each street has its family planners.
They hold meetings in which every
family is involved and these meetings
go on for weeks. Families also .have
many discussions among themselves.
In one street, Kuang An Men, which
has about 47,000 people, a collective
decision was reached to produce no
more than 360 babies in that street
during the year 1973.
This "common decision by consen¬
sus of all the potential childbearers
(about 13 per cent of the women) in
the street" was arrived at after each
case was debated. Families with
more than two or three children were
asked to wait, priority for childbearing
being given to those couples who
wanted a first or second child. "We
shall bring our population increase
down to 7.5 per thousand, or 0.75 per
cent, this year", the street committee
woman, a young worker of 30, with one
child, said to me.
In 1972, the women employees of
childbearing age in one administrative
operation decided not to have more
than two children each. (Two children
[is the ideal, but three children are
quite common.) "Of course it is some¬
times difficult when the two are both
girls. Many women still like to have
a boy and will try a third time for a
boy." This example has now been
emulated by many other organizations
throughout China. "A girl child is as
good as a boy child" is a sentence
now heard everywhere.
In another organization (a teaching
institute) a priority system for child-
bearing was agreed on among the
staff. A couple without children was
due to have one; but a woman with
two girl babies was pregnant again;
and she insisted that this one was
going to be a boy.
"What could be done? She was
not only having a third child, but she
was actually taking someone else's
turn." The matter was solved, how¬
ever, with another woman voluntarily
giving up her turn to have a baby, and
having an abortion instead. This pub¬
lic-spirited self-sacrifice may appear
strange to other societies, but in China
one must remember these decisions
are individual, not enforced, and they
serve as "examples" to be emulated.
There are countless anecdotes and
stories, illustrating the immense debate
going on today. There is the young
couple with two children who both got
a raise in salary, and immediately said,
"Now we can have another baby" an
example of the love of children which
characterizes the Chinese.
On the other hand there is the
example of the two young workers
who delayed marriage by another two
years (they had already been engaged
for two years), to "set an example"
in late marriage, perhaps the most
effective method of population control.
There is the story of the commune
where 175 young couples voluntarily
delayed their marriages by one year,
and the story of a woman who has nine
children, all of them girls, and will
continue until she achieves a boy.
There is the commune in Szechuan
province, a backward area, where the
peasants have carved: "Birth control
is a patriotic duty" on a hillside, and
the 30-year-old peasant I met in Kuei-
chow province who had seven children
and refused to give permission for his
wife to be sterilized.
Such contradictory stories are facets
of a great human transformation; family
planning becomes a moving drama of
consciousness, of the emancipation of
the woman as a total human being, of
the struggle against tradition and
ignorance. It is part of the liberation
of man too "Only when woman is
liberated will man also be liberated."
In the industrialized areas, in fac¬
tories, and in the cities, the family
planning drive has already achieved a
good measure of success. In the
Peking area, for instance, 70 per cent "
of the city workers (clerical staff,
workers in factories, etc.) are practis¬
ing family planning. In Shanghai, an
even greater effect is reflected in the

"Why should we stay at home
and just have baby after baby?"
population increase rate, which has
fallen to 0.6 per cent from a high in
1963 of about 2.5 per cent. In Peking
the population increase last year was
1.17 per cent, whereas it was 3.5 per
cent in 1963.
But the countryside is also showing
progress. Thus, in the county of
Hsingtou, in Szechuan (pop. 500,000),
12,000 vasectomies were performed
last year.
I visited communes in Chekiang
province in 1971, and found each
brigade clinic abundantly provided with
contraceptives, including the oral pill.
But this was not enough. At that
time, the "barefoot doctors" were
responsible for carrying out family
planning both in spreading propa¬
ganda and in providing contraceptives.
They are the young people between
17 and 21 years old who serve
3-5 years in the countryside as para¬
medical workers, and whose existence
are 1,300,000 of themhas
assured the most complete network
of preventive inoculation measures and
health care anywhere.
It has now been found out that they
are not the ideal medium for this task-,
people of this age are still considered
by the peasantry as "too young to
know about such things".
Since 1972, it is through the women
cadres, those in the management
committees at every level in the rural
areas, that the drive for family planning
is most effective. These women are
middle-aged, married, with children,
and practise family planning.
They are "living examples" that
family planning works. Painstakingly,
they will go from family to family,
propagandizing the women, the men.
They work with the medical staff,
with the barefoot doctors and health
workers. They are trusted and
accepted by the village women. They
bring contraceptives to each house, so
there is no excuse of "being too busy"
to go to the clinic.
I visited one commune where every
morning, the woman secretary stands
in the fields and shouts to the working
women: "Have you taken your pill?"
She checks personally on each and
everyone of them. Only in this way
can the oral contraceptive become
effective. "Most women forget to take
it ... or take it for a little while only . . .
But each case is an individual case;
we cannot force anything or anyone.
So we give them a wide choice."
Since all contraceptives and all
operations are free of charge, it is up
to the individual to make up his or her
mind. Hence, the wide range of con¬
traceptives, and also abortion on
demand. "But abortion is not the
answer. We want less and less abor¬
tions, more prevention."
How can family planning, without
coercion, without economic pressures,
but only by education and persuasion,
be achieved?
It implies, above all, a total refusal
to adopt "emergency" attitudes of
crisis, to adopt shortcuts and auto¬
cratic methods of pressure. Consider¬
ation for the human factors, for
emotion and tradition, coupled with a
continuing process of education for all
is what distinguishes the Chinese
experiment.
Han Suyin
