Unesco
and the changing
attitude toward
solar energy
by Rolf E. Glitsch
'OME twenty years ago it
was thought that solar energy might
provide the ideal answer to man's
energy needs but no breakthrough
in the direct conversion of sunlight
into energy application was made.
When the large-scale use of solar
energy did not flourish largely due to
economic reasons, many were disil¬
lusioned and others directed their
attention exclusively to small-scale, low
temperature applications for developing
countries. Certain of these appli¬
cations were successful, others failed
to materialize mainly due to social and
economic rather than technical reasons.
What has been operating here is a
particularly pernicious case of the
advanced-versus-developing nations di¬
lemma. Those who could most benefit
from the advance and utilization of
View of part of the
solar still at the
Bakharden
State Farm in the
Karakum desert of
Turkmenia, U.S.S.R.,
reflected in a concave
reflector (photo is
purposely published
upside down). For
the past five years
the still has supplied
three metric tons
of drinking water
every 24 hours for
the farm's livestock.
14

solar energy technology the develop¬
ing countries, most of them in the solar
belt, with limited fuel resources, poor
communications and isolated popu¬
lations, and therefore much in need of
small solar-powered appliances (such
as pumps, refrigerators, heaters,
dryers) have lacked the scientific,
managerial and financial resources for
doing much about it.
And in the advanced industrial
countries where there is plenty of
capital and a surfeit of scientists and
engineers, there has been little interest
or incentive to invest human or
monetary resources in either large or
small scale use of new forms of energy.
Conventional fuel has, until recently,
been cheap and plentiful. The planning
and development of alternative sources
has been almost entirely in the
direction of nuclear power: "conven¬
tional"- fission, breeder reactors and
fusion. Small wonder that there has
been an unwillingness by both public
and private enterprise to finance the
research and development of solar
devices to make them competitive.
But over the last three years, at first
slowly, but more recently, quite dra¬
matically, attitudes have changed, and
events have occurred which make it
appear that the take-off point for solar
energy development may now have
been reached.
There is, at last, a widespread
appreciation that the earth is a small
planet with very limited energy re¬
sources; the costs to the industrial
states both monetary and political
of oil and natural gas are rising
sharply; progress in breeder reactors
and in controlled fusion has been slow;
mounting concern with pollution and
for the protection of the environment
has not only cast a shadow over the
use of fossil and nuclear fuels but
also put a brake on the construction
of oil pipelines and atomic plants and
on the resumption of large-scale coal
mining.
Finally, there have been a number
of interesting technological develop¬
ments although not yet major break¬
throughs in solar energy collection
and conversion. As a result solar
energy development is now receiving
wide (if not yet universal) respect and
increased scientific and technological
attention.
It is obvious that the time has come
for new trends and new approaches
to meet the energy needs of future
generations. Discussions and action
are therefore being initiated with a
view to finding acceptable solutions
not only on a national basis but also
on an international scale.
ROLF E. GLITSCH, geophysicist and mineral
resources expert, has been a member of
Unesco's Science Sector since 1968. From
1964 to 1968 he was Deputy Director of
Unesco's Field Science Office for the Arab
States in Cairo. He was previously engag¬
ed in applied research on the exploration
of mineral resources.
The situation today thus differs
considerably from that of the early
1950s when Unesco became active in
solar energy through its international
programme for the world's arid zones.
At that time Unesco and the Indian
Government organized, in New Delhi
in 1954, an international symposium on
solar energy (and wind power). Its
findings stressed the social and politi¬
cal implications as well as the technical
possibilities of the use of solar energy,
as did a number of technical studies
commissioned by Unesco. But with
the termination of the Arid Zone pro¬
gramme Unesco's interest and work in
solar energy became dormant an
attitude caused by the world-wide
stagnation in solar energy activities.
The United Nations too through its
Department of Economic and Social
Affairs had contributed to the dev¬
elopment of solar energy by organ¬
izing, in August 1961 in Rome, a large
symposium on practical ways of using
energy from the sun (as well as from
the wind and geothermal sources).
This major international meeting on
solar energy attracted about 500 scien¬
tists from over 50 countries. The
proceedings were published in full and
can be considered as a major contri¬
bution to the scientific literature in
this field.
w,HEN all the activities
towards the promotion of solar energy
application during the 1950s and 1960s
are assessed, it appears that the public
mainly judged solar energy appli¬
cations as a possible replacement for
other sources of energy. It is evident
that the result of the judgement was
not very favourable as there existed
no satisfactory solution to the problem
of solar energy storage.
Moreover, society underwent a cer¬
tain change during this era. Central¬
ized power production from coal, oil
and natural gas or nuclear material and
its distribution in the form of electrical
energy with the advantage of continual
coverage sometimes even an inter¬
national grid became far more attract¬
ive. This form of power was con¬
sidered more convenient than individual
power units of small size which
produced the required form of energy
often without its transformation into
electricity.
Solar energy applications could not
fulfill the requirements which society,
rightly or wrongly, expected of them
to be able to replace existing energy
sources, to be continuously available
(storage problem) and lastly to be not
only as cheap as other sources of
energy but preferably cheaper.
When society became seriously
concerned about the existing energy
resources solar energy came to be
regarded as an additional source of
energy, able to bridge the gap between
the existing and the required amount
of energy. Thus storage problems
and to a certain extent commercial
evalutions became less important.
Therefore, at the beginning of 1970,
Unesco reviewed its interest in solar
energy. A modest programme of
education, information and promotion
of international co-operation was
launched. Research fellowships were
awarded to scientists from developing
countries, technical aid was given in
Cuba and Mexico and a seminar on
solar energy and its applications in
Africa was organized (in Niamey,
Niger, in 1972) for engineers and
scientists from tropical Africa.
These activities culminated with
Unesco's participation in the planning,
organization and sponsorship of an
international congress, "The Sun In the
Service of Mankind" in July 1973 at
Unesco's Paris headquarters (see
article page 24).
Prior to the congress an inter¬
national group of specialists met in
Paris to advise Unesco on a possible
future programme in solar energy.
The group drew up a series of
recommendations for projects that
Unesco might consider for a broad
international programme. Its pro¬
posals include:
Additional Unesco-supported solar
energy training courses and an expan¬
sion of current fellowship awards to
scientists, engineers and technicians
in solar energy research institutes;
A clearing-house operation to
provide information on educational,
research and development aspects of
solar energy to scientists, engineers,
technicians, students and potential
users in member states;
Aid to non-governmental organi¬
zations and to international solar
energy seminars and workshops;
Missions to advise member states
on possible development programmes
in solar energy;
Co-operation with member states
in drawing up and evaluating national,
regional and global research and
development projects for the exploi¬
tation of solar energy. Such projects
might be designed to meet home,
community, agricultural and industrial
needs and embrace conventional solar
energy devices as well as newer
processes such as photovoltaic (solar)
cells (see article page 16). Particular
techniques and devices might include
the solar pond, building design for
natural heating and cooling, green¬
houses, and other biological appli¬
cations, solar furnaces for baking
bricks, solar pumps and other small
engines.
These proposals are now being
studied by Unesco in the context of HP
an eventual programme that would | Jl
open up new possibilities for inter¬
national co-operation in solar energy
and its applications. '
