THE GRINDING
ARITHMETIC
FOR THE YEAR 2000
HE decade of the 1970s
may be confronted with a higher rate
of growth than ever experienced
before in the history of man, and one
higher than is likely to be confronted
again in the future.
World population trends for many
years to come will be decisively in¬
fluenced by trends in the developing
regions. These are the conclusions
that emerge from the latest United
Nations projections to the end of the
century, which illustrate the impli¬
cations of the unprecedented growth
in world population brought about by
reductions in mortality accompanied by
little change in the high levels of
fertility in developing regions.
It is important to remember that a
population increasing at an annual rate
of 2 per cent will double in 35 years,
and one increasing at a rate of 3 per
cent will double in 23 years.
According to the "medium" pro¬
jections representing the trend con¬
sidered most plausible the world's
growth rate will be about 2 to 2.1 per
cent per year for the decade. That is
from 1 to 1.1 per cent in the developed
regions but 2.4 to 2.5 per cent in the
less developed regions.
These "medium" projections show
that the world's population may con¬
tinue to grow at a virtually constant
rate of about 2 per cent annually until
1985. A downward trend would then
start, ending at a 1.7 per cent rate by
the end of the century.
In absolute terms, the population
may increase from nearly 4 billion in
1973 to 4.5 billion in 1980, 5.4 billion
in 1990 and 6.5 billion in 2000. The
less developed regions would double
their population to a total of 5 billion
by 2000, or more than three times the
population total of 1.5 billion projected
for developed countries.
The largest addition to the popu¬
lation during the period is expected in
South Asia, which now contains almost
one third of the world's population.
India is the largest contributor to this
area's total. Its population may in¬
crease from 487 million in 1965 to
nearly 1.1 billion by 2000 (an increase
of 123 per cent in 35 years). South
Asia as a whole may have an increase
of 1.4 billion over the 1965 total by
2000, accounting for 43 per cent of the
projected increase in world population.
The next major area of importance
is East Asia where the pace of popu¬
lation growth is expected to be
moderate, but the absolute increase
will be very high. China's population
is projected to increase from 700 million
(1965) to 1.2 billion (2000). Sizeable
increases in total population are also
expected in Latin America from
246 million to 652 million and in
Africa, from 303 million to 818 million.
The world's current 2 per cent
annual rate of increase is not expected
to continue. If it did, population would
soar to a total of 28 billion only a
century from now. If the growth rate
were reduced to 1 per cent after the
year 2000, and if it remained at that
rate, the population in the year 2074
would be about 14 billion.
Among major areas of the world,
rates of population growth are currently
highest in Latin America and South
Asia. Latin America is expected to
maintain the very high rate of 2.8 to
2.9 per cent annually until about 1985
a result of its relatively low mortality
compared to other developing areas
then decrease to 2.6 per cent by the
end of the. century. In South Asia,
where current high growth rates
reflect very high fertility levels, a
gradual decrease is expected, so that
growth would reach about 2 per cent
by the year 2000.
In Africa, the decline in fertility is
not expected to begin until later in the
century. Its population growth rate
may exceed 3 per cent annually in the
1980s, then begin to drop slightly.
Africa may have the world's highest
growth rate well into the 21st century,
and may also be the only area where
the age structure, already unfavourable
for development, may change for the
worse, with the percentage of children
remaining much the same or even
increasing within the next decades.
In the largest country, China, where
birth control practices are reported to
be in wide use, the rate of increase
for the period 1965-1970 was estimated
at 1.8 per cent. On the .other hand,
recent figures for some thirty devel¬
oping countries in Africa, Latin America
and Asia indicate a rate of increase of
about 3 per cent.
These include: In Africa Algeria,
Kenya, Liberia, Libya, Morocco,
Southern Rhodesia, Sudan, Tunisia.
In Latin America Costa Rica, Domi- _
nican Republic, El Salvador, Honduras, jl
Mexico, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay,
Peru, Surinam, Venezuela. In Asia
Brunei, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, East Ma-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

GRINDING ARITHMETIC (Continued)
laysia, Mongolia, Pakistan, Philippines,
Syria, Thailand.
Population is also increasing in
density. In the 1950-1970 period,
63 inhabitants were added to each
square kilometre in Middle South Asia
and 56 in Japan. The Caribbean area
added an average of 38 people per
square kilometre, and in South East
Asia, China and Western Europe
density gains were about 24 to 26 per¬
sons per square kilometre. Gains in
Southern Africa, the Soviet Union,
North America and temperate South
America were modest, each adding
only 3 persons per square kilometre.
One of the major achievements of
our civilization is "death control", the
steady march towards victory over
disease and famine.
Today the inhabitants of most
developed countries can expect to live
70 years or more; the figure is around
76 in Scandinavia. The developing
countries also have benefited from
progress in extending the life span,
but in many of these countries a person
still cannot expect to live more than
50 years, especially in Africa where
life expectation In many countries is
under 40. (In Gabon and Guinea, life
expectancy for men has been estimated
at 25 and 26 years respectively.) In
many Latin American countries, on the
other hand, people can now expect to
live as long as 60 years.
Until about 1850, the demographic
differences between the developed and
developing worlds were slight. In both
there was an average of about
35 deaths and about 40 births per
thousand inhabitants each year. But
after 1850, the death rate In the now
more developed regions decreased
gradually to about 28 in 1850-1900,
about 18 in 1900-1950, and 10 or less
since 1950.
In the less developed regions, the
death rate was still 32 per thousand
from 1900-1950, but by the 1960s it
had dropped sharply to a rate of 17.
In these regions, the drop in mortality
was delayed by nearly a century, and
now is occurring with outstanding
speed.
A further impressive decline in
mortality levels is anticipated in the
less developed regions. An overall
gain of more than 15 years in life
expectancy at birth is expected within
the next 30 years, and the death rate
may decline from about 16 to 7 or
8 per thousand towards the end of the
century.
Because of the more youthful corn-
considered as much of an indicator of
social and economic development as
it was in the past. There are still a
number of countries where about one
out of five live-born infants dies before
its first birthday. But in the past three
decades, the infant mortality rate has
fallen from 106 to 27 per thousand in
more developed regions, and from 230
to 140 per thousand in the less devel¬
oped.
Over the past two centuries the
pattern of an uneasy balance between
births and deaths has been broken.
There are about 125 million births each
year in the world, and about 55 million
deaths roughly in a ratio of 2 to 1.
About four fifths of the births are in
the developing countries.
Few indicators descrimlnate so
sharply between the more developed
and the less developed countries as
do the measures of fertility. The
countries with birth rates of about
30 and gross reproduction rates above
position of their populations, the death
rate in some of the less developed
countries already has fallen as low as
that in some developed countries with
a high proportion of people at an
advanced age. Some developing
regions may attain by the end of the
century the lowest death rate ever
experienced by sizable human so¬
cieties as little as 5 per thousand.
Among the significant features of
recent mortality trends has been a rise
in death rates among middle-aged or
older men in some highly industrialized
countries. In these countries, where
mortality had already reached low
levels and infectious diseases had
been brought 'under control, cardio¬
vascular diseases have become the
most important cause of death.
Infant mortality in some developing
countries has dropped closer to the
level in developed countries and the
infant mortality rate is no longer
2.0 (a gross reproduction rate of 1.0
means an average of one daughter per
woman) are found almost exclusively
in the developing regions in Africa,
Asia and Middle and South America.
Countries with rates below these levels
are located, with few exceptions, in the
economically more advanced regions.
Birth .rates fell substantially in the
19th century in all the now more
developed regions, but hardly at all in
the less developed. The gap has
widened enormously. Typical birth
rates in developed countries are near
20 per thousand, while in developing
countries they are twice as high.
In a number of high-fertility countries,
including some which have adopted
policies and programmes aimed at
reducing the birth rate, there have
been decreases in the birth rate during
the 1960s. But the combined popu¬
lation of countries with an appreciable
drop is small compared to those where
there has been little or no change in
the high birth rate.
In Africa, a belt of very high fertility
extends across West Africa from
Guinea and Mali to Niger and Nigeria.
The countries in this belt have gross
reproduction rates of 3.3 or above.
In Latin America, only slightly lower
CONTINUED PAGE 12

STANDING
ROOM
-BUT
ONLY JUST
The three drawings on this page and
overleaf, commentaries in humorous
vein on the demographic squeeze,
are by a young artist from the Fed¬
eral Republic of Germany, Hans-
Georg Rauch. A frequent contri¬
butor to leading European and Am¬
erican magazines, Rauch has pub¬
lished two volumes of drawings
and has made several television
films. Our illustrations are from a
new album of Rauch's drawings
entitled "Die Schweigende Mehr¬
heit" (The Silent Majority) to be
published shortly in the German
Federal Republic by Rohwolt and in
Paris by Hachette.
Drawings ^ Ed Lahumiere Paris
11

rates have been estimated for the
Middle American mainland.
A zone of much lower fertility is
centred in the Congo Basin in Africa
(estimated gross reproduction rates
2.1 to 2.4). In the Caribbean area,
fertility is only moderately high (gross
reproduction rates around 2.5).
In Asia there is a Chinese cultural
zone of rather moderate fertility, with
gross reproduction rates not exceeding
2.8; this zone includes Hong Kong and
Singapore and probably also China,
for which knowledge of fertility levels
is uncertain.
A group of countries in South-East
Asia, including the Philippines, Cam¬
bodia, Thailand and the East Malaysian
States of Sabah and Sarawak, have
estimated gross reproduction rates of
3.2 and higher. Pakistan also appears
to have very high fertility, but a zone
of somewhat lower fertility, with
estimated gross reproduction rates of
2.5 to 2.7, includes India, Nepal, Burma
and Sri Lanka.
Because adequate statistics are not
available, it is impossible to prove
whether in Asia as a whole the birth
rate has changed at all in recent years.
China, which comprises over one fifth
of the world's population, may be
undergoing a slow decline in the birth
rate. Various estimates of long-term
fertility trends in India, the second
largest country with around one
seventh of the world's inhabitants,
indicate either that the birth rate has
shown only a moderate decline since
earlier in the century, or else that it
has remained practically unchanged.
In view of improved health conditions
and reduced widowhood as a con¬
sequence of lower mortality, the ab¬
sence of a rise in fertility may be
looked upon with some optimism.
Birth rates have probably diminished
at least slightly in Latin America as a
whole. In Africa as a whole, it seems
likely that the average birth rate has
not changed perceptibly. It may
actually be increasing in Middle Africa,
although data are lacking to verify
this fact.
For the world as a whole, the birth
rate is projected to decline from 34 to
25 per thousand by the year 2000, with
the death rate dropping from 14 to 8.
As for the more developed regions,
the projections show only slight
changes in the next quarter-century in
regard to crude birth and death rates
(annual number of live births and
annual number of deaths per 1,000
people), gross reproduction rate and
life expectancy.
Even after fertility drops below re¬
placement level of 2 children per
couple, a population can continue to
grow for up to 70 years, due to delays
built into the age structure.
The achievement of world "zero
population growth" by 2000 is highly
unlikely; this would require the total
fertility rate throughout the world to
drop far below replacement level,
reaching 1.1 by 2000. (See page 16.)
Even if the less developed countries
were to achieve a net reproduction
rate of 1 by 2000, they would grow by
about 2.5 times by 2050. If current
fertility remained constant and mor¬
tality declined, the population of the
less developed countries could be
more than 10 times its present size
by 2050.
In the less developed countries
seeking to slow population growth, the
key elements are the starting date and
the speed of the decline in fertility;
these will determine when fertility
levels will approach replacement.
Many developing countries may
quadruple in population within 50 years
if they do not move toward the goal
of a reduced growth rate. Only a few
nations such as the Federal Republic
of Germany, German Democratic
Republic, Austria and Sweden can
expect populations to remain at about
the present level. If a non-growing
population is desired, this is likely to
take several decades in most of the
developed countries, but much longer
in the less developed countries.

Drawing by Hans-Georq Rauch
J O Ed. Lahumière. Paris
