The birth of an original
form of literature
HE history of Iceland's
rich and varied literature dates back
over 1,000 years. At the earliest pe¬
riod, the Icelanders had no written
literature, but in poem and story they
preserved memories of times long
past, of notable events not only in
their own country but also among
their neighbours, their sister nations
across the sea, especially Norway,
Sweden and Denmark, from whence
their forefathers had come.
rfc>
This natural amphitheatre, at Thingvellir, was
the cradle of Europe's oldest parliament, the
Althing, whose first meeting in 930 A.D. mark¬
ed the birth of the Icelandic state. Meetings
were held each summer in the open air.
Today the Althing meets a 19th-century build¬
ing in Reykjavik. Old traditions persist and
at an annual banquet it is customary for
members of parliament to make their speeches
in verse. Below, a cavalcade crosses the
Thingvellir plain. Top of page, 16th century
drawing of an Icelandic sailing-boat, a direct
descendant of the Viking drakkar (see page 9).
In this they were not unique: settlers
In a new land often seem to have a
memory more retentive of ancient lore
than that of those who remain behind.
The stories of Norse gods and heroes
are now a familiar part of the European
heritage of myth and legend, but It is
not always realized that knowledge of
them derives chiefly from Icelandic
manuscripts.
The settlement of Iceland itself about
870 A.D. was itself a tremendous event,
bound to leave its imprint on the na¬
tion's memory and give birth to stories
and tales. In the Settlement Age the
Icelanders had no books, and between
the founding of the Icelandic state in
930 and the beginning of the Age of
Writing towards the end of the 11th
century just the right length of time
passed for the tales of ancient heroes
to mature in oral tradition.
The history of Old Icelandic litera¬
ture may be roughly divided into three
periods. First there is the period of
oral literature, lasting from settlement
times until about 1100. At this time
poems and occasional verses were
composed on a great variety of sub¬
jects and memorized and handed down
from generation to generation.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
4(4>. -
Photo © Icelandic Photo and Press Service, Reykjavik
!*.»'

THE ICELAND SAGA (Continued)
In the same way memories of men
and events as far back as the Settle¬
ment Age or even earlier times were
kept alive, and tales of ancient worthies
were told for instruction or entertain¬
ment. This period may thus be called
the Age of Tradition.
The first works written in the Ice¬
landic language were produced to¬
wards the end of the 11th century. On
the one hand we find translations from
Latin of religious writings saints'
lives, homilies, etc. and on the other,
historical and other learned works
law books, genealogies, and concise
histories, with Ari the Learned's Book
of the Icelanders as the outstanding
example. The 12th century can there¬
fore rightly be termed the Age of
Learning.
In the course of time Icelandic his¬
torical writing underwent a remarkable
development which led to the creation
of a rich and varied narrative literature.
In other languages the Icelandic word
saga has been adopted to describe
this literature. The earliest preserved
sagas date from the end of the 12th
century, and the most recent were
probably composed around 1400. The
third and last period of Old Icelandic
literature, from c. 1200 to c. 1400, can
thus be called the Age of Sagas.
After this time no original prose lite¬
rature to speak of was produced until
the latter half of he 16th century, by
which time the Reformation had paved
the way for new kinds of literature in
the Icelandic language.
When we speak of the first period
(Age of Tradition), it is customary to
distinguish two kinds of Old Icelandic
poetry: Eddie poems and Scaldic (or
Court) poems. Both forms of poetry
have their roots in Scandinavia or, in
the case of the Eddie poems, even
farther south. The oldest poems were
composed in Norway, but the bulk are
Icelandic, and they have been pre¬
served only in Iceland.
The earliest Icelandic poetry is
closely bound up with pagan beliefs.
Many of the ancient poems deal di¬
rectly with the old gods, while poetry
itself is the gift of Odin and its lan¬
guage derived from pagan religion and
the legends of the gods. One word
has become a kind of common denomi¬
nator for these religious beliefs and
poetry the name Edda, which means
great-grandmother.
To explain the art of poetry or teach
would-be poets how to compose could
not be done without giving an account
of the old beliefs and telling the stories
of the gods on which the poetic voca¬
bulary was based.
According to the old Norse beliefs,
the gods live In Asgard as a large
family, though each individual has his
specific dwelling. Their chief is Odin,
god of poetry, runes and magic. To
Valholl, his abode, go all men who
have died in battle.
Many of the principal gods are sons
of Odin. Of these the most popular is
Thor, who is also the biggest and
strongest. He batters the giants with
his hammer Mjolnir ("the crusher"),
which becomes the sacred symbol of
pagans.
Tyr is the god of war. He is one-
handed, having lost a hand which he
had placed as a pledge in the jaws of
the wolf Fenrir. Heimdall is the sen¬
tinel of the gods. He sees as well
by night as by day and can hear the
grass and the wool of sheep growing.
Baldur is the best of all the gods.
"He is so fair of countenance and so
bright that he shines." But Loki,
crafty and the scandalmonger of the
gods, brings about the death of Bal¬
dur, who then descends to the abode
of Hel to share a miserable existence
with those who die of disease and
old age.
Njord, the god of navigation, belongs
to another race called Vanir. His
children are Frey and Freyja, deities
of love and fertility who enjoyed an
extensive cult throughout Scandinavia.
The gods are at perpetual war with
their enemies the giants who live in
the rocks and caves of Jotunheim.
With them are associated various
monsters such as the wolf Fenrir,
whom the gods bound, and Midgard-
sorm, the World Serpent, that lies
encircling the earth with its tail in its
mouth.
But the Icelanders also composed
becîc ^(rtVte J* t)c 00
n»m 5*

poetry of another kind, the so-called
Scaldic of Court Poetry that Is dif¬
ferent from Eddie poetry in form and
content. This kind of poetry originated
in Scandinavia and reached its matur¬
ity in Iceland. Scaldic poetry is cha¬
racterized by a highly elaborate and
artificial form, requiring the use of a
special poetic diction and complicated
syntax and word order.
When young Icelandic poets went
abroad, they would make their way
to some royal court, where they recited
a poem of praise before the king,
eulogizing his noteworthy deeds, and
were rewarded with wealth and hon¬
ours. But poets would also impro¬
vise verses on all kinds of everyday
occasions. Battles were a favourite
subject, but the poets also sang the
praises of fair maidens and the sad¬
ness of unrequited love.
In the year 1000 Christianity was
adopted by the Althing, the Icelandic
Parliament, as the national religion, and
with it the literary culture of Europe
came to Iceland. But because of the
unique political structure of the Ice¬
landic state, literature developed along
other lines than it did in Europe. In
pagan times secular chieftains had
also been the religious heads of the
community, and this situation inevi¬
tably remained unchanged after the
coming of Christianity.
During the first centuries of Chris¬
tianity the church was therefore sub¬
ject to the secular power and was
not a state within the state as in most
other countries. The result was a two¬
fold gain for Icelandic culture: the
Church became national in character,
and members of the ruling class
devoted themselves to book-learning.
Thus in Iceland learned men had
both feet firmly planted in the secular
world and had a taste for national
lore, ancient poems and traditional
tales, and consequently the art of
writing was taken into the service of
the national culture. Icelandic writers,
almost without exception, wrote not in
Latin but in their native tongue. Reli¬
gious works were translated Into or
composed in Icelandic, as were
works on other branches of foreign
learning.
The Icelanders were subject to no
earthly king, but after they had become
Christians, they began to direct their
panegyrics on high, using scaldic me¬
tres for sacred poems in praise of the
saints of Christianity.
A great many works pertaining to
the Age of Learning (1100- 1200) have
been irretrievably lost, but the remain¬
ing sources testify to the fact that
writers of the time were composing
many Icelandic historical and other
learned works.
Shortly before the middle of the
12th century an unknown grammarian
set out to devise an alphabet for the
Icelanders. The work of this gram¬
marian, the so-called First Grammatical
Treatise, is thus our authority on the
first things to be written in Icelandic.
This treatise is an outstanding work of
linguistic scholarship, an invaluable
source of information about the Ice¬
landic language at the time it was
being reduced to writing.
The first known records in the Ice¬
landic tongue were the laws of the
Commonwealth. These were preserv¬
ed only in men's memories during the
first centuries of its existence, and a
special official, the Law Speaker, was
charged with the duty of reciting them
in public at the Althing. It was thus
a great step forward when the code
was put in writing about 1100, so that
all could know what In fact was the
law of the land.
The rudiments of native sagas may
already be detected in the works of
learning of the 12th century, such as
the Book of the Icelanders In which
Ari the Learned sketches a dramatic
picture of the adoption of Christianity
at the Althing in the year 1000. (see
article page 4).
Ari the Learned also had a hand In
making of the Landnámabók (The
Book of Settlements), in which all the
principal settlers of Iceland are enu¬
merated, their original homes and their
places of settlement given, and their
ancestors and descendants recorded.
No other nation in the world possesses
such a record of its origin. '
With the approach of the Age of
Sagas (1200-1400), learning no longer
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
ifcÍ
Illuminated manuscripts with scenes from everyday life
Before the spread of printing, many illuminated
manuscripts were produced in Iceland, especially
during the 14th and 15th centuries. There were many
scribes, not only in church and monastery but also in
the lay world. Calfskin parchment and ink made from
plants were in plentiful supply. Some manuscripts
were the size of half a calfskin while others were no
more than matchbox size. The oldest extant manuscript
dates from the beginning of the 12th century when the
Latin alphabet was adopted. On these two pages we
present details from a 16th century copy of the Jónsbók,
the law code of king Magnus "the law-mender"
(14th century). Opposite, ladies in festive garb attired
in embroidered dresses and high headdress. Above,
a group of notabilities. Left, saddle horses of
the time were richly harnessed. During the long winter
nights villagers would gather at the communal bath¬
house and one of them would read a book aloud. As
manuscripts became worn from constant handling,
new copies were made, so few of the earliest remain
13

THE ICELAND SAGA (Continued)
Tales of gods and heroes, chivalry and romance
14
enjoyed the same pre-eminence as
before. The scholarly writing of his¬
tory declined as the artistic exploi¬
tation of history developed.
There can be no doubt that one of
the main sources of the sagas are
oral accounts of men and events,
sometimes from the remote past. The
style and diction of the written sagas
bear the artistic imprint of oral nar¬
rative. Yet the sagas are very far
from being a mere copying.
The saga is a prose story whose
narrative is swift-moving and concise,
free from verbal embellishments and
verbosity. The dialogue Is terse, and
the characters often express them¬
selves in pointed epigrams. The cast
of characters is large and varied, and
the individual traits of each character
are drawn in clear strokes. While
minor characters may typify particular
human qualities, the main characters
are often complicated and even enig¬
matic. Great emphasis is placed on
certain moral commands, ideals, and
duties, many of which are of great
antiquity.
The highest ideal is drengskapur, a
term which embraces most of the ad¬
mired virtues: truthfulness, good faith,
sincerity, frankness, humanity, magna¬
nimity, and, above all, the courage to
defend honour and family, flinching at
neither wounds nor death.
The circle of kinsmen is a power¬
ful defensive bulwark, but the ties of
kinship can also become strong fet¬
ters to draw men into blood feud and
vengeance, in defiance of the precepts
equally of pagan law and Christian
doctrine.
HE Kings' Sagas were the
first completely original Icelandic
sagas to be written. They derive their
name from the fact that the principal
characters are kings or earls of
northern lands.
Greatest of all the writers of Kings'
Sagas was a poet and scholar Snorri
Sturluson (1178-1241). His monu¬
mental Heimskringla is a comprehen¬
sive history of Norwegian kings from
the twilight times of myth down to
his own day. Each king is given his
own saga in chronological order, but
more space than to any of the rest Is
devoted to the saga of King Olafur
Haraldsson the Saint.
In the wake of the Kings' Sagas
follow other kinds of sagas, each with
its own definite characteristics. The
Sagas of Icelanders are the most ori¬
ginal and remarkable and deal with
events of the 10th and 11th centuries.
They tell mostly of quarrels and con¬
flicts, of killings and blood feuds.
Although the Icelandic Common¬
wealth was in many ways a well orga¬
nized state with an extensive system
of law, a central authority was totally
lacking. As a result, unruly and violent
individuals were free to settle their
differences by force of arms. Such
conflicts would naturally be recognized
as fitting themes for a story and be
preserved in memory more readily
than the peaceful dealings of law-
abiding members of the community.
Many of these short stories are min¬
iature masterpieces, such as the story
of Audun of the West Fjords, who
presented the King of Denmark with
the gift of a polar bear and was
royally rewarded but in the end re¬
served his deepest gratitude for the
King of Norway, who in time of war
had let him pass In peace with a gift
intended for the enemy king.
As time goes by, the Sagas of Ice¬
landers undergo great changes. The
distance between the events and the
authors grows and as a result the oral
tradition becomes attenuated, and the
saga as a literary form begins to lead
a life of its own.
New trends from abroad influence
development: the French tales of chiv¬
alry are translated into the old Norse
tongue and leave their mark on Ice¬
landic literature.
The novelty in the Saga of Laxdaela,
for example, Is due to the influence
of the translated romances. From
them are derived the beauty and
"courtesy" of the characters, the
splendour and elegance of their dress,
and the sentimental quality of their
love.
Kjartan Olafsson is "the handsomest
man ever born in Iceland", his hair is
"fine as silk and hangs down In curls".
His wife dies of sorrow when she
learns he has been slain.
The current of southern romanticism
continues to flow through the Sagas
of Icelanders side by side with the
ancient Icelandic one. Gradually the
oral sources from the Heroic Age dry
up, but in their place the authors dip
deeply into the wells of literature.
Fantasy and romanticism flourish and
sagas with little or no basis in tradi¬
tion are written in Imitation of older
works. This is the literature of deca¬
dence of the 14th century.
The decline is partly accounted for
by the fact that the Icelanders had
lost their independence and become
subject to the king of Norway shortly
after the middle of the thirteenth cen¬
tury. Finally the creative impulse is
exhausted, and saga writing comes to
an end around 1400.
N the watershed between
classical saga and extravagant adven¬
ture tales stands Njála, the greatest
and most famous of all sagas, written
shortly before 1300.
Its author had at his disposal some
historical sources, oral and written, on
the persons and events of the saga,
but he also helped himself liberally
from literature, picking up whatever
served his purpose, reshaping it and
providing it with a new context to suit
his story. His cast of characters is
enormous, and the connexion between
individual chapters is often of the
most tenuous kind.
Gunnar of Hlidarendi is a romantic
knight, a splendid figure of chivalry,
who can jump his own height in full
armour, but his violent temper and his
self-will serve to make him human.
When he learns that his wife Hallger-
dur is guilty of theft, he strikes her in
the face. Essentially a man of peace,
Gunnar is repeatedly drawn into hosti¬
lities and feuds, but the author's sym¬
pathies always remain with him.
Hallgerdur, on the other hand, is
the character for whom the author
seems to have the greatest aversion.
When Gunnar is fighting his last battle,
she remembers the blow he struck her
and refuses to give him a strand of
her hair to replace his broken bow¬
string.
No Icelandic saga has achieved such
popularity as Njála. It captures a
child's imagination with its simplicity
and its boldly pencilled outlines, but
in later years an adult can return to it
again and again and always find new
strokes of creative genius, new depths
of wisdom. Booklovers in Iceland
have long thought it right to read Njála
once a year. And there are old men
who still maintain, maybe with more
than a modicum of truth, that in it are
to be found answers to all the prob¬
lems of human life.
The Icelandic sagas and Eddie
poems are a notable chapter In the
history of world culture, and the
manuscripts that preserve them are
the most treasured literary heritage of
the Icelandic people.

CHURCH-PEW PORTRAIT
Portrait of an Icelandic farmer and his wife painted by an unknown artist on the pews of a church, probably at the
beginning of the 18th century. The woman carries a purse and the household keys at her waist. Her curious
headdress is perhaps a development of a much older traditional style (see photo p. 12).
