SOLAR ENERGY
CLAIMS A NEW PLACE m
IN THE SUN W
On every continent, domestic heating
and lighting units, water pumps,
desalting stills, refrigerators
are running on solar energy.
by Dan Behrman
HE first rays of a world¬
wide co-operative effort to get more
power from the sun have appeared on
the international scientific horizon.
They could be discerned in the out¬
come of a meeting that brought thirteen
experts from four continents to Paris,
earlier this year to advise Unesco on
how to set up a solar energy pro¬
gramme. This mini-conference was
held just prior to the vast international
congress on "The Sun in the Service
of Mankind" that met under Unesco's
.sponsorship with its more than 800
participants from 59 countries.
Despite the discrepancy In size, the
two meetings were complementary.
The congress showed that techniques
are available to apply solar energy at
a time when the world faces a shortage
of fossil fuels (particularly oil and gas)
and a surplus of pollution; the experts'
meeting sought ways to bring these
techniques to developed and devel¬
oping countries alike.
The experts suggested that scientists
the world over consider the possibility
of an International Solar Energy
Decade, a "massive internationally-
founded and directed research and
development programme". This pro¬
posal was voiced emphatically at the
closing session of the congress by its
24
DAN BEHRMAN is a Unesco science writei.
He Is the author of 'The New World of the
Oceans" (Little Brown and Co., Boston,
U S A.) also published in a paperback edi¬
tion, and 'In Partnership with Nature: Unesco
and the Environment", Unesco, Paris, 1972.
His latest book, 'The Man Who Loved Bi¬
cycles", was published last year by Harper's
Magazine Press, New York.
Solar furnaces are not only
capable of converting solar
energy into electrical energy
and producing ultra-pure met¬
als, they are also a priceless
research tool for studying the
properties of materials at
high temperatures. Right,
the solar furnace at Mont
Louis in the French Pyrenees,
built in 1952. The world's
biggest solar furnace, com¬
pleted In 1968 at nearby
Odeillo, is much more power¬
ful and can reach a tem¬
perature of 3,500 degrees C.
president, Prof. Pierre Auger, a leading
French physicist and popularizer of
science.
The experts also asked Unesco's
Member States to think about "the
possible creation of an International
Solar Energy Commission to lead and
co-ordinate a larger future international
programme in solar energy".
The cautious optimism of the experts
was more than justified by the con¬
gress itself. There scientists marshall¬
ed facts and figures to show that in
such regions as the south-western Uni¬
ted States or the eastern Pyrenees In
France the sun is cheaper than elec¬
tricity as a way to heat homes, and is
getting within competitive reach of oil
and gas, two fuels that can only rise
in price.
A solar energy panel set up In the
United States by the National Science
Foundation and the National Aeronau¬
tics and Space Administration (NASA)
has concluded that by the year 2020
the sun could provide 35 per cent of
the nation's total building heating and
cooling needs; 30 per cent of its
gaseous fuel; 10 per cent of its liquid
fuel and 20 per cent of its electric
energy requirements.
But the panel did not think that Am¬
ericans would have wait fifty years
before starting to reap such benefits:
" If solar development programmes are
successful, building heating could
reach public use within 5 years, build¬
ing cooling in 6 to 10 years, synthetic
fuels from organic materials in 5 to
8 years and electricity production in
10 to 15 years."
Solar power is a good way to heat
houses because the sun delivers
energy right to the rooftop without the
long transmission lines required by
electric power plants. On the other
hand, solar-fired steam plants are very
inefficient when it comes to generating
electricity. It can be done a battery-
driven car has been run with electricity
produced by a solar engine but the
cost per kilowatt is so high that it is
just not realistic.
One way to get around this is to use

\
solar cells that convert sunshine
directly Into electricity without any
boilers or turbines. Developed for use
on artificial satellites in outer space,
solar cells are extremely efficient but
still wildly expensive. At one-
hundredth of their present cost, they
would be competitive and it is hoped
that mass production will bring thefr
price down.
One scientist at the congress, Prof.
Sean Wellesley-Miller from Massa¬
chusetts Institute of Technology, has
his own answer to the problem of cost.
"Just imagine that solar energy is
everywhere In use, providing energy
at a cost slightly above current prices.
Imagine further that I was proposing
the 'radical' idea of sending geological
survey teams to the Middle Eastern
deserts to search for oil and, having
found it, to erect derricks, extract it
and transport It either by pipeline or
by especially constructed ships to the
other side of the world where it would
be refined and delivered to end-use
points by truck.
"I am sure that, in these cases, there
would be many people who would
prove 'conclusively' that this would be
economically infeasible."
He might have added that solar-
powered generator plants would
appear less uneconomic if they were
stacked up against newly-invented
diesel engines built the same way in
small machines shops as one-of-a-kind
prototypes.
In countries other than the United
States, prospects for the sun are also
looking brighter. In Australia, it has
been estimated that 15 per cent of the
country's energy needs could be met
by solar power by the year 2000 and
government scientists are now studying
industrial applications that run from
water-heating to timber-drying.
The world's most powerful solar fur¬
nace, the 1 ,000-kilowatt machine used
to produce refractory materials of
extreme purity at Odeillo in the
Pyrenees of southern France, serves
as the focal point for a major French
effort directed by Prof. Félix Trombe.
He began his work right after World
War II, using reflectors from surplus
anti-aircraft searchlights, and he is now
one of the world's top solar energy
authorities.
Prof Trombe Is particularly proud of
the contribution he has been able to
make In Chile. In the clear, dry and
transparent atmosphere of the Chilean
coastal desert, loss of heat by radia¬
tion from the earth out into space at
night is very high. Temperature dif¬
ferences of more than 40° C. have
been obtained between an isolated
"black body" and the air around it.
Developed by Prof. Trombe this
process has been used by Chilean
scientists to desalinate brackish water
by freezing it. The fresh water, pro¬
duced at the rate of 10 litres per
square metre of basin per day, Is used
to grow tomatoes, radishes and cu¬
cumbers In greenhouses so that local
miners, working In one of the world's
driest deserts, can have a diet of fresh
vegetables.
In the Soviet Union, solar power
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
25

PLACE IN THE SUN (Continued)
26
is under study and is already in use
in various branches of the economy in
Sunny central Asia and the Caucasus
(see articles pages 32 and 38). As
for Japan, It probably leads the world
In the number of solar home water
heaters in use.
Canada, though in a more northern
latitude, is exporting expertise. At the
congress, a paper by members of the
Brace Research Institute of McGill
University's Macdonald College in
Quebec described how a large-scale
solar steam cooker has been installed
to feed 240 pupils at a school in Haiti.
The Institute's help had been re¬
quested by a religious community, Les
Filles de la Sagesse, at Miragôane in
Haiti. Charcoal, the traditional fuel,
had become so scarce and expensive
that the school was spending $60 a
month just to heat the noonday meal
for its pupils. Kerosene and similar
fuels were not available because they,
too, are costly in Haiti.
The Brace Institute's paper, written
R. Alward, T.A. Lawand and P.
Hopley, described how a solar steam
cooker was built for a total cost of
$520 which means that it can pay for
itself in fuel savings In less than nine
months.
One should not forget that this is a
special situation. In India, for example,
a solar cooker as good as a 500-watt
electric hot plate was tested but
without success. Families did not
always want to eat their big meals at
noon when a solar stove works best,
of course, as In the case of the Haitian
school nor did women like to cook
outside. When they did, they felt
obliged to feed all the curious who
came around to watch, and that drove
up the price of solar energy. It would
also drive up the price of barbecues if
such a tradition of hospitality existed
elsewhere .
OLAR energy has proven
economic first of all in the sort of
absurd situations that affluence pro¬
duces. Heating a swimming pool with
the sun can mean a saving of several
hundred dollars a month with no great
hardship if one must miss a dip on an
occasional cloudy day. In countries
where fresh water is sold at a price
that other countries pay for wine, a
solar still can pay for itself very quickly.
As Dr Aden P. Meinel from the
U.S., one of Unesco's group of experts,
put It, solar energy is no longer a
hobby for scientists and it is getting
out "into the industrial world where
money and men answer key ques¬
tions".
Dr John Duffie, another expert and
head of the solar energy laboratory
at the University of Wisconsin in the
U.S., remarked that money is not
enough: "If you give me a dollar and
I give you a dollar, we each have one
dollar. If I give you an idea and you
give me an idea, we each have two
ideas."
This Is the approach that the
experts have urged on Unesco. Sur¬
veys are needed of existing inform¬
ation and a clearing-house should be
set up to make It available where It Is
most needed.
The capacity to apply solar energy
can be augmented in several ways,
the experts believe. They recommend
that Unesco should support such acti¬
vities as the seminar It organized in
October 1972 at Niamey (Niger) on
solar energy in Africa or the training
course it sponsored a year later in
France at Perpignan, with Prof. Félix
Trombe. They also asked that
countries should be helped to start
research and development work that
could be financed internationally.
Such work is needed to develop
greenhouses, solar pumps for irriga¬
tion, small furnaces to fire bricks, bet¬
ter buildings to take advantage of
natural heating and cooling or techni¬
ques to store the energy of the sun
overnight or longer.
That, perhaps, is the ' toughest
problem of all in solar energy: what
does one do when the sun doesn't
shine? The experts could hardly
recommend the solution suggested by
Jonathan Swift, the author of Gulliver's
Travels:
"He had been eight years upon a
project for extracting sunbeams out
of cucumbers which were to be put
in phials, hermetically sealed, and let
out to warm the air in raw inclement
summers."
Luckily, the earth's supply of human
ingenuity is not running out as fast
as its reserves of fossil fuels. At the
Paris congress, a number of uncon¬
ventional solutions were advanced,
nearly all based on the commonsense
approach that the best way to collect
and store the sun's energy is to use
nature's way. One of them is photo¬
synthesis, the process by which plants
manufacture carbohydrates (sugars,
starches, cellulose) from carbon
dioxide and water.
It is the basis of the "energy planta¬
tion" described in a paper contributed
to the congress by an American
scientist, George C. Szego. He wants
to use the sun to grow trees for
fuel.
According to his calculations, 400
to 500 square miles of land could
produce enough organic matter in the
form of trees to feed a 1,000-megawatt
power plant. Burning wood, he
remarks, does not lead to much pollu¬
tion and actually produces ash that
could be used as a fertilizer to grow
more trees.
He thinks that by farming trees to
stoke an electric power station it
should be possible to produce fuel at
a cost close to $1 per million BTU's
(British Thermal Units). In the U.S.,
he said, coal and oil-fired plants now
operate at a cost of about $70 per
million BTU's.
The panel set up by NASA and the
CONTINUED PAGE 40
HOME
SWEET
SOLAR
HOME
I HERE are some people who
say we will be heating and cooling our
homes with solar energy fifty years from
now... and there are other people who have
decided they don't want to watt that long.
One of them is Harold R. Hay from
Los Angeles who has invented a new
word: solarchitecture. In a paper present¬
ed to Unesco's Paris congress on "The
Sun in the Service of Mankind", Hay
defines this as "the essential integration
of interdisciplinary knowledge involving
natural radiation forces, building design,
materials of construction, and human com¬
fort".
He first experimented with a house in
Phoenix, Arizona, which he succeeded in
heating and cooling with a roof pond
20 centimetres deep. Moveable panels
let the pond warm up by day during the
winter, then shield it at night to keep the
heat in. In summer, the pond stays cover¬
ed by day and, at night, the panels open
to let the heat out.
Since then, Hay has constructed a
solarchitecture house at Atascadero, Cali¬
fornia, on a test site that he calls "nearly
ideal for demonstrating that heat storage
produces superior comfort to the wasteful
use of power for alternately heating during
the cold nights and cooling during the hot
daytime".
Cheap and easily available, water is
Hay's preferred heat-storage medium. He
uses it to fill piastic tubes which are
inserted into walls of hollow concrete
blocks. Hay remarks that such natural
air conditioning is particularly appropriate
to developing countries. Walls of earth,
brick or stone can be built to support roof
ponds even though they are priced out of
the market in most industrialized countries.
There is no need to buy motors and com¬
pressors with scarce foreign exchange.
Natural air conditioning could be of special
help to hospitals because it provides
"gentle and uniform comfort with no noise,
drafts or disease-spreading circulation of
air".
This means a premium on low buildings
because they have a much higher ratio of
roof to total floor area and it is the roof
that is needed to collect or get rid of
heat. Such architecture runs counter to
the universal trend of monumental high-rise
buildings standing in lonely grandeur
amidst a desert of parking lots.

Left, circular farmhouse, built 10 years
ago at Lissey in north-eastern France, is
being adapted to capture energy from the
sun using a system evolved by two
Frenchmen, architect Jacques Michel and
Professor Félix Trombe, head of the Solar
Energy Laboratory of the Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique at Odeillo in
the French Pyrenees. Vertical panels of
polyglass are placed on the facade of the
house a few centimetres away from
sections of black-painted concrete wall.
The "greenhouse" effect thus achieved
causes heat from the sun to be absorbed
and stored in the walls. Cool air from
the rooms is drawn in through vents at
the bottom of the wall, rises as it is
heated between the polyglass and the
heated wall and is then returned to the
rooms. Below, model of a group of three
houses, designed by Jacques Michel and
using the same principles, now under
construction at Odeillo. Two-thirds to
three-quarters of the houses' heating requi¬
rements will be met by the sun.
Drawing © Jacques Michel, Neuilly. France
SOLAR HOME (Continued)
Hay wrote in his paper: "Land use and
value are changing in ways that will affect,
and will be affected by, on-site use of
solar energy. Land prices may become
higher wherever natural microclimates
reduce the need for extra energy and
property deeds might be required to
indicate the energy value of building sites.
"To conserve virgin areas, new cities
should be built on abandoned agricultural
land and planned for lower power and fuel
consumption through natural heating and
cooling."
Solar water heating for domestic pur¬
poses has been a small but flourishing
industry in Australia for some 15 years,
with a sizable export trade. Solar dis¬
tillation is not yet established commer¬
cially, but a number of solar stills have
been built and used successfully. Research
programmes are being carried out by the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization and at a number of
universities and work has begun on energy
conversion using photovoltaic cells. Left,
solar water heating system installed in
a house at Mount Eliza, Victoria.
27

SOLAR ENERGY CLAIMS
A NEW PLACE IN THE SUN (Continued from page 26)
National Science Foundation to study
solar energy has looked at this pro¬
posal quite favourably. It could find
no strong social objections although
it did see a problem in land costs.
Then it cited a number of other ways
to achieve a similar conversion of
sunshine into a fuel that can be used
at any time. In many cases, the end-
product Is hydrogen, a clean fuel that
is easy to transport. It could be pro¬
duced, for example, by using the
photosynthetic apparatus of green
plants or blue-green algae.
Another useful gas, methane, can be
manufactured by letting bacteria go to
work on solid wastes. There is nothing
new here; many sewage treatment
plants already meet their own power
requirements with the gases they
generate.
An even older process, charcoal-
burning, appears in the NSF/NASA
report under the much more alluring
name of pyrolysis. This is destructive
distillation carried out in an atmosphere
void of oxygen. It breaks organic
wastes down into liquid, solid or
gaseous fuels and, so the panel thinks,
the U.S. could meet one per cent of
its oil requirements in this way alone.
w,
40
ATER is a cheap way to
gather solar energy with a cost per
square metre infinitely lower than that
of mirrors or the so-called selective
surfaces that absorb more heat than
they radiate. It is used in the so-called
solar pond developed about fifteen
years ago by Dr. Harry Tabor, head of
the National Physical Laboratory of
Israel.
The first pond was about 600 square
metres in area. It measured a metre
deep with a blackened base. When
filled with layers of water In which
salt has been dissolved, the denser
bottom layers are heated without any
convection occuring. So the heat stays
down at the bottom where it can be
drawn off and used to run a turbine
while the sun pours more heat onto
the surface. Interest in this principle
is being awakened with the rising cost
of fossil fuels.
Most tempting of all is the possi¬
bility of using the ocean as a gigantic
collector of solar energy to be had
for the asking. Some forty years ago,
a French scientist, Georges Claude,
suggested that the difference between
the temperature of the ocean's surface
and its depth about 20°C in certain
tropical areas could be used to run
a heat engine.
His idea was demonstrated on a
bay in Cuba where 22 kilowatts of
power were generated but then it
was allowed to become dormant
when the discoveries of new fields
staved off an oil shortage that was a
threat even forty years ago. Today,
the NSF/NASA panel wants to wake
up this idea.
Another way to use the sea was
suggested at the congress by Dr. Ali
Kettani of the College of Petroleum
and Minerals in Saudi Arabia. He
wants to harness solar evaporation to
perform the apparently impossible feat
of generating hydro-electric power in a
country with neither rainfall or mount¬
ains.
How? Look at a map of Saudi
Arabia. Its coastline is dented by the
Dawhat Salwah, a small gulf 6,000
square kilometres in area. Quatar lies
across the Dawhat from Dahran, and
the island of Bahrain is in the middle,
forming a stepping-stone for a pro¬
posed series of dams.
Once the Dawhat Salwah had been
shut off from the open sea, it would
receive no new water to replace what
it loses by evaporation in one of the
world's hottest climates. After three
or four years, Dr. Kettani calculates,
the level of the gulf would fall by
thirteen metres. That would be enough
of a head to run a "helio-hydro-electric"
plant producing 300 million kilowatt-
hours per year.
"Scientists should think big", he told
the congress, "Theoretically, enough
sun falls on 5 per cent of the area of
the United States to generate all
the electricity that the United States
will need in the year 2000. But I'm
sceptical about covering 40,000 square
kilometres with solar cells. I try to
avoid the problem of solar cells by us¬
ing open areas of the sea to transform
solar energy into electricity. This is a
dam in a reverse and we are now
investigating evaporation rates in
Saudi Arabia to determine its feasi¬
bility."
He pointed out that other economic
benefits could be expected from a
Dawhat Salwah complex. Water on
the lower side of the dam could be
turned into a brine from which such
highly-prized minerals as magnesium
and bromine could be extracted.
Kettani estimates that it would cost
$150,000,000 to carry out his project
but it would bring in between fifty and
sixty million dollars a year. And, not
least of all in his view, it could
conserve oil, the treasure of Saudi
Arabia.
This would be a change from the
present state of affairs but, if the
omens at the congress are right, our
whole world may be turned topsy¬
turvy. Homes that are cheap to build
but costly to run because they eat
great quantities of fuel could become
obsolete, giving way to houses that
hoard the sun's energy collected on
their roofs.
Fred Dubin, a New York consulting
engineer who spoke at the congress,
is a long-time apostle of energy con¬
servation. He estimates that about
40 per cent of the energy Americans
consume goes for heating, cooling,
ventilation, lighting and power sys¬
tems in buildings. Proper design could
cut energy consumption in new build¬
ings by up to 50 per cent and in old
ones by around 20 per cent.
"When the architect, for God knows
what reasons, produced glass boxes
with inoperable sashes and sheer wall
surfaces without solar control, the
engineers dutifully provided lots and
lots of air-conditioning using lots and
lots of power", Dubin has written.
Then Americans could save another
40 to 75 per cent of the power they
now use in buildings if they turned to
solar energy to heat and cool offices.
This does not hold true just for sunny
California but also in a chilly New
England climate at Manchester, New
Hampshire, where Dubin is planning
an office building.
HE very shape of com¬
munities would change if energy came
not only from mines, refineries or
power plants but also from the sky.
Solar energy could bring about the
sort of revolution wrought by steam or
electricity when they were introduced.
A hint of this came in a paper
presented to the congress by Prof.
J. K. Page of the University of
Sheffield (United Kingdom). He also
took a swipe at modern architects for
introducing the worst features of
European design into developing
countries. Glass-walled buildings In
hot climates demand air-conditioning
that takes electric power away from
industry. "It's a case of bad archi¬
tecture slowing the industrialization of
nations", he said.
Prof. Page sees the distinction being
wiped out between town and country.
Already, factory farming has created
"animal cities" and even "animal
slums" in the countryside. The next
step is to bring the country into the
city. He wants to use sunshine falling
on buildings to grow plants on their
roofs. Carbon dioxide and moisture
generated by their inhabitants could
be fed up to the gardens on the roof
to speed plant growth.
And, during their lunch hours, office
workers could relax in these gardens
where city and country would be
combined without the lemming-like rush
of commuter migrations.
Dan Behrman
