*
;
&*
Photo» O )*an Ribier«, Pvrpianan
20

The establishment
of a new
international economic order
In the article published below, Unesco's Director-General, René Maheu, presents his views
on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order which was the subject of a
special session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York between April 9 and
May 2, 1974.
The General Assembly met to study for the first time the problems of raw materials and
development which it considered as the most important economic questions facing the world
community today. It adopted a formal Declaration on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order based on equity, sovereign equality, interdependence,
common interest and co-operation among all States, irrespective of their economic and
social systems. The General Assembly also adopted a Programme of Action to implement
the Declaration.
"The present international economic order is in direct conflict with current developments
in international political and economic relations," the Declaration states, adding, "Since
1970 the world economy has experienced a series of grave crises which have had severe
repercussions, especially on the developing world... (which) has become a powerful factor
that makes its influence felt in all fields of international activity."
Mr. Maheu outlines his suggestions on how Unesco can contribute to the establishment
of the new world economic order and the new paths open to the U.N. He will present his
views to Unesco's General Conference being held in Paris from October 17 to November
22,1974.
At the end of this session of the General Conference, Mr. Maheu will retire from the post
of Director-General of Unesco, which he has held since 1962. Mr. Maheu, who was
reappointed as Director-General for a second term in 1968, has decided not to stand as a
candidate for a third term, and his period of office accordingly expires on November 14.
by René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
THE institutional system of the
United Nations is the only one,
at the present time, which prov¬
ides the political framework and the
technical facilities capable of allow¬
ing the international community to
devise, adopt and carry out action on
a world scale such as is required by
the problems of development and jus¬
tice in the economic and social sphe¬
res. There are two main reasons for
this.
The first is that the United Nations
system is the only framework in
which States, while . appreciating the
inequalities between them in respect
of power and wealth, meet on a com
pletely equal footing as regards rights
and, consequently, in which an inter¬
national order can be freely negotiated
and freely adopted, not imposed.
The second reason is that by its
very universality, the United Nations
system offers the only means
of considering the problems of the
organization of the world in their
entirety from the inside, that is, on the
basis of the immediate experience of
those concerned.
By their very nature, neither bila¬
teral relations nor specific multilateral
understandings, regional, sub-regional
or other, can offer these essential
advantages.
In bilateral relations, factors of
power play a preponderant part. As
for limited multilateral understandings,
it would not be to underestimate the
intrinsic value of their contribution to
the organizational action which they
pursue within the framework of their
own specific objectives, to point out
that a multiplicity of sub-systems, far
from helping the establishment of a
universal order, may on the contrary
be prejudicial to it, in so far as such
sub-systems are prone to accerjtuate
differences of opinion and of interests
and to crystallize separatist tendencies.
For these reasons, it was from the .
rostrum of the United Nations General V
21

y Assembly that the sponsors of the
movement to claim international eco¬
nomic justice for the benefit of dev¬
eloping countries needed to raise the
problem of a new world economic
order and to put forward their ideas
on that subject in order to pass them
on to the whole human community.
And it is a subject for legitimate gra¬
tification that this was indeed done
thanks to the initiative of Mr. Houari
Boumedienne, President of the Demo¬
cratic and Popular Republic of Algeria.
Thus, on May 1, 1974, the United
Nations General Assembly, meeting in
special session, adopted a Declaration
on the Establishment of a New Inter¬
national Economic Order.
Some of the principles of this new
order, as set out in the U.N. Declar¬
ation, are, in part, a restatement of
ideas which, both in form and sub¬
stance, belong to what might be called
the traditional United Nations ideology.
These principles are: sovereign
equality of States, self-determination of
all peoples, non-interference in the
internal affairs of other States, co¬
operation of all States based on equity,
whereby the prevailing disparities in
the world may be banished and pros¬
perity secured for all, the right of
every country to adopt the economic
and social system that it deems to be
the most appropriate for its develop¬
ment, the right of peoples under colo¬
nial and racial domination to achieve
their liberation, the extending of
assistance to developing countries and
peoples under colonial domination, ex¬
tension of active assistance to develop¬
ing countries by the whole interna¬
tional community, free of any political
or military conditions.
Unesco, which has always been in
the vanguard of ideological move¬
ments within the United Nations, has
in recent years taken up an increas¬
ingly militant attitude in promoting
these ideas.
But the Declaration also contains
ideas which, while not being com¬
pletely original from an intellectual
point of view, had never before been
stated so unequivocally in a United
Nations text of an essentially political
nature.
For example:
"the active, full and equal parti¬
cipation of the developing countries
in the formulation and application of
all decisions that concern the interna¬
tional community", the necessity for
which is explained by "irreversible
changes in the relationship of forces";
"preferential and non-reciprocal
treatment for developing countries" in
international economic co-operation;
this calls, in effect, for the introduction
of a kind .of positive discrimination in
favour of countries which are econo¬
mically weak, in order to redress the
inequalities of the present international
economic system;
"full permanent sovereignty of
every State over its natural resources
and all economic activities". This
involves, among other things, "the
inalienable right"... "to nationalization
or transfer of ownership to its natio¬
nals";
"the strengthening, through indi¬
vidual and collective actions, of mutual
economic, trade, financial and tech¬
nical co-operation among the develop¬
ing countries, mainly on a preferential
basis."
The adoption of such principles by
the international community is obvious¬
ly likely to bring about significant
changes in economic relationships
between States. But, precisely be¬
cause of the importance of these
innovations, they can only be adopted
by governments as sincerely as is
desirable if the people themselves
understand the true meaning of the
principles and subscribe whole¬
heartedly to their implications. This
means that a great effort to promote
explanation and reflection must be
made in allcountries.
Unesco cannot claim to be parti¬
cularly well qualified to undertake the
technical analysis of the strictly eco¬
nomic implications. It must leave this
undoubtedly high priority task to trie
organizations of the United Nations
system which deal with economic and
financial matters. But it is reasonable
to believe that, within the framework
of its own far-reaching intellectual and
ethical mission, and more particularly
in the context of its action to promote
peace and development, Unesco is in
a position to make a useful contribu¬
tion to reflection on the ideas in ques¬
tion by laying emphasis on the need
for scientific objectivity and the pro¬
motion of justice.
Moreover, the Declaration has some
omissions which should be made good.
The main one concerns the social and
cultural dimension of development.
This is understandable, of , course,
since the principal aim of those who
took the initiative of requesting the
convening of a special session of the
General Assembly and of preparing
the draft Declaration and the Pro¬
gramme of Action to implement the
Declaration was to focus the attention
of the international community on the
basic economic conditions of a new
world order.
In this they were perfectly justified
both for reasons inherent in the situa¬
tion arising out of the financial and
economic crisis which is upsetting
international relationships, and for
essential considerations relating to the
fundamental nature of economic fac¬
tors in the determining of those inter-
Kurt Waldheim, U.IM. Secretary-General
SIX CRITICAL PROBLEMS OF OUR TIME
IM il Ç Ç il n M P r t M "The single most devastating indict-
IM a 0 O |JUVCIlj ment of our current world civilization
is the continued existence of stark,
pervasive mass poverty among two thirds of the world population."
2Pnnill/tt¡nn "The increasing population of the world
rUpUldllUII presents a constantly growing demand on
our limited natural ressources."
Ffl fi il "Never, in recent decades, have world reserves been so
U U U frighteningly low."
Ell P T 0 V "The world at large has suddenly realized the cri-
II b I 5 J tical importance of energy in our daily lives."
5. - Military expenditure "S^srj;
armaments, the imperative
need for substantial disarmament becomes more urgent as each day passes."
6. - The world monetary system w^Vl^y
system is essen¬
tial if our natural resources are to be used to the best advantage." The
present system "contains a most dangerous, cancer-like disease inflation."
22

national relationships and the infra¬
structure of development.
However, once these economic
bases have been established it is
necessary none the less to recall the
essential importance of social and cul¬
tural factors for the twofold reason
that the social element is an integral
part of development, and of any enter¬
prise for international justice.
The social element is an integral
part of development. There can be no
going back on this decisive gain of
the First Development Decade, which
is now universally accepted. We
realize now that development involves
more than mere expansion, that it is
not to be measured simply in terms
of average incomes. It is basically a
human process of which man himself,
in all his complexity, is the alpha and
omega, the agent and the end, the
subject and measure.
Specifically social questions such as
employment or the distribution of the
national income are thus at the heart of
development problems, and basic social
services such as health and education
are among the most urgent require¬
ments and demands of ordinary people
and, as such, are yardsticks by which
actual development can be measured,
both subjectively and objectively.
But we must go even further. The
term social must be interpreted in its
broadest and loftiest sense, to include
and give expression to the cultural
element as well. The social reality of
development is something much more
than material well-being. Human
dignity is at least as important a part
of it as happiness, and that dignity
is meaningless except in relation to
those values which make life worth
living and of which culture is both
the custodian and critic, the repository
and the originator.
The imprecise but at least sugges¬
tive term "the quality of life" expresses
this twofold demand for happiness and
dignity, a demand incomprehensible
without reference to culture, which our
contemporaries, and particularly the
younger generation, are coming more
and more to see as the criterion of
genuine development. Environmental
problems have suddenly brought out
its immense significance, challenging
as it does the whole of Industrial civi¬
lization and its very basis.
For many countries whose econo¬
mies are far from having reached the
level of the industrial civilization, ex¬
pansion is admittedly an essential
requirement for overcoming bitter pri¬
vations and scarcities. Even so, the
establishment of a new system of rela¬
tions between developed and develop¬
ing countries cannot possibly overlook
the social and cultural considerations
to which I have just referred.
Moreover, the serious difficulties of
specifically cultural origin which the
aid given to these countries has run
up against, particularly as regards the
transfer of technology, are always
there to remind us, if any reminder
were needed, of this fundamental
aspect of the problems of develop¬
ment.
Lastly, there is a vital corollary to
the ideas expressed in the Declaration
which was not included in it and
which, in my opinion, should receive
Unesco's attention: the notion of jus¬
tice which, on reading the Declara¬
tion, we find is the basis of its ideo¬
logy, and which in this text is applied
solely to relations between States.'
However, justice by definition is mean¬
ingless if it cannot be claimed in res¬
pect of all aspects of man's estate.
It cannot therefore be restricted to
international and more especially inter-
State relations. It must also prevail at
the national level so as to affect the
actual situation of peoples and indivi¬
duals.
It is the same with development.-
For too long now we have been
content with defining and measuring it
by criteria and parameters which are
only total or average figures on a com¬
munity scale, as for example the Gross
National Product or per capita income.
Contrary to so many economists who
remain enslaved by these abstractions,
the President of the International
Bank, Mr. Robert McNamara, has had
the great merit of emphasizing for
several years past what is patently
true, that is, in order to evaluate a
country's genuine development, the
distribution of wealth within the com¬
munity is quite as important as its
total volume.
There again Unesco must not hesi¬
tate to take vigorous promotional, intel¬
lectual and moral action. Whether the
social aspect is discovered at the
national level through the international
order, or whether the organization
of international relationships is ap¬
proached in the light of the require¬
ments of equity towards peoples in
their actual national conditions, jus¬
tice is indivisible and exists only in so
far as the utmost is done to make it
complete.
It is not, of course, for Unesco to
intervene in the internal political
affairs of States unless asked to do
so. But it is important that both its
Member States and Unesco itself
should be thoroughly convinced that
aid for development is not a purely .
technical operation in which means r
23

Wand methods are the only questions
arising.
Such action, when it is studied in
sufficient depth, is bound to lead to
reconsideration of existing objectives
and structures. This is because dev¬
elopment is not merely economic
growth, but essentially social and cul¬
tural change, and because such
change must in every case be made
in the interests of justice.
We cannot be satisfied with a
situation where a State is rich
and powerful and its leaders are
able to express and defend their views
on the world stage if broad sections
of its population continue to live in
want, ignorance and a passivity bor¬
dering on alienation. National econo¬
mic indépendance, following on from
political independence, must go hand
in hand with a corresponding eman¬
cipation of the people this is the
very definition of social progress.
WHETHER it is a matter of
defining and promoting the
ideas contained in the Dec¬
laration or of shaping and carrying
out the Programme of Action designed
to make these ideas a reality, the
United Nations system has been
given an opportunity, rich in ex¬
ceptional possibilities and fraught
with unprecedented responsibilities,
to prove the irreplaceable nature of
its services. It is a challenge which
cannot be evaded.
But the very importance of what is
at stake makes it essential to approach
the question with lucidity and realism.
Now that the concerting of efforts has
begun and that a number of major lines
of emphasis in thought and action have
been defined, with massive support
from the Third World, one must ask in
all honesty whether the United Nations
system, with its present set up and as
it now functions, is capable of acquitt¬
ing itself satisfactorily of the increas¬
ingly heavy tasks which action for
development and the establishment of
a new international economic order
place upon it.
I do not feel able to reply to this
question in the affirmative. On the
contrary, it is my considered opinion
that in order to be able to make a
success of ,the great enterprise in
question, the United Nations system
must be considerably strengthened.
In my view, this strengthening should
be directed mainly towards the follow¬
ing points:
(a) improving the functioning and
even possibly the structures of the
competent organizations, considered
both individually and as part of the
United Nations system;
(b) increasing financial resources
and political support in proportion to
the growing importance of its object¬
ives and responsibilities.
As far as the first point is concern
ed, it must be made clear from the
start that it is most certainly not a
question of revising existing consti¬
tutional texts. In the economic, social
and cultural fields such a revision is
by no means necessary and would
even, in the present situation, which
is characterized by so many opposing
viewpoints, be a singularly hazardous
operation.
What I have in view is rather a
reappraisal, on the basis and within
the framework of the constitutions now
in force, of certain provisions concern¬
ing structure and certain of the operat¬
ing methods and practices of the
various United Nations organizations,
with a view to achieving some common
objectives of major interest.
Among such objectives one might
include, for a start, the need for a very
considerable increase in the clearly
insufficient participation by representa¬
tives of the Third World in the work
and decisions of the financial organi¬
zations of the United Nations system.
Only if this condition is met can the
measures to organize international
relations with regard to monetary
questions and to investment for dev¬
elopment be the outcome of free
discussion among the community of
nations as a whole instead of being
decided by a privileged minority.
Parallel to this however, it is only
fair that the developing countries
which have the means to do so should
appreciably increase their contri¬
butions to the resources of the orga¬
nizations in question. This last obser¬
vation applies particularly to the oil-
producing countries several of which
are now among the richest in the
world whose monetary reserves are
immense and continually increasing
and are now far greater than can be
entirely used for national development.
In the interests both of monetary
stability and of equity, it would be
advisable if a part of this capital,
which is at present floating and is
largely being invested in the developed
countries, were to be channelled,
either through the competent organi¬
zations of the United Nations system
or with their guidance, into the new
world economic order.
The International Monetary Fund
has taken or is about to take important
measures, for instance, to ensure, on
the lines described above, that the
Third World has a greater share in
international responsibilities and that
some of its countries make a larger
contribution to the resources of the
institution. This movement should be
intensified and extended to the field
of banking.
To turn to another side of the United
Nations system, that is to say, the
Specialized Agencies, I wish primarily
to sound a note of warning against the
centralizing tendencies seeking to
, restrict the autonomy of these organiz¬
ations, which come to the fore when¬
ever there is talk of reforming the
system. I regard their autonomy,
which, moreover, is formally establish¬
ed in the texts of their Constitutions,
to be essential, both in fact and by
law.
It alone can guarantee the full effec¬
tiveness and the objectivity of their
technical activities by protecting them
from the excessive interference of
politics that would be the inevitable
result of integrating them into or
subordinating them to the United
Nations organization. Such decen¬
tralization meets the need for division
of labour which is made ever more
urgent by increasing specialization.
It would run counter to the trend of
our civilization to reopen the question
of decentralization.
Having said this, the very fact that
there are a large number of Special¬
ized Agencies with widely different
functions clearly raises problems of
co-ordination if the system is to
operate smoothly, and there can be
no doubt that reforms are to be
recommended in this respect to Im¬
prove overall efficiency.
THERE remains the question, no
less important, of the resources
the United Nations system
would require to carry out its tasks
effectively, particularly those which fall
to it to establish a new world economic
order.
The economic and financial diffi¬
culties at present being experienced
by some of the most powerful countries
cannot relieve the international com¬
munity of the obligation to face up
to the problem with a proper under¬
standing of the realities and respon¬
sibilities.
On the one hand, however much the
developed countries are being affected
by the crisis, they have immense
resources which enable them if they
so wish, to contribute much more than
they do at present to the economic
and social activities of the United
Nations system. One merely has to
compare their present contribution to
these activities with the enormous
sums they spend on armaments.
On the other hand, as was said
above, certain countries of the Third
World have seen their incomes grow
substantially, to the point where six
öf them are now among the 21 States
with the largest monetary reserves.
They ought to play a greater part in
financing the system's activities for
development.
Thus whatever troubles at present
affect the balance of economic power
among nations, one can confidently
assert that the international community
as a whole possesses fully adequate
means to make the effort the rela¬
tively modest effort needed to enable
the United Nations system to fulfil its
role to the full.
René Maheu
24
