AL-BIRUNI vs. AVICENNA
IN THE BOUT
OF THE CENTURY
Two geniuses aged 24 and 17
debate the nature of the universe
by
Seyyed Hossein Nasr
SEYYED HOSSEIN NASR, rector of Arya-
mehr University, in Teheran, is the author
of a remarkable study on al-Biruni, published
in his "An Introduction to Islamic Cosmo-
logical Doctrines" (Harvard University Press,
1964), in which he dealt with al-Biruni, Avi¬
cenna and Ikwan al-Safa. Professor of the
History of Science and Philosophy at Arya-
mehr University, he has devoted another
book to great Islamic scholars, "Three Mus¬
lim Sages" (Avicenna, Suhrawardi and Ibn
'Arabi) published by Harvard University Press.
Last year his "Al-Biruni end Ibn Sina - Ques¬
tions and Answers" was published by the
High Council of Culture and Art in Teheran.
Our text is abridged from the English
introduction to this work.
I|N the rich tradition of
Islamic intellectual history there are
several instances in which leading
thinkers have left in writing the
exchanges of ideas and debates which
they have carried out with each other
on the highest Intellectual level.
One of the most important is the
series of Questions and Answers
exchanged between al-Blruni and
Avicenna (Ibn Sina) in which Avicenna's
student Ma'sumi, also took part. This
series of exchanges stands as a peak
of Islamic intellectual history and a key
to the understanding of an aspect of
al-Biruni's thought not discussed
extensively in his other writings.
The Questions and Answers, include
ten questions pertaining to Aristotle's
De Cáelo (On the Heavens) and eight
other questions posed by al-Biruni
himself. These are answered by
Avicenna one by one. Then al-Blruni
once again responds to Avicenna's
answers, discussing eight of the first
ten and seven of the last eight
questions. Finally Ma'sumi answers
al-Biruni once again on behalf of
Avicenna.
There are then altogether two sets
of exchanges on some of the most
fundamental points of "natural phil¬
osophy" between al-Blruni, the "in¬
dependent" scientist and thinker, and
Avicenna the most eminent represen¬
tative of the Islamic Peripatetic (ma-
CONTINUED PAGE 29

¿# «i
4 *
w
"l\Ä
AL-BIRUNI ON THE SCREEN (continued)
Two further scenes from the forth¬
coming film on al-Biruni. Above, the
great scientist and an assistant discuss
a reading from the quadrant he cons¬
tructed for determining latitude by
measuring the sun's elevation. Below
left, al-Biruni (right of photo) talks with
an Indian sage during the travels he
Photos N. Kasyanov j APN, Tachkent

AL-BIRUNI vs. AVICENNA (Continued)
undertook before writing his monu¬
mental "India". Below right, the film
crew on location. The film is being
directed by Shukhrat Abbasov (wearing
cap) from a scenario written by the
historian and orientalist Pavlov Bulga¬
kov, al-Biruni's Russian translator.
shsha'i) school, and one of his fore¬
most pupils, Abu Sa'id ibn Ali al-
Ma'sumi.
In one question al-Biruni criticizes
the reasons given in Aristotelian
natural philosophy for denying that the
celestial spheres have gravity or levity.
Al-Biruni does not reject the view of
Aristotle but criticizes the reasons
given to sustain such a view.
Moreover, he attacks the Aristotelian
thesis that circular motion is innate
to heavenly bodies, asserting that
although the heavenly bodies do move
in circular motion, such a motion could
be "forced" and accidental while the
motion natural to these bodies could
be straight.
Avicenna replies to these objections
along the lines of argument presented
in standard works of Aristotelian
natural philosophy.
In another question al-Biruni criticizes
Aristotle's over-reliance on the views
of the ancients and his oredecessors
concerning the conditions of the
heavens without relying upon his
own observation. Al-Biruni gives an
example of the Hindu description of
mountains which he says cannot be
relied upon because If one observes
them today one sees that they have
altered.
Avicenna reminds al-Biruni of the
difference between mountains which
undergo generation and corruption and
the celestial bodies which do not do so.
Furthermore, he accuses al-Biruni of
having learned this argument from
either John Philoponus, who was
opposed to Aristotle because he
himself was a Christian, or Mohammed
ibn Zakariyya' al-Razi, who according
to Avicenna should have remained
content with medicine and not meddled
in metaphysics, in which he had no
competence.
kL-BIRUNI criticizes the
Aristotelian denial of the possibility
of the existence of another world
completely different from the one we
know, and unknown to us because
it is completely veiled to our senses.
He cites as illustration the fact that
it is impossible for the person who
is born blind to conceive of vision.
In the same way there might be other
worlds for the perception of which
man does not have the necessary
faculties. Avicenna accepts the exist¬
ence of other worlds which differ from
this world but defends the Aristotelian
view that there cannot be another
world such as this with the same ele¬
ments and nature.
After these questions which are
related to Aristotle's De Cáelo, al-
Biruni poses eight other questions
himself related to natural philosophy.
Al-Biruni, for example, asks how
vision is possible. Why can we see
beneath water whereas water is an
opaque body which should reflect the
rays of light at its surface? Avicenna
states that according to Aristotle
vision results from the eye becoming
affected by the "qualities" of visible
colours contained in the air that is in
contact with it. According to this
theory the problem mentioned by al-
Biruni does not arise since both water
and air are transparent bodies that
can transmit the colours to the sense
of sight, thus making vision possible.
If there is no vacuum either inside
or outside this world, al-Biruni asks,
why is it that if the air within a flask
is sucked out water rises up in it?
Avicenna answers that this is not due
to a vacuum. Rather, a certain amount
of the air remaining in the flask
contracts as a result of the coldness
of the water causing the water to rise
within the flask.
If things expand through heating and
contract through cooling then why, al-
Biruni asks, does a flask full of water
break when the water within it freezes?
Avicenna believes that it is the air
which upon being cooled contracts,
almost causing a vacuum to be created
in the flask, and since that is not
possible, causing the flask to break.
Finally, al-Biruni queries, why does
ice float on water while its earthy parts
are more than water and it is therefore
heavier than water? Avicenna replies
that upon freezing ice preserves in its
internal spaces and lattices airy parts
which prevent it from sinking in water.
An examination of the questions
posed by al-Biruni reveals their vital
significance for the history of science.
In Islamic civilization the main school
of natural philosophy which served as
the immediate philosophical back¬
ground for most Muslim scientists was
the Peripatetic, itself a synthesis of
the views of Aristotle, his Alexandrian
commentators and certain elements of
later Neoplatonism. Avicenna in his
Peripatetic writings represents this
main current in its most mature form.
But there was also an anti-Aristo¬
telian current which is of much
importance for an understanding of
Islamic science, to which the questions
of al-Biruni belong. Some of the anti-
Aristotelian elements derived from
schools related to the Pythagorean-
Hermetic heritage of Antiquity such as
the writings of Jabir ibn Hayyan and
the Ikhwan al-Safa' while others issued
from the logical criticism of individual
philosophers and scientists such as
Mohammed ibn Zakariyya' al-Ra^i and
al-Biruni.
Al-Biruni's criticism of Peripatetic
natural philosophy is one of the
sharpest attacks on this dominant
school. It touches upon the most
difficult and thorny problems of Aristo¬
telian physics and for that reason
resembles some of the arguments
against this form of physics by
Renaissance and 17th century scientists




in the West, although the point of view QJ
of al-Biruni is ven' different from that Lm
of the Western critics of Aristotle.
Seyyed Hossein Nasr
