SUPPOSE
A tale for the
year 3550 A.D.
by Isaac Asimov
64
ISAAC ASIMOV, noted American scientist and science fiction writer, is
the author of over 60 books, ranging from a textbook on biochemistry
(he is associate professor of biochemistry xt Boston University School of
Medicine) to a small book on man-made satellites for eight year olds.
According to the latest edition of Unesco's "Index Translationum", he is the
world's most translated author ofscience fiction (37 translations in 1971).
This article is taken from his forthcoming book for children, "Earth: Our
Crowded Spaceship ", to be published next month under the auspices of
UNICEF, by John Day Co.. New York. The text is copyright f 1974 by
Isaac Asimov. and is reproduced by kind permission of the publisher.
'UPPOSE the whole world
became industrialized and that indus¬
try and science worked very carefully
and very well. How many people
could such a world support? Different
limits have been suggested, but the
highest figure I have seen is 20 billion.
How long will it be before the world
contains so many people?
For the sake of argument, and to
keep things simple, let's suppose the
demographic growth rate will stay as
it is now at two per cent per annum.
At this rate, it will take 35 years for
the population to double, so it will
take the present world population of
3.8 billion 70 years to reach the 15.2
billion mark. Then, fifteen more years
will bring the world population to our
20 billion. In other words, at the
present growth rate our planet will
contain all the people that an indus¬
trialized world may be able to support
by about 2060 A.D. That is not a
pleasant outlook for only 85 years
from now.
Suppose we decide to hope for the
best. Let us suppose that a change
will take place in the next 70 years
and that there will be a new age in
which population can continue rising
to a far higher level than we think it
can now. This means that there will
be a new and higher limit, but before
that is reached, still another change
will take place, and so on. Let's
suppose that this sort of thing can
just keep on going forever.
Is there any way of setting a limit
past which nothing can raise the
human population no matter how many
changes take place?
Suppose we try to invent a real
limit; something so huge that no one
can imagine a population rising past
it. Suppose we imagine that there are
so many men and women and children
in the world, that altogether they weigh
as much as the whole planet does.
Surely you can't expect there can be
more people than that.
Let us suppose that the average
human being weighs 60 kilogrammes.
If that's the case then
1 00,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 people
would weigh as much as the whole
Earth does. That number of people is
30,000,000,000,000 times as many
people as there are living now.
It may seem to you that the popu¬
lation can go up a long, long time
before it reaches the point where there
are 30,000,000,000,000 times as many
people in the world as there are today.
Let's think about that, though. Let us
suppose that the population growth-
rate stays at 2.0 per cent so that the
number of people in the world con¬
tinues to double every 35 years. How
long, then, will it take for the world's
population to weigh as much as the
entire planet?
The answer is not quite 1,600 years.
This means that by 3550 A.D., the
human population would weigh as
much as the entire Earth. Nor is
1,600 years a long time. It is consider-

ably less time than has passed since
the days of Julius Caesar.
Do you suppose that perhaps in the
course of the next 1,600 years, it will
be possible to colonize the Moon and
Mars, and the other planets of the
Solar system? Do you think that we
might get many millions of people into
the other world in the next 1,600 years
and thus lower the population of the
Earth itself?
Even if that were possible, it
wouldn't give us much time. If the
growth-rate stays at 2.0 per cent, then
in a little over 2,200 years say, by
4220 A.D. the human population
would weigh as much as the entire
Solar system, including the Sun.
We couldn't escape to the stars,
either. Even if we could reach them;
even if we could reach all of them;
population would reach a limit. If the
growth-rate stays at 2.0 per cent, then
in 4,700 yearsby about 6700 A.D.
the human population would weigh as
much as the entire Universe.
So you see we can't go on forever
at the rate we are going. The popu¬
lation rise is going to have to stop
somewhere. We just can't keep that
2.0 per cent growth-rate for thousands
of years. We just can't, no matter
what we do.
S try again, and let's be
more reasonable. Suppose we go back
to considering the density of popula¬
tion on Earth.
Right now, the average density of
population on Earth is 25 per km2. If
the population of the world doubles
then the average density of population
also doubles, since the area of the
world's surface stays the same. This
means that at a population growth-rate
of 2.0 per cent per year, the average
density of population in the world will
double every 35 years.
In that case, if the growth-rate stays
where it is, how long will it take for
the average density of population to
become 18,600/km2? Such a density
is almost 750 times as high as the
present density, but it will be reached,
at the present growth-rate, in just
about 340 years.
Of course, this density is reached
only if human beings are confined to
the land surface of the world. Perhaps
human beings will learn to live on the
bottom of the ocean, or on great plat¬
forms floating on the sea. There is
more than twice as much ocean sur¬
face as there is land surface and that
would give more room for people.
That wouldn't do much good, how¬
ever. At the present growth rate, it
would take only 45 additional years
to fill the ocean surface, too. In 385
years, the average density of popu¬
lation would be 18,600/km2 over land
and sea both. That would be by
about 2320 A.D.
But a density of 18,600/km2 is the
average density of population of the
island of Manhattan.
Imagine a world in which the average
density everywhere, over land and sea
alike everywhere in Antarctica and
Greenland, over the oceans and along
the mountains, over the entire face of
the globe was equal to that of Man¬
hattan. There would have to be sky¬
scrapers everywhere. There would be
hardly any open space There would
be no room" for wilderness or for any
plants and animals except those
needed by human beings.
Very few people would imagine a
world like that could be comfortable,
yet at the present growth-rate we will
reach such a world in only 385 years.
But let's not pick Manhattan. Let's
try the Netherlands. It is a pleasant,
comfortable nation, with open land
and gardens and farms. It has a
standard of living that is very high and
yet its average population density is
400/km2. How long would it take for
our population to increase to the point
where the average density of the sur¬
face of the world, sea and land, would
be 400/km2 ?
The answer is 200 years, by about
2175 A.D.
You see, then, that if we don't want
to go past the average population
density of the Netherlands, we can't
keep our present growth-rate going
even for hundreds of years, let alone
thousands.
In fact, we might still be arguing in
an unreasonable way. Can we really
expect to have a world-wide Nether¬
lands in the next 200 years ?
No one really believes that man¬
kind can spread out over the ocean
bottom or the ocean top in the next
200 years. It is much more likely that
man will stay on land. To be sure,
there may be some people who would
be living off shore in special structures,
on the sea or under it. They would
make up only a small fraction of all
mankind. Almost everybody will be
living on land.
Then, too, not every place on land
is desirable. It isn't at all likely that
there will be very many people living
in Antarctica or in Greenland or in the
Sahara Desert or along the Himalaya
Mountain range over the next 200
years. There may be some people
living there, more people than are liv¬
ing there now, but they will represent
only a small fraction of the total
population of the Earth.
In fact, most of the Earth's land sur¬
face isn't very suitable for large popu¬
lations. At the present moment, most
of the Earth's population is squeezed
into that small portion of Earth's land
surface that is not too mountainous,
too dry, too hot, too cold, or too
uncomfortable, generally. In fact, two-
thirds of the world's population is to
be found on a little over 1/13 of the
land surface of the planet. About
2,500,000,000 people are living on
11,000,000 sq. km. of land that can
best support a high population.
The average density on the
11,000,000 square kilometres of the
best land is 230/km2, while the aver¬
age density on the rest of the land
surface is just under 10/km2.
Suppose the population continues
to increase at the present growth-rate
and the distribution remains the same.
In that case, after 30 years, the aver¬
age population density of the less
pleasant parts of the Earth will reach
the 19/km2 figure, but the density of
the 11,000,000 square kilometres of
best land will be 400/km2.
In other words, we will reach a kind
of world-wide Netherlands density-
figure, for as far as we can go, in only
about 30 years.
But will all the world be as well-
organized and as prosperous as the
Netherlands is now? Some of the
reasons why the Netherlands is as
well off as it is now, are that it has
a stable government, a highly-educated
population, and a well-organized
industrial system.
This is not true of all nations and
they need not expect to be as well off
as the Netherlands when they are as
crowded as the Netherlands. Indeed,
if they have an agricultural way of life
and a poorly-educated people, who
don't have long traditions of stable
government, then a population as
dense as that of the Netherlands now
is, would only bring misery.
I N other words, the world
can't keep going at the present growth-
rate, even for tens of years, let alone
for hundreds or thousands.
The matter of a population limit is
not a problem for the future, then.
We might just as well realize that the
world is just about reaching its popu¬
lation limit now.
Of course, this entire argument is
based on the supposition that the
population growth-rate will stay the
same as it is now. If the growth-rate
drops, that obviously will give us more
time before the limit is reached. If it
drops to zero, the limit will never be
reached. Even a 1 per cent per year
population increase, however, is
enough to bring disaster. So we can't
just sit back and do nothing. We will
have to do something.
Isaac Asimov
65
