MAN IS COURTING
ECOLOGICAL
DISASTER
If population growth proceeds
unabated, averting catastrophe
will be impossible'
John P. Holdren
and
Paul R. Ehrlich

20
HREE dangerous fallacies
appear to be widespread with regard
to population growth, environmental
deterioration and resource depletion.
The first is that the absolute size
and rate of growth of the human popu¬
lation has little or no relationship to
the rapidly escalating ecological prob¬
lems facing mankind.
The second is that environmental
deterioration consists primarily of
" pollution ", which is perceived as a
local and reversible phenomenon of
concern mainly for its effects on
human health.
The third fallacy is that science and
technology can overcome all prob¬
lems arising from the scale and rate
of growth.
Environmental problems can be
classified according to the direct or
indirect nature of the damage to
human beings.
Direct assaults include obvious
JOHN P. HOLDREN is assistant professor In
the Energy and Resources Programme at the
University of California, Berkeley. He has
been senior research fellow on environmental
and population questions at the California
Institute of Technology, and staff physicist
In the controlled thermonuclear fusion pro¬
gramme at the Lawrence Radiation Labora¬
tory In Livermore, California. His current
teaching and research concern energy
technology and policy, environmental aspects
of controlled fusion, and global environmental
problems.
PAUL R. EHRLICH Is professor of Biological
Sciences at Stanford University, Stanford,
California. He has gained international
renown as the author of 'The Population
Bomb", "Population, Resources, Environ¬
ment" (with Anne H. Ehrlich), and other books
on biology and contemporary problems. His
work on coevolutlon and the dynamics and
genetics of natural populations has taken him
to Africa, Asia, Australia and Latin America.
damage to health, damage to goods
and services, social disruption (for
example, displacement of people by
mining operations or hydroelectric pro-
jectsjnand effects on what people per¬
ceive as their "quality of life", such as
congestion, noise and litter.
Indirect harm is caused by interfer¬
ence with the services provided for
society by natural biological systems.
Examples are diminution of ocean pro¬
ductivity by pollution of coastal waters
and acceleration of erosion by logging
or overgrazing.
Most of the attention devoted to
environmental matters has been
focused on the direct effects. This is
only natural. It would be wrong,
however, to interpret limited legislative
and technical progress toward amelio¬
rating the direct symptoms of environ¬
mental damage as evidence that so¬
ciety is on its way to an orderly reso¬
lution of its environmental problems.
The most serious threats of all may
well prove to be the indirect ones
generated by man's disruption of the
functioning of the natural environment.
The most obvious services provided
for humanity by the natural environ¬
ment have to do with food production.
The fertility of the soil is maintained
by the plants, animals, and micro¬
organisms that participate in the great
nutrient cycles, and soil itself is pro¬
duced by the joint action of bacteria,
fungi, worms, soil mites, and insects.
The best protection against erosion of
soil and flooding is natural vegetation.
Insects pollinate most vegetables,
fruits, and berries. Most fish the
source of 10 to 15 per cent of the ani¬
mal protein consumed by mankind
are produced in the natural environ¬
ment, unregulated by man. Most
potential crop pests one competent
estimate is 99 per centare held in
check not by man but by their natural
Top photo: an aeroplane sprays
insecticide on a potato crop.
Insecticides and pesticides are
beneficial in many respects, not
only helping to reduce the ravages
of malaria and other insect-borne
diseases in many parts of the world,
but also by increasing food production
output. However, the excessive use
of pesticides, herbicides and
chemical fertilizers in recent years,
In the face of over-exploitation of land
as a result of population growth,
is impoverishing the soil, polluting
water and seriously threatening
the world's ecological balance.
enemies and by the environment (tem¬
perature, moisture, availability of
breeding sites). Some agents of human
disease also are controlled principally
not by medical technology but by
environmental conditions.
At many stages of the nutrient cy¬
cles, organisms accomplish what hu¬
mans have not yet learned to do
the complete conversion of wastes
into resources. Human society de¬
pends on these natural processes to
recycle many of its own wastes, such
as sewage, detergents and industrial
effluents. The environmental concen¬
trations of ammonia, nitrites and hy¬
drogen sulphide all poisonous are
biologically controlled.
These public-service functions of the .
global environment cannot be replaced
by technology now or in the foresee¬
able future. The sheer size of the task
dwarfs civilization's capacity to finance,
produce and deploy new technology.
The day is far away when food for
billions will be grown on synthetic
nutrients in greenhouses free of pests
and plant diseases, when the wastes
of civilization will be recycled entirely

by technological means, and when all
mankind will live in surroundings as
sterile and as thoroughly managed
as those of an Apollo space capsule.
Until that improbable future arrives
and it may never come the ser¬
vices provided by the orderly operation
of natural biological processes will
continue to be irreplaceable as well
as indispensable.
Ecological disruption on a large
scale by human beings is not a new
phenomenon. One of the best known
early examples is the conversion to
desert of the lush Tigris and Euphrates
valleys, through erosion and salt accu¬
mulation resulting from faulty irrigation
practices. Overgrazing and poor culti¬
vation practices have contributed over
the millenia to the expansion of the
Sahara Desert, a process that con¬
tinues today.
Much of Europe and Asia were
deforested by pre-industrial men,
beginning in the Stone Age; heavy
erosion, recurrent flooding and the
nearly permanent loss of a valuable
resource were the result. Overgrazing
by the Navajo has destroyed large
tracts of once prime pastureland in
the American southwest.
Attempts to cultivate too intensively
the fragile soils of tropical rainforest
areas are suspected of being at least
in part responsible for the collapse of
the Mayan civilization in Central
America and that of the Khmers in
what today is Cambodia.
Agriculture is a simplifier of ecosys¬
tems, replacing complex natural bio¬
logical communities with . relatively
simple man-made ones based on a
few strains of crops. Being less com¬
plex, agricultural communities tend to
be less stable than their natural coun¬
terparts; they are vulnerable to inva¬
sions by weeds, insect pests and plant
diseases, and they are particularly
sensitive to variations of climate.
The Irish potato famine of the last
century is perhaps the best known
example of the collapse of a single
agricultural ecosystem. The heavy
reliance on a single crop led to
1.5 million deaths when the potato
monoculture fell victim to a fungus.
Advances in agricultural technology
in the last hundred years have aggra¬
vated the ecological dilemma. The
dilemma can be summarized thus: civi¬
lization tries to maximize productivity,
while nature operates in a way that
maximizes stability, and the two goals
are incompatible.
Ecological research has shown that
the most complex and therefore most
stable ecosystems have the smallest
net productivity. In short, productivity
is achieved at the expense of stability.
Yet mankind must practise agriculture.
A tendency toward instability must be
accepted and, where possible, com¬
pensated for by technology. But the
trends in modern agriculture are espe¬
cially worrisome ecologically.
There are four major liabilities.
As larger and larger areas are
given over to farming, the areas left to
carry out the public-service functions
of natural ecosystems become smaller
and fewer.
Pressure to expand the area under
agriculture is leading to attempts to
cultivate land that is unsuitable for
cultivation with the technologies at
hand. To give but one example among
many, attempts to apply the techniques
of temperate-zone agriculture to the
tropical soils of Brazil and southern
Sudan have led to erosion, loss of
nutrients, and degradation into the
rock-like material called latérite.
Attempts to maximize yields have
led to dramatic increases in the use
of pesticides and inorganic fertilizers.
These attempts have led also to
the replacement of a wide variety of
traditional crop varieties all over the
world with a few, specially bred
strains. Unprecedented areas are now
planted with a single variety of wheat
or rice. This has increased both the.
probability and the potential magnitude*
Left: Troubled waters: Just outside Paris,
two anglers cast their lines on the
Seine, polluted by a cloud of detergent
foam. Since they are insoluble in
water, detergents have been playing
havoc with life In lakes and rivers
killing fish by the thousands and
asphyxiating aquatic plants. Chemists
are trying to develop new kinds of
non-harmful detergents. The damage
caused by industrial waste is
another formidable problem facing
modern society today.
21

k of epidemic crop failure from insects
or from disease.
A continuing industrial revolution
has multiplied many times over both
the magnitude and variety of the
substances introduced into the bio¬
logical environment by man. These
may be classified as qualitative pollu¬
tants (synthetic substances produced
and released only by man) and quanti¬
tative pollutants (natural substances
released by man in significant addi¬
tional amounts).
Well known qualitative pollutants
are the chlorinated hydrocarbon pesti¬
cides, such as DDT, and some herbi¬
cides. These substances are biologi¬
cally active, but since natural orga¬
nisms have had no experience with
them over evolutionary time they are
usually not easily biodegradable.
Their potential for disruption of eco¬
systems is enormous.
There are three criteria by which
quantitative pollutants may be judged
significant.
-Man can perturb a natural cycle
with a large amount of a substance
ordinarily considered innocuous, as we
do when we over-fertilize.
A relatively small amount of a
substance can cause great damage if
released in a sensitive spot, over a
small area, or suddenly for example,
the destruction of coral reefs in
Hawaii by silt from construction sites.
Any addition of a substance that
can be harmful at its natural concen¬
tration must be considered significant.
Some radioactive substances fall in
this category.
The effects on the public-service
functions performed by ecosystems
are varied and serious. Food chains,
for example, are shortened by the
selective loss of the predators at the
top. This is so because predators are
more sensitive to environmental stres¬
ses of all kinds than are herbivores.
In marine ecosystems the top pre¬
dators are generally precisely the food
fishes most highly prized by man. On
land the loss of predators releases
checks on herbivorous pests that
compete with man for his supply of
staple crops, a good example being
the increase of cotton pests in parts
of Peru. The loss of structure also in¬
creases the load on the process of
decay, already heavily stressed by
man's domestic and agricultural wastes.
The ocean, indispensable as a
source of animal protein, may be the
most vulnerable ecosystem of all. Its
vast bulk is deceiving. Over 99 per
cent of the ocean's productivity takes
place beneath 10 per cent of its sur¬
face area, and half of the productiv¬
ity is concentrated in coastal up-
wellings amounting to only 0.1 per
cent of the surface.
The reason is that productivity
requires nutrients, which are most
abundant near the bottom, and sun¬
light, available only near the top.
Only in shallow waters are both avail¬
able in the same place. The coastal
regions also receive most of the oil
spills, fallout from atmospheric pollu¬
tants and river outflow bearing pesti¬
cide and fertilizer residues, heavy
metals and industrial chemicals.
Overfishing is almost certainly also
taking a heavy toll in the ocean.
Since World War II, the catches of the
East Asian sardine, the California sar¬
dine, the north-west Pacific salmon,
the Scandinavian herring and the Ba¬
rents Sea cod, among others, have
entered declines from which there has
been no sign of recovery. Present
world fisheries production of somewhat
over 60 million metric tons per year
is already approaching the 100 million
that some marine biologists consider
to be the maximum sustainable yield.
m

Many people still imagine that
mankind is a puny force in the global
scale of things. This is not so. As a
geological and biological force, man¬
kind is today becoming comparable to
and even exceeding many natural
processes.
Oil added to the oceans in 1969
from tanker spills, offshore production,
routine shipping operations and refin¬
ery wastes exceeded natural seepage
by an estimated 20 times.
Man is now contributing half as
much as nature to the atmospheric
sulphur burden and will be contribut¬
ing as much as nature by the year
2000. In industrial areas, the input
of sulphur dioxide so overwhelms
natural removal processes that in¬
creased concentrations are being
found hundreds to thousands of
kilometres downwind.
Combustion of fossil fuels has in¬
creased the global atmospheric con
centration of carbon dioxide by 10 per
cent since the turn of the century.
Such figures do not prove that
disaster is upon us, but they are
cause for uneasiness. Mankind is for
the first time operating on a level at
which global balances could hinge on
our mistakes.
At least one environmental problem
is absolutely intractable, and that is
the discharge of waste heat which
accompanies consumption of energy.
All the energy we use as well as that
we waste in. generating electricity
ultimately enters the environment as
waste heat. Obvious examples are
the heat from a light bulb and the heat
from an automobile engine.
The heat production resulting from
man's use of energy is not yet a
significant fraction of the solar energy
at the earth's surface over the world
as a whole. Even if the present five
per cent per annum rate of increase
persists, it will take another century
before civilization is discharging heat
equivalent to one per cent of solar
radiation. Considerably sooner, how¬
ever, it could become a significant
influence on regional and continental
climate.
Human heat production already
exceeds 5 per cent of solar radiation
over local areas of tens of thousands
of square kilometres, and could exceed
this level over areas of millions of
square kilometres by the year 2000.
Such figures could imply substantial
climatic disruptions.
Man also has the potential to dis¬
rupt climate through additions of
various pollutants to the atmosphere.
The consequences of climatic altera¬
tion reside not in any direct sensi¬
tivity of humans to moderate changes
in temperature or moisture, but rather
in the great sensitivity of food pro¬
duction to such changes.
Opposite page: This curious little animal
from North America with its petal-like
ruffle Is a star-nosed mole. Like all
moles it Is almost blind, but its snout
is equipped with delicate feelers for
picking its way along the tunnels it digs
for the insects and worms on which
it feeds. Because moles rip the roots
of plants as they tunnel through the earth,
they are anathema to farmers and are
wantonly destroyed despite their actual
usefulness. Many other living creatures
which do no harm to man whatever are
likewise being ruthlessly slaughtered:
310 species of mammals face extinction,
320 species of birds, 180 reptiles,
90 fish. Left: This cruelly deformed
hand belongs to a Japanese suffering
from the Minamata Disease, named after
the town in Japan where it made its
appearance in 1953. The- disease was
caused by eating fish from coastal waters
polluted by mercury waste. Many
victims died, others who survived are
paralyzed for life. Babies were born with
incurable disorders of the nervous or
cerebral system. (See "Unesco Courier",
July-August 1971).
23

k The effect of climate on agriculture
was once again being dramatically
demonstrated in early 1973. Famine
was widespread in sub-Saharan Africa,
and was starting in India. South-east
Asia had small rice harvests, parts of
Latin America were short of food.
Crops were threatened in the United
States and the Soviet Union. Over¬
population is dramatically demon¬
strated in mankind's inability to store
sufficient carry-over food supplies in
anticipation of the climatic events
which are a regular feature of the
planet Earth.
How and how much do population
variables themselves contribute to
ecological problems? The most ele¬
mentary relation is that population size
acts as a multiplier of the environ¬
mental damage caused by each indi¬
vidual. The important point here is
that slowly growing factors, when they
multiply each other, lead to rapidly
growing products.
A simple example is the emission
of lead into the atmosphere by auto¬
mobiles in the United States. Vehicle-
miles per person doubled between
1946 and 1967, while emissions of lead
per vehicle-mile increased 83 per cent.
The United States population increased
41 per cent. The result was that more
than five times as much lead was
being discharged into the atmosphere
as 20 years before, and this dramatic
increase arose from rather moderate
24
but simultaneous increases in the
contributing factors.
There is however a. more difficult
and perhaps more important question
than this arithmetical one. A small
increase in population may generate a
large increase in environmental dis¬
ruption. These effects fall into two
classes. First, population change may
itself cause changes in consumption
per person. Second, a small increase
in impact upon the environment
generated in part by population
change and in part by changes in the
other multiplicative factors may sti¬
mulate a disproportionately large en¬
vironmental change.
An obvious example is the growth
of suburbs in the United States, which
has had the effect of increasing the
use of the automobile. Another is
that of diminishing returns in agri¬
culture, in which the increases in
yield needed to feed new mouths can
be achieved only by disproportionate
increases in inputs such as fertilizer
and pesticides. In each case, the
contributing factors can no longer be
considered to be independent. It is
what the mathematicians call a non-
linear relationship.
Environmental disruption cannot be
measured only by man's inputs.
Equally important is how the environ¬
ment responds, and this response
itself is often non-linear. One example
is the existence of thresholds in the
response of individual organisms to
poisons and other forms of stress.
Fish may be able to tolerate a 10-de-
gree rise in water temperature without
ill effect, whereas a 12-degree rise
would be fatal.
Another non-linear phenomenon is
the simultaneous action of two or more
inputs. A disturbing example is the
combined effect of DDT and oil spills
in coastal waters. DDT is not very
soluble in sea water, so the concen¬
trations to which marine organisms
are ordinarily exposed are small.
However, DDT is very soluble in oil.
Oil spills therefore have the effect of
concentrating DDT in the surface layer
of the ocean where much of the oil
remains, and where many marine
organisms spend part of their time.
As a result, the combined effect of
oil and DDT probably far exceeds
their individual effects.
Some forms of non-linearity would
occur eventually whether population
grew or not. For example, a constant

demand for copper that persisted for
a long time would lead eventually to
substitution of other metals in some
applications. In such instances, popu¬
lation growth accelerates the onset of
diminishing returns, so leaving less
time to deal with the problems and
increasing the chances of mistakes.
In other cases, such as the effects of
population concentration on certain
forms of consumption, population
change is clearly the sole and direct
cause of the non-linear response.
All rational observers agree that no
physical quantity can grow forever.
This is true of population, the produc¬
tion of energy and other raw materials
and the generation of wastes. But is
there anything about the 1970s as
opposed, say to the 1920s or 1870s
to make this the decade in which
limits to growth become apparent?
When limits do appear, they will
appear suddenly. Such behaviour is
typical of exponential growth; that is,
where the quantity multiplies at a
more or less constant rate with
compound interest, so to speak. If a
quantity can double 20 times before
a limit is reached, the system will be
less than half loaded for the first
nineteen doublings, or for 95 per cent
of the time between initiation of growth
and exceeding the limit. Clearly, then,
a long history of exponential growth
does not imply a long future.
The human population is growing at
a rate that would double our numbers
in 35 years, and ecological impact is
growing even faster. The 1970 Study
of Critical Environmental Problems,
sponsored by the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, estimated that
man's demands upon the biological
environment are increasing at about
five per cent per year, corresponding
to a doubling time of 14 years. Con¬
tinuation of this rate implies that, if
the environment could absorb, say, as
much as 32 times the 1970 level of
damaging inputs, the limit would be
reached by the year 2040.
The -likelihood of overshooting the
limit is increased by the momentum
of population growth, by time-delays
between cause and effect in many
environmental systems, and by the fact
that some kinds' of damage are irre¬
versible by the time they are visible.
The momentum of human population
growth has its origins in deep-seated
attitudes toward reproduction and in
the age composition of the world's
population, 37 per cent being under
15 years of age. Even if every couple
in the world henceforth had only the
number of children needed to replace
themselves, the imbalance between
young and old would cause population
to grow for 50 to 70 years more before
leveling off. Under extraordinarily
optimistic assumptions, world popula¬
tion could not stabilize below eight
billion people.
Environmental time delays come
about in a variety of ways. Some
substances persist in dangerous form
long after they have been introduced
into the environment. Mercury, lead,
DDT and its relatives and certain
radioactive materials are obvious
examples. They may be entering food
chains from soil, water and marine
sediments for years after being de¬
posited there. Time lags usually mean
that when the symptoms finally appear,
corrective action is ineffective or
impossible. Species that have been
eradicated cannot be restored. Soil
that has been washed or blown away
can be replaced by natural processes
only on a time scale of centuries.
The momentum of growth, the time
delays between causes and effects and
the irreversibility of many kinds of
damage all increase the chances
that mankind may temporarily exceed
the carrying capacity of the biological
environment. Agricultural failures on
a large scale, dramatic loss of fisheries
productivity and epidemic disease are
among the possible consequences.
The evidence suggests that such
possibilities exist within a time frame
measured in decades, rather than cen¬
turies. This is not to suggest that the
situation is hopeless. The point is
rather that the potential for grave
damage is real and that prompt and
vigorous action to avert or minimize
the damage is necessary. Such action
should include measures to slow the
growth of population to zero as rapidly
as possible.
It will also be necessary to develop
programmes to alleviate political ten¬
sions, render nuclear war impossible,
divert flows of resources and energy
from wasteful uses in rich countries
to uses in poor ones, increase the
human benefits resulting from each
pound of material and gallon of fuel,
devise new energy sources, and, ulti¬
mately, stabilize civilization's annual
throughput of materials and energy.
Ecological disaster will be difficult
enough to avoid even if population
limitation succeeds. If population
growth proceeds unabated, averting
disaster will be impossible.
John P. Holdren
and Paul R. Ehrlich
uñBccjS
