SB*
r<sfii
©G TfiCourier
m
SSV
TjÍ>*ÍAr¿
sm ^* Va
K&ll
isss.
&>2
AL-BIRUNI
r v
UiF
Portrait of al-Biruni by the Iranian artist
Azarguin based on recent historical research.




MINIATURE ANTHOLOGY
Selections from works by al-Biruni
including many translated
into English for the first time
Al-Biruni is believed to have written at least 150 works (180 according to some
authorities) by the time of his death about 1050 A.D. The actual number is uncer¬
tain since roughly four-fifths of his writings have vanished. Al-Biruni himself
recorded 113 titles in a bibliography he prepared in 1036 when he was 63 years
of age. In this special supplement, the "Unesco Courier" presents passages from
the writings of al-Biruni, including many translated into English for the first
time. Those we present here have been chosen not only to show the originality
and encyclopaedic scope of his thinking, but in particular his narrative talents and
the scientific approach he made to every subject. Highly technical and scientific
material has naturally been excluded. The passages published are taken from:
Alberuni's India (translated by Edward C. Sachau, 2 volumes, London, 1888);
The Chronology of Ancient Nations (translated by Edward C. Sachau, London,
1879); Al-Biruni's Book on Pharmacy and Materia Medica (translated by Hakim
Mohammed Said, Karachi, 1973); The Determination of the Co-ordinates of
Cities (Geodesy); The Mas'udic Canon on Astronomy; Gems, and Bibliography
of the Works ofal-Razi.
	^mm^mmBm^m^L. %mmÊ&&

K
«&»
!?SK|
' Photo Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
aaa
»
íí^í
INTELLIGENCE
AND REASONING
Some believe that science is of recent
origin, others that it is as old as the
world. The former affirm that its tech¬
niques were taught by "initiation" and
go so far as to maintain that every
technique was revealed and implanted
by a particular prophet. But there are
others who think that man discovers
techniques with the help of Intelligence
and that it is reasoning which enables
the mind to acquire understanding . . .
When one discovers, by reasoning, a
law or principle, one must proceed from
the general to the particular. At the
same time, experiment and reflection
allow us to compare one thing with
another and so obtain knowledge in
detail...
Time is limitless and successive
generations traverse only stages. Each
passes on its heritage to the next,
which develops and enriches it. That
is the true metempsychosis, not the
soul, which simply passes from one
body to another.
Bibliography of the Works
of al-Razi
ANTIQUITY'S
SUEZ CANAL
When the Persian kings conquered
Egypt they tried to cut a canal through
the isthmus to link the two seas [the
Red Sea and the Mediterranean]. Sea¬
going vessels would thus have been
able to sail direct from west to east.
The first king to dream of such a canal
was Sesostris, whose idea was taken
up by Darius. A waterway of consider¬
able width was dug, of which traces
can be seen to this day. The waters
of the Red Sea flowed in at high tide
and receded when the tide was low.
However, when the level of the Red
Sea was measured, the project was
abandoned, for the Red Sea is higher
than the Nile of Egypt and it was feared
that its waters would engulf that river.
During the reign of Ptolemy III, Archi¬
medes completed the unfinished worî«
without causing the slightest mishap.
A Roman king blocked the canal, how¬
ever, in order to bar the way to the
Persians who threatened to invade
Egypt.
The Determination of the
Co-ordinates of Cities (Geodesy).
SCUBA DIVING
IN 1000 A.D.
Someone from Bagdad has told me
that pearl divers have recently discover¬
ed a method for overcoming the problem
of breathing under water. They are thus
able to dive from morning till evening,
for as long as they like... The device is
a leather sac<< which the diver passes
over his head and which extends to
just below his chest. He attaches it
very firmly just beneath the lower ribs
then he dives and breathes the air
contained in the bag. But a heavy
weight is needed to draw the diver,
with his air supply, towards the bottom
and to keep him down. It would be
more advantageous to fix to the upper
part of the device a leather tube shaped
like a sleeve, the seams of which are
hermetically sealed by wax and tar.
The length of the tube should corres¬
pond to the depth of water in which
the diver has to work. The upper end
of the tube should be fixed into a large
vessel through an opening pierced in
the bottom. One or more bladders
attached to the vessel would keep It
afloat. Breathing air in and out through
the tube, the diver could then stay
under water as long as he wished, even
through the entire day.
Gems
THE NATURE OF GOD
. . . Some Hindu scholar calls God
a point, meaning to say thereby that
the qualities of bodies do not apply
to him. Now some uneducated man
reads this and imagines that God
is as small as a point, and he does not
find out what the word point in this
sentence was really intended to express.
He will not even stop with this offensive
comparison, but will describe God as
much larger, and will say "He is twelve
fingers long and ten fingers broad."
Praise be to God, who is far above
measure and numberl Further, if an
uneducated man hears what we have
mentioned, that God comprehends the
universe so that nothing is concealed
from him, he will at once imagine that
this comprehending is effected by means
of eyesight; that eyesight is only
possible by means of an eye, and that
two eyes are better than only one; and
in consequence he will describe God as
having a thousand eyes, meaning to
describe his omniscience.
Alberuni's India
' THE ENCOMPASSING
OCEANS
The northern regions are uninhabited
because of the cold and the snow, but
we find that the shores of the sea,
called the Sea of the Varangians (Bal¬
tic Sea), which leads off the Encircling
Sea to the north of the lands of the
Slavs (1), are inhabited.
These folk live on the shores of the
sea In localities parallel with regions
which are beset by cold and snow, yet

. ;Mfô 'íáiv^-
Left, map of the world, from a treatise by al-Biruni on
astronomy, drawn in Tashkent The north is at the
bottom. Below, the same map reversed with the north
at the top to facilitate indentification of different regions :
1. Caspian Sea, 2. China, 3. India, 4. Persian Gulf,
5. Red Sea, 6. Black Sea, 7. Mediterranean, 8. Egypt,
9. Morocco, 10. Andalusia, 11. Baltic Sea, 12. The
" Encircling Ocean ".
Photo S.A. Davldov - © APN, Tashkent
the cold in those places, though severe,
is not so extreme.
Furthermore, there are among these
folk fishermen and hunters who put far
out to sea during the summer days and,
following the Azimuth of the North Pole,
reach places where the Sun at the
summer solstice never descends below
the horizon; observing this with their
own eyes, they then boast among their
kindred that they have been In places
where there is no night at all.
As concerns the impossibility of the
inhabited regions continuing uninter¬
ruptedly to east and west, there Is no
excess of heat or cold to prevent this,
but habitability comes to an end because
the dry land emerged from the oneness
of the waters by the will of God as
well as from natural causes. The dry
land must therefore be a separate part
without continuation and it must be
bounded by the encompassing waters.
Hence it must have boundaries both to
the east and to the west.
The sea which lies to the south of
the dry land I assume to be a sea leading
out of the encircling sea to the East of
China, stretching along the Equator
parallel tb China, then to India and to
Persia, and then to the land of the
Arabs, and ending in a gulf of the Sea
of Kulzum [Red Sea]. In every place
it is called by the name of the country
off whose shores it passes.
Similarly, the sea which runs out
of the Encircling Sea to the west of
ZinJ by the headland known as Rasun
(2), stretches southward from the Equa¬
tor parallel to the land of the Negroes
and the Sofala of the Zinj (3).
Both these regions are located
beneath the zenith of the Sun, Moon and
Stars, for which reason their climate is
mild and their waters are easily navi¬
gable.
As concerns the Encircling Ocean to
the West [Atlantic Ocean], it Is an
enormous mass of water, but there are
many shoals and shallows in it where
the water becomes viscous, like a mud
spring, so that navigation Is difficult
and its paths are unknown. It was for
this reason that the great Hercules set
his signs and pillars opposite Andalus,
so that sailors might be deterred from
the ambition of sailing beyond them.
The place where they were set up was
then probably dry land which has since
been covered by the waters.
A worthy traveller recounts in a mes¬
sage to Khamza ibn al-Hasan al-lsfa-
hani (4) the wonders which he saw In
the West. He recalls having sailed
through a narrow strait, the strait [Straits
of Gibraltar] connecting the Syrian Sea
[Mediterranean] with the Encircling Sea
The shores were visible both on the
side of Andalus and on the side of
Tangier and Further Sus (5). He looked
Into the waters of the Strait and saw
In Its depths a mighty bridge of rock,
and one of those present affirmed that
It had been built by Alexander. But
the Andalusians exclaimed: "The devil
take your Alexanderl Could he have
taken the land of the Andalusians to
build this? This was built of old by
Hercules I "
I believe that "Hercules' crossing"
mentioned in Ptolemy's "Geography" is
nothing other than this bridge. It was
undoubtedly once above water, but the
water then rose up and covered it.
As concerns the Encircling Sea to
the East [Pacific Ocean] it is often
shrouded in darkness and is a place
of frequent calms, where navigation is
most dangerous.
It is believed that these two seas, the
one to the West and the one to the
East of the dry land [the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans] are not Joined together.
But those who have sailed these seas
and have suffered shipwrecks because
of the storms recount things which lead
us to believe that they may be joined.
Recent evidence has furthermore
strengthened these suppositions and
indeed given them the character of truth.
Ship's timbers have been found bound
together In the Encircling Sea near its
confluence with the Syrian Sea. But
it is only In the Indian Sea that timbers
are lashed together In this way (because
of the many magnetic stones which are
there and are a danger to shipping) and
not in the Western Sea, where the
ships' timbers are not lashed together
but fastened with Iron nails. The pre¬
sence of these timbers in the Western
Sea is proof that they arrived there by
(1) Slavs who settled on the shores of
the Baltic the Pomeranians and the
Novgorodian Slovenes.
(2) A name not found In other sources,
It may refer to the Cape (Ras) Khafun, the
extreme eastern tip of Africa.
(3) " Ethiopians " East African Ne¬
groes.
(4) Famous 10th century historian and
philologist.
(5) As-Sus al-Aqsa, medieval name of
part of Morocco.
*m!$.

m
i&i
m
%t>S.*À
some waterway connecting it to the
Indian Sea. This could not have happen¬
ed by way of the Sea of Kulzum for
between it and the Syrian Sea there
lies an isthmus.
Nor is it easy to envisage a junction
between the two by way of the sea
which lies to the north. In such a case,
the timbers, after being broken up in
the Indian Sea, would have had to drift
out of it through an eastern strait linking
the seas (6) and would then have had
to drift around those parts lying to the
north beneath the zenith of the Polar
Star or through the other northern
quarters of the Earth lying opposite the
dry land.
This cannot be what happened. Espe¬
cially when it is considered that those
who speak of the joining of the seas
point out that the level of the eastern
waters is higher than that of the western
waters, just as it was discovered when
the land was being surveyed that the
waters of the Sea of Kulzum are higher
than those which run into the Syrian
Sea. The conclusion must be that the
seas are linked to the south of the dry
land.
The Determination
of the Co-ordinates of Cities (Geodesy)
(6) AI-Blrunl may have known or conjec¬
tured about the existence of the Behring
Straits.
SMART SCHOLARS
Once a sage was asked why scholars
always flock to the doors of the rich,
whilst the rich are not inclined to call
at the doors of scholars. "The schol¬
ars", he answered, "are well aware of
the use of money, but the rich are
ignorant of the nobility of science."
Alberuni's India
'SPEAK THE TRUTH"
That man only is praiseworthy who
shrinks from a lie and always adheres
to the truth, enjoying credit even among
liars, not to mention others.
It has been said in the Koran, "Speak
the truth, even if it were against
yourselves" (Sûra, 4, 134); and the
Messiah expresses himself in the Gospel
to this effect: "Do not mind the fury of
kings in speaking the truth before them.
They only possess your body, but they
have no power over your soul."
In these words the Messiah orders us
to exercise moral courage.
Alberuni's India
POWER OF MOONLIGHT
That the moon has certain effects on
moist substances, that they are appar¬
ently subject to her influences, that,
for instance, increase and decrease in
ebb and flow develop periodically and
parallel with the moon's phases, all this
is well .known to the inhabitants of
seashores and seafaring people.
Likewise physicians are well aware
that she affects the humores of sick
people, and that the fever-days revolve
parallel with the moon's course. Phy¬
sical scholars know that the life of
animals and plants depends upon the
moon, and experimentalists know that
she influences marrow and brain, eggs
and the sediments of wine in casks
and jugs, that she excites the minds
of people who sleep in full moonlight,
and that moonlight affects linen clothes
which are exposed to it.
Peasants know how the moon acts
upon fields of cucumbers, melons,
cotton, etc., and even make the times
for the various kinds of sowing, planting,
and grafting, and for the covering of the
cattle depend upon the course of the
moon. Lastly, astronomers know that
météorologie occurrences depend upon
the various phases through which the
moon passes in her revolutions.
Alberuni's India
DIAMONDS AND THE EAGLE
Al-Biruni related the story of
the eagle which collected dia¬
monds. Many similar legends
describing how precious gems
were obtained in this way
flourished in the East. A num¬
ber were recorded In the
"Thousand and One Nights", and
so reached the West, where
they inspired engravings such
as this, which appeared in
"Hortus Sanitatis", published at
Mainz, Germany, In 1491.
Many strange and unlikely tales are
told about diamond mines and the way
these precious stones are obtained. It
is said for example that the diamond is
called the eagle's stone. . The origin
of this name is that diamond prospec¬
tors are said to cover the nest in which
eaglets are lying with a piece of glass.
The eagle can see its young but, unable
to reach them, it goes in search of
diamonds, which it places on top of the
glass. When a goodly number have
been deposited, the prospectors purloin
them, then remove the glass, so deceiv¬
ing the eagle into believing that it
has regained its young thanks to fetch¬
ing the diamonds. The glass is then
replaced, and the eagle flies off in
search of more gems.
Gems
THE GREAT ART
OF THE HINDUS
In every place to which some particu¬
lar holiness is ascribed, - the Hindus
construct ponds intended for the ab¬
lutions. In this they have attained to
a very high degree of art, so that our
people (the Muslims), when they see
them, wonder at them, and are unable
to describe them, much less to construct
anything like them. The Hindus build
them of great stones of an enormous
bulk, joined to each other by sharp and
strong cramp-irons, in the form of steps
(or terraces) like so many ledges; and
these terraces run all around the pond,
reaching to a height of more than a
man's stature. On the surface of the
stones between two terraces they con¬
struct staircases rising like pinnacles.
Thus the first steps or terraces are like
roads (leading round the pond) and the
pinnacles are steps (leading up and
down). If ever so many people descend
to the pond whilst others ascend, they
do not meet each other, and the road
is never blocked up, because there are
so many terraces, and the ascending
person can always turn aside to another
terrace than that on which the descend¬
ing people go. By this arrangement all
troublesome thronging is avoided.
Alberuni's India
THE PROPERTIES
OF CHINESE TEA
It is said that chah is a Chinese
word and Is meant for a herb which
grows at high altitudes there. It also
grows in Katha and Nepal. Several
varieties of it are distinguished on the
basis of its colour: some are white,
while the others are green, violet, grey
and black.
White tea is the most excellent variety
of the herb; its leaf is slender and
fragrant, and exerts its effect on the
body comparatively more swiftly than
all the other varieties. It is rare and
not easily available, followed with regard
to availability by the green, violet, grey
and black varieties.
The people (of China and Tibet) cook
it, and preserve it In a cube-shaped
vessel after desiccating it. Tea has the
characteristics of water but is especially
benefical in overcoming the influence
of tippling. For this reason it is taken
to Tibet where people habitually quaff
considerable quantities of wine, and
there Is no better médecine for negating
the effect of liquor than this herb.
Those who transport it to Tibet accept
nothing in barter but musk.
%agaEB£&^^

In the book, Akhbar al-Sln it has
been stated that thirty bags of tea cost
a dirham, and its taste is sweet coupled
with sourness. On boiling, however,
the sourness disappears.
The people (of China and Tibet) drink
it. It is said that they drink it with
hot water and believe it to be a chola-
gogue [promoting the flow of bile] and
blood purifier. A person who travelled
to the place of its occurrence in China
has stated that the king of that country
resides in the city of Yanju. A big
river like the Tigris traverses this city.
Both sides of the river are studded
with wine sellers' tenements, kilns and
shops. People flock there to drink tea,
and do not take Indian cannabis clan¬
destinely. The king of the place receives
the capitation tax, and the public cannot
transact the sale of tea, since both
tea and wine are in the possession of
the king. He who transacts business
in salt and tea without the king being
aware of it is awarded the punishment
due to a thief.
Profits from such places go to the
coffers of the king and such profits
equal those accruing from gold and
silver mines. Some physicians have
mentioned in their pharmacopoeia that
tea Is the plant produced in China. The
people of that country make tablets
from it and take them to foreign lands.
These pharmacopoeia also describe
the origin of tea. A Chinese king became
displeased with one of his courtiers
whom he exiled from the city in the
direction of the mountains. The cour¬
tier was seized by a fever, and one
day he trudged, in a desperate state,
towards the mountain valleys. He was
being gnawed by hunger, and he saw
only tea plants, whose leaves he ate.
After a few days, his fever began to
abate. He continued eating tea leaves
till he recovered completely.
Another courtier happened to pass
that way. He saw the courtier who
had made this remarkable recovery,
and informed the king about it. The
king was surprised and he recalled
the exiled courtier and enquired from
him the reason for his recovery. The
courtier then narrated the remarkable
medicinal properties of tea.
The king thereupon ordered that tea
should be tested, and his physicians
enumerated its advantages to him. They
also began to incorporate tea in
medicines.
Book on Pharmacy
and Materia Medica
THE LODESTONE
Like amber, the lodestone has the
property of attraction. But It renders
greater service, because it can draw
a blade from a wound, the point of a
lancet from a vein or a metal ring
swallowed and lying In the stomach.
According to Dioscorides, the best lode-
stones are the colour of lapis lazuli.
When burnt, the lodestone becomes red
Ironstone. Yet, we have never seen
this stone and no one has described it
to us. In an anonymous work, it is said
that the best lodestone Is a reddish
black, followed by lodestone the colour
of fire. Some say that the most sought
after lodestone Is more plentiful in the
Zabtara region, on the eastern confines
of the Roman Empire, than anywhere
else on earth.
It is said also that the hulls of ships
built for crossing the Arabian Gulf are
bound with palm fibres threaded through
holes drilled in the planks, while the
boards of ships sailing on the Medi¬
terranean are secured with iron nails.
The avoidance of nails in the former
case is explained by the presence of
hidden lodestone reefs in the Gulf,
which could constitute a grave danger
for ships built with iron fixings. This
is a far-fetched argument, however,
because the ships that cross the Ara¬
bian Gulf cannot dispense with anchors
and are always laden with Iron imple¬
ments, notably weapon blades from
India.
Gems
15th Century engraving showing
the foundering of a ship on a
magnetic rock. From "Hortus
Sanitatis", Mainz 1491.
WHY THE EARTH IS ROUND
As concerns the curvature of the
Earth in the directions between longi¬
tude and latitude, it may be ascertain¬
ed by means of the longest days in
the towns we have mentioned. Let us
consider, for instance, the town of Bul-
gar, in the far north, and the town
of Aden, lying far to the south of it.
In and around Aden, the length of the
longest day is little more than twelve
hours, whilst in Bulgar it is little less
than seventeen hours. There is a dif¬
ference of two hours between the hours
of sunrise and sunset in those two
towns. Consequently, at the time of
sunrise over Aden, the Sun has already
risen to a height of two hours' travel
in the sky over Bulgar.
Thus, In summer, an observer in Bul¬
gar looking In the direction of the sun¬
rise or sunset sees a part of the sky
corresponding to that magnitude, whilst
the same part of the sky is not visible
in Aden, being situated In a circle be¬
neath the very Pole. Similarly, a part
of the sky of similar magnitude is visi¬
ble at sunrise and sunset In winter, when
it is not visible in Bulgar.
This being the case, we may assert
that a line traced on the Earth in the
direction of latitude, that is to say a
meridian, must of necessity be either
straight, or a concave or convex curve.
As regards the probability of its being
a straight line... the facts themselves
refute such a hypothesis, so that the
surface of the Earth cannot be flat in
this direction. As to the meridian being
concave, if It were, the height of the
Pole, that is to say the number of
stars permanently visible in the far
south, would diminish as the obser¬
ver moved northwards, becoming fewer
and fewer the further north he went.
In fact, the opposite occurs, the number
of such stars becoming greater, which
implies the convexity of the meridian
and hence the curvature of the Earth.
Thus the Earth is round in this direc¬
tion too, and if the same is true both
in the directions of latitude and longi¬
tude, then the Earth's surface must be
spherical.
Moreover, mountains, however high
they may be, do not alter this shape,
since they are small In comparison with
the whole and are mere wrinkles which
detract from the smoothness of its sur¬
face but not from the roundness of
the whole.
If the observer still harbours certain
doubts and thinks that this curvature
is characteristic only of the inhabited
parts of the Earth but not Its other
parts... let us turn for confirmation to
another argument, the Earth's shadow...
If an object Is round, its shadow Is
round, if it Is triangular its shadow
is triangular, if square then square, if
oblong oblong, and so forth with other
shapes.
When we observe an object casting
a shadow upon the Moon, we see that
its edges are rounded, especially near
the fullest point of the eclipse when
we may see most of the circumference
of the object casting the shadow and
the roundness of the object, thus con¬
cluding that the Intersection of the part
of the Earth illuminated by the Sun and
the part casting the shadow ¡s a cir¬
cle... Since such intersections are nu¬
merous, corresponding in number to the
number of observations and since they
concern different parts of the Earth,
yet all have this in common, that they
all throw a rounded shadow upon the
Moon, there can be no doubt as to
the shape of the Earth, which is Indeed
confirmed to be rounded on all sides.
The Mas'udic Canon on Astronomy
ÏZ&Ï
m
s»
5«a
ra
m
n«i3i
:<i-s
vernimm

Ï?*WS
fi
m
m
THE CAPRICIOUS
TURQUOISE
We have ceased to prize the turquoise
since it changes rapidly with changes
In the skies, as they clear or are cover¬
ed with cloud, and also with the caprice
of the wind. Further, perfumes diminish
the brillance of the turquoise, toilet water
attacks its lustre and unguents dull it
completely. For these reasons the tur¬
quoise does not rank as a precious
stone. It Is thought to come from a
"mud which has petrified". It may be
polished with grease or the fatty tail of
the sheep. That Is why it flashes with
a brillant fire in the hands of a butcher,
particularly one who has flayed an ani¬
mal's skin, while grasping it with his
hand.
Gems
INDIA WAS ONCE A SEA
... If you have seen the soil of India
with your own eyes and meditate on
its nature if you consider the rounded
stones found in the earth however
deeply you dig, stones that are huge
near the mountains and where the
rivers have a violent current; stones
that are of smaller size at greater
distance from the mountains, and where
the streams flow more slowly; stones
that appear pulverized in the form of
sand where the streams begin to stag¬
nate near their mouths and near the
sea if you consider all this, you can
scarcely help thinking that India has
once been a sea which by degrees has
been filled up by the alluvium of the
streams.
Alberuni's India
WITCHCRAFT AND SCIENCE
We understand by witchcraft, making
by some kind of delusion a thing appear
to the senses as something different
from what it is in reality. Taken in
this sense, it is far spread among peo¬
ple. Understood, however, as common
people understand it, as the producing
of something which is impossible, it Is
a thing which does not lie within the
limits of reality. For as that which Is
impossible cannot be produced, the
whole affair is nothing but a gross
deception. Therefore witchcraft In this
sense has nothing whatever to do with
science.
One of the species of witchcraft is
alchemy, though it is generally not called
by this name. But if a man takes a
bit of cotton and makes It appear as
a bit of gold, what would you call this
but a piece of witchcraft? It is quite
the same as if he were to take a bit
of silver and make It appear as gold,
only with this difference, that the latter
is a generally-known process, I. e. the
gilding of silver, the former Is not.
The Hindus do not pay particular
attention to alchemy, but no nation is
entirely free from it, and one nation has
more bias for it than another, which
must not be construed as proving
intelligence or ignorance; for we find
that many Intelligent people are entirely
given to alchemy, whilst ignorant people
ridicule the art and its adepts. Those
intelligent people, though boisterously
exulting over their make-believe science,
are not to be blamed for occupying
themselves with alchemy, for their
motive is simply excessive eagerness
for acquiring fortune and for avoiding
misfortune.
Alberuni's India
AI-Blrunl used a vase similar
to this to calculate the specific
gravity of various substances
such as metals and stones.
Ingeniously constructed, the
vessel enabled him to ascertain
the volume of water displaced
by an immersed object and so
determine its specific gravity
with a high degree of accuracy.
He put the specific gravity of
gold at 19.0 (it is actually 19.3),
Iron at 7.92 (actually 7.9) and
lapis-lazuli at 3.91 (3.90).
ON-THE-SPOT OBSERVATION
Reliance on personal observation and
on-the-spot examination enhance the
capacity to remember and distinguish
facts and also to Identify objects, not
only in pharmacy but in other pro¬
fessions and crafts. Gathering data
through direct handling and observation
is a greater advantage to be encourag¬
ed over mere reading of books.
Book on Pharmacy
and Materia Medica
A HEMISPHERE
10 CUBITS IN DIAMETER
I began by correcting the distances
and the names of places and towns,
basing my work on what I had heard
about those who had visited those
places and what I could learn from
the mouths of those who had seen
them. I took the precaution of verify¬
ing the reliability of the material and
of comparing the evidence of different
witnesses.
I spared neither energy nor money
In order to achieve my purpose and I
constructed a hemisphere 10 cubits [5.4
metres] in diameter, on which to base
the longitudes and latitudes of the
places and towns as calculated from
their distances, since time did not allow
me to use mathematical calculations,
the distances being so many and the
calculations so long.
The Determination
of the Co-ordinates of Cities (Geodesy)
THE MISER & THE BOOK
"He who Just collects boot« and
prides himself on their possession is
like a miser who fills his chests and
locks them."
Book on Pharmacy
and Materia Medica
25 WAYS TO FREEDOM
According to the Hindu philosophers,
liberation is common to all castes and
to the whole human race, if their inten¬
tion of obtaining it is perfect. This view
is based on the saying of Vyâsa: "Learn
to know the twenty-five things (I. e. the
twenty-five elements of existence)
thoroughly. Then you may follow
whatever religion you like; you will no
doubt be liberated."
Alberuni's India
THE GEOMETRY OF FLOWERS
Among the peculiarities of the flowers
there is one really astonishing fact, viz.
the number of their petals, the tops of
which form a circle when they begin
to open, is in most cases conformable
to the laws of geometry. In most cases
they agree with the chords that have
been found by the laws of geometry,
not with conic sections.
You scarcely ever find a flower of
7 or 9 petals, for you cannot construct
them according to the laws of geometry
in a circle as isosceles (triangles). The
number of their petals, is always 3 or 4
or 5 or 6 or 18. This is a matter of
frequent occurrence. Possibly one may
find one day some species of flowers
with 7 or 9 petals, or one may find
among the species hitherto known such
a number of petals; but, on the whole,
one must say nature preserves Its
genera and species such as they are.
For If you would, for example, count
the number of seeds of one of the
(many) pomegranates of a tree, you
would find that all the other pomegra¬
nates contain the same number of
seeds as that one the seeds of which
you have counted first. So, too, nature
proceeds in all other matters.
Frequently, however, you find in the
functions (actions) of nature which it is
her office to fulfil, some fault (some
irregularity) ... I, however, do not call
them "faults of nature", but rather a
superfluity of material beyond the due

m%z&
proportions of the measure of everything.
To this category belong, for example,
animals with supernumerary limbs,
which occur sometimes, when nature,
whose task it is to preserve the species
as they are, finds some superfluous
substance, which she forms into some
shape instead of throwing it away.
Chronology of Ancient Nations
AN AGE OF IMITATORS
The most important requirement of
medicine is that the man of medicine
should examine the terms of reference
as regards natural science and should
be fully acquainted with the natural
laws. When he comes to the resolution
of the ingredients of a drug every medi¬
cinal ingredient is arrayed in a different
aspect before him and each one has
properties that argue differently. This
is what the art of pharmacy should
achieve, but alasl ours is an age of
blind imitation, and people mostly go
by hearsay. Only he who sedulously
learns from the masters the fundamen¬
tals of the art and follows their di¬
rections can ever hope to achieve
mastery.
Book on Pharmacy
and Materia Medica
Photo © Gérard Dufresne, Paris
In his treatise on precious
stones, al-Biruni wrote, "I used
to have a disc of onyx, on
which wavy lines formed the
perfect figure of a duck, the
legs being invisible as if it was
swimming or sitting on its eggs;
the representation was faultless,
as if done by a skilful artist"
This figured onyx shows not a
duck but a fish. It Is part of
the private collection of the
writer Roger Caillois, of the
Académie Française.
LAWS OF NATURE
. . . The bees kill those of their kind
who only eat, but do not work in their
beehive.
Nature proceeds in a similar way;
however, It does not distinguish, for its
action is under all circumstances one
and the same. It allows the leaves and
fruit of the trees to perish, thus pre¬
venting them from realizing that result
which they are intended to produce in
%&$&
the economy of nature. It removes
them so as make room for others.
If thus the earth is ruined, or is near
to be ruined, by having too many
inhabitants, its ruler for it has a ruler,
and his all-embracing care is apparent
in every single particle of it sends it
a messenger for the purpose of reducing
the too great number and of cutting
away all that is evil.
Alberuni's India
THE NATURE OF TIME
Some people maintain that time
consists of cycles, at the end of which
all created beings perish, whilst they
grow at their beginning; that each such
cycle has a special Adam and Eve of
its own, and that the chronology of this
cycle depends upon them. Other people,
again, maintain that in each cycle a
special Adam and Eve exist for each
country in particular, and that hence the
difference of human structure, nature,
and language is to be derived.
Other people, besides, hold this
foolish persuasion, viz that time has no
terminus a quo at all.
Now, personal observation alone, and
conclusions inferred therefrom, do not
prove a long duration of the human life,
and the huge size of human bodies, and
what else has been related to be beyond
the limits of possibility. For similar
matters appear in the course of time
in manifold shapes. There are certain
things which are bound to certain times,
within which they turn round In a certain
order, and which undergo transfor¬
mations as long as there is a possibility
of their existing. If they, now, are not
observed as long as they are in
existence, people think them to be im¬
probable, and hasten to reject them as
altogether impossible.
This applies to all cyclical occurrences,
such as the mutual impregnation of
animals and trees, and the forthcoming
of the seeds and their fruits. For, if it
were possible that men did not know
these occurrences, and then were led
to a tree, stripped of its leaves, and
were told what occurs to the tree of
getting green, of producing blossoms
and fruits, etc., they would certainly
think it improbable, till they saw it with
their own eyes. It Is for the same
reason that people, who come from
northern countries, are filled with ad¬
miration when they see palm-trees,
olive-trees, and myrtle-trees, and others
standing in full-bloom at wintertime,
since they never saw anything like It in
their own country.
Further, there are other things
occurring at times In which no cyclical
order Is apparent, and which seem to
happen at random. If, then, the time
In which the thing occurred has gone
by, nothing remains of it except the
report about it. And if you find In such
a report all the conditions of authenticity,
and if the thing might have already
occurred before that time, you must
accept it, though you have no Idea of the
nature nor of the cause of the matter
in question.
Chronology of Ancient Nations
PARABLE OF THE
FOUR PUPILS
A man Is travelling together with his
pupils for some business or other
towards the end of the night. There
appears something standing erect before
them on the road, the nature of which
it is impossible to recognize on account
of the darkness of night. The man
turns towards his pupils, and asks them,
one after the other, what it is. The
first says: "I do not know what it is." The
second says: "I do not know, and I have
no means of learning what it is." The
third says "It is useless to examine
what it is, for the rising of the day will
reveal it. If it is something terrible,
it will disappear at daybreak; if it is
something else, the nature of the thing
will anyhow be clear to us." Now, none
of them had attained to knowledge, the
first, because he was ignorant; the
second, because he was incapable, and
had no means of knowing; the third,
because he was indolent and acquiesced
in his ignorance.
The fourth pupil, howeyer, did not
give an answer. He stood still, and
then he went on In the direction of the
object. On coming near, he found that
it was pumpkins on which there lay a
tangled mass of something. Now he
knew that a living man, endowed with
free will, does not stand still In his
place until such a tangled mass Is
formed on his head, and he recognized
at once that It was a lifeless object
standing erect. Further, he could not
be sure if it was not a hidden place
for some dunghill. So he went quite
close to It, struck against it with his
foot till it fell to the ground. Thus all
doubt having been removed, he returned
to his master and gave him the exact
account.
Alberuni's India
SOLAR AND LUNAR YEARS
... People distinguish two kinds of
years the Solar year and the Lunar
year. They have not used other stars
for the purpose of deriving years from
them, because their motions are compar¬
atively hidden, and can hardly ever be
found out by eyesight; but only by astro¬
nomical observations and experiments...
The Solar Year. According to the
statement of Theon (1), In his Canon,
the people of Constantinople, and of
Alexandria, and the other Greeks, the
Syrians and Chaldaeans, the Egyptians
of our time... all use the solar year,
which consists of nearly 365 i days.
They reckon their year as 365 days, and
add the quarters of a day in every fourth
year as one complete day... This year
IjSP
l¿f¿s
PS
TÓV
m
m
wm
m
í^mi^^í^:<^i^^tí^:íyíí-^Crí2^:^^í^
- À "7 f .

they call an intercalary year, because
the quarters are intercalated therein.
The ancient Egyptians followed the same
practice, but with this difference, that
they neglected the quarters of a day
till they had summed up to the number
of days of one complete year, which
took place in 1,460 years; then they
Intercalated one year.
The Persians followed the same rule
as long as their empire lasted; but they.,
treated it differently. For they reckoned
their year as 365 days, and neglected
the following fractions until the day-
quarters had summed up in the course
of 120 years to the number of days of
one complete month and until the fifth
parts of an hour, which, according to
their opinion, follow the fourth parts of
a day (i.e. they give the solar year the
length of 365 i days and 1/5 hour), had
summed up to one day; then they added
the complete month to the year in each
116th year.
The Luni-Solar Year. The Hebrews,
Jews, and all the Israelites, the Sâbians,
and Harrânians, used an intermediate
system. They derived their year from
the revolution of the sun, and its months
from the revolution of the moon with
this view, that their feast and fast days
might be regulated by lunar computation,
and at the same time keep their places
within the year. Therefore they inter¬
calated 7 months In 19 lunar years.
Chronology of Ancient Nations
ON HINDU RELIGIONS
Everything which exists on this subject
[the religions of the Hindus] in our
literature is second-hand information
which one has copied from the other,
a farrago of materials never sifted by
the sieve of critical examination.
...I have written this book on the
doctrines of the Hindus, never making
any unfounded imputations against
those, our religious antagonists, and
at the same time not considering it
inconsistent with my duties as a Muslim
to quote their own words at full length
when I thought they would contribute to
elucidate a subject. If the contents of
these quotations happen to be utterly
heathenish, and the followers of the
truth, I. e. the Muslims, find them
objectionable, we can only say that such
is the belief of the Hindus, and that they
themselves are best qualified to
defend it.
Alberuni's India
THE WEAK FOUNDATIONS
OF ASTROLOGY
The art of astrology in general is
built upon weak foundations and its
deductions are Insubstantial. Its calcul¬
ations are confused and it is mostly
supposition rather than reliable know¬
ledge. The subject matter of astrology
consists of the various configurations
of heavenly bodies which are themselves
contingent on the chosen points on
the heavenly sphere itself or on a certain
relationship between that and the hori¬
zon. Astrology therefore can never
produce positive results since its very
basis is unreliable.
How indeed could it be reliable, when
the exact location of the object for
which the calculations are made and for
which the future is foretold by means
of horoscopes of "conjunctions" and
"oppositions" is unknown and when the
actual positions of these configurations
conflict with those which are used I
The Determination
of the Co-ordinates of Cities (Geodesy)
ON LEARNING
Learning is the fruit of repetition.
Alberuni's India
THE PERFUMER'S ART
Dari was a port in the old days where
scents and perfumes were unloaded
and therefrom perfumers went from
one city to another selling them, or
bought by the people of the Quraysh
tribe. The Quraysh possessed a
masterly expertise in this art. It Is
because of this that the Arabs call
apothecaries Dari. In the hadith the
Holy Prophet (peace be on Him) said:
"The example of a noble and sincere
person is like that of a Dari whose
perfumes, even if he does not give any
of them to you, will all the same have
their pleasant smell; and a bad com¬
panion is like an ironsmith who, even
though he may not singe you with the
sparks of his furnace will at least
harass you with its smoke."
Book on Pharmacy
and Materia Medica
THE DESALTING
OF WATER
People say that on the 6th [of January]
there is an hour during which all salt
water of the earth becomes sweet. All
the qualities occurring in the water
depend exclusively upon the nature of
that soil by which the water is enclosed,
if it be standing, or over which the water
flows, if it be running. Those qualities
are of a stable nature, not to be altered
except by a process of transformation
from degree to degree by means of
certain media. Therefore this statement
of the waters becoming sweet in this
one hour is entirely unfounded.
Continual and leisurely experimen¬
tation will show to any one the futility
of this assertion. For if the water were
sweet It would remain sweet for some
space of time. Nay, if you would
place in this hour or any other in a
well of salt water some pounds of pure
dry wax, possibly the saltiness of the
water would diminish. This has been
mentioned by the experimenters, who go
so far as to maintain that if you make
a thin vase of wax and place it ¡n sea
water, so that the mouth of the vase
emerges above the water, those drops
of water which splash over into the
vase become sweet.
If all salt water were mixed with so
much sweet water as would overpower
its nature, in that case their theory
would be realized (i.e. all salt waters
would become sweet). An example of
this process is afforded by the lake of
Tlnnis, the water of which is sweet in
autumn and winter in consequence of
the great admixture of the water of the
Nile, whilst at the other seasons it is
salt, because there is very little ad¬
mixture of Nile water.
Chronology of Ancient Nations
QUALITIES OF ARABIC
All the arts of the world have been
transferred to the Arabic language; it
has penetrated deep into our hearts,
and its charms have crossed into
the innermost reaches of our being,
although to every people their own
language appears to be sweet, since
they use it day in, day out.
When I observe my language, I find
that if any art is rendered Into it, it
would look de trop and odd. On the
other hand, if the same art is rendered
Into Arabic, it would look natural and
good, even though Arabic does not
happen to be my mother tongue.
Book on Pharmacy
and Materia Medica
THE RUSE OF
ALEXANDER THE GREAT
Some say that the diamond was
brought by the Bicornutus (Alexander
the Great) from the valley of the dia¬
monds, a valley teeming with snakes.
Whoever set eyes on these reptiles
would instantly perish. The Bicornutus
advanced on the snakes with a mirror
carried by men who were hidden behind
it. When the snakes saw their reflec¬
tions, they died on the spot. Yet these
snakes had looked upon each other
without dying and the sight of the real
thing should have been more deadly
than the mere reflection.
Gems
MUSLIM ADAGE
"Your knowledge should not be like
the clothes that you wear, and not likely
to be washed away while you are taking
your bath."
Adage quoted by al-Biruni.
Book on Pharmacy
and Materia Medica
w
m
m
m
mm
i'H'^ï.;'
MiâïM&M&&Ê: ,
