'FATHER' OF
ARABIC PHARMACY
IN MEDIEVAL
ISLAM
by Hakim Mohammed Said
I ORE than nine hundred
years have passed since al-Biruni
wrote his Book on Pharmacy (the Kitab
al-Saydanah, or Saydalah), a work that
has rightly earned him the title of
Father of Arabic Pharmacy in medieval
Islam.
Today the science of medicine Is
characterized by disciplines unknown
in al-Biruni's age. A proper appraisal
of al-Biruni's work can, therefore, only
be made by referring to his age and
its standards.
Lest It be understood that al-Biruni's
book is concerned with the aetiology
of diseases and their treatment, it must
be made clear that this is by no
means the case. In fact, it is a
treatise on materia medica, patterned
somewhat on the Ist century A.D.
treatise of the Greek physician Dios-
corides, which lists 600 medicinal
plants.
But al-Biruni sets forth five times
as many medicinal plants as Diosco-
rides, although he makes the latter the
main source on which to base his
discussion of the drugs. It has,
however, been said that the description
of the drugs, given by Dioscorides, is
so vague as to make most of them,
with the exception of about a hundred
drugs, unidentifiable today. It is rather
HAKIM MOHAMMED SAID, a medical doctor
of Pakistan, is president of the Hamdard
National Foundation, Karachi. This founda¬
tion, devoted to scientific and medical
research, has ¡ust published "Al-Biruni's Book
on Pharmacy and Materia Medica" (two
volumes, Karachi, 1973), the first translation
into English of the complete text of al-Blruni's-
Pharmacology". Dr. Said was the organizer
of the AI-Birunl International Congress, held
in Karachi, last November.
interesting to see how al-Blruni over¬
came the problem.
One of the advantages that al-Biruni
enjoyed was his command over both
Persian and Arabic and his own
Khwarizmian dialect. He lived on the
fringe of the Iranian mainland, and had
an intimate knowledge of Persian
customs and traditions, and, since most
of his extant works are in Arabic, felt
even more at home with the Arab
background, although he never visited
the Arab part of the world.
The procedure that he commonly
adopts with regard to the description
of a drug is that he first discusses it
under its Arabic name, and then
examines its equivalents in other
languages, finally establishing its iden¬
tity. For example, if a drug is known
as hum al-majus in Arabic and arzad
maghushi in Syriac, the probability is
that it is the same drug, that is, the
Magian plant, which is today known
by the botanical name of Ephedra
pachyclada from which the alkaloid,
ephedrin, is extracted.
Primarily a geodesist, geographer,
mathematician and historian, during the
course of his sojourn in Afghanistan
and north India, he studied the customs
of different people at close quarters.
In short, he was a polymath who aimed
at what is known in Arabic as takhrij
(extraction of the essence). One
cannot say that he was as much of
a rationalist in science as the Egyptian
scientist Ibn al-Haytham (he was not);
nevertheless, he knows how to sift the
grain and separate it from the chaff.
One may smile today on reading
that, after the hatching of the eggs
of the timsah (skink lizard), the off¬
spring either make their way to the
river and become crocodiles, or remain
on land and become skink lizards.
CONTINUED PAGE 34

A binomial method
of classifying plants
seven centuries before Linnaeus
Al-Biruni has rightly
been called the Father
of Arab Pharmacy in
medieval Islam. In his
"Book on Pharmacy
and Materia Medica",
he laid down the credo
that pharmacy was an
independent entity from
medicine and "the first
step in the hierarchy
of the health profes¬
sions", a calling requir¬
ing much study, obser¬
vation and experimen¬
tation. Right, a present-
day apothecary of Fai-
zabad (Afghanistan) in
his shop.

ARABIC PHARMACY (Continued)
But al-Biruni who had never been to
Egypt, to which the skink lizard Is
indigenous, describes what he has
been told by the earlier masters, and,
after describing this, he comes to the
ecology of the skink lizard, how it is
obtained, its medicinal usages,, and
substitutes.
There are also priceless gems of
information scattered throughout the
text of the Kitab al-Saydanah. Al-
Biruni's is among the first detailed
descriptions of tea, telling us that tea
was taxed in China (see Anthology
page 22). His is the first description
of the plant, faghirah (Zanthoxyllum
species) which he describes as coming
from Sufalah, the present-day Sangla
Hill in Pakistan. This shows how the
horizon of the Arabic materia medica
was widening to embrace new drugs
from the Indo-Paklstan Subcontinent,
Iran, Afghanistan, and other regions.
It amply shows, too, that what he was
writing was not merely a piece of
compilation but bears the stamp of an
original mind.
Let us give a concrete example of
his approach. The winter truffle is
known in Arabic as urjun qabal, and
faswat al-dab. While describing this
variety of the mushroom, al-Blruni says:
"When tender, fresh, and lush, It is
cooked for food as any other edible
mushroom. But when it dries, the top
scatters away leaving what looks like
the Ceylon cornet tree which gives
the mushroom its name ... It shoots
out of the ground In a rectangular
shape, like a white stick with a top . . ."
Maimonides, the famous Jewish
philosopher and rabbi, wrote his
Exegesis of Drugs much later than
al-Biruni. He holds Usan al-kalb (the
hound's tongue) to be lisan al-hamal
(Plantago major), belonging to the
Plantaginaceae family. Al-Biruni, on
the other hand, holds It to be a
Cynoglossum species, and he is
correct, for the name given by him is
34

*\j/$r*',l*r
c
The illustrations on these pages are taken from a 15th century Persian manuscript
of a work by the Greek physician Dioscorides (1st century A.D.) on the healing
qualities of plants. The Persian text of this bilingual (Arabic-Persian) manuscript
is richly illustrated with drawings of animals and plants, rendered with a grace and
in colours typical of Persian art, though sometimes scientific accuracy gives way
to poetic fancy. Above stylized drawings of two medicinal plants: the bitter-sweet
nightshade (top) a climbing plant with red berries; the highly poisonous henbane
(below). Its analgesic qualities were well known to al-Biruni, who wrote: "It is an
emollient for earaches and, with vinegar and rose oil, relieves toothache. Similarly,
its seeds and root, cooked in vinegar or oil, act as analgesics for the pains descri¬
bed above. ..Excessive eating of its leaves results in the loss of senses..." According
to Avicenna, "those who eat henbane begin to bray like a donkey and whinny like
ahorse." Left, from the same 15th century Persian manuscript, a treatment for
cow-buffaloes suffering from a skin disease: to purify the air, incense is burned in
a perforated vessel.
Photos Roland and Sabrina Michaud, Topkapl Museum library. Istanbul, Turkey
a direct translation of the Greek word.
Although he did not know Latin for
he always equates Rome with the
Byzantine Empire and Greek, al-
Biruni's transcription of Greek names
is generally scrupulously correct.
Al-Biruni's book of pharmacy offers
a view of several new tendencies which
were crystallizing during the 10th-
11th century Muslim world:
The vague notion of the binomial
notation which is at the very heart of
the Linnaean system. For example, in
the Linnaean notation a species is
described by means of its genus and
its specific characteristic, after the
name of the discoverer, or its location,
e.g., Rosa damascena (that is, the
damask rose of Damascus). In a
similar manner, al-Biruni describes the
maiden-hair fern as sh'ar al-juyad (the
hair of the giant). The description of
sh'ar al-juyad is followed by that of
sha'ar al-ghul, also a fern and known
as Onychlum japonicum in botanical
parlance. This tendency is rather
vague in al-Blruni, but he resorts to it
wherever possible.
The ethnography of plants. AI
Biruni describes different plants and
their occurrence In relation, wherever
possible, to the folklore associated
with them. When he calls a certain
drug Roman or Persian, he does not
mean that the drug is only In use In
those countries but that It has
originated there.
Drug substitution. In this field
al-Biruni has been very liberal In
providing the names of substitute
drugs in case the drug described Is
not available. He had little leeway,
however, for originality here since the
workings and active principles of drugs
as we understand them today were
not known in his day, and even the
application of some rule of thumb
would not have been possible.
A critical appraisal of al-Biruni's
materia medica would also demand an
examination of the shortcomings of the
treatise. Al-Biruni rarely describes
the Galenic properties of drugs and
even when he discusses poly-pharma¬
ceuticals he hardly ever describes how
they are prepared.
Most of such descriptions are copied
from earlier texts. Sometimes he
simply indulges in etymological exer¬
cises as In his descriptions of the
excreta of different animals. For
example, an Interesting account of the
dolphin is given but not its medicinal
relevance. At times he is so irrelevant
that he makes one laugh. To quote
one such example, he says that the
excrement of the dog is ironically
called dawa-l-kabir (i.e. panacea) in
Persian!
All the same, al-Blruni's materia
medica provides us with a picture of
the expanding materia medica of the
time; of the Muslim approach In general
to science; how the Muslim Weltan-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

ARABIC PHARMACY (Continued)
schauung was embracing an enlarging
world-picture supported by a Greek
base which was being gradually dug
out and replaced by a new one; and
as a bridgehead to modern science.
Perhaps the finest materia medica
of all times, ¡ami Mufradat al-Adwiyah
wa'l Aghdhiyah (A Definitive Treatise
on Medicinal and Nutritional Simples)
was written two hundred years after
al-Biruni's death by Diya al-Din Ibn
Baytar Mulaghi, one of the Hispano-
Arabs, who quotes al-Biruni as one of
his sources while elucidating the occur¬
rence and properties of the drugs.
Since al-Biruni wrote or rather
dictated the book during the ebb-time
of his life, identical drugs are described
in different parts of the work. Also,
while citing authorities, he does not
generally specify the works from which
the passages are taken. He seems to
have been a man of strong dislikes:
Avicenna (Ibn Sina) is not mentioned
at alll He also holds Abu Bakr Zaka-
riya al-Razi generally conceded to be
one of the greatest clinicians of all
times in scant respect, although he
draws upon him with recurring fre¬
quency. Succeeding generations have
noted this fact, and one famous
historian, Ibn abi 'Usaybi'ah, the Syrian
chronicler, has particularly written on
this aspect of al-Biruni.
On the other hand, al-Biruni held the
Greeks in the highest respect, although
his acquaintance was greater with the
Jatter-day masters. He mentions the
philosopher Theophrastus only oc¬
casionally and Aristotle mostly when
referring to the pseudo-Aristotelian
treatise on the magical and talismanic
properties of certain stones. Galen is
mentioned comparatively less frequent¬
ly, as he was more a physician than
an exponent of the materia medica.
Occasionally al-Blruni commits real,
howlers: thus ambrosia (ambrosiya) Is
held to be a plant)
But, as I have stated earlier, al-
Biruni was not a physician; at best he
could be called a dilettante in so far
as medicine was concerned. And yet,
when he describes the mandrake plant,
the marking nut, balsam, the poppy,
the Iris, the aloes, he writes with the
ease of a master. Very rarely in a
book of materia medica have minerals
been described in such delightful
detail, and here he is at both his worst
and best. For he does his best to
extricate himself from the prison of
traditionalism and one can well see
that he goes more to the Greek sources
here than to the oriental ones, tradition-
fraught as the latter were.
Among the animal drugs, his des¬
criptions of the civef cat and the
beaver are among the best. One also
gets the impression that, even while
traversing the beaten path, al-Biruni
would like to ferret out something new,
something not known to the ordinary
man in the street. ;
Thus the impression that this book
leaves, along with his other pieces like
the Qanun al-Mas'udi (his great work
on astronomy), the Kitab al-Hind (his
book on India), and Athar al-Baqiyah
(The Chronology of Ancient Nations) is
that of a man writing at breakneck
speed to communicate his own learning
to his contemporaries and posterity,
a fantastically industrious being, rather
vain, egotistical, but self-effacing, ever
keen to gain more and more know¬
ledge, ready to scrutinize the different
hypotheses without bias and arrive at
his own opinion; of a man eager to
forswear narrow interests (he discards
Persian and accepts Arabic), not prone
to glossing over the foibles of his own
people he makes a devastating attack
on Dayfi Nam (Ten Names), the Persian
source book for medicinal synonyms
and holds it to be far inferior to the
Syriac Christian, Yashaq Samahi or
Chahar Nam (Four Names); of a man
determined to leave not a, single
moment of his life go to waste.
It should also be noted, that his age
was one of' disquisitions, argumen¬
tation, and internecine quarrels not
only between orthodoxy and hetero¬
doxy but between the four orthodox
Muslim schools of jurisprudence. Al-
Biruni seems to have been a liberal
orthodox Muslim who did not find it
necessary to condemn the other
schools of thought. A greater exponent
of live-and-let-live is rare to find. This
alone should be sufficient to place him
among the ranks of the really great.
Hakim Mohammed Said

Photo O Roland and Sabrina Michaud,
Topkapi Museum library, Istanbul, Turkey
MANDRAKE THE MAGICIAN. "Two forms appear,
if it is cloven in the middle, and these are the male and
female human shapes." This is part of a long descrip¬
tion which al-Biruni gives of the mandrake root in his
treatise on pharmacy. Photo left, a striking example of
this strange root which might be taken for the statue
of a man, his hands clasped. The soporofic properties
of the mandrake have been known since ancient times.
It "brings about sleep after three to four hours",
observes al-Biruni. Above, Muslim doctors examining a
mandrake. Dioscorides, surgeon to Nero, used the man¬
drake as an anaesthetic in the 1st century A.D. The
Persian translation of his treatise contains an illustration
of the leaves and flowers of the plant (opposite page)
which corresponds exactly with the description that "the
flower resembles an actor's mask with a tongue protrud¬
ing from the open mouth". In the Middle Ages, the
mandrake was the subject of countless legends: it
was supposed to grow under the gallows, to shriek
when uprooted, and to be effective for all manner of
beneficent or evil purposes. A lively and profitable
trade in imitation mandrake roots flourished for cen¬
turies, with any sort of root carved in a human shape
being passed off as a mandrake. In fact the mandrake
is a close relative to the inoffensive and humble potato.
Photo © Gerard Dufresne, from the collection of Roger Caillots, Paris
