	HtfÉf
H»GH FERTILITY
'Population growth produces
better economic performance
in the long run than does
a stationary population.'
by Julian L. Simon
IIN the past decade popular
journalism, and even some of the
scientific press, has presented only a
single set of views of the effects of
population growth on economic growth,
and this view has therefore become
accepted as received truth.
This set of views is that (1) in
Less-Developed Countries (now often
abbreviated LDC) lower population
growth means faster economic dev¬
elopment (2) in More-Developed
Countries (abbreviated MDC) lower
population growth means higher per-
worker output and income; and (3)
continued population growth means
world-wide disaster, as described in
the Club of Rome's Limits to Growth.
But these conclusions and analyses
are not necessarily correct though
JULIAN L. SIMON, of the United States,
is Professor of Economics and of Mar¬
keting at the University of Illinois. In
recent years he has studied such topics
in economic demography as the effects
of population growth on economies, the
welfare economics of additional children
and cost-benefit analysis of birth control
campaigns. At present he is completing
a research volume on the economics of
population growth. This text is "n abridged
version of a paper he delivered at Unesco's
Conference on Law and Population, held
in Paris in February 1974.
they may be, of course. Therefore to
push ahead with anti-natalist laws on
the assumption that these views are
correct might be a tragic mistake
from the economic as well as human
points of view.
fere are some of the reasons why
it is not an open-and-shut case that
population growth is a bad thing in
More-Developed Countries.
Most important is that whether popu¬
lation is now too large, or is growing
too fast, cannot be decided on scien¬
tific grounds alone. This judgement
depends upon one's values, a matter
about which science must be silent.
Science can only reveal the likely
implications of various policies. The
judgement about which policies are
good or bad and which policies should
be chosen rests squarely upon one's
values. Whether you think that it is
better for a country to have a popu¬
lation, say, of 50 million human beings
at $4,000 per year per capita income,
or 100 million human beings at
$3,000, is strictly a matter of what you
consider important.
Therefore, a judgement that popu¬
lation growth is too fast or too slow
is not a scientific judgement, but
rather a value judgement.
Historical and cross-national com¬
parison data give no reason to believe
CONTINUED PAGE 25
23

HÍgh ,erti,i^co1S-
(Continued from page 23)
that faster population growth is asso¬
ciated with lower economic achieve¬
ment in More-Developed Countries.
One piece of historical evidence is the
difficulty of France to excel economi¬
cally despite its low birth rate in the
past 100 years.
The experience of various More-Dev¬
eloped Countries displaying 10-year
rates of growth of population and out¬
put per capita for those for which data
are available for periods of roughly
90 to 115 years, and roughly 43 to
70 years, respectively, show no clear
relationship between population growth
and economic growth.
when they speak as
citizens rather than as scientists, there
is not consensus among scientists that
there is now overpopulation in the
United States, or that population
growth in the United States is too fast
for the good of the U.S. or for the good
of the world. For example, Ansley
Coale, as respected a demographer as
there is in the world, does not judge
that there is a population crisis in the
United States (though he does worry
about population growth in poor
countries).
Frank Notestein, the elder statesman
of American demographers, finds
nothing but "aesthetic grounds" for
wishing to slow population growth in
the U.S. "I would like to come to zero
population growth, but with no great
haste, and without making important
sacrifices in the process."
But Notestein's and Coale's mes¬
sages are less exciting than the alarms
about impending starvation, misery,
death, and oblivion sounded by those
who favour population control. The
drama of such alarms may account for
the wider publicity they have received.
This is simply because an additional
baby this year does not produce goods,
but he does consume goods; so if the
pie is the same size and there are
more claimants to it, each must receive
a smaller share.
But though this kind of simple-
minded arithmetic is at the base of
most reasoning about the economic
effects of population growth, it really
tells us nothing about the effects of
population growth upon the economy.
To understand population growth's
effects we must understand its effect
upon output per worker. This is a




growth
longer-run concept, and much more
complex.
The discrepancy between the facts
and the theory has provoked various
explanations:
1. Population growth provides a
"challenge" which evokes the "res¬
ponse" of increased effort by indi¬
viduals and societies.
2. There are advantages in having
proportionately more youth in the
labour force.
3. Growth in population creates
additional opportunities which facilitate
changes in the MDC economy and the
society.
4. Faster population growth causes
faster growth of technological knowl¬
edge and its adoption.
Among these explanations, the fourth
is both the most impressive and also
the easiest to integrate with con¬
ventional economic theory and its
Malthusian element of diminishing
returns.
I performed an analysis to quantify
the technological-advance factor in
order to arrive at an overall estimate
of the effects of population growth
upon per-worker income in a devel¬
oped country. I found that areas with
larger rates of population growth, after
initially falling behind in per capita
income, usually overtake areas with
lower rates of population growth, in
much less than half a century in some
cases. That is, though an increment
of population initially has a negative
effect upon economic welfare, after
some decades the effect has become
positive.
This analysis should not be taken to
prove that population growth is
definitely good in the long run in More-
Developed Countries. But it should
be evidence enough that population
growth is not clearly bad.
In the very short run say next
year it is unquestionable that per
capita income will be lower if there
are more children than otherwise. If
there are more babies, almost the same
amount of food will still be produced,
but it will be split among more mouths.
Furthermore, more babies mean greater
demands on public resources more
health care immediately, and more
schooling which means that resources
will be pulled away from other possible
uses that might otherwise help raise
per capita income. The point is that
babies consume but do not produce.
In the somewhat longer run, more
babies today mean that people will be
added to the labour force in a few
years, but land and capital will be no
bigger than otherwise at least at
first. So production output per
worker will be lower than otherwise,
with negative effects on income per
person (*).
Furthermore, these effects cumulate.
More children may also reduce house¬
hold saving, which may increase the
cumulative effect. As the effect grows
at compound interest, the lower-birth¬
rate case achieves an even greater
advantage in per capita income over
the higher birth-rate-case for a while,
anyway, say 50 years.
B'UT the data do not support
this a priori reasoning. First, there is
again the historical fact that population
grew at an unprecedented rate during
the period of Europe's develop¬
ment from 1650-1750 onwards when
European countries were Less-Devel¬
oped Countries. Economic historians
have concluded that slower demo¬
graphic growth would have ham¬
pered England's economic develop¬
ment during the Industrial Revolution.
And there is no significant correlation
in the historical series of population
growth and economic growth over the
past century or half century in those
countries now regarded as developed.
Second, the evidence from among
the presently-developing countries on
the overall relationship between con¬
temporary population growth and
economic growth certainly does not
reveal a consistent pattern.
Richard Easterlin finds "that there
is little evidence of any significant
association, positive or negative, bet¬
ween the income and population
growth rates."
Simon Kuznets compiled data on
21 countries in Asia and Africa, and
19 countries in Latin America. In
the separate samples, and in the
40 countries together, there is not a
significant negative correlation bet¬
ween population growth and growth of
per capita product; the relationships
are actually positive though very weak.
Jean-Claude Chesnais and Alfred
Sauvy last year analysed the relation¬
ship between demographic and econ¬
omic growth in the 1960s for various
samples of up to 76 Less-Developed
Countries and found non-significant
correlations (mostly slightly positive).
These overlapping empirical studies
by world famous specialists certainly
do not show that fast population
growth in Less-Developed Countries
CONTINUED PAGE 27
(*) Output per worker or output per worker
hour, and not Income per person or income
per consumer equivalent, is the appropriate ftf
measure of the productive power of an
economy. And productive power rather than
the quantity of consumption would seem to
be the underlying concept in economic devel¬
opment.

Photo Unesco - Dominique Roger
Jzniiimiiiiiiimiiiiii
JIEIIIIIIMIIMIHMII III
11111111111111111111
;l!l! "IHIIIIMIItMIIII
itiiiiH'iinm urn
MlimiMIIIIIM'	 M
High fertility
and economic growth
(Continued from page 25)
increases per capita income. But they
certainly do imply that one should not
confidently assert that population
growth decreases per capita economic
growth in Less-Developed Countries.
When the theory and the data do
not jibe, either (or both) may need
re-examination. To re-examine the
theory I made a number of studies
embodying not only the usual factors
affecting population and economic
growth, but also other considerations.
For instance, population growth may
induce people to work longer hours.
Kusum Nair, a close observer of rural
India, makes us sadly aware of how the
lack of aspirations and other psycho¬
logical make-up keep Indian agri¬
culturalists from striving and working
longer hours. If one decides to work
longer hours for more product,
different sorts of- production techniques
make sense. This is what happened
when men were forced to abandon the
heavy-land-using hunting and grazing
ways of life to work hard at primitive
agriculture.
The shift to more intensive use of
the land then makes more room for
even more people. Then later there
will again be a press upon resources.
Again people are pushed to work
harder and use more advanced tech¬
niques: And so on. Clearly this has
been the story of the growth of
civilization.
The results of the simulation suggest
that positive population growth pro¬
duced considerably better economic
performance in the long run (120 to
180 years) than does a stationary
population, though in the short run
(60 years) the stationary' population
has very slightly better performance.
A declining population does very badly
in the long run. And in the exper¬
iments with the "best" estimates for
a representative Asian Less-Developed
Country, moderate population growth
doubling over 50 years has better
long-run performance than either fast
population growth (doubling over
35 years) or slow population growth
(doubling over about 200 years).
It will surprise almost no one that
very high birth rates are not best.
But the outcome that very substantial
birth rates produce higher incomes in
the long run than do low birth rates
runs against the conventional wisdom.
The standard response when some¬
one questions the need to immediately
check, population growth in More-
Developed Countries is a series of
calculations about how after a certain
number of doublings of population
there will be only standing room, or a
solid mass of human bodies, on earth
or in the More-Developed Countries.
This apparently shows that popu¬
lation growth must stop sometime. Of
course population growth must stop
sometime, just like any other growth
process must stop sometime. But the
question is must growth stop now?
And the standing-room-only sort of
argument is quite inapplicable at this
point in time.
Population alarmists assume that if
we do something now we will inevitably
continue to do the same in the future.
But one need not believe that if people
decide to have more children now, they
will also continue indefinitely to have
them at the same rate.
By analogy, because a man decides
to have another bite of pie today does
not mean that we should worry that he
will eat himself to death. . If he is like
most people, he will stop after he
recognizes a reasonable limit. But
many seem to .have a different model
of people and fertility, that of the
drunkard; if he takes one drink, he's
down the road to hell.
27
CONTINUED PAGE 29

H'gh fertilité
JÉL
(Continued from page 27)
Second, population alarmists seem
to think that people (especially poor
people) have babies without rational
thought, and without wanting them.
It is factually wrong, however, to think
that "primitive" people breed prolifi-
cally and without rational control. (For
a summary of the evidence see Julian
L. Simon "The Effects of Income on
Fertility" published by Chapel Hill:
Carolina Population Centre, 1974.)
Eventually most parents in present-
day poor countries will be able to
expect that all their children will live
to maturity. At such time parents will
bear just as many children as they
want, and no more. And at such time
the birth rate will be much lower than
it now is in poor countries, being
instead like what it is today in the
countries where life expectancy is high.
The birth rate may still be high
enough for population to grow at a
substantial rate, but this will respond
to what people can afford, just as
within industrialized countries a rise in
income seems to increase the birth
rate, and a drop in income (as in the
depression of the 1930s) lowers the
birth rate.
LLL this seems* pretty sure,
barring cataclysm; the question is how
soon it will come about.
The quickest and surest route to the
rosy situation portrayed above is,
I think, by further increasing life
expectancy, and especially by reducing
child mortality. Recent empirical
studies have shown that when child
mortality falls, the birth rate falls, too.
And the best way to reduce child
mortality is by better nutrition.
Until mortality falls very low, parents
will continue to have more children
than they want, on the average,
because of" the conservative but
rational desire to err on the high side
rather than the low side. That is,
parents are more willing to chance
having too many children rather than
too few, too many sons rather than
none.
Recent analyses have shown that if
people really do behave in this fashion,
the effect of a fall to a very low
mortality rate could have a terrific
effect on the birth rate in poor
countries, in exactly the direction the
popu'ation-control enthusiasts wish.
It is interesting that many Asians
econo""c¿ro^S
who work in their population pro¬
gramme have come around to this
general viewpoint of their "population
problem". But some Westerners have
the opposite view with respect to
death control. They would lessen the
emphasis on increasing life expectancy.
But I am sure that to postpone the
drop in mortality will not achieve what
population-control extremists want as
well as will perfect death control and
it is morally abhorrent, too, at least
to me.
Pollution is a red herring in dis¬
cussions of population. Pollution can
be prevented if we put our minds and
our money to it. Man can clean up
the mess that man makes without
limiting births. In little more than a
decade England has cured pollutions
that lasted for a century, and probably
made England a healthier environment
than it ever was.
Trash and junk accumulation surely
is one of the easiest problems to
dispose of. Berlin built seven hills of
World War II rubble which now add to
the beauty of the city, I'm told. In flat
central Illinois where I live we could
certainly benefit from a hill built of old
cars and glass bottles, hammered down
with pile drivers and covered with a
layer of dirt and trees. This would
provide climbing in the summer, skiing
in the winter. Rather than being a
liability, our solid waste could be
a blessing to us.
It seems to me that modern man in
his populousness has great power to
make his environment even better than
primitive man found it. And an im¬
mediate decrease in the birth rate is
quite irrelevant to most immediate
pollution problems. This is especially
true because the main determinant of
the total amount of pollution potential
is Gross National Product, and babies
don't affect GNP for 20 years or so.
Many fear that if there are more
people now, there will be less
resources left for people in the future.
But in any case, we need not assume
that more people now mean less
energy, water, air, building materials
and fertile soil in the future. We
should have learned by the fate of the
prediction made in 1865 by Stanley
Jevons, one of the century's truly great
social scientists, that England's in¬
dustry would soon grind to a halt due
to exhaustion of England's coal.
Those who worry about natural re¬
sources seem to have "out-go vision".
They are like someone who sees only
his record of expenditures and assumes
that he must be on his way to going
broke failing to see that at the same
time there is income, which may well
yield a positive balance. Many people
note our use of resources but fail to
see our creation of resources planting
of forests, exploration of new oil fields
and invention of ways to obtain oil
from rock, discovery of substitute
sources of energy and nutrients, in¬
vention of new tools of all kinds.
Clearly we now have available to us
vastly more resources ot almost every
kind than did people in any preceding
age. And there is no reason to doubt
that this process of the expansion
of resources will continue in the
forseeable future that is, as far into
the future as we can sensibly plan
for now.
Some people argue that there is
one resource that is inevitably dim¬
inished as population grows space.
It is getting harder to find spots in
the West where a man can camp for
a week in perfect solitude, it is said,
and more people will make it even
harder.
It is true that more people in the
U.S., say, would mean less chance to
be able to enjoy the wilderness of
Montana in solitude. But this does not
by itself suggest that more people are
a bad thing. Rather, it only suggests
that you must balance your desire for
space and privacy against your other
values about humanity, including the
number of people you think should
enjoy life.
Also, though one's chance for soli¬
tude would indeed be diminished by a
bigger population, this does not mean
that the overall effect of more people
is less privacy and opportunity to enjoy
nature. Clearly one's opportunities to
enjoy nature are greater than were any
city dweller's a hundred years ago
because people invented the auto and
airplane, and created roads. And your
chances of enjoying a variety of wil¬
derness all over the world are much
greater than anyone's were 100 years
ago, even a prince's.
ONCERNING valuesthis
is really the key issue in judgements
about population growth. Let us be
absolutely clear on this: All judge¬
ments about popu'ation size hinge on
value judgements. Economists, for
example, have long used the concept
of "optimum population" for a given
country, and this sounds very scientific.
But these discussions about optimum
population sizes or growth rates must
have some criterion of better and
worse, and this criterion is usually per-
capita income of the present popu¬
lation, including "quality of life" con¬
siderations.
No one, however, is prepared to take am
the per-capita income criterion to its /M
logical conclusions. Two implications
of this criterion are:
(1) Do away with all lower-income
CONTINUED PAGE 32


High fertility and economic growth (continued from page 29)
people. Removing the lower half of
the income distribution in any country
will raise the average income of the
country as a whole by a purely arith¬
metic process. And logically one
should then carry this to the point at
which one leaves only one man the
richest man to start with. Of course
this is absurd, but this is the kind of
absurdity that the average-income
quality-of-life criterion leads to. Such
absurdities should make the criterion
suspect.
(2) Another implication of an aver¬
age-income criterion is that the birth
rate should be driven down to ridicu¬
lously low levels, and perhaps to zero
births the particular level depending
upon the weight one gives to the future
relative to the present. For example,
if the future is discounted at perhaps
10 per cent per year, the present value
of per-person income into the infinite
future would be maximized if we stop
having babies completely. This is
because it will be a long time before
the' babies begin to produce anything,
though they will be consuming im¬
mediately.
Hence a baby born today lowers the
income of everyone else, on the aver¬
age. Having no babies at all next
year would be good for per-capita
income next year. But no one wants
to go so far with this implication of an
average-income criterion. Hence this
criterion should not be taken as a
basic guide to action.
Julian L. Simon
