THE MADRID
For Leonardo, drawing was a kind of
language In Images more Immediate and
telling than words. Drawing below, from
Codex Madrid I, is one of several lie made
to demonstrate the impossibility of
perpetual motion. As "The Unknown
Leonardo" states. Leonardo was scornful
of the seekers after perpetual motion and
likened them to the alchemists who tried
to convert base metals to gold.
Drawing © 1974, McGraw-Hill Book Co (UK)
Limited, Maidenhead. England and Taurus Edicio¬
nes. Madrid, Spain.
.1-, r. J» »

NOTEBOOKS
by Anna Maria Brizio New aspects of
Leonardo's genius emerge from his
rediscovered manuscripts
HE recent discovery of two
large manuscripts of Leo¬
nardo da Vinci, containing
drawings and notes long
thought to be lost, has opened up
a new, exciting chapter on the work
and thought of Leonardo, the Universal
Man.
The new manuscripts form part of
the extraordinary collection of notes
and drawings into which Leonardo
poured a lifetime of research, exper¬
iment and reflection on art and "natu¬
ral philosophy" (science), on mecha¬
nics, geometry, anatomy, hydraulics,
the motion of air and the mechanics
of flight.
The two notebooks have added no
less than 700 pages to the former total
of 6,000 pages of Leonardo manu¬
scripts. The Madrid Codices are rich
in new information which now helps
to clarify issues which have long been
discussed by Leonardo scholars and
left unsolved because of insufficient
or fragmentary evidence.
Together, the new notebooks cover
the fifteen-year period between 1491
and 1505 when Leonardo was at the
peak of his creative activity. How¬
ever, the two manuscripts differ
ANNA MARIA BRIZIO Is the president of
the Ente Raccolta Vlnclana (the famous Centre
for the collection of Leonardo da Vinci's
works) at Vinci, where Leonardo was born.
She is a member of the Commissions Vinciana
(Committee of Vinci studies) and the Higher
Council of Fine Arts of Italy's Llncel National
Academy. Professor of art history at the
University of Milan, she is the author of many
important studies on Leonardo da Vinci.
from each other in subject-matter:
Codex Madrid I presents an exception¬
ally uniform range of material and
deals principally with mechanics,
whereas Madrid II covers a wide
variety of subjects, most of which have
some connexion with art.
For example, Madrid II contains
subtle notes relating to painting and
deals with colour and colour effects.
Extracts from some of these notes in
fact appear in Leonardo's Treatise on
Painting (compiled after his death).
An entire section of the Codex is
devoted to plans for casting the Great
Horse of Milan, the equestrian statue
of Francesco Sforza which Leonardo
worked on for many years but which
was never actually cast (see page 37).
The Codex also includes a series of
architectural sketches of fortifications.
When we are dealing with Leonardo,
however, any distinction between
artistic and non-artistic drawings is
meaningless and indeed unjustified
for he conceived of no such distinction
in his work. His artistic and scien¬
tific activities always sprang from a
single source, so that the conclusions
reached in an artistic venture affected
the development of a scientific project
and vice versa.
Furthermore, Leonardo's drawings
are always a living language endowed
with extraordinary creative force and
possessing the same clarity and
elegance, whatever their subject-
matter. The airy red chalk drawings
of mountains in the Madrid folios are
modern in their luminous and im¬
pressionistic depiction of landscape.
It is interesting to note that they were
in fact executed as part of a series of
maps of the Arno river valley.
Again, the drawings of machines in
Madrid I are so lucid and compelling
that they suggest not only the surface
appearance of the objects but also the
dynamic force which makes them work.
We get the same impression from
Leonardo's anatomical drawings.
Of all the Leonardo notebooks
which have come down to us, Madrid I
is one of the most systematic (if such
a word can ever properly be applied
to Leonardo), perhaps because it is
almost entirely devoted to a single
subject mechanics. In appearance too
it is one of the most orderly, and many
of its pages give the impression of
being a definitive copy. On many
pages the drawings are so neatly and
carefully sketched and shaded, and
the accompanying texts so impeccably
laid out, that one wonders whether he
was actually preparing them for
publication.
The earliest and latest dates
mentioned in Codex Madrid I are
1493 and 1497. However, I am
personally inclined to place the work
as a whole nearer to the earlier of
the two dates, because of the nume¬
rous parallels with other Leonardo
manuscripts from the early 1490s.
This was the crucial period of
Leonardo's work in Lombardy, when
he was applying himself with growing
determination and success to both the
theoretical and practical aspects
of mechanics. His theoretical work
centred on the definition of the
"powers" (Leonardo uses the word
"potenzie") which move the universe:
weight, force, motion and impact. His
practical work consisted in the appli¬
cation of these principles to the con- *
struction of mechanical devices. r
Leonardo's drawing of a windlass to be
used for hoisting heavy loads (right), is so
precise as to be the envy of a modem
draftsman. The assembled mechanism Is
sketched at left; at right, an exploded view
of its wheels, discs and gears. Here
Leonardo brilliantly resolved the problem
of translating rotary to reciprocating motion.
Drawing © 1974 Giunti-Barbera, Florence, and
Johnson Reprint Corporation. New York.

Some of Leonardo's most exquisite
drawings in Codex Madrid I deal with the
transmission of motion and power by
means of toothed wheels, screws and
levers. Mechanism shown above is an
example of his constant efforts to design
improved devices. Leonardo's diagram,
above right, illustrates his explanation of
the nature of accidental and natural motion.
To demonstrate his theory he used as an
example the pendulum effect produced
when a weight suspended from a cord Is
allowed to fall and swing freely.
k Leonardo set forth his ideas on the
link between theory and practice In
two famous maxims: "The book about
the science of machines precedes the
book of applications"; and "Mechanics
is the paradise of the science of
mathematics, because through it one
reaches the fruit of mathematics."
The most spectacular section of
Leonardo's Madrid I manuscript is the
part devoted to a detailed analysis
and depiction of machinery, or more
precisely, the components of various
machines. This manuscript consti¬
tutes a kind of handbook of mechanics
and gained immediate fame for the
beauty and elegance of its drawings.
Ladislao Reti was the first Leo¬
nardo scholar to examine the Madrid
notebooks at first hand. He spent
years of passionate study on them,
and drew special attention to the large
number of Innovations and ingenious
solutions to mechanical engineering
questions found in Codex I. Many of
these are based on principles and
techniques which are astonishingly in
advance of his time foreshadowing
developments made many decades or
even centuries later.
From amongst the mass of obser¬
vations on mechanical engineering
contained in Madrid I, Reti underlines
two themes which, he says, are worthy
of exceptional interest because of their
originality and the extensive treatment
given them by Leonardo, namely, the
motion of projectiles and the motion
of the pendulum.
Leonardo divides motion into "natur
al motion" and "accidental motion",
and analyzes their characteristics and
the laws which govern them. Natural
motion, in Leonardo's sense of the
term, is dependent on the force of
gravity: "All weights desire to fall
towards the centre of the earth by the
shortest possible path", writes Leo¬
nardo in his typical style in which he
often personified things and events
In Nature.
"Accidental motion", on the other
hand, is caused by a force (Leonardo
uses the word potenzia, or "power"),
which opposes the object's "desire"
to get as near to the centre of the
world as possible. And "accidental"
motion will be violent, says Leonardo.
On the recto side of folio 147 of Ma¬
drid I, Leonardo analyzes the laws and
behaviour of natural and accidental
motion.
"We shall propose as example", he
writes, "a round weight suspended from
a cord, and let this weight be a (above,
letters reversed). And it shall be lifted
as high as the point of suspension of
the cord. This point will be f ... I affirm
thus, that if you let this weight fall, all
the motion made from a to n will be
Right, Leonardo's drawing of flywheels
equipped with a crank, for regulating the
speed of a machine. Many of Leonardo's
machines had built-in errors, according to
Lord Ritchie Calder in his book "Leonardo
and the Age of the Eye." Ritchie Calder
recalls a newspaper article which pointed
out that a tank devised by Leonardo would
not have worked because Leonardo had
arranged the crank in such a way that the
front wheels would have rotated one way
and the rear wheels the opposite way.
"This was no error," says Ritchie Calder.
"It was a deliberate mistake, typical of
Leonardo's sardonic habit of putting
a 'spanner in the works'. Was it mischief,
or was it Leonardo's way of 'patenting' his
ideas so that only he could make them?"
Conducting research into Leonardo's
technical work, Luigi Boldettl, a lecturer at
a polytechnic in Milan, consistently found,
working from Leonardo's diagrams, that
there was frequently "something" which
prevented the machine from working an
extra cog-wheel, a misplaced crank, or an
unnecessary ratchet When he had
"debugged" it, the machine would work.
Drawings © 1974 by McGraw-Hill Book Co. (UK) Limited, Maidenhead.
England and Taurus Ediciones. S A. Madrid, Spain
10

Chart 1974, McGraw-Hill Book Co. (UK) Limited, Maidenhead, England
1. Screws
2. Keys
3. Rivets
4. Bearings and plummer
blocks
5. Pins, axles, shafts
6. Couplings
7. Ropes, belts and chains
8. Friction wheels
9. Toothed wheels
10. Flywheels
11. Levers and connecting rods
12. Click wheels and gears
13. Ratchets
14. Brakes
15. Engaging and disengaging
gears
16. Pipes
17. Pump cylinders and
pistons
18. Valves
19. Springs
20. Cranks and rods
21. Cams
22. Pulleys
The elements
of machines
In the Madrid Codices, Leonardofor the
first time in the history of technology
develops a systematic analysis of the
concepts and elements of machines. In
a chapter of the forthcoming volume,
"The Unknown Leonardo", entitled
"Elements of Machines", Ladislao Reti
states that "Codex Madrid I proves beyond
doubt that in this work Leonardo attempted
to compose a true treatise on the
composition and work of machines in
general." Leonardo's understanding of
individual mechanical elements as distinct
from whole machines set him apart from
other technologists of his time and from
many who came after him. Previously
scholars have held that It was not until the
1870s that Franz Reuleaux, in his classic
work, "The Kinematic of Machinery",
founded the modern theory of mechanisms.
Codex Madrid I now establishes, in
conjunction with a note found in the Codex
Atlanticus on pump cylinders and pistons,
that all the 22 elements of machines listed
by Reuleaux were analyzed and studied by
Leonardo, with the exception of rivets
(which he purposely excluded). Chart
above, reproduced from "The Unknown
Leonardo", shows Leonardo's drawings
in each case.

^called natural, because it moves in
^order to approximate itself as near to
the centre of the world as possible.
After reaching the desired site, that
is, n, another motion takes place, which
we will call accidental, because it goes
against its desire."
Leonardo next asserts that "Such
accidental motion will always be less
than the natural . . ." and "Conse¬
quently, natural motion, the more it
approaches its end (from "a" to "n"
as in the diagram) increases its veloc¬
ity. Accidental motion (from "n" to
"m") does the contrary."
In the same passage, Leonardo also
analyzes the motion of a projectile
launched in the air: "But if such
motions are made towards the sky, as
stones thrown in an arc, then the
motion made by accident will be
greater than the one we call natu¬
ral . . ." and (in its return towards the
ground after it has reached the zenith
of Its upwards motion) "the stone will
cease to follow in the air the shape of
the arc it began, but, due to the great
desire to go back down, it describes a
line of much greater curvature and
shorter than when it went upwards."
Almost a century later Galileo still
believed that the line traced by the
motion of projectiles in the air was a
perfect parabola. With his sharp eye,
Leonardo had "seen", both literally
and metaphorically, the real trajectory
of projectiles and correctly depicted
the curve in his drawings.
Leonardo had also correctly observ¬
ed the motion of the pendulum. He had
seen that when a pendulum swings,
the arc of its upwards motion is
shorter than its descending arc, and
that this ascending arc becomes
Vi: ^
2r
rtj>fV.H y%.\»4 '*/ ,'fi,
Galileo in 1582 and Huygens years later are
usually credited with the invention of
a pendulum clock. However, Codex
Madrid I contains notations and drawings
which show that Leonardo had the
completely original idea of applying the
pendulum to clocks, thus anticipating
Galileo by nearly a century. Leonardo's
drawings include a number of pendular
escapements (the escapement is the device
for regulating the motion of the wheelwork
in a clock) and on one page (folio 157
verso) he drew the complete clock
mechanism shown here (on left) with
a counterweight using a cord wound round
a drum wheel, a series of cog wheels, a cam
and a fan escapement, assembling the
elements here into an ideal mechanism.
Other drawings on this double page
illustrate Leonardo's lifelong research into
time-keeping devices and the ingenuity
he displayed in devising more efficient
mechanisms for them.
All the parts of a mechanical timepiece W
are described by Leonardo in Codex '
Madrid I. However, he does not depict or
describe complete clockworks except for
the one drawing shown at right, depicting
the general set-up of a weight-driven
clockwork provided with striking
mechanism. Many important parts are
nevertheless missing.
-4«.*** *-!»
... -+ ¡w * *** -n .4. V] .
I The spring as a power source for clocks
' was still only a few decades old when
Leonardo devised a spring-making machine
and devoted several pages of Codex
Madrid I to the production and use of
springs, especially clockwork. In drawings,
above, he illustrates several types of _
springs and shows how a clock spring is
wound under tension with a key (bottom
row). Left, another example of Leonardo's
research on clockwork mechanisms:
sketches for a pinwheel escapement.
Leonardo does not Indicate the purpose
of his escapement, but Galileo made use
of the same device with a pendulum, and
24 years after his death a clock with such
an escapement was installed in Florence.
JwrS-i/-- --rut
.« ,w*rw« -» *"
,bf> tirer*« *^4-i *v*êlet»- 'nrrr
' ~M1 -H* ù-Hft *t*MMJf »"w -f

;£¿¿s3+

+
f~ OtttfJüWíwjJ
Leonardo drew these sketches in Codex
Madrid I to illustrate the working of toothed
wheels and pinions. His notations, starting
from the top, read as follows: "Here the
wheel is unable to move the pinion but
the pinion can move the wheel." "The
same as above." "Again the same as
above but only in part." "Here the pinion
will move the wheel." "Here one moves
the other."
Drawing © 1974 by McGraw-Hill Book Co. (UK)
Limited, Maidenhead, England and Taurus Edicio¬
nes, S.A., Madrid. Spain
, shorter as the oscillations of the pen¬
dulum become slower. Leonardo also
realized that the smaller the arc
becomes, the more uniform become
the pendulum's oscillations.
We know about Leonardo's research
into the possible application of pen¬
dular mechanisms to drive saws,
pumps, and especially mill-wheels.
But did he ever think of applying the
pendulum to clocks? This question
has been much debated, but never
fully resolved.
In many pages of the Madrid I Co¬
dex, however, Ladislao Reti found a
significant number of notations and
drawings by Leonardo which he care¬
fully analyzed and found to be studies
for the adaptation of the pendulum to
a clock escapement. Reti's arguments
were sufficiently impressive to con¬
vince Silvio Bedini, one of the world's
great experts on clockwork. The two
scholars have written an entire chapter
on the subject for the book The Un¬
known Leonardo amply illustrated with
reproductions from Leonardo's Codex
Madrid I.
Leonardo was always interested in
time-keeping devices. He shows a
clear knowledge and deep curiosity in
the large clocks and planétariums that
existed in Lombardy at that time. He
was particularly interested in the clock
In the tower of the Abbey of Chiara-
valle near Milan, and the astronomical
clock (or astrarium) by Giovanni de'
Dondi in the ducal library of the Vis¬
conti Castle at Pavia, and made many
sketches of their highly complicated
parts.
Bedini and Reti point out that cer¬
tain pages of the Madrid I Codex (folio
9 recto, folio 61 verso, and above all
folio 157 verso) contain conclusive
evidence that Leonardo had the com¬
pletely original idea of applying the pen¬
dulum to clocks, thus anticipating the
research of Galileo in this domain (1).
On folio 9 recto, Leonardo draws a
crown-wheel connected to a horizontal
rod, driven by a drum with cord and
weight. On folio 61 verso there are
some exceptionally clear-cut drawings
of two different kinds of pendular
escapement, one with a horizontal
tooth-wheel, the other with a vertical
tooth-wheel.
Finally, on folio 157 verso there is
a rapidly drawn sketch, but it depicts
a complete mechanism with a counter¬
weight using a cord wound round a
drum-wheel, a series of cog-wheels,
a cam with sinusoidal track, and a fan
escapement. All these components
recur repeatedly in various folios of
Codex Madrid I, but here they are
apparently assembled into an ideal
mechanism..
Yet nowhere in Codex Madrid I did
Leonardo actually draw a complete
clock with a pendulum mechanism; on
folio 157 verso, for example, there is
no indication as to the motor required
to drive the device.
However, It is characteristic of
Codex Madrid I that Leonardo gener¬
ally tends to sketch the individual
component parts of a mechanism, in
order to gain a clearer picture of its
structure and the way it works, rather
than to make a final drawing of the
fully assembled model. In the draw¬
ing on folio 157 verso we are fully
entitled, according to Bedini and Reti,
to see the first ever project for a pen¬
dulum clock almost a century before
Galileo!
All kinds of other mechanisms are
analyzed by Leonardo in Codex Ma¬
drid I: springs for driving time-keeping
CONTINUED PAGE 36
(1) Editor's note: Professor Joseph Need-
ham, in Volume IV, Part II of Science and
Civilisation in China, devotes over 100 pages
to an account of China's six centuries of
mechanical clockwork which preceded the
clocks of the 14th century in Europe. He
particularly points out that the key invention
in clockwork, the escapement, was devised
as early as 1088 for an astronomical clock
built by a Chinese scholar and civil servant,
Su Sung.
14

Leonardo's
theatre
in the round
Leonardo was a brilliant and enthusiastic
organizer of shows and spectacles of
various kinds. The lavish entertainments
he arranged at the court of Lodovico II Moro
in Milan (see page 25) were legendary,
and in later life, when living at Amboise,
he is known to have staged at least one
spectacular show for King Francis I.
He designed scenery and theatrical
costumes as well a,s a revolutionary kind
of theatre and the machinery to work it.
Leonardo's theatre consisted of two
semicircular amphitheatres which rotated
around a pivot and then closed to form
a complete circle. He took the idea from
Pliny's Natural History, which says that
a theatre of this kind existed in ancient
Rome but does not describe how it worked.
Leonardo worked out his own solution to
the problem. He closed the two
semicircular halves of his theatre into
a circle using what he calls "chains
of beams."
Bottom right, we show the diagrams of
this ingenious system as Leonardo depicted
it in Codex Madrid I. When open the
theatre consists of two semicircles joined
together in the form of a rounded X
(drawing no. 1). The audience takes its
seats, and when the theatre is full the
chains at the back of each amphitheatre
(see drawing no. 3) are hauled until the
two amphitheatres are side by side (drawing
no. 2). The walls then continue to move
around the pivot until they meet to form
a complete circle (drawing no. 4). This
invention is not impracticable. An engineer
named James E. McCabe has In fact
constructed a model of this theatre in the
round from Leonardo's instructions, thus
proving that the mechanical principles on
which it is based are correct. Top centre
and centre, model of theatre shown in
various positions. The same principle Is
also found in the toy held by child (top
right) in painting by Bernardino Luini
(1475-1532). Perhaps Leonardo took the
idea of the chains which manipulate his
theatre from a children's toy, just as he
may have done for the helicopter
(see page 30).
J A study of the proportions of the eye and
eye-lid. Detail from a manuscript in the
Royal Library, Turin.
Photo © Royal Library. Turin
m
B3
Photos 0 1974 from 'Leonardo da Vinci" a collective work published by Giunti-Barbera. Florence.
Drawing 0 1974 McGraw-Hi
SA. Madrid, Spam
Book Co (UK) Limited, Maidenhead. England and Taur

THE MADRID NOTEBOOKS
Continued from page 14
devices, mechanisms using the spring
principle to obtain a constant motor
drive, cog-wheels to transmit motion,
and so on. Leonardo pays consider¬
able attention to the problem of reduc¬
ing friction and comes up with some
ingenious solutions.
Here I should like to develop several
observations by Carlo Zammattio, who
has pointed out how absorbed Leo¬
nardo was In water-courses when he
was in Lombardy. Leonardo was inte¬
rested in water and the uses it could
be put to, such as providing power for
machines, driving a mill-wheel, etc.
A particularly compelling example of
the way Leonardo proceeds to a uni¬
versal rule from his observation of a
specific phenomenon is provided by
his method of working out the
"powers" (i.e. the motor force) of a
series of jets of water pouring from
apertures of the same size but at
various different heights in a recep¬
tacle which is kept full of water at the
same level. Now, Leonardo is aware
that the force behind the individual
jets remains Identical.
This is how he explains the pheno¬
menon: each particle of water, once
it falls free from the aperture, responds
exclusively to its own weight and
acquires an impetus which produces
a corresponding force of impact if It
meets something in its path. But in
the original receptacle, the water par¬
ticles are subject not only to their own
weight, but also to the weight of all
the water that lies above them.
So when the jets of water emerge
from their apertures at varying heights
and fall towards the same horizontal
surface below them, the force of their
impact is bound to remain constant,
because their "power" is a sum of the
weight of the column of water that
pressed down on them in the recep¬
tacle and the velocity acquired during
their downward trajectory once releas¬
ed from it. Hence the more the one
increases, the less the other becomes,
and vice versa.
Zammattio points out that the method
and conclusions in this analysis by
Leonardo correspond to the theorem
enunciated in 1738 by Daniel Bernoulli,
in other words, the fundamental equa¬
tion of hydrodynamics. Such were
the formidable results which Leonardo
was capable of drawing from minute
observation.
A number of other comments remain
to be made in connexion with Leo¬
nardo's Madrid II Codex. There is,
for example, a passage which immedi¬
ately became famous because of its
obvious reference to Leonardo's mural
for the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence,
The Battle of Anghiari, which was
ruined before completion:
"Friday the 6th of June, 1505, at the
stroke of the thirteenth hour I began
to paint in the Palace. As I lowered
the brush, the weather changed for the
worse and the bell started to toll,
calling the men to the court. The
cartoon was torn, water poured down
and the vessel of water that was being
carried broke. Suddenly the weather
became even worse and it rained very
heavily till nightfall. And the day
turned to night."
Some persons have considered this
passage as a solemn record of the day
on which Leonardo began to paint The
Battle of Anghiari; this interpretation
does not seem to me to have a solid
basis. This is a typical reference to
an exceptional meteorological occur¬
rence. These always fascinated Leo¬
nardo, and as well as arousing his
scientific curiosity about their natural
causes, stimulated the fantastic, apo¬
calyptic side of his imagination.
A long list of Leonardo's books
comes next, containing 116 titles. It
is the longest list of book holdings
that Leonardo has recorded in any of
his manuscripts, and therefore consti¬
tutes a precious source of information
about the authors which he drew on.
There is also a shorter and more
cursory list of fifty books. The titles
are not recorded and the books are
simply grouped according to their
shape and size. This list almost
certainly refers to autograph manu¬
scripts by Leonardo himself.
There are also some superb colour¬
ed maps of the Arno valley and the
plain of Pisa, drawn up as part of
Leonardo's research into a plan to
divert the course of the Arno in order
to cut Pisa off from the sea at a time
when the Pisans were at war with
Florence. These maps can be dated
to the summer of 1503. Also there
are the red chalk sketches of moun¬
tains which we have already
referred to.
A side of Leonardo's activities which
was completely unknown until the
discovery of the Madrid II Codex is
revealed in the repeated references
around November and December 1504
to Leonardo's work on the harbour
and citadel of Piombino. The Codex
contains many drawings dealing with
problems of architecture and forti¬
fications.
Once again the insatiable student
of nature that Leonardo was could not
resist the proximity of the sea, and in
the Madrid II manuscript we find notes
on currents, winds and navigation.
There are also drawings of sailing ships
in the different positions they adopt
according to the changing direction of
the wind. Often these drawings are
no more than a few rapid strokes but
they are always strikingly evocative.
Then come drawings and notes on
the flight of birds, descriptions dealing
with aspects of painting, comments on
geometry, proportion, and so on. The
quantity of material is breathtaking.
However, Codex Madrid II is not a
single manuscript. It actually contains
two separate manuscripts. The folios
numbered 141 to 157 verso make up a
separate section entirely devoted to
the casting of the "Great Horse of
Milan" for the monument to Francesco
Sforza. This monument was never
cast. Leonardo protracted his research
into it for so long that the duke
eventually used the bronze which he
had allocated for the horse to smelt
some cannons instead. Nonetheless,
the detailed studies which Leonardo
made for the project and which he
records in these pages are packed
with bold and ingenious solutions.
Taken together, the two Madrid
Codices cover a long period of time,
from 1491, a date which can be found
in the part devoted to the casting of
the Great Horse, to 1505, the date of
the projected Battle of Anghiari mural.
This period stands at the very centre
of Leonardo's creative span, covering
his experience at Milan and Florence,
his activities as "engineer general" to
Cesare Borgia, and (as we now know
from Codex Madrid II) his service as
an engineer to other local despots,
such as the Duke of Piombino.
Above all, the Madrid notebooks
were rediscovered at a time when
Leonardo studies were directed more
at the contents of da Vinci's manu¬
scripts than his paintings and other
works of art proper. The immense
range of subject matter found in the
notebooks, especially the scientific
and engineering studies, has come to
light at a time when the world is
increasingly interested in science and
technology and their history.
The forthcoming publication of the
facsimile edition of the Madrid Co¬
dices, reproducing the beauty and
elegance of the originals, will place
a unique fund of new knowledge at
the disposal of scholars and the
general public everywhere.
Anna Maria Brlzlo
