THE LONG
ODYSSEY
by Jacques Boilot
In the footsteps of a Muslim scholar
through a world in ferment
10
FATHER JACQUES BOILOT, distinguished
French orientalist, has devoted many years
to the study of al-Biruni. His 'L'suvre
d'al-Biruni : Essai Bibliographique" is regarded
as the standard bibliographical work on the
subject. He is a member of the Dominican
Institute of Oriental Studies (formerly the
French Institute of Oriental Archaeology) in
Cairo. His article is abridged from a study
on al-Biruni published in the Dominican
Institute's review, "Mélanges" (No 11,1972).

Photos Edinburgh University library, U.K.
Miniatures on these pages are from two different manuscripts of
al-Biruni's Chronology of Ancient Nations. Opposite, copied and
illustrated in Cairo in the 17th century, a miniature portraying the
Sassanian king Feroz addressing his court (1). The four miniatures
above are from a manuscript probably made at Tabriz, Iran, dated
1307. They show the celebration of the autumnal equinox by the
Hindus (5); a barbecue with roast fowl and game (4); a discussion
between a sage and a peasant (2); and the birth of Caesar (3),
an early pictorial representations of the surgical operation which
bears his name. Al-Biruni himself used the term "Caesarian".
kL-BIRUNI is one of the
greatest scholars of medieval Islam
and probably the most original and
profound of all. His Eastern contem¬
poraries called him al-Ostadh (The
Master).
How did his fame spread to the West
in the Middle Ages? 'His major works
were apparently not translated into
Latin, with the possible exception of a
few peripheral chapters dealing with
natural magic, judicial astrology, talis-
manic art . . . The extraordinary features
of his life as recounted by his Eastern
biographers perhaps added to his
reputation. Early French texts that
speak of a "Maître Aliboron" are
almost certainly alluding to "Master
al-Biruni", scientist, doctor and man of
deep wisdom.
While al-Biruni's work is of great
value in itself and deserves serious
study by historians of science, religion
and philosophy, it is the Master's
mental outlook and the nature of his
intellectual interests that scholars
today find stimulating.
Fifteen years ago we wrote: "Appar¬
ently not much given to making
generalized syntheses by systemized
deduction, or metaphysical speculation
in the strict sense of the term, but
constantly on the look-out for positive
facts carefully and critically observed,
trained to think mathematically, In¬
terested in everything concretely
related to human life, he appears at
the beginning of the eleventh century
like a champion of the scientific spirit
as it is understood today.
"He showed great religious tolerance
and doctrinal objectivity. Above all,
he wanted to learn and understand.
He was relatively unprejudiced but
prepared to take a courageous stand
in defence of truth. He was one of
the first Muslims to study the phil¬
osophy and science of India sympath¬
etically, and in exchange he taught
those of Greece."
So it Is al-Biruni the man we wish to
discover, by piecing together such
facts as will help us to place him in
his setting and his time.
This puts us in the latter part of the
tenth century In Khwarizm, a central
Asian country situated south of the
Aral Sea, along the Amu-Dar'ya river,
the Oxus of the ancients (1).
The sultanate of Khwarizm had en¬
joyed relative independence throughout
its history but successive wars and
changes in the course of the Amu-
Dar'ya river brought about the de¬
struction of one medieval city after
another. As a result, It Is difficult to
determine the exact site of Kath, the
city where al-Biruni was born in
973 A.D., beyond the fact that it was
probably situated on the right bank
of the Amu-Dar'ya river north-east of
the modern town of Khiva.
The second largest city in Khwarizm
was Jurjaniyya on the opposite bank
and to the north of Khiva. Today it
is known as Urgench. On the right
bank across from Urgench, a new town
has risen not very far perhaps from
ancient Kath, and its name, "Biruni",
commemorates the scientist's birth¬
place.
(1) Now part of the Soviet Socialist
Republic of Uzbekistan, this region is in¬
habited by Turkmenlan and Mongolian
peoples, the Karakalpaks, whose lands form
the Kara-Kalpak Autonomous Republic.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
11

12
THE LONG ODYSSEY (Continued)
Al-Biruni very early began scientific
studies and at the age of 17 he used
a ring graduated in halves of a degree
to observe the height of the sun at
the Kath meridian and thus calculate
the latitude of the city. Four years
later he made plans for a series of
observations and measurements, and
had prepared an astronomical ring
15 cubits (8 metres) in diameter along
with other equipment.
At this time, civil war broke out in
Khwarizm and al-Biruni, who was
now 22, went into hiding and soon had
to flee the country.
In order to understand al-Biruni's
long career from then on, we must take
into account the political situation in
the countries where he was to live. In
addition to what is now Uzbekistan,
they comprised the northern part of
present-day Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan
and northern India. Al-Biruni in the
course of his life was directly involved
with six princely dynasties.
Who was the prince that al-Biruni
fled to for protection in 9957 We do
not know with certainty. It may have
been then that he went to the town of
Ray, near present-day Teheran. In his
Chronology of Ancient Nations he
quotes a poem on the tribulations of
poverty, and recounts that when he
was living in Ray without royal
patronage and destitute, a local
astrologer scoffed at his views on
some technical matter simply because
he was poor. Later, when his situation
improved, the same man became
friendly.
At that time, the flourishing Bowayhid
dynasty, which had originated in the
mountains south of the Caspian Sea,
extended its domain south towards the
Persian Gulf and west to Mesopotamia.
At the request of the Bowayhid
prince, Fakhr al-Dawla, the astronomer
al-Khojandi had built a large mural
sextant on a mountain above the town
of Ray. He used this "Fakhri Sextant"
so named after the prince to
observe the sun's transits throughout
the year 994.
Al-Biruni wrote a treatise describing
this sextant and giving a detailed
account of the observations made,
based on information given to him by
al-Khojandi in person. As the astron¬
omer died about the year 1000, his
scientific discussions with the young
al-Biruni in Ray, must have dated from
shortly after the observations carried
out in 994.
There is reason to believe that al-
Biruni was also in the province of
Gilan, along the south-west corner of
the Caspian Sea about this time. One of
his books Is dedicated to the Ispahbad
("ruler" or "commander") of Jilan. In
the Chronology of Ancient Nations
which was finished by the year 1000,
he speaks of having been in the
presence of the Ispahbad of Jilan
perhaps the same official who pro¬
tected Firdausi, the epic poet of Persia,
from the wrath of Sultan Mahmud.
In any event, al-Biruni was certainly
back in Kath by 997. On 24 May in
that year, he observed an eclipse of
the moon in Kath, after arranging to
have the great Muslim mathematician,
Abu' l-Wafa, observe the same
phenomenon in Baghdad. The time
difference between the respective
observations enabled the two scientists
to calculate the difference in longitude
between the two points.
HE short reign of the Sa-
manid Mansur II began the same year,
997, and it was also about that time
that al-Biruni visited his court at the.
capital city of Bokhara. The Samanid
dynasty, a royal house of Zoroastrian
origin, but early converted to Islam,
ruled an area comprising all of modern
Afghanistan, Transoxiana and Iran.
Meanwhile, 0aDUS, the Ziyarid ruler
of Gurgan, a city at the south-east
corner of the Caspian Sea, had been
driven from his lands, and was trying
to obtain support from Bokhara in an
effort to return to power. He suc
ceeded in reinstating himself in Gurgan
and al-Biruni followed him there.
The Chronology, al-Biruni's first
major work, seems to have been
written at the Gurgan court. This
book, which treats of calendars and
eras, and fundamental problems in
mathematics, astronomy, meteorology,
was dedicated to 0aDUS about the year
390 of the Islamic calendar (1000 A.D.).
In it al-Biruni refers to seven other
books that he had already completed,
dealing with decimal numbers, the
astrolabe, astronomical observations,
astrology and history.
During this period al-Biruni was
carrying on an acrimonious correspon¬
dence with a young prodigy, the
brilliant philosopher and physician of
Bokhara, Ibn Sina, known in the Latin
countries as Avicenna, who was seven
years his junior (see article page 27).
Among the subjects on which they
exchanged views were the nature and
transmission of heat and light. Al-
Biruni was not yet 30 years old at the
time and Avicenna was in his early
twenties.
In his book on geodesy, after de¬
scribing the measurement of a degree
along a terrestrial meridian, made at
the direction of the Caliph Ma'mun, al-
Biruni describes his own failure to
repeat the operation. A suitable tract
of land had been chosen between Gur¬
gan and the land of the Oghuz Turks
(on the deserts east of the Caspian)
but the patron, presumably Oabus, lost
interest.

THE TOWER OF QABUS
Al-Biruni lived at a time of great ferment in learning and
the arts. About 1 000 A.D., he was living at Gurgan, in
north-east Iran, at the court of Qabus, to whom he dedicated
his first known major work, the Chronology of Ancient
Nations. Left, the famous tower of Qabus. It was long
believed to be the ruler's tomb, but recent investigation
has revealed no trace of a burial chamber. Al-Biruni may
have watched the tower being built, since elegantly carved
Arabic inscriptions at its summit and base record that
Qabus ordered its construction in 1006 A.D. when al-Biruni
was 33 years old. The region had been reputed since the
9th century for its pottery. Below, platter and bowl shaped
by Samanid potters who worked in Transoxiana and in
Khorassan, countries in which al-Biruni sojourned for several
years. Kufic Arabic inscriptions adorn platter (left); glazed
bowl (right) bears a stylized bird motif.
Photo © The Metropolitan Museum of Art,
New York, U.S.A.
Photo © Freer Gallery of Art,
Washington, U.S.A.
The end of al-Biruni's stay at the
Ziyarid court can be precisely estab¬
lished, for in 1003 he observed two
lunar eclipses from Gurgan, one on
19 February and the other on 14 Au¬
gust. The following year he observed
a third lunar eclipse, but this time
from Jurjaniyya, on 4 June. Thus in
the interim, he had returned to his
homeland, high in favour with the
reigning Khwarizmshah.
Thanks to the Khwarizmshah's liber¬
ality, al-Biruni was able to construct
in Jurjaniyya an astronomical instru¬
ment which in gratitude he called the
"Shah's Circle". In all probability it
was a large ring fixed on the plane of
the meridian.
Al-Biruni speaks in several places
in the Tahdid, his book on geodesy,
and in his Canon on astronomy, of
15 observations of the sun's transit
over the meridian in Jurjaniyya, the
first one at the summer solstice on
7 June 1016, and the last one on
7 December of the same year. It was
probably during this period of pros¬
perity and royal favour that he had a
hemisphere ten cubits (5.4 metres) in
diameter built to help solve geodesic
problems graphically.
Meantime the political atmosphere
in the sultanate of Khwarizm was
becoming more and more tense. In the
Tahdid al-Biruni writes: "I had enjoyed
only a few years of peace when the
Lord of Time (God) allowed me to
return to my own country; but there
I was forced to take part in public
affairs, which caused fools to envy me
and wise men to pity me."
Ma'mun, the Khwarizmshah, confided
several difficult political missions to
al-Biruni, who carried them out skil¬
fully "with tongue of silver and of
gold". But Ma'mun was assassinated
by some of his troops in revolt and
this gave the Ghaznavid sultan Mahmud
an opportunity to march against
Khwarizm with a large army. From
its base In east-central Afghanistan the
kingdom of the Ghaznavids was swiftly
expanding. By 1020, Sultan Mahmud
had carved out a realm extending a
thousand miles north and south and
twice as far east and west.
»L-BIRUNI was among those
deported by the conqueror to Ghazna
in Sijistan (Afghanistan), partly no
doubt to enhance the sultan's court
with his presence, but also In order to
get rid of an active supporter of the
Khwarizmian pretenders. He was then
44 years old.
The following year we find him in
a village south of Kabul, downcast and
livinq in misery, but working hard on
the Tahdid. On 14 October 1018 he
wanted to measure the height of the
sun but had no instrument to hand.
So he was obliged to draw a calibrated
arc on the back of a reckoning board
and use it.with the aid of a plumb line,
as a makeshift quadrant
On the basis of the measurements
made with this crude device he calcu¬
lated the latitude of the locality. On
8 April, 1019, he observed an eclipse
of the sun at Lamghan, a town to the
north-east of Kabul.
Al-Biruni's relations with Sultan
Mahmud were never cordial. It is
evident, none the less, that he was
given official support for his work. In
his Canon he relates that he determin¬
ed the latitude of Ghazna by a series
of observations made between 1018
and 1020 with an instrument which he
calls the "Yamini Ring". Yamin al-
Dawla (Right Hand of the State) was
one of the titles conferred on Mahmud
by the Abbasid Caliph in Baghdad, and
the monumental instrument was named,
according to custom, after the royal
patron.
It is also evident that al-Biruni's
interests in Sanscrit and the civilization
of India were due to his forced resi¬
dence in an empire that now extended
well into the Indian subcontinent. In
1021 the conquering sultan subjugated
the Ganges Valley almost as far as
Benares, and in 1026, by a daring raid
south starting from Ghazna, he reached
the Indian Ocean.
Al-Biruni took advantage of these
events to visit various parts of India
and stayed there more or less volun¬
tarily. We know that he journeyed to
the Punjab and Kashmir regions,
though no dates can be given for his
visits. He determined the latitudes of
a number of towns, and reports that
CONTINUED PAGE 16
13

I
' <3XHBB
'***ito$ tt 4j
ii' i Vi a
Ml i
; i i i .
Vi1,» .».<
*'
II,
I liK\J
.
'.. ' .1
THE NINE-DOMED
MOSQUE
OF BALKH

J*»-
m
if
y*
mf*f%
IF*
r
j fi I
r ^,.- i// ^ r*
£@
^.feriJ-O
ßfc
ro?A
í>?Ji
£&f
&Mm
m-. %
m i JmâMà
'l*
:AWÇ>
^ ._./&:
fté!«
."'
If .t'
-ifc. *"
I I I I I.
I I I I
l.l II I .
Ill I I
I1.' ' . i
',1 I I 1,1,1
I I I J I,
I I I f
: I > III
'il I .
i-,
fc
'S-* .
v,;,-..
-M A ;a
y ¡
;-Vrr r
i
r
-
*i
Seven years ago the existence of the mosque of Nouh-Goumbed
with its nine domes, one of the early examples of Islamic archi¬
tecture in Central Asia, was unknown to modern scholars. Its
imposing ruins, hidden away in the remoteness of north-west
Afghanistan on the site of the ancient city of Balkh, were studied
and described by archeologists only in 1967. In this region
al-Biruni set the scene of one of his romances, The Two
Idols of Bamian (see page 30). Up to the 7th century, Balkh
was an important seat of Buddhist learning. After its conquest
by the Arabs in 663, its fame as an intellectual and artistic centre
spread even wider and its splendours were recounted by Arab
and Chinese travellers and historians. The nine domes of this
almost square mosque were once supported on pointed arches
resting on six central columns. The domes have fallen in, but even
in its present state the mosque gives an impression of beauty
and strength. This is in part due to the size of the six columns
1.56 metres in diameter (above) and to the manner in which the
baked bricks are separated by small decorated interstices 4 to
5 cm. wide. The exterior (above left) is ravaged by time, but
the interior decoration is well preserved (see ornamental detail
below left). The floral and geometrical motifs are found on the
stucco carvings which cover the entire surface above the columns
in an infinite profusion of designs, none of which is repeated,
except on the capitals. The decorative features and form of
construction enabled archaeologists to place the mosque in the
9th century and as "an architectural achievement without precedent".
15


THE LONG ODYSSEY (Continued from page 13)
16
while he was living at Fort Nandana,
he used a nearby mountain to calculate
the diameter of the earth. Nandana
had been taken by Mahmud in 1014.
It controlled the route by which he, the
Moghuls after him, and Alexander the
Great long before penetrated the Indus
Valley.
Al-Biruni spent a long time in Ghazna
itself and made many astronomical
observations there, including transits
of the sun across the meridian at the
time of the summer solstice in 1019,
an eclipse of the moon on 16 Septem¬
ber 1019, and equinoxes and solstices
up to the winter solstice in 1021. It
was then that he completed his treatise
Shadows.
In 1024, the ruler of the Turks along
the Volga sent an embassy to Ghazna.
The Turks had trade relations with the
inhabitants of the polar regions, and
al-Biruni was able to add to his know¬
ledge of those countries by question¬
ing the envoys. One of them stated
in the sultan's presence that some¬
times in the far north the sun did not
set for days. Mahmud at first con¬
sidered this as heresy and was enrag¬
ed, but al-Biruni convinced him that
It was perfectly plausible.
In 1027, the year that the treatise
Chords was finished, a Chinese and
Uighur Turkish legation came to
Ghazna. From this mission, al-Biruni
obtained geographical information
about the Far East which he later
included In his Canon.
Sultan Mahmud died in 1030, and
soon afterwards al-Biruni completed
his encyclopaedic book, India, but he
did not dedicate it to any particular
patron. Within the year (1030) the
sultan's eldest son, Mas'ud succeeded
to the crown and then the situation of
his most famous scientist changed
completely.
Al-Biruni put the final touches to his
third major work, the Canon of Astro¬
nomy, and dedicated it to the new
sovereign in florid terms.
In this book he takes issue with
Ptolemy's system on several points.
He holds, for example, that the sun's
apogee is not fixed, and while he
accepts the geocentric theory, he
shows that the astronomical facts can
also be explained by assuming that the
earth revolves round the sun.
According to one chronicler, Mas'ud
offered the Master an elephant-load of
silver coins for this work, but al-Biruni
declined the gift. Nevertheless he
was provided with the means to con¬
tinue his scientific and literary studies
as long as he lived.
It may have been because of this
change of regime that he was able to
re-visit his native country. He made
at least one trip back, for in his
Bibliography he writes that for over
forty years he had sought a certain
Manichaean work, a copy of which he
finally procured in Khwarizm.
Al-Biruni recounts that after the age
of 50 he suffered from a number of
serious ailments. In his distress, he-
questioned several astrologers about;
how much time he had left to live.;
Their replies were at total variance
with one another and some were
obviously absurd. In point of fact,,
towards the end of his 61st year
(possibly his 61st lunar year) his
health began to improve.
One night he dreamt that lie was
observing the new moon and when its
crescent disappeared he heard a voice
predicting that he would be able to
gaze upon it 170 times more. As It
turned out, he lived longer than
170 more lunations (14 lunar years).
It was during the reign of Mawdud,
son of Sultan Mas'ud, (1040-1048) that
al-Biruni wrote Gems, his book on
precious and semi-precious stones
and on metals. Following this period,
even though his sight and hearing were
failing, as he himself tells us in his
last book, he carried on his research
assiduously with the aid of a Greek
assistant.
His final work was the Pharmacology
which ¡s a tribute to his prodigious
erudition. Al-Biruni tells us that he
was over eighty years old (lunar
years?) when he was still working on
this compilation, which brings us down
to the year 1050 or later. The date
of his death, as given by Ghadanfar.
December 1048 Is therefore
inexact. Ultimately, he survived his
third Ghaznavid patron and lived
longer than the time predicted in his
dream.
Al-Biruni was Persian by birth. He
was brought up In the Khwarizm dialect
and later used Neo-Persian as his
spoken tongue, but out of choice he
preferred the Arabic language as an
instrument of thought and a means of
expression in his intellectual life, both
for his scientific treatises and his
purely literary works.
Thus his writings constitute a monu¬
ment in the history of ideas and doc¬
trines within the Arab world before
forming part of the general history of
human thought, as a contribution from
the Arabic-speaking world where they
came into being and first acquired their
fame.
In point of fact, al-Biruni, personally
and well ahead of his time, was a
promoter of mutual understanding and
fruitful cultural exchange between the
East and the West though he may
not have thought of himself as such
through the active mediation of the
Arabic language and the profoundly
humanistic values Inherent in it.
By virtue of his scientific method,
which makes him a model for the
Eastern world even today and ensures
him the gratitude of Western science,
he was a forerunner; and in his apti¬
tude for inter-cultural understanding,
he formed a connecting link between
East and West, just as his work is a
manifestation of their underlying unity
and fraternity.
Jacques Boilot
