'Economic development
would be simplified by
a drastic reduction
of fertility in the
less developed countries.'
by Frank W. Notestein
HE world's people are at best little
interested in population growth per se. It is a planner's
abstraction. But everywhere they express not the slightest
ambiguity about wanting to be more prosperous, and no
one with compassion can face the tragic poverty prevalent
in most of the world without feeling the urgent need for
great increases in material well-being, especially among the
poorest peoples. Our first premise, therefore, is :
Population policies must be geared to fostering the
processes of economic development and the more equitable
distribution of income. Moreover, no population policy can
be a substitute for economic development. Poverty can
only be cured by enhanced production.
The fund of life is renewed and maintained by near
balances of birth and death, of which there are two polar
types : the inefficient one, based on very high birth rates
cancelled by very high death rates, and the efficient one,
based on low birth and death rates. If these two combina¬
tions exhausted the possibilities there can be no doubt
as to which combination people would universally choose
for themselves. In all normal circumstances, given a
realistic choice, people prefer health and survival to
sickness and death.
CONTINUED PAGE 24
22
FRANK W. NOTESTEIN is the internationally known American
demographer. He was the first Director of the Population Division
of the United Nations. Visiting Senior Research Demographer,
and former Director of the Office of Population Research, Prince¬
ton University, he is President Emeritus of the Population Council.
This text is an abridged version of a paper he delivered at a
United Nations symposium on Population and Development, in
Cairo last June.

L°w fert/Kty
and economic
growth
(Continued from page 22)
The polar combinations of high birth and death rates or
low birth and death rates do not exhaust the options.
Our choice, however, is limited. High death rates chroni¬
cally coupled with low birth rates lead to extinction, and
high birth rates coupled indefinitely with low death rates
are impossible in a finite world.
In principle, high birth rates can be coupled with an
epoch of low death rates to be followed by an epoch of
high death rates. But a systematic policy of seeking
longevity now at the cost of short life later seems a particu¬
larly vicious means of visiting the sins of the fathers on the
children of the coming generations. It surely is not
something that the world seeks to do as a matter of
principle.
I
24
F we pursue this line of thought, we must quickly
come to our second premise that:
The ultimate goal of the world's population policy
must be to achieve an equilibrium based on low birth and
death rates that can be sustained throughout a distant
future for the world and its several parts.
The fact that a demographic equilibrium based on low
birth and death rates is the option that all the world would
ultimately choose for itself if it could, does not mean that
it is immediately either necessary or desirable. Therefore,
our third premise is that :
Policies supporting population growth, or its necessary
concomitants, must find their justification as desirable
way-stations on the path to stability, health, and prosperity.
The foregoing do not incorporate the only, or even the
most important, human values. The values are among the
most universal, and their attainment would require fulfilling
other ; universal wants, such as the need for education.
Certainly all of us would put our right to political freedom,
to philosophical and religious beliefs of our choosing, and
to opportunities to pursue a life of personal fulfilment on
still higher planes. None of these, however, need come into
conflict with the universally wanted equilibrium of healthy
prosperity. They would not, that is, given the essential
condition for policy formulation at the international level
that:
No one is free to advocate for others policies that in
similar circumstances he would not be willing to accept
for himself and his family.
In the light of these goals, what can be said about the
costs and benefits of population growth?
Clearly there are cases in which growth is needed to
provide a large enough population to reap the economies
of large-scale production. But most countries that need a
larger area to provide the economies of scale could
attain it much more rapidly by lowering the barriers to
international trade than by waiting for their populations to
grow, however fast.
It is possible for a nation to be too sparsely settled to
be efficient, but there are not very many such cases and
the existence of empty space does not provide the proof.
There is usually a reason for low density such as the
limited nature of the resources, the vagaries or severities
of the climate, the prevalence of disease, the displacement
of labour by machines, and the lack of political stability
or of communications with the outside world. It would be
well if governments could face the fact that there are a
great many places and conditions in which people simply
do not want to live.
In some instances, however, areas have been kept
relatively empty for reasons that modern technology and
the control of disease have made irrelevant. In these
circumstances rapid growth may be needed. It is a fair
indication that more rapid growth is needed in a region
when its wage rates are high in terms of the national average,
and when the stream of internal migration is moving in that
direction already. All too often the empty spaces that we
are told need more population prove, on closer inspection,
to have wages that are lower than the national average and
are experiencing a net outward movement of people.
In such instances "too little" population really means too
little population to provide owners with opportunities for
efficient exploitation.
The need for larger numbers is often urged on non-
economic grounds. It is necessary for national power, or
simply as a matter of prestige. Surely there never was
an age when such reasoning should have less force. The
world has always been led by the people with superior
technology, and it was never more true than in the atomic
age, when the world can be ruined but cannot be ruled
by aggression.
Nor would one think much attention would be given to
population size as a matter of prestige. Quite clearly many
of the world's small healthy and wealthy nations draw more
admiration and exert more influence than countries many
times their size. One only has to think of the countries
of Western Europe, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand to
realize how little either power or influence turns on issues
of population size.
In short the number of cases in which a rational argument
can be made that larger numbers are needed is very small.
A much stronger case can be made that the world needs
smaller rather than larger numbers. This case does not
rest as much on the paucity of resources as is often thought.
Good land is in short supply, but recent history has shown
that capital and skill can be fairly effective substitutes.
We hear a great deal of talk about nearing the end of
economic growth because of a shortage of resources and
of mounting pollution.
It seems to me that the world has never been so close
to being able to obtain a supply of basic resources beyond
the imaginings of all previous generations. At least this
is my reading of the prospects for virtually unlimited energy
from the nuclear sources.
With an almost unlimited supply of cheap energy, vast
supplies of low-grade minerals become potentially available
for use and recycling. It seems to me that modern science
and technology have the capacity of bringing the world's
production of both food and manufactured goods to levels
about which we have as yet scarcely dreamed.
Nor do the risks of pollution negate this potentiality.
The problems are serious but they do not lie as much in the
nature of our technology as in our faulty economic arrange¬
ments, whereby the polluter and his product do not bear
the social costs of the pollution. Obviously it will be
expensive to clean up, but the expense is one that a truly
prosperous society can well afford. We may well be at the
beginning rather than the end of economic growth.
CONTINUED PAGE 26

The 20th cantury has
witnessed an astounding
increase of cities with
"million-plus'' populations
from 11 in 1900 to 75 in
1950. By 1985 the world's
"million-plus" cities will
probably number over 270.
Far right, high-rise housing
blocks in an Asian city
contrast sharply with meagre
catch of fish (photo right).
Can world food harvests
match the speed of the
global population growth?
Low fertility
and economic growth
(Continued from page 24)
It is to be earnestly hoped that we are at the beginning,
because it is poverty that is the great destroyer. It is
poverty so abject that the future takes a terrible discount
against the needy present; poverty that destroys the forests
and soils, that lets the rivers flood, that malnourishes the
children into stupidity, debilitates them with disease, and
Withholds knowledge of the earth's potential. Poverty is the
great destroyer.
The potentialities are great but the realities are grim.
The constraints of high density in purely extractive
economies are clear. In the less developed countries
population densities often are already so great that simple
systems of production are no longer adequate to prevent
crushing poverty. The real risks are those of coupling
complexity and high density with poverty. Complex modern
economic systems are highly productive, but they are so
completely Interlocked as to be vulnerable to disruption.
In the rich countries, where there is ample room for
retrenchment in times of turmoil, the risks are tolerable.
But in the less developed countries, where large proportions
of the population live close to the margins of subsistence,
the risks of complexity are grave, as the recent history of
starvation during major civil disturbance amply proves.
Complex systems of production in poor countries with
high population density may prove to be lethal in times
of trouble, but the populations are often already so large
that the absence of complex economies would be lethal in




_ft normal times. The problems of economic and social
yR development would be much simpler if the densely settled
countries had smaller populations. Their huge numbers
already present substantial obstacles to the modernizing
process on which all hope for future welfare depends.
To say that rather few countries actually need larger
populations to support their social-economic development
is not at all the same thing as saying that further population
growth is undesirable. Throughout the world, with very few
exceptions,' it would require an . almost cataclysmic
disturbance to stop population growth immediately. In the
vast majority of countries an immediate end to growth could
only be attained by a two or three-fold increase in death
rates, which would not only violate our basic values, but in
all probability be sufficiently disorganizing to set back the
entire developmental process.
Even in those cases in which one can imagine that
population growth might be stopped immediately by drastic
declines in fertility it is doubtful that such a development
would be desirable. In almost all of the countries the
higher birth rates of the past have left populations with
rather large proportions of youth. As these large numbers
of youth move into the childbearing ages, even if they bear
only enough children to replace themselves, there will be
many more births than deaths. Indeed, if fertility were
to fall to the replacement level immediately, it would take
more than 75 years to bring population growth to a complete
halt in most countries.
It seems quite impossible to reduce populations in the
near future or even to bring growth to a quick end. But
it should be possible to reduce the extremely high rates of
population growth that characterize particularly the most
poverty stricken of the less developed countries. Today
most of them are growing more rapidly than ever before
in their history.
Many learned discussions have developed about the
economic consequences of such growth. To me the issue
CONTINUED PAGE 28

£ii;%^^
growth
{Continued from page 26)
seems quite straightforward. The less developed countries
are bearing the enormous costs of modernizing their
educational systems, their methods of disease control, their
agricultural production, their manufacturing equipment,
their transport and their civic services. It is unfortunate
that they have to carry at the same time the burden of the
most rapid population increases of their histories. With
the technology in transition, it is bound to be difficult at best
to find productive roles for all of the population, but the
problems are vastly complicated when the stream of entering
workers doubles in size every two or three decades.
The nexus of problems centering on the expansion of the
food supply is particularly difficult. The less developed
nations of dense settlement need to triple their food supply
by the end of the century to improve the diet of populations
that are expected to be twice their present size by that time.
Agricultural specialists seem to believe that it is technically
possible for the Green Revolution to achieve that goal if
all goes well.
But such gains can only be made by a high degree of
modernization which depends on other inputs than
conventional labour. In short, in order to produce the
amount of food required, substantially smaller proportions
of the labour force can be used in agriculture. There may
well be massive flights from the land, of which the present
trek to the city is only the beginning. The resulting train
of unemployment and underemployment in urban squalor
may well threaten the maintenance of political coherence,
with its attendant risk of disorder and death from sweeping
starvation and disease.
HIS agricultural displacement seems to me to carry
the most serious threat to welfare of the next decades.
The cure lies partly in the use of labour-intensive methods,
but still more in the development of non-agricultural industry
with all its heavy requirements for training and capital
investment. Rapid agricultural and non-agricultural develop¬
ment may well be essential to avoid the most serious of
human tragedies in the next decades.
the less developed
growth, will continue
the past, large pro-
absorbed in meeting
numbers rather than
It seems self-evident
ified by a reduction
28
The danger is grave indeed that
countries, faced with this spectacular
to see, in the future as they have in
portions of the developmental effort
the minimum requirements of growing
contributing to the enrichment of life,
that these problems would be simpl
of the rate of population increase.
There is coming to be very general agreement with this
view that the rate of population growth needs to be reduced,
particularly in the less developed countries. The main
objection one hears now is that other things are more
important. Of course they arel One must protect the
living before giving heed to the future. But this is precisely
the viciousness of rapid population growth in this setting.
Today's needs are so pressing we can scarcely look ahead.
It Is difficult to escape the conclusion that the problems of
economic development would be greatly simplified if the
rate of population growth could be cut by a drastic reduction
of fertility in the less developed countries.
The problems of the more developed countries are much
less severe. Their fertility is already quite low, often close
to, and sometimes below, the level required for the long-run,
maintenance of a stationary population. Their populations
are large, and are close to an equilibrium situation. It is
to be hoped that they set their targets at or a bit below
this replacing level and then concentrate on problems of
the quality of life in a situation that is in equilibrium with
the environment.
The conclusion is clear. We have an additional reason
for fostering social-economic development. It is essential
to alleviate the poverty of existing populations and to
provide for the larger numbers which the future will almost
inevitably bring. But also it is needed to foster the
motivation for reduced childbearing which will be needed
if our efforts at modernization are not to be frittered away
in support of ever larger numbers living in poverty. There
seems to be no major group opposing this position.
The difficulty lies, not in disagreement, but in lack of
serious commitment in a world preoccupied with more
Immediate problems in which its parochial interests are
sharply involved. Perhaps demographers, who led the way
in calling attention to the importance of development in the
transformation of value structures, have paid little attention
to economic development as a specific population policy on
the simple grounds that if development is not undertaken
for itself, it will not be undertaken because it should help to
reduce birth rates.
There Is every reason to believe that strong family
planning programmes can help slow the rate of population
growth. It is sometimes urged that programmes designed
to spread contraceptive practice are irrelevant where the
large family system remains intact and parents want more
rather than fewer children. This interpretation is too simple.
There is a wide diversity of values in every society. The
predominance of the traditional system does not preclude
the presence of the emerging system In some degree.
The problem is to support the new values that are centered
on fewer children to whom better opportunities for health,
education, and prosperity can be given.
One way to foster the new values is to make it possible
for those already motivated to limit their childbearing as
simply and effectively as possible, thereby gaining
community examples of the merits of the smaller family.
It is true that values mediate behaviour, but it is also
true that behaviour mediates values, as any observer of
fashions in dress must agree. Probably there is no more
effective means of communicating the small-family ideal

than to support the efforts of those already motivated by
making contraception simple, attractive, and inexpensive
to practise.
In addition, serious educational programmes are also
needed. Such programmes should draw upon as wide a
range of legitimating authority as the medical, religious,
and governmental leaders can supply. The essential
message, however, has nothing to do with national popu¬
lation. It should be concentrated on the advantages in the
modern world of smaller families to both children and
parents and on the nature of services available for their
attainment.
Such work should not be thought of as a substitute for
programmes in the fields of health and education which
are so clearly a part of the modernising process and
desirable in their own right. Moreover, since the wanted
innovation can be used as an excellent carrier for those
that are needed but less well understood, it is often
desirable to combine family planning with the maternal-
child health services.
Frank W. Notesteln
