Population growth
or
?economic growth?
'It's one or the other' say some
'A phony problem' say others
I
6
IT took at least a million
years for human numbers to reach the
billion mark. Before the emergence of
settled agriculture perhaps 8,000 years
ago, the world's entire population may
have been from 5 to 10 million. With
more elaborate social organization,
much larger populations could be
sustained, and about 2,000 years ago
the world's population had grown to
between 200 and 400 million in¬
habitants.
The billion mark was reached around
1800, and the second billion arrived
in about 130 years. But the third
billion took only 30 years, and the
fourth will have arrived within only
15 years.
World population growth is the result
of natural increase the excess of
births over deaths. The fall in the
death rate occurred first in the
developed regions, but over the last
thirty years has been operating
spectacularly in Africa, Asia and Latin
America. Small families have become
the rule in the economically advanced
countries but birth rates in the poorer
regions have remained high.
Thus a revolutionary change in the
reproductive balance of the human
species has taken place in modern
times. Never in history had it been
possible to reduce human mortality to
such an extent as witnessed in the past
hundred years or so. The present
decade is confronted with the most
rapid growth of population the world
has ever seen.
Terrible though the losses of human
lives have been in mass killing of
wartime and widespread deaths from
earthquakes, floods, famines and
epidemics, these have not substantially
impeded the growth of population in
the modern period. It has been
calculated that all the national and
regional disasters on record since 1850
may have delayed the growth by no
more than about 10 years. Had there
been no war, famine or epidemic since
1850, the world's population might have
totalled more than 3.5 billion in 1960
instead of in 1970.
Unless disasters occur on a scale
never before known, enormous future
increases in the numbers of mankind
are a virtual certainty. But population
cannot grow forever. If population
growth is not to be cut down by
disasters, it will have to be reduced by
decreases in birth rates decreases
comparable to those which have
already occurred in the death rates.
Thus it has become evident that
there is, as a U.N. panel on population
has stated, "an increasing need for
a global or world-wide look at the
problem of population growth and the
international consequences of national
policies. The world appears to be
approaching a stage where not only
individual decisions will have to be
evaluated in terms of national interest
but also national decisions will have to
be evaluated in terms of the interest of
the world community."
The U.N. panel has pointed out that
zero population growth (ZPG) is
inevitable as a long-run proposition.
Short of natural disaster, man may
bring it about deliberately and by
acceptable means (mainly by controlling
births) or through undesirable means
(such as increased mortality). However,
the experts emphasized that while it is
not unrealistic to expect ZPG to be
achieved in many developed countries
in the foreseeable future, such an
expectation would be quite unrealistic
in regard to the presently developing
countries.
Population policies cannot be con¬
sidered separately from broader ques¬
tions of development, U.N. studies have
revealed. A high level of social and
economic development is generally
accompanied by a reduction in fertility.
Without reduction in the rate of popu¬
lation growth, however, economic
development may be severely jeopar¬
dized. At the same time without
economic development, and without
radical transformation in the structures
of society, reduction in the rate of
population growth will be hard to
achieve. Moreover, reducing the
growth rate will not be enough to solve
the problem of poverty.
All government policies aimed at
economic growth and social develop¬
ment may affect fertility in some way,
the U.N. studies indicate. Certain
policies and programmes aimed at
improvement in welfare may also lower
the benefits and increase the costs of
having children and therefore constitute
policies for limiting fertility; yet, other
policies and programmes may tend to
encourage fertility.
The phenomenal growth of the
human family in the coming decades
may call for new ways of thinking
about man's needs and values. The
vastly increased sizes of population in
every form of settlement in the
largest cities as well as in towns,
villages and the open countryside
may require forms and methods of
economic and social organization
unlike those successfully used in the
past.
Cultural, political and international
circumstances also will cause future

Geopoliticus Child Watching the Birth of a New Man ", oil painting by the Spanish artist
Salvador Dali (1943), from a private collection in Cleveland, U.S.A.
development to differ in many respects
from the past, as will the persistent
shortage and geographical maldistri¬
bution of sources of investment capital.
Some goals of humanity may have
to be reformulated. Revolutions in
thought, feeling and attitude of one
kind or another may become necess¬
ary and, in fact, such radical changes
appear bound to occur. World Popu¬
lation Year offers an appropriate
occasion for all to reflect on the basic
goals and directions of mankind.
Several developing countries, whose
area and resources are extensive in
relation to current population, have
expressed opposition to any world
campaign to limit population.
Brazil, for example, vigorously
pressing this point of view, told a recent
U.N. population meeting that it
could not understand why developed
countries with high population den¬
sities advised less densely populated
countries to be demographically wiser
and to reduce their population growth.
If the developed countries were so
concerned with population growth,
Brazil's representative asked, would it
not be preferable for them to transfer
plants and new investments to devel¬
oping countries, instead of accepting
additions to their labour force from
abroad?
Brazil and other countries argue that
population growth has been over¬
emphasized. Development has always
spread outward from densely-popu¬
lated to thinly-populated areas, they
maintain, and history has shown that
rapid population growth has also been
a sign of development. The solution
to population problems, they say, will
be found only in economic develop¬
ment, and not through action forcing
certain sectors to adopt contraceptive
measures. Brazil advised the inter¬
national community to concentrate on
providing factual information upon
which governments could formulate
programmes and policies.
Chile's delegate to the U.N. General
Assembly said, in November 1970, that
the population growth problem is
"artificially emphasized by developed
countries as an excuse for them to
escape their obligations to the inter¬
national community"; the real need was
"to attack the causes of underdevel¬
opment through an increase in trade
and financial aid, greater access to
modern technology, and co-operation 7
between developed and developing *
countries in all areas of technical
assistance."
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

TIME-CLOCK
OF DOUBLING
POPULATIONS
This watch dial shows in graphic form what
demographers mean when they say a coun¬
try's growth rate is 3.2 per cent or 2.5 per
cent Dial shows the year when the popula¬
tion of different countries will double de¬
pending on growth rate (circled figure on
outer rim of dial). For example, Costa Rica
with the highest growth rate (3.8) will double
its population from 1.8 million inhabitants to
3.6 million by 1990. India with a growth rate of
2.6 will double its population by 1998 (from
over 550 million inhabitants to over 1,000
million). See also pages 9 and 10.
8
POPULATION GROWTH (Continued)
Senegal's representative, declaring
that Europe developed in the 19th cen¬
tury without birth control programmes,
added: "I am aware that the decrease
in mortality rates today adds a new
dimension to the population problem,
but technology has increased the
industrial output. In Senegal it would
be disastrous to limit population since
the population density there is only
seven persons per square kilometre."
Miguel A. Ozorio de Almeida, head
of Brazil's delegation to the U.N. Con¬
ference on the Human Environment,
in Stockholm, in September 1973,
attacked "the attitude that the devel¬
oped countries have demonstrated, by
their development, a special right to
salvation and perpetuation, thus pass¬
ing on to the more numerous under¬
developed peoples the responsibility
for creating the necessary space on
earth... Emphasis upon population
growth, as such, unlinked to the
relationship of the population to the
national resource base including geo¬
graphical space is inadequate and
unacceptable.
"Countries with more than 100, 200,
Unesco Courier drawlnq
by François Guillot
or even 300 persons per square kilo¬
metre are thus left outside this
approach, while countries with fewer
than 20 inhabitants per square kilo¬
metre are being condemned for demo¬
graphic policies that would bring
about increased economic efficiency
and constitute a necessary condition
for their national integration and fulfil¬
ment as a human community." If
resources were to be shared by a|l
peoples, "then economic power, in¬
dustrial productivity and financial
control should also be shared", he
maintained.
