WHAT FUTURE
FOR OUR
ANCIENT CITIES?
by Georges Fradier
4
GEORGES FRADIER is co-ordinator of
Unesco's studies on man and his environment.
A member of Unesco's staff since 1949, he
was head of the Press Division and chief of
Unesco missions to Mali and Sierra Leone
before becoming director of the project for the
safeguard and development of the Tunis-
Carthage region carried out by the Tunisian
Government and Unesco with financial aid from
the U.N. Development Programme Special
Fund. Novelist and essayist, he is the author
of "Encounters and Celebrations', on the
mutual appreciation of Eastern and Western
cultural values (1963), and "East and West,
towards mutual understanding' (1959), both
published by Unesco. He has been a frequent
contributor to the "Unesco Courier."

*m£ ¿Sx % W
Photo © Jacqueline Hyde, Paris
Integrating historic sites
into modern urbanism
THE preservation of historic
towns and sites is a problem
that arises even in countries where
urbanization has only recently begun.
Some capital cities which were no
more than villages at the end of the
19th century already face problems
of growth and a difficult choice bet¬
ween the preservation and moderniza¬
tion of their historic centres.
Such problems are even more
frequent in towns with centuries, if not
thousands of years, of history behind
them. Violent controversies may be
caused as much by misunderstandings
as by conflicting interests. Some
projects for urban renewal In historic
city centres arouse strong feelings so
confused that they are sometimes
wrongly seen as new quarrels between
the Ancients and the Moderns.
At first sight, the notion of a historic
town or locality presents no difficulty
for anyone. It seems quite clear in
brochures and other tourist literature
publicizing "cities of artistic and his¬
toric interest".
However, the places whose age and
picturesque qualities get all the lime¬
light are as a rule the best protected
or at least the best provided with
means for ensuring their preservation.
Many other cities of equal merit,
whose sites are less accessible or
whose architectural worth is less
easily discerned, remain neglected.
Today's rapidly expanding towns
are better known for their vigorous
growth than for the vestiges of their
past. But now they are discovering
the charm of their old quarters which
seemed commonplace to the tourists
of former times, interested only in the
"remote" or "great" periods.
City buildings do not always need
to have defied the centuries in order
to be considered as venerable. They
may be classified as historic because
they were once the childhood homes
of famous persons or the scene of
outstanding events in the recent his¬
tory of a nation.
The notion of a town or quarter of
historical interest thus covers a wide
variety of places: ghost towns,
forgotten cities among whose ruins
nomads now pitch their tents, over-
populated towns bursting with life.
Some are legendary cities, known the
world over; others are remote villages
whose stones reveal their history to
only a handful of scholars. .
Some ancient cities, raised In the r

)V space of a few years, have retained
an astonishing unity of style and the
stamp of the age in which they were
built. Others, which have been con¬
tinually developing, are a disconcerting
mixture of periods and styles like
manuscripts in which old writing has
been rubbed out to make room for new.
All these groups of historic buildings
have one thing In common: they are
generally thought to be ill adapted to
modern life. When their raison d'être
political, religious, military, cultural
or economic has moved elsewhere
or disappeared completely through
changes in religious, social and
technological conditions, these build¬
ings lose some of their original uses
and are poorly equipped to fulfil new
ones as commercial centres, for
example.
Once the wealthier and more enter¬
prising sections of the population
move out to new towns, the whole
character of a city changes radically.
People from low income groups move
in, renting accommodation In former
palaces, mansions, stately homes and
ancestral dwellings. They cannot
afford to maintain these buildings,
which almost inevitably become dilapi¬
dated. Trade, previously geared to
the needs of a prosperous, structured
and diversified society, adjusts to the
requirements of more modest and
relatively deprived groups.
Needless to say, not all towns and
quarters of historic interest have
suffered the same fate: some are
empty, some bubble with vitality;
others have kept or regained their
former prestige.
If a historic city has ceased to fulfil
the purposes intended by its builders,
are we to conclude that it no longer
has a "raison d'être"? Or ought we, on
the contrary, to endow it with new
functions? And if so, what are they?
At all times towns and cities have
changed in appearance, sometimes
with brutal speed, for wars and fires
have been powerful forces of urban
development. But when a town or
city was rebuilt after a disaster, its
new appearance did not necessarily
conflict with the original vision of the
master builders of former times. The
world of Its inhabitants would change
very little.
The new buildings which replaced
the old were usually built on the same
site and followed the same layout.
Succeeding generations saw their
town grow or shrink, become beautiful
or ugly, expand or close in on itself.
In other words, cities changed gradu¬
ally. During one man's lifetime, his
city would stay the same.
In our time, there has been a radical
break with this process. Today, for
the first time in history, every city in
6
the world Is being rapidly transformed,
and in accordance with a uniform
pattern. The disappearance of old
city centres and quarters should not
be an inevitable consequence of urban
expansion, but this is what is
happening everywhere.
Our industrial civilization is the first
to possess both the financial means
and the technical resources to demo¬
lish old buildings on a large scale and
almost immediately to replace them
with new and totally different ones.
This Is why the issues involved
when old towns are threatened with
demolition often seem so confused.
Only in modern times have we become
aware of the problem and Its inherent
contradictions.
The ancient city existed as an un¬
questioned presence which no more
gave rise to value judgements, to
acceptance or rejection, than did the
presence of a mountain or a river.
But once Its existence is questioned
It becomes historic, and Is' either
extolled or dismissed as alien to the
modern world, a treasure for some,
a source of embarrassment for others.
Large-scale demolition of historic
centres or quarters Is generally justi¬
fied on the grounds of "progress" by
the public authorities which either
decide on demolition or allow It to take
place. The needs and advantages of
progress are expressed from a wide
variety of viewpoints.
Traditional cities have been and still
are condemned on aesthetic grounds.
Cultural and political changes can
provoke curiously hostile reactions to
works of the past. What is ancient
may be regarded simply as old, dirty,
unseemly.
This attitude, still widely found in
some countries which seek to hide the
most typical examples of old archi¬
tecture and town planning, brings to
mind the contempt in which neo¬
classical Europe long held what it
termed the "barbarism" of Gothic
castles and cathedrals. The results
are disastrous when the authorities,
anxious to modernize their capitals,
apparently feel nothing but shame for
the evidence of their national culture,
whose purity, moreover, they claim
to defend.
Social considerations also play an
important part. Badly cared for,
overcrowded and often neglected by
the public health and maintenance
services, historic buildings used for
housing can all too easily become
classed as "Insanitary". Old town
centres are sometimes regarded as
hotbeds of disease and epidemics, fit
only for radical and over-simplified
"cleaning-up" measures as though
demolition were the only cure for
unhygienic conditions.
CONTINUED PAGE 38
Kawr¿*
¿i a i ;P

WHAT FUTURE FOR OUR ANCIENT CITIES ?
Continued from page 6
Sanitary considerations often go
hand in hand with other concerns
closely related to politics or the
problems of policing a city. Slum
buildings can provide a refuge for
swarms of unskilled workers, unsettled,
difficult to keep track of and viewed
with suspicion by better housed and
more prosperous citizens. Such ac¬
commodation then becomes suspect
and a target for rigorous action, which
is another aspect of the "cleaning-
up" process.
Then there is the spectre of popu¬
lation pressure. In some big cities,
extremely rapid growth calls for a
judicious use of space, and some
technicians would not hesitate to tear
down two- or three-storey buildings in
a historic centre and replace them
with high-rise constructions. They
imagine that this will increase the
amount of accommodation, although
experience has often shown that this
is an illusion, since redevelopment
schemes in city centres generally
encourage the building of offices and
banks rather than new houses.
Some clearer motivations are ex¬
pressed in economic terms. Historic
towns or localities overcrowded with
people who are poor if not actually
destitute, appear to be unjustifiably
occupying space and preventing it
from being put to more profitable use.
To let these buildings stand, goes
the argument, means restoring hun¬
dreds of buildings, constructing miles
of roads, and laying endless lengths
of cables. Even if this kind of pro¬
gramme caused property values to
rise, it would still be unprofitable, and
thus in many countries financially
unacceptable to the authorities.
On the other hand, urban develop¬
ment schemes which are initially
presented as partial renovation pro¬
grammes but are designed to spread,
seem infinitely more profitable. And
so they are for some.
The most frequent cause of demo¬
lition is a controversial though still
widely practised form of town planning,
in which the needs of traffic take
precedence over everything else.
By first opening up a few roads in
a town of historic interest, so as to
reduce traffic congestion, and then
laying out avenues, crossing the town
in various directions, it is thought that
the town's essential historic features
buildings, a celebrated view, a
restored quarter will have been
preserved.
The truth is that the original layout
will have been distorted, the city
disfigured and disorganized and soon
destroyed as an urban ensemble.
This process has happened too often
over the last 50 years to need elabor¬
ation. Whenever short-term planning
gives absolute priority to the road
system and the needs of motor traffic,
it regards groups of buildings from the
pre-industrial era as obstacles and
treats them as such, irrespective of
their size and value as monuments.
Some villages of historical interest
are subject to the same pressures, in
spite of or because of their renown.
Although city-dwellers who buy houses
in these villages as week-end homes
may respect their style and pro¬
portions, the same cannot be said for
the shop-keepers, craftsmen, con¬
tractors and developers who pro¬
liferate in their wake.
The more a village is uniform in
style and appearance, and the more
harmoniously it fits into the landscape,
the more vulnerable it is. It can be
spoiled within a few years by devel¬
opers who were originally attracted by
its solitude, its uniqueness and its
historic charm in other words, by its
"undeveloped" state.
Local and State authorities who are
thinking of protecting a historic
locality, town or site, have usually
gone beyond the stage of making out
a case for the preservation of cultural
property. Yet nearly always they
have to overcome the kind of argu¬
ments and practices described above.
They should realize that calculations
for urban renovation projects are not
always reliable guides, except in
quantitative terms which do not take
into account every aspect of the
social costs involved.
The quality of life in a city cannot
be measured in financial terms. The
urban development schemes which are
most successful in the eyes of their
promoters are not necessarily those
which, in the long run, are beneficial
to the community.
Some highly industrialized countries
have also become aware in recent
years that if millions of old dwellings
were repaired and restored, they would
last as long as, if not longer than,
present-day constructions. As such
they represent a considerable capital
asset, which would be almost totally
lost if they were demolished.
Thus a rational housing policy
should consider preservation as part
of its overall approach to housing.
especially since the renovation of old
dwellings will continue to be for a
long time to come the chief means of
providing homes for the poorer mem¬
bers of the community. Bringing new
life to historic localities, in particular,
has become an economic and social
necessity as well as a cultural one.
Today, when attempts are being
made to redefine the goals of progress
and to measure them against the
hazards of growth, and when defenders
of the environment are challenging
many forms of destructive exploitation,
it has become quite clear that old
towns are among the irreplaceable
resources which no country can afford
to sacrifice.
An international
inquiry on
national laws
for the protection
of historic sites
IN 1973, at Unesco's request, the
International Council of Monu¬
ments and Sites carried out an inquiry
among its 45 national committees on
current laws and regulations for the
protection of historic sites and towns
and groups of ancient buildings.
The results of the survey show
strikingly that protection is inadequate
in almost every country and that diffe¬
rent countries have adopted different
measures.
Very few of them have special laws
or regulations for the preservation of
historic quarters, towns or sites, drawn
up and enforced jointly by the two
authorities usually responsible for such
measures, that is, the historic monu¬
ments services and those in charge of
building and town planning.
From the survey it appears that this
is the case only in France and Bulgaria.
Elsewhere the protection of historic
quarters is covered by laws for the
safeguarding of the cultural heritage
(as in Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
Mexico, Poland, Tunisia, Venezuela
and Vatican City), or comes under
building and town-planning (in Den¬
mark, Finland, and Luxembourg).
In other countries the system is still
more complex, and historic localities
are protected by various laws and
regulations, dealing either with the
protection of the cultural heritage
38

To preserve these towns in all their
diversity is to give the people who
live in them today a longed-for
opportunity for social life. The
modern town-dweller is not filled with
nostalgia for the past, but Tie yearns
for an art of living, and this should
not be rejected when the only
alternative offered to him is the cult
of the motor car, in a world of steel
and concrete.
It is precisely because anonymity
and isolation seem impossible in old
towns and quarters that they are today
attracting the children and grand¬
children of those who deserted them.
And partly for the same reasons they
are attracting builders with highly
original ideas. Many architects and
town planners believe that the old
towns disparaged by their predeces¬
sors are not just relics of the past but
models from which they can draw
inspiration.
Many young people feel strongly
that these historic towns and buildings
must be preserved. In some countries
it is the young who most of all frequent
the old parts of cities and when
necessary fight to save them from
destruction. Perhaps they feel that
when an old town is destroyed,
something more than its familiar
streets is destroyed with it.
For an overwhelming majority of
people, untouched by the culture
acquired from books, old cities are
the only historical evidence they can
perceive and understand. Old cities
are the repositories of the struggles,
customs and aspirations of those who
gradually shaped the world in which
we live.
In its old towns and cities, more
surely than in its national language, a
country can discover the roots of its
personality. For the generations of
our time, cut off from the common
past, historic cities are becoming the
collective memory of mankind. The
disappearance of such places would
condemn them to live in the uncer¬
tainty and isolation of men with no
remembrance of the past.
or with town-planning, which have
usually been drawn up separately by
each of the authorities concerned (as
in Spain, Italy and U.K.).
A number of countries still have no
protection system, though some of
them are currently preparing new laws
and regulations.
Only in a few of the countries
covered by the survey do laws for the
protection of historic localities and
sites require a detailed inventory to
be drawn up of the buildings in the
protected area. This is essential if
the laws are to be effectively applied.
In Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
France, Italy, Mexico, and Spain these
inventories are now being prepared.
In other countries, quite a large
number of national committees of the
International Council of Monuments
and Sites (Cyprus, Finland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Switzerland, Tu¬
nisia and Venezuela) consider that the
national lawmaking machinery is in¬
adequate. This applies particularly
to financing and the supervision of
restoration and renovation.
Finally, even where laws are
deemed adequate, as in Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France,
Hungary, Poland and Spain, problems
arise in implementing them. The main
difficulties are a lack of supervision,
penalties which are too light or not
enforced, lack of interest or under¬
standing by authorities and individuals,
and shortage of funds.
An international agreement on these
questions would thus be of service to
all those concerned with the protection
of historic localities and towns.
In Unesco's view, action for the pre¬
servation of ancient cities comes
within the broader context of several
crucial modern problems including the
need to improve the quality of life. A
series of international recommenda¬
tions or conventions sponsored by
Unesco has carefully defined the
principles and aims of the preservation
of the environment.
The Recommendation concerning
the protection of the beauty and
character of landscapes and sites,
adopted in 1962, for instance, warns
against the dangers of "uncontrolled
urban development". The Recommen¬
dation on the preservation of cultural
property endangered by public or
private works, adopted in 1968,
stresses that it is urgent to "harmonize
the preservation of the cultural heritage
with changes due to social and
economic development."
Similarly, the Recommendation con¬
cerning the protection, at the national
level, of the cultural and natural
heritage, adopted in 1972, recognizes
that it is "essential for human equilib¬
rium and development to preserve a
setting in contact with nature and the
evidence of civilization bequeathed by
past generations."
Lastly, the Convention on the pro¬
tection of the world cultural and
natural heritage, also adopted in 1972,
declares that "the deterioration or
disappearance of any part of the
cultural or natural heritage constitutes
a harmful impoverishment of the
heritage of all nations."
It is with these ideas in mind that
Unesco is now drawing up an inter¬
national regulation for the protection
of historic localities, cities and sites
and their integration into a modern
environment. Preservation, in this
context, means planning based on a
global concept of the environment.
Thus, far from being restrictive, it
forms an integral part of the economic
and social development of the whole
urban or rural environment.
Following more consultations, it is
hoped that this international regulation
will be ready in 1976, and that it will
encourage States to adopt effective
legal measures.
Two conclusions can already be
drawn. The first is that the protection
of historic cities and localities, and
especially their maintenance and
restoration (as in the case of natural
and archaeological sites) must become
an integral part of the reorganization
and development of the urban area
or region concerned.
This decision must be taken at the
highest level by authorities responsible
for overall development. In certain
cases it must be taken by the govern¬
ment itself and, in any event, it should
involve not only the minister for
culture, but also the ministers for
economic affairs, development or
equipment, planning and finance.
Only such authorities are able to study
ways and means, authorize operations
and make financial provision.
Neither competence and devotion
at subordinate levels nor the en¬
thusiasm and alertness of cultural
organizations can replace this political
determination. Maintenance and res¬
toration is a component of global
planning and an integral part of the
reorganization of a locality or region.
Only a government decision to protect
and restore historical centres can
ensure that laws will be drawn up,
funds will be made available and other
measures taken.
The second conclusion is that the
cultural renewal of a town, locality or
village would be meaningless if no
way was found to arouse the interest
of local people who, in any case, must
participate in the project. It some¬
times happens that the renovation of
old quarters is mainly due to the effort
of private individuals, the authorities
providing only legal advice and
technical aid. Yet even when auth¬
orities make a more important con¬
tribution, the participation of the
community is still indispensable.
Historic cities, it has been said, must
be preserved for mankind and for pos¬
terity. This is true. But first and
foremost they must be protected and
restored for the men and women who
live in them, with their collaboration
and for their benefit. M
Georges Fradier
39
