THE GLORY by Carlo Pedretti
Reflections
on art
in the
Madrid II Manuscript
OF PAINTING
Photo O Anderson-Giraudon. Paris
Leonardo defined his whole approach to art
in Codex Madrid II. "Do not make the muscles
of your figures apparent", he writes, "because
even if they are in their right places they do not
show prominently unless the limbs in which
they are located are exerting great force or
are greatly strained." He criticizes "barren
and woody figures" and applies the phrases
"bag of nuts" and "bunch of radishes" to
nudes that are "woody and without grace."
Leonardo attacked many artists who were
guilty of this abuse, and in a manuscript
dating from 1513-1514 (known as "Manuscript E",
at the Institut de France in Paris) his Imprecation
appears to be a criticism of Michelangelo's
nudes in the Sistine Chapel, in Rome. Above
left, red chalk nude by Leonardo (about 1503-1504).
Above right, Adam and Eve expelled from Paradise,
detail of a fresco by Michelangelo on the
ceiling of the Sistine Chapel (1508-1510).
LIMBS which are not in exercise must be drawn
without showing the play of muscles. And if you
do otherwise, you will have imitated a sack of nuts
rather than a human figure."
This is one of the notes on painting found in the second
of the recently discovered Madrid Manuscripts of Leonardo
da Vinci dating from the first years of the 16th century.
It is of great interest because it illustrates how Leonardo
and Michelangelo differed sharply in their approach to
depicting the human form, particularly as portrayed in *
Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel frescoes (1508-1510). For r
CARLO PEDRETTI Is the author of many books on Leonardo. The
latest, "Leonardo: A Study In Chronology and Style', was publishea
in 1973 by Thames and Hudson, London. He is a professor in the
Department of Fine Arts at the University of California, Los Angeles.
This article is inspired by a chapter on the "Notes on Painting in
the Madrid Manuscripts" published In Italian in his book "Leonardo
da Vinci Inédito" (Leonardo' da Vinci's unpublished works), published
by Barbera Editore, Florence, 1968.
45

r-
wWtw*
t^mmmm»^!-
^^mmMmWÊMW^Ê
'*- HI^IMiHHH^HBHHI^^^^^^^^^^HH
An eye of the angel in The Virgin of the Rocks,
executed by Leonardo in Milan about 1483
(Louvre Museum, Paris).
k Leonardo, the human body was not an excuse for the
artist to show off his skill in depicting bulging muscles
unnecessarily.
This and the other notes on painting in Codex Madrid II
were written at a crucial moment of Leonardo's career, and
as such they reflect the innovations in the artistic theories
of the Cinquecento (16th century).
It is no longer the appearance of things that Leonardo is
concerned with, but their structure, so that he adopts a type
of drawing which moves away from atmospheric effects to
stress form: form which is defined by sharp contours and
by lines of shading which curve around it with deliberate
slowness.
It is no longer the Florentine gracefulness of the late
Quattrocento but a more heroic and herculean sense of
proportions which is reflected in his anatomical studies, and
in the studies for the warriors of his Battle of Anghiari,
which appear to conform, like a silent homage to Masaccio,
to the example provided by Michelangelo with his David,
completed in 1501.
Form is expressed by style; and by style I mean not only
Leonardo's art but also his thought as expressed by words,
for there is a close affinity between his writing and his
drawing. An example is given by a text already known, in
which Leonardo tells the painter how to retain the images
of human figures in action by using essential lines,
something like shorthand.
"In order to draw a head," says Leonardo, "make an O,
for an arm make a straight or bent line, and do the same
for the legs and bust, and when at home turn such notations
into perfect form."
However, our eye does not need to "turn" those notations
Into "perfect form"; on the contrary it is able to perceive
the impulse that has guided the artist's hand, and it is
undoubtedly seduced by the open touch, which leaves much
more to the imagination.
3W -
An eye of Mona Lisa. Leonardo began work
on the painting about 1501 and finished it
more than four years later (Louvre Museum, Paris).
The notes on painting in Leonardo's Codex Madrid II
pertain not only to the human figure but also to the problems
of light, shadow, and colour.
On one page Leonardo brings together two major aspects
of pictorial vision: the representation of colour "in per¬
spective", (that is, the colour of objects as it Is affected by
intervening atmosphere and therefore varying in intensity
according to the distance of the objects), and human
movement.
These aspects are further elaborated in other parts of the
manuscript, and while the first is treated with a considerable
degree of abstraction which can only be explained with the
language of the diagram, the second is exemplified by quick
notations of the human figure in action.
Some of them recall the sketches for the Battle of
Anghiari drawings of an energy which approaches fury,
done with an explosive line, such as the one at Windsor
in which Leonardo juxtaposes the screaming expressions of
men and animals, lions and horses. This is a sheet of
thoughts, more than the definite path of an idea for com¬
position: a search for the expression of human bestiality
in war.
In Codex Madrid II one can see how optics is closely
related to painting. One example: "The surface of every
opaque body takes on the colour of the object opposite
to It. But green subjects, such as meadows and other
such things should be arranged opposite the shadows of
green bodies, according to art, so that the shadows that
take on the colour of such an object do not lose their
quality and appear to be the shadow of a body other than
green; should you put bright red facing a green shadow,
the shadow will become reddish of a most ugly colour, and
will be very different from the true shadow of green."
Most Interesting here is the advice given to the painter
to make colour juxtapositions "according to art", so as to
achieve the kind of harmony that derives from retaining in
46 The smile of the angel in The Virgin of the Hocks. The smile of Mona Lisa.

An eye of St. John the Baptist, painted
by Leonardo about 1509 (Louvre Museum, Paris).
WHEN LEONARDO EYES
ARE SMILING
In Codex Madrid II, Leonardo states that the
human face and body are defined by the
light surrounding them. He notes that
reflected and refracted light as well as coloured
shadows are all what he calls "the truth
of colours". This may explain the affinity^
between the many faces he painted which
the photographic enlargements on this double
page clearly reveal, especially Leonardo's
rendering of the eyes and the smile. The
enlargements show how skilfully Leonardo
played with light and shadow in order to achieve
his enigmatic smile and beautifully expressive
eyes (thousands of pages have been written
about Mona Lisa's smile). In Codex Madrid II,
Leonardo advises the painter to strive for a
subtle blend of shadows which he describes
as "the gracefulness of shadows, smoothly
deprived of every contour". By so doing he
has given us his secret of how he achieved
such delicately nuanced forms in his models.
An eye of the lady in the portrait known as
the Belle Ferronnière. (Louvre Museum, Paris.)
a shadow the colour of its object (Leonardo refers to the
"true shadow") and by avoiding what he calls "very bad
shadows", which are those affected by the reflection of
another object of different colour, as would be the case
with a green object that comes to produce a reddish shadow.
All the elements of Leonardo's painting are present in the
theories expressed in the Madrid Manuscript. Another
series of notes, in addition to those on form and colour,
deals with light and shadow and the smooth transition from
light to shadow, which is the true essence of the famous
Leonardo sfumato. The notes on this subject in the newly
discovered manuscript are numerous, but it is interesting
to note that each one takes into account the element of
colour.
When in the first period of his activity Leonardo was
dealing with the problem of light and shadow he conceived
of objects in terms of geometrical entities and was mainly
concerned with the study of the gradations and degrees of
intensity of the shadows.
After 1500 his major concern becomes the study of light
and shadow on objects placed in the open air, thus taking
into account colour and reflections. Light becomes the
vehicle that blends the elements of landscape into a har¬
mony of transitions from colour to colour, and this Leonardo
calls "grace".
The human figure too becomes part of the landscape (one
thinks of the Mona Lisa, The Virgin and St. Anne, Leda) and
thus participates in the phenomena of reflection, refraction,
and Interplay of coloured shadows, as is the case with every
other object placed under the light of the sky. What can
be seen under the projection of a roof is also to be seen
under the chin of a human face.
One of Leonardo's most beautiful observations pertains
to the way a human face should be represented. He
advises the painter to arrange the setting so as to achieve ^
the most delicate sfumato effects in the shadows, what he r
The smile of St. John the Baptist. The smile of the lady in the Belle Ferronnière. 47

calls "the gracefulness of shadows, smoothly deprived
of every sharp contour."
The setting is provided by the walls of the houses flanking
a street, through which the light penetrates light made of
air without brightness, a golden, diffuse light such as that
of Giorgione.
Now, says Leonardo, "light ends upon the pavement of
the street and rebounds with reflected motion at the
shadowy parts of the faces, brightening them considerably.
And the length of the aforementioned light of the sky
created by the boundaries of the roofs hanging over the
street illuminates almost as far as the beginning of the
shadows which are underneath the projections of the face,
and so it is gradually changed into brightness, until it ends
over the chin with imperceptible shadows all over."
It is a widely accepted opinion that Leonardo was in¬
sensitive to colour and that for him the "glory of painting"
lay only in the effect of relief that it can produce. The
chronology of his notes on painting shows that this may
apply to the first period of his theoretical work, when his art
was still bound to the teaching of the Florentine school of
the Quattrocento.
But after 1500 his observations on colour gradually
intensify to a point where his theories have no application
in any of his works which have come down to us. It is
enough to mention the effects of violet light at sunset,
a light that he designates as being of the colour of the lily
and that makes the landscape "most cheerful and pleasant."
"The beauty of colour," concludes Leonardo, "is to be
found in the main lights." Light is taken as a symbol of
virtue, and the "truth of colours" is the beauty that light
reveals in them.
What is most interesting in this d^ase as in many others
is what the British would refer to as the "unpredictable
Leonardo", the Leonardo who cannot be anticipated, because
the notes he writes are nothing but the record of the move¬
ments of his mind, so that his precepts to the painter do not
have the stiffness of academic teaching but the freshness
of a revelation.
But enough of comments, explanations, and interpret¬
ations! Leonardo's words come to us with the precision
of mathematics and yet they are evocative of the space
that opens up in the background of his paintings:
"What I would remind you of, concerning faces, is that
you should consider how, at varying distances, different
qualities of the shadows are lost and that only the main
spots are left, that is, the pits of the eye and the like: and
finally that the face remains dark, because the lights, which
are small compared with the medium shadows, are absorbed
by darkness. For this reason, at a distance, the qualities
and quantities of the main lights and shadows are con¬
sumed, and everything blends into a medium shadow. And
this is why trees and all objects appear darker at a distance
than if the same objects were near the eye. From this
obscurity on, the air which is between the eye and the object
causes the object to become brighter and to turn towards
blue. But it turns bluish rather in the shadows than in the
luminous parts, where one can see better the true quality
of the colours."
Carlo Pedrettl
fryH s
Study of Star of Bethlehem amid twirling
grasses, with leaves of crowsfoot and wood
anemones, and flowers of spurge. Drawn
as part of a study for Leonardo's Leda.
48

nnoto <D Taken from "Leonardo and the Aqe of the
Eye" by Ritchie Calder, Hememann, London. 1970
»fcqf vfcttf' jMfriAtJ ,+.~a. * V. %.*
Whirling movements of every kind fascinated
Leonardo. He likened the eddies of whirlpools,
which he called "the cosmic breathing of the
ocean", to the "lake of blood extending
through the human body". He saw a parallel
between water and hair. "Observe the movement
of the surface of water", he wrote, "how
it resembles hair, which has two movements,
one of which comes from the weight of the hair,
the other from the curves of the curls. Thus
water has its whirling curls, some of which
follow the rush of the main current, while
others have a movement of incidence and
reflection". Leonardo's scientific drawings
of water in motion are veritable works of art.
Above, a shaft of water pouring into a pool
forms a chrysanthemum-like image of
bubbles and dancing lines.
Drawing of a rearing horse executed by
Leonardo in 1504 for his never-completed
mural, The Battle of Anghiari. Even the cartoon
of this ill-fated work has been lost, although
many preliminary sketches of the work
have survived.
Study of hair arrangement for Leda
and the Swan, a Greek myth which inspired
Leonardo to produce a painting, now lost
and known only from preliminary
sketches and 16th century copies.
