LOST HORIZONS
IN THE
LAND OF POETRY
The vanished works
of a scientist
turned man of letters
by
Zabihollah Safa
I|T is sometimes difficult
to make a distinction between the
"scholar" and the "man of letters" of
Islamic civilization. In both the Arab
and the Persian worlds, the two
cornerstones of Islamic literature, it
frequently happens that great scholars
in the fields of philosophy, medicine,
natural history or mathematics are also
poets and men of letters.
In some cases they even put aside
their scientific preoccupations and set
about recounting or writing tales or
anecdotes. Philosophers and thinkers
such as Avicenna and al-Blruni, in the
11th century, and Suhrawardl In the
12th, have thus left behind them novels
and stories written in Arabic or In
Arabic and Persian.
Avicenna wrote two well-known
philosophical novels In Arabic, which
foreshadowed certain later Persian
works.
Islamic scholars found a welcome
source of diversion in writing poetry,
and there are very few Iranian scholars
who did not at some time or another
apply themselves to verse in Arabic
or Persian. One of the earliest among
them Is al-Farabl, some of whose
quatrains in Persian are still extant.
At a later date when scholars
versified to their heart's content, Avi¬
cenna became a prolific writer of verse
30
ZABIHOLLAH SAFA is the author of a book
on the life and works of al-Biruni. He is
president of the Iranian National Commission
for Unesco and professor of literature at the
University of Teheran. He has written several
works on Avicenna, and is now compiling
for Unesco an annotated bibliography in
Arabic and Persian on the writings of al-
Biruni. He also prepared, for Unesco's
Collection of Representative Works, the
"Anthologie de la Poésie Persane", published
by Editions Gallimard, Paris, in 1964.
in Arabic as well as Persian. Al-
Biruni, an author of serious scientific
works, also wrote poetry in Arabic,
and others, such as the great 12th cen¬
tury mathematician, philosopher and
doctor, Omar Khayyam, became so
well known for their literary work that
their names have been handed down
to posterity as poets rather than as
scholars.
These are but a few of the many
examples we could quote, for Arabic
and Persian literary history is rich in
such many-sided talents. At that
time the language of science was
Arabic, and the approach to any
scientific discipline necessarily invol¬
ved learning Arabic. In Irano-Arablc
schools the teaching of Arabic lan¬
guage and literature preceded all
other subjects; Arabic prose and
poetry were used as a means to enable
pupils to benefit from text books
written in Arabic, and students learned
by heart works of prose and verse
by leading writers and poets.
This meant that the student began
Islamic schooling with an introduction
to Arabic, which he continued to study
throughout his life, and which often
led him to an interest in literature, even
when his main preoccupation was the
rational study of a specific field of
science. So it is hardly surprising that
the great scientist-scholar al-Biruni
became interested In literature and
composed verses for his own pleasure.
Yaqut of Hama examined some of
al-Biruni's literary works in the library
at Marw (or Merv) shortly before the
Mongol invasion of Khorassan in the
13th century. The vestiges of Merv,
former capital of Khorassan, can still
be seen near the modern city of Mary
in the Soviet Turkmenistan Republic.
Yaqut's bibiography of al-Biruni
shows that the latter wrote a consi¬
derable number of literary and critical
works: among many others, an Arabic
etymology, commentaries on the poems
of the great Arabic poet Abi Tamman,
and even an anthology entitled " Selec¬
tion of Verse and Literary Works".
One of his most important works,
of a literary rather than a scientific
stamp, deals with his native region of
Khwarizm. Although this book was
widely known during the 11th and
12th centuries, it has since disap¬
peared. Fortunately, part of It is quoted
by the 11th century Persian writer-
historian Balaghl, and the fragment
which has reached us demonstrates
al-Biruni's scrupulous and Impartial
research into historical events, their
causes and their consequences.
The value of al-Biruni's work lies
in the vast scope of his knowledge,
which, particularly in respect to pre-
Islamic nations, was not shared by
his contemporaries. This is largely
due to his command of languages
Iranian, Arabic, Syriac and Sanskrit
were as familiar to him as Soghdian,
the language of his native Khwarizm.
He was also able to use Arabic
translations of works written In Greek
and Syriac.
Al-Biruni was of both a serious and
lighthearted turn of mind; perhaps his
penchant for humour and jokes was
a counterweight to the scientific rigour
of his studies. In his personal rela¬
tionships and in his conversation, as
his biographers have noted, he reveals
a pleasant open nature and a spirited
wit. Occasionally, he surprises his
readers by the use of earthy terms in
his poems.
It may have been this trait that led
him to translate or write a number of

Al-Biruni wrote several novels which unfortunately have not come down to us.
One of these, entitled The Two Idols of Bamian, is about two Buddhist statues,
of a man and a woman, carved from the face of a huge cliff of Bamian in
northwest Afghanistan. The now famous cliff is honeycombed with caves,
which provide a dramatic setting for numerous carvings and paintings. The
two colossal stone Buddhas, stand majestically in the shelter of the rock,
dominating the entire valley. Above, the smaller of the two (35 metres high).
The larger statue stands 53 metres high. The sculptures date from the 4th-5th
century A.D.
popular or folk romances while en¬
gaged In exacting scientific work. In
the inventory of his writings, which he
made when he was 65 years old, he
lists six novels, which have all unfor¬
tunately been lost. Works by other
authors and poets, however, record
passages from these novels, but it Is
not known whether they were written
in Arabic or in Persian.
The adventure of "Vamegh and
Azra", an ancient legend of Greek
origin which found its way Into Pahlavi
literature, is a love story. Onsori, a
poet of the time, seems to have used
this as a source of inspiration for his
own poetic work, "Vamegh and Azra";
it was at a much later date that several
other poets put this tale Into verse.
It Is worth noting here that the story
also entered Persian literature through
pseudo-Callisthenes' novel on Alexan¬
der the Great
Qassim al-sorur wa'ayn al-hayat is
another tale put into verse by Onsori.
It has never been clearly established
whether the original was written by
Onsori or by al-Biruni, but neither
version exists today.
"Urmasdyar and Mehryar" is an old
story adapted by al-Biruni; the names
indicate that it is certainly of Iranian
origin.
"The Two Idols of Bamian", a folk
tale adapted by al-Biruni, Is about two
Buddhist statues, a man and a woman,
carved in the rock of a mountainside
at Bamian, near Balkh in northern
Afghanistan. The statues still exist
and the local people, believing that
they were two lovers who were turned
to stone, still recount their adventures
and the reason for their metamor¬
phosis. The story was also put Into
verse by Onsori, under the title "The
Red Idol and the White Idol". This
story, like that of "Dadmeh and Gera-
midokht", has also disappeared. "Ni-
nufar" (water Illy), the last of these
works appears to have been a tale of
Hindu origin.
The six titles clearly demonstrate al-
Biruni's interest in legend;, it is unfor¬
tunate that they should have been
lost, for they would have provided
excellent material for analysis. From
the narrative skill and descriptive
power al-Biruni displays in his various
works, especially when dealing with
historical or contemporary subjects,
one can easily imagine the excellence
of the stories that have disappeared.
In short, in addition to some twelve
thousand pages of erudite and scien¬
tific writing, this prodigiously indus¬
trious scholar produced a great number
of literary works: Arabic poetry,
romances, etymology, literary criticism,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

32
LOST HORIZONS (Continued)
history which in Islamic civilization is
a part of literature.
It is interesting to note that both
Arabic, the scientific language of Islam,
and Persian, were greatly enriched by
the contributions of the major scholars
of Iranian origin and of the Islamic
civilization within the Iranian cultural
sphere living at the beginning of this
civilization (between the late 8th cen¬
tury and the end of the 12th century).
This was brought about firstly by the
addition of many words, phrases,
explanations and expressions from
Greek, Syriac, Pahlavi and Hindu, with
a few minor changes In pronunciation;
secondly, by the translation of scien¬
tific expressions and terminology; and
finally, by the invention of turns of
phrase or expressions using the rules
and the flexibility of Arabic and Persian
grammar.
The debating skill of such scholars
as al-Biruni, Avicenna, Suhrawadi,
among others, contributed greatly to
the elucidation of many concepts in the
field of philosophy and disputation in
the Arabic and Persian languages.
Al-Biruni was one of the master-
artisans of this enrichment.
What differentiates him especially is
his knowledge of Sanskrit and Syriac,
Greek texts and ancient* Iranian sour¬
ces, by virtue of which he introduced
a considerable number of words,
expressions and turns of phrase Into
the Arabic and Persian languages.
His Pharmacology gives ample evi¬
dence of this. In this work each
drug is named ¡n Persian (Pahlavi),
Arabic, Greek, Syriac and Sanskrit,
and sometimes even in local dialects
of the Iranian plateau, together with
directions for its use. Its composition
and cases where its use would be
harmful, written in Arabic. This book
alone would suffice to establish al-
Biruni's contribution to the enrichment
of Arabic (see following article).
The same considerations apply to
the only book of his which is written
in Persian and which is still extant,
namely the Astrology, where his
terminology shows extensive use of
Sanskrit and Pahlavi sources.
Al-Biruni's literary work adds a
particularly engaging aspect to his
complex genius. It presents an In¬
exhaustible field of linguistic research,
which Iranologists have now begun to
investigate.
At the start of the present century
Carra de Vaux, the French orientalist,
wrote in his basic study "Thinkers of
Islam": "Like other great thinkers of
the more recent past, a Leonardo da
Vinci or a Leibniz, al-Biruni combines
the most varied talents. Philosopher,
historian, traveller, linguist, scholar and
poet, mathematician, astronomer and
geographer, he has left his mark in all
these spheres . . . spanning the gap of
time, he is a figure whose youthfulness
strikes us today; it is as though he
stands out and breaks away from his
own era and comes to meet us."
Zabihollah Safa

