Left, "King David", a fresco painting
by Onufri, adorning the church at
Shpat in central Albania.




ONUFRI
MASTER OF FANTASY
AND REALISM
A 16th-century Albanian painter
of icons and frescoes
virtually unknown outside his country
by Theophan Popa
WrHEN Michelangelo, Titian
and Tintoretto were producing works
of art in Italy which became famous
in their day, another great artist, only
a few hundred kilometres away on the
other side of the Adriatic, was painting
masterpieces. which are still practically
unknown today outside his country.
The artist, an Albanian priest, whose
only name known to us is "Onufri",
produced a large number of frescoes
and icons of rare quality and powerful
originality. It is only now that he is
beginning to find his place in the world
of art as one of the great painters of
his age.
Onufri, most of whose works
fortunately remain intact, worked
chiefly at Elbasan, a small town in
central Albania. He injected new life
into the Byzantine pictorial art of his
time which was until then shackled
to medieval tradition. His influence
led to a search for realistic human
expression and movement, and to an
THEOPHAN POPA, Albanian art historian, has
devoted numerous studies to the work of
Onufri.
attention to life-like detail which had
never before appeared in Albanian
painting.
Albania was for many centuries part
of the Byzantine empire. During the
Middle Ages the Albanian Church
observed Greek Orthodox rites, Greek
became the country's literary language,
while Byzantine art and architecture,
spreading from Constantinople, took
root and flourished there.
In the 13th and 14th centuries, under
the Byzantine Paleologus dynasty,
Albania enjoyed a period of remarkable
economic and social progress. The
feudal chiefs formed principalities
which became independent of the
Byzantine empire and less subjected to
the political, religious and cultural
authority of Constantinople. Artistic
expression began to assume certain
distinct characteristics of its own.
One of these was a search for true-
to-life art, but the movement was
arrested at an early stage by the
Ottoman conquest in the second half
of the 15th century.
A period of turbulence ensued
during which the length and breadth
of the land were torn asunder by
insurrections against the invader.
Struggling to defend their language
and culture against the arbitrary rule
of the Ottomans, the Albanians joined
forces with their neighbours, Greeks,
Serbs, Bulgarians, Macedonians and
Montenegrans who were all trying to
rid themselves of the common yoke.
It was during these sorely trying times
that Onufri appeared.
We have very little information about
the artist's life neither the date of his
birth nor that of his death are known.
He worked during the first half of the
16th century, and a few autographic
inscriptions appear on some of his
frescoes covering the walls of the
churches of Elbasan, Shelcan and
Valsh. Some of these inscriptions are
simple prayers, and one of them dates
the fresco as 1554. His son Nicola,
who was also a painter, left some
clues on a fresco painted in '1578
scraps of information indicating that
Onufri married, had children, was
ordained and became archpriest of
Elbasan.
Information about his artistic training
is no more plentiful. He was probably
able to study frescoes and icons at
leisure, for at the time there were in¬
numerable and very fine examples of
both. Some can still be seen today,
but a great many have been lost. It is
almost certain that Onufri must have
begun work in Berat, a lively centre
on the river Osum. He presumably
studied in the studio of a master-
painter who, according to the custom
of the times, passed on to his pupil
the secrets of his art.
The life-like expressions of Onufri's
characters were a distinct departure
from traditional Byzantine painting, and
lead to the supposition that the painter
visited Italy and gained inspiration from
the various Renaissance schools which | Q
in the early 16th century were at the **
height of their brilliance. However,
Onufri restricted his art to large-scale
CONTINUED PAGE 16

ONUFRI (Continued)
Away from the traditional
Towards a fresh realism
A painter who deserves to be better known outside his
country is the Albanian 16th-century artist, Onufri, who
produced some of the most astonishing icons and frescoes
of the late Middle Ages. Onufri, who had a keen eye for
colour and form, often broke away from traditional Byzantine
painting and took delight in enriching his works with realistic
and shrewdly observed details of the landscapes, architec¬
ture, clothing and other everyday objects of different parts
of Albania. On this double page we present Onufri's
magnificent icon painting, "The Nativity" (1) and four details
from the same work: (2) a shepherd; the drinking gourd
at his belt is exactly the same as those used today by
Albanian shepherds. (3) One of the Three Kings. (4) The
bathing of the Infant. (5) The archangel announcing the
birth of Jesus; the shepherd's bonnet and musical instrument
are still seen in Albania.
Photos Albanian Embassy, Paris
14

15

ONUFRI (Continued from page 13)
mural paintings and to
for icons.
easel work
THE PRESENTATION IN THE TEMPLE, another icon painting by Onufri.
Note how skilfully the artist manages to incorporate vaulted ceilings,
pavilion roofs, balconies and other architectural features of his time
into this work, depicting Mary, mother of Jesus, finding her son among
the doctors in the temple at Jerusalem. The narrow coloured bands on
the stole worn by the archpriest greeting Mary (detail below) are still
a feature of Albanian folk art weaving.
His admirable frescoes cover the
walls of the churches of St. Nicholas
at Shelcan, St. Venerand at Valsh,
near Elbasan, and St. Theodore at
Berat. Other churches at Berat are
richly decorated with his icons. He
is known to have worked in Greece
where he painted the fresco of the
Holy Apostles' Church in the Mace¬
donian town of Kastoria. His com¬
prehensive work embraces hundreds
of single figures and scenes of a rich
variety of compositions.
Onufri observes the tradition of
pictorial narrative which sought to
provide religious instruction in works
of art, but his compositions are power¬
fully original and the expressions of
his subjects have a strong element of
realism and imagination. This is
particularly exemplified in an icon
of the "Presentation in the Temple",
where the Virgin Is met by the arch-
priest and a number of women.
Onufri likewise gave a new sense
of realism to the treatment of accessory
motifs. His "Entry into Jerusalem" has
an architectural background showing
red-tiled house-roofs with two eaves
to drain off rain-water, just as they
were in Elbasan during the painter's
lifetime and just as they still are today.
Another example is the "Last Supper"
at which the Apostles have table-
napkins decorated with narrow red
bands. These motifs are still used
today on table napkins in Albania.
Again in the "Nativity" (both fresco
and icon), Onufri paints a shepherd
with a gourd attached to his belt just
like the drinking gourds used today by
Albanian shepherds.
Right up to the 19th century all
Albanian religious painting bore the
stamp of Onufri's influence: his
plasticity of form, transparency and
contrast of colour, dynamic compo¬
sition and intense spirituality in facial
expression all played a decisive role
in the subsequent trends followed by
Albanian art.
Besides Onufri's son, Nicola, a whole
line of anonymous 17th century painters
followed in the master's fotsteps, but
none of them grew to his stature. The
18th century produced another Alba¬
nian master, David of Selenica, who
reached a remarkable degree of per¬
fection, but creative originality in
religious painting died with him.
Onufri is now not only recognized
as a great master of Albanian painting,
but his name is beginning to take a
deservedly prominent place among
those artists who throughout the
ages have enriched the cultural heri¬
tage of humanity as a whole.
Photos Albanian Embassy. Paris

Fantasy
and
Reality
In some of his icons,
Onufri seems to have let
his imagination run wild,
depicting hallucinating
panoramas and landscapes
peopled by strange
diabolic or angelic
creatures. "The Baptism
of Christ" (right) is a
remarkable example of
fantasy and realism
combined.
.**' :,
*w
**.4
1 /
» r
^ *-
- i>.
P^J'Sí
6%¥J&
" è
0 ****)*
Photo Albanian tmbassy. Pans
