DISMEMBERED
WORKS OF ART
Reconstituting works of art which have been dismembered is a delicate
operation, especially when the fragments have been widely dispersed
and now belong to museums and collectors in different countries.
It calls for a combination of historical research, detective work,
diplomacy, goodwill, taste and cultural appreciation. This complex
international problem is examined in an outstanding book just pub¬
lished by Unesco: An Illustrated Inventory of Famous Dismembered
Works ofArt European Painting (223 pages, 340 illustrations, 54 F.).
Its publication marks an important step in Unesco's efforts to encourage
the reconstitution of dismantled works of art throughout the world,
the salient features of which are described in the following article.
by Selim Abdul Hak
26
M ROM time immemorial,
war, invasion and conquest have led
to the loss of countless works of art.
Because of the values they symbolize,
conquerors have set out to obliterate
them, since the destruction of a
nation's treasures or the relics of its
past was one way of eroding or
annihilating the personality of a
vanquished people.
Armed conflict is also responsible
for the deplorable practice of removing
works of art from the settings for
which they had been created, dismem¬
bering them and transporting the
fragments elsewhere for profit or
enjoyment or for reasons of prestige.
The ostentatiousness of famous
people, the passion of art-lovers and
the rich for collecting and the profit
motive of art dealers have also
contributed throughout the ages to the
dismemberment of works of art. Even
the owners of such works, unaware of
SELIM ABDUL HAK was head of Unesco's
Monuments and Museums Division from 1965
to 1970 and until recently was responsible
at Unesco for international conventions and
recommendations concerning the preservation
of the world's cultural heritage. Former di¬
rector-general of antiquities and museums in
Syria, he is the author of many studies on
art and archaeology.
their real value or tempted by the lure
of gain, have readily condoned this
practice.
Moreover, artists have turned their
hands to rectifying or transforming
works of art regarded as out of date
or immoral, and museum curators have
often succumbed to the temptation to
enrich their collections by acquiring
fragments of dismembered works.
It is, of course, some consolation
to reflect that the dispersion of these
fragments has helped to build up
great collections in famous art gal¬
leries and museums, thus helping to
CONTINUED PAGE 28
Photos © Bulloz, Paris
OUTRIGHT VANDALISM
ON A FAMOUS WORK
BY TOULOUSE-LAUTREC

La Goulue and Valentin le Désossé at the Moulin Rouge, painted ¡n
1895 by Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (1864-1901), was acquired by a
collector who had no scruples about cutting it up and selling it In
pieces to increase his profit. It was one of a series of paintings
depicting two of the artist's favourite models, La Goulue (Louise
Weber) and Valentin le Désossé (Jacques Renaudin), dancers who
delighted revellers at the famous Moulin Rouge cabaret in Paris and
other Montmartre haunts at the turn of the century. The painting
was cut Into five pieces, and in the process Valentin le Désossé
(Valentin the India-rubberman) lost a foot, his right hand, and two O |
fingers of his left hand. In 1929 the painting was acquired by the ¿. f
French National Museums and painstakingly reassembled (opposite
page). Today it hangs in the Louvre. Above centre, La Goulue
dancing the can-can, facing Valentin le Désossé (right).

promote a deeper knowledge of the
arts and enriching the cultural life of
the world as a whole. So there would
be no point in re-examining the rights
and wrongs of the historical events
which led to such dismemberment nor
in condemning too harshly the methods
employed. Any attempt to do so could
only impair international under¬
standing.
Although research on these prob¬
lems has not hitherto enabled many
works of art to be reconstructed, It
has at least produced a great deal of
information about the nature, history
and original form of masterpieces
which have been fragmented and dis¬
persed. As a result, the value of
these fragments has increased, since
the fact that they form part of a well-
THE PRINCE
WHO LOST
HIS HEAD
In 1924 the Louvre Mu¬
seum in Paris acquired
a headless Sumerian
statuette. According to
Its inscription, it depict¬
ed Ur Ningirsu, a
prince of Lagash, who
had lived around 2100
B.C. The mutilated sta¬
tuette had been found
at Tello in Iraq, in a
region where archaeo¬
logical sites have long
been pillaged by loot¬
ers. In 1934 the head
was located in a pri¬
vate collection, and in
1947 It was bought by
the New York Metro¬
politan Museum of Art
It has now been agreed
that the Louvre and the
Metropolitan Museum
of Art will take three-
year turns to exhibit
the prince complete
with head.
Photo © Almasy. Paris
28
known original has given them a new
and hitherto unsuspected worth.
Co-operation between curators and
restorers has enabled several Europ¬
ean countries to. reconstitute dismem¬
bered works from fragments in their,
own museums and private collections.
Reconstitution is much more difficult
when fragments of world famous works
belong to two or more museums in
different countries, especially when
each fragment is a masterpiece in itself
and has over the years acquired a
value of its own. In these cases, the
problem can only be solved by co¬
operation between the countries con¬
cerned.
At a meeting held in Unesco's head¬
quarters in Paris, in 1966, specialists
studied such problems as the exchange
of works between museums, the re-
constitution of dismembered works on
a national and international basis, and
the role of international organizations
in this field.
The specialists considered that in
most cases it would be a mistake to
envisage the extremely costly oper¬
ation of attempting to reconstitute dis¬
membered architectural monuments
from dispersed ornamental fragments.
On the other hand, sculpture, painting
and other decorative features forming
part of these monuments should ob¬
viously be considered as having
acquired independent status and be
treated separately, an appropriate
solution being sought in each case.
As for the problem of reassembling
dismembered paintings, sculpture, en¬
gravings, etc., the specialists consider
that it should be dealt with through
exchanges between museums. In their
view, every effort at reconstitution
should take account of the same legal
and psychological issues as are posed
by exchanges.
In response to an international in¬
quiry carried out by Unesco in 1967
and 1968, 37 countries and three inter¬
governmental organizations stated
their views on the problems of ex¬
changing objects and reconstituting
dismembered works.
Several countries felt that fragments
of dispersed works should be as¬
sembled so that their reconstitution
benefits the country which is the real
owner, especially where such frag¬
ments either form part of an architec¬
tural monument or would complete a
collection.
This view was naturally opposed by
those who had come by such frag¬
ments legally. Several countries tried
to "cool down" the discussion by
pressing for a more cautious approach.
They proposed that exchanges should
be made only on the basis of free
consent, and that the problem should
be solved by the parties concerned,
and should never be considered as
a simple act of restitution.
The question of the counterpart to
be provided was considered to be of
vital importance. Since it raises legal
and psychological issues, it should be
settled by agreement between the
parties involved. It is essential that
objects to be exchanged should be of
equal value, especially when these are
unique objects of great worth. In this
connexion, a system of national, re¬
gional or international arbitration might
be of great assistance.
Despite these reservations, the
countries consulted were not opposed
DAVID EXCLUDED
FROM 'BATHSHEBA
AT HER BATH'
No one knows what motivated the muti¬
lation of this work (right) by the Flemish
painter Hans Memling (1433-1494) of
Bathsheba, wife of King David and mother
of Solomon, at her bath. The original
upper left-hand corner of the painting
(above), a half-length representation of
King David showing his ring to a youth
who may be a messenger, was removed,
possibly in the 17th century. It was
replaced by an architectural perspective
showing a man and a child standing on
the gallery of a palace. Today, Mem-
ling's painting, incorporating this curious
"improvement", hangs in the Staatsgale¬
rie, Stuttgart (Fed. Germ. Rep.), while
the fragment portraying King David,
since rediscovered, is in the Chicago Art
Institute, U.S.A.
to the idea that the problem of recons¬
titution might be considered within the
framework of new international regul¬
ations and solved by exchanges bet¬
ween museums, provided that the aim
was to restore the true value of dis¬
membered works, and that all the
necessary scientific, technical and
administrative measures were taken.
In 1968 Unesco organized a pilot
exhibition of dismembered works at
its Paris headquarters. Unesco's pur¬
pose was to set an example, which it
was hoped would stimulate thought on
the subject and lead to the reconsti¬
tution of other dismembered works of
art. The works displayed came from
several museums.
The Louvre Museum, in Paris, the
Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, the Musée
des Arts Décoratifs in Paris and the
Museum of the Wawel Royal Castle
in Cracow (Poland) lent Unesco three
works, two of which had been perma¬
nently reconstituted, while the third
was reconstituted for the duration of
the exhibition only.

This temporarily reconstituted work
was the Persian carpet, known as the
"Paris-Cracow" carpet, the two halves
of which belong to the Musée des
Arts Décoratifs in Paris and the Mu¬
seum of the Wawel Royal Castle in
Cracow respectively. Thanks to
Unesco, these two halves were put
together again after being separated
for a long period of time; and they were
displayed first at Cracow, from 27
April to 13 May 1968, and then at the
pilot exhibition in Paris the following
month.
This carpet, the only one of its kind
in the world, dates from the second
quarter of the 16th century and is the
work of the Tabriz school. It was
intended to cover the steps of the altar
of Cracow cathedral, but it was found
to be too large, and was therefore cut
in two.
The temporary reconstitution of this
carpet gave art historians an opport¬
unity to compare the two halves and
make scientific studies.
One of the two permanently recons
tituted works was the picture repre¬
senting "The Battle of Bergen (1665)",
painted by Willem Van de Velde the
Elder.
In 1877, the Nederlandse Museum
at The Hague purchased the right-
hand part, and the left-hand part was
acquired by the National Maritime
Museum at Greenwich (Great Britain).
After the exhibition, the Greenwich
Museum generously offered its half of
the picture to the Netherlands, thus
enabling the work to be reconstituted
in its original form.
The other reconstituted work on
display was a polyptych by Paolo Vene-
ziano. Dismembered after the disper¬
sion of the Campana collection, it has
been completely reassembled and
since 1956 has been in the collection
of the Louvre Museum, in Paris.
To provide material for systematic
exchanges of information and docu¬
mentation of dismembered works in the
various arts, Unesco decided In 1969
to prepare an inventory of major works
that have been fragmented or dis¬
persed. Since the dismemberment of
works of art is a prominent feature of
the history of European painting, it
was decided to begin with an inven¬
tory of European works of art, and par¬
ticularly of paintings from the Renais¬
sance to the present time. Inventories
covering other cultural regions of the
world will follow.
Unesco has just published this first
inventory, which is entitled An Illus¬
trated Inventory of Famous Dismemb¬
ered Works of Art European Painting.
It contains chapters on dismembered
works of Italian, Flemish, French,
Spanish, Russian and German painting.
One special chapter deals with Euro¬
pean illuminated manuscripts, another
with French dismembered tombs.
This illustrated inventory presents a
disconcerting picture of the disfigure¬
ments and dismemberment inflicted on
works of art by irresponsible hands.
Works by such great masters as Giotto,
Simone Martini, Masaccio, Paolo
Uccello, Andrea Mantegna, Roger Van
der Weyden, Hans Memling, Pieter
Bruegel, Hans Holbein the Elder, Al-
brecht Durer, Peter Paul Rubens,
Anthony Van Dyck, El Greco, Fran¬
cisco de Zurbaran, Juan de Valdes
Leal, Nicolas Poussin, Jean-François
Millet, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec and
many others have paid a heavy price
for this deliberate vandalism.
One example is Paolo Uccello's
three great pictures of the Florentine
victory over the Sienese at the battle
of San Romano in 1433, which, with
three other pictures, once formed part
of the decoration of Lorenzo the Magni-
ficent's chamber in the Medici Palace,
Florence.
In the 16th century, the panels were
transferred to another part of the
palace, and were then lost without
trace until the 18th century. The
panel representing "The Unhorsing of
Bernardino délia Garda" was bought
sometime between 1769 and 1784 by
the Uffizi Gallery, Florence, where it
still hangs today, while the other two
were discovered in a private collec¬
tion In the 19th century. The one
showing "Micheletto da Cotignala
Counter-Attacking" was acquired by
the Campana Collection and today
hangs in the Louvre, while "Niccolo
da Tolentino Leading the Attack" has
belonged to the National Gallery, Lon¬
don, since 1857.
The fate of the triptych of the An¬
nunciation, painted by an unknown
fifteenth-century master for the cathe¬
dral of Saint-Sauveur, Aix-en-Provence
(France) has been equally tragic. After
the French Revolution, the central part
depicting "The Virgin and the Angel",
was transferred to the church of the
Madeleine in Aix.
The two side-panels passed through
several hands. The right-hand one,
showing "The Prophet Jeremiah in a
Niche", was acquired in 1923 by the
Royal Fine Arts Museum in Brussels,
while the left-hand panel was cut into .
two. One part of it, depicting "The
Prophet Isaiah in a Niche", is now
in the Van Beuningen museum in the
Netherlands. The other part, which
shows books and objects painted in
trompe-1' was acquired by the
Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam, and is at
present on loan to the Louvre.
A series of great paintings which
once formed a unity is "Christ and the
12 Apostles", by Van Dyck. No one
knows where these pictures were ori¬
ginally hung. However, in the early
18th century, the central painting of the
group a half-length representation of
Christ holding the Cross in his right
hand was in the Palazzo Rosso,
Genoa, where it still hangs.
The 12 apostles were detached no
one knows when and disappeared
until they were discovered around 1914
by a Munich art dealer, who sold them
separately. Today the whereabouts of
only six of them is known they are
in museums in the US.A. (Sarasota,
Florida), Hungary (Budapest), German
Fed. Rep. (one in Hanover and two in
Essen), and Austria (Vienna).
Among Spanish works of art which
have suffered dismemberments \ff an
altarpiece, painted by Francisco de
Zurbaran at the height of his powers,
which hung in the Monastery of St.
Joseph of the Order of Discalced Mer-
cedarians in Seville.
The paintings which formed part of
this magnificent group had a curious
fate. The group was broken up twice,
once in 1810 and once in 1835. Today
paintings from it hang in the Seville
Museum, the Louvre, Chartres Mu¬
seum (France) and others belong to
the heirs of Marshal Soult, the Valdes
collection (Bilbao), the Munt Gallery
(New York), the Hamilton Collection
(New York) and the heirs of the Mar¬
quis de Valdeterrazo (Madrid). OQ
The fate of the Très Belles Heures '
de Notre-Dame du Duc Jean de Berry, ^
was no less tragic. Written around*

SEVILLE (Spain)
The Eternal Father, from the main altarpiece
of the church of St. Joseph. Seville Museum.
TOLEDO
(Spain)
Martyr. Museum of the Casa del Greco.
Toledo.
CHARTRES (France)
St. Lucy, from the main altarpiece of the
Church of St. Joseph. Chartres Museum.
HARTFORD (U.S.A.)
St. Seraoion. The Wadsworth
Atheneum, Hartford, Connecticut.
LENINGRAD (U.S.S.R.)
St. Lawrence, from the altarpiece in the
transept of the Church of St. Joseph. Hermi¬
tage Museum, Leningrad.
EXILED
PAINTINGS
OF FRANCISCO
DE ZURBARAN
30
1380, some changes and embellish¬
ments being made in the early 15th
century, this manuscript was soon frag¬
mented. The first part, which was
illustrated by the Duke of Berry, passed
through many hands and was finally
acquired by the Bibliothèque Nationale,
in Paris.
The second part of the manuscript
was embellished by various masters,
including the Van Eyck brothers, Jan
and Hubert, and broken up into two
volumes. One part, which was in the
collections of the dukes of Savoy and
later In the Royal Library of Turin (now
the National Library) became known
as the Les Heures de Turin. This pre¬
cious manuscript was destroyed by
fire at the beginning of the 20th cent¬
ury. However, four leaves, which had
been detached from this part, event¬
ually found their way to the Louvre.
Finally, the second volume was ac¬
quired by the Museo Cívico, Turin, in
1935, after belonging to the Counts
of Aglie in Piedmont, and the Counts
Trivulzio of Milan, under the name of
Les Heures de Milan.
It is appalling to think that many
fragments of these and other works
of art have disappeared without trace
and are lost forever. However, the
situation is not entirely gloomy, and it
is encouraging to note that some spec¬
tacular reconstitutions have been
made.
The figures which formed part of
the altarpiece of the Last Judgment,
painted by the 15th-century artist Ste¬
phan Lochner for the parish church of
St. Lawrence in Cologne, were dis¬
persed in Frankfurt, Cologne and Mu¬
nich, and finally reconstituted in their
original form in 1936 for the Lochner
Exhibition, held at the Wallraf Richartz
Museum, in Cologne.
Under the Treaty of Versailles (1919),
the side-panels of the Holy Lamb
polyptych, painted by Van Eyck for
Ghent cathedral, were returned to
Belgium. They had belonged to the
collection of Frederic William III of
Prussia, who had presented them to
the Museum of Berlin. In 1923, the
Belgian government returned to the
cathedral the panels of the same po¬
lyptych, which depicted Adam and Eve
and which had been exhibited in the
Royal Fine Arts Museum in Brussels.
Thus this magnificent polyptych has
been reconstituted in the Vydt Chapel
of Ghent cathedral.
Two vast oil paintings by Toulouse-
Lautrec, La Goulue and Valentin le
Désossé at the Moulin Rouge and La
Goulue Dancing an Egyptian Dance in
her Shack were bought by a private
collector who in 1926 cut them into
ten pieces of various sizes.
Fortunately, the French National Mu¬
seums were able to trace the paintings
from photographs taken before they
were dismembered, and skilfully to
sew them together, again. Today the
two paintings hang in the Louvre
and one can see the marks of
the stitches, which serve as a reminder
of the perils to which they were expos-

Of all the famous artists whose works have been dismembered down the centuries,
perhaps the Spanish painter Francisco de Zurbaran (1598-1664) has suffered most.
Between 1628 and 1640, when the great religious orders were commissioning
paintings to illustrate their history, Zurbaran executed a large number of works
of remarkable quality. Among them was the prodigious group of pictures he
painted for the Monastery of St. Joseph of the Order of Discalced Mercedarians,
in Seville. They were completely dispersed as a result of the secularization laws
promulgated by the government of Joseph Bonaparte in 1810. However, at least
one good thing has come out of this misfortune: in the 18th century Zurbaran
was virtually unknown outside Spain, and the dispersion of his works, today
displayed in museums from Aix-la-Chapelle to Boston, from Genoa to London, from
Barcelona to Leningrad and Paris, has brought him world-wide renown. On these
pages we show some of the works which Zurbaran painted for the Monastery
of St. Joseph in Seville and indicate where they hang today. The exact number
of pictures decorating the monastery is unknown, but Zurbaran's paintings of
the martyrs alone numbered about fifty, some of which have disappeared.
PARIS (France)
St. Apollinia, from
the main altarpiece
of the Church of St.
Joseph. Louvre
Museum, Paris.
MADRID (Spain)
Martyr. Adanero Collection, Madrid.
ed and the fashion in which they were
restored to their original condition.
Finally, recent work by the Museums
of Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev on
the reconstitution of Russian works of
art has shown that such operations are
always worthwhile and give good
results, even when the main elements
of the work are missing. The way in
which two 15th-century works the
royal doors of the school of Tver and
the iconostasis of the Novgorod school
have been reconstituted is truly
remarkable.
The adoption by the General Con¬
ference of Unesco, in November 1970,
of the Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Owner¬
ship of Cultural Property marks a dis¬
tinct advance in the international com¬
munity's efforts to guarantee every
nation the possession of works that
are representative of its genius or that
have been created within its borders.
Contracting States, recognizing that
international co-operation is one of the
most effective means of protecting
such property against the dangers that
result from the illicit practices which
threaten it, undertake to oppose such
practices by removing their causes and
helping to make the necessary repar¬
ations.
The 1970 Unesco Convention states
that nothing shall prevent contracting
states from concluding special arrange¬
ments among themselves or from con¬
tinuing to implement agreements
already concluded regarding the resti¬
tution of cultural property removed,
whatever the reason, from its territory
of origin, before the entry into force of
the Convention. The party in whose
favour a work was reconstituted should
in principle give in return something
of scientific or artistic value equal to
that of the fragments which it receives.
The way is open to various arrange¬
ments which, while ensuring that the
interests of the parties concerned are
respected, may provide various valid
solutions for the reconstitution of
works of art exhibitions, long-term
loans, alternating possession for a
given period, or the permanent taking
over of a work of art.
Recently, the Metropolitan Museum
of New York and the Direction des
Musées de France jointly purchased a
12th-century comb, and decided to take
five-year turns in holding it. This is
an example of the way in which com¬
mon ownership can promote the inter¬
national enjoyment of a work of art.
Through this kind of arrangement, a
work of art may belong to two or more
institutions, each of which takes turns
to exhibit it.
Working along these lines, it may
be possible to reassemble certain dis¬
membered works of art or groups
which have been dispersed. If recons- _.
tituted they would recover their full jl
impact.
Sellm Abdul Hak
