sahel
2. the battle for
*'Lkj»UÙ.i «¡mmm
UNCERTAINTY and danger are
the very essence of life in the
Sahel. Its immense open spaces
are sometimes a hostile desert shunn¬
ed by man and, at others, green pas¬
tures towards which the herdsmen
drive their animals.
Although the amount of rainfall in
the Sahel is the most immediately
striking factor, the timing of the rains
over the year is also important.
Other influential factors are: the
different types of soil, some of which
retain water better than others, so that
fertility varies as also do the dangers
of erosion; the subsoil, which may or
may not contain reserves of water that
can be tapped by the nomad shepherds
either directly or indirectly by means
of deep boreholes; and lastly the
vegetation cover on which the life of
the animals and the herdsmen ulti¬
mately depends.
The fact that there is grass does
not necessarily mean much in itself.
Grazing land is only of any value if
there is accessible water nearby. To
water a flock of a hundred head during
the dry season, the shepherds must
draw more than 3,500 litres of water
a day from a depth of 30 to 50 metres.
The problems of providing the Sahel
with wells have long been recognized
as crucial, especially during that part
of the year when the pools are dried
up and the animals get hardly any
moisture from the vegetation they
consume.
Sometimes parched, sometimes ver¬
dant, the great expanses of the Sahel
have a vegetation that varies not only
from year to year but also between
different seasons of the same year.
In the steppes of the northern Sahel,
every tuft of vegetation has to com¬
pete for moisture with its neighbours.
The wadis and watercourses provide
favourable ecological conditions. In
their dried-up beds and on their banks
grow plants and small trees, or bushes
whose leaves provide fodder which the
animals relish. However, these favour¬
able conditions are rare in the north
of the Sahel, most of which consists
of pasture land covered with tall,
drought-resistant grass.
The southern Sahel begins where
An ox or a cow needs to drink at least
30 litres of water daily. Deprived of this
amount it is soon reduced to the condition
of the emaciated cow seen at left. On
right, sturdy cattle slake their thirst at a
new borehole in the desert. Many Sahel
wells have dried up, and where water
was once found at a depth of 12 metres,
the nomads must now dig down as much
as 36 metres to reach it.
14

survival of the Tuareg and their herds
the grass at times forms a continuous
carpet of green, where trees and
bushes begin to dot the landscape and
where the alternation of the seasons
can be more clearly perceived.
There also exist a number of "ref¬
uge" areas in the immediate proximity
of aquifers, streams or rivers, such as
the central Niger delta, and the water
courses, often temporary, which con¬
verge towards it.
What must be borne in mind is the
extreme variability of the grass cover
in space and in time. In an average
year, the vegetation of the Sahel
produces a heavy but short-lived crop.
What animals can live off this
vegetation? A camel will eat whatever
it finds, including thorns. Goats, of
course, are still less hard to please
and will even eat plants which are
toxic to other animals.
In the Sahel, goats in fact play an
ambiguous role: they have, it is true,
a catastrophic effect on the poor
vegetation, but on the other hand they
are the only animals capable of finding
nourishment in certain vegetation
zones, such as on strips of rocky
ground. Cattle, though more choosy,
find food on the various types of
grazing land In the Sahel, while sheep
will eat the grass left over by the cows.
Traditionally, the nomads stay near
to ponds during the wet season.
When these dry out, they lead their
flocks and herds towards areas where
the aquifers lie at a depth of no more
than 10 metres. In the middle of the
dry season, they move towards the
banks of the river or of permanent
branch channels.
The size of the flocks and herds
which the different types of grazing in
the Sahel can support certainly varies
from year to year and from month to
month. The quantity of grass prod¬
uced in one and the same area may
be anything between 600 kg and
5.2 tons to the hectare, and sometimes
the cattle leave untouched as much as
a third of the grass available for
consumption.
With a rainfall of 300 mm., the
number of hectares required to support
one head of cattle ranges from 6 to 30.
Within these ecological constraints, it
is up to the herdsman to decide
whether to increase his herd or to keep
it at the same level.
The herdsmen have themselves been
strongly marked by the environment in
which they live as regards their patterns
of behaviour and their way of life.
Conversely, they have to some
extent transformed that environment by
drilling wells, marking out trails, and
leading their herds from one grazing
ground to another, thus modifying the
grass and bush cover of the ecosystem.
While nomadism as practised in the
north follows no regular pattern, trans¬
humance, or the passage from summer
to winter pastures and vice-versa, is
an annual cycle which allows the
vegetation resources to be used to
the maximum.
The logic of the nomadic system of
stock-rearing and, in the more southerly
regions, of the regular seasonal move¬
ment of herds has been dictated by
the basic characteristics of the Sahel.
The herd followed the vegetation, the
Tuareg or the Maure followed the herd
and the servant tended to his master's
needs and watered the cattle.
But this does not mean that no sort
of control was exercised. One of the
main reasons for the power of the
herdsmen was their skill in managing
the Sahel environment. Wars, conflicts
and fights were frequent, but there
was nevertheless a certain consensus
among the Tuareg concerning the
distribution and rational use of the
grazing grounds and watering points.
Relations between the nomads and '
the villagers were also more or less ^
Herdsmen's ties
of friendship
The Wodaabe one group of the Peul
people practise a traditional form of
aid known as "haBBanaae" (as it
is written in Pular, the Peul language).
It ¡s a kind of contract or bond between
a cattle-owner (the "kaBBanDo",
or "he who attaches") and another
person (the "kaBBanaaDo", or
"he who is attached"), who wishes to
build up a herd. The "kaBBanDo",
a man of substance, lends the
"kaBBanaaDo" one or several cows
to start off a new herd or to
increase an existing one.
The "kaBBanaaDo", usually a young
bachelor or a poor man, rears the
animals on loan to him, keeping the
milk and butter they provide and also
the first three calves born to each cow.
When an "attached" cow has calved
for a third time, it is returned to its
owner and the contract ends.
The "haBBanaae" contract is the special
form of aid for the needy provided
for by Wodaabe custom. The cows on.
loan are called "animals of
friendship", representing not only the
nucleus of a new herd, but also
symbolizing the ties of friendship
between a poor man and a person who
wishes to help him. A Wodaabe
proverb maintains that an "attached"
cow must always be at the head of
the herd: it is always the first to be
watered, it should be caressed and
never beaten. In the evening the herds¬
man must personally take it to the pen.
This love for an "attached" animal is
often held up as an example, and it is
said that one person loves another as
much as he loves the animal "attached"
to him. It is in these terms too that a
boy will express his feelings to the
girl he loves.
15

codified by custom. Only in areas
with year-round humidity or, further
south, where the rainfall becomes
increasingly abundant, was agriculture
practised and millet grown to be
exchanged for meat and dairy products.
There is therefore nothing here to
disturb the Sahelian environment too
seriously.
It would, however, be unwise to
regard the period of Sahelian history
preceding the colonial conquest or that
which immediately followed it as having
been relatively Idyllic. The "equilib¬
rium" which some people claim then
existed was achieved only at the price
of epidemics which ravaged the cattle
and of increasingly severe famines.
In the Niger part of the Sahel, for
instance, memories subsist from before
the colonial period of the "Ize nere"
(the sale of children) famine when
"useless mouths" were exchanged for
food; of the "Gaasi borgo" when the
people had nothing left to grind In their
mortars but gourds; of the "Yollo
morou" "stroke your mats" (because
there was nothing else to do). (1)
Famines did not end with the arrival
of the French: 1913 saw the great
"beri" ("chest") famine which ravaged
the whole of the Sahel from the
Atlantic to the Red Sea. Between
1931-1932 there was the "Doo izo
jire" the year of the locust larvae.
There was a famine alert In 1937.
Lastly, 1942 was the year of "Wande-
waasu" "Forget about your wife",
so-called because everyone was think¬
ing of saving his own skin.
It was by exacting such a heavy toll
as this that the Sahelian system
functioned. The economies of the
northern and southern fringes comp¬
lemented one another in a relationship
favouring the stock-breeders. But
when people began to tamper with
systems of exchange and dependence
of this type, they did not realize that
this endangered the whole relation¬
ship between man and environment.
Although the landscape of the Sahel
does not seem to have experienced
anything more than localized modifi¬
cation in the last 50 years, the econ¬
omic, social and political life of the
Sahel has, on the contrary, undergone
profound changes.
The most spectacular event was the
end of hegemony by the Tuareg and
the Maures. This conditioned sub¬
sequent events: a "modernization"
policy, preceding then going hand in
hand with the Introduction of a money-
economy. In this way the stage was
set for keener competition for the
different areas of the Sahel. The
survival of the peoples involved
seemed likely to hinge on their use
and mastery of these regions.
One might summarize the situation
at the beginning of this century on the
southern edge of the Sahara and in the
(1) André Salifou. "Crise alimentaire au
Niger: les leçons du passé." (Food crisis
in Niger: the lessons of the past.) Formation
pour l'Environnement (Training for the
Environment.) Niamey, 1974.
northern part of the Sahel as follows.
Firstly, there was constant pressure by
the nomads whether Tuareg, Maure
or Peul on the sedentary population;
the two groups certainly had peaceful
contacts, but there were also many
occasions when surprise attacks were
carried out by the nomads.
The settled regions, inhabited by
blacks, provided the stock-breeders
with the millet which formed an in¬
dispensable part of their diet and
with menial workers who were soon
culturally assimilated. Furthermore,
within the area usually inhabited by
the nomads, the relations between the
population and the environment were
periodically adjusted by annual epidem¬
ics of diseases which man was then
incapable of checking, by droughts and
by wars between nomad groups which
sometimes led to a redistribution of
livestock and of captives from the
southern part of the Sahel.
However, It would be wrong to
present too schematic a picture.
Tuareg and Maure societies each have
their own kind of balance, some groups
specializing in warfare, others forming
marabout religious communities, with
"captives" (servants) performing tasks
such as guarding and watering the
flocks, crop-growing in oases, and
domestic work.
The Tuareg never seem to have
practised more than a limited number
of professions. This is still the case
today: a survey of Tuaregs in the
Tahoua area reveals that only two per
cent of the population are craftsmen
and less than 0.2 per cent are traders.
The organization of the Peul groups, on
the other hand, is quite different.
Tuareg hegemony over a large part
of what is now Mali and Niger was
challenged by the advance of colonial
power. At first there was strong
resistance, then in 1916-1917, a general
uprising throughout the whole of the
Tuareg country. This uprising was
sternly put down, with the result that
most of the families who held power
were eliminated and the Tuareg confed¬
erations dissolved. The colonial era
thus signified the reversal of the
relationship based on force between
the nomad herdsmen and the villagers.
From then on, the situation changed
rapidly. Thus freed from the pressure
exerted by the nomads, the black
population of the south was able to
extend the area under cultivation,
encroaching further and further upon
the herdsmen's traditional grazing
lands, a process which In the long term
was to have serious consequences.
The colonial power was in fact based
on the areas populated by sedentary
farmers; it protected them and re¬
cruited its auxiliaries from among them.
It was the farming townships which
received the administrative facilities
set up by the colonial authorities and
it was the sedentary peoples who got
the lower grade administrative jobs,
while the Tuareg, the Maures and to
a large extent the Peul turned their
backs on the schools set up by the
French and the English, regarding them
as institutions which led the young
astray from Islam and helped to
consolidate the influence of the foreign
conquerors.
At the same time as relations
between farmers and herdsmen were
changing, profound transformations
were also taking place within nomad
societies. The relations between
groups and families, already weakened
by the measures taken by the colonial
administration, tended to become
weaker still. There was no longer the
need, as before, to come together for
purposes of attack or defence. New
wells enabled certain groups to change
their former grazing grounds and to
move away from the rest of their kin.
The former prestige of the noble
tribes and families was undermined.
Distinctive changes took place within
each group and within society as a
whole the relationship between cap¬
tives and their masters became looser.
Traditionally servants had been
either those who looked after the cattle
and gradually managed to build up
their own herd, or those who did the
household chores for the master's
family, acted as guards or, in the case
of women, fetched water, collected
seeds of wild plants, etc.
The .colonial authorities however,
abolished serfdom and the nomads'
servants gradually became aware of
their rights. Some of them took a long
time to decide to leave their masters
and set up on their own with few
means of subsistence, but gradually
more and more former captives left the
nomad camps, usually settling in the
south.
Tuareg society, which had already
suffered at its apex, was thus slowly
undermined at its base. The tra¬
ditional pastoral economy was left
with a declining work force and the
"true" Tuareg found themselves with
fewer and fewer men to guide and
guard their herds. However, there
was only a slight drop in the number
of livestock of most Tuareg families.
The total number of livestock for
a group of three households living
more or less interdependently must
consist of a herd of 11 to 20 camels
and from 50 to 100 cattle. But it
should also be made clear that the
livestock are unequally distributed
between the different herdsmen.
There are hardly any groups of
herdsmen without animals of their own.
Individuals without possessions of their
own often have to be absorbed Into
households which have a herd. Nearly
a third of nomad groups, however, have
no more than 10 camels and/or
50 cattle, while one tenth of all such
groups have as many as from 40 to
90 camels and/or 200 to 600 cattle.
Thus although they lost their power,
the Tuareg kept or built up, again herds
of by no means negligible size. To a
certain extent, therefore, they gained
from the "development policy" applied
in the Sahel.
16



DESERT CARGOES OF SALT
The transport of salt is a major activity of the caravans which ply within the vast region
stretching from Mauritania to Ethiopia. The rock salt they carry is found in natural
deposits in the Sahara, the Sahel and Ethiopia. Lower photo, opposite page, shows
workers prising loose the crust of salt at Lake Assale in the Danakil depression, Ethiopia.
The salt is sliced into blocks, or "loaves", and then transported by camel caravans
(left) across the Sahel and the desert, for sale in oases and markets (below) or is
often bartered for millet. Because of this transport over long distances, the salt
sometimes fetches more than 20 times its cost price when sold at market.
