The supplement also presents major new activities which Unesco
will undertake in 1975 and 1976, (see boxes, pages 20-26).
An age of solidarity
or
An age of barbarism ?
by Amadou Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
Q
_^^INCE each of us is marked by the age in which
^a^»^he lives, by the environment into which he was
born and in which he grew up and by the experience
which he has accumulated, it is first of all in the spirit
of the African people, and in their wisdom, that I shall
find guidance for my actions.
When I speak of the people of Africa, this is not
some abstract image, but a reality which I have exper¬
ienced and in which I have fully shared. My presence
at the head of this Organization is merely the conse¬
quence of the profound changes which have taken
place in that vast continent since the present century
began.
Yes, I grew up with Africa, suffering its pains, feeling
its anguish, sharing its aspirations. The lesson I learned
there was the lesson of determination to root oneself
in the traditional environment ; in accepting the funda¬
mental values of that environment, we accepted our
responsibilities as free beings in a dominated society,
for what we had to preserve was freedom of the spirit,
in which lies the true meaning of dignity. We never felt
hatred in our hearts, even in times of conflict, because
we never lost hope in mankind...
The inevitable choice facing mankind is between
entering an age of solidarity or relapsing into an age
of barbarism. Solidarity means firstly the acceptance
of differences, whether they are biological in origin
or the product of geography and history. It means
the renunciation of all notions of hierarchy among peo¬
ples and nations. It means the abandonment, once and
for all, of the view of history long held by those who,
from Ancient Greece and Rome down to the age of
modern imperialisms, have always confused civilization
with power, reducing to the status of "barbarians" the
subjugated peoples as well as those who rejected their
yoke.
But solidarity means something more. It calls for
an effort to rise above our differences in order to
build, on a world-wide scale, a new economic, social
and cultural order which, transcending national self-in¬
terests, will enable man to organize his environment
rationally, so that each of us may live there freely and
happily, in brotherhood with his neighbours, whoever
they may be.
It is to be feared that the only alternative is barbarism,
for the balance of terror and the rising tide of inequal¬
ities may lead to those final confrontations after which
nothing will remain but ruin and desolation: the destruc-

. tion of all that human genius has helped to create over
so many centuries.
Even if peace were assured, failure to make wise
use of the power conferred on us by science would
pose no less a threat. Man's capacity to calculate and
to inquire has today expanded to the point at which
he is able to study both the infinitely small and the
infinitely great. Whether he penetrates the mysteries
of genetics or escapes from gravity to explore outer
space, whether he pursues the study of the microcosm,
dividing particles which only yesterday seemed indivi¬
sible, or sets out in conquest of the universe, man
indeed appears to stand on the threshold of a new
age, as if the combined fruits of two centuries of scien¬
tific progress were on the point of freeing him from all
his bonds.
But were science to be diverted from its highest
goal and placed at the service of evil, it too might well
imperil mankind's very existence, or at any rate enslave
humanity in new forms of bondage, worse perhaps than
any which it has known throughout its history.
It is true that scholars and scientists in many countries
are each face to face with his own conscience reflec¬
ting on the true meaning of their work and on the final
aims of science. Unesco cannot stand aside from
this debate, any more than it can remain indifferent
to whatever bears on the progress and the destiny of
mankind.
Its responsibility is all the greater since no organiza¬
tion is better placed to mobilize the intellectual resour¬
ces which both reflection and action demand. The
ambition of its new Director-General is to stimulate a
vast movement in which scholars from all horizons and
all disciplines may participate in a joint, world-wide
effort of meditation on the problems of the evolution
of our civilizations.
Since its foundation in 1946, Unesco has followed
a long and difficult path, facing countless problems
and passing through a number of world political crises
with their tensions and confrontations. Today its Mem¬
ber States, all its Member States, must endeavour to
understand that Unesco can carry out its mission only
in an atmosphere of serenity, and frank and patient
dialogue.
In the period of unprecedentedly rapid change through
which the world is passing, Unesco must constantly
review its objectives and its methods, in order to meet
the imperatives of new situations. In many spheres, this
sustained effort of renewal and adjustment has made it
possible to deepen and broaden a programme of action
for which, by reason of its universality, there is still no
substitute in the modern world.
Admired by some, criticized by others, at times misun¬
derstood, Unesco exists because of the part taken in
its work by its 135 Member States, whose participation
bears witness to the faith and hope that mankind as a
whole places in it. So a heavy responsibility is invol¬
ved in everything connected with the preparation and
execution of Unesco's programme, which demand an
unremitting effort of self-criticism, evaluation of the
results achieved, and an open-minded, imaginative out¬
look on the future.
Ethical action, the promotion of knowledge, with all
the exchanges it involves, and aid for development,
cannot be considered in isolation from one another
without a risk of divesting Unesco of one of the reasons
for its existence.
While ethical objectives reflect the Organization's
loyalty to one of its foremost tasks, which is to lay
down universal standards applicable to all because
they are freely accepted by all, the promotion and dis¬
semination of knowledge represent the prime source of
progress.
But human destiny cannot be dissociated either from
the development of society of all societies; there
is no society in the world today which is not in some
way having to face development problems. Special
attention must certainly be given to the needs of the
most seriously deprived peoples.
It is shocking and unjust that hundreds of millions
of human beings are suffering the humiliations of disease,
illiteracy and hunger, and are thus being deprived of
what is indispensable to human dignity, when one thinks
of the colossal waste which is a feature of certain
societies.
If it is not to fail in its mission, Unesco must do more,
and do it more effectively, to help the underprivileged.
And so we must make a determined effort to modernize
our methods for planning and carrying out all our acti¬
vities. . .
Each period of history has its underlying trends, its
lines of force, marking its significance and its distinc¬
tive character. Today more than ever, an organiza¬
tion such as Unesco cannot afford to trail world events;
it must resolutely take its proper place in the vanguard
of the double movement of emancipation and unification
of peoples which is the outstanding feature of our time.
I wish to address an appeal to Unesco's Member
States, and, through them, to all men and women in
every country of the world, to redouble their efforts to
encourage all those for whom the happiness and well-
being of others are more than empty words to rally
to Unesco in a great movement of universal solidarity.
Forum for the global exchange of ideas and fraternal
association of peoples, Unesco must continue to be the
ultimate hope for peace and understanding, in a world
which now, for better or worse, possesses tremendous
technical powers.
The task before us is to see to it that each day the
meaning of justice and truth is more clearly perceived,
to combat all that abases man physically and intellec¬
tually poverty, ignorance and inequalities and cons¬
traints in all their forms and to free him from the
often overwhelming pressures of exploitation, alienation
and mechanization which tend to reduce him to the status
of an object.
If the goal at times seems far distant and our quest
an arduous one, it is because the true achievement
of our purpose would mean nothing less than an ethical
revolution through which all mankind may be assured of
full development. I remain convinced and this convic¬
tion will underlie all my work in the service of Unesco,
in the years ahead, and be an unfailing source of hope
and energy that hatred and misunderstanding can be
overcome in the unity which is forged when ideals
freely accepted by all are finally put into practice, and
that man will one day succeed, as we read in the
Vedas, in "overcoming hatred by love, and falsehood
by truth..."
Unesco 1975-1976
YOUTH
Mobilization of young people, particularly students,
in national literacy campaigns.
H Study on ways in which young people can share in
community action to improve or preserve the quality of
the environment.
International inquiry to evaluate cultural services
available to young people in different countries.
International meeting of young scientists from
developing countries on student education and special
problems in university scientific training.
Surveys by groups of young people in developing
countries on the role and influence of the cinema in the
cultural life of youth.
International inquiry into attitudes and claims of
young people regarding laws that determine their rights
and responsibilities (right to vote, civil and penal
majority, minimum age for marriage, etc.).
Survey of needs and aspirations of young people in
Asia today; in particular how they can help to preserve
traditional cultural values in modern life.
Young people to participate in programmes for
preserving and developing the cultural heritage
(monuments and sites).
First international conference of ministers and
specialists on the role of physical education and sport
in the education of young people.
