WHO WERE
by Anne Ross
I am a wind on the sea,
I am a wave of the ocean,
I am the roar of the sea,
I am a powerful ox,
I am a hawk on a cliff,
I am a dewdrop in the sunshine.
I am a boar for valour,
I am a salmon in pools,
I am a lake in a plain,
I am a spear with spoils that wages battle,
I am a man that shapes fire for a head.
So sang Amergin, the poet of early Irish tradition, as
the invading Goidels triumphantly claimed the land of
Ireland from their divine opponents, the Tuatha De
Danann, "People of the Goddess Danu".
Ox, hawk, boar, salmon, sacred seas and waters,
magic weapons, venerated severed heads. All these are
essential ingredients in the religion and mythology of
the pagan Celts; beliefs which formed a vital part of
their everyday life and did much to bind together tribes
of such wide geographical distribution and ethnic
variation.
The lines also suggest another fundamental belief
found throughout their pagan cults; that of the survival
of the soul after death, and its rebirth in human, animal
or inanimate form time and time again. That this belief
was common to the Celtic peoples is strongly supported
CONTINUED PAGE 8
ANNE ROSS Is a British archaeologist and writer
and an international authority on Celtic history and
civilization. She was formerly associated with the
universities of Edinburgh and Southampton but
now devotes herself exclusively to writing and
research on the prehistory and history of the Celts
and related subjects. She is the author of Pagan
Celtic Britain (Routledge and Kegan Paul. London
1967) and The Everyday Life of the Pagan Celts
(Batsford. London 1970). Her latest book. Folklore
of the Scottish Highlands (the first of three volumes)
is shortly to be published bv Batsford. She is cur¬
rently at work on a book to be entitled Celtic
Requiem : a Cultural Analysis, and five other books
on aspects of the Celts, past or present

. " ifBJJJJJJJJJJJ
98 JV*V - . I
ma^BmmJMma^BmmJMma^BmmJMM
^b\%m\ H
'5 ~'V '
<
'> ^*<«
m
^Lm a\\\\\\\\\m
HHalaBHH
-ni\ÉLWaT

Two stylized faces stare out boldly
from this bronze Celtic brooch,
made about 2,400 years ago. With
its bulbous nose, and dot eyes and
nostrils, the upper face is a fine
example of Celtic grotesque. Lower
face, surmounted by a palm-leaf
motif ending in a lotus bud, is a Celtic
interpretation of a satyr, complete
with pointed ears. The brooch was
unearthed in a Bavarian grave.
CELTIC EXPANSION
IN EUROPE
Area of Celtic settlement
beginning 5th cent. B.C.
Expansion
of Celts between late
5th and mid-3rd cent. B.C.
Area of birth
of La Tène art style
by the other sources of evidence for
the Celts.
One of the earliest known Welsh
poets, who may have lived in the 6th-
7th centuries A.D., Taliesin, originally
born of the goddess Ceridwen, chants
a similar verse, which makes claim to
a long series of rebirths:
Once more transformed,
I was a blue salmon,
I was a dog, I was a stag,
I was a roebuck in the mountains,
I was a stock and a spade,
I was a drill in a smithy.
For a year and a half,
I was a speckled white cock,
Desirous of hens.
The tradition of rebirth and the soul
in animal or insect form still survived
into the present century in Celtic folk¬
lore. People firmly believed that the
spirit could be seen leaving the flesh
in the shape of a butterfly or small
insect, or of a bird which also hovered
near the body or at the window of one
about to depart this life.
Support is given to these literary
records and to modern folk-belief by
the writings of the classics, Greek and
Roman; all the evidence points to a
fervent belief in survival after death,
spiritual and even physical to rebirth
in this world, and a firm footing in the
Otherworld.
This was not the grim, gloomy Under¬
world of Mediterranean belief, but a
place which surpassed the mundane
world in all the pleasures most desir¬
able to the pagan Celts fighting, feast¬
ing, hunting, horse-racing, drinking,
cattle-raiding; listening to tales; making
love to superlatively beautiful women;
delighting in all the simple glories of
nature.
We may well now ask "Who were
the Celts?" "What are our sources
of evidence for them?" "What are the
peculiar elements of their psyche which
made them a distinctive people in the
ancient past and have preserved them
to the present day in the western
fastnesses of the British Isles, and in
Brittany, the Armorica of Caesar's
time7"
Who the Celts were, and when and
where they originated is a subject of
long and continuing controversy
amongst scholars, and is likely to
remain so well into the future. But
the controversy is no longer a sterile
and stagnant one. New developments
in scientific techniques and the applic¬
ation of new disciplines to the old
give a greater measure of proof to
conclusions built largely upon specul¬
ative theory.
The main sources of evidence for
the Celts, their religion, everyday
lives, artifacts and craftsmen are the
testimony of archaeology which prov¬
ides tangible evidence for their culture;
the writings of the Greeks and Romans
(6th century B. C. onwards), hostile
or eulogistic as the case may be;
place-names, personal names and ins¬
criptions that can be shown to be
Celtic; the writings of the early Christ¬
ian Irish and Welsh scribes who pre¬
served for posterity much of the invalu¬
able lore and beliefs of their fore¬
bears.
The folklore of the surviving Celts,
and of areas which were once and
for so long essentially Celtic can also
provide valuable corroborative material
which must, however, be used with
the greatest caution. And now new
factors such as radio-carbon dating
and the use of scientific methods for
detecting material no longer visible
to the naked eye are being marshalled.
Palaeobotany which can reveal vital
facts about plants and diet in antiquity;
the study of blood-groupings and gene
frequencies, and vastly improved me-
BS

Forhistonsk Museum, Moesgaard, Höjbjerg, Denmark Photo © Editions Le Temps, Paris
thods of linguistic research can all now
assist us in our search for the origins
of the people whom we call the Celts.
The origins of the Celts are, for the
moment then, still hidden in the dim
mists of antiquity. Their reality is
with us in their surviving descendants
whose temperament and personality
still reveal an astonishing affinity with
their early progenitors. And it is not
only amongst those who still speak
an inherited Celtic tongue as their
birthright that we find echoes of the
powerful tribes who, for hundreds of
years, occupied vast tracts of Europe
and Asia Minor and threatened and
dominated all who came into contact
with them.
They have left their mark down to
the present day in many subtle ways
on the countries which developed from
their old tribal strongholds. The
"Gallic temperament" owes much to
the spirit, vivacity, ¡oie de vivre and
artistic perfectionism of the Celts. And
recently, a professor of the beaux-arts
from Hungary said in conversation:
"In Hungary we are all Celts at heart.
Soldiers may come, heroes fall, but
the people go on." That then is
a summary of the Celtic world at the
broadest ends of the spectrum; its
importance is profound in any true
understanding of the subsequent pat¬
tern of European history and develop¬
ment.
Our concern here, however, must
be limited to the traditional concepts
of the Celts; and for this reason we
shall consider them as people who
were highly-developed by 800-700
B.C. and whose fortunes rose to a new
high between 500 and 250 B.C., when
their declining influence and power
began to succumb to, but was not
destroyed by, the rapid rise of Rome
and the imposition of the rules
of the Roman Empire on the greater
part of Celtic Europe. Ireland remained
immune from Roman domination and
this factor makes it an invaluable store¬
house of treasures from the vital, inde-
The manner in which a 3rd century
B.C. Celtic craftsman has depicted '
this face of an eagle-owl comes close
to the techniques of a 20th century
film cartoonist. With a skilful use
of semi-circles, half moons, triangles
and other geometrical shapes he
has created an immediately
recognizable image. The owl forms
part of a massive (one kilo) bronze
handle mount on a large cauldron
discovered in Jutland (Denmark).
The Braa cauldron, as it is known, is
believed to have been produced in
the Bohemian-Moravian region of
central Europe. Its presence in
non-Celtic Scandinavia is one
example among many of the wide
diffusion of Celtic art in Europe.

Photo Aerial Photography, Cambridge University, U.K.
pendent world
Celts.
of the pre-Roman
In order to understand anything
about Celtic daily life and spiritual
inclination we must then begin with
the generally-accepted emergence of
the Celtic world as a distinctive culture,
that is round about 700 B.C. This
culture is designated by scholars as
the Hallstatt culture.
This is, of course, a "convenience
term", because it implies that the
culture originated at this mountainous
site in the Salzkammergut of Austria
and that this was the generative area.
This we know was not the case. The
new developments in European prehis¬
tory heralding the arrival of what we
call the Celtic culture manifested them¬
selves all over Europe at roughly the
same time.
But it is the richness and wealth of
material found at Hallstatt in the 19th
century which makes it a useful term
for this early phase of Celtic develop¬
ment. Here, in the remote mountains,
traces both of a powerful aristocracy
and a salt-exploiting labouring class,
all composed largely of the old indigen¬
ous Urnfield (late Bronze Age) peoples
lived and brought about an astonishing
technological revolution, like that of
their fellows in many other parts of
Europe.
Their wealth in this instance was
based upon their exploitation of the
rich salt mines. Salt is a valuable
commodity; its preservative qualities
allow meat and other perishable food
produce to be preserved, ensuring
supplies throughout the lean months
of a northern winter. Its healing
powers must have been recognized
from very early times.
And here at Hallstatt were dis¬
covered the graves of the aristocrats
who now used iron, not bronze, for
their edge-tools and weapons; nobles
who buried their dead in splendid
wooden chambers (the sacred oak was
the most favoured wood) under
mounds, surmounted by a life-size
statue of the departed hero or his
god, or a sacred pillar-stone or ritual
wooden post instead of cremating
them as did their predecessors.
In these carefully-excavated graves
we can see traces of the lives and the
religious beliefs which were to become
so common amongst their descendants,
the "historical" Celts who appear
about 500 B.C. and are known to
scholars as the La Tène Celts. At the
height of their power between this
date and about 225 B.C. Celtic
dominion stretched from the Baltic to
the Mediterranean and from the Black
Sea to the Atlantic Ocean.
To return to the Hallstatt Celts.
Although they come from outside the
historical record we recognize them as
Celts from their material culture which
was to become elaborated and refined
but not substantially changed in the
second, La Tène phase.
The testimony of some of the oldest
European place-names suggests that
Celtic languages were being spoken in
Europe long before the ethnographers
of the classical world commented on
the habits of one of their most distin¬
guished, and certainly their most
powerful barbarian neighbours. Long
in fact before the technological exper¬
tise of the Celts had introduced the
use of iron to Europe north of the
Alps, and achieved what we may,
perhaps, call the first great Industrial
Revolution.
We cannot say with confidence what
gods these Hallstatt Celts worshipped,
but the existing evidence suggests that
they differed little from those of their
descendants, the La Tène Celts. The
increasing archaeological evidence for
aspects of pagan Celtic religion having
originated far back in prehistory
supports the likelihood that they had a
10

This immense horse (left) hewn through the turf
into the chalk of the Berkshire Downs (U.K.)
measures 110 metres from tail to nostrils. Known
as the "White Horse of Uffington", it lies near
an Iron-Age hill-fort. It strikingly resembles
the stylized horses depicted on some ancient
Celtic coins(See pages 38-39).
Dogs, natural and supernatural, had a special significance for
the ancient Celts. Cu Chulainn ("Hound of Culann") the great
hero of an Irish epic, won his name by slaying the savage dog
of another legendary figure, Culann the smith, and then
perished for breaking the taboo against eating a dog's flesh.
Dogs were also companions of the deities and guardians of the
Otherworld. Even today Celtic folk tradition abounds in stories
of supernatural malevolent dogs, helpful dogs and enchanted
dogs. Above, bronze leaping dog (14 cms long).
powerful priesthood, possibly even the
renowned Druids themselves.
The honour which they accorded to
the dead in the form of burial by
elaborate ritual, including in the grave-
goods some of the finest work of
their craftsmen superbly fashioned
weapons and personal ornaments, pots
of fine artistry, perhaps filled with ale
for the thirsty traveller on his long
journey to the Otherworld; vessels of
metal, and even joints of pork the
favourite food of the Celts all these
are indicative of the later widespread
Celtic veneration of the ancestors and
the cult of graves. These they
believed to be entrances to the much-
desired life beyond death.
Their four-wheeled wagons the
status symbol of the aristocrats were
buried with them together with their
horse-gear. Indeed, all that they
would require in the next existence
was provided for them. The later
Celts replaced the wagons by the light,
two-wheeled war chariot as their
outward sign of grandeur. The skilful
craftsmen who were accorded a high
place of honour within the rigid struc¬
ture of Celtic society in fact the smith
was regarded as semi-divine, pos¬
sessed of supernatural powers made
vehicles of a delicate, but hardy
elegance. i^
The ancient Celts regarded the boar as the supreme beast for
the chase and food fit for gods and heroes. They also venerated
it as an Otherworld, magical animal. Below, trio of bronze boars
(1st cent. A.D.) was found at Neuvy-en-Sullias, Loiret (France) ;
the centre one is a nearly life-sized portrayal. Now in the Musée
Historique de l'Orléanais, Orléans (France) they rank among the
finest specimens of Gaulish animal sculpture.

k These skilled artisans learnt to heat
and shrink the iron tyres onto the
spoked wooden felloes of the wheels,
and to create transport both practical
and pleasing to the eye, fit for the
proud Celtic noble and his well-bred
companion, the charioteer. These light
vehicles were drawn by two smallish,
specially-bred ponies which were
attached to a yoke at the end of a
long, and probably squared pole.
The nature of Celtic society, which
was highly aristocratic as we have
seen, gave employment to craftsmen
of all kinds and their assistants, and
the patronage and largesse of the
powerful nobles and their families
ensured a ready supply of artists and
specialists of every kind.
Not only were the structurally
simple, but no doubt elaborately
furnished and decorated houses of the
patrons to be built and furbished.
Schools of itinerant craftsmen also
seem to have hired themselves out for
the purpose of creating hill-forts so
much a feature of Celtic life and
ritual. They adorned the shrines and
created superb vessels and ornaments
not only for the use and adornment of
the chieftains and their wives, but for
the ritual of gift-giving between power¬
ful families within and outside the
native culture in order to seal bonds
of friendship and promises of peace
and allegiance.
All the sources of evidence for the
Celts thus point to a highly-stratified
society which was divided into three
main classes; the priests, poets,
prophets and noble warriors; the free
craftsmen and farmers; and the great
unfree the people who made possible
the rich lives of their social superiors.
But all came within the intricate and
ancient structure of Celtic law, the
oldest and most complex legal system
in Europe, and one with which the
Romans had to come to terms and
make some compromise. These laws
left none without his rights, un¬
protected, no matter how humble his
circumstances unless, having commit¬
ted some serious crime, he was banned
from attending the sacrifices, disowned
by his tribe and compelled to live the
desperate life of an outlaw.
The Roman use of the term barbarian
is an unfortunate one; for us, today,
the term connotes a picture of a wild
savage, deprived of the benefits of
civilization. For the Romans the word
simply meant someone who was not
a Greek or a Roman. Even the elegant
Etruscans were barbarians in the eyes
of the classical world.
The Celtic houses, different though
they were from Roman needs and
taste, were fully suitable for people
whose everyday lives were spent in
hunting, cattle-raiding, fighting, manag¬
ing the land and in religious observ¬
ance for the beliefs and deities of
the Celts were one of the great
binding factors amongst them. The
Romans preferred the quiet gossip of
the forum, the leisurely elegance of
the bathing establishments, the exotic
repast, the impersonal worship of the
official gods.
The thatched houses of their Celtic
neighbours were often surprisingly
large; they provided adequate comfort
and shelter for those tired from a long
day of activity in the open air. The
simple, low tables were sufficient for
the plain but plentiful food and copious
potent ale of the aristocratic warrior,
returned from the skirmish or the hunt.
High, graceful walls of impeccable
masonry and shimmering mosaic floors
were not missed when the eye could
delight in the beautiful metal wine
flagons and goblets, the comforting
central fire flickering on the exquisite
designs and the marvellous workman
ship of the skilled Celtic artists and
craftsmen. The warm flames reflected
the superb weapons and personal
ornaments of the vain, feasting nobles,
and the richly-decorated shields which
were never far out of reach of their
touchy owners.
Personal rivalry and the unceasing
search for distinction amongst fellow-
warriors lent a pleasant sense of
potential danger and the possibility of
sudden single combat the favourite
method amongst the Celts of settling
disputes to the comfort of the simple
fare.
And there was little need for exotic
entertainment when the meal was over,
such as was necessary for jaded
Roman appetites. The noble warriors,
their lord and guests for hospitality
was, and still is almost a religious duty
in the Celtic world would settle back
and listen to the music of the lyre,
to the pleasing voice of the bard
(poet) singing or reciting, commemorat¬
ing the feats and prowess of long dead
heroes, telling tales of the gods, and
praising the generosity and high
qualities of the lord of the feast.
These things were fitting and
appropriate to the temperament of the
Celts, their geographical situation and
their chosen, traditional way of life.
The fact that they differed from Medi¬
terranean taste and custom did not,
on that score, render them barbarous,
or the people barbarians.
Certain aspects of Celtic religion
did indeed strike the Roman world as
barbarous. Amongst these was their
custom of head-hunting, their fervent
human sacrifices, and the total power
of their priests, the Druids. Old Irish
tradition tells us that at an assembly
or feast no man might speak before
the king; but the king himself must be
silent if the Druid wished to make
utterance.
SALTY CELTS
OF HALLSTATT
Right, view of Hallstatt, near
Salzburg (Austria). This little town
at the foot of the Salzbergtal, a
mountain where salt has been
mined since antiquity, gave its
name to the first main period of
the Celtic Iron Age (700-500 B.C.).
In 1846, the director of the Hallstatt
salt mines, George Ramsauer,
discovered a vast ancient burial-
ground. Ramsauer worked on the
site for 17 years and personally
opened almost 1,000 of the 2,500
tombs, bringing to light finds of
major archaeological importance
which proved the existence of an
early iron-using Celtic culture.
Weapons, tools, jewellery, bridles
and war-chariots, all remarkably
well preserved, revealed the skill of
Celtic metal-founders and smiths.
12
Photo <D Erich Lessing, Magnum. Pari

HELMETED WARRIOR
This life-sized sandstone statue
of a warrior is helmeted but
otherwise unclad except for a belt
girdling the waist. Dating from the
5th century B.C., it was
unearthed in 1963 near Stuttgart
Germany (Fed. Rep.). The
statue once stood atop a grave
mound containing 16 burials but
was eventually dislodged and was
found lying broken on the
mound's perimeter. Below right,
a reconstructed burial mound at
Tübingen, Germany (Fed. Rep.).
The Celts believed in their gods and
in the powers of the Otherworld to
such an extent that religion was an
integral part of their daily lives. And,
although each tribe worshipped its own
gods apart from a few elevated
deities who seemed to be venerated
over a wide area and told its own
tales of their origins and adventures,
there is an overall unity in the religion
which can be detected from all the
sources of evidence at our disposal.
The tribal god was father to his
people, their provider and protector,
leader in battle and host at the Other-
world feast. The king must emulate
the god in all things. He must be
physically unblemished; his rule must
bring truth, prosperity and good
government to his people.
The mate of the tribal god was the
mother of her people. She was
concerned with the fertility of the stock
and the people and with the tribal land
where she stayed if the tribe, led by
its chief god, moved. There she
remained bound to the earth she
nurtured, facing an invading force with
her magic powers and her alternating
divine beauty and excessive ugliness.
She must be propitiated or destroyed,
for the Celts did not believe their
divinities to be incapable of death.
Over and above these was a wealth of
deities of all kinds and local spirits,
guardians of sacred wells or venerated
groves.
This common religion, widespread
Druidic priesthood which took some
20 years of training to achieve, the
common languages, the archaic legal
system, the delight in genealogy,
history, mythology, poetry, and the
intense cultivation of oral learning all
these things bound together the far-
flung tribes into a people which can
be recognized by archaeology, by the
Photo Wurttemberaisches Landesmuseum. Stuttgart. Germanv fFed Rer> 1
writings of the Greeks and Romans,
and by their own later records of the
ancient oral tradition of their forebears,
as Celts.
Unlike the Romans, the Gauls wore
trousers and cloaks, suited to their
equestrian tastes; the Irish wore tunics
and cloaks. The Celtic ¡deal was tall,
blond, blue-eyed, strong of body, bold
of spirit. And this indeed is the way
in which the artists of their classical
opponents portrayed them, passionate
in the attack, proud and scornful in
defeat and subjection.
The Celtic story is a long and
intricate one, and the end has yet to
be written. The ancient Celts did not
care to commit their learning and
beliefs to writing; they used Greek
and Latin for their business dealings.
This cultivation of the memory has
survived in Celtic-speaking areas to
the present day where the greatest
delight is still in the recitation of the
ancient tales and ballads, not learned
from books, but handed on from one
generation to another down the long
centuries by word of mouth.
The finest early Irish epic is the Tain
Bó Cualgne, "The Cattle-Raid of Cual-
gne". It is concerned with the rivalry
of the goddess-queen Medb and her
husband Ailill over the possession of
a superb divine bull, the Donn of
Cualgne, and the warfare and disasters
which result from this conflict. Ver¬
sions of this ancient tale can still be
heard in the Outer Hebrides, told by.
those who know nothing of its origins r
13

Museum of National Antiquities, St-Germaln-en-Laye,
Photo © Belzeaux-Zodiaque
France
Horse lovers of the Iron Age
To the Celts, the horse was not
only a beast of burden and mount
for the hunt but also an animal
they associated with several of
their deities. Figures of horses and
their portrayal on Celtic coins and
all kinds of metalwork demonstrate
this respect for horses. Above, a
magnificent bronze "cult cart"
(1st-2nd cent. B.C.) discovered at
Merida, Spain, on which a
mounted Celt hurtles in full cry
after a boar. Celtic metal
craftsmen often produced ornately
decorated harness fittings like
those shown at right. Discovered
at the famous Celtic Iron-Age site
of La Tène, in Switzerland, this
reconstituted harness is now in the
Schweiz. Landesmuseum at Zürich.
Below, Celtic ingenuity devised
this mule-powered harvester on
wheels whose teeth tear off ears
of grain as it advances. The
drawing is of a 2nd century A.D.
sculptured relief found in Belgium.
Drawing from Kölner-Römer Illustrierte, 1975, Historische Museen der Stadt,
Cologne, Germany (Fed. Rep.)
. or the antiquity from which it has
sprung.
One of the passages from the Old
Irish tale itself will do much to sum
up the Celtic ideal of heroism and
beauty in the description of the youth¬
ful hero Cu Chulainn, bathed and
adorned after violent battle, as he
appeared to those in the court of his
uncle, King Conchobar. Cu Chu¬
lainn was the son of the pan-Celtic
god Lugh (Lugus) and the king's sister
Deichtire, the hero par excellence of
the ancient Celtic world.
"Beautiful indeed was the youth who
came thus to display his form to the
hosts, Cu Chulainn. Three kinds of
hair he had, dark next to the skin,
blood-red in the middle and hair like
a crown of red-gold covering them.
A hundred bright crimson twists of red-
gold red-flaming about his neck.
Seven gems of brilliance in each of
his eyes. His dress for assembly that
day was a fair mantle, well-fitting,
fringed, five-folded. A white brooch
of white silver inlaid with gold over
his white breast, as it were a bright
lantern that men's eyes could not look
at for its brilliance and splendour. A
tunic of silk next to his skin, bordered
with edges and braidings and fringes
of gold and of silver and of white
bronze. A splendid dark-purple shield
he bore with a rim of pure white silver
round it. He wore a golden-hilted
ornamented sword at his left side. In
the chariot beside him was a long grey-
edged spear together with a sharp
attacking dagger, with splendid thongs
and rivets of white bronze. He held
nine heads in one hand and ten in the
other and these he brandished at the
hosts."
"Nine heads in one hand and ten
in the other." The Celts not only
decapitated their enemies. They wor¬
shipped the severed human head to
such an extent that it may be said to
symbolize pagan Celtic religion to the
same extent as the Cross epitomizes
Christianity. In one of the stories of
the Welsh Mabinogion concerning
Bran, a giant being whose divine
origins are clear, his head, after it has
been severed from his body on his
own request, remains fresh, an
excellent companion, lord of the Other-
world feast, the dispenser of the food
and drink of the gods.
The literature of Ireland received
written form earlier than did that of
Wales, under the aegis of the Christian
Church, a Church which in Ireland was
unrivalled in its austere devotions, but
having at the same time a deeply-
rooted love of its native background,
its Celtic language and traditions.
Although much of paganism is detect¬
able in both the Irish and Welsh
CONTINUED PAGE 16
14

CRAFTSMEN OF HIGH METAL
Skilled artists and artisans in bronze and iron, the Celts
created splendidly decorated objects of everyday use in
these metals. Above left, a Ist-century A.D. bronze shield
(77 cm. long) adorned with glass studs. It was recovered
from the river Thames in London. Detail of shield (above)
shows some of its red glass-decorated roundels whose
manufacture called for a mastery of complicated techniques.
The shield is more likely to have been used for ceremonial
occasions than for actual combat.
Bronze helmet (right) measuring 42 cm.
between the points of the horns, dates from
the 1st century B.C. It too was found in
the river Thames and may once have
decorated some Thames-side Celtic shrine.
Photo © British Museum, London
Below right, bronze and iron lynch pin from a Celtic horse
bridle. The pin was discovered in Germany (Fed. Rep.)
close to the site of the "Heidengraben", the largest presumed
Celtic oppidum (fortified settlement) in Germany. Below,
detail of the head crowning the lynch pin. It has lost the
original inlay decorating its eyes.

kliteratures the oldest vernacular litera¬
tures in Europe north of the Alps the
Christian scribes were too faithful to
the oral tradition to disguise more than
the most flagrant examples of pagan
practice.
How the Irish Christians managed to
accommodate this pagan past to their
very devout Christianity is nicely
illustrated by the words of the scribe
who committed the Táin Bó Cualgne
which depicts the Celtic world of about
the 1st century B.C. to writing. He
ends his narrative thus:
"A blessing on every one who shall
faithfully memorize the Tain as it is
written here and shall not add any
other form to it. But I who have
written down this story, or rather this
fable, give no credence to the various
incidents related in it. For some things
in it are the deception of demons,
others poetic figments; some are
probable, others improbable; while still
others are intended for the delectation
of foolish men."
Anne floss
Borély Museum, Marseilles, Photo
P's and Q's of the Celtic language
The Celtic language is one of the great group of languages known as Indo-European,
believed by many philologists to have originated somewhere between the Balkansand
the Black Sea. For reasons unknown to us, but which probably included external
pressures from people in neighbouring regions, together with ecological factors,
a great dispersion of these peoples began; specialists in philology are now taking
the dispersal of the Indo-Europeans back to about 2,300 B.C.
With the widespread movements which included all of Europe, apart from the
Finnish, Hungarian and Estonian languages (Finno-Ugrian family of languages)
and that of the Basques, the once-common tongue became differentiated to gra¬
dually form the distinctive European languages of later history. Sanskrit is the
most easterly representative of the old Indo-European speech. The Celtic languages
are very archaic and, like the social structure, have preserved much of the older forms.
There are three distinctive Celtic languages, or branches of the Celtic tongue.
The first and probably the most ancient is that known to linguists as Q Celtic, or
Goidelic, modern Gaelic. This branch preserved the original Indo-European ovsound
as q, later becoming k in sound, but written as c.
This is the branch of Celtic which was spoken and later written in Ireland and
introduced into Scotland in the late 5th century A. D although it may, of course,
have been known there already. It also reached the Isle of Man (in the Irish Sea between
Ireland and England) where it is still spoken traditionally by some of the oldest
members of the community.
There are some traces of it on the European Continent, but in general it would seem
to have been the second branch, known as P Celtic or Brythonic or Brittanic, that
was the common Celtic language of the Continent of Europe, and Britain until after
the Anglo-Saxon settlements gradually displaced it. After that it was the language of
Wales and Cornwall, from where it was re-introduced to Brittany from the end of
the 5th century on.
In Goidelic, for example, the word for head is cend (modern Gaelic ceann) ; in
Brythonic penn. In Goidelic the word for son is mac; in Brythonic map or ap.
The third and most enigmatic branch is that known as Pictish. The Picts are
mysterious Celtic peoples who, from historical times at least, occupied Scotland
north of the Forth-Clyde isthmus. Their language is known principally from
lapidary inscriptions in which the Celtic element is recognizable but which, like their
culture and highly-individual art style (Celtic though it indubitably is) still leaves
the problem of the Picts unresolved anda subject of hot controversy amongst scholars.
A. R.
Lintels and pillars furnished
with niches occupied by skulls
are an outstanding feature
of the great Celtic religious
sanctuary of Roquepertuse, near
Marseilles (France) dating
from the 3rd century B.C.
They illustrate the "cult of the
head" and confirm reports of
classical writers regarding the
Celtic custom of cutting off
and preserving enemies' heads.
This striking sheet-bronze mask
with its spiralling hair, beard
of S-shaped furrows and oval
eye-sockets that were probably
once encrusted with coloured
glass or enamel, was found in
the Pyrenees. Dating from
the 3rd century B.C., it may
have represented a Celtic
. divinity. The mask has a hollow
cylindrical neck enabling it to be
mounted on a wooden handle.
Tarbes Museum, Hautes-Pyrénées, France
Photo © Yan, Toulouse, France
16

I
«-.-' i
J
th
¡mm
i
V
J*-
o»**
WmW
Be
17
