AMADOU MAHTAR
M'BOW
A PROFILE
OF THE
SIXTH DIRECTOR-GENERAL
OF UNESCO
by Pierre Kalfon
NINETEEN fifty-three. Senegal
is still a French colony. In the
village square at Badiana, deep in the
bush of the Casamance region, a man
addresses the villagers.
He speaks of the need to learn to
read and write, to observe simple rules
of hygiene in order to prevent disease;
he explains that green manuring yields
more rice, that animals should be
vaccinated and that infant mortality Is
not inevitable. He tells the villagers
not to be ashamed of Africa's past.
He speaks of dignity and hope. . .
If the assembled villagers listened
so intently, it was not only because
they were fascinated by . his words.
It was because this time it was a black
African, and not a Frenchman from the
town, speaking to them about them¬
selves in clear and simple terms. This
Senegalese, a graduate frpm the Sor¬
bonne, was a school teacher of a new
kind. His name was Amadou, Mahtar
PIERRE KALFON, French teacher and jour¬
nalist, has lived for many years in Latin Ame¬
rica, where between 1968 and 1973 he taught
French language and literature at the University
of Chile. Santiago,: and was also correspondent
of the French daily "Le Monde " and the weekly
" Le trouve! Observateur ". Author of an essay,
" Argentine " (Éditions du Seuil, Paris 1967),
he is currently at work on a thesis on the lit¬
erature of the pampas.
M'Bow. On November 14, 1974, he was
elected Director-General of Unesco
by the representatives of 135
countries assembled in Paris. He
had jumped a century.
Shortly after he was born in Dakar,
in 1921, his parents took him back to
Louga in the Sahel, where the rest
of the family lived, the extended
African family of uncles, aunts, grand¬
parents and cousins. There he grew
up, "learned about life", had brothers
and sisters to whom he was the elder
brother and, above all, first learned
from practical experience and later
from books, as Jean-Jacques Rous¬
seau once proposed. Louga was at
that time a small rural community
With a population of hardly more than
5,000, situated at the cross-roads of
the Wolof, Peul, Toucouleu and
Berber settlements of Senegal.
His father, who came from a village
near the coastal town of St. Louis, was,
like many other villagers, an artisan and
farmer. He worked hide and made
leather goods, cultivated his field, and
kept a few sheep, cattle and horses.
Ä devout and highly esteemed Moslem
who read the Koran and strictly
observed the fast of Ramadan, he
was respected as much for his moral
uprightness as for his imposing
physical stature. Visiting Senegalese
political leaders always stayed at his
house, and as a prominent local
figure, he had been a member of the
Senegalese delegation invited to
Paris for the Universal Exhibition in
1900.
Amadou Mahtar M'Bow spent his
childhood and adolescence in a pro¬
tected yet liberal atmosphere: he
played to his heart's content with the
other children of his age to the
rhythm of Wolof fable-songs, ab¬
sorbing his cultural heritage in this
way: he listened spellbound to the
legends and tales of marvellous hap¬
penings whose animal characters
parodied man, his faults and his
qualities.
He was brought up in the time-
honoured way by his mother and
aunts, until the age of seven or eight,
when the responsibility for his edu¬
cation fell to his father and mat¬
ernal uncle who initiated him in crafts
and farming skills, taught him to raise
animals, build huts, repair tools and,
above all, to discover and to love
nature.
"I knew the names of all the plants
and how to recognize those that
healed and those that killed", he
says, "and even here in Paris, I often
Í4

make herbal tea from African plants
which are sent to me." In fact,
years later his knowledge of agricul¬
ture was to astonish many an
agronomist.
The only constraint he knew was
the systematic memory-training, from
the age of five, which consisted of
learning by heart and reciting verses
from the Moslem Holy Book at the
Koranic School. "It is a school of
humility", he wrote. "Whatever his
status or background, the pupil must
be prepared to render such services
as fetching wood and water, working
the land or seeking donations for his
teacher. . ."
Between 1928 and 1930, a terrible
drought hit the Sahel, like the one of
recent years, in which thousands died
from starvation. But without radio or
television, this appalling situation went
unnoticed in the Western world.
Even as an adult, Amadou Mahtar
M'Bow was never to forget what he
had seen as a boy. He still talks
about it: "As a child, I lived with
hunger. I saw men and women die
for lack of food. For me hunger is no
rhetorical expression; one must have
lived through it to understand its
horror."
One day, when he was nearly nine,
"on a morning in November 1929, 1 was
taken by my father, who did not know
a word of French, to the French
regional school at Louga." Wearing
his long African boubou (he did not
exchange it for European dress until
he was seventeen), Amadou Mahtar
M'Bow spoke only Wolof like most
Senegalese. He also knew Pula the
language of the Peul people which
he picked up from his grandmother.
One wonders whether this is where
he became interested in history. Did
he learn it from a typical French
history textbook of the time which
always began, "Our ancestors, the
Gauls. . ."? One thing is certain.
Within his own family, his father and
uncles took it upon themselves to
teach him another history, in the oral
tradition, of the feats of his ancestors.
Louga, where his family lived, had
been part of the ancient kingdom of
Cayor where resistance against col¬
onial penetration had been at its
strongest in the 19th century.
Mr. M'Bow himself has stressed the
vital importance of this aspect of his
upbringing, and it explains his later
deep-rooted need to affirm his identity
as an African. "Many of us were
brought up on tales which were a far
cry from what was taught in the col¬
onial or mission schools."
At fourteen, he was awarded his
certificate of primary studies, no mean
feat considering that nine out of ten
African children dropped out of primary
school. Told that he was too old to
enter secondary school, he changed
to a higher primary school, took a
commercial course and got a job as
a clerk in the Governor of Dakar's
office. He was already organizing
a youth movement.
Then came World War II. He was
eighteen, thirsty for knowledge and
eager to fight oppression. He joined
the French Army as a volunteer. "I
felt I had a duty to accomplish as a free
man", he says. He embarked for
France, where he later witnessed the
horrors of war. He does not like to
talk about this period of his life:
"I am not a pacifist at any price", he
says, "but to me war is utterly absurd.
The next one will mean the end of
mankind."
After the debacle of 1940, he
returned to Senegal until the Allied
Forces landed in North Africa, in
November 1942, when he again joined
the French Forces and was assigned
to the Air Force school at Agadir, in
Morocco. He left there at the top of
his class, and a specialist in electrical .
aviation equipment. At the time, he r
15

' i gn »
hHHBt ^ was the only black sergeant with
specialized qualifications.
Demobilized in France in 1945, he
was determined to go on studying.
But first he had to find a way to get
into university. For two years, working
alone, he prepared both for his
Baccalauréat and for the entrance
examination to the engineering section
of the Breguet School of Electrical
Engineering, in Paris, where he was
admitted as a first-year student.
There were then few African students
in Paris, In the Latin Quarter. Amadou
Mahtar M'Bow was no run-of-the-mill
student. He was convinced that he
had to fight for the dignity of the
oppressed, and in particular the dignity
of the "black peoples", since they were
among the most oppressed.
It was during this post-war period
that Africans were discovering Aimé
Césaire, of Martinique, who had
coined the word "négritude" and
brandished it like a flag, long before
American blacks proclaimed "black is
beautiful". At that time, the poet
Leopold Sédar Senghor, Senegal's
future head of state, was the most
listened-to apostle of négritude. Jean-
Paul Sartre was writing a brilliant
preface to Senghor's "Anthology of
Black and Malagasy Poetry". Another
Senegalese, Alioune Diop, was de¬
fending Pan-Africanism in the magazine
Présence Africaine. . .
But for an African living abroad, in '
France, there were then three pri¬
orities crying for action: first, to
rediscover Africa's true identity,
second to rescue Africa's past from
colonial disdain, third to proclaim the
rich cultural heritage of the African
people.
Senegal was sorely In need of
technicians but it was even more in
need of people to awaken the African
conscience.
So, Mahtar M'Bow decided to return
to his own cultural roots, though not
empty-handed and not unprepared.
Rather than become an engineer-
technocrat, he chose as a Senegalese,
to become an African geographer and
historian. After taking his Bacca¬
lauréat at the age of 26, he entered
the Sorbonne. "There I learnt rigour
and method", he says, speaking of his
Marxist and non-Marxist mentors.
He quickly established himself in the
African community as an anti-col¬
onialist student leader. With friends
he organized a research group seeking
to reconcile the quest for African
cultural identity with Marx's principles
and the anti-imperialist struggle.
In 1948 he became President of the
Association of African Students in

Photo" Georg Gerster V Fiapno. Paris
Fishermen's boats on one of Senegal's vast Atlantic beaches
between Dakar and Saint-Louis.
Paris, and in 1950, President then
Secretary-General of the Federation
of Black African Students in France.
This organization was to be the well-
spring from which emerged the future
"intelligentsia" of all French-speaking
Africa. It was here that Mr. M'Bow
discovered the complex realities of
pressure groups and French political
and trade union movements.
Contrary to what sometimes .hap¬
pens, his militancy stimulated his
academic work. He quickly obtained
his licence degree, and even found
time to marry a geography student,
Raymonde, whom he met at the Sor¬
bonne. She was a Haitian, tall and
beautiful, a diplomat's daughter, and
a descendant of the African slaves
shipped to the Americas centuries ago.
Their marriage was the beginning of
a long and rewarding association: joint
publication of many works, and a close
family life, with three children.
When he left university, M'Bow was
offered a teaching job in France. He
refused and asked to return to his own
country. But because of his political
views, the authorities of French West
Africa preferred to keep him away
from the major centres. He was
appointed to the secondary school at
Rosso, a small isolated town in Mauri¬
tania, then a part of French West
Africa. "I was delighted", he recalls.
"I wanted to make contact with Africa
again and to be with African pupils.
I was just thirty, and the only black
secondary teacher in the Senegal-
Mauritania area. It was quite an
event."
- This. "event" was to last two years.
A singular spark fired the lessons of
this young teacher, but his pupils were
not aware that it came from a man
rediscovering himself.
Amadou Mahtar M'Bow did not
remain unnoticed in isolated Rosso for
very long. At that time, Unesco's
Director-General, Jaime Torres Bodet,
had proposed the setting up by Unesco
member countries of "fundamental
education programmes" to combat
illiteracy. The Rectorate of Dakar
called on Mr. M'Bow, because of his
experience as a teacher and also as
a Senegalese, to head a new depart¬
ment of fundamental education for the
whole of Senegal.
Then began a unique period in the
life of Amadou Mahtar M'Bow, "no
doubt the most inspiring and instruc¬
tive of my whole career", he says.
This was a far cry from the quiet
sinecure of a civil servant sitting
behind . his desk. For five exciting
years, from 1953 to 1957, accompanied
by a small team of African doctors,
veterinary personnel, student teachers,
farming specialists, radio and cinema
technicians, and sometimes even a car¬
penter and a mason, he travelled by
truck throughout the country.
He ate from the calabash pot with
the villagers, whose life he shared for
two or three months at a time. He
acquired a unique and detailed know¬
ledge of daily life in the villages of
Senegal. Under his direction, schools
were built, health centres opened,
midwives and nurses trained, agricul¬
tural co-operatives installed, chemical
fertilizers introduced. Everywhere he
strove to alleviate ignorance, disease
and misery, the afflictions of what was
already beginning to be called under¬
development.
The villagers were illiterate. But
"dignity comes through learning". The
history teacher became a simple pri¬
mary school teacher. Using French
and local dialect, he devised a
reading and writing method specially
adapted to his classes. His pupils,
of both sexes, were "aged from 6 to
60. "In Badiana, for the first time, a
literacy campaign included both men
and women. The villagers helped to
finish the ideographic alphabet; it
was stencilled and roneoed . . . The
simplicity of the method gave them ^
confidence. Those who had learned r
17

W'to read well were loudly applauded.
Evening sessions sometimes went on
far into the night. .
It is revealing to read the reports
written by Mr. M'Bow, Chief of Mission,
after expeditions to places such as
Badiana, Dembakane, Senoudébou,
Mangaroungou, or Gaya. . . The fifty
close-written pages are not only a
sociological study of life in a Sene¬
galese village twenty years ago, but
also, despite the deliberately im¬
personal style, an adventure story of
a handful of men working together to
bring African villagers into the modern
world.
Between missions, however, Mahtar
M'Bow found time to participate
actively in the political life of his
country. His name became known as
that of an opposition leader whose
views commanded respect. First he
was a member of an independent group
of intellectuals which, in 1955, united
with the Democratic Coalition, led by
Leopold Senghor, to later form, with
the Senegalese Union for Progress,
the Senegalese People's Coalition.
In 1957, France beaan its decol¬
onization process and installed Sene¬
gal's first semi-autonomous govern¬
ment. Mr. M'Bow was appointed the
first Minister of Education and Culture.
Once again, he travelled through the
bush, built additional schools and set
up the first post primary classes, so
that more children could go on to
secondary education.
In 1958, General de Gaulle, on
assuming power, asked the French
African territories if they would
agree to form a Community linked to
France. Some said "Yes". Others,
with M'Bow, replied "No", and called
for immediate independence. When
the views of the former prevailed,
M' Bow, who had resigned to fight his
campaign, returned to secondary
teaching, with his wife, at St. Louis, in
Senegal, at the same Lycée Faidherbe
which had turned him down as a pupil.
This time, it was as an influential
opposition leader in the African Re-
groupment Movement that he patiently
took up the struggle again. His pro¬
gressive nationalism won him esteem
abroad, especially when Senegal
finally gained independence in 1960.
He travelled a lot, made many
contacts, published several books
aimed at making Africa better known
to the world at large and also school
textbooks designed to impress on
African children the richness and
diversity of their continent. But he
remained a teacher at heart.
The new Africa needed highly quali¬
fied personnel. In many countries,
Unesco launched the idea of teacher
training colleges to train such person¬
nel, and M'Bow was called on to teach
in one of these colleges in Dakar.
In 1966, Senegal's economy de¬
pended on one crop, the ground-nut.
An economic crisis loomed; the huge
port of Dakar stood empty. President
Senghor asked the opposition to
collaborate with him. It accepted,
hoping to implement its own proposed
reforms from the inside.
Amadou Mahtar M'Bow once again
became Minister of Education and with
Leopold Senghor's accord began the
"Africanization" of the university. He
himself presided over the commission
which drew up the first Senegalese
alphabet based on the phonetic tran¬
scription of the six Senegalese
languages, including Wolof. From
then on the teacher and the political
leader in M'Bow we're to become one.
When the 1968 wave of student
revolt in the world hit Dakar, M'Bow
tried to avoid a head-on confrontation
and succeeded in keeping the dis¬
cussion open with the student body
whose motives he fully understood.
Following this he was made Minister
of Youth and Culture, a post he held
until 1970, when in a cabinet reshuffle
he again left the Government.
P
| ^mY that time he had come to be
as "elder brother" by
many of his fellow Africans. In 1966
and again in 1968 he headed the
Senegal Delegations to two Unesco
General Conferences. Since 1966 he
had been a member of Unesco's
Executive Board. He also became
chairman of the African group of
Unesco's Member States and of the
group of 77 countries representing the
Third World.
In November 1970, Unesco's Direc¬
tor-General, René Maheu, offered him
the key post of Assistant Director-
General in charge of Education.
This post, calling for administrative
and diplomatic qualities, permitted
Mr. M'Bow to gain a detailed know¬
ledge of the educational developments
in every part of the world.
At Unesco's Paris headquarters and
"in the field", M'Bow's tall, well-built
figure soon became a familiar sight.
He was known for his frank, open
manner, his simple and direct method
of speaking. Possessed of a phenom¬
enal memory, he spoke with an
assurance that comes from knowing
every detail of a project. He came to
be recognized as the man who
preferred to settle questions rapidly by
direct personal contact rather than
through red tape or lengthy bureau¬
cratic procedures.
He owes to his African village back¬
ground and long experience a feeling
for conciliation invaluable for solving
harmoniously the thorniest problems.
"We have never seen him lose his
temper", say his colleagues, "but while
he readily shows confidence in others,
woe betide anyone who lets him
down."
Now a vigorous 53, with a capacity
for work that astonishes everyone,
Amadou Mahtar M'Bow has no illusions
about the job ahead. He knows, it
will be tough, but he also knows
how much Unesco can do to help
countries free themselves from ignor¬
ance and poverty. Knowing Unesco
well and believing wholeheartedly in
its objectives,, he intends to infuse it
with fresh vigour and give it a new style.
"I should be delighted indeed to
listenas we do under the baobab
tree in Africa to all points of view and
to find a solution acceptable to all. . .",
he says. "I am a little wary of a
universalistic humanism which often
masks Eurocentrism. I prefer plural¬
ism, which accepts the distinctive
identity of each people. I was brought
up to accept differences in a spirit of
tolerance. I am the brother of every
human being, whatever his or her race,
whatever his or her belief, and
wherever he or she may live. This is
the first stepping stone for building
true solidarity between all peoples.
With René Maheu, Unesco's former
Director-General, a whole generation
of the early pioneers of the Organ¬
ization is disappearing. They were
dedicated men and women who often
came from the Western world. With
Amadou Mahtar M'Bow, a black
African who stands at the cross-roads
of several civilizations and rejects
neither his past under a colonial
regime nor his European university
background, a new generation of men
and women is emerging in the train
no doubt of the present acceleration
of history.
The path that led the country boy
from the African Sahel to head one
of the most important organizations of
the United Nations system perhaps
marks a turning point in the emergence
of this other world, long oppressed,
despised or disregarded the world of
the disinherited peoples. "I feel that
I am today the symbol of these
peoples", Amadou Mahtar M'Bow said
on taking office, on November 15, 1974.
In choosing him as Director-General
for six years, Unesco has entered the
21st century.
Pierre Kalfon
18
