THE NUCLEAR NIGHTMARE
50,000 Hiroshimas:
such is the destructive power
of the so-called 'tactical'
nuclear weapons
IN 1944, no nuclear weapon existed.
Today, there are tens of thousands.
The nuclear arsenals of the U.S.A. and
the U.S.S.R. have grown so large as to
be wildly in excess of any conceiv¬
able need, military or political, of
either power.
Thirty years ago, nuclear weapons
could be delivered only by bombers.
Nowadays, they exist in a bewildering
variety of forms: intercontinental
ballistic missiles (ICBMs), submarine-
launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs),
medium-range ballistic missiles, inter¬
mediate-range ballistic missiles, short-
range ballistic missiles, depressed
trajectory ballistic missiles, fractional
orbital bombardment systems, free-fall
tactical bombs, free-fall strategic
bombs, air-to-surface missiles, air-to-
surface stand-off missiles, air-to-air
missiles, army artillery shells, naval
artillery shells, howitzer projectiles,
torpedoes, rocket torpedoes, depth
charges, demolition devices, land
mines, sea mines, anti-ballistic missiles
and so on.
The development of nuclear-weapon
systems continues unabated. Some
strategic missiles are now being
equipped with multiple independently-
targetable re-entry vehicles (MIRVs) of
very high accuracy. Soon it will be
possible to deliver missile-borne
thermonuclear warheads over dis¬
tances of 6,000 miles and more to
within a few tens of metres of the
target. Almost incredible military
technological advances have been
made in the past three decades.
Tactical nuclear weapons
Most publicity has been given to
strategic nuclear weapons, but in addi¬
tion the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. have
deployed tens of thousands of tactical
nuclear weapons. In Europe alone
there are about 7,000 U.S. and 3,500
Soviet tactical nuclear weapons.
The total explosive power of existing
tactical nuclear weapons is enormous
so large as almost to defy imagin¬
ation. The combined explosive capa¬
bility of the U.S. and Soviet tactical nu
clear weapons is roughly equivalent to
700 million tons of TNT or 50,000
Hiroshimas. The tactical nuclear
weapons at present deployed in Europe
would, if ever used, totally obliter¬
ate the continent 20,000 Hiroshimas
would be unleashed.
Conventional weapons
Fear of the catastrophic conse¬
quences of nuclear war has tended to
obscure the frightening developments
that have been made over the past
two decades in conventional (non-
nuclear) weapons.
Although the nuclear bomb remains
the ultimate in weapons, it has not
been used since Hiroshima and
Nagasaki were blasted apart in 1945.
Yet, since the end of World War II,
tens of millions of people have been
killed or maimed for life and wide¬
spread destruction has been caused in
a hundred wars in which conventional
weapons were used. And environ¬
mental damage caused by some
conventional weapons (in Indochina,
for instance) will bear witness for
years to come of the "effectiveness"
of modern non-nuclear war.
Never before in human history has
the military man had so much, or so
varied an assortment of, weaponry at
his disposal. Not only has a huge
number of new weapons been develop¬
ed, but even older types have been
updated and "refined" to such a
degree that they bear little resemblance
to their predecessors.
The naval destroyer provides a good
example. A destroyer built in the late
1940s displaced 3,480 tons fully
loaded and was armed with six 5-inch
guns, six 3-inch guns, and five torpedo
tubes. For antisubmarine operations,
there was only a primitive sonar and
some ordinary depth charges.
Its modern counterpart displaces
6,900 tons fully loaded. The warship
has an armament of only two 5-inch
dual purpose guns. But these are
automatically fired and operated, using
radar and a remote control television
system to direct fire against surface
and aircraft targets. There is also a
missile system for defence purposes.
The antisubmarine equipment includes
highly sophisticated sonar systems
and antisubmarine missiles, armed
with either conventional or nuclear
warheads and fired from an antisub¬
marine helicopter.
The warships, packed with electronic
equipment, are so highly automated
that, despite being twice as big and
infinitely more complex than the 1940-
type destroyers, they carry about the
same crews.
Even more dramatic changes have
occurred in military aircraft. Com¬
pared with modern military aircraft,
those of only 20 years ago seem to
belong to another era.
A new jet fighter, for instance,
carries a variety of missiles in addition
to a 20-mm anti-aircraft gun capable of
firing 1,000 rounds a minute. It
resembles a flying computer.
A lightweight radar system has been
developed for the aircraft to detect
and track high-speed targets at great
distances and at all altitudes down
to tree-top level. This information is
fed into the aircraft's central computer
for the accurate launching of missiles
or the firing of the gun.
For close-range combat, the radar
automatically projects the target on
a head-up display giving all the
necessary information on a glass
screen positioned at the pilot's eye
level. The computer also informs the
pilot if the aircraft which he has
detected by eye or radar is a friend
or a foe, and provides information
enabling the pilot to navigate accu¬
rately literally anywhere in the world.
Remotely piloted weapons
With today's advanced military air¬
craft costing around $20 million each,
there is a growing interest in the
development of remotely piloted ve¬
hicles (RPVs) for missions such as
reconnaissance, electronic warfare,
ground attack and air-to-air combat.
RPVs could also be used as decoys
against radar-controlled air-defence
22

systems, which are becoming Increas¬
ingly more effective and deadly.
Thanks to new technological ad¬
vances, the cost of a low altitude
strike-reconnaissance RPV works out
at about $500,000. What is more,
these pilotless warplanes, that have
already proved their "usefulness" in
both Viet-Nam and the Middle East,
do not need the expensive ejection
and survival systems nor the other
man-orientated equipment necessary
In a piloted aircraft.
Using equipment such as television
cameras and data transmission, an
RPV could be controlled precisely,
and at a safe distance from the target
area, by an operator either in the
launcher aircraft or in a ground control
centre working from television pictures
transmitted from the vehicle.
One of the many new developments
in conventional weapons Is that of
precision guided munitions, or PGMs.
There now exists a whole class of
such weapons, in which are normally
included all those bombs, missiles and
other projectiles that can score direct
hits on their targets at full range with
a high probability of say, greater
than one-half.
According to the design of the
PGM, the target may be a tank, ship,
aircraft, bridge, radar installation,
concentration of armour or troops, and
so on. A PGM may be an air-to-air,
air-to-surface, surface-to-air or surface-
to-surface weapon and may be fired
from an artillery piece, an aircraft, a
ship, a vehicle or launched by an
individual soldier.
Because PGMs can be guided during
flight onto even moving targets they
are considerably more accurate than
unguided weapons. Various homing
devices, based on TV, lasers, infra
red, wire-guidance or radar homing,
have been developed for these
weapons.
PGMs are relatively easy to operate
and they are cheap (at least compared
to the cost of potential targets).
Together with their accuracy, these
characteristics have stimulated con¬
siderable military interest in these
weapons.
Concurrent with the development of
PGMs, significant advances have been
made in such areas as: artificial
sensors for target acquisition; night-
vision equipment; information-pro¬
cessing systems; command and con¬
trol systems: and so on. In com¬
bination, these developments are likely
to make warfare increasingly auto¬
mated. But very little thought has so
far been given to the political, social
and economic consequences of this
type of warfare.

