THE NUCLEAR NIGHTMARE
Arms control efforts have
failed to produce any nuclear disarmament
or even to halt the nuclear arms race
EVER since nuclear weapons
were invented, attempts have
been made to justify their possession
a familiar state of affairs In military
technology. To this end, very elabo¬
rate theories of deterrence have been
developed by strategists and other
intellectuals. And dubious beliefs
have evolved about the political and/or
military utility of nuclear weapons the
most common one being that these
weapons actually prevent war.
It is, of course, unprovable that
nuclear weapons have ever prevented
war but many firmly believe that they
did so in the late 1940s and early
1950s. Be this as it may, it is cer¬
tainly no longer true nor has it been
for a long time now that the Soviets
and the Americans are prevented
from fighting each other mainly be¬
cause of their possession of nuclear
weapons.
All theories of nuclear strategy and
deterrence based on massive assured
destruction contain basic flaws. By
their very nature they must. Not only
are the theories often based on
assumptions that defy common sense
and experience such as, political
leaders will always behave rationally,
countries will surrender rather than
use all their nuclear weapons, adver¬
sary countries will negotiate at an
early stage of a conflict, and so on
but they are inhumane, immoral, even
genocidal and they seriously hamper
progress towards disarmament.
Unfortunately, nuclear deterrence
has become so ingrained into the
thinking of politicians, strategists,
military men and the general public,
that it has almost become an article
of faith. We have, so to speak,
learnt to live with nuclear weapons.
Political leaders often subscribe to
the theory of nuclear deterrence not
necessarily because they believe in
its virtue but for reasons of political
expediency. Once new weapon sys¬
tems have been developed, very
strong pressures (by no means all
military ones) rapidly grow within socie¬
ties for their extensive deployment.
But often there is no obvious stra¬
tegic justification for this deployment
and so one has to be invented. And
a convenient rationalization is that
the deployment is necessary "to main¬
tain and strengthen deterrence". In
this way, there has been rationaliz¬
ation about large numbers of new
types of intercontinental ballistic
missiles, nuclear strategic submarines,
intercontinental strategic bombers,
and so on.
It is often said that if one side
were weaker in nuclear weaponry it
would tempt the other side to exert
political pressure and blackmail on
the weaker one. But this does not
affect the argument for negotiated
general nuclear disarmament which
would maintain an equilibrium, and
therefore a feeling of security on both
sides, throughout the disarmament
process.
The public has become lulled into
a false sense of security by those
most often undeniably sincere patriots
extolling the virtue of a balance of
nuclear terror as a fine and sensible
policy. But the advocates of this
theory have become hoist on their
own petard.
A "good" policy for one country is
likely to be seen by others as "good"
also for themselves. If the U.S.A. and
the U.S.S.R. are seen to perceive
that nuclear deterrence is a workable
doctrine then other countries will pro¬
bably come to believe in it too. In
international politics, perceptions are
more important than facts.
The dilemma for the nuclear-weapon
CONTINUED PAGE 26
23

(Continued from page 23)
countries is how to dissuade other
countries from acquiring nuclear
weapons which they are very
anxious to do and rightly so without
playing down the importance they
attach to their own.
The fact is, of course, that the
nuclear-weapon states cannot have it
both ways. But it appears that the
political leaders of these countries
are not prepared to declare that, in
today's world, nuclear weapons have
little or no political or military value.
They have probably become too
carried away by their own propaganda
to be able to do so, even though times
have changed.
Throughout this century, disarma¬
ment and the control of armaments
have been more or less permanent
features of the foreign policies of the
great powers. And since World
War II, literally hundreds of interna¬
tional meetings have taken place
mainly in an attempt to control the nu¬
clear arms race between the U.S.A.
and the U.S.S.R. and then to reduce
the number of nuclear weapons in the
arsenals of the nuclear-weapon
powers. But, in spite of so much
talk, virtually no progress has been
made towards either of these ends.
How can this be explained?
A major reason for a lack of pro¬
gress towards nuclear disarmament
is related to the decision taken by
politicians in the early 1960s to aban¬
don attempts at the direct negotiation
of general and complete disarmament
and to work instead for partial arms
control measures. The idea was that,
by this method, it would be possible
to move towards general disarmament
by small steps.
Whereas "disarmament" normally
means a quantitative reduction in total
numbers of existing weapons by the
traditional methods of international
negotiation, leading to a multilateral
treaty, "arms control" normally refers
to negotiated measures leading to the
slowing down (and eventual halting)
of arms races.
In other words, disarmament refers
to the elimination of armaments (either
specific armaments, such as nuclear
ones in the case of nuclear disarma¬
ment, or all armaments in the case of
general and complete disarmament)
and arms control to curbs on acquir¬
ing new weapons.
Slow progress seems to be inherent
in the arms control approach. Arms
control advocates claim that, in a
world of security-conscious sovereign
states, disarmament can only come
about if at all as the end product
of a lengthy process.
The initial stage In this process
involves banning weapons of little or
no military value (such as biological
weapons) and banning weapons from
environments of little or no military
significance (such as the sea-bed,
outer space, Antarctica and so on).
This process, so it is said, will
establish such a degree of mutual
confidence between the powers and
so improve the climate of international
affairs that, in due course, far-reaching
disarmament may be possible.
Confidence-building measures like
arrangements to minimize the risk of
"nonprovocative" weapons, the adop¬
tion of "nonprovocative" strategies,
and so on and tension-reducing
measures like nuclear-free zones,
demilitarized areas, nuclear test bans,
nonaggression pacts and so on are
advocated as measures which may
facilitate the eventual negotiation of
disarmament.
Although disarmament advocates
disagree amongst themselves on the
details of the most desirable general
and complete disarmament plan, most
agree on the urgent need for nuclear
disarmament usually as part of some
broad programme of disarmament.
Arms control advocates often argue
that disarmers exaggerate the dan¬
gers in a nuclear-armed world and,
more importantly, they feel that it is
politically unrealistic to expect signi¬
ficant disarmament to be achieved in
a world organized as ours is today.
In their turn, disarmers argue that
far-reaching disarmament is a politi¬
cally realistic objective (although
admittedly a difficult one to achieve)
in a world of sovereign states because
governments could be persuaded to
disarm by, for example, the pressure
of public opinion. They would then
direct their energies towards disarm¬
ament instead of diverting their atten¬
tion to the negotiation of partial arms
control measures.
An argument often used against dis¬
armament is that even if weapons
were destroyed, knowledge of their
production technology would still
exist and governments could order
their manufacture again at any time.
This is true, but the reestablishment
of an armaments industry would take
time and would be extremely difficult
to conceal.
The risk that weapons will be used
is greatest if they are available for
use at a moment's notice in the heat
of a crisis. Any delay in the outbreak
of war would give more peaceful
methods of settling the conflict a
chance of success.
The record to date is a dismal one.
The only disarmament that has taken
place in the past quarter century is
the destruction of stockpiles of biolo¬
gical weapons by the U.S.A. and
possibly also by the U.S.S.R. The
former has been officially announced,
the latter not yet.
Apart from this, not a single
weapon not even a pistol, let alone
an intercontinental ballistic missile
has been destroyed as a result of an
international agreement. Instead, vast
numbers of weapons conventional,
nuclear and chemical of a bewilder¬
ing variety of types have been devel¬
oped and deployed as fast as techno¬
logical developments will allow.
Furthermore, the international trade
in arms has increased alarmingly and
even the most sophisticated weapons
are now sold in large quantities by
the advanced nations, often even
before they enter the arsenal of the
producing country.
Very little attention has so far been
paid to the problem of controlling and
reducing conventional armaments or
the arms trade, even though the
greatest proportion of world military
expenditure is used to acquire these
weapons. Yet these weapons encour¬
age and add to the violence of local
conflicts and the arms trade is one
way in which the great powers, as
suppliers, become embroiled in regio¬
nal wars involving client states.
So far, seven multilateral treaties
have been negotiated at the Confe¬
rence of the Committee on Disarma¬
ment in Geneva, the main international
forum for disarmament negotiations,
and a number of bilateral treaties have
been negotiated directly between the
U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.
The first multilateral arms control
treaty was the Antarctic Treaty (1959)
which prohibits the militarization of
the Antarctic the area is to be used
exclusively for peaceful purposes.
The veteran disarmament advocate,
Philip Noel-Baker, commented that
"while disarming Antarctica, we put
7,000 nuclear weapons in Europe. We
should have disarmed Europe and put
those weapons in Antarctica." But
the Antarctic Treaty was only the first
of a series of arms control measures
which merely banned weapons from
environments in which there is no mili¬
tary interest.
Another treaty of this type is the
Outer Space Treaty (1967) which
controls military activity in space and
26

prohibits the placing in orbit round
the earth of any objects carrying
weapons of mass destruction. And
then there is the Sea-Bed Treaty
(1971) which rules out the sea-bed for
the emplacement of nuclear weapons
or any other weapons of mass
destruction.
The intention of the Treaty of Tla-
telolco (1967), to make Latin America
a nuclear-free zone, is a good one.
Unfortunately, the two countries in the
region most likely to acquire nuclear
weapons, Brazil and Argentina, have
not fully acceded to the Treaty and
are unlikely to do so. In their absence,
the Treaty is a dead letter.
Many apologists for the arms control
approach regard the Partial Test Ban
Treaty (1963) as a singular success.
But it has mainly functioned as an
antipollution measure and, as such, it
can be regarded as the first modern
international treaty to control the
contamination of our environment.
No one today doubts that our en¬
vironment would now be considerably
more contaminated with radioactive
material if the U.S.A., the U.S.S.R. and
the U.K. had continued testing nuclear
weapons in the atmosphere and under¬
water.
Although France and China have
not stopped conducting nuclear tests
in the atmosphere (1) they have done
so much less frequently than did the
other three powers. The Treaty may
also have prevented India who has
ratified it from detonating its nuclear
explosive device above ground.
After the Treaty, the U.S.S.R. and
the U.S.A. continued testing nuclear
weapons underground at about the
same rate as they had tested nuclear
weapons before 1963. The Partial
Test Ban has not, therefore, signifi¬
cantly slowed down the nuclear arms
race between the U.S.A. and the
U.S.S.R.
If it has had any effect at all, it was
to limit the further development of very
large thermonuclear weapons but
military interest in these weapons
waned some time ago. On the other
hand, very substantial progress has
been made since 1963 by underground
(1) In June 1974, France announced that
her nuclear tests In the atmosphere in the
summer of 1974 would be the last of their
kind, and that future tests would be carried
out underground.
testing in improving the yield-to-weight
ratio of nuclear warheads and thus
developing, for example, very small
nuclear weapons; hardening weapons
against anti-ballistic missiles (ABMs);
developing multiple independently-
targetable re-entry vehicles (MIRV)
and ABM warheads; and so on.
It is, therefore, difficult to claim
convincingly that the Partial Test Ban
was a significant step towards nuclear
disarmament. Nothing short of a
comprehensive test ban, prohibiting
all nuclear tests, could reasonably be
so described.
There is little doubt that public
concern over the radioactive contami¬
nation of man's environment was the
main factor which induced the U.K.,
the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. to agree
to discontinue tests in the atmosphere,
in outer space and underwater.
Public opinion had been aroused
by a series of dramatic nuclear events
prior to 1963, such as the severe radio¬
active contamination of a boatload of
Japanese fishermen by an American
thermonuclear explosion in 1954 in the
Pacific (see "Unesco Courier", Aug.-
Sept. 1967) and the Soviet atmospheric
explosion at Novaya Zemlya in October
1961 of the largest nuclear device ever
exploded in the world a thermo¬
nuclear weapon with an explosive
power equivalent to that of 58 million
tons of TNT.
The fact that the force of public op¬
inion overcame the strong objections
to a partial test ban on the part of
those groups within the nuclear-wea¬
pon powers with vested interests in
nuclear-weapon testing is an object
lesson.
It demonstrates that if 'successfully
mobilized again, public opinion could
compel reluctant politicians to move
towards nuclear disarmament. This
may be the best if not the only hope
of achieving such disarmament.
The other two existing arms control
measures are the Non-Proliferation
Treaty (1968), and the Biological Wea¬
pon Convention (1972) which prohibits
the production of biological weapons
and stipulates the destruction of biolo¬
gical-weapon stockpiles.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty is un¬
doubtedly a fragile instrument. The
Treaty is weak because two nuclear-
weapon powers (China and France),
and many key states with the technical
ability and the nuclear material to
acquire nuclear weapons (Argentina,
Brazil, India, Israel, Pakistan and South
Africa among them) have not asso¬
ciated themselves with the Treaty.
But the most serious weakness is
the imbalance between the obligations
of, and the benefits for, the nuclear-
weapon parties (the U.S.A., the
U.S.S.R. and the U.K.) and those of,
and for, the non-nuclear-weapon par¬
ties. The latter states have substantial
obligations but have, so far, received
very few benefits.
Moreover, the nuclear-weapon par¬
ties have failed to fulfill the few obliga¬
tions under the Treaty which they do
have. In particular, the obligation to
take "effective measures relating to
cessation of the nuclear arms race at
an early date and to nuclear disarma¬
ment" has clearly not been fulfilled.
If the nuclear-weapon parties do not
take their obligations seriously, why,
say the others, should we?
The most obvious next candidates
for multilateral arms control treaties
are a chemical-weapon convention and
a comprehensive nuclear test ban.
Verification is said to be the main
stumbling block in the negotiation of
both of these measures but experience
shows that once the political will to
obtain an agreement exists, verification
problems are easily dealt with. Such
was the experience with the Biolo¬
gical Convention and the Strategic
Arms Limitation agreements between
the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.
The real reason for the delay in pro¬
hibiting chemical weapons is that they
are of much greater military interest
than biological weapons. Meanwhile,
binary chemical weapons are being,
developed. These weapons contain
chemicals which, although harmless
singly, produce poisonous compounds
when mixed. Mixing occurs either
when the munition is fired or when it
impacts.
The deployment of binary weapons
will make the negotiation of a compre¬
hensive ban on chemical weapons
considerably more complicated. And a
ban not including binaries would be
ineffective. This is a typical example
of the way in which technological
advances can complicate, as time
elapses, the negotiation of arms con¬
trol and disarmament treaties.
In July 1974, the U.S.A. and the
U.S.S.R. signed a Treaty on the Limi¬
tation ôf Underground Nuclear Tests,
banning the underground testing of
nuclear weapons having a yield ex¬
ceeding that of the explosion of
150,000 tons of TNT (150 kilotons).
But this cannot be regarded as a.
substitute for a complete ban on r
27


. nuclear-weapon tests. The very high
threshold of 150 kilotons is not, in
practice, a significant limitation because
most American and Soviet tests during
the past few years have been less than
about 200 kilotons. The Treaty will,
therefore, hardly affect the current
development of nuclear warheads.
The most serious objection to the
Treaty is that it may indefinitely delay
a comprehensive nuclear test ban a
measure most urgently needed tobring
the nuclear arms race under some
control.
The Treaty has, no doubt, a few
positive aspects. It will complicate the
development of new high-yield war¬
heads by both sides. It will also make
it difficult for them to carry out stock¬
pile-sampling, because the existing
large thermonuclear weapons could
not be tested at their full yield. Cessa¬
tion of explosions in the megaton range
may have favourable environmental
effects. It will reduce risks of radio¬
active venting, artificial earthquakes
or tidal waves.
Most important, however, are the
verification provisions. It will be the
first time that detailed information con¬
cerning sites and yield of nuclear wea¬
pon explosions will be exchanged
between the parties. Apart from the
political significance of this procedure
constituting a step towards greater
openness among states, a suitable
verification framework could be created
for use in a possible comprehensive
test ban.
The provisions of the Treaty do not
extend to underground nuclear explo¬
sions carried out by the parties for
peaceful purposes (Article III). This
means that the threshold of 150 kilo¬
tons does not apply to such explosions.
But it is not possible to distinguish
with certainty nuclear tests serving
peaceful aims from those serving mili¬
tary aims.
A mere statement by the testing
state that its intention is "peaceful"
may not be found satisfactory; the
loophole could be taken advantage of
for a new large weapon development,
if at some point in the future this
became necessary.
On the other hand, if the yield limit
of 150 kilotons were imposed on all
underground nuclear explosions, cer¬
tain peaceful applications of nuclear
energy, such as large-scale excavation
projects, would have to be abandoned.
The studies on the possible use of
nuclear explosions to dig a sea-level
Panama Canal indicated that some 300
nuclear blasts with yields ranging up
to 15 megatons would be required. It
has also been estimated that the cons¬
truction by nuclear excavation of the
northern 65 km part of the Pechora-
Kama-Volga canal in the U.S.S.R.
would require about 250 nuclear explo¬
sives with yields of up to 600 kilotons
each, while the yield for any one
"salvo" of charges might attain three
megatons.
The most familiar bilateral agree
ments between the U.S.A. and the
U.S.S.R. are those that have arisen out
of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
(SALT) between the two powers
these began in 1969 and have been
going on ever since. The first SALT
agreement (SALT I), which came into
force in October 1972, included an
Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and an
Interim Agreement on offensive wea¬
pons.
A major weakness of SALT I is a
total lack of any restriction on the
improvement of the quality accuracy,
penetrativeness and range of ballistic
missiles and their launchers. The
technological arms race is encouraged
and even legitimized better weapons
can be substituted for those which
become obsolete.
Most significant is the lack of con¬
trol of the number of nuclear warheads
each missile can carry. Since SALTI,
the number of nuclear warheads de¬
ployed by the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.
has increased, and is increasing, con¬
siderably.
On 24 November 1974, at their
meeting in Vladivostok, President
Gerald Ford and General Secretary
Leonid Brezhnev agreed that the SALT
negotiators would, from January 1975,
work for a new agreement (SALT II)
under which each side would be limited
to 2,400 stategic nuclear delivery sys¬
tems a net increase on the present
total number deployed. Within this
number each side would be further
limited to a total of 1,320 ICBMs and
SLBMs equipped with MIRVs.
The arms control efforts multilat¬
eral and bilateral over the past 15
years have failed to produce any
nuclear disarmament or even to halt the
nuclear arms race. In spite of this, the
public has been seriously misled into
believing that steady progress is being
made in disarmament.
The main reason for this mistaken
belief is that political leaders habitually
make euphoric statements about the
value of arms control treaties. Each
treaty is signed with much pomp and
ceremony, and to the accompaniment
of speeches full of high-sounding pro¬
mises of bigger and better things to
come. And the preambles and articles
of the treaties usually contain far-
reaching commitments to further prog¬
ress rarely, if ever, followed up.
The political leaders, are, of course,
aware of the almost universal human
desire for a secure and peaceful disar¬
med world and of the considerable
political benefit to be gained from
paying lip-service to this desire. But
perhaps not surprisingly they, and
those involved in negotiating arms con¬
trol treaties, take on a "professional
optimism" which apparently causes
them to convince themselves that
substantial progress is being made.
That may be a psychological necessity
for those involved but it also hampers
progress towards disarmament.
^'ifetçfi ,
