The modern Muslim family reflects a
gradual but unmistakable change in the
traditional status of Muslim women.
Photo shows three generations of
Tunisian women. The mother, still
veiled (left) belongs to a generation
whose lives until recently were secluded
and limited to housework and
motherhood. Life for her teen-age
student daughter means freedom
to choose her job, husband and
life-style. Between them, the
grandmother, whose age now allows her
to discard the veil.
Photo H W. Silvester © Rapho, Paris



A noted Algerian writer
presents her views
of Muslim women today
by Assia Djebar
ASSIA DJEBAR, Algerian writer and pro¬
fessor of literature at the University of Algiers, is
currently carrying out a sociological study on
women and the rural exodus, in Algeria. A
number ofher novels have been widely translated,
and her study " Femmes d'Islam " has been
published In English (Women of Islam) by
André Deutsch Ltd., London.
FOR several decades .the stirrings
of nationalism have drawn a
spotlight on the Muslim world a giant
crescent with its centre in the Middle
East stretching across the globe and
spanning the deserts from the Maghreb
to Indonesia. Over the last half
century it has been shaken time and
again by the fever of political ferment
while pouring out its life-blood in oil,
and in places suffering from the .
festering sores of underdevelopment. P
23

. But for centuries it has remained silent
on the subject of its women.
Today, as we embark on the conquest
of space, the pioneers of Muslim
feminism are boldly demanding the
right to venture outside the confines
of their homes and look at last upon
their fellow beings before lifting their
eyes to the stars. Men have already
travelled to the moon but to this day
most of the houses lining the traditional
Arab streets are windowless; in order
that women shall remain invisible, they
are still deprived of sight.
, But one cannot attempt to define the
Muslim woman without first defining
the Muslim man.
Is the Muslim the same today in
Morocco as he is in Pakistan, for
example? Let us be quite clear that
in speaking of the Muslim man, we
do not necessarily mean the devout
believer who, as he turns towards the
Kaaba in Mecca for the set prayers
five times a day, sheds his historical
and geographical heritage and is at
once immersed in the source of his
faith in the far off year 622, the date
of the Hegira; the devout Muslim,
whether in Constantine or Ispahan,
renounces the present and embraces
the eternal he bestrides the centuries
and exists beyond time.
But the Muslim who is simply
satisfied to be a passive member of
the Islamic community is open to the
full impact of political events and
developments: grandeur followed in
turn by decadence, lethargy, sub¬
jection and lastly the bloody and
chaotic upheavals of the slow awaken¬
ing. Af the end of such a road what
does a Muslim living in Mesopotamia
have in common with another in the
south of Hoggar?
Everywhere he is called with a
truth that transcends this fashionable
expression and journalistic tag a
"Man of the Third World". The
characteristics of this new community
are by now all too familiar: indepen¬
dence newly wrested from European
(and Christian?) colonialism dating
back to the last century or earlier;
an underlying economic paralysis and
social inflexibility (due to the partial
or total disappearance of the old
tribal society, the suffocation or
erosion of traditional village life);
the pre-eminence of politics eagerly
embraced as a community objective
and seen as a crucible of future
aspirations; and finally, a situation
which, in many cases, is a revolution¬
ary one or potentially so, because
ideas and attitudes which have served
for centuries are today unable to with¬
stand the shock of confrontation with
technological and industrial society.
Moreover, for young people who are
aware of and feel consciously involved
in the process of historical change
throughout the world, religion is losing
ground as a collective fact of life. The
faith of Islam, conceived in the sands
of Arabia as a pure entity embracing
the whole of life (encompassing prob¬
lems of hygiene, politics and diet as
well as metaphysics and woven into
a dense arabesque-like pattern) sud¬
denly seems to be enfeebled by this
narrowing of its scope.
Debilitation or reform, retreat or
renewal such is the dilemma which
Islam must resolve if it is to return
to its essence as a faith dwelling in
the individual consciousness, as an
evolving system of thought, as an
affirmation rather than a negation, as a
critical appraisal of time-honoured
habits.
The Muslim who is forced to come
to terms with concrete problems (the
brotherhood of the real New World
of the 20th century with its hordes
of beggars, its illiterate peasants, its
culturally uprooted intellectuals, its
military politicians and its political
militants the problems, in fact, of this
modern community which extends far
beyond the confines of the Islamic
crescent) whether he is overwhelmed
or inspired with new life, nevertheless
In the Muslim world constant
changes are taking place in the status
of women.' Below, girls leaving
the secondary school at Batna in
the Aurès mountains (Algeria).
Right, a young woman researcher
in a medical laboratory in
Alexandria (Egypt) studies the
tiny worms which cause
bilharziasis, next to malaria the
world's most serious parasitic
infection. In Egypt the worms are
carried by snails living in the
waters of the Nile.
Photo © Georges Viollon. Paris
24

feels himself to be alone. He is iso¬
lated perhaps because he can no longer
regard his religion as an umbilical cord.
As his ties with tradition gradually
crumble away he feels that he is losing
for ever the innumerable small ways
in which he once asserted his identity.
Amid these shifting sands, there is
one reassuring point of stability, one
element which gives him inner coher¬
ence: his image of woman.
Every Muslim more or less con¬
sciously views the woman of his
dreams whether as sister, wife or
loved one in one particular guise,
that of the "Umm", the "Mamma" of
Mediterranean countries. She, unlike
the Father too often bereft of his
former prestige by collective defeat
has retained an unchallenged authority
in the eyes of the westernized intel¬
lectual, the traditionally minded, but
nowadays ill-at-ease, middle-class
citizen, or the countryman newly
transplanted to the city.
The Tribe is no more than a memory,
the earth no longer feeds the members
of the patrilineal family; the old woman,
with her apparent serenity, a vigorous
archetypal mother figure, thus stands
like a living image of the past to which
every masculine consciousness clings,
and increasingly so as this conscious¬
ness is undermined by ever new
aggressions.
Should one see the role which the
man of Islam assigns to women as
being a result of the strict prohibition
imposed by Islamic law on the inter¬
marriage of women with non-Muslims?
Throughout the period when the
Muslim world was under Western
colonial domination (in the East, the
Middle East, the Maghreb and else¬
where in Africa) no racially mixed
civilization emerged.
Admittedly, a mingling of races,
which in all ages has been a source
of human progress, took place
within the crescent itself: between
Berbers, Persians, Arabs, Turks,
Spanish Muslims and others. Never¬
theless, although a foreigner in Islam
is entitled, as a guest, to every mark
of hospitality, he may choose a wife
only on one condition: that he
renounce his original faïTîi. Once he
has embraced the faith of Islam all
roads become open to him and he is
free to marry.
But no historical or sociological
explanations can now prevent the
woman of Islam from thinking of herself
as an individual in her own right.
Having for so long been secluded,
apparently more on account of the
anguish of fathers, brothers and hus¬
bands than as an act of high-handed
and arbitrary masculine authority, she
nevertheless feels more and more that
she has been unjustly "consigned to
the shadows". Now, suddenly, she
finds herself in the spotlight, and the
ancestral ¡mage crumbles; the picture
loses its definition before the sharp
outlines of reality emerge.
The image of woman which is
preached, as a cautionary ¡deal, by
intellectuals, politicians and moralists
in the Muslim world now carries little
weight. The proletarian woman, worn
out by continual childbearing, who for
centuries has always borne the brunt
of the exploitation of labour, is assailed
by the modern world; new economic
needs are increasingly thrusting towns-
women, widows or divorced women in
the cities and ardent intellectuals into
occupations outside the home.
Political strife and bloody wars like
the recent struggle in Algeria or the
continuing conflict in Palestine, have
not merely thrust into the limelight
countless heroines, celebrated or
anonymous; they have given millions
of women the opportunity to shoulder
everyday material responsibilities either
as individuals or within the now un¬
settled traditional family.
Certain countries such as Tunisia
have made changes in their laws to
demonstrate that the Coranic law is
not immutable and absolute but that
it Implies in the first place, an effort
("ijtihad") to reach a new spirit of
liberal interpretation.
Today, more than ever before, the
continued existence of two separate
worlds In Islam seems an anachronism:
according to the traditional ethic, the
two parallel planes masculine and
feminine, external and internal each
had its own momentum and the re¬
lationship between the two was
governed by codes of rules which
remained unchallenged by either side:
with the wisdom of hindsight one may
debate whether this equilibrium was
necessary, but it remained an Inescap¬
able fact.
The causes of tensions and conflicts
lay elsewhere: in confrontations be¬
tween different social classes, national¬
ities or regions, or between those who
held power.
The world of women, overshadowed
both socially and politically, was
affected indirectly by all that went
on although, alas, no written testi¬
mony of this has survived; women's
role reasserted itself (and, in a sense,
took its revenge) in the sphere of the
growing consciousness, education,
sensibility, the "quality of life" here
it was in advance of the masculine
world.
CONTINUED PAGE 28
25

. So much for the past. Today in
other words in the course of at least
the past fifty years two generations
of women have discovered that,
although the ferment of social conflict
denotes an awakening, and thus a kind
of progress, women can no longer be
content to play a subsidiary role (as
wives, mothers or sisters never
being considered as individuals in
their own right) and to be swept along
by the headlong advance of society.
The modern family with its new
structures the restricted family of
father, mother and children is the
seat of new conflicts: women in
general not all of whom are femin¬
ists are conscious of the fact that
the Muslim man, however revolution¬
ary he may be within his own union
or party or in discharging his civic
responsibilities, all too often clings in
his domestic life to the old ways.
When a modern Muslim couple is
alone (whether the partners are
intellectuals, 'an industrial worker and
his wife, a fellah and his wife who
labours with him in the fields, or an
unemployed townsman and his wife
who works both in and outside the
home) the woman is still expected to
submit passively to the weakened and
ineffective authoritarianism of the hus¬
band: a passivity concealed in such
imposed social stereotypes as women's
"goodness", "meekness", "modesty"
or "femininity".
Indeed, Muslim women are all too
often silent, and they appear to be so
all the time. The assumption, some¬
times overstated, that they exercise
a measure of authority behind the
scenes is small consolation and one
which is generally offered to oppressed
minorities.
Women themselves, their children
and the entire community would benefit
if women spoke out plainly on this
issue and came to terms with it but
centuries of traditional feminine reti¬
cence are against them. Any cour¬
ageous attempt by women to criticize
meets with a prompt response by
Muslim men who, unlike those in
Western bourgeois societies, are un¬
willing to mitigate the force of future
women's demands by adopting an
attitude of male reformism and pa¬
ternalism, such as one finds in Europe
today.
For the Muslim woman, therefore,
the outlook is all the more constricted
because of the lingering memory of
the Arab horizons of bygone days the
freedom of the desert, the intoxication
of warlike fantasias, the refinement of
the Andalusian courts of love.
All the tensions and frictions which
have succeeded each other during the
past hundred years in Europe as the
situation of women gradually improved
are to be found simultaneously within
the typical urban Muslim family today.
The Muslim family is becoming a
sort of kaleidoscope in which each
woman represents a stage of evolution:
the grandmother, or sometimes the
mother, has lived or still lives a
completely cloistered life; under the
same roof lives the teen-age girl, keen
on sport or politically committed, full
of youthful confidence as she pre¬
pares to embark on a life in which
she will accept and exercise personal
responsibilities.
Between these two extremes there
are sisters, aunts and cousins who, at
the stage of puberty or a little later,
were "shut in" and "veiled" as though
they were somehow incapacitated
and for whom this remains a painful
memory. Some of them are clearly
aware that they have paid the price
of the petty middle-class fears and
cowardice of fathers or elder brothers.
Any dialogue between the sexes is
therefore bound to be rendered more
difficult, as elsewhere in the world, by
feelings of bitterness and even rancour
on the part of women. Any expression
of optimism often seems little more
than rhetorical.
But what of the situation among
women themselves? In Islam, one
factor which makes a useful, tangible
contribution to any determined move¬
ment for their advancement is the
solidarity which exists among women
precisely because women exemplifying
different stages of emancipation live
in close proximity.
The grandmother, mindful of tra¬
ditional proprieties, may sometimes
disapprove of what she regards as her
grand-daughters' boldness, but this is
of small importance.
On the other hand, all women, at the
crucial stages of life education,
marriage, choice of job feel that they
are joining a long line of sacrificial
victims whose fate must inevitably
lead to the liberation of their suc¬
cessors.
It Is as though the young women
of Islam, in their inexorable advance,
feel themselves to be vicariously
reliving all the wasted lives of former
days.
This is the new harem, an almost
instinctive alliance welded together by
a singleness of purpose; when the
struggle to overcome material in¬
security and the exploitation by the
unemployed father or the working
brother harden the resolve of the
daughter in school or the sister in her
office job, the impetus of feminism
will be strengthened by a truly prolet¬
arian vigour.
What can be said of the future while
only insignificant and intermittent
progress is apparently being made but
when at the same time, an upsurge of
hope has already taken shape and is
seeking to make itself heard?
The future of Muslim society rests
on a new form of energy lying beneath
the surface: I am not making an
ironical reference to oil I am referring
to a real, even if sporadic awakening
of ideas among women. A new ethic
must be in the making if there is to
be any possibility of a modern Muslim
community. Assia D/ebar
See also p. 39: Unesco inquiry in Lebanon.
