Perfect match with animal,
vegetable and mineral
How micro-organisms make possible
an extraordinary array of partnerships in Nature
by John Roger Porter
FEW people realize that various
kinds of associations, ranging
from beneficial to competitive, exist
among all forms of life from the
smallest microbe to the largest plants
and animals.
These associations are not only
responsible for the delicate balance
that occurs in nature between living
creatures and between them and their
environment but actually control the
cycles in nature on which life on earth
depends (see article page 26).
Many thousands of species of micro¬
scopic organisms exist in nature and
they may interact with each other, or
with higher forms of life. In so doing
they produce either neutral, beneficial
or harmful effects, or bring about some
intermediate changes on one another
or on the environment.
One of the best-known examples of
a beneficial relationship between two
microbes is the lichen, in which an
alga and a fungus combine as partners
to form a plantlike structure that grows
slowly until it finally becomes visible
to the naked eye.
The alga and the fungus may be
cultivated separately in the laboratory,
but in nature they are found living
together as a lichen, which was once
thought to be a single organism.
Lichens are widespread in nature,
appearing on surfaces of rocks, trees,
JOHN ROGER PORTER, U.S. microbio¬
logist, is Chairman of the Unesco-ICRO
(International Cell Research Organization)
Panel on Microbiology. Professor of Micro¬
biology at the University of Iowa, he is
noted for his discovery of the functions of
vitamins in bacterial nutrition. He has
published many studies in the field of
microbiology and from 1951 to 1961 was
editor-in-chief of the Journal of Bacteriology
(published in the USA). For many years he
has promoted the application of microbiology
in the developing countries.
and other solid objects. In extreme
environments such as deserts and
polar regions, they may be the pre¬
dominant forms of life, since they are
remarkably resistant to heat, cold and
desiccation.
Because of their slow growth,
lichens can be used by geologists to
estimate the age of glacial deposits
in certain regions. Also lichens are
extremely sensitive to air pollutants
and quickly disappear from some
industrial areas as the quality of the
environment declines. They may thus
be used by ecologists as an early-
warning system, signaling environ¬
mental deterioration.
Micro-organisms frequently have a
beneficial association with higher
forms of life, since plants and animals
may provide favourable environments
for their growth. But because various
parts of a plant, or organs of an
animal, differ physically and chemically,
certain environments exist that favour
some kinds of microbes and not others.
Plants and animals also possess a
variety of defence mechanisms that
may prevent or inhibit the invasion and
growth of some microbes.
The leaves and stems of many plants
which are subjected to dry weather
possess a waxy coating that helps to
retain moisture and, incidentally, may
be responsible for the small number
of microbes on their surfaces and
for preventing micro-organisms from
invading the inner plant tissues.
Tropical freshwater and marine
plants may have larger numbers of
microbes on their leaves and stems
because they grow in a moist environ¬
ment and they frequently suffer from
disease or other harmful effects
caused by micro-organisms.
The roots of plants are in an environ¬
ment where moisture is usually less
variable and nutrients are more abun¬
dant than in the air. The roots are
continuously in association with mi¬
crobes, some of which have little
influence on the normal growth of
plants, whereas others may be highly
beneficial. Others, again, may be very
harmful as in the case of diseases of
cereals, fruit trees and garden plants.
One of the most interesting and
important relationships among micro¬
organisms and the roots of plants is
that between legumes and bacteria of
the genus Rhizobium (which means
root dweller).
Legumes include such economically
important plants as alfalfa, clover,
lupins, beans, peas, and the soybean.
Appropriate strains of rhizobia are
capable of invading the roots of these
legumes, with the formation of nodules.
In the nodules the bacteria obtain
nutrients, such as sugars, from the
plants and in turn convert atmospheric
nitrogen (which plants cannot use) into
ammonia which is then transformed
into amino-acids, the building blocks
of all proteins.
This process is called nitrogen
fixation and is often cited as one of
the best examples of symbiosis or
mutual benefit. It is one of the most
important biological interactions that
occurs in nature. Estimates are that
about 10 billion tons of nitrogen are
fixed annually in the world by living
organisms, most of it by this process.
Neither legumes nor rhizobia are
able to fix nitrogen alone, yet the
symbiotic interaction between the two
results in making atmospheric nitrogen
available for plants, and provides
proteins for man and other animals.
Another type of symbiosis between
plants and microbes is the mycorrhiza
root. This is an association between
a fungus and the young feeder roots
24

Drawings Jean-Marie Clément © Unesco Courier
of plants, whereby the fungus may
greatly increase the efficiency of
nutrient uptake by the plant roots.
Many different types of mycorrhizal
associations exist, although few have
been exploited up to the present.
They hold great promise for conserving
scarce and expensive plant nutrients,
and for economising on fertiliser use
in the future.
Indeed, some legumes are known
which can support two distinct sym¬
biotic systems at the same time one
for nitrogen fixation and the other for
nutrient gathering from the soil.
Bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses
cause many diseases in plants. In
fact, losses in the production of food,
fibre, and forest products each year
are so enormous that the control of
the harmful effects of microbes in
agriculture and forestry is one of
today's great problems.
Insects and microbes have a wide
variety of associations, some beneficial
and some harmful to each. Certain
wood-boring beetles live on the fungi
they deposit in their tunnels, and some
ants cultivate fungi as part of their life
activities. In other cases the micro¬
organisms live within the bodies of
insects, such as the protozoa that
digest cellulose in the intestine of the
termite.
Insects are also subject to microbial
diseases, and practical advantage is
being taken of this to produce bio-
insecticides to control certain insect
pests on food crops and trees.
Most of the microbes are highly
specific for a particular insect, and are
virtually harmless to other forms of
life in contrast to almost all currently
registered chemical insecticides.
Many small freshwater and marine
animals, ranging from protozoa to
worms and molluscs and from sponges
to higher invertebrates, have a close
association with certain micro-organ¬
isms, especially green algae that are
capable of using sunlight as a source
of energy. In such cases the algae
synthesize food in a manner similar to
that of higher plants for the animals,
and in turn they receive nutrients from
their aquatic animal partners.
Animals, and especially mammals,
almost always possess a "normal"
microbial flora, especially in those
regions of the body which are exposed
to the outside world such as the skin,
oral cavities, upper respiratory tract,
and the intestinal tract.
If you examine a small drop of saliva
through a powerful microscope, you
will be amazed at the number and
variety of micro-organisms to be seen
on the slide. We are not certain about
the functions of the flora on the skin,
or in the mouth and upper respiratory
tract, but in the intestine we know that
microbes may help digest food and
synthesize important vitamins for the
host body.
Micro-organisms are not usually
found in the organs or the blood and
lymph systems of the body; when they
are found in such tissues in significant
numbers they usually indicate the
presence of disease.
Perhaps one of the most interesting
beneficial relationships existing bet¬
ween microbes and animals occurs
in ruminants. Cows, sheep, goats,
camels, deer, and giraffes possess a
special organ known as the rumen, in
which the digestion of complex plant
materials (cellulose, etc.) occurs
through the activity of special mi¬
crobes. Food entering the rumen
mixes with the teeming microbial popu¬
lation and remains there for about 8 to
9 hours.
During this time the cellulose and
other complex carbohydrates are
broken down by several species of
bacteria and protozoa into sugars,
which then undergo the process of
fermentation to give various organic
acids, and the gases carbon dioxide
and methane.
The organic acids are absorbed and
CONTINUED PAGE 34

PERFECT MATCH WITH ANIMAL,
VEGETABLE AND MINERAL (Continued trompageZS)
used as a source of energy by the
ruminant, or converted to amino acids
and vitamins, for the benefit of
the animal. Because human beings
depend a great deal on such animals
for meat and dairy products, the mi¬
crobial activities that occur in the
rumen are of great economic signifi¬
cance.
Microbes can also compete and
cause diseases in higher animals.
Some of the most dramatic and signifi¬
cant discoveries in1 the past century
have been concerned with under¬
standing the bases of infectious
disease.
These discoveries have led to thera¬
peutic and preventive measures that
have had great influence on the life
of mankind. Not only have many
disease-resistant plants and animals
been developed, but a reduction of
many of the most harmful human
diseases has been accomplished.
Microbiology has been responsible
in part for many progressive measures
in the control of infectious diseases
through the installation of good public
health measures, such as the improve¬
ment of sanitation, immunization pro¬
grammes, and the discovery of anti¬
biotics.
Here, for example, are the pro¬
portions by which the number of
reported cases of several important
human diseases have been reduced in
the past 30 years: plague by 99 '%;
yellow fever 86 '%; cholera, 85%;
smallpox, 83 % and typhus fever
by 63 '%.
These figures would seem to imply
that mankind has won its competition
with microbes, and that it will only be
a matter of time before all infectious
diseases are under control. This is
.a fond hope, but statistics indicate that
the number of cases of certain well
known diseases, such as measles,
mumps, dysentery, and venereal infec¬
tions, which were thought to be under
control, are again on the increase.
There are also many diseases known
throughout the world for which our
knowledge is still far from complete.
Schistosomiasis, a debilitating disease
that afflicts an estimated 200 million
people, is one example, and several
viral diseases are still poorly under- .
stood. Thus microbiologists must
continue to strive for more knowledge
about microbial associations.
John Roger Porter
I
Q
I
z
<
34
