ARCHITECTURE
WITHOUT
ARCHITECTS
A white mosque of simple beauty at
Kairouan, a central Tunisian city
founded in 670 A.D. Its cupola Is
typical of Islamic religious
architecture. Elsewhere in Tunisia, such
cupolas are found only on the
island of Djerba (see following
pages) as a characteristic feature
of traditional architecture in
village houses and other buildings.
Photo © André Martin, Paris



The timeless art of building
in Tunisia: the first of a series
of Unesco studies on traditional
architecture in Africa and Asia
by Wolf Tochtermann
VERY part of the world has a ,
of architecture which is
rarely mentioned in encyclopaedias or
scholarly works and which is given
only marginal treatment in the history
of building and architecture. And yet
this traditional or indigenous architec¬
ture as it is sometimes called, boasts
an extraordinary wealth of expression,
that differs widely from country to
country.
It is not associated with any archi¬
tects, for the simple reason that archi¬
tects have had nothing to do with It
It Is not a product of the drawing-
WOLF TOCHTERMANN, German architect
and town-planner (Fed. Rep. of Germany) has
been in charge of Unesco's programme of
architecture and the environment in the Dept.
of Culture since 1969. He is concerned in
particular with the education of architects and
town planners and with research into traditional
architecture in the context of development.
board, nor does it follow the rules
and canons laid down and taught by
art schools and universities.
It is not only the fruit of ancient
traditions and the skill of its builder-
occupiers (for It is essentially "do-it-
yourself" building), but in every case
it mirrors the structure and way of life
of a specific society. Architecture of
this kind makes wise and efficient use
of available local materials, and is
perfectly adapted to climatic conditions.
It is only in the last few years per¬
haps since the famous 1964-65 exhi¬
bition organized by the New York
Museum of Modern Art on the theme
"Architecture without Architects" that
architects, weary of the "international
style", sociologists, ethnologists and
geographers have come to recognize
the importance of this hitherto un¬
known, or at least little-known, form
of architectural expression.
4
The few studies previously devoted
to the subject by a handful of specia¬
lists had had very little influence,' and
some specialists only began to show
an interest in the. conceptual originality
of this vernacular architecture when
they became aware of the dangers
Involved in the indiscriminate use of
an all-purpose style of architecture,
whose enthusiasts advocated its appli¬
cation in every latitude and climate.
It has been noted that buildings that
derive from rural traditions remain
extraordinarily efficient as dwellings,
because they are directly related to
an economy and a way of life still
very much- alive in many rural areas.
It is far easier to see the relationship
between environment and habitat in
these dwellings than In the case of
the big-city architecture of Western
countries.
The architectural forms and ex-
CONTINUED PAGE 7

f
5

}
J
Photo © Fulvio Roiter, Venice
Rhythm of undulating roofs
The low, flat island of Djerba in the
Gulf of Gabes (south east Tunisia)
has many gardens and orchards that
drink from thousands of wells and
storage tanks. A diversity of mosques,
(above and right) spread their admir¬
able architecture and blindingly white
outlines across its landscape. Vaulted
roofs give a particular rhythm to
Djerba's architecture. Some are
multi-domed, as on the public baths
seen at left. Standing among olive
groves and date palms are 2-storey
white houses also capped by cupolas.
The two small rooms are thus well
protected from heat and cold. The
layout of the traditional-style house
is designed above all to maintain the
intimacy of family life.

pression of these buildings are not
dictated by a striving for aesthetic
effects. They are determined by a
profound though often quite uncon¬
scious understanding of the landscape
and a judicious use of locally available
materials. The builder-occupier's con¬
struction reflects his social and cultural
needs and establishes a balance which,
however precarious, is nevertheless a
real one, between his dwelling and the
natural environment from which he has
to provide a shelter.
Yet today, this indigenous architec¬
ture, an expression of the outstand¬
ingly rich cultural heritage of many
countries in Asia, Africa, Latin Amer¬
ica and Europe, is seriously threaten¬
ed. Over the last few years many
splendid examples have disappeared
or are in the process of doing so.
Since it is basically a rural archi¬
tecture, its disappearance is geared
directly to the speed of urbanization
and the depopulation of rural areas, as
in villages in the valley of Verzasca
in southern Switzerland and Berber
villages in the south of Tunisia, among
many other places.
In 1973 Unesco launched a number
of studies on traditional architecture,
particularly in African countries (Tuni¬
sia, Cameroon, Ghana, Senegal, the
Central African Republic, the People's
Republic of the Congo). Further
studies are to be carried out in Asia.
Missions of architects have been
sent to various countries to carry out
surveys and prepare photographic and
written reports. Unesco intends to
publish all these works in a series
under the general title of Studies on
Traditional Forms of Architecture.
The first study in the series, pre¬
pared by a French architect, Claude
Perron, is devoted to Tunisia.
Situated between the Mediterranean
and the Sahara, Tunisia has been sub¬
jected to a wide variety of outside
influences, through its maritime links
with the countries of the Middle East
and of Europe, and its lines of commu¬
nication with Africa south of the
Sahara across the formidable yet by
no means impassable barrier of desert
wastes.
Tunisia has also known both the ebb
and flow of a nomadic population, at
certain times extending over a large
part of the country, and the growth of
settlements in areas with the most
favourable climatic conditions. The
impressive variety of Tunisian dwell¬
ing-places is thus largely explained by
these contrasting ways of life.
In his study, Claude Perron points
out that the history of North Africa Is
marked "by the struggle of the noma¬
dic peoples of the steppes and desert
against the settled populations of the
wealthy coastal areas and the oases."
This struggle has given birth to the
different types of houses found in
Tunisia.
Today, when nomadism is on the
wane and settlement is more wide¬
spread, the groups of tents that were
once set out so as to form temporary
villages have disappeared, although
the individual tent is still found In
almost every part of the country. In
some cases it serves as a kind of
annexe to the home of a newly-settled
family. The forms of these family
dwellings, like all traditional architec¬
ture, in Tunisia and elsewhere, are
determined by the nature of the local
terrain and the climate, the nature of
farming and animal rearing, historical
events such as occupation and outside
cultural influences, or sociological
factors such as the structure of family
and community life.
The author of the Tunisian study
describes many examples of huts
constructed of branches or reeds, of
circular houses with conical roofs, of
square or rectangular houses with
pointed or flat roofs. Some dwellings >
have attained their purpose to per- 1
CONTINUED PAGE 10

Troglodyte
farms
and
herdsmen's
dwellings
One of southern Tunisia's most astonishing
landscapes is in the plain of Matmata which
runs to the foot of .the heights of Djebel
Dahar (above and left). People and animals
come and go across a lunar-like countryside
dotted with palms... and suddenly vanish as
if the earth had swallowed them. There is a
simple explanation. Having no hard and
durable building materials, the local people
have dug out homes (up to 50 metres long)
in the soft alluvial soil. Craters criss-crossing
the countryside are in fact patios around
which the rooms of the underground houses
are set. Round or square, and up to 8 metres
deep, the patios are reached via tunnels along
which stables for animals have been exca¬
vated. Cooking is done in the patio while
the rooms around it, white-washed and
shaped like the hull of a boat turned upside
down, are used as living quarters, store¬
houses or workshops. When the ground, is
suitable, houses also have a granary, with
access through a hole at ground level by means
of a rope or ladder of branches. These houses,
with their many amenities, cool in summer
and warm in winter, are still made by their
inhabitants. Communities of cattle breeders
and shepherds in the nearby mountains have
a different kind of architecture. Right, the
village of Toujane with its houses built of
stones from the rocky soil.

9

fection: various family-sized defensive
structures and highly functional dwell¬
ings such as the "menzels" on the
island of Djerba. Among the wide
variety of materials used are fabrics,
wood, matting of reeds and straw
and other materials derived from
plants, bricks of mud and earth and
unmortared stone.
The study examines not only indivi¬
dual buildings, but offers examples of
groups of dwellings set in compounds
or of villages each with installations
appropriate to their needs. In almost
every case the author shows that the
forms of traditional architecture are
not an accidental choice but on the
contrary are the logical answer to
certain specific needs, which can vary
from one region to another.
Why then is Unesco carrying out
these studies? They might quite justi¬
fiably have been undertaken to pre¬
pare for later work of preservation.
They might too have been considered
worthwhile from the viewpoint of
10
historical documentation. However,
Unesco's reasons for carrying out
these studies were quite different.
The world's population is likely to
double within the next thirty years if
the present rate of growth continues,
in which case additional housing will
need to be provided for 3 to 3.5 billion
persons. Since urban expansion is
far outpacing that of rural communities,
new technologies will have to be used
in order to meet this unprecedented
demand for housing more efficiently
and economically.
However, the building techniques
habitually used in Western style archi¬
tecture often call for materials which
are difficult to obtain in the developing
countries, and are therefore beyond
these countries' economic means.
Moreover, such materials are rarely
suited to the specific climatic, social
and cultural conditions in these
countries.
In future, therefore, there can be
no question of despising cheap build
ing materials such as clay bricks,
moulded clay or bamboo. Nor is
there any reason to consider traditional
building materials as a mark of under¬
development.
On the contrary, the merits of tradi¬
tional architecture must be made clear
to architects, urban planners and
government officials in order to pro¬
mote the rise of an architecture that
is not merely an imitation of Western
industrial construction. In the same
context, traditional architecture should
occupy an important place in the pro¬
grammes of architectural colleges in
the developing countries. The ren¬
aissance of this type of architecture
would also prevent the appearance of
shanty-towns and other blights of
urban housing.
It is with such needs in mind that
Unesco has launched its studies on
traditional architecture in different
parts of the world.
Wolf Tochtermann

The citadel
granaries
The unusual structures shown here are
"ghorfas" (granaries) once used as store¬
houses for grain, oil and other produce
by the semi-nomadic peoples of southern
Tunisia farmers or shepherds according
to the season. Left in the care of a few
guardians for part of the year, ghorfas were
often built on rocky mountain spurs and
grouped defensively to form a "ksar" (the
Arabic word for fortress or citadel). Tiers
of ghorfas top the hill at Chenini (photo
left) and below them homes have been
hollowed out in softer ground. These par¬
ticular dwellings blend into and even accen¬
tuate the natural outlines of their setting.'
Fortified granaries are also found in the
plains of southern Tunisia as at Medenine
(below). They consist of small rectangular
cells with barrel vaults on which an identical
unit is often superimposed (right). Designed
for the needs of a semi-nomad way of life,
each cell held the food reserve for a single
family, during whose absence the entrance
was walled up. Buildings of great stylistic
beauty, the storehouses are mostly aban¬
doned nowadays although groups of them
have been converted into hotels.

Nomad
homes
and
oasis
cities
The nomad builds his dwelling with the produce of his flocks sheep's wool and goat or dromedary
hair woven into long strips and sewn together into a large rectangle. With a few pieces of wood as
tent pegs and brushwood to make it draught-proof around the bottom, this mobile dwelling is quickly
erected and just as quickly taken down. It is easily transported by dromedary or donkey along with the
household utensils and the handsome carpets woven by womenfolk. Above, a traditional Tunisian tent
pitched with its entrance facing Mecca. In harmony with the landscape and solidly anchored to the
ground, the tent shown here is a habitat that serves its purpose to perfection. After crossing vast
windswept desert wastes, a traveller experiences a feeling of relief on reaching the oases of the Djerid
region of southern Tunisia. Below, a street in one of these oases, at Tozeur (12,000 inhabitants) whose
large houses are faced with straw coloured bricks. Openings of ventilation shafts for drying dates
Tozeur's main product are seen at top of photo. Right, aerial view of Thysdrus, an ancient Roman
city lying between Sousse and Sfax, and today called El Djem. Its enormous third century amphitheatre,
which could accommodate 60.000 persons, dominates the present city's typically Tunisian buildings. .
-^^ r * * r' - .

"%*
y\\r | ¡iy9^^x
/iPvífV ti -v/'1 »|
< vrt
" ' .
"" " » i
M l.f J J . >*¿ 'ij. 'I ''V»1 '-fc>
3' .'* . v*dj.
*t ' -
y .a^
^^ - - -p* » . »* .am r -^ _-u.
1 -.t ufïÇZ^jjÊF -*
F af / « . - a. -
k _ __» r * - M 	 - /
"* * J" -~l"' ' ' -"á . >A ill
^*a,>,it,'s3fi,,?~«
