Into the Soviet
tundra...
by
Vladimir I. Vasilyev
..where learning to lasso
reindeer is an everyday
school subject
Text © Copyright
THE peoples of the north in the
U.S.S.R. have always handed
down their stock-breeding skills from
generation to generation within the
family or the encampment. Young
children were taught the basics of
animal farming, and as they grew older
they learned more advanced methods
and techniques. Studies of this prac¬
tice have led to the idea of a "people's
school" providing vocational training
for young people in the Far North.
The passing on of practical know¬
ledge from parents to children has long
been an integral part of general family
education, in the past the only means
of vocational training.
In czarist Russia schools providing
general education in the districts
VLADIMIR I. VASILYEV is a Soviet historian
and ethnologist who has taken part in 15 ex¬
peditions to the tundra and taiga regions of the
Soviet Far North and East. Author of over
30 studies on the peoples and cultures of these
regions and their present social and economic
development, he is currently engaged on res¬
earch at the Institute of Ethnography of the
U.S.S.Ft. Academy of Sciences.
inhabited by the peoples of the north
were virtually non-existent. Then in the
first years of Soviet rule school build¬
ing began in the Far North and con¬
tinued at a brisk rate. By the end of the
1930s there were 86 day and boarding
schools in four of the seven districts
of the Far North and In' the Murmansk
oblast (administrative region).
In addition to the permanent schools,
mobile schools began to be opened
in the tundra and the taiga forest
regions of Siberia about 40 years ago,
in reindeer breeders' camps, among
fishing communities, and in places
inhabited seasonally by hunters, fisher¬
men and herdsmen. The purpose of
these mobile schools was to provide
education in the native tongues for the
greatest possible number of children,
most of whom at that time shared the
nomadic life of their parents.
This intensive drive to open schools
in the Far North paid dividends. In a
fairly short time schools were available
for all children over the age of seven,
both those living sedentary or semi-
sedentary lives and the nomads. By
about the 1940s this education problem
had been satisfactorily solved in most
districts of the north. (See "Schools
of the Soviet Far North", "Unesco
Courier", June 1972.)
In the years which followed, particu¬
lar attention was devoted to increasing
the number of schools and Improving
teaching methods, specially adapted to
local conditions.
In 1970, the Far North regions had
more than 600 schools of different
types, including primary (four years
of schooling), shortened secondary
(8 years' course) and full secondary
(10 years' course).
These secondary schools provide
training in various occupations such
as reindeer-breeding, fishing, etc., and
the teaching is specially adapted to
farming conditions In the Far North
regions, where reindeer farming is the
chief activity.
The vocational training of children
in the Far North as it exists at present
comprises three main stages:
1) Vocational training for pre-school
children and those in junior classes at*
school (5 to 10 years) generally takes r
27

place within the family. At this age
toys are the main teaching aids. These
are usually miniature versions of tools
which are (or were) used by adults
in daily life. Among the most common
are bows and arrows, which develop
qualities such as accuracy and visual
judgement. Hunting games such as
throwing the lasso (maoute, chaoute)
develop similar skills. Gradually,
parents see to it that their children
spend less and less time playing.
Games begin to take on a more pract¬
ical character: children use young rein¬
deer as targets for lassoing and prac¬
tise harnessing dogs to small sleighs.
The basic vocational training in the
junior classes consists of energetic
games and sports (especially skiing).
No vocational training is provided in
the primary schools, where all sub
jects are taught in the native languages.
2) The next stage of vocational
training is important because it intro¬
duces the children to the techniques
of fishing, hunting, reindeer-breeding
and other occupations of the Far North.
At this age (11 to 15), the children
familiarize themselves with fishing and
hunting equipment. They are taught
how to look after reindeer, and learn
about the biology of furred animals
and fish. They do jobs on reindeer
farms, working directly with the
reindeer-breeders.
The secondary school in the village
of Novoye Chaplino (Chukotka district)
is a concrete example of the kind of
vocational training courses provided
for the children of the Far North.
Chukchi, Eskimo and Russian children
attend this school, and in recent years
the chief subject taught there has been
the raising of furred animals.
In the two upper classes, two and
three hours respectively were devoted
to this subject each week. Lessons
were also given on a stock-rearing
farm belonging to the local kolkhoz
(collective farm), known as "Zarya
kommunizma" ("the dawn of com¬
munism"), under the direction of the
biology teacher and a specialist in
the breeding of furred animals. Each
pupil looked after two or three animals.
Other schools in the north gear
their education to hunting, fishing or
reindeer-breeding, and some combine
training in a number of these activities.
The secondary school of Laryakskaja
In the district of Khanta-Mansi Is
a case in point: it offers courses in
hunting, fishing and the breeding of
28

furred animals. Another school, at
Ust'-Belsk in the district of Chukotka,
trains its pupils In fishing, breeding
furred animals and raising reindeer.
At Bajkitski in the Evenk district, the
school provides instruction in hunting
and the breeding of furred animals.
The education provided In each
school is determined by the economic
needs of the local kolkhozes and
sovkhozes (state farms). Particular
care is taken to ensure that the schools
have adequate equipment and are
well-staffed.
In practice, all the reindeer-breeding
instruction is provided by the kolkho¬
zes and the sovkhozes. For example,
at Novoye Chaplino school mentioned
above, the head teacher and the local
kolkhoz arranged for pupils in the
four senior classes whose parents
were members of the farm's reindeer-
breeding sections to work with them
during the summer as apprentice-
herdsmen. A large number of pupils
in schools In the Taimyr district work
during the summer in the fishing
sections of the local kolkhoz, and
LEARNING
BY DOING
In the vast Chukotka dis¬
trict of northern Siberia,
reindeer farming is still
the most important tra¬
ditional occupation of
the native peoples. In the
Soviet Far North the
schools provide special
lessons on the habits of
reindeer (below). But
handling a lasso (left)
needs a high degree of
skill, and there is no real
substitute for practical
experience and guid¬
ance from parents.
during the winter holidays they help
out in partridge rearing.
The family, however, still plays a
key role in vocational training, de¬
pending on the children's ages. Skills
normally acquired within the family
Include: how to use fire-arms, how to
handle draught animals and reindeer
sleighs, how to cure reindeer skins,
make certain kinds of clothes and
prepare food. Not all schools in the
north can yet provide every aspect
of the vocational training described
above, and so the contribution of the
family is still highly Important.
3) During the final stage of vo¬
cational training, teen-agers specialize
in the work they have chosen. After
taking the short course of secondary
education, some pupils choose to con¬
centrate on reindeer-breeding and go
on to attend more advanced courses In
animal farming, which are available in
many districts and in the bigger towns
of the polar region. These schools
train technicians specializing in the
breeding of reindeer and furred
animals. For instance, the Naryan-Mar
^technical school In the Nentsy district
trained 608 students in 14 years,
including 139 Nentsys and 135 Komis.
At the end of the short course of
secondary education (and In some
cases even before), some teenagers
start work immediately in the various
sections of the kolkhozes and sovkho¬
zes, one pupil usually being assigned
to each section.
In the hunting sections, pupils learn
how to set traps, how to skin animals,
how to treat hides, and how to track
animals.
Apprentice fishermen learn all about
the art of fishing: where to fish in
different seasons, how to tell the depth
of the water, and how to forecast the
weather.
In the reindeer-breeding sections,
the pupil learns all about the herds¬
man's job; he is taught about calving
and migrations and how to distinguish
between the different breeds of
reindeer and the various kinds of
pasture. He learns how to build and
repair reindeer sleighs, and how to
train draught reindeer and hunting
dogs. A specialist is responsible for
each pupil throughout the training
period.
Training lasts from one and a half
to two working seasons for fishing and
furred animals and from two to three
years for reindeer-breeding. After this
the pupil becomes a full member of
his section.
Such is the present educational
system in the Far North of the U.S.S.R.
In the future it will, of course, have
to be improved. But generally speaking
this vocational training system meets
current requirements In training the
specialists which are acutely needed
by the farms and communities of the
reindeer-raising economy of the
north.
Vladimir I. Vasllyev
2$
