Where the husband
is head cook
and bottlewasher
by Elsa Rastad Braaten
THE United Nations has solemnly
declared that there shall be
equality between the sexes. But it is
one thing to talk about equality,
another to make it work in reality. For
you certainly can't change the present
position of women without affecting
the status of men. Men have so long
been used to accepting women as a
kind of ground crew, servicing the
male flight towards the upper heights
of society, that they will feel a little
"wing-clipped" if women withdraw their
services.
And what effect will this have on
their personality, their self respect,
and what they conceive as their mas¬
culine image ? Lots of men firmly
believe that masculinity dissolves in
dishwater. They would rather die than
be caught washing the baby's nappies.
ELSA RASTAD BRAATEN, a member of the
Norwegian parliament, has been active in the
Norwegian women's rights movement for
nearly 40 years. She has been an under¬
secretary of state to the Minister of Justice and
a consultant on women's employment to
Norway's Labour Directorate. A formerjournalist,
she was for some time editor of the women's
magazine published by the Norwegian Labour
Party.
Up to now women have been forced
to accept so-called equal opportunity
in working life on men's conditions.
They have had to meet the demands
of employers accustomed to the ser¬
vices of men who are supported by
housewives at home.
Women workers, on the other hand,
usually have the full responsibility of
home, husband and children in addi¬
tion to their paid jobs. Married women
especially with small children thus
take on a double work load when they
accept full-time work outside the home.
That is why many of them prefer part-
time work. So what becomes of equal
opportunity?
And what about the children ? If
both parents are working full time,
small children will certainly be deprived
of some of the affection and care to
which they are entitled. Yet at the
same time, the traditional family with
a mother at home all day and a father
out at work often means too much
mother and too little father.
The Family Council of Norway has
been anxiously following a situation
that seemed to be undermining the
family in modern industrial society. It
searched for a solution that in some
way would strengthen the family
within a framework of equality between
the sexes.
It was not so difficult to find the
answer in theory. If men and women
were to have equal opportunity outside
the home, they must also have the
same responsibility for home and
children. Full time work for both
parents had proved to be no solution
if they had small children. But, if part
time work was acceptable for women,
why not for men ? The idea was
reasonable, but would it work ?
In 1971, the Family Council, together
with the Institute of Sociology of the
University of Oslo, launched a research
experiment called "conjugal work-
sharing families".
The project was in two parts. First
it was necessary to create public
interest and get the support of workers
and employers. Secondly, research
was required to explore the causes
and motives that were leading families
to adopt the new pattern and to find
out what happened when they did.
A preliminary report on this exper¬
iment, published recently, shows that
56

"It's daddy's turn tonight". And why shouldn't fathers share responsibilities
in the home? In Norway some families have taken part in a "conjugal
work-sharing" experiment, husband and wife each taking part-time jobs
and arranging for one or the other to be always at home to look after
the children, do the housework, cooking, etc. Free of adult prejudices,
children are quite happy to have a father who's good at nursing, cooking,
dusting and other home chores.
conjugal work-sharing is at least a
possible way of life.
The couples taking part could share
their working time as suited them best.
The ortly condition was that neither
the husband nor the wife should work
away from home more than 28 hours
or /ess' than 16 hours a week. They
had to synchronise their work-hours
so that one of them would always be
at home. \
There were of course some diffi¬
culties. At first it was rather hard to
get employers to accept a man part-
time. It didn't seem right to them
that a well educated man should prefer
to stay at home half the time to do
housework and look after children
when he had a wife who in their view
could do it better!
About 25 families agreed to partici¬
pate in the experiment, but only
16 were able to get suitable part-time
work for both parents. In most of the
families, both parents occupied posts
such as teachers, nurses, dentists,
lawyers and so on.
The women usually earned less than
the men, so the family income generally
went down. This is probably one of
the reasons why working class parents
were less interested: they simply
couldn't afford the drop in income.
Surprisingly enough, equality be¬
tween the sexes was not the main
consideration of the majority of those
taking part in the experiment, though,
of course, it did count to some extent.
The parents mostly felt that the
children needed more attention, es¬
pecially from the father.
One of the couples who opened
their home life to public scrutiny was
Aud and Svein Fjelland in Bergen.
Both agree that for them, at least, the
arrangement turned out well. They
have more time together and share
more interests, which has enriched
their married life.
The children love having a father,
as well as a mother, to help with the
school work, someone who is an
expert bun, cake and bread baker,
who knows how to blow on a bruised
knee so it doesn't hurt any more and
a lot of other tricks that usually only
a mother is supposed to know about.
Svein Fjelland says that part-time
employment has forced him to accept
work that is a bit below his qualifi
cations he has a Master's degree
from a business school and that his
career will probably suffer. But he
thinks his wife and children are more
important.
The new way of life also gives him
more time for community activities.
He doesn't feel less respected as a
male, in spite of being accepted as
a member of the local Housewives
Clubl Aud Fjelland perhaps has met
with more disapproval. She has been
accused of selfishness because say
some people she lets her husband's
career suffer to make life more
comfortable for herself. More often,
however, friends say they envy the
couple their courage in trying out
something new.
The report shows that most of the
conjugal work-sharing families had
similar experiences to the Fjellands.
On the one hand they noted a mild
curiosity and envy among their friends,
a little hostility among a few who feel
threatened by a change of the familiar
life-style, and difficulties in finding
suitable jobs; and on the other, better
marital relations and happier children.
Elsa Rastad Braaten
57
