Non-governmental organizations
and the struggle
for women's emancipation
by Jeanne Henriette Chaton
Faces of Greece (above),
Morocco (left)
and India (below).
Photos © Gar Smith,
Canadian Cultural Centre, Paris
IN^ its March 1975 issue, the
Tlnesco Courier" published a
brief chronology of milestones in the
emancipation of women, which listed
some of the women's organizations
founded in the 19th and 20th centuries.
Inspired and led by women whose
names hold an honoured place in the
history of some countries, these organ¬
izations campaigned for wide-ranging
or specific objectives, drawing women
into a global and irreversible movement
whose definitive history has still to be
written.
Women's organizations owe their
existence to a number of special
circumstances. One was the right, only
then recently accorded in some count¬
ries, to form associations. Another
was the extension of education to
women in a widening range of social
classes and occupations.
Industrialization was a third and de¬
cisive factor. Until the 19th century
women's activities were largely confin¬
ed to the family circle; they helped
run the family business or farm, bar¬
tering or selling their produce locally.
Industrialization and the development
of a market economy reduced the
role of women as producers of goods
for local consumption and led them
to seek work outside the restricted
family group, and to earn money to
pay for some of their household needs.
Thus, the demands put forward by
a handful of highly educated women
were gradually taken up step by step
by others grappling with new problems
and social and economic handicaps.
One can say that every new activity
JEANNE HENRIETTE CHATON, of France,
has played a leading part In the work of many
international women's organizations, including
the International Council of Women, the Inter¬
national Federation of Business and Professional
Women and the International Federation of
University Women, of which she was President
from 1953 to 1956. A member of the French
committee for International Women's Year, she
has also represented France on the United
Nations Commission on the Status of Women.
A history teacher, she was a consultant to
Unesco for its programme on the equal access
of girls and women to education between 1949
and 1952.
undertaken by women, howeverlimited,
has demonstrated the need for women's
organizations and the work they do.
The foundation of the League of
Nations after World War I was a land¬
mark in the development of women's
organizations. It encouraged them to
make international contacts and gave
them an opportunity to make known
their views to the League's specialized
committees dealing with women's
questions.
The League also heard proposals
for banning, in any form whatever,
"the sale or trade in women and child¬
ren, either for work or prostitution, or
even marriage" but it failed to approve
the proposals at that time.
Thus, following the foundation of
the League of Nations, international
women's organizations became in¬
creasingly active in the League's var¬
ious social, humanitarian and econ¬
omic committees. Joining forces, their
delegates presented petitions in sup¬
port of peace and disarmament and
made direct appeals to heads of gov¬
ernments.
These activities, at meetings of the
League and of the International Labour
Office in Geneva and of the Institute
of Intellectual Co-operation in Paris,
led to the foundation of still more
international women's organizations.
But World War II disrupted their
work, even though they tried, often
at great risk, to keep their internatio¬
nal links alive and to aid war victims
and refugees.
As soon as the conflict ended,
women's organizations showed their
readiness to play a still more important
role in helping to repair the ravages
of war.
Their eagerness to play a full part
in the post-war world was recognized
at the San Francisco Conference
(1945), which, in drawing up the Char¬
ter of the United Nations, made pro¬
vision for the U.N. Economic and So¬
cial Council to work with non-govern¬
mental organizations on a consultative
basis. Since then, many women's asso-.
dations have been given consultative r
65

^ status with the U.N. and its agencies,
including Unesco.
International women's organizations
have played a growing part in pro¬
moting international solidarity and un¬
derstanding, and as membership of the
United Nations has increased so has
their influence and importance.
The World Association of Girl Gui¬
des and Girl Scouts, for instance,
today groups 90 national organizations
and 6.5 million members covering
every continent. The International
Alliance of Women has branches in
nine African, eight Latin American,
11 -Asian and 14 European countries
as well as in the United States and
Australia. The Associated Country
Women of the World has 8 million
members in 69 countries. The World
Union of Catholic Women's Organi¬
zations has 125 affiliated associations.
All these women's organizations
are voluntary and non-governmental
bodies. They are financed by members'
dues and occasional gifts or legacies,
but they rarely receive large subsidies.
All have affirmed their determination
to contribute to the maintenance of
peace and world understanding and
to the fundamental freedoms laid down
in the U.N. Charter and the Universal
Declaration on Human Rights.
Some of the women's groups which
are concerned with the overall problem
of women's status in the world have
focussed their activities on education,
job training and family welfare as well
as on economic, civic and political
problems. They have also worked to
improve the conditions of the world's
poorest and most neglected peoples.
One of these, the World Young Wom¬
en's Christian Association (founded
in 1894) operates in many parts of
the world. It provides emergency and
long-term aid to refugees in areas
with acute refugee problems, such as
Bangladesh, Ethiopia, the Middle East,
Pakistan, Hong Kong and Mauritius.
It also helps immigrants to adjust
to their new surroundings by running
literacy courses in the language of
their host country, provides job train¬
ing, helps to integrate refugees
into the community, regularises the
situations of illegal immigrants and,
when necessary, helps those who wish
to return to their country of origin.
The Associated Country Women of
the World (founded in 1930) tackles
the same problems in rural areas by
training women teachers for widely
scattered farming communities. It has
launched literacy programmes in
Indonesia, Brazil, Trinidad and East
Africa, and it provides basic training in
farming, market gardening and stock-
raising. It shows people how
best to use local resources and how to
combat vitamin deficiencies and also
teaches about sanitation, family plan¬
ning and care of children.
The major goal of the International
Alliance of Women (founded in 1888),
whose motto is "Equal rights, equal
responsibilities", is to show women
what they must do in order to achieve
equality in law and in daily life. Its
special concerns are problems of em¬
ployment, health, family, social welfare,
rural development, living conditions in
cities, and education.
The International Council of Women
(also founded in 1888) operates on
similar lines. In countries such as
Nepal, Pakistan, Cameroon and Peru,
it has helped women group-leaders in
rural areas to carry out literacy cam¬
paigns and community development
and training courses, with the help of
Unesco's Gift Coupon Programme or
through its own project contracts.
Associations of women of the same
religious faith, such as the World
Union of Catholic Women's Organiza¬
tions (founded in 1910) or the Inter¬
national Council of Jewish Women
(founded in 1912 it ceased its activi¬
ties during the two world wars, and
was restarted in 1949) do not re¬
strict their work to persons of their
retraining and helps members who
have emigrated.
The International Federation of Busi¬
ness and Professional Women (found¬
ed in 1930) working with a wide variety
of professional groups also seeks to
improve women's professional qualifi¬
cations. In developing countries car¬
eers are now opening up for women
which call for specialized training
notably in legal and economic fields.
These careers are -related to priority
activities such as family welfare, con¬
servation of the environment and the
development of marketing and trade.
The International Council of Social
Democratic Women (founded in 1955)
promotes contacts between women's
organizations in the social democratic
movement in over 30 countries, sup¬
porting their efforts to achieve equality
between the sexes.
Two clubs working in conjunction
with Unesco have similar aims. They
-^Ä7
"Welcome
aboard. This is
your captain
Margaret
Williamson
speaking. Will
you please attach
your seat
belts..."
Drawing by Richter
Photo USIS
own faith, although they aim to main¬
tain fundamental religious values.
Their objectives are to protect women
children and young people and to en¬
sure their moral welfare.
The World Union of Catholic Wo¬
men's Organizations is particularly
active in Venezuela, Colombia and
Mexico. Besides promoting literacy
and technological development, Catho¬
lic and Jewish women's groups alike
are engaged in the struggle against
economic and social injustice.
The Women's International Demo¬
cratic Federation (founded in 1945) is
concerned primarily with the problems
of women as mothers, workers, and
citizens. It works to promote peace,
accession to national independence
and better living conditions and also to
combat hunger.
The International Federation of Uni¬
versity Women (founded in 1919) stri¬
ves to bring women greater access
to higher education, more posts in
basic and applied research and jobs of
greater responsibility. In developing
countries it promotes the growth of
education so that women can have
access to the further studies that open
the way to better jobs. It provides
many grants for studies, research and
are the Soroptimist International Asso¬
ciation (founded in 1928) and Zonta
International, whose name is derived
from a Sioux Indian word meaning
"honest and trustworthy".
A number of organizations are in fact
open to both men and women; trade
unions, for instance have large num¬
bers of women members. In the early
days of trade unionism, women were
either rejected outright or only reluc¬
tantly accepted as members, but since
then they have actively participated in
worker's organizations including those
which have consultative status with
Unesco. The same is true for some
professional bodies (teachers, lawyers
and others).
So long as discrimination exists, so
long as world opinion has not con¬
demned and abolished discrimination
both in theory and in practice, the
need for women's associations and
their world-wide action will remain.
The proof that they are needed is
shown by the fact that the United
Nations and its specialized agencies
so frequently call on women's orga¬
nizations to help them carry out their
programmes.
Jeanne Henriette Chaton
66
