In the last 30 years six
countries (the United
States, the U.S.S.R., the
United Kingdom, France,
China and India) have
developed nuclear weapons,
and at least 20 others have,
through peaceful nuclear
programmes, acquired the
technical knowledge and
nuclear material to produce
such weapons. Below, the
explosion of China's first
atomic bomb in October 1964.
I
KH . H
|K||jH
mam
\
28

THE NUCLEAR NIGHTMARE 0 A tragic paradox:
peaceful atoms which foster
the proliferation of nuclear weapons
T NTIL a few years ago, most
countries were prevented from
readily acquiring nuclear weapons by
two main barriers one technical and
the other economic. A lack of know¬
ledge of the technical details of
nuclear-weapon design and a lack of
expertise and experience in nuclear
technology in general were virtually in¬
surmountable obstacles to many coun¬
tries, even if they had had the political
desire to produce nuclear weapons.
'<í,^^íí^>s ^;K"^^'fi w;^;;:--:^:v'
Apart from the lack of technical
know-how, few countries, other than
the present nuclear-weapon countries,
could have afforded a nuclear force
without diverting unacceptably large
resources from other activities.
But in country after country these
barriers have become, and are be¬
coming, ineffective. This radical
change has come about because of
the spread of nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes.
Although nuclear energy has mani¬
fold applications in industry, medi¬
cine, agriculture and so on, the main
reason for the spread of peaceful
nuclear technology is related to the
rapidly increasing world demands for
energy. The demand for electricity,
the most versatile form of energy, is
increasing faster than that for other
forms of energy. In many if not
most situations around the world,
the electricity produced by nuclear-
.
1 :/.; E
: s j 1 ..:.-.' .
^^^' Wêê
jn Am % ik-
> ^Mp ^Êm ûW
.- .--
m - -
..';:;. ^wÊÈÊÊËÊÊÈ
29

( power reactors is significantly cheaper
' than that generated by coal- or oil-
fired power stations.
This is rather dramatically illustrated
by the fact that Iran is buying nuclear-
power reactors even though it has
enormous reserves of oil. The ration¬
ale for this is that it is more econo¬
mical for Iran to use nuclear power
to generate electricity and to sell or
conserve its oil, rather than burn it
in power stations. There are, of
course, other reasons why countries
want nuclear-power reactors to ac¬
quire the option to produce nuclear
weapons, for example but the eco¬
nomic factor Is, in general, the domi¬
nant one.
Few people have a clear im¬
pression of how extensively nuclear
technology has already spread around
the world or how rapidly .it is likely
to continue to do so.
The nuclear-weapon countries were
the first to build peaceful nuclear-
power reactors the U.S.A. and the
U.S.S.R. in 1954, and France and the
U.K. in 1956. The peaceful nuclear
programmes in these countries evol¬
ved directly from their military pro¬
grammes. It is of relevance to the
present-day situation to note that just
the opposite applied to the Indian
nuclear explosion in 1974. This
was entirely a by-product of India's
peaceful nuclear programme and a
relatively inexpensive one at that.
The Fed. Rep. of Germany was the
first country to embark on a purely
peaceful nuclear-power programme.
Its first nuclear-power reactor
went into operation in 1960.
Canada and Italy were next, with
nuclear-power reactors operating in
1962. Sweden and Japan followed in
1963; the German Democratic Rep¬
ublic and Switzerland in 1966 ; the Ne¬
therlands and Spain in 1968; Belgium
and India in 1969; Pakistan in 1971;
Czechoslovakia in 1972; and Argen¬
tina and Bulgaria in 1974. China has
built one or two nuclear-power re¬
actors (in the late 1950s or early
1960s) but to supply electrical power
for its uranium-enrichment plant, as
part of its nuclear-weapon pro¬
gramme.
At the end of 1974, therefore,
20 countries had already installed
nuclear-power reactors. An additional
six countries Austria, Brazil, Finland,
South Korea, Taiwan and Yugoslavia
have their first nuclear-power re¬
actors under construction. And many
others, amongst them Australia, Den¬
mark, Egypt, Hungary, Iran, Israel,
Mexico, the Philippines, Poland, Ro
mania, South Africa and Thailand, have
announced plans to acquire power
reactors.
By 1980, if present plans are
followed through, some 30 countries
will have nuclear-power reactors with
a total electrical generating capacity
about 15 times that of the world's re¬
actors in 1970. Looking further ahead,
it is predicted that the 1980 figure
for nuclear generating capacity will
increase more than tenfold by the
year 2000.
From now on nuclear power will
move increasingly into the developing
regions slowly at first, but much
more rapidly in a couple of decades
hence. Argentina, Brazil, India, Pakis¬
tan, South Korea and Taiwan are the
vanguard of this trend.
Cheap energy supplies are vital for
industrialization. In fact, supplying a
source of cheap energy may well be
the main (if not the only) significant
contribution that technology can make
to development. For this reason, the
spread of peaceful nuclear power to
developing regions probably could not
(and should not?) be hindered.
In countries with advanced nuclear-
power programmes Canada, France,
the Fed. Rep. of Germany, Japan,
U.K., U.S.A. and U.S.S.R.large
nuclear industries have been estab¬
lished. Investments in these indust¬
ries already amount to billions of
dollars and are rapidly increasing.
As might be expected, the nuclear
industry is becoming highly competitive
and cut-throat, similar to other multi-
billion dollar concerns, such as oil,
aviation, electronics and so on.
The nuclear industry can be divided
into two sections one designing and
installing power reactors and the other
providing fuel for them. Nuclear re¬
actors normally use uranium, a widely
distributed element, as fuel. Natural
uranium contains two main types of
atom, the isotopes uranium 235 and
uranium 238.
In ordinary uranium, atoms of ura¬
nium 235 occur in the proportion of
only one atom to 140; the other 139
are atoms of uranium 238. But ura¬
nium 238 undergoes nuclear fission
the process that produces the heat
in a reactor which is used to produce
steam tó drive a turbine which gener¬
ates the electricity much less readily
than uranium 235.
Consequently, many reactors use
not natural uranium as fuel but ura¬
nium in which the proportion of ura¬
nium 235 has been increased above
the natural value. The process of
increasing the content of uranium 235
is called enrichment and is, as we
shall see, of importance to the prob¬
lem of nuclear-weapon proliferation.
As uranium "burns" in a nuclear
reactor, plutonium an element not
found in nature is produced as an
inevitable by-product. One isotope of
plutonium, plutonium 239, readily
undergoes fission, as does uranium
235, and therein lies the importance
of plutonium.
Uranium fuel is normally put into
a reactor in the form of cylindrical
metal-clad elements. As the uranium
is used up, plutonium accumulates in
the fuel elements.
After a time, a given fuel element
stops contributing effectively to the
total production of fission energy in
the reactor and is then removed and
replaced with a new one. The spent
element is then sent to a chemical
plant, called a reprocessing plant,
where plutonium is recovered. This is
done because plutonium is a very
valuable material (more so than gold),
required as fuel for future nuclear-
power reactors specifically, breeder
reactors.
But plutonium can also be used for
the production of nuclear weapons.
And this is the crucial link between
the spread of peaceful nuclear tech¬
nology and the proliferation of
nuclear weapons. It is true that the
plutonium has to be separated from
the reactor fuel elements but there
are enough reprocessing plants in the
world to ensure that no country
should have much difficulty in obtain¬
ing access to one.
Nuclear-power reactors produce
relatively large amounts of plutonium.
A typical power reactor (having a
generating capacity of about 500
megawatts of electricity) produces
about 120 kilograms of plutonium
annually. This would, in theory, be
sufficient to produce about 12 nuclear
weapons per year with yields similar
to that of the bomb dropped on Naga¬
saki (equivalent to about 20,000 tons
of TNT).
When nuclear-power reactors are
operated for the production of the
cheapest electricity, the plutonium
they produce is not suitable for the
construction of the most efficient
nuclear weapons because it consists
of a mixture of isotopes. Plutonium
239 is the preferred material for
nuclear weapons.
To obtain relatively pure plutonium
239, the reactor fuel elements have
to be removed from the reactor after
a period of a few weeks rather than
the normal period of 2 to 3 years.
30

Nevertheless, the plutonium normally
produced in nuclear-power reactors
would still be usable for effective
albeit not optimally efficient nuclear
weapons.
In 1975, the world's nuclear reactors
will produce 25,000 kilograms of plu¬
tonium. And in 1980, they will prob¬
ably produce nearly 100,000 kilograms.
By 1980, the world will probably have
accumulated about 350,000 kilograms.
About one-third of this plutonium will
be produced in countries which do
not now have nuclear weapons the¬
oretically, enough for them to have
made 12,000 nuclear weaponsl
Breeder reactors differ from ordin¬
ary reactors in that, by converting
uranium into plutonium, they produce
more fuel than they consume. About
every 10 years double the amount of
fuel initially put in accumulates.
Thus, enough fuel becomes avail¬
able, not only to keep the reactor
operating, but to fuel a new one of
the same size. Because breeder re¬
actors will eventually become relati¬
vely self-sufficient insofar as fuel is
concerned, they are an attractive
proposition since there is likely to be
a scarcity of uranium at economic
prices.
Breeder reactors are being devel¬
oped mainly in France, the Fed. Rep.
of Germany, Japan, U.K., U.S.A.
and U.S.S.R., and they may be¬
come available commercially by
the mid-1980s. It is predicted that
their use will eventually become so
widespread that, in the 21st century,
they will be the main source of elec¬
tricity unless or until they are super¬
seded by a cheaper and more abun¬
dant source of power presumably
solar or fusion energy.
Although the first generation of
breeder reactors will probably use
uranium, the preferred fuel for sub¬
sequent generations will be plutonium.
This will have important consequences
for nuclear-weapon proliferation be¬
cause any country owning a breeder
reactor will have on its territory a
large amount of plutonium suitable for
immediate use in efficient nuclear
weapons.
In summary, any country with a
nuclear-power reactor has on its terri¬
tory continuously increasing amounts
of plutonium suitable for the construc¬
tion of effective nuclear weapons and
the capacity to produce plutonium of
the type needed for the most efficient
nuclear weapons an alarming state
of affairs.
Plutonium can also be produced In
research reactors. These are relatively
small reactors often used by countries
planning to embark on a nuclear-power
programme to train personnel in re¬
actor technology and to give them
experience in reactor operations.
Israel is an example of a country
which has accumulated a stockpile of
plutonium from a research reactor.
About 50 countries now operate
research reactors and so the picture
is more alarming than it appears at
first sight.
This dangerous situation will, in 20
or 30 years from now, become even
more critical when breeder reactors
are widely used. Unless effective
steps are taken to prevent it, we can
look forward to a steadily increasing
number of nuclear-weapon powers. It
is unrealistic to expect otherwise.
Because the technical and economic
barriers to the acquisition of nuclear
weapons are no longer effective at
least for any country with a peaceful
nuclear programme a political barrier
is necessary if an attempt is to be
made to control the proliferation of
nuclear weapons. For many countries,
this political barrier is the Non-Proli¬
feration Treaty (NPT). Of crucial
importance to this Treaty is the ques¬
tion of nuclear safeguards.
Any country with plutonium on its
territory will want to assure itself
that it can account at all times for
almost all of the material. Not only
does plutonium have a very high
monetary value but it is a very toxic
material (a particle of microscopic
dimensions inhaled into the lung can
cause lung cancer).
Moreover, plutonium is frequently
transported by road, rail and sea
between nuclear reactors and repro¬
cessing plants, and between repro¬
cessing plants and plutonium stores.
Thus, at a very early stage in its
nuclear programme, a country will
establish a national control system
or safeguards system based on
modern accounting methods and so¬
phisticated instrumentation. These na¬
tional systems are being constantly
modernized and improved as the
amounts of plutonium to be safe¬
guarded sharply increase.
National systems do not, of course,
assure other countries that plutonium
is not being diverted to military pur¬
poses. For this reason, international
nuclear safeguards are far more
reassuring for other countries than
any national ones. But even with the
best safeguards technology available,
the undetected diversion of sufficient
plutonium for "one-bomb-a-week" pro¬
duction will soon become possible.
For many years now much nuclear
material and nuclear equipment for
peaceful uses has been exported.
Exported nuclear material includes
enriched uranium, mainly used as fuel
for nuclear reactors. So far, only the
nuclear-weapon countries have had
the facilities required to produce en¬
riched uranium on a large scale.
A uranium enrichment plant is an
enormous industrial undertaking, very
costly to construct, and only seven
large plants now exist three in the
U.S.A. and one each In China, France,
the U.K. and the U.S.S.R. At present,
the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. are by
far the main producers of enriched
uranium, each with a virtual monopoly
position in its own part of the world.
But other countries, including the
Netherlands (in co-operation with the
Fed. Rep. of Germany and the U.K.),
Australia, India, Japan and South
Africa, are building, or plan to build,
large-scale enrichment plants.
The uncontrolled dissemination of
uranium-enrichment technology seri¬
ously increases the risk and the
dimensions of nuclear-weapon proli¬
feration since an enrichment plant
gives a country the capability not only
to produce nuclear-reactor fuel but
also the capability to produce the
highly-enriched uranium needed to
trigger a thermonuclear weapon.
For reasons which have not been
made public, uranium 235 is the
preferred (if not the essential) mate¬
rial for efficient triggers for thermo¬
nuclear weapons it seems that plu¬
tonium is much inferior for this.
Exporting countries normally require
that the nuclear material and equip¬
ment supplied, and any plutonium pro¬
duced from this material and equip¬
ment, are subjected to safeguards
against diversion to military use.
Bilateral safeguards treaties bet¬
ween exporting and importing coun¬
tries have been used for this purpose,
but it is now more usual for exporting
countries to rely on the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to pro¬
vide safeguards on exported nuclear
facilities. In fact, one of the main tasks
of the Agency, which was set up in
1957, has been to administer nuclear
safeguards and it has, over the years,
accumulated a great deal of expertise.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty has
added a new and desirable dimension
to international safeguards. Each non-
nuclear-weapon party to the treaty
has undertaken to accept IAEA safe¬
guards not only on imported nuclear
facilities, but on all peaceful nuclear
activities within its territory. :
31
