This huge industrial plant for
extracting gold operates on the
river at Alixerov, in the Magadan
region of the Soviet Far East.
Processed rock is dumped in the
huge mounds seen in foreground.
The discovery and tapping of new
mineral deposits on a global scale
poses major geological and techno¬
logical problems calling for interna¬
tional co-operation. Unesco has
taken the initiative in this direction
by launching in 1972 the Interna¬
tional Geological Correlation Pro¬
gramme which is undertaking a
wide range of operations, includ¬
ing investigations of the earth's
crust and of mineral resources on
the continents and the sea bed.



OUR HIDDEN
MINERAL RESOURCES
An Eldorado beneath the oceans
and in every kind of rock
by Konstantin I. Lukashev
KONSTANTIN I. LUKASHEV, Soviet geolo¬
gist and mineralogist, is director of the Institute
of Geochemistry and Geophysics, in Minsk
(Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic). He is
the author of more than 250 publications on
geology, economic geography and related sub¬
jects, andis a member of the Academy ofSciences
of the Byelorussian SSR. A fuller version of
this article originally appeared in Unesco's
quarterly 'Impact of Science on Society'
(July-September 1974). Annual subscription :
23 F. Per copy : 8.50 F.
MANKIND will need more
mineral resources in the next
half-century than In the whole of its
previous history. This applies to all
types of minerals but particularly to
fuels and to rare metals and elements.
In many of the modern alloys and
materials used in industry and science,
many different constituents are added
to the basic metals, including large
quantities of rare elements.
Many kinds of minerals, occurring
in large deposits, are being rapidly
exhausted or In some cases have
already been exhausted. This is
especially true of iron ores, manganese,
chromium, nickel, copper, lead, zinc,
gold, silver and platinum.
Fewer deposits of metallic and non-
metallic minerals are being discovered
near the surface and at depths of two
or three kilometres. Prospectors are
concentrating more and more onv
deeper levels of the earth's crust. r
11

. In theory, contemporary science and
technology could make it possible fully
to satisfy the world's material needs.
In practice many social, geographical,
technical and other difficulties will
have to be overcome before these
needs are filled.
Information on world mineral stocks
Is not complete even for the major
metals and minerals used in industry.
Many developing countries recently
freed from colonial rule are only
beginning to prospect and assess
their own mineral wealth while Infor¬
mation on deposits and reserves of
ores, petroleum and gas at depths of
more than three kilometres is also
very inadequate.
According to rough calculations, the
bulk (65 per cent) of known deposits
of various kinds of minerals consists
of low-grade ores, with only a very
small proportion (5 per cent) of high-
grade ores.
The resources of the United States,
Japan, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, the United Kingdom, France and
other Western European countries are
not sufficient to meet their require¬
ments.
The United States of America, for
example, has adequate supplies of
coal, gas, phosphates and molybdenum
but is dependent on imports for the
bulk of Its supplies of manganese,
chromium, nickel, mercury, tin, cobalt
and other metals and minerals. Japan
is completely dependent on imports
for Its oil, iron ore, chromites, nickel,
cobalt, molybdenum, bauxite, tin,
potassium salts and phosphates.
The Federal Republic of Germany
Imports 55-85 per cent of Its supplies
of copper, manganese, mercury, lead,
tungsten and zinc, the only minerals
which it is not obliged to import being
coal and potassium salts. The United
Kingdom is able to supply its entire
natural gas needs from domestic
sources and has been supplying 90 per
cent of its own coal requirements.
While France is rich In iron ore,
potassium salts, bauxite and some
other useful minerals, it is obliged to
import many others.
The Soviet Union is better provided
than other countries with mineral
resources, having large deposits of
coal, oil, gas, iron ore and non-ferrous
metals.
Energy Resources. Of all the
possible sources of energy fossil
fuels, atomic power, . solar energy,
hydraulic and wind power, and geo-
thermal energy the most widely used
have hitherto been coal, oil and gas.
What energy resources will mankind
have at its disposal at the beginning
of the twenty-first century and what
TAPPING UNDERSEA OIL
To meet the world's rising demand for oil, man is now prospecting and exploiting
new sources under the sea. Huge concrete structure, below, under.construction
in Stavanger Fjord, Norway, is protective casing of a 160,000 m* deepsea tank
for storing output of a North Sea oil-field. The 100-metre-high structure has
since been towed about 300 kms out to sea close to the drilling site, where
it is now grounded on the sea bed with about 30 metres protruding above
the water, ready to provision tankers anchored nearby. Perforated casing will
blunt the force of heavy seas. Study of fossil microscopic marine organisms
like the one shown above, 0.8 mm in diameter, helps scientists to date
geological layers during oil prospection. Right, three aqualung divers are
lowered from a drilling rig in the Gulf of Gascony, off the French coast, for
underwater inspection.
28

scientific and technological progress
Is to be foreseen in the utilization of
these different resources?
World supplies of coal, which is a
very important raw material in the
manufacture of synthetic products, are
assured for the next 150-200 years.
For world reserves of bituminous coal
and brown coal at economically
workable depths (up to 1,800 metres
for coal and 600 metres for brown coal)
the most often quoted estimate is
16 trillion tons (1 trillion = 1012).
Towards the end of this century,
prospecting for further deposits at
great depths, particularly In developing
Photo Serge de Sazo © Rapho, Paris
countries, may well raise this estimate
to one of 30 or 40 trillion tons.
Known world supplies of oil amount
to 85.5 billion tons, including 14.8 billion
tons in sea bed deposits. These
figures could be multiplied by three or
five to allow for deposits which may
be discovered before the turn of the
century.
Known world reserves of natural
gas, according to the same calculations,
amount to over 50 trillion cubic metres,
including almost 7 trillion cubic metres
in sea-bed deposits.
Coal, oil and gas will probably be
the main sources of energy until the
end of this century. But extraction
of oil and gas is increasing very
rapidly and, if present trends continue,
supplies of these extremely important
fuels will be exhausted in a matter of
decades even allowing for the dis¬
covery of new deposits and improved
extraction coefficients. We might
recall that Mendeleev, the formulator
of the periodic table of elements, once
observed that burning oil was like
stoking a furnace with banknotes.
This applies equally to natural gas.
Other Mineral Resources. One of
the most important tasks facing
science and technology In the Im¬
mediate future, therefore, is to discover
ways of using other natural sources
of energy. Nuclear energy, solar
energy, geothermal energy and energy
derived from the wind and water are
bound to become Increasingly import¬
ant In the near future.
It is possible that towards the end
of the century progress will have been
made in harnessing thermonuclear
energy, which will mark an extremely
Important step by science and tech¬
nology towards solving the world's
energy problems. Mankind will then
have millions of years of supplies of
thermonuclear energy based on
hydrogen Isotopes obtained from sea
water.
If world population estimates for the
end of the century (at least 6,000 to
7,000 million) are taken as a basis of
needs, production and consumption of
metals will have to double. With the
development of ferrous and non-
ferrous metallurgy in the developing
countries, the total world production
and consumption of metal may well
Increase more than twofold but prob¬
ably not more than threefold. Rough
calculations indicate that the world's
extraction of Iron could rise to a total
of 1 billion tons. Extraction of other
ferrous and of non-ferrous metals
could increase up to tenfold. "
The Importance of the rare elements
is certain to increase steadily in
consequence of technical progress.
They are essential for the development
of modern processes and industries
which require extremely strong, light-,
weight, acid-, heat- and corrosion-
resistant materials to be made into
articles of small size.
Little in the way of study and
prospection has been carried out on
ores containing rare elements. The
problem of metal ores is therefore
highly important and Indeed acute for
many countries, Its solution involving
geological, technical and sometimes
social factors.
Non-metallic raw materials are more ^
widely used in the economy than r
29

metals. They are Increasingly Import¬
ant to the construction industry, the
manufacture of products for use in
agriculture, mineral salts, chemical
products and so on. The building
Industry obviously relies on stone and
the ingredients for cement, bricks, tiles
and Insulating materials, while rock
salts, potassium salts, sulphur and
phosphates are basic raw materials
for the chemical industry, and clay,
feldspar, talc and other minerals are
the basic materials for the ceramics
industry. Many minerals and rocks
are used in metallurgy and In the
manufacture of abrasives, insulators
and lubricants.
More than forty kinds of minerals
are used by industry. Among the
most important are diamonds, asbestos,
gypsum, clay, granite, graphite, lime¬
stone, minerals containing potassium,
sodium and lithium, sand, sandstone,
sulphur, mica and phosphates.
It is a curious fact that the world's
annual per capita consumption of
sulphuric acid exceeds that of sugar
and that the' petroleum and petro¬
chemical industries are to a large
extent dependent on barite and
bentom'te clays for use during drilling
and on fluorite, salt, sulphur and
various clays for the refining process.
Future Sources of Mineral Wealth.
There Is a preponderance of low-
grade ores in the earth's crust. The
exploitation of these ores Is likely to
become more important as further
technological advances are made. In
the nineteenth century only copper
ores containing 4 to 6 per cent or more
of copper were regarded as paying
ores. Now ores with a copper content
of as little as 0.4 per cent are con
sidered worth working. Modern
methods make it possible to extract
zinc, lead, silver, copper, nickel,
cobalt, and many other metals from
low-grade ores.
The possibility of using low-grade
ores will greatly increase our mineral
stocks and remove the threat of total
depletion of the world's mineral
resources for decades.
A substantial proportion of the
world's resources of coal, oil, gas,
bauxite, rock salts and potassium
salts, sulphur and phosphorites occurs
in sedimentary deposits. There are
good prospects for extracting these
minerals from depths of 5-7 kilometres
and more.
It has recently been established that
vast reserves of mineral wealth lie
beneath the seas and oceans of our
30

A SPARKLE
OF DIAMONDS,
A WHORL
OF COPPER
To produce a handful of diamonds
(left) thousands of tons of rocks'
must be processed. Even in rich
deposits, each stone, whether for
industrial use or jewellery, may have
to be extracted from 14 million times
its own weight in rock. Many large
deposits of far less rare minerals,
such as copper, are today being
rapidly exhausted. Right, the whorl-
shaped outline of the largest open-
cut copper mine in North America,
at Bingham Canyon, Utah. From
these workings, two miles across
from rim to rim, which snake down
over 1,000 metres into the earth,
more than 180,000 tons of barren
rock and 90,000 tons of ore are
excavated daily. Some idea of its
size is given by lines of trucks and
excavating machines seen as tiny
dots on different levels.
planet. Surveys carried out by
scientists in recent years indicate that
thousands of millions of tons of
manganese, nickel, cobalt, and copper
are contained ¡n the iron-manganese
nodules which lie on the sea-bed.
The Soviet exploration vessel V/'tyaz,
for example, has discovered large
accumulations of these nodules at
depths of 4-5 kilometres in the central
Indian Ocean, covering whole areas
of the ocean bed in continuous layers.
Reserves of these minerals on the
floor of the Pacific Ocean are esti¬
mated at 1,656 billion tons, including
358 billion tons of manganese, 207
billion tons of iron, 43 billion tons of
aluminium, 25 billion tons of mag¬
nesium, 14.7 billion tons of nickel,
9.9 billion tons of tin, and 7.9 billion
tons of copper.
Furthermore, it has been calculated
that the seas and oceans of our planet
contain more than 20 million cubic
kilometres of salts, a truly colossal
figure. Sea water also contains
varying quantities of iron, gold, copper,
nickel, cobalt, manganese and other
elements.
If all the gold contained in sea
water could be extracted and divided
equally between all the earth's in¬
habitants, there would be more than
a ton for each of usl And there is
twenty times more silver, thirty times
more thorium and molybdenum and a
thousand times more iodine in sea
water than there is gold. The oceans
are Indeed a veritable Eldorado. But
a satisfactory way has yet to be found
of extracting rare elements from sea
water.
In the long run, technical progress
may make it possible to extract the
essential minerals from any kind of
rock. Every 100 tons of ordinary
magmatic rock (granite, for example)
contains on average 8 tons of alumi¬
nium, 5 tons of Iron, 540 kilogrammes
of titanium, 80 kilos of manganese,
80 kilos of chromium, 18 kilos of
nickel, 14 kilos of vanadium, 4,5 kilos
of tungsten, 9 kilos of copper, 1.8 kilos
of lead and a quantity of uranium and
thorium capable of producing as much
energy as 50 tons of coal.
If man could devise a method of
extracting chemical elements from all
the different kinds of rocks, he need
never lack mineral resources. It Is
my belief that in time mankind will
solve this problem and will look on
all rocks as ores.
Konstantin I. Lukashev
31
