30 years after
Photo © Jackie Raynal, Paris, from the film Heraclite l'Obscur, by the French director Patrick Deval
4

world war II

Amadou Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
THE commemoration of the end of
the Second World War rekindles
in the hearts and minds of all those
who, like myself, were directly involved
in that global tragedy, a reeling of
indescribable horror at a slaughter of
unprecedented cruelty and magnitude.
During the six years that the war
lasted, more than 50 million persons
men, women and children from almost
every country, civilians as well as non-
civilians died in battle, from bombing
raids, in concentration camps, or from
other causes directly resulting from
the war. And to this tragic loss of
human life one must add the devas¬
tation of entire areas, the obliteration
of cities, and the destruction of works
representing centuries of creative
effort.
Cruelly destructive and waged at
the cost of untold sacrifices, the war
ended nevertheless on a note of hope
and confidence in mankind, with the
victory of those who had fought for
freedom against those who sought to
impose on the rest of the world by
force of arms a tyranny based on
injustice, racialism and violence raised
to the status of law.
The end of hostilities 30 years ago
marked the defeat of a doctrine of evil,
and it is understandable that the first
concern of leaders facing the immense
task of reconstruction was to try by
every possible means to prevent such
a tragedy from ever happening again.
Out of this determination, and as
soon as the war ended, the United
Nations system was born, and with it
Unesco, in a surge of enthusiasm
which Is reflected in the entire Unesco
Constitution. It is because Unesco
was conceived by its founders as one
of mankind's bastions against barbar¬
ism that the essential mission assigned
to the Organization is to contribute to
the maintenance of peace a true
peace which can only be assured by
the intellectual and moral solidarity
of mankind.
The Second World War was brought
about by the denial of the democratic
principles that imply respect for the
individual and by the propagation
through ignorance and prejudice of a
doctrine of inequality between races
and men. When the conflict ended it
was clear that Unesco's role should
be to help to secure universal respect
for justice, for the rule of law, and
for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction of
race, sex, language or religion.
This was the principal concern of
Unesco's founders, whose ideas may
be considered as the inspiration of all
the Organization's efforts, however
modest.
But every anniversary is also an
occasion for self-examination, and
today we should ask ourselves whether
those forces which plunged much of
the world into chaos 30 years ago have
really been neutralized and whether
the moral commitments which the inter¬
national community made to mankind
immediately after the war have really
been fulfilled. We must ask these
questions out of respect for the victims
of the Second World War and as a
minimum measure of our Vigilance.
The last 30 years have seen a
constant strengthening of the con¬
science of the international community.
I am thinking particularly of the upward
struggle of peoples and the work of the
United Nations system, and certain
major trends of contemporary history,
including the one which led to the
emancipation of many countries from
colonial domination. All these have
paved the way for a more just and
more fraternal order on our planet.
But a single glance at the world of
1975 reveals many causes for anxiety.
Armed conflicts have not been
eradicated (one of the cruellest wars
has just ended after devastating a tiny
country for 30 years and claiming
millions of victims) nor have threats of
war; nor the most flagrant violations
of human rights (not infrequently
5

y associated with the maintenance or
re-emergence of racialism or the
resurgence of authoritarianism). Nor
have we seen the end of the unjust
division of wealth among nations and,
in many cases, within nations them¬
selves.
The balance of forces has shifted
from the industrialized countries to the
poorer countries. This proves that
there are no longer any so-called
"minor" peoples and that all peoples
now aspire to respect for their freedom
and dignity. To stifle their aspirations
would be to negate the full meaning of
the victory won 30 years ago.
But even in the industrialized
countries, the arms race, embarked on
in the perhaps illusory hope of
guaranteeing security through what has
been called the "balance of terror", is
impeding progress in other fields far
more beneficial for mankind and may,
if carried to extremes, lead to the very
perversion of science diverted for
destructive purposes.
The Second World War and the
period which preceded it can teach us
an important lesson, which is that
peace can only be founded on justice
and that international co-operation,
which is more necessary than ever
today, must now enter a new and more
dynamic stage. Only in this way can
mankind hope to avert the threat of
global upheaval such as the one that
rent the world apart from 1939 to 1945,
and avert the possibility of an even
greater catastrophe that would annihil¬
ate the whole human race.
This new path of international co¬
operation to preserve peace is the one
that the United Nations and all its
agencies have embarked upon with
increased vigour, whether it be to
promote human rights as they have
always tried to do in the past, or to
attack the root causes of some of the
most serious and dangerous in¬
equalities amongst men through recent
action to establish a new international
economic and social order.
Unesco must redouble its efforts to
serve the cause of peace in all spheres
of its competence, and it can do this
particularly by helping to construct the
defences of peace in the minds of men.
As an organization concerned with the
world of the human spirit and the
human mind and invested with the
global authority which its virtual uni¬
versality has conferred upon it, Unesco
can, I am convinced, contribute increas¬
ingly to the practical fulfillment of
human rights and, if its Member States
overcome their differences, it will one
day come to be recognized by all
mankind as a spiritual forum embodying
the conscience of the world.
Hector Wynter
Jamaica
Chairman of Unesco's Executive Board
In 1946, a year after the end of a war that had involved
60 countries and caused the deaths of many millions of
people, the governments of 50 states agreed to create
Unesco, whose purpose was, in the words of its Consti¬
tution, "to contribute to peace and security by promoting
collaboration among the nations through education, science
and culture in order to further universal respect for justice,
for the rule of law and for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms which are affirmed for the peoples of the world,
without distinction of race, sex, language or religion, by
the Charter of the United Nations."
In the 30 years since then, Unesco has been engaged
in its task of constructing the defences of peace in the
minds of men. Peace is not just the absence of war, but
the active interplay of freedom and independence at the
individual and national level, with the international co¬
operation necessary to ensure independence and freedom.
It is through international collaboration that the obstacles
to active and real peace poverty, hunger, illiteracy and
the denial of human rights can be overcome.
On this occasion, the Executive Board of Unesco remem¬
bers with pride and also with sadness the courage and
sacrifice of those who died. The best memorial to them
will be through action and co-operation designed to create
a world based on justice and equality.
Leonid N. Kutakov
U.S.S.R.
The Second World War swept into its orbit about two
billion persons. It was the most bloody and most destruc¬
tive conflict in history. Millions of lives were wiped out on
battlefields, in concentration camps and beneath the debris
of bomb-blasted cities.
Every country which fought against the fascists had its
toll of dead and suffered grevious losses, but the whole
world knows that it was the peoples of the Soviet Union
who paid most dearly for the common victory, which
cost them twenty million lives. The Soviet Union lost
over 30 per cent of its national wealth and 1,710 of its
cities and 70,000 of its villages were reduced to ruins...
In recalling the decisive contribution of the Soviet
Union to the victory over Hitler, we have no intention
whatever of diminishing the contribution and the merits
of other peoples and countries. The Soviet people have
always deemed and still consider the victory over the
fascist bloc as the common victory of the freedom-loving
nations which joined the anti-Hitlerian coalition. The mili¬
tary alliance of the Soviet Union with the United States,
the United Kingdom, France and other countries with capi¬
talist systems which united their efforts to crush the
aggressor was striking proof of the possibility of effective
political and military co-operation between states with
different social systems.
The Soviet people pay tribute to the resistance move¬
ments which, by becoming such a powerful force, played
a major role in the occupied countries. The deeds and
armed uprisings of resistance groups and the heroism
of fighters in the forces of national liberation are inscribed
for all time in the annals of the struggle against fascism.
Constantine Warvariv
United States
The United Nations arose from the ruins left by the
Second World War as a symbol of mankind's determination
to work in unison in the search for peace. That historic
event deserves to be honoured. The United Nations stands
for the principle that differences should not be resolved
by violence, but that countries should agree to differ peace¬
fully, since the consequences of a new world war are too
catastrophic to contemplate.
Leonard C.J. Martin
United Kingdom
The international community has reached the stage at
which recollections of the war must give way to renewed
efforts for the broadest possible co-operation within the
United Nations. The basic principles of international co¬
operation were worked out in 1945. Thirty years later
it is important that those principles should not separate
victors from vanquished, but should increasingly unite
all nations.

VICTORY 1945
Among the events marking the 30th anniversary of the end
of World War II at Unesco's H.Q. in Paris was an
exhibition of posters from an international competition
which drew 900 entries from 35 countries. The competition
was organized by the International Federation of
Resistance Movements, the Polish Ministry of Culture
and the Union of Polish Plastic Artists. Two first prizes
were awarded. Shown here (top) is "Victory" by Shigeo
Fukuda (Japan) winner of the first prize and (bottom)
a poster by Zbigniew Pieczykolan (Poland) depicting
the Nazi swastika hung from a gallows (third prize).
The poster awarded joint first prize (not shown here)
was by Georgy Kemeny (Hungary).
Madame Sida Marjanovic
Yugoslavia
On 15 May 1945 Yugoslavia regained its freedom. But
to achieve this, it was obliged to sacrifice 1,700,000 lives...
Herbert Blankenhorn
Federal Republic of Germany
The suffering and loss of human life, the destruction of
cities and irreplaceable cultural values caused by a regime
based on megalomania, despotism and violence are still
alive in our minds. The people and the Government of
the Federal Republic of Germany abhor war and loathe the
use of threats and force. They have learnt from the
tragedy of war that they must do everything in their power
to ensure a peaceful world order based on respect for
neighbours, on mutual understanding, tolerance and co¬
operation...
Lasting peace can best be assured through the co¬
operation of nations in joint undertakings directed above
all towards the solution of global problems. Intensive
co-operation is the best means of overcoming conflicts,
which are often the result of ignorance, suspicion and
fear. The United Nations and Unesco offer the basis on
which to practise and to strengthen such co-operation,
thereby bringing about solidarity among nations.
Madame Rita Schober
German Democratic Republic
The German people suffered the loss of six million
dead. Inestimable cultural treasures belonging to man¬
kind's global heritage were utterly destroyed and at the end
of the war most of Europe resembled a vast wilderness
of ruins...
All those who wish to carry out the sacred testament
of the victims of World War II, who wish to respect the
will of those who died and realize the hopes of the living
have a duty to preserve future generations from the scourge
of war, to strengthen and ensure lasting peace, to see
that international détente becomes irreversible, and to
resolve all differences between nations by negotiation, using
the services of international organizations. These ideals are
written into Unesco's Constitution and the same spirit
inspires Unesco's participation in the commemoration of
the 30th anniversary of the end of World War II.
Kankam Twum-Barima
Ghana
Even pow while we talk and plan for peace in the
world, a clandestine traffic in arms is still going on to
areas where they are likely to cause conflagration. All
countries which manufacture, sell or buy weapons are
equally guilty.
Nicolai Todorov
Bulgaria
Unhappily, war still threatens various areas of our
planet. Great efforts are needed to ensure that war ceases ^
to be regarded as a means of settling differences. r

N'Sougan Agblemagnon
Togo
The peoples of the Third World who have only recently
regained their freedom, or who are still engaged in winning
it, feel anxiety for themselves and for mankind as a whole.
Given the present state of the world and the difficulties to
be overcome in order to improve existing economic and
social structures and to promote a dialogue between
peoples of different cultures, the struggle for universal
peace and fraternity must be waged still more vigorously,
in the spirit of Unesco, on the new battlefields of education,
science and culture.
The Second World War cost the
Soviet Union 20 million lives. In
this pathetic scene repeated
innumerable times during the Nazi
occupation women search for
husband, father or son among
the bodies of men executed
during reprisals against
the civilian population.
Gopalaswami Parthasarathi
India
This is an occasion for us to reflect deeply on the
consequences and lessons of the Second World War
which nearly brought about total disaster for mankind.
It is a moment for humility and introspection and dedication
and for recalling the opening paragraph of Unesco's
Constitution: "the great and terrible war which has now
ended was a war made possible by the denial of the
democratic principles of the dignity, equality and mutual
respect of men..." The victory that was achieved at the
cost of enormous sacrifices was a triumph over fascism,
militarism and the forces of reaction.
Eliezer Yapou
Israel
Acting Permanent Delegate to Unesco
The Jewish survivors of the holocaust have dedicated
themselves wholeheartedly to the great ideals of mankind
and to their ideal of peace, progress, equality and liberty
on the basis of emancipation and independence. Today,
exactly as 30 years ago, the entire Jewish people express
the hope that racial and other forms of discrimination will
be eliminated forever. For it was these discriminations
which brought about the horrors of World War II.
Madame Magda Joboru
Hungary
Chairman of Unesco's General Conference
As a result of the new international balance of power
which was born in the wake of the victory over fascism,
fundamental changes have taken place in the entire system
of international relations. Due to developments, especially
those of recent years, the policy of international détente,
the practice of peaceful co-existence and mutually advan¬
tageous co-operation among states with different social
systems have become a dominant trend. All these together
make it possible to express the conclusion that now,
30 years after the victory won in the Second World War,
the very principles which moved the anti-fascist coalition
all through the war and later prevailed over the conferences
In Yalta and Potsdam, are being realized one after the
other on a higher level and in accordance with the new
conditions. A new collaboration of states with different
social systems is now in formation, for the purpose of
averting a common danger, a new holocaust, and for
realizing a common goal the creation of a new world
without wars and armaments.
In the name of Nazi racism and
anti-Semitism, 5.900,000 Jewish
men, women and children were
murdered, including 4 million
exterminated in concentration
camps, between 1939 and 1945.
Below, a round-up in Warsaw,
where 400,000 Jewish people
were slaughtered during the war.
Below right, the memorial to
French victims of deportation,
on the Ile de la Cité in Paris,
erected in 1962. During the
Second World War 238,000 French
citizens were deported, more than
half of them on racial grounds.
8


¿if*
3
STALINGRAD (U.S.S.R.) 1943
COVENTRY (United Kingdom) 1940 IN THE WAK
ROTTERDAM (Netherlands) 1940
10

WARSAW (Poland) 1944
OF WAR
DRESDEN (Germany) 1945 CAEN (France) 1944
11
