A Statement on Israel by Amadou Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
R
eports carried by press, radio
and television on recent deci¬
sions by the eighteenth ses¬
sion of the General Conference
of Unesco concerning Israel have frequently been lacking
in accuracy and even objectivity.
Two resolutions adopted by the General Conference
chiefly concern Israel: the first refers to the composition
of regional groups set up within the Organization; the second
refers to the protection and preservation of the cultural
heritage in Jerusalem.
Because the resolution defining regions with a view
to carrying out activities of a regional character has been
interpreted incompletely or incorrectly, it- has been main¬
tained that Israel has been excluded from Unesco or denied
the possibility of participating in Its activities.
Israel has neither been ousted from Unesco nor from any
regional group within the Organization. Israel continues
to be a member of Unesco, as one of the 135 Member States,
which make up the Organization.
Israel also continues to be listed, for elections to the Exec¬
utive Board, in Group I (Western Europe) onthesamefooting
as Australia, Canada, the United States of America and New
Zealand, which are situated geographically outside of
Europe.
During the eighteenth session of the General Conference,
Israel, like Canada and the United States of America, intro¬
duced a draft resolution with a view to being included
"in the list of countries entitled to participate in the Euro¬
pean regional activities in which the representative character
of States is an important factor." While the resolutions
referring to Canada and the United States were adopted,
the one tabled by Israel was rejected by the General Con¬
ference, that is, by the duly accredited representatives of
the governments of the Member States of Unesco.
Thus, Israel is in exactly the same situation it was in prior
to the eighteenth session of the General Conference. It
therefore cannot be argued that It has been ousted from
anything at all ; the only new fact is that Israel is now the
only Member State not to be included in one of the regions
"with a view to the execution of regional activities", since
Australia and New Zealand, at the proposal chiefly of five
Asian countries, have been listed in the Asia and Oceania
group, while Canada and the United States (at their request)
have been listed in the Western European group.
Canada and the United States, I should recall, had requested
unsuccessfullyat the seventeenth session of the General
Conference in.1972 to participate in the Second Conference
of -Ministers of Education of European Member. States.
At that time nobody, either in Canada, or the United States,
much less' in Europe, accused Unesco of having excluded
them from any regional group whatsoever. Thus, these
countries have, like Israel, taken part in the conference held
at Bucharest in December 1973 as observers.. This possibility'
is open at all times to Israel should a ministerial conference'
again be convened in Europe. In the same way, Israel can
participate as an observer, as it has, done In the past, at
any regional conference of ministers no matter where it is
held.
The second resolution "invites the Director-General
to withhold assistance from Israel in the fields of education,
science and culture until such time as it scrupulously respects
the resolutions and decisions" of the Executive Board and
the General Conference.
This resolution Is based essentially on resolutions 2253
of.4 July 1967 and 2254 of 14 July 1967 of the United Nations
General Assembly and resolutions 267 of 3 July 1969 and
298 of 25 September 1971 of the United Nations Security
Council on the status of Jerusalem, as well as on the decisions
of the Unesco General Conference at its fifteenth and seven¬
teenth sessions and of the Unesco Executive Board at
its 82nd, 83rd, 88th, 89th and 90th sessions. When it adopted
a new resolution, the General Conference considered that
the Israeli Government had not heeded the urgent appeals
made to it since 1968 calling on it to "desist from any archaeo¬
logical excavations in the city of Jerusalem and from any
modifications of its features or its cultural and historical
character, particularly with regard to Christian- and Islamic
religious sites." Noting that the excavations and works were
continuing which it considered susceptible of endangering
the Christian and Islamic sites, the. General .Conference
decided six years after Issuing its first notification, to
condemn the attitude of Israel, which It considered "contra¬
dictory to the aims of the Organization as stated in its
Constitution..."
I wish to stress that in reaffirming all the prior resolutions
concerning Jerusalem the General Conference again explicitly
invited the Director-General to " continue his efforts to
establish the effective presence of Unesco in the city of
Jerusalem."
Such are the facts. I hope they will permit the general
public to form a fairer and more accurate opinion of the
resolutions adopted by the General Conference at its eigh¬
teenth session. Similar decisions have been taken in the
past without giving rise to the reactions of these last few
weeks.
There has been reference to the "politization of Unesco",
as if the agencies of the United Nations system had not in
fact been born of a political determination to found a just
and durable peace by contributing to the general progress
of humanity and to strengthening understanding and co¬
operation among all peoples. Unesco is composed of almost
the same Member States as the United Nations. The delegates
to its General Conference are government representatives.
It is therefore natural that the problems which perturb the
world today should find an echo there.
For my own part, as I had occasion to say at the close of
the eighteenth session of the General Conference, I think
that, in an Organization devoted to education, science and
culture, we must avoid those conflicts which take on the
character of systematic confrontations.' We should perhaps
also avoid the adoption of resolutions, even with large
majorities, that could result in deep bitterness in certain
quarters. The golden rule for an organization such as Unesco
should always be the search fora consensus through patient
and, open dialogue.
That is why, as the newly elected Director-General, who
had not taken part in the discussions which went on long
before my election, I indicated to the General Conference
my firm intention If so authorized to speak out henceforth
and whenever it Is necessary, in order to try to reconcile
different points of view so as to reach the widest- possible
agreement.
I therefore regret that on the basis of information which
is to say the least incomplete and often distorted,- certain
eminent persons have thought fit to adopt such uncompro¬
mising attitudes, although thinkers and scholars might be
expected to be more. Inclined to. discussion and dialogue.
I think it is appropriate to recall that for nearly 30 years
Unesco has been engaged in a vast undertaking, in its fields
of competence, with the help of men and women of all ori¬
gins and all creeds for. the good of the international com¬
munity, and that today in the Unesco Secretariat itself men
and women from more than 100 Member States including
Israel are joined in a common effort.
I am firmly convinced that it should always be possible
for Unesco if only interested States agree to workalong with
it to overcome the tensions which hinder International
co-operation and understanding In its fields of competence.
But this presupposes that the norms and rules established
by the Organization should not be considered a dead letter
each time they conflict with specific interests.
