The situation of women
in 12 socialist countries
An international seminar held in Moscow on the eve of International Wo¬
men's Year brought together representatives of women's organizations from
12 socialist countries. The discussions focussed on women's participation
in productive work. The article published below is based on the conclusions
of the seminar.
THE degree of women's eman¬
cipation is a criterion of general
emancipation", wrote the great French
Utopian Charles Fourier (1772-1837).
But long before Fourier phrased this
fundamental principle, others had af¬
firmed that women should have equal
rights with men in every sphere of
human activity, since discrimination
against women retards human pro¬
gress.
i
This is even more true today when
one-third of all the material wealth
essential for human existence is pro¬
duced by women.
Although women's rights are written
into the constitutions of the majority
of countries or stipulated by law, inter¬
national experience shows that the
proclamation of equality does not
necessarily mean its implementation.
Only an active participation of women
in productive work can ensure their
full and genuine equality with men.
This viewpoint was reaffirmed by
representatives of women's organi¬
zations from twelve countries (1) who
took part in a seminar on the parti¬
cipation of women in productive work,
held in Moscow on the eve of Inter¬
national Women's Year.
Speakers at the seminar described
how governments in their respective
countries are working to create condi¬
tions which enable women to take
regular jobs outside the home while
still being able to care for their chil¬
dren and do housework.
This probably explains why nearly
half of all industrial and office workers
in these countries are women : 45 per
cent in Bulgaria and Romania, 46 per
cent in Poland, 48.5 per cent in
Czechoslovakia, 50 per cent in the
Korean People's Democratic Republic
and 51 per cent in the U.S.S.R.
The number of women workers is
increasing in all parts of the world,
but in the twelve socialist countries the
proportion of women holding paid jobs
is particularly high while the number
of women contributing to economic
growth and engaged in studies is espe¬
cially impressive: 84.5 per cent in
the German Democratic Republic,
85.6 per cent in Czechoslovakia and
92.5 per cent in the U.S.S.R.
These figures show that for women
work is not only an economic neces¬
sity it is increasingly becoming a
(1) Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Demo¬
cratic Republic of Vietnam, German Demo¬
cratic Republic, Hungary, Korean People's
Democratic Republic, Mongolia, Poland, Ro¬
mania, U.S.S.R. and Yugoslavia.
Right, invitation to the dance in
Prague (Czechoslovakia). Left, fun
at the fair for a mother and her
children in a Romanian village.
62

moral requirement (to be useful to
society). A recent sociological survey
in the U.S.S.R. revealed that 30 per
cent of the women polled gave this
as their primary reason for working
and about 67 per cent had both eco¬
nomic and moral motivations.
This difference of opinion as regards
motivation is explained by the diver¬
sity, in terms of education, profes¬
sional training, jobs and also family
status, of working women. And this
in turn accounts for other problems,
of which perhaps the most serious is
the extent to which women lag behind
men in professional skills.
Women's social role as workers
and mothers indeed reveals a certain
contradiction.
Professional training and skills are
usually acquired between the ages
of 20 and 30. But it is generally
between these ages that women bear
children and raise families and so
have to leave work, which means that
they also begin to lose their pro¬
fessional skills.
So in this context it is especially
important to make the right approach
to the professional orientation of
women. Though they are equals,
socially and economically, men and
women have basic psychological dif¬
ferences, which must be considered
when choosing an occupation.
The Moscow seminar stressed that
professional orientation should aim
not merely to provide equal job op¬
portunities for men and women, that
is, their "equal representation" in
every occupation, but should see to
it that women are given jobs for which
qualifications and pay are the same as
those of men.
Some jobs, though well paid, are
hard and unhealthy and cannot be
done by women for physical and phy¬
siological reasons. The code of female
labour and motherhood in the twelve
socialist countries prohibits the em¬
ployment of women for this kind of
job, although this entails no discri¬
mination in remuneration, and wages
are fixed according to the quantity,
quality and value of work done.
In all 12 countries, it was stressed
at the seminar, measures to exclude
the possibility of discrimination start
with access to general education, in
which the principle of equality is
strictly applied. Girls usually make
up 50 per cent or more of the chil¬
dren enrolled in schools.
Out of every thousand Soviet work¬
ing women 717 have higher, second¬
ary or partial secondary education.
The figure for men is 718 so there is
no gap between the sexes in terms
of the average level of education.
In Poland, 48 per cent of women
have had higher, secondary or partial
secondary education, in Bulgaria 51.6
per cent and in Czechoslovakia,
54.2 per cent.
At the turn of the present century
it was not easy for women to enter
the medical profession. Today from
50 to 85 per cent of medical and
nursing staffs in the twelve socialist
countries are women.
In Mongolia, for instance, all women
were illiterate before 1928. Today
women make up 24.5 per cent of the
country's specialists with higher edu¬
cation, 37.6 per cent of all persons
with a secondary education and 50
per cent of those with technical secon¬
dary education.
The gap between "men's" and
"women's" jobs has narrowed sharply. ^
Photo 0 Czechoslovak Life, Prague
63

^ in all socialist countries. In the
U.S.S.R., heavy industry is now staffed
largely by women, while light industry,
traditionally a women's sector, now
ranks just below it. Women today
make up between 65 and 67 per cent
of workers in the machine-engineering
industry and electronics and 77 per
cent of workers on automatic assembly
lines in industrial plants.
Women's work does not interfere
seriously with their being mothers,
thanks to a system of law under which
mothers receive benefits that in some
instances are considerably above
the standards laid down by ILO
conventions.
In Bulgaria, the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary, Czechoslovakia
and the U.S.S.R., periods of mater¬
nity leave range from 3 to 6 months,
and women there are entitled to ad¬
ditional leave In order to care for
their babies.
Thus, in Hungary, in addition to a
20-week maternity leave, a woman is
entitled to additional leave for baby-
care, during which she receives one-
third of her pay for 30 months. In the
Korean People's Democratic Republic
women with more than two children
receive a full day's pay for only six
hours' work.
The participation of women in work¬
ing life, as the Moscow seminar
stressed, promotes their cultural ad¬
vancement, increases their qualifi¬
cations and raises them to a new posi¬
tion in society. More than half a mil¬
lion Soviet women are In charge of
factories or collective farms and wom¬
en occupy 32 per cent of senior posts
as managers and heads of departments
in industrial plants.
Women's professional work is one
criterion of their participation in the
political life of their countries. In
Czechoslovakia, for instance, 24 per
cent of government officials are wom¬
en, in the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam about 30 per cent and in the
U.S.S.R. 31.3 per cent.
Of course it is not statistics alone
which count, although they help to
give a general idea of women's status
in the socialist countries, where their
equality with men, as seminarspeakers
pointed out, enables them to play a
truly active part in society.
But figures do reveal, the particular
nature of social and economic devel¬
opment in these countries, each of
which is distinguished by its own ap¬
proach to the problem of women's
employment.
Speakers at the Moscow seminar
expressed the hope that International
Women's Year will mark the beginning
of concerted efforts to achieve equal¬
ity for women in all countries, to
ensure their participation in economic,
social and cultural development and
to enhance their role in promoting
world peace.
64
