Just carried out by Unesco National
Commissions in Argentina, Ivory Coast,
Lebanon, Sierra Leone and Sri Lanka
for Unesco and ILO
A UNESCO INQUIRY
ON WOMEN'S STATUS
IN FIVE COUNTRIES
Aj o i n t Unesco - International
Labour Organization inquiry
into the status of women in five coun¬
tries Argentina, the Ivory Coast, Leb¬
anon, Sierra Leone and Sri Lanka
was completed on the eve of Interna¬
tional Women's Year.
Carried out during 1974 by the
Unesco National Commissions, of the
five countries, the studies focussed on
the opportunities open to women in
education, training and employment.
They revealed that in all these
countries, which differ widely geo¬
graphically and culturally, women still
do not enjoy in practice the equal status
with men to which the law entitles
them. They have not yet achieved
equality in education (fewer women
than men are studying in schools and
universities); in earnings (most of them
have poorly paid jobs); or in job
opportunities and responsibility (few
women occupy top posts) (1).
(1) See also a new Unesco study entitled
"Women, Education, Equality: a decade of
experiment" describing three projects to
promote equal educational opportunities for
women in Upper Volta, Nepal and Chile.
(See inside back cover).
by Antony Brock LEBANON
ANTONY BROCK, British writer and journalist
specializing in educational questions, is English
language editor In Unesco's Press Division.
Take the case of the
Lebanon, which stands
at the crossroads of East and West.
The Lebanese woman is equal before
the law and enjoys the same rights
and duties under the Constitution as
men.
But although women are full citizens
with the right to vote at 21, not one
woman representative was in parlia¬
ment at the time of the inquiry.
Legally speaking, as a minor a woman
is subject to her father who may
betrothe her to a man of his choice
once she is nine years old, as long
as she consents and the marriage does
not take place before she reaches
puberty.
At 18 she may marry without parental
consent but once she is married the
Family Code requires her to obey her
husband in everything "which is not
forbidden by law". This means that
she needs his authorization to choose
a profession or carry on a trade and
she has no right to any allowance
from the husband if she continues
working without his consent, although
she may be obliged to pay an
allowance to her husband from her
income if it is he who is in need.
A poll carried out with a small
sample of Lebanese men and women
showed that it was age and tradition
which most influenced the attitude of
men towards women being educated
and taking jobs, with the 50-65 year-
old group showing the most opposition.
The attitude of Lebanese women,
however, varied according to the
degree of education they themselves
had received; those with only primary
and secondary education gave priority
to the roles of wife and mother and
thought that for this reason a girl's
education should differ from a boy's;
those with university education saw
no reason for making a difference and
believed that women ought to be able
to take the same posts as men, urging
the establishment of child-care centres
to help working mothers.
Despite some recent break-throughs
into traditional "men's jobs" (in the
police, serving in restaurants, working
in precision engineering factories), the
major obstacle to women's progress
in the Lebanon is still the idea of
"men's work" and "women's work",
women's work being generally associ¬
ated with housekeeping, minimum ^
39

qualifications and minimum wages.
State-run training institutions make
no distinction between boys and girls
but provide residential accommodation
only for boys. So few girls go to
these centres.
A poll of girl students showed that
teaching was the first choice of
profession (31 per cent) with medicine
and nursing second although some
way behind, with 12 per cent. This
order of priorities showed the same
basic idea of what constitutes
"women's work", as in other countries.
SRI LANKA
In Sri Lanka, for
example, women make
up the largest proportion of unqualified
teachers and the vast majority of the
nursing profession both traditionally
women's jobs. However, women
doctors, forming only 5 per cent of the
medical profession some ten years
ago, now total 33 per cent, as women
move into the decision-taking area of
medicine.
This progress of women into the
ranks of the professionally qualified
not in itself surprising in Sri Lanka,
where a woman became Prime Minister
back in 1960 is in line with a trend
for girls to receive more education:
more of them are enrolled than boys
in secondary schools, while the number
of women entering university has risen
sharply during the last decade to the
point where they outnumber boys on
one campus.
The Sri Lanka study shows that
women make up a quarter of the
labour force and those who work are
protected by a number of legal pro¬
visions governing employment. Equal
pay is the rule in State jobs which,
like those in a number of the better
private firms, provide for maternity
leave with pay.
But this does not mean that women
in Sri Lanka can count their battle won.
Despite their equal access to edu¬
cation, less than a third of the women
in the working age group are employ¬
ed. Half of those who work are in
farming an occupation where skills
and pay are low.
In Sri Lanka women are regarded
as the weaker sex, who need pro¬
tection and whose primary function is
that of homemaker. Many employers
share this view, the study shows, and
regard employment outside the home
as a secondary need to supplement
family resources. And since the
country has a high level of unemploy¬
ment they tend to give preference to
men for employment and promotion.
As the report notes: "The instability
characteristic of women's employment
in some areas was considered a
good reason by some employers for
not providing training facilities" thus
extending the vicious circle whereby
women are regarded as not useful
because they are untrained and are
left untrained because they are not
useful.
But the employer's attitude is
matched by an ambivalent attitude of
women themselves. Although a job
is now regarded as a long-term pro¬
position if not always a vocation, some
unmarried women workers "still regard
employment as a temporary expedient
to spend their time profitably between
school and marriage" and so fail to
take advantage of training if offered.
Sri Lankan girls are also dis¬
advantaged in a vocational education
system which fails to meet the needs
of a large-enough proportion of school
leavers and puts them even farther
behind in the competition for jobs,
while the schools tend to reserve
woodwork and metalwork classes for
boys and home science and needle¬
work for girls, "thereby creating an
artificial division between the sexes."
SIERRA LEONE Although Sierra
Leone, in Africa,
has a different economy, tradition,
history and culture, the conclusions
of its study show some striking
similarities with those from Lebanon,
Sri Lanka and the other countries
co-operating in the investigation.
In Sierra Leone women have the
same constitutional rights as men and
the law bars any discrimination in
education. While successful pro¬
fessional women are no rarity and
while for the educated woman the
opportunity of developing her capa¬
bilities to the full exists, real equality
has still not been assured.
Women in Sierra Leone may opt for
a Christian or monogamous union when
they marry or may marry under Muslim
or Customary Law, in which case they
may have to share their husband and
conform to a system of seniority in
which the husband decides who Is to
be head wife. With the spread of
education, many women are choosing
monogamous unions whatever their
religion.
Economic independence for women
was not generally approved of in
Sierra Leone. Over 66 per cent of
men and 48 per cent of women inter¬
viewed felt that a wife would then
"want to leave her husband on the
slightest excuse", while a slightly
lower percentage (65 per cent men
and 46.5 per cent women) believed
that the economically independent
wife would not give her husband his
due respect.
UNESCO
AND THE STATUS
OF WOMEN
II/Í1DV PflAQT ^ne otner African
I V Ul\I uUnOl country investi¬
gated, Ivory Coast, shows some
marked differences from what might
appear to be the general rule. To
begin with, a high proportion of the
women doing paid jobs are qualified
(about 43 per cent) even though only
a tiny proportion of wage-earners
(3.8 per cent) are women.
Furthermore, there seems to be no
complaint that women are more prone
to absenteeism than men and com¬
paratively little regard for the division
40

The Unesco National Commissions of
Argentina, the Ivory Coast, Lebanon,
Sierra Leone and Sri Lanka recently
carried out studies into the
opportunities open to women in
education, training and employment
as part of a joint Unesco-International
Labour Organization inquiry. The
investigations, carried out by means
of polls, statistical research and
interviews with teachers, employers,
workers and the general public showed
the extent to which women still
suffer from the effects of
discrimination and inequality.
of labour into men's work and women's
work: male nurses, secretaries and
social workers outnumber women in
these fields.
However, as elsewhere, fewer girls
than boys are in school at all levels,
there is no possibility ' for them to
become apprentices, and educational
institutions reserved for boys out¬
number those for girls by more than
four to one. The introduction of cash
crops has meant that women are less
and less willing to provide free labour
on the land, and the growth of edu
cation has brought with it the idea of
sex equality, leading some girls to
refuse to marry illiterate husbands.
ADPrilTlUA Some of the features
AlfUtnllNA of women's life in
Argentina, fifth country in the study,
also serve as a warning against too-
easy generalizations and particularly
against seeking to equate access to
education with access to work which
is personally or financially rewarding.
Although education is uniform for
both sexes, girls seem to have the
edge over boys. There is general
approval of girls studying seriously
and regularly: fewer girls than boys
fail to enter school, they attend more
regularly and more of them complete
their primary education. Even in
higher education, Where until recently
men outnumbered women by two to
one, the proportion of women is now
rising rapidly.
At this level, if the results of an
investigation at one university are
typical, women tend to qualify more
quickly than men. Moreover women ,.
students are enrolling in science, r
41

L engineering and agricultural courses.
At the University of Buenos Aires,
women have recently been out¬
numbering men in natural sciences,
biochemistry and pharmacy courses.
There is little declared opposition to
women working outside the home but
the Argentinian study notes that
"despite all the favourable declar¬
ations. . .when one comes to medium
or higher level posts men are preferred
to women." This situation may now
be evolving rapidly but one of the
striking features noted is that "pro¬
gress in education is not being
followed by a proportional increase of
integration into paid work."
The national average of women
employed in industry in Argentina is
below 20 per cent and unemployed
women waiting for their first job out¬
number men by nearly two to one in
several big cities.
Three classes of obstacles in the
way of full integration of women into
the productive system are picked out
by the report. They are:
social: family structure continues
to dominate ideas, the woman being
allotted a secondary role and her
work regarded as a complementary
source of family income;
cultural: one aspect of Latin
American "machismo" (see article
page 18) is the scorn of some men
for the affective side of life compared
with the productive side, with women
being regarded as unsuited to pro¬
duction work. Such prejudices also
bar women from executive posts "since
men will not accept decisions taken
by women outside the family circle";
economic: unemployment affects
more women than men, and women
unable to meet the demands of
technological development for higher
professional qualifications are thus
excluded from considerable areas of
employment.
If unemployment problems are solv¬
ed, the study notes, women will be
more favoured in the future. But this
alone will not speed the promotion of
women in employment; to do this "an
aggressive policy of cultural change"
is required not only for women but
also for employers and trades unions
in order that joint action can gradually
wear away the prejudices against
women in productive life.
This applies to all five countries
covered by the Unesco-ILO investi¬
gation. Any real progress in improv¬
ing the status of women will involve
not sb much a change in present
structures as a change in the mentality
which finds these structures tolerable.
Antony Brock

