
Letter to a budding
My young friend,
I address this letter to you and to
your student friends, who sense the
chilly winds of change, and who now
search for a challenge far removed
from the tenets of conventional wisdom.
After all, conventional wisdom has
bred the belief that by.some miracle
by the sheer momentum .of traditional
ideologies and institutions we will all
gently be lifted over the mountains of
global problems.
Personally I think that their solution
requires, among other things, much
more creative thinking about the mo¬
bilization of science for society than
we have seen so far and a systematic
expansion of certain key branches of
science.
The branch I would like to con¬
centrate on here is microbiology,
because it links the life-giving leaves
of molecular biology to the mighty
CARL-GORAN HÉDEN, Swedish bacte¬
riologist, is Chairman of the Department of
Bacteriology and Bioengineering at the
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm (Sweden).
He is at present engaged on research into the
peaceful uses of microbes, microbial energy
and automated microbial technology for
quality control of foods and environmental
monitoring. Chairman of the International
Advisory Committee on the Global Impacts
of Applied Microbiology Programme, he is a
member of the Unesco-ICRO (International
Cell Research Organization) Panel on Mi¬
crobiology.
trunk of technology. Also it offers a
thought-provoking example of how the
destructive potential of certain short¬
sighted applications of science can be
switched over to meet great social
needs.
The U.N. biological weapons dis¬
armament convention is, in fact, the
first example of an international agree¬
ment that not only eliminates an exis¬
ting weapons system but also under¬
lines ways of redeploying it for man's
benefit (1).
Improved environmental management
by biological pest-control, waste re¬
cycling and a better distribution of
energy production units as well as new
"wonder drugs" and cheap foods
produced by fermentation, are just a
few of the opportunities which now
offer themselves.
The most important of these may
be the various microbiological pro¬
cesses that can provide an "inter¬
mediate technology" appropriate for
countries which have little industry but
where large-scale farming can provide
substrates for the growth of useful
microbes.
People disfigured by leishmaniosis,
weakened by malaria and susceptible
to other infectious diseases because
of malnutrition offer a challenge to
(1) Convention on the prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of
bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons
and on their destruction, signed on April 10,
1972 in Washington, Moscow and London.
applied microbiology and to the United
Nations bodies concerned with mo¬
bilizing micro-organisms for various
peaceful purposes.
Nowadays we read so much about
social deprivation and environmental
deterioration that we forget that the
last century has witnessed an un¬
precedented growth in opportunities
and life expectancy.
It is often claimed that increased life
expectancy is largely due to the impact
of antibiotics, chemotherapeutic agents
and vaccines.
However, if we compare the numbers
of children in the U.K. who died from
tuberculosis, diphtheria, scarlatina and
pneumonia in 1940 (before modern
antibiotics and vaccination campaigns)
with the equivalent figures for 1900,
we find an enormous improvement had
already taken place. The ratios bet¬
ween 1900 and 1940 are respectively
537: 24 (tuberculosis), 215: 5 (diph¬
theria), 313: 3 (scarlatina), 2450: 990
(pneumonia). These figures are for
deaths per 100,000 children up to the
age of one.
If we go back as far as 1840, the
effects of social evolution are seen
to be even more striking. A child born
in England at that time had an average
life expectancy of 21 years (if born in
a one-room home) as compared with
40 years in families with four-room
homes.
Though this is worth remembering, it
in no way diminishes the historical
impact microbiology has had on such


microbiologist by Carl-Göran Héden
developments as the global movement
of people and goods and the dissemi¬
nation of ideas. These developments
obviously called for the control of
major epidemic diseases, and efforts
in this direction have been so success¬
ful that, in a few years time, and
providing no wars intervene, a disease
such as smallpox will have been
eradicated.
Because it has taught us to domesti¬
cate the most abundant and diversified
living matter on our planet, 'micro¬
biology is one of our greatest assets
in meeting problems posed by the
population explosion and increase in
life expectancy.
It is only during the last century
that micro-organisms have provided
the means that will make possible the
next major transformation of our
environment. They have, for instance,
shown us how the cell saves energy
and materials by using short lines of
communication and transport, simple
separation systems, multiple control
circuits and extensive process inte¬
gration.
These principles, as well as Nature's
preference for products that are suit¬
able for recycling, will certainly in¬
fluence future industrial practices.
Enzymes the biological catalysts are
used in industry today and before the
end of the century industry will prob¬
ably also have devised types of energy
transport systems similar to those
observed in micro-organisms.
Operating with great efficiency at
low temperatures and pressures, such
approaches offer numerous possibilities
of saving not only energy but also large
quantities of construction metals and,
of course, the various by-products we
now consider as pollutants.
Yet while enzyme engineering opens
up fascinating perspectives it is likely
that fermentation will offer the most
economic means for many types of
synthesis. And here microbial gen¬
eticists can paint the future in glowing
colours, because they have shown that
bacteria can even be taught to produce
substances that are normally made
only by higher organisms, which are
often unpractical and inefficient pro¬
ducers. The synthesis of certain
hormones from micro-organisms, for
example, offers many advantages over
their synthesis from animal organisms.
It is also reasonable to expect that
a genetic transfer of many microbial
capacities to higher organisms will
become possible. Certain human
enzyme deficiencies might be cured
through a transfer by microbes of the
genes responsible for the synthesis
of these enzymes. And if we could
isolate microbes capable of associating
with the roots of crops such as cereals
to produce nitrogen fixation compar¬
able to that accomplished by legumes,
the economic and social gains would
be considerable.
If you decide to become micro¬
biologists you will have plenty of
opportunities to work for the welfare
of mankind. But don't rely on the fact
that Louis Pasteur only got a "fair"
grading in chemistry, when he left
secondary school. True, his indifferent
marks did not prevent him later from
launching the new field of stereo¬
chemistry, but when he eventually laid
the foundation of modern micro¬
biology there was really very little
relevant knowledge to start with.
But nowadays, the student of micro¬
biology has to stand on the shoulders
of countless predecessors if he wants
to set eyes on something new. Since
the most dynamic fields of micro¬
biology lie at the meeting points with
other sciences a microbiologist also
needs to know a lot of mathematics,
biophysics and biochemistry, as well
as the essentials of at least one mother
discipline: medicine, veterinary, agri¬
cultural or food sciences, biology or
engineering.
This means hard work and, in many
parts of the world, sadly inadequate
economic rewards. But a micro¬
biologist can count on the satisfaction
of being able to influence the choice
which today faces mankind as it
approaches a crucial cross-roads. The
great challenge for mankind is no
longer outer space but inner space
which holds the microcosm of invisible
forms of life that surround us through¬
out our lives. To penetrate it, a
microscope is not enough, it also
requires knowledge, because, as
Goethe expressed it: "To see, one
must also know how."
Carl-Göran Héden
