"I'm afraid to go shopping," proclaims one of these spoon-shaped picket-signs brandished
by members of Japan's Union of Women (Shu-Fu-Ren) during a demonstration against
rising prices. The rice spoon is the emblem of this million-strong movement which
has on several occasions forced big Japanese companies to reduce their prices, and which
crusades not only for women's rights but for the protection of the environment,
international understanding and many other causes.
12

Japanese women
raise the rice spoon
of revolt
by Michiko Inukai
WHEN in 1948 a Japanese
woman senator, Mumeo Oku,
chose a flat wooden rice spoon called
a Shamoji as the emblem of her newly
organized Union of Women (Shu-Fu-
Ren), few Japanese were surprised at
her choice. For most people it clearly
indicated what she wanted to achieve.
Ever since then huge picket signs
bearing the Shamoji emblem have
become a familiar sight to the Japa¬
nese public at demonstrations against
political corruption, price-fixing by big
business, or other economic scandals.
Throughout our history of some
2,000 years, the Shamoji has been
inseparably associated with something
of vital importance to all Japanese
rice. Rice not only formed the basic
diet of the people; until the end of the
19th century it was also a substitute
for money, playing a central role in
finance as gold does today. This
explains why in Japan rice-growers
were always esteemed more highly
than merchants or artisans.
Rice was also the finest of all
offerings one could make to the gods
who watched over Mizu-Ho-No-Kuni
MICHIKO INUKAI, Japanese author, has
twice won Japan's "Fu/in-Koron" literary prize.
A member of the Japanese Writers' Association,
she was the first woman to join the Prime
Minister of Japan's "Think Tank" (1965-1970).
(Land of Abundant Rice the ancient
name of Japan). It was the supreme
means of reconciling individuals and
classes: eating rice cooked in the
same pot meant sharing a single
offering, a single prayer, a single
source of life and in this way sym¬
bolized one brotherhood.
The Shamoji was the only utensil
which could be used to handle rice.
It became a symbol of participation
in the nation's economic and political
life, as well as representing the idea
of reconciliation and peace in Japa¬
nese society. And women had a pri¬
vileged role as keepers of the
Shamoji.
By choosing the Shamoji as its em¬
blem, Madame Oku's Union of Women
thus proclaimed that it was aiming to
reaffirm and strengthen the traditional
role of Japanese women in response
to the needs of the modern world.
The traveller who walks out of the
Yosuya Railway Station in Tokyo
cannot fail to notice a greyish six-
storey building on the opposite side
of the station square. From its summit
hangs an enormous sign bearing the
words Shu-Fu-Kaikan (Headquarters of
the Union of Women) in Japanese
characters. Since it was built in 1956
with donations from about one million
women from all over Japan, this modest
building has been a source of conster¬
nation to big business monopolies and
a place where popular causes have
always found a hearing.
In the entrance hall hangs a huge
placard bearing the union's declar¬
ation: "This is the headquarters of the
associated union of all the women
and of various women's organizations
whose aims are: 1) to enable every
woman to develop her talents and
interests to the full; 2) to establish
real and lasting peace and equality
in society through a fair distribution
of goods; 3) to promote better eco¬
nomic and political development In
society through the use of reason,
not power".
All this may seem rather idealistic,
but in fact the. union's activities are
very much down-to-earth. Every day
the headquarters receives telephone
calls and letters from hundreds of the
union's million members, who unfail¬
ingly report any new developments
social, political or economic which
may be against the public interest.
One member may notify head¬
quarters of a sudden rise in the price
of soja sauce' (an indispensable item
in Japanese cooking). Another may
report that a factory manufacturing
dangerous chemicals is to be built
near a kindergarten. Information of
this kind is first of all sorted out at
headquarters and then if the union
considers that it is sufficiently impor¬
tant for action, it forms an emergency
committee to investigate the matter
and fight if necessary.
For these women with their spoons
are fighters to be reckoned with. Once
they set out to get to the bottom of
a question, the investigation com¬
mittees never let up until they have
got a satisfactory answer.
Three years ago, for example, after
a long inquiry and a fierce tussle with
one of Japan's biggest industries, the
union won a 30 per cent price cut in
colour television sets, to universal
applause.
One of the union's strongpoints is
that its members include women
specialists in many different fields,
whose expertise the union can call on
at any time.
The union's big fight in 1975 is being'^
13

f1 waged against a powerful chemical
company whose cosmetics, the union
believes, contain too many dangerous
chemicals, as well as being overpriced.
To the company's horror, the union
has ordered a general boycott of its
products.
The union also has its own labora¬
tory for chemical analysis, again
thanks to permanent collaboration by
its own chemists, doctors and other
scientific experts, where new synthetic
products and foods are tested to find
out whether or not they contravene
current laws or regulations on such
products.
The union has long waged an anti¬
pollution campaign. True Shamoji
holders cannot ignore this modern
enemy of peace and health. Last
year, groups were formed to examine
the "quality of the air" in various areas
of Tokyo. The results of their investi¬
gations were sent to the Ministry of
Health, with a strongly-worded demand
that anti-pollution policy should be
stepped up.
Many Shamoji members have seats
In the Japanese Parliament or in local
assemblies. Some members who are
economists sit on Japan's National
Price Control Committee, and are thus
always available to make a political
issue out of rising prices. Whenever
they think it necessary, the union's
executive members ask for a half-hour
(or even an hour) interview with the
Prime Minister or the Finance Minister
on a nation-wide television network.
To turn down such a request would be
to guarantee a mass demonstration of
women with their spoons.
The Shamoji women may be comba¬
tive, but they do not simply fight for
fighting's sake. They keep themselves
fully Informed on all the economic,
political and social problems of Japan
today, and when they fight it is with
the idea of achieving better solutions
to these problems.
Since 1949 a summer university
session has been organized at union
headquarters to give non-specialist
members a better understanding
of current events through lectures
by leading Japanese educators and
specialists.
The union's interests are not limited
to Japan's domestic problems. It has
an international relations office where
current reports from overseas on such
questions as the status of women,
environment policy, the problems of
world hunger, etc., are assembled. Last
year the international relations section
sent a group of its members to the
People's Republic of China to study
the conditions of women workers.
The union also has its own hotel for
members and visitors, its own monthly
paper, its own adult education centre
and its own nation-wide chain-store
network. In most parts of Japan,
these are called "honest shops",
chosen, supported and sponsored by
the union. These shops, conspicuous
for the huge signs hanging on
their doors reading " Shu-Fu-No-Mise"
(authorized by the Shu-Fu-Ren) sell
a wide variety of reasonably priced,
good-quality products.
The remarkable thing about the Shu-
Fu-Ren is that though it defends the
cause of women, its horizons stretch
beyond feminism: it believes that one
cannot promote the welfare of women
without doing the same for men. This
is a viewpoint long rooted in the tra¬
ditions of Japan.
No discrimination between the sexes
existed in Japan until the end of the
11th century. Previously, women of
the wealthier classes were allowed by
law to possess "their own piece of
land" (usually rice-fields). Each
woman land-owner had to pay taxes.
Married or not, she had to make her
own income tax declaration bearing
her seal and signature.
In Japan, as in other agricultural
countries, women worked long and
hard on the land. Since they did half
the work in the rice-fields and fishing,
they were paid the same wages as men.
Until the 11th century, Japan had a
prosperous, stable society, as Japanese
literature testifies. The earliest Ja¬
panese poem to have survived was
written in the middle of the 4th century
and its author was a woman.
The 8th century saw the compilation
of the anthology of poems known as
Manyoshu (Collection of Ten Thousand
Leaves). Among the works in this
classic anthology, which still holds a
powerful appeal for young Japanese
today, are a long poem by a girl
farmer, a lyric by a poor soldier's wife,
a passionate song by a princess, an
epic by a fisherwoman, a love poem
by an empress.
After these poems, Japanese roman¬
tic literature reached its apogee,
crowned by the immortal figure of Lady
Murasaki (978-1016), whose multi-
volume "Tale of Genji" has appeared
in Unesco's Literature Translation
series. (See "Unesco Courier", June
1957.)
But Japanese society was radically
transformed with the spectacular rise
of the Samurai (the warrior class),
whose struggle for power plunged
Japan into a turmoil which lasted until
the end of the 15th century.
The Samurai wanted to fight and
conquer and this was an affair of men,
not women. Inevitably the position
GOOD-BYE
TO THE
HOMEBODY
IMAGE
The traditional image
of Japanese women as
little homebodies is
fading fast. Modern
Japan has a steadily
rising number of work¬
ing wives and mothers,
although many big em¬
ployers consider mar¬
riage incompatible
with real commitment
to a job. Japan's Labour
Law carefully defines
the status of women
workers, governing
their hours of work
and holidays and pro¬
hibiting their employ¬
ment in dangerous or
harmful jobs. Here
two young Japanese
mothers carry their
babies piggyback as
they wait for a train in
a provincial town.
formerly enjoyed by women began to
deteriorate, and it was not long before
they lost their right to own land and
their equal status in the eyes of the law.
During the dominance of the Sa¬
murai, only one thing counted: the
power of one man over another. The
feudal Samurai lord commanding 1,000
men wanted to lord it over 2,000; a
Samurai with one son wanted two.
And so women of the Samurai class
soon came to be regarded simply as
a means of "providing more men".
Yet in place of what they had lost,
women of the Samurai class gained
a new status as mothers, provided they
were lucky enough to give birth to
sons. Motherhood and all the rights
that came with it gave these women
authority not only over their sons but
over the entire household.
For the lower classes, however,
things were somewhat different.
The harsh demands of daily life
meant that anyone, man or woman,
who worked hard and well was highly
esteemed as a person in his or her
own right. Chronicles of various
Japanese villages reveal that women,
in fact, were often the family bread-
14

winners and thus had an influential
say in local community decisions.
In the 17th century, Japan's long era
of internal strife finally ended and
a rich merchant class began to emerge.
In flourishing centres of commerce
such as Osaka and Sakai, many
remarkable women rose to prominence
in business. In these towns even
today the tradition of giving able
women an opportunity to run busi¬
nesses is still maintained.
It is a myth that Japanese women
only achieved emancipation after World
War II. Long before 1945 they were
active in every field of Japanese life
in social work, teaching, literature,
economics, politics and the law.
The way was opened to them in
1869 by a law setting up Japan's
modern education system. Over
53,000 elementary schools and 256
secondary schools were set up; by
1872 half of the country's school¬
children were girls and Japan's illiter¬
acy rate had dropped to less than
5 per cent.
Although women were not able to
study at state universities until after
World War II, private universities were
opened to them at the beginning of
the 20th century, enabling a large
number of women to train for the
professions.
Japanese women also became active
in the fight for social justice. In 1886
girl textile workers launched Japan's
first strike in support of improved
working conditions. And it was a
group of women workers in northern
Japan who in 1918 organized the first
demonstration against current govern¬
ment price policies.
Between 1900 and 1920 many
Japanese women writers whose works
are now considered as classics were
associated with the movement against
Fascism and militarism. They were
not afraid to risk persecution and
torture at the hands of the police,
believing that "the pen is mightier than
the sword" and that it was their duty
to work for national and international
peace.
The appearance of many women's
magazines is another aspect of
women's literary achievement in 20th-
century Japan. The most outstanding
of these publications was "Fujin-
Koron" (Central Review for Women),
first published in 1915, which became
the standard-bearer of freedom, eman¬
cipation, equality and peace for all.
Its small group of regular women
contributors, led by Madame Raicho
Hiratsuka, a member of the famous
Sei-to-sha (Blue stocking women)
group exerted a remarkable influence
on Japanese thought at that time. One
of these talented writers was a young
woman named Mumeo Oku, the future
founder of Shu-Fu-Ren, the union of
the spoons.
Michiko Inukal
15
