Northeast Brazil
fights hidden hunger
by Nelson Chaves
>.
c
o
E
a
O
THE agonizing problem of hunger
is nothing new. History records
some terrible famines in the past
which virtually wiped out whole
peoples. Nowadays, thanks to rapid
transport and modern communications
media, acute crises of mass starvation
are almost always averted by aid from
more fortunate countries. Neverthe¬
less, hidden hunger continues to be
an endemic plague in many parts of
the world.
Paradoxically this situation has
grown worse despite the advances of
modern science and technology. Its
causes are multiple and varied. Some
are ecological, others social or econ¬
omic especially the population ex¬
plosion with its appalling prospects
and some political.
Endemic hunger and malnutrition are
the twin fruits of poverty. Together
with ignorance, lack of elementary
sanitation, infection and crowded living
conditions, they primarily afflict the
most vulnerable groups of the popu¬
lation: pregnant and nursing women,
babies, pre-school and school-age
children and adolescents.
The scourge of hunger takes what
many regard as a shamefully heavy toll
NELSON CHAVES, of Brazil, is professor of
physiology at the faculty of medicine of the
Federal University of Pernambuco (Brazil) and
scientific adviser to the University's Institute of
Nutrition.
in the Latin American countries, parti¬
cularly those in the tropical zones.
Premature death is widespread in the
less-developed nations, and its dam¬
aging effect on their social and econ¬
omic structure runs deep.
In regions where ecological con¬
ditions are unfavourable, the situation
is getting worse as the gap between
the developed and the developing
world grows wider. As Addeke H.
Boerma, Director-General of FAO, so
aptly put it: "Mankind lives on a single
earth, but in two different worlds."
One nutrition expert, J.M. Bengoa,
claims that at present a million children
in Latin America suffer from serious
malnutrition, and 10 million from less
acute malnutrition. Comparable fig¬
ures for Africa are 3 million and
16 million respectively, and for Asia
6 million and 64 million.
Taking the world as a whole, there
are 10 million children in imminent
danger of death, and even if they were
to be given the attention they need,
a third of them would still die.
Bengoa adds that the condition of the
90 million children suffering from
various forms of less serious mal¬
nutrition could suddenly become worse
as a result of infections.
If the food now available were
distributed equitably, says Bengoa,
not a single child would be under¬
nourished. There is enough food for
everyone in the world but it is not
distributed according to need.
Endemic malnutrition, widespread in
Recife and other parts of Northeast
Brazil, has slowly been brought into
prominence through various studies on
health and nutrition indicators, such as
the mortality rates of new-born babies,
of infants and of children from one to
four years of age, 'the frequency of
premature births, etc.
Anthropometric measurements es¬
pecially the weight-height ratio, cranial
circumference and skin wrinkling re¬
veal chronic undernourishment among
the most vulnerable groups of the
population referred to above. Mal¬
nutrition is an obstacle to the economic
and social development of this
vast area in Brazil covering some
1,548,000 km2 Gust over 18 per cent of
the entire national territory) with
28,675,000 inhabitants, or about 30 per
cent of Brazil's population.
A study made in 1963 by the U.S.
28

Interdepartmental Committee on Nu¬
trition for National Development and
the Nutrition Institute of Brazil's
Federal University of Pernambuco
showed that there was a high degree
of malnutrition, particularly among the
low-income brackets, in the 15 cities
of the Brazilian Northeast selected for
the survey.
It disclosed inferior weight-height
ratios among children, calorie and
protein deficiency, too-early weaning,
premature ageing, vitamin deficiency,
tooth decay and many cases of
infestation by intestinal parasites. The
study also showed that the Northeast
does not produce sufficient food to
meet the needs of the population
adequately. The reason for this
shortage becomes clear when it is
pointed out that sugar and cacao
alone account for some 37 per cent of
the total food calorie production and
that they are the two main export
products.
Adonis Carvalho, a Brazilian special¬
ist, found fatty degeneration of the liver
due to malnutrition in children under
15 years of age, and other specialists
have found anatomical and pathological
signs of calorie and protein deficiencies
in children who have died in Recife,
capital of the State of Pernambuco.
Surveys carried out in seven munici¬
palities in the Mata-Sul area, based on
anthropometric measurements as well
as clinical and biochemical studies,
revealed first-, second-, and third-
degree malnutrition in some 70 per cent
of the children of pre-school age who
were examined. It was also found
that babies were weaned too early, a
practice that is customary in the
industrialized countries and is being
introduced in the developing countries.
At Agua Prêta, in the area where
sugar cane is grown and processed,
children of pre-school age showed a
high rate of malnutrition: 58 per cent
were suffering from first-degree mal¬
nutrition, and 18 per cent from second
and third, giving a total of 76 per cent
who were underfed in that age-group.
In Ribeiräo, another town in the
sugar-producing area, 50 per cent of
the children from 4 to 10 years of age
had calorie, and 49 per cent animal
protein, deficiencies as well as low
weight-height ratios. They were also
found to be suffering from deficiencies
of calcium, vitamins, riboflavin and
niacin; only iron was above the
recommended minimum, owing to the
large consumption of beans which are
a staple food of the local people.
The study, which covered three
different seasons of the year, also
showed that the sugar crop was an i
important factor in this situation as a I
29

\... -"C*r'^ * "»VW
¿a»
m
§^
-
~. ., «§
M ^.
result of unemployment and under¬
employment in the periods between
harvests.
The World Health Organization has
made thirteen surveys related to these
problems in Latin America, including
one in the city of Recife, through the
co-operation of the Institute of Child
Medicine of Pernambuco and the
Department of Paediatrics in the
Federal University of Pernambuco.
The population of Recife that year
(1969) was estimated at just over
1,060,000. Three over-populated sub¬
urbs Beberibe, Encruzilhada and Casa
Amarela totalling 365,680 inhabitants,
or 34 per cent of the city's population,
were selected for the study. Results
showed that 57 per cent of the deaths
of children under the age of five were
due to malnutrition and premature birth.
Undernourishment caused 46.2 per
cent of the deaths in Recife itself, and
premature birth 20.2 per cent, together
accounting for 66.4 per cent of the
deaths of children under five. It was
found that 26.8 per cent of the new¬
born babies were prematurely weaned,
having been breast-fed for only one
month. Recife had one of the highest
rates of infant mortality: deaths be¬
tween the ages of one and four,
deaths from diarrhoea or tuberculosis,
and deaths of new-born babies.
Studies have shown that a child is
born in Pernambuco every three
minutes, and that one child less than
a year old dies every fifteen minutes.
The infant mortality rate in Recife was
173.5 per thousand in 1973 (having
risen from 148 per 1,000 in 1970),
three times as high as in Sweden.
A study of 879 children aged one
to four living in Recife and other
places in Pernambuco State revealed
below-par anthropometric measure¬
ments and extensive third-degree mal¬
nutrition among children less than a
year old, though these diminished after
the age of three, presumably because
of the high mortality rate between
these two ages.
Studying the effects of malnutrition
on the development of the nervous
system, I discovered that in 109 chil¬
dren between the ages of 1 and 4
suffering from serious undernourish¬
ment in Ribeiräo, Gameleira and Agua
Prêta, the average Intelligence Quo¬
tient was 74.6, whereas a properly
nourished control group had an average
of 98.3.
All these fairly recent studies
indicate how precarious life is for the
greater' part of the population living
in the Mata de Pernambuco area and
in Recife, the State capital and one of
the centres of industrial development
in Brazil's Northeast. The city has
four universities, yet it is flagrantly
lacking in hospital and hygiene ser¬
vices, as well as basic sanitation
facilities.
In Recife and other parts of Brazil's
Northeast, over 50 per cent of children
under five die of malnutrition and
related causes which affect them both
in the foetal stage and during their
first years of life. Those who survive,
helped by a process of natural selec¬
tion and a better genetic make-up,
will in some cases possibly never
know any other school but the street.
Others, who come from somewhat less
underprivileged families and live in
less depressing surroundings, will
reach school age with physical' and
mental handicaps and will probably be
repeaters in the first three years of
school.
Unfortunately, although there has
been considerable discussion about
the problems of children from birth to
the age of six, little attention has
been paid to their plight in the
developing regions.
30

EXODUS
FROM HUNGER
Drought, crop failures and
unemployment in northeastern
Brazil, the vast "Nordeste", often
spark off mass migrations of
refugees towards the coast and
its towns. Whole families take
to the roads with a few
belongings (right) in search
of work, usually making for urban
areas where, as a result, slums
and shanty towns spring up like
this one (left) in Recife (capital
of Pernambuco State). The
Brazilian health authorities are
doing all they can to combat
the scourge of malnutrition which
afflicts millions of children
living in these wretched
conditions. The Nutrition
Institute of the Federal
University of Pernambuco, for
example, has set up and equipped
several Education Centres for
Improved Nutrition in various
parts of Pernambuco State.
Below, a floating market well
supplied with vegetables on
a Brazilian river.
1* £
I O-
É"

> There are not enough pre-school
classes in these regions, and factories
have no crèches. Child-care edu¬
cation programmes for mothers are
few and far between, and premature
weaning is the rule, encouraged by the
availability of powdered milk, the
fashion of bottle-feeding and the
advice of some doctors, even though
it has serious nutritional, emotional and
affective consequences.
Recife reflects the current social and
economic situation throughout the
State, particularly in the Mata area
where the economy is based on the
sugar-cane crop grown on large
estates since colonial times and
originally associated with subsistence
farming, fruit-growing and livestock-
and poultry-raising.
When sugar became one of the
country's main export products, large
and small sugar-mills sprang up.
These rudimentary sugar-mills or
engenhos, mostly owned by the rural
aristocracy, provided greater distri¬
bution of income, but they have
gradually disappeared and are now
only crumbling vestiges of the past.
Sugar-cane planting has expanded
and pushed out other crops. This has
led to a monotonous diet of jerked
(dried) beef (called charque, from which
the English word "jerked" is derived),
manioc (cassava) flour, beans, sweet
potatoes and sugar, with very little
milk or dairy products, eggs, poultry,
fish, green vegetables or fruit.
Moreover, waste from the large mills
has polluted the rivers, killing off the
fish and shellfish, thereby depriving
the population of a major source of
animal protein. In addition, the soil
has become acidified and unsuitable
for many types of crop.
The unrestricted felling of trees has
also contributed to the impoverishment
of the soil and to its erosion, and has
reduced the total surface exposed to
photo-synthesis, which in turn has
altered the production cycles of car¬
bon, nitrogen and water.
The sugar-cane industry has devel¬
oped in Sao Paulo, where the land is
most fertile and least irregular in
contour, where industrial and agri¬
cultural technologies are most ad¬
vanced, and in whose vicinity the
largest consumer market in the country
is to be found. This development has
brought an economic crisis to the
sugar industry in the Northeast, forcing
many mills to close down.
The immediate consequences of this
have been unemployment and under¬
employment, and the emergence of a
semi-slave labour force with an
extremely low purchasing power. Mal¬
nutrition has increased, affecting whole
families and striking as usual the most
vulnerable groups, namely mothers and
children.
This economic situation has caused
people from the interior to flock to
Recife and nearby cities, as often
happens in the Sertäo area during
long droughts when masses of human
beings throng to the cities looking for
work.
The industrialization programme
sponsored in the region by the North¬
east Development Authority has not
been able to absorb the growing labour
force. Thus the rural population,
which in its own "habitat" was at least
able to produce something, has become
an idle body of consumers, thereby
creating new problems and compli¬
cating those that already existed.
Uncontrolled settlements around
Recife and other industrialized centres
in the Northeast have greatly raised
the population density, already high
because of the birth rate.
All this goes to prove that mal¬
nutrition in the Mata-Sul area of the
State of Pernambuco and in Recife has
gone hand in hand with the sugar
cycle. The nutritional situation was
actually much better during the colonial
period. For example, in 1801 the
authorities in the Pernambuco area de¬
creed that any sugar-mill owner or
producer of sugar-cane, cotton or other
industrial product had to plant manioc,
beans and maize as well. In 1811,
another decree granted exemption
from military service to anyone
producing food.
The struggle against malnutrition and
hunger calls for drastic reforms. This
means that rational, long-term pro¬
grammes for the most vulnerable
groups should be given top priority,
since the number of needy children in
Latin America and other less-devel¬
oped regions of the world continues
to grow.
Data from surveys carried out at
various places in the Northeast made
it possible to analyze the nutritional
problems of the region. On the basis
of these studies the Nutrition Institute
of the Federal University of Pernam¬
buco set up five Education Centres for
Improved Nutrition (at Ribeirâo, Game-
leira, Agua Prêta, Belem de Maria and
Usina Estreliana), and two others in
Recife.
A number of Brazilian experts have
described the initial results achieved
at one of these centres (Ribeirâo)
where the basic objectives were to
restore poorly-fed children to normal
health through proper diet, and also
to instruct their mothers in the basic
needs of nutrition.
Selected and classified according to
their degree of malnutrition, the chil¬
dren remained at the Centre for four
months, as day boarders, from Tuesday
to Saturday. They were given regular
clinical and anthropometric examin¬
ations and, when necessary, bio¬
chemical blood and urine tests. Tests
were also made for parasitical micro¬
organisms.
The children were put on a carefully
planned diet containing all their nu¬
tritional requirements. After a four
months' stay, they were discharged,
but the Centre continued to provide
them at home with a diet supplement
which satisfied one-third of their nu¬
tritional requirement.
Mothers took an active part in the
programme. They were taught how to
care for their offspring and were given
courses in hygiene, domestic science
and nutrition. This training enabled
them to continue the treatment that
their children had received at the
Centre, and also to give the benefit of
it to others at home.
The programme was run by doctors
and nutrition specialists. Its cost
was very low 25 or 30 times less
than comparable training in hospitals.
These centres were always attached
to a medical unit and took full ad¬
vantage of its services.
All these efforts represented a
concerted attempt to break out of the
vicious circle of malnutrition. The
results were most rewarding. Un¬
fortunately this pilot project, which was
meant to serve as a model for the
entire Northeast, was not continued
and could therefore not be fully
evaluated.
Special mention should also be made
of the work being done by the State
Foundation for the Welfare of Young
Children in Guanabara, particularly
the unit set up in Jacarepaguá.
All in all, there are better prospects
in store for the vulnerable groups in the
Northeast. For instance, the Amaury
de Madeiras Health Foundation, named
after a former Minister of Health, and
the Medical School of Pernambuco, are
working on an interesting programme
of child care for mothers, and this is
to be expanded. The National Food
and Nutrition Institute also intends to
launch a large-scale programme of
education centres for improved nu¬
trition in the near future.
In many parts of the world, vast
masses of the population are suffering
from hunger but do not understand its
causes, as in the case of other
problems such as pollution, violence,
water scarcity, juvenile delinquency.
Hence they neither fear hunger nor
are they sufficiently alive to the
need to co-operate in the search for
solutions to it. Others, greedy for
gain, do nothing practical to alleviate
the situation, lest they forfeit some of
their privileges.
It has been said that "infinite growth
is not possible on a finite planet." To
this we must add: especially if that
planet is being laid waste by the
constant and increasingly predatory
action of man.
Unless there is a radical change in
man's behaviour, it will be impossible
to eradicate hunger and malnutrition
from the earth, to protect the most
vulnerable groups, and to solve or at
least attenuate the serious problems
that are threatening the survival of
mankind.
Nelson Chaves
32
