We spend $300 billion
$3 will save 100 children
caused by vitamin
by René Dumont
AT first sight, the growing cri¬
sis of World Hunger strikes
one as a problem of overwhelming
dimensions. Moreover, estimates of
the global food situation drawn up by
the Secretariat of the United Nations
World Food Conference in Rome, in
November 1974, seemed over-optim¬
istic, as I pointed out in a paper I
circulated at the conference.
The fact is that crop yield and pro¬
duction figures are provided by govern¬
ments, which prefer to publish stat-
RENÉ DU M O NT is internationally known for
his hard-hitting studies on the plight of rural
populations in developing countries and what
he considers the chaos of the world's economic,
social and agricultural situations. An agrono¬
mist, he is professor of agriculture at the National
Institute of Agronomy in Paris. His books have
appeared in many languages. "False Start in
Africa" and "The Hungry Future" have been
published, by Praeger. New York and "Utopia
or Death", by André Deutsch. London (1974).
istics that reflect favourably on their
management. Statisticians have told
me that in some cases governments
gave "upbeat" assessments. The
serious food shortages in the Indian
sub-continent in the autumn of 1974
were not readily "owned up" any more
than those in the Sahel in the winter
of 1972-1973.
The preliminary assessment of the
world food situation made for the
Rome conference (1) did, however,
concede that "there is no sign of any
drop in the percentage of the popu¬
lation estimated as undernourished. . .
It is estimated that in the Far East
alone more than 100,000 children go
blind each year due to vitamin A defi¬
ciency. . . Iron and folate [a vitamin
of the B complex] deficiency anae¬
mias are widely prevalent in developed
and developing countries and are the
cause of ill-health and result in a
decreased ability to lead an active
life. . .
"A comprehensive world review of
endemic goitre revealed that there
were 200 million people suffering from
the disease. . . which is usually accom¬
panied by endemic cretinism. . . Half
(1) Preliminary Assessment of the World
Food Situation ; Present and Future, United
Nations, April 1974.
the children under five in developing
countries are inadequately nourished,
and for many this will inevitably lead
to premature death."
And of those who survive, how many
fail to attain normal brain growth
because of lack of proteins? Those in
the rich countries who oppose birth
control would like to see even unwant¬
ed children born. They forget that
children already alive are deprived of
their minimum needs, because of the
unequal distribution of the world's
produce and "our" overconsumption,
especially of meat.
"We" (the rich countries) gave the
countries of the Sahel the equivalent
of 600,000 tons of cereals and $150
million in 1973. Even so there was
still a shortage of about 400,000 tons
of cereals in the Sahel that year, result¬
ing in thousands of deaths.
In that same year, we fed our farm
animals (cattle, pigs, poultry and the
like) 400 million tons of grain (and
50 million tons of oil cake) a thousand
times as much food as was needed
in the Sahel. Since we dump into our
trash cans at least a tenth of the food
we buy, all we had to do was "throw
away" a little less and we would have
been able to provide what was needed.
The total annual income of the rich
16

Hil]|Ti7T
Clmur
Construction of a crop irrigation dam in
central India. The phoJKppears on oppos¬
ite page inverse
annually on arms
from blindness
deficiency f
countries in 1973 was estimated at
about $3,000 billion. So we gave
"our" poor not the biblical tithe (one-
tenth) but 1/20,000th of our income,
or 1/2,000th of the tithe.
The same year Togo's agricultural
marketing boards gave Togolese
cocoa, coffee and cotton growers
40 per cent of the revenue they had
earned from selling these products
abroad. The Togolese farmer thus
contributed 60 per cent of his gross
receipts to the country's budget: he
gave six times the tithe, or 12,000
times as much as we did.
Yet a number of the most urgent
measures for improving the nutritional
situation require only a modest out¬
lay, even a ridiculously small one in
some cases. In the case of children
suffering from serious protein defi¬
ciency, it would cost $20 a year to
provide a child under five with all the
additional proteins it needs for full
brain development. For 100 million
children it would cost $2 billion.
This seems an enormous sum, until
one realizes that expenditure on
advertising in the United States alone
is $20 billion a year, while world spend¬
ing on arms totals $300 billion (at
least), in other words, sums that are
respectively 10 and 150 times as
much as it would cost to save the
world's children from protein defi¬
ciency.
And then there is the incredible
amount of money spent on luxury
goods, such as our expensive auto¬
mobiles which the "élite" of the Third
World covet, because they want to
imitate us. Such spending is ruining
these countries. Armaments expendi¬
ture in the so-called underdeveloped
countries is rising twice as fast as
their domestic production. And we
rake off profits from these arms sales.
There is a whole range of measures
requiring so little expenditure that it
is hard to understand why they have
not been adopted so far. Take the
case of blindness caused by vitamin
A deficiency. The United Nations
World Food Conference, in its second
report (1) made use of statistics pro¬
vided by WHO to conclude that
"Considering that each child has to
be given two capsules (of vitamin A),
the total annual cost of protecting
100 million one-to-five-year-old chil¬
dren all over the world against the
risk of xerophthalmia [caused by
(1) The World Food Problem: Proposals for
National and International Action, United Na¬
tions, 1974.
Photo © Claude Sauvageot, Paris
vitamin A deficiency] would be around
$3 million."
Three dollars to save a hundred
children! Leaving humanitarian con¬
siderations aside completely, the outlay
would be worthwhile in purely econ¬
omic terms considering what it costs
society to aid the blind when it
actually does do something for them.
Let us look at another problem.
According to the same U.N. report,
"injecting iodized oil gives protection
(from goitre) for periods ranging from
three to five years at a cost of 10 to
20 cents per head per year." As for
protection from iron and folate defi¬
ciencies, which threaten some 300 mil¬
lion people (women between the ages
of 15 and 45 and children from one to
five years old), "the. total annual cost
of the supplements would be around
$44 million." In other words, one
dollar to save more than six persons
from the effects of the worst forms
of anaemia.
The cost of combating intestinal
parasites (worms, amoebae or other
organisms) can also be evaluated: a
world-wide drive against them would
cost less than the campaign which
succeeded in considerably reducing
the incidence of malaria. Measures k
to eradicate the tsetse fly, success- r
17

W fully launched in various parts of
Africa by WHO, FAO and other inter¬
national agencies, could be extended
to much wider areas, covering most of
Central Africa, with beneficial results
for human health and animal husbandry.
We have all these courses of action
open to us, but what is likely to happen
if the present trend continues, es¬
pecially in regard to the population ex¬
plosion? In the Club of Rome's second
report (1) M. Mesarovic and E. Pestel
picked out the most daunting case,
that of South Asia, from the Middle
East to the Philippines, with a popu¬
lation of 1.3 billion in 1973. At the
rate birth-control measures have been
introduced here in recent years, it will
take another half a century at least for
births and deaths to balance out at
zero population growth.
By thenIn the year 2025South
Asia's population, according to this
projection, will have reached 3.8 billion.
Assuming that as much fertilizer as
was used by developed nations in 1960
were to be available to South Asia and
that irrigation were developed and
grain varieties carefully selected,
South Asia would still need, according
to the authors of this report, 500 million
tons of grain a year.
My own estimate was a deficit
of between 300 and 400 million tons
a year. In any case the deficit will
be far more than the richer countries
could give or transport, even assuming
they display a generosity of which
there has been little sign so far.
(We shall soon see what the oil-
producing countries will do.)
And what if this part of Asia does
not receive so massive a volume of
"aid", which is as hypothetical as it is
costly? The authors of the Club of
Rome report say the level of nutritional
deficiencies would be such that as
many as 500 million children up to the
age of 15 years would die of hunger
alone in the next 50 years. The
disasters of recent years in the Sahel,
Ethiopia and Bangladesh would then
be a mere foretaste of far more
terrible and widespread famines to
come (2).
The time has come to ask ourselves
what can be done. Overpopulation
is threatening the very survival of the
human species. United Nations popu¬
lation experts today estimate that world
population will probably rise to be¬
tween 6.5 billion and 7.5 billion by the
year 2000. They "hope" the popu¬
lation will level off between 12 billion
and 14 billion towards the middle of the
next century. I say such projections
are misleading.
Let us take the U.N. experts' "lower
estimate" of 12 billion by 2050 as a
starting point for discussion. This
would imply that South Asia, where
a third of the world's people live today
and where the population is growing
faster than the world average (2.1 per
cent a year) will have more than
4 billion people. Here we are back
to the theory of vast shortages and
extraordinarily high child mortality
rates mentioned earlier. If births are
not curbed more rapidly, then equi¬
librium will be achieved by an
increasingly swift rise in mortality rates.
An academic assumption? No, for
already between 50,000 and 300,000
persons were estimated to have starved
to death between August 1974 and the
end of the year in two Bangladesh
provinces alone, Rangpur and Dinajpur,
following severe floods.
These deaths were only one conse¬
quence of famine. The provinces'
smallest landowners, with "less than
4,000 square metres" of rice-paddy,
had to sell all their plots of land in
order to survive. The richer peasants,
the "kulaks", bought up the land at
give-away prices, queuing overnight
outside land registry offices and buying
tax stamps on the black market so as
not to miss a "good bargain".
This brings us to the great hopes of
vanquishing world hunger which were
raised by the Green Revolution,
especially in the years 1969-1971,
when the cultivation of high-yield rice
and wheat strains was extended (3).
Wheat, on the whole, proved to be
a success in India, where production
doubled in seven to eight years,
especially in the north west (Punjab,
Haryana). But this was partly at the
expense of legumes [beans, soybeans,
etc.] production which fell from
26 kilogrammes a head annually in
1956-1961 to 18.7 kilogrammes in 1971-
1973, which meant a proportionate
decrease in precious proteins.
Rice production has increased much
less than that of wheat, for while most
rice fields continue to be dependent
solely on rain, the new rice strains
require a strictly regular supply of
water. Only the big landowner
groups, with access to official credits,
have succeeded in installing the
necessary irrigation and drainage fa¬
cilities and in procuring fertilizer, pesti¬
cides and so on. Some of them have
made so much money that they have
bought tens of thousands of tractors
and thousands of combine harvesters,
all of which helps to increase rural
unemployment.
Studies by the United Nations
Research Institute for Social Develop¬
ment, in Geneva, have shown that this
"Green Revolution" in very many cases
aggravated social inequalities and
increased underemployment. If all
the poorer peasant farmers are to
benefit from the Green Revolution, they
must be freed from the clutches of the
many parasites battening on them.
Though laws frequently limit land
dues to a quarter of the harvest, many
CONTINUED PAGE 23
(1) Mankind at the Turning Point, Dutton,
Readers Digest Press, U.S.A. ; Hutchinson,
U.K.
(2) See A Computer Warning of Hunger
Tomorrow by Mlhajlo Mesarovic, Eduard Pes¬
tel and Maurice Guernier, In the "Unesco
Courier" (July-August, 1974).
(3) See also article by Norman E. Borlaug.
"Father of the Green Revolution" ("Unesco
Courler", February 1972).

owners ask for and easily obtain,
because of an overabundance of share
croppers, half the harvest in return
for just a bare field. Loans from credit
co-operatives are not readily available
for small farmers, and loan sharks
often charge an annual interest rate
of 75 per cent.
Many civil servants in distributing
out'ets "lose" some of the fertilizer
it is their job to allocate: this fertilizer
turns up on the black market and the
officials get a percentage of the profits.
The trader, who is often a moneylender
and landowner as well, buys up grain
harvests outside the market. He later
sells them at high prices, when sup
plies are scarce, sometimes to the very
farmers who had been forced to sell
their crops to him a few months earlier
to pay off their debts.
Hunger, then, is not just a technical
problem. The high cost of fertilizer
(quantities of which we waste on our
lawns) and fuel is indeed a major ob¬
stacle, but hunger will be vanquished
only when farmers are finally rid of all
those who exploit them; only if they
learn to read and write, become
socially and politically educated, and
are motivated to organize themselves
and defend their interests. So that, in
other words, "they may rely above all
on their own efforts and resources,"
as the Chinese put it.
The struggle against hunger there¬
fore calls for a number of preliminary
economic and social and hence, poli¬
tical changes. So long as power is
left in the hands of village bosses,
there can be no hope of organizing
co-operatives providing real benefits
to all farmers, nor of mobilizing them
to carry out irrigation or other basic
improvements for farming progress.
The wealthy countries can help, of
course, and first of all by ceasing to
exploit the Third World.
René Dumont
