the drama of 6 il

kilometres ofAfrica's Sahel
by Howard Brabyn
"In less than 50 years'
time... the advancing
desert threatens to wipe
three or four countries
of Africa completely
from the map. "
Kurt Waldheim
United Nations
Secretary-General
(addressing the Inter-State Committee
on Drought Control in the Sahel, in
Ouagadougou, Upper Volta, on Febru¬
ary 21. 1974)
HOWARD BRABYN, English writer and
journalist who has specialized in popularizing
scientific and educational questions, is editor
of Unesco's quarterly "Nature and Resources"
(annual subscription 20 F). He was previously
assistant editor of the English edition of the
"Unesco Courier".
LIKE the Tuareg who roam its
northern expanses, the Sahel is
a nomad, a shifting buffer zone bet¬
ween the wastes of the Sahara and the
agricultural regions of the Sudan
whose limits stretch and contract in
accordance with the amount of rain
that falls or fails to fall each year.
"Sahel" (from the Arabic word mean¬
ing "borderland") is therefore essen¬
tially a climatic term for an area vaster
than India, almost 4 million square kilo¬
metres of semi-arid land stretching
across Africa from Mauritania and
Senegal in the west, through Mali,
Upper Volta and Niger, to Chad and
the borders of the Sudan.
In the area extending southwards
from the southern fringes of the
Sahara, nomadic herdsmen exploit the
meagre resources of a belt of land
in which annual average rainfall varies
from 100 to 350 mm. Further south,
in a region where rainfall varies from
350 to 600 mm., herdsmen and agri¬
culturalists co-exist, the peasant farm¬
er exchanging his grain for the nomad's
animal products of meat and hides.
To understand what these rainfall
figures mean it must be borne in mind
that, In the Sahel, rain falls in short,
concentrated spells and that 80 to 90
per cent of this moisture is lost
through evaporation. In the world's
temperate zones rainfall is not all that
much higher (in Paris, for example, It
is only 650 mm.) but it is more evenly
spread out over the year and losses
through evaporation are comparatively
insignificant.
Relatively slight annual variations
in rainfall can transform huge areas
of land. Thus, In 1941-42, when rain¬
fall over a 340,000-square-kilometre
area of Mauritania dropped below
100 mm., the whole area (a third of the
total area of the country) became
inhospitable desert ; ten years later,
with rainfall once again above the
100 mm. mark, nomadic herdsmen
were grazing their livestook on its pas¬
tures. Another swing of the pendu¬
lum and the situation is reversed.
Over the past decade, for example,
the Sahara has crept Inexorably south,
encroaching as much as 150 kilometres
on what was formerly nomad grazing
territory.
Against this shifting background
the peoples of the region have built
up a range of differing but interdepen¬
dent life styles adapted specifically to
both seasonal and cyclical patterns of
moisture deficiency. In other words,
semi-arid conditions are the one cons¬
tant of the Sahel and It is upon this
constant that the entire life style of
the peoples of the Sahel is based.
But if this is so, why has the drought
of recent years entailed such serious
consequences? If the way of life
evolved over centuries in the Sahel
was specifically designed to cope with
semi-arid conditions, why did It fail so
catastrophically to stand up to what
was, admittedly, a period of exception¬
ally severe drought?
The answer Is that a number of tech¬
nical and socio-economic innovations,
introduced from the outside, upset the
precarious equilibrium of the. area.
These innovations were Introduced
with the best of Intentions. What
could be of greater practical help to
the herdsman in a drought-prone region
than the digging of deep wells and the
creation of a chain of watering points
for his cattle? What could be more
logical than to control or eliminate
the periodic and endemic diseases
that regularly decimated his herds?
These innovations did not only affect
the herdsman. To help the peasant
farmer, cash crops such as cotton,
ground-nuts and rice were introduced.
Population grew and more and more
former grazing land was put under
cultivation.
With disease largely eliminated, the
nomad's herds multiplied and more
and more cattle were concentrated on
diminishing areas of grazing land.
Gathering round the newly-created
watering points the enlarged herds
soon degraded the fragile pasture.
Thus, in solving the problems of ani¬
mal health and watering, a new prob¬
lem was created as drought became
more acute, that of hunger. During
the recent five-year drought period,
over a third of the total cattle stock
died of hunger rather than of thirst or
disease.
Would It, then, have been better
not to interfere, to allow disease and
thirst to regulate the size of the
nomad's herds? In countries that
need to make use of every available
resource such a wholly negative policy
would have been unforgivably wasteful.
Indeed, the policies that were adopted
cannot, in themselves, be faulted; what
went wrong was that those who Intro¬
duced them failed to take Into account
the social, economic and ecological
consequences of their successful
implementation.
Traditionally the nomad felt obliged
to maintain the largest possible num¬
ber of cattle in order to guard against
the ravages of disease, drought and
marauding rivals. Watering points
were fewer, but their use was control¬
led by a mixture of force, agreement
and custom. When disease was con¬
trolled and watering problems reduc¬
ed, the nomad continued to maintain .
large herds as an insurance against r
CONTINUED PAGE 7

Photo Alain Noguès © Sygma, Paria
St SL^"
?
.'i* 1 A ^ *» Ai
Photos on this page depict the ordeal of the nomad
peoples of the drought-stricken African Sahel. Above,
women and children scratch in the sand for remnants of
grains and husks left behind after an air drop. Air-borne
food supplies and other aid were not able to provide for
the needs of all the inhabitants of the belt of drought
that stretched 6,000 km across Africa, in 1973 and 1974.
Thousands of Tuareg herdsmen fled the Sahel to escape
famine, some of them crossing the Sahara in an attempt
to reach southern Algeria. Relief programmes were
launched by the Algerian government and the Red Crescent
(the Red Cross of Muslim countries), but exhaustion and
sickness have taken a terrible toll. Below, survivors of
the exodus at Tim Gaouine, Algeria, in 1974.
Photo Raymond Depardon © Gamma, Paris

k disasters which had become much less
of a threat.
Subsequent events have taught us
that If the improvement of watering
arrangements had been coupled with
controlled use of the new watering
points and the reduction of animal
disease had been coupled with pasture
Improvement schemes and better mar¬
keting arrangements to handle the
Increased animal production, the scale
of the recent disaster would have
been greatly reduced.
The destruction of the basic pastoral
forage and fodder resources through
over-exploitation, serious enough be¬
fore the recent drought period, had
catastrophic consequences during
years In which rainfall was significant¬
ly below average. The central prob¬
lem of the Sahel is, therefore, one
of the management of grazing lands
under marginal and fluctuating climatic
conditions in a particular social, eco¬
nomic and cultural context. It is a
problem which cannot be solved by
taking separate action on one, two
or even half a dozen individual diffi¬
culties; what is needecl is an overall
approach to the system as a whole.
This is where Unesco's Man and
the Biosphere (MAB) Programme,
with its Integrated, Interdisciplinary
approach to research aimed at Improv¬
ing man's partnership with and man¬
agement of the environment, has a
vital part to play. One of its main
objectives Is precisely to examine the
impact of changes In human popula¬
tions, settlement patterns and techno¬
logy on the ecosystems In which they
occur.
Research undertaken by MAB is
not limited to the study of grazing
lands and arid and semi-arid zones
such as the Sahel; it covers all the
major ecological systems of the world
Including both tropical and temperate
forests, lakes, marshes, rivers, deltas,
estuaries and coastal zones, mountain
and tundra lands and island eco¬
systems.
However, the problems of the Sahel
have a particular urgency and Unesco
is fortunate enough to have a wealth
of experience and research material at
its disposal thanks to Its earlier Arid
Zone Research Programme. This Pro¬
gramme, which ended in 1962, provid¬
ed the basic knowledge about the
natural resources of Africa, its water
resources, the problem of nomadism
and various aspects of the develop¬
ment of arid zones and the utilization
of land and water on which all current
research Is based. It gave rise to the
publication of the World Soil Map, a
vegetation map covering the whole
of Africa and the preparation of a map
of groundwater resources in Africa
north of the Equator.
Where the MAB research pro¬
gramme differs from what has gone
before is that it brings Man back into
the forefront of scientific research.
At a MAB regional meeting held In
Niamey, Niger, in March 1974, after
listing a number of reasons for the
comparative failure of previous deve¬
lopment schemes for the Sahel, MAB
experts concluded:
"Perhaps most Important, however,
is the fact that insufficient attention and
importance has been given to the
socio-economic and ethno-cultural
context of local populations. These
populations have an Intimate know¬
ledge of the environment and a
wealth of experience which we have
not always fully appreciated or used.
Given the need in any successful dev¬
elopment action for active participa¬
tion of local populations (thus exclu¬
ding the imposition of ill-adapted
exterior models) and given the disor¬
ganization of the pastoral system after
a period of drought, It is recommended
that:
all research and development op¬
erations take into account the social
and economic context of local popu¬
lations;
the experience and knowledge of
local populations on cattle-breeding
and on the local environment be
considered the point of departure for
studies which precede development
projects;
all research and development ac¬
tions be accompanied by educational
action so that local populations recog¬
nize their responsibilities in the use
and exploitation of their environment;
in the context of the recent drought,
a detailed evaluation of the carrying
capacity of the Sahelian zone be un¬
dertaken, as well as an examination of
the behaviour of local populations
during the period prior to the present
situation."
Pilot research projects now being
planned will be concerned primarily
with two typically Sahelian human and
ecological situations.
The first of these concerns the
zones of contact between grazing lands
and cultivated lands. In these contact
zones the main purpose of the pilot
studies will be to help develop land
management guidelines based on
mutually beneficial social and econo¬
mic relationships between nomads and
peasant farmers.
The second area for research con¬
cerns regions where rainfall Is insuf¬
ficient to support agriculture and the
main land use Is, and is likely to
remain, livestock breeding on a
nomadic pattern. The aim of pilot
projects in these areas will be to
assess the carrying capacity of the
land and to provide guidelines for its
management. They will also examine
the possibility and consequences of
a fundamental reorganization of life In
rural areas such as a change from
nomadic to sedentary cattle-raising.
As an example of what could be
done, Gabriel Boudet, a French expert
in grazing land management and a
MAB consultant, has proposed an out¬
line land management scheme which ^
would involve a change from migra-*
'* .a. 1 1* i ,i ii.fci
- ^^^HV*^ I
\
Photos © Claude Sauvageot, Paris
River of life
in a thirsty land
Top photo, a Peul herdsman happily
waters his cow in the mighty Niger
river. But away from the river, water
is scarce and must often be sought
by digging holes in dried-up river beds.
Above, a Niger girl ladles precious
drops into bowls and pitchers.

tory to sedentary cattle-farming (1).
The scheme would be applicable in
areas where conditions were favour¬
able for fodder production and water
supplies were adequate. It assumes,
of course, a careful preliminary study
of the carrying capacity of the area
concerned and would Involve some
7,000 head of cattle representing the
combined herds of 70 families or a total
of about 350 Individuals. The scheme
is presented diagrammatlcally on
opposite page.
The area to be managed would
centre on a deep well which would
provide a source of water during the
dry season. A village to house the
herdsmen's families would be situated
some 500 metres from the well. The
dry season pasture would consist of an
area of some 31,500 hectares forming
a circle of land with a 10 kilometre
radius around the well.
Outside the circumference of this
circle would be a ring of land, some
three kilometres wide, which would
serve as grazing land for the rainy
season. Spaced out at regular inter¬
vals In this area would be a series of
10 "guzzlers", or artificial ponds, cap¬
able of holding sufficient water between
major spells of rain to provide for the
needs of 700 head of cattle (one tenth »
of the total herd) for about 15 days.
Round each "guzzler" would be an
840-hectare grazing area.
In the dry season each herding unit
of 700 cattle would be brought inside
the "dry season circle" but would
remain towards the outer edge of the
circle. Each day the cattle would go
to be watered at the central well, being
driven along narrow well-defined paths
in order to avoid trampling the pasture
land. Later, the herds would move
again to within five kilometres of the
well, thus reducing the distance to be
covered to obtain water during the
period of greatest heat.
Simple as the scheme may sound It
would require enlisting the whole¬
hearted co-operation of the herdsmen
and an educational programme to
explain the need to adopt new habits
and disciplined control of herds.
One of the major preoccupations of
MAB In its research on the problems
of a specific area is to acquire a body
of knowledge and experience that ran
be applied to similar problems arising
elsewhere. In recent years drought
attaining disaster proportions has also
struck Ethiopia and parts of Somalia
and the Sudan. While not strictly a
part of the Sahel, these areas have
very many similarities with it and are
often referred to as forming part of a
wider entity of semi-arid land called
the Sahelian Zone. The knowledge
being acquired by MAB in the Sahel
proper jwill soon, therefore, be aiding
the drought-affected nomads and
peasant-farmers of these regions.
Throughout Unesco's Man and the
(1) In 'The Sahel: Ecological Approaches to
Land Use", to be published by the Unesco
Press, Paris. Price 16 F.
THE SAHEL. Spanning the breadth of Africa, the region known as the Sahel (outlined
in grey on map) is more than 30 times the size of England. The two grey patches at
right of map indicate areas of Ethiopia and Somalia forming part of the Sahelian
zone and also hit by the drought, in 1973 and 1974. Countries named on map are
those directly or indirectly affected by the Sahel catastrophe. Opposite page, a
mother and child lying exhausted on the sand an image of the human misery
inflicted by the worst drought experienced in the Sahel during this century.
Biosphere Programme runs the theme
of man as a social being and his
relationship with his environment.
Nowhere can the importance of this
kind of approach be greater than it
is in an ecosystem as fragile as that
of the Sahel. Every action to be
taken must be weighed and examined
from every angle, scientific, sociologi¬
cal, economic, cultural, etc. The re¬
cent disaster in the Sahel provided a
costly reminder of the dangers of
taking short cuts.
The ecologist, that general practi¬
tioner of science, knows that whatever
he does to the smallest fraction of that
living microcosm he calls an eco¬
system will have its effect on the
whole organism. He must be able,
as William Blake wrote in another
context,
To see a World in a grain of sand
And Heaven in a wild flower,
Hold Infinity in the palm of the hand
And Eternity in an hour. M
SATELLITE'S EYE VIEW >
OF DESERT RANCH
In a study on the Sahel carried out
for Unesco's "Man and the Biosphere"
programme, an American specialist,
Norman MacLeod, stresses the value
of remote-sensing techniques in
drawing up a map of natural resources,
carrying out surface water studies,
and analyzing cropping patterns, etc.
Dark-coloured polygon on photo right,
taken by earth-girdling satellite on
May 8, 1973, is formed by vegetation
contrasting with the surrounding
desert. It marks the boundaries of
the "Toukounouss" ranch, established
in Niger several decades ago. To
maintain this greenery in the midst
of an arid landscape, the ranch owner
divides his land into five grazing
areas, only allowing his cattle to
graze on a single area each year.
This "rotation" gives the grass à
chance to grow in the other four
areas. Wire fence surrounds the ranch.
8

-
Photo David Burnett © Gamma. Paris PASTURE ROTATION. A Unesco study has proposed a scheme of
pasture rotation for the Sahel, involving a change from migratory
to sedentary cattle farming, so as to reduce the dangers of
catastrophic drought (see diagram below). A circle of land
20 km in diameter would centre on a well providing water during
the dry season for some 7,000 head of cattle. Herdsmen's families
would live in a village near the well, on which cattle tracks
would converge. Outside this circle a ring of land (represented
by 10 small circles) would provide grazing during the rainy
season. At the centre of each grazing area is an artificial pond
fed by rainwater.
Artificial pond A Encampment
Well À Encampment
Permanent village -- Cattle track
start of dry season
end of dry season
