WOMEN'S LIB
30 years of progress

by Helvi L. Sipilä
G
-~J INCE the U.N. began in 1945
^^ a great deal has been done to
improve the situation and status of
women in the world. Particularly in
the legal field, much has been and is
being done to accord women equal
rights with men in political, economic,
social and family life. Age-old trad¬
itions, attitudes and practices are
still, however, slow to change and the
gap between law and reality still
remains very wide.
In the political field, for example,
HELVI L. SIPILA, of
Finland, is in addition
to her functions at the
United Nations indicat¬
ed above, Secretary-
General of the United
Nations Conference for
International Women's
Year which will be
held in Mexico City
between June 19 and
July 4, 1975. A lawyer,
Mrs. Sipilä has played
a leading part in the work of Finnish govern¬
ment committees dealing with matrimonial
legislation and the protection of children. She
was President of the International Federation
of Women Lawyers (1954-56), Chairman
of the U.N. Commission on the Status of
Women (1967), and since 1970 she has been
Vice-President of the International Council
of Women.


^. whereas in 1945 women were denied
the right to vote in approximately one
third of the U.N.'s 51 Member States,
today women are legally eligible to
vote in all elections and to stand for
election on equal terms with men in
124 Member Nations. Yet, the per¬
centage of women holding policy¬
making posts in the local, national and
international areas still remains strik¬
ingly small.
In New Zealand, for example, which
was the first nation in the world to
grant women the vote in 1893, 92 per
cent of the candidates and 95 per cent
of those elected in the last elections
(1972) were men. In Egypt, in 1967,
76 per cent of women failed to vote.
The highest percentages of political
participation in national legislatures
are reported in the U.S.S.R. (35 per
cent) and Finland (21.5 per cent).
At the international level, the picture
is equally dismal. In the 28th U.N.
General Assembly (1973), for example,
there were only 180 women compared
to 2,369 men delegates. There were
no women in the delegations of
55 countries and only one woman in
the delegations of 44 countries.
In the economic field, considerable
progress has been made in the past
25 years. In 1945 women's right to
work and to equal conditions of work
(including the thorny question of equal
pay for work of equal value) was hard¬
ly discussed, even in the International
Labour Organization. Today, these
questions are fully accepted as
"rights" to be recognized and im¬
plemented in practice, albeit progress¬
ively and at a very slow pace.
A number of ILO instruments,
especially the 1951 Convention on
Equal Remuneration for Men and
Women Workers for work of equal
value and the 1958 Convention on
discrimination in employment and
occupation have been landmarks in
this process of achieving public
acceptance of these rights.
Nevertheless women, who constitute
about 562 million workers or 34 per
cent of the world's labour force (38 per
cent for the developed, 32 per cent
for developing countries) are mainly
concentrated in a limited number of
jobs, frequently at low levels of skills
and responsibilities with equally low
wages or salaries.
Their work is often not recognized
in practice as being of equal value to
men's work and their pay for the same
job is often lower. And these figures
do not take into account the millions
of women who are toiling from morn¬
ing till night as unpaid subsistence
farm or domestic workers. There are
no statistics to tell us how many
women live in such circumstances, nor
the extent of their economic output
and return.
Statistical data on wage differentials
of men and women in the various
sectors and occupations are very in¬
adequate, but ILO studies suggest that
even in many industrialized countries
rv
1975 «
The stylized dove presented
on these two pages is the
emblem chosen by the United
Nations for International
Women's Year.
The emblem was designed by
Valerie Pettis, a graphic artist
in the studio of Henry Dreyfuss
Associates, New York.
women's wages are about 50 to 80 per
cent of men's for the same work time..
The concentration of women in
lower ranking positions is found even
in the United Nations Secretariat,
where approximately 80 per cent of the
General Service staff, but only 20 per
cent of professional staff, are women.
As regards education, while few
today would deny women's right to be
educated equally with men, women
remain in many countries seriously
disadvantaged at every level primary,
secondary and at the higher level.
Particularly in the developed world,
some progress has been made through
educational measures to eliminate
prejudice and discriminatory attitudes
based on the stereotyping of sex roles.
Changes have included curriculum
reform, greater flexibility in the choice
of subjects for both boys and girls
(both, for example, are now studying
the same amount of mathematics,
sciences and home economics in
some countries) and both are being
educated in sex and family life.
Whatever illiteracy prevails, how¬
ever, the percentage of illiterate
females is always higher than that of
males. In 1960 the illiteracy rates
were 33.5 per cent for men and
44.9 per cent for women. By 1970
these were 28.0 per cent and 40.3 per
cent, respectively. In Africa and the
Arab States which have the highest
rates, the female illiteracy rate drop¬
ped from 88.5 to 83.7 per cent and
from 90.7 to 85.7 per cent, respectively,
in the same decade.
Despite the fact that special efforts
have been made in many countries to
provide adult literacy classes, a much
lower ratio of women than men
continue to enroll. This is due mainly
to such factors as distance from
schools, impracticability of travelling
by night, household chores, early
marriage, outmoded attitudes and
sheer lack of adequate facilities to ser¬
vice the number of illiterate persons.
Access to education of girls and
women in different parts of the world
also depends on the level of general
development of a country. But even
in industrialized countries, where
primary education is compulsory,
differences in curricula, in teaching
methods and in subjects available to
girls and boys continue to exist. One
of the results is the preponderance of
women in the labour force in certain
fields and their small or complete lack
of representation in other fields.
The element of choice may be
theoretically present but to a large
extent the "choice" is induced by sex-
biased education which begins in early
childhood. Clearly differential treat¬
ment exists equally with regard to
vocational training and this leads to
different opportunities in employment
and occupations, different salaries,
wages and occupational hierarchies,
no matter what principles of equality
exist in law.
The trend towards the improvement
of the legal position of women has
accelerated markedly in recent years,
and the principle of equal rights of
men and women has now been rec¬
ognized and written into the basic
laws of many countries. While, in
some instances, formal legal equality
has existed since the early part of this
century (e.g. Nordic and Eastern
European countries), in most cases
major changes have taken place only
since 1945.
In the field of civil law, however, and
especially family law, the principle of
equality has not yet won universal
acceptance although there have been
noticeable trends in that direction in
recent years. Recent or current re¬
forms have done away with legisla¬
tion which was discriminatory against
women and several countries have
enacted laws with the aim of achieving
a more equitable sharing of rights and
responsibilities within the family.

Laws enacted in some countries
(e.g. Brazil, France, the Ivory Coast,
Luxembourg, Monaco) in the past two
decades reveal, for example, discern¬
ible trends toward a more even-
handed partnership of the spouses in
decision-making; towards a more
equitable sharing, based on the earn¬
ing ability of each, of the assets
acquired during marriage at the time
the marriage is dissolved (e.g. Austria,
Canada [various provinces], France,
Monaco); towards the recognition of
the work of the housewife as a contri¬
bution to the assets of the family,
assets which should be shared by the
spouses (or their heirs) at the disso¬
lution of marriage (e.g. Eastern Euro¬
pean countries, and in the United
Kingdom [since 1970]).
Some countries, which had not
previously done so, adopted legisla¬
tion recognizing the inheritance rights
of the surviving spouse (e.g. France),
and equal parental rights and duties,
the interest of the child being the para¬
mount consideration. The latter
included the granting of full status as
a parent to the unmarried mother (e.g.
Austria, Sweden).
The laws of various countries gov¬
erning divorce have been liberalized
to some extent. Divorce is now per¬
mitted in countries where previously
it was not recognized, e.g. Italy (since
1974), Monaco (since 1970). In Afgha¬
nistan (since 1971) the wife now has
the legal right to divorce under certain
conditions, whereas formerly, it was
the exclusive privilege of the husband.
In other countries, divorce has been
made much easier for both spouses
than previously (e.g., Sweden, the
United States of America [State of
New York]).
In many countries, however, the
husband is still recognized in law as
the "head of the family" and plays the
dominant role in the marriage relation¬
ship, the wife being relegated to an
inferior position with little or no legal
say in decisions affecting herself and
other members of the family.
The laws of some of these countries
may stipulate that the wife owes
obedience to her husband (e.g. Ethio¬
pia, Jordan, Mali, Tunisia). She may
need the authorization of her husband
or the court to exercise her legal
capacity to contract, sue and be sued
(e.g. Ecuador, Haiti, Mexico, the Phi¬
lippines, Uruguay). Her property
rights may be limited under the rules
governing the property relations of the
spouses. Her right to work may be
subject to the express or implied
authorization of her husband (e.g.
Burundi, Ecuador [only to engage in
trade or industry], Mali [to engage in
trade]). In other countries, however,
the law requires that the wife owe
obedience to her husband.
Despite the fact that modern legis¬
lative trends increasingly recognize
the importance of women's employ¬
ment outside the home, from the view¬
point of overall economic development
as well as personal or family need.
the role of homemaker is still assigned
primarily to the woman, not only
through tradition and social custom
but also in some instances in law, and
she is expected to perform that role
without financial compensation during
marriage. This may be explicitly for¬
mulated in the law or implied in va¬
rious legal provisions concerning
maintenance of the wife and of the
family's expenses when these are the
main responsibility of the husband.
This problem is of major importance
in considering ways to increase
opportunities for women to participate
in gainful employment and develop¬
ment. Governments and government
planners in some countries have be¬
gun to realize that functions should be
more equitably divided between the
sexes so that both may have practical
opportunities to participate in parent¬
hood and in employment.
It is also being gradually recognized
that policies which attempt to give
women an equal place with men in
economic life, while at the same time
confirming women's traditional re¬
sponsibility for the care of the home
and children, have no prospect of
fulfilling the first of these aims.
There is one field in which equality
does not arise, but in which the needs
and rights of women obviously need
protection, and that is maternity. Be¬
cause of the lack of women's particip¬
ation in the formulation of policies in
the field of health, their special needs
for the protection of maternity are
often not even known to the decision¬
makers. This is, therefore, one of the
most neglected fields of health care
in many countries. Although the avail¬
ability of health services largely
depends on the resources and per¬
sonnel available, much could be
achieved by inexpensive training in
health, nutrition and home economics
as preventive health services.
In all our efforts to improve the
quality of life of all human beings, too
little attention is paid to the needs of
millions of children and mothers,
especially in the developing areas,
rural as well as urban. How can we
improve the quality of life of a human
being born to an illiterate, economical¬
ly dependent, malnourished, and over¬
burdened woman, whose health may
leave much to be desired and who
gives birth to one child per year?
International Women's Year 1975
gives all of us a unique opportunity
to focus attention on eliminating these
still pervasive discriminations against
women, thereby enabling women to
more fully participate and contribute
to the economic, social and political
life of our planet.
The significance of the Year will be
what we make of it. It could be a
truly historic year a landmark not
only in the history of women's ad¬
vancement but also in the advance¬
ment of humanity as a whole. Let us
all work to make it so.
Helvi L. Sipilä
