A YOUNG NATION
BUILDS A UNIQUE
OPEN-AIR MUSEUM
The wealth of Niger's traditions
crafts and wildlife in an unusual setting
Photo © Alberto Silva, Paris
32

The National Museum of Niger, at Niamey,
has achieved a remarkable feat. It has
recreated, in the heart of a' city on a
24-hectare site, the immense country of
Niger (1,200,000 km' in area) in all its
aspects: ethnic, cultural, artistic, zoolo¬
gical, botanical, etc. This highly original
museum, held up as a model for other
newly independent countries, enables over
200,000 visitors each year to discover
Niger's national roots and to learn about
the country's diversity through contact
with its rich cultural heritage and facets
of contemporary life. Below left, a
weaver at his loom in the great open-air
museum stretching around the exhibition
buildings. Visitors can watch him as he
works with other craftsmen from all parts
of the country. Below right, decorated
with an incised design, the entrance to a
typical village mud hut of the Hausa
people of southern Niger. Right, the
entrance of the National Museum.
TTTl i T TTTll
> x t\. .
by Pablo Toucet
THE young African nations,
whose historical, ethnic and
geographical "fabric" is sometimes far
from homogeneous, for reasons with
which everyone is familiar, feel a
need a strong need to express their
personality and affirm their unity.
Firstly because it is only In the last
few decades that these nations have
emerged on to the international stage.
Secondly because their governments
are well aware that the long and
arduous task which faces them, and to
which they must give the highest
priority, is to melt and unite in the
crucible of a collective consciousness
the ethnic and historic mosaic formed
by their different peoples.
In laying the foundations on which
the new state of Niger has been built,
the government has been employing
every means it could devise, including,
surprisingly enough, the creation of a
national museum.
Four separate yet closely connected
operations are simultaneously being
carried on by the National Museum of
Niger: an ethnological museum; a zoo
and public pleasure gardens; a centre
for the development of traditional
craftsmanship; and an educational and
social work, project.
PABLO TOUCET, Spanish archaeologist and
museologist, was responsible for planning and
building the National Museum of Niger, Niamey,
of which he has been curator since 1958.
He was previously in charge of Punico-Roman
excavations at Uvea, Tunisia. Using a new
method he had developed for handling ancient
mosaics, he succeeded in removing and recons¬
tructing the famous baptistry of Kelibia, a
masterwork now in the Bardo Museum in Tunis.
These four operations, . carefully
planned to interlink, have given the
Museum an original appearance and
made it a dynamic ensemble of
activities.
The buildings of the National Mu¬
seum stand in the very heart of
Niamey, capital of the Republic of the
Niger, on a beautiful site whose
southern section overlooks the broad
and peaceful waters of the river Niger.
The great park had been badly
neglected and eventually became the
city refuse dump because of Its
proximity to what was then Niamey's
only market. Since June 1958 it has
been gradually transformed into a
series of delightful gardens where
today the people of Niamey and
tourists stroll In ever Increasing num¬
bers. In these surroundings stand the
various Museum buildings, whose
diversity is one of their chief attrac¬
tions.
A museum is a means of extending
and completing the basic teaching
given in schools. However, In our
case we were aiming to attract the
interest of both educated people and
those who are illiterate. Thus we
were constantly searching for a highly
elusive compromise: a museum that
would appeal to the first of these
groups without boring the second.
A visit to the ethnological museum
is an opportunity for people to return
to their past, creating in many cases
a new self-awareness.
In Niamey there are many adults
with time on their hands and children
with no opportunity to attend school.
By attracting their interest, the Mu¬
seum is making a real and practical
contribution to the education of
children and adults.
Since its foundation, the National
Museum of Niger has carefully
arranged, a collection of many every¬
day objects used by the people of Y
33

W Niger. These objects are an ethnolo¬
gical treasure trove, not because of
their Intrinsic value but on account of
their authenticity.
Within the Museum grounds are
modern buildings whose architecture
is inspired by the traditional construc¬
tions of banco (dried mud), buildings
which show that Niger possesses the
essential features of an architectural
style suited to the country and which
can easily be developed and adapted
to meet the needs of modern life (see
also article page 4).
Different types of dwellings from all
over Niger have also been accurately
reconstructed In the Museum grounds,
so that people can see them without
having to travel great distances.
There is a Sorkawa fishermen's
encampment, just like those found on
the banks of the river Niger during
the fishing season. Huts, ovens for
smoking fish, nets, fish-traps, har¬
poons and a canoe give the im¬
pression that the camp is actually
being used.
Not far away tents with lavish
34
furnishings used by Niger's nomadic
tribes have been pitched. There are
tents of Toubbou tribesmen from the
oasis of Bilma, of Tuaregs from the
Air region and from Azaouack in
northwest Niger, as well as those of
Wogos, Kourteys and Fulanl.
The rural homes of the major Hausa,
Songhai and Djerma tribal groups have
been recreated down to the last detail,
comprising buildings, furnishings and
the utensils used by families in daily
life. These recreations of rural Niger
are of great educational value, offering
foreign visitors a broad panorama of
the country's traditional life and at the
same time giving the people of
western Niger an opportunity to get
to know about the way of life of their
fellow-citizens In the distant eastern
countryside.
Elsewhere masons have built a
house with the famous "Hausa" arches
used in a typical type of dwelling of the
Hausa people. This style of building
is urban rather than rural.
There is also a pavilion of Niger
traditional dress, which considerably
enriches the Museum's ethnological
collection. But the Museum has gone
still further by bringing together
craftsmen from all parts of the
country blacksmiths, weavers, cob¬
blers, carvers, leatherworkers and
potters. This has been done partly to
prevent traditional techniques from
dying out, but above all so that
craftsmen from different tribes, the
Djerma and the Tuareg, the Songhai
and the Hausa, the Beriberi and the
Fulanl, can work together, mingling
their laughter and their songs.
When the Visitor has seen the
different traditional costumes and
homes, he can watch the craftsmen
at work and, If he wishes, take away
one of the objects he has seen being
made. We do not think that any
ethnological museum can do more than
this. '
' In another part of the park visitors
listen to traditional songs, legends
and historic tales from Niger's distant
past, all rendered in the native lan¬
guages. We believe that there is no
better way of preserving a song or
story than teaching it to children,

The regional diversity of the Republic
of the Niger is outstandingly displayed
and explained at the country's national
museum in Niamey. All the different
types of traditional dwellings have
been scrupulously reconstructed in the
open air: nomads' tents, fishermen's
huts, and town and village homes from
the mosaic of regions that form Niger.
Left, a "boua", a millet granary of a
kind found in Songhai villages in
western Niger. This highly functional
construction of "banco" (worked clay
and straw) has an opening a metre
above ground level. The grain is poured
through a vent in the dome, which is
covered with an enormous straw hat
known as a "boua bata", affording
protection against sun or rain. Below,
in the museum's zoo, where virtually
all Niger's animal life is represented, a
hippopotamus accepts a little snack
from admiring visitors.
without any kind of compulsion. These
songs, in which the Niger visitors
sometimes join in, are thus being
saved from the oblivion which threat¬
ened them.
In a report written after a tour of
Africa, South America and Asia, M. de
Varine-Bohan, Director of the Interna¬
tional Council of Museums, described
the Niger as the first country to have
made maximum use of a museum to
further government efforts to promote
national unity.
About 300 boys and girls regularly
attend courses given in the Museum's
education centre. These boys and girls
have been pupils in state primary
schools, but at the end of their
schooling some have not yet found an
opening in the country's economy.
And so they have time on their hands,
they forget what they have been
taught, and become a serious social
problem. The school at the Museum
is not modelled on the state schools.
The primary aim Is to encourage the
children to retain what they have
learned, and so they attend revision
classes in languages and mathematics.
At the same time they are given a
broad training in manual skills which
find a ready use in everyday life.
They learn how to build a complete
house in banco: how to prepare the
foundations, make bricks and build
walls and roofs, and also how to paint
It and Install electric wiring, etc.
Among other things they also learn
market gardening, how to rear chick¬
ens and rabbits, basic mechanics (how
to repair light motor-cycles and bicy¬
cles), and traditional pottery.
The girls also attend revision classes
and learn sewing and cooking. The
cookery taught is based on foods
produced locally,' the aim being to
work out nutritionally well-balanced
menus. They also learn hygiene and
child care.
By the end of their time at the
Centre these boys and girls have
learned many useful skills. They also
come to realize the importance of
manual work, unlike some young
people In cities who tend to despise it.
In October 1971, the National Mu¬
seum, using its own resources, began
to work on behalf of the blind and
physically handicapped. Initially these
persons were housed in a straw hut.
Most of the handicapped were
beggars, and the aim was to make
them capable of earning a living.
This meant providing for all their needs,
including food, clothing, transport, and
training, including special exercises in
order for them to acquire manual skills.
Today over a score of blind and
handicapped persons are housed in a
specially constructed building and are
taught by two young instructors who
have graduated from the craft training
school. Each blind person works with
a spastic person, and this teamwork is
producing good results.
We have made no attempt "to Imitate
the fine museums of Europe and else¬
where. Instead, we have planned and
created a museum in keeping with our
resources. It was originally conceived
for the people of Niger, but we have
since found that Europeans enjoy
visiting it as much as Africans.
Several other African states have
expressed their intention of setting up
similar museums. By launching this
pioneering cultural enterprise, we have
shown our fellow African countries
that it Is possible to create a museum
without spending vast sums on
buildings and running costs.
Pablo Toucet
35
