This head, discovered in Czechoslovakia,
was carved in stone by a Celtic artist
in the 2nd century B.C. Note the highly-
stylized face with prominent eyes and
spiralling eyebrows and moustache.
Celtic art was imaginative rather than
representational. "To the [Classical]
Greeks a spiral was a spiral and a face was
a face", wrote Paul Jacobsthal, an
expert on Celtic art, "whereas the
Celts saw the faces as spirals or tendrils..."




THE CELTS
National Museum, Prague Photo © Erich Lessing, Magnum, Paris
4

builders of the first
European community
THERE are two Celtic periods in
the history of Europe. The first
is that of the ancient Celts, who
flourished in the late Iron Age. These
were the contemporaries of classical
Greece, the Alexandrine kingdoms and
the Roman Empire, which gradually
drove them to the British Isles, where
they retained their pagan beliefs until
about the 5th century A.D.
The second Celtic period is that of
the Christian Celts, their descendants,
who lived in Ireland, Scotland and
Wales. Some of the Christian Celts
returned to Armorica (Romanized
Brittany) from the 5th century onward
and founded a brilliant literary culture
that profoundly influenced the entire
Middle Ages in the West, through
missions led by Irish monks into the
very heart of Europe.
In both cases, these were peoples
of mainland Europe and its offshore
islands, regarded as barbarians by the
Mediterranean peoples who ranked
them with the Iberians of Spain, the
Germanic tribes, the Scythians from
the Steppes, the Dacians of the Car¬
pathian region and the Thracians of
the Balkans.
What made the ancient Celts so
powerful? Firstly, they were highly
skilled in working iron, and had a re¬
markable gift for technical and cultural
assimilation. Secondly, their explosive
population growth and military dyna¬
mism enabled them to swarm out from
the regions between the Rhine and the
Vltava (or Moldau, the Czech river that
flows through Prague) which seem to
have been the cradle of the Celtic
peoples, towards the Atlantic, the
Mediterranean, the Adriatic, the Black
Sea, and even to reach Asia Minor,
where they founded Galatia. And yet,
they had no written language.
The Christian Celts had other
sources of strength. They occupied
large islands that the Romans never
managed to subdue completely; they
committed to writing an oral literary
heritage comparable in stature to the
PAUL-MARIE DUVAL of the Institut de
France is professor of the archaeology and
history of Gaul at the Collège de France. Paris.
Director of Gallia - Fouilles et Monuments
Archéologiques en France Métropolitaine
(Gaul : Excavations and Archaeological Mo¬
numents in Metropolitan France), published
twice yearly by the French National Centre for
Scientific Research, he has directed excavat¬
ions on many sites in France and north¬
western Africa. Author of La Vie Quoti¬
dienne en Gaule (Daily life in Gaul. Hachette,
Paris. 1952) and Paris Antique (Ancient
Paris. Hermann. Paris. 1961) he is an
eminent authority on Greek. Latin and Celtic
written sources for the history of Gaul. He
is currently preparing a work on Celtic art
throughout Europe.
Homeric epics; they developed and
intensified a distinctive civilization in
the areas where they settled, culti¬
vating and preaching an ardent faith
whose ascetic hermits rivalled those of
the "Eastern Deserts"; and they
tenaciously preserved a group of
languages and traditions that are still
alive today.
To the Celts we owe nothing less
than the first great non-Latin literature
in Europe: the Irish and the Welsh
epics (Sagas) in the pagan era, and
the legends of King Arthur and the
Holy Grail and their successors, the
Breton Romances, Tristan, and the lais,
or verse narratives, of Marie de France.
Thus, before the emergence of the
Roman, the Byzantine, the Germanic
and the Slav empires, there already
existed an underlying layer of Celtic
customs and language in Europe,
extending from Ireland to Silesia. Yet,
the ancient Celts never constituted a
nation, nor did they found a State or
an Empire capable of withstanding
conquest by the Romans or by the
Germanic tribes.
They lived in tribes, principalities,
hegemonies and federations based on
the establishment of "clientships" (that
is, winning over and gaining the
allegiance of individuals or groups
belonging to other tribes). Political
unity among the Celts went no further
than that. When they attempted to
settle permanently they spent their
vitality in the conquest of territory and
were weakened when their young men
were drawn from them to fight as
mercenaries by the lure of adventure
and plunder.
In this way a number of Celtic
countries came into being but were
gradually split up and eventually
disappeared. This was the case with
Middle Germany and Bohemia; eastern,
then central and finally western Gaul;
a large part of Spain, where the
"Celtiberian" people was formed;
northern Italy, conquered early on by
the Romans; the Danube region, from
Austria to Yugoslavia, whose Celtic
population dwindled towards the East;
Great Britain and Ireland, where mi¬
grations from continental Europe came
to rest and took root. Finally,
"Gaulish" bands left traces of their
passage in Bulgaria, Greece and Asia
Minor, while Celtic artifacts if not
the Celts themselves travelled as far
as Silesia, southern Poland and the
Ukraine. All this had come to an end
by the dawn of the Christian era,
except in the Atlantic islands.
Greek and Latin authors speak of
the Celts as adversaries. Were not
these the barbarians who had taken
by Paul-Marie Duval
Rome at the beginning of the 4th cen¬
tury B.C., and who sacked the shrine
of Delphi, in Greece, a century later?
They were thus depicted as being all
too easily tempted by the prospect of
booty and the wines of the Medi¬
terranean, proud and courageous, yet
unstable and fickle.
Yet, in reality, Gaul formed a power¬
ful group of tribes that took Caesar
ten years to reduce. Northern Italy
was known as "Cisalpine Gaul" before
becoming Roman, while no Roman
soldier ever set foot in Ireland, nor
were the Romans able to establish
themselves firmly in Scotland. So,
the judgement of the Mediterranean
peoples on their contemporaries, the
ancient Celts, and particularly the
Gauls, needs to be reappraised. Only
linguistic and archaeological evidence
can help us in this task of historical
rehabilitation which has been ad¬
vancing slowly since the last century.
Celtic unity, which can today be
seen to have extended over a vast and
varied expanse of territory, is revealed
in several ways. Firstly, the Celts had
a common language with different
dialects. We know this from Gaulish
inscriptions, from quotations found in
Greek and Latin authors, and from
place-names in all parts of Europe:
London, York, Dublin, Paris, Lyons,
Leyden, Tongres, Bonn, Vienna, Ge¬
neva, Zürich, Bologna, Milan and
Coïmbra are all Celtic names, as are
Singidunum (Belgrade) and Boihae-
mum (Bohemia).
In this way we know hundreds and
even thousands of words, but only
some of them have so far been
explained by comparison with ancient
Irish, Gaelic or Breton, or through
corresponding word forms in the most
closely related dead Indo-European
languages, namely Latin and Germanic.
Fortunately, the linguistic wealth of
medieval Celtic literature is immense.
As literature it also reveals a taste for
the supernatural, a poetry of dreams,
of fairylike enchantment, a quality of
unreality in complete contrast to Medi¬
terranean classicism. These character¬
istics confirm that the Celts have
always shared a common cast of mind.
Today, we can rediscover the ex¬
pression of this mentality in the subtle
and refined art of the ancient Celts,
with their decorated weapons, their
precious ornaments, ceramics, sculp¬
tures, glasswork and coins of original
and singularly "modern" style.
This ancient Celtic art has been
named La Tène after the site where
a hoard of Celtic objects was dis¬
covered on Lake Neuchâtel in Swit- .
zerland. The name La Tène is now

L also applied to the whole of the later
* European Iron Age.
Both graphic and plastic forms of
this art are based chiefly on combi¬
nations of curved lines, plant and
foliage motifs borrowed from Greek
and Italian decorative designs, and the
transformation of these designs into
imaginary figures. These motifs were
subsequently perpetuated in British
and Irish illuminated manuscripts; on
sculpted crosses and steles in Ireland,
and even in some Roman art.
Here again, in this pre-eminently
cultural sphere, we observe the unity
and the continuity of the Celts. The
boldest linear inventions found on
Gaulish coins already reveal a power
of abstraction that. has been a recur¬
rent feature of European art ever since.
The art of La Tène thus resembles
none of the other art forms of
Antiquity. It is extremely refined,
notably in the shapes of its small
objects; it breaks with the symmetry
of classical models, displaying a
freedom of invention which reflects the
Celts' independence of mind and their
constant revolt against conformity.
But it is also rigorous in its combi¬
nations of curves and counter-curves,
often executed with the aid of a pair
of compasses. Abstraction, metamor¬
phosis and the creation of imaginary
beings all played a large part In Celtic
art, as did the magical quality of
objects and decorative motifs.
The originality of the Celts can be
seen also in their religion. They
venerated nature gods: cosmic forces,
rivers, mountains, animals; monsters
such as three-faced deities, the ram-
headed serpent, the stag-horned god,
tiny spirits or demons that one Is
tempted to call elves or goblins;
collective, often anonymous goddesses
(the "Earth-mothers", who were the
forerunners of the Fairies); and
numerous local deities.
Some of these archaic divinities were
assimilated with Roman gods and god¬
desses and, in Christian Ireland, with
saints, thus showing the profound
continuity of mankind's most cherished
beliefs.
Finally, many places still inhabited
today were originally chosen by the
Celts. Most French towns and cities,
for example, are Gaulish in origin.
Whether or not their locations have
been moved slightly in the meantime,
they have always retained their import-
. anee. There is often an unbroken
evolution stretching from the Celtic
oppidum, through the Roman settle¬
ment, to the city of today.
Even if they are no longer aware of
it, the peoples of Europe, whether
Iberian, Latin, Germanic and Anglo-
Saxon, Hungarian or Slav, have all
inherited Celtic ethnic and cultural
features from their ancient past, and
it may well be that, among the forces
of the past revealed to us by modern
science, these could well serve as one
of the bonds cementing a sense of
rediscovered kinship.
Paul-Marie Duval

