sahel
4. twenty thousand
Photo © Claude Sauvagoot. Paris
26

arrived but no one knows how many started out
PURSUED by hunger and drought,
the nomads sooner or later
came to a halt somewhere at a
spot where a few refugees had
already drifted, close to some
locality where at least they could beg
and find something to drink. Some¬
times food distribution centres were
set up where these little groups of
people had formed. News got around,
and other wanderers began to gather.
A good many Mali nomads arrived
at the Lazaret camp, close to Niamey,
after making their way down either
bank of the Niger. A series of gul-
leys and branch channels of rivers
also lead in the direction of the capi¬
tal of Niger. Understandably, those
in search of water and hoping to find
grazing land in the damper regions
followed these routes.
Some also felt that only in a major
city could they hope to receive a
little help.
As a result the few groups that had
settled in Niamey, on the outskirts of
the Lazaret camp, as early as 1973,
swelled rapidly. Their numbers jump¬
ed suddenly from 4,000 to 6,000 bet¬
ween November and December. In
January 1974 this figure climbed to
10,000 and in February it passed the
12,000 mark. The high point of 22,000
was reached in August 1974.
One has the impression that the
Lazaret camp contains only the rem¬
nants of families. "None of the fami¬
lies at the Lazaret at the present time
is complete. We don't know if our
relatives who stayed behind are going
to join us here, or whether we shall
return to try to find them."
The composition of one family from
Gao is disturbing: six men aged
between 30 and 65, and only one
woman over 15. Surely these men are
married. But where are their wives?
Elsewhere, we find eleven adults (over
15 years old) with only six children
between them, none of whom is less
than five years old. What has
happened to the others?
These survivors of drought and
famine are today packed together on
an almost treeless plateau, swept by
a sand-laden wind where there is only
one dispensary and a few Zerma huts.
The moral and physical wretched¬
ness of these conditions weighs heavily
on the nomads. Water is available,
but in niggardly quantities. And what
most upsets these refugees in the
camp are the smells and the flies and
"the worms that suck our blood".
There Is little to be gleaned from
the surrounding countryside: a few
broken boughs and, with a bit of luck,
some millet stalks to build a shelter..
Yet four households out of five gather r
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
The Tuareg find ready-to-hand all the materials they need to produce
the fittings and furnishings for their tents : poles and posts, curtains
of fibre matting and animal hair carpets with traditional designs
which keep the cold and sand at bay (photo above). Beneath the tents,
the Tuareg unfold beds like the one shown below, its solid feet and
frame carved with skill and artistry. Strips of matting, here rolled
up ready to be carried, are used as screens against the wind. Among
the Wodaabe, a group of the Peul nomads, the women usually carry
furnishings and utensils on their heads. Opposite page, a Tuareg
woman from Niger.
*~' . -* -<rV<"3
-
-¡.9r **.
- V,-
Photo J.-F. Schiano, Paris
27

^ brushwood to make cooking fires. A
quarter of the families also use millet
straw. Customarily in their home
regions, the nomads used dried animal
dung as fuel, but here only one in
twenty does so since there are hardly
any animals left to produce it.
The majority of nomads have no¬
where to shelter or to sleep on arrival.
Most of their tents, cushions and
blankets have been sold, or sometimes
simply abandoned when there were no
more animals left to carry them. Vir¬
tually the only exception to this are
the Wodaabe, whose women are used
to carrying on their heads household
utensils and sometimes even pieces
of wood for use as bed frames.
Almost all the nomads have had
something to eat daily since their arri¬
val in Niamey. Not that the distri¬
butions have necessarily provided
everyone with an adequate ration, but
at least these distributions have been
systematic and regular.
Yet the nomads are haunted by the
fear that one day these handouts may
cease. When asked what they worry
about most, half of them reply: food.
At the end of January 1974, there
were 400 graves in the camp ceme¬
tery. But now that the hardships of
the exodus are over, one can say that
fewer people are dying at Lazaret.
To cope with this swarm of refugees
from Niger and other countries, in
such a desperate state of malnutrition
and sickness, obviously poses a tre¬
mendous problem.
Nevertheless, in the month prior to
the survey at the camp, half the fami¬
lies had at least one member receiving
medical treatment. As for malnutrition,
this is serious, but perhaps less so
than one might have feared. The
worst hit are already dead.
The first signs of an awakening, of
a desire on the part of the nomads to
take their fate in their own hands are
now appearing In the camp. For the
moment only a very small minority has
reacted in this way but the new atti¬
tude nevertheless led the refugees to
make some basic improvements In the
camp early in 1974.
About that time seven schools
were opened, while a women's action
group also got down to work. These
first steps taken by the nomad refu¬
gees towards reorganizing their sur¬
roundings may well mark the end of
their attitude of resignation.
They are now utterly cut off from
their original surroundings and way of
life. In the past the meat and milk
they obtained from their livestock
provided their daily food and also
served as a means of exchange
against millet. From the hides and
the fleeces of their animals they made
harnesses, water-skins, tents and
clothing. Even the animals' dung was
used as fuel.
Now, however, food is brought from
far away in planes or lorries, along
with blankets and clothes. Waste
materials and packing cases from the
town are used for building huts or
as fuel for cooking.
Formerly, the risk of uncertain food
supplies was a problem which the
people of the Sahel coped with on
their own with varying success. Today
attempts are being made to solve It
through international aid. For the
links binding the human group to its
Sahel environment as well as those
binding the human group itself have
snapped simultaneously.
All that remains today is the debris
of a people, exposed to misery,
reduced to depending upon assistance
from others.
For those nomads who have lost
their flocks, the situation remains
bleak. "They are totally uprooted,
facing unknown horizons in a land
whose language they do not speak.
Nothing remains of their former envi¬
ronment, neither their dwellings (though
they have occasionally managed to
build makeshift homes from materials
such as cardboard or jerrycans) nor
their eating habits.
"There are no more pack animals
left. Men face the long and arduous
task of learning to work as labourers
or as craftsmen, changes their caste-
based society would never have
tolerated under normal circumstances.
So refugee families now depend upon
charity and public goodwill, both of
which are unpredictable, and on any
menial tasks others may give them
(fetching water, hewing wood or
grinding millet...)." (1)
Camp-life first strikes the nomad
refugee as unfamiliar and bewildering.
Many of those in the camp sink Into
an apparently bottomless gloom. But
most of them dream. Among adult
refugees, five out of six told us of
their day-dreams. One head of a
family group told us he "dreamed only
of famine". Others dream of "the lorry
which comes to distribute food". Many
look back over their former lives: "We
dream of having our animals and of
living In the bush as we used to."
Should they stay or should they
leave? What do the refugees really
think about this vital question? Some
of them want to return to their home¬
land. "We want to go back home If
we can have the means; the day we
have something to hold on to... If I
could, I'd stay there forever. If I
could live In my own land, I wouldn't
want to be anywhere else."
But only ten per cent of the nomads
are thinking of returning, so these
viewpoints are somewhat exceptional.
The most widespread feeling is
that the Tuareg nation has been forced
to migrate en masse and that It is
going to have to find a new land for
itself.
(1) Yveline Poncet "La Sécheresse en
Afrique Sahéllenne." See footnote page 11.
But there is another, by no means
unimportant aspect: the psychological
shock from which these nomads now
seem to be suffering. They claim they
are being exploited, and particularly in
economic terms: they say they are not
given enough millet In exchange for
their livestock in the markets of Mall.
As a result their purchasing power as
stockbreeders is constantly declining.
Others complain that when they
make enclosures of thorn bushes in
order to keep calves from their mo¬
thers, they are accused of uprooting
protected shrub species and are fined.
They also protest that they are forced
to pay an exorbitant tax every time
they want to dig a new well.
Whether or not these allegations are
true is less important than the degree
to which the Tuareg believe them to
be so, and the need to clearly under¬
stand the implications of this state of
mind. What many refugees feel about
this flight in the face of drought may
well have political repercussions.
These are men and women who, in
the final analysis, are seeking not
merely a drop of water and a mouth¬
ful of food, but also peace of mind,
a haven, a place where as a people
they may once more hope to exist.
When parents see no future for
themselves in the region they have
left, they draw the logical conclusion
and begin to hope for another way. of
life for their children.
Many of them see which way the
times are moving; they see that ani¬
mals are no longer productive. "We
don't want our children to become
nomads", they say, "now we can see
that a settled life is better than a
nomadic one."
Generally speaking, about a third
hope to see their children following in
their footsteps and taking up the same
occupation. One head of family in six
says this depends on their being able
to build up big enough herds. All the
same, a little over half of all the nomad
refugees don't want to see their chil¬
dren ending up as herdsmen.
This means that the new generation
will need a different type of education
from that given to the previous one.
AID BY AIRLIFT
AND DESERT CONVOYS
A massive international programme of
emergency aid has channelled food, tents,
blankets and medical help by land, air
and sea to the peoples of the Sahel
afflicted by drought and famine. Top
right, like ants in the giant bowl of sand
and sky, a convoy of relief trucks halts
briefly in the Sahara en route from England
to Niger. Regular airlifts have brought
food and equipment to the stricken
African region. Right, Tuaregs greet a
transport plane from Belgium on its
arrival in Niger. Belgian planes alone in
1973-1974 logged 1,755 flying hours and
flew a total of 700,000 km to bring in over
5,000 tons of relief cargoes.
28

Photo Tom Sheppard © Camera Press, London
Photo Jean Guyaux © Sygma, Paris
29
