of malnutrition
Photo © Claude Sauvageot, Paris Photo J.-L Nou.
by Coluthur Gopalan
COLUTHUR GOPALAN, Indian doctor and
nutritionist, is Director- General of the Indian
Council of Medical Research. Director of the
National Institute of Nutrition. In Hyderabad, for
many years, he is first Vice-President of the
International Union of Nutritional Sciences. A
fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences and
the Indian Academy of Medical Sciences, he
has published over 170 research papers on
various aspects of nutrition. He is a member
of the nutrition experts' panel of WHO and FA O.
ALNUTRITION is one of the
most important public health
problems in many countries today. In
the developing countries, deficiency
diseases due to inadequate nutrition
continue to be widespread.
Protein-calorie malnutrition, vitamin
A deficiency, anaemia and ailments due
to a deficiency of vitamin B complex
are the most commonly encountered
diseases. While protein-calorie mal¬
nutrition and vitamin A deficiency are
predominantly diseases of young child¬
ren, particularly of pre-school age,
anaemia ¡s a problem affecting all sec¬
tions of the population, though it is
most severe among women of child-
bearing age.
Protein-calorie malnutrition occurs
in large numbers of pre-school children
in most developing countries. Judged
by the occurrence of the most severe
forms of the disease like kwashiorkor
and marasmus, the incidence is bet¬
ween 0.5 and 5.0 per cent in children
between the ages of 1-5 years in poor
communities. On the other hand,
judged by the number of children who
suffer from deficient growth, which is
the feature of the mild and moderate
forms of the disease, the problem is
indeed a formidable one 60 to 70 per
cent of poor children showing signs
of growth retardation.
It may, however, be debated whether
mild and moderate degrees of growth
failure really constitute protein-calorie
malnutrition. The functional signifi¬
cance of varying degrees of growth
retardation is now under intensive in¬
vestigation, and these data may be
expected to provide reliable informa¬
tion on the real extent of the problem
of protein-calorie malnutrition in young
children.
Severe forms of protein-calorie mal¬
nutrition carry with them a high rate
of mortality. Even with hospitalization
and the best medical care, 10 to 15
per cent of all children suffering from
kwashiorkor and marasmus do not sur¬
vive. A very high proportion of child¬
ren living in rural areas cannot and
do not get such medical attention and
the mortality rate for them is several
times higher.
As a result of kwashiorkor alone,
several million children in the world
24

Even when they survive, millions of children
suffer irreversible damage to brain and body
do not live beyond the age of five.
High as this figure is, mortality due to
malnutrition computed ' on this basis
would be a gross underestimate,
because in a large number of children
who die of other diseases like tuber¬
culosis, measles, smallpox, chicken-pox
and gastro-intestinal infections, malnu¬
trition is not only an underlying cause
for the development of the disease, but
also adversely modifies its course.
But for their malnutrition, they might
not have contracted the disease, and
even if they had, they would not have
died.
In many developing countries, 30 to
40 per cent of deaths occur in children
below the age of 5, and mortality rates
of very young children are as high as
18 to 30 per 1,000. In the developed
countries, where malnutrition does not
exist, corresponding figures are 7 per
cent and less than 1 per 1,000.
Photo Brlncourt
Gamma, Paris
This high mortality rate among pre¬
school children has several serious
repercussions. In countries where
there is a high death rate among child¬
ren, the age structure of the population
shows a high proportion of youth.
Nearly 15 per cent of the population
in developing countries is below 5
years of age as compared to between
7 and 10 per cent in the developed
countries, and this group constitutes a
high risk group from the nutritional
point of view.
A vicious circle of malnutrition lead¬
ing to high death rates, which, in turn,
motivates large families, is also set up.
In rural families with limited means the
nutrition of young children is influenced
to a considerable extent by family
size.
Almost 70 per cent of the most sev¬
ere forms of protein-calorie malnutrition
seen in hospital are among the fourth
or subsequent children in a family,
even though 70 per cent of all children
receiving medical attention in hospital
are the earlier born ones. Incidence of
other nutritional deficiency symptoms
is also higher in later born children.
It has been suggested on the basis
of these observations than even under
existing social and economic condi¬
tions, a considerable impact can be
made on the extent of severe malnutri¬
tion, by simply restricting the number
of children in poor families to three
or less.
In most countries of the world, total
food production has shown a progres¬
sive increase during the last decade,
and in some spectacular gains have
been made. In spite of this, the avail¬
ability of food per person has re¬
mained essentially unaltered, primarily
because of the rise in population.
As a result, the nutritional situation
of the poorer sections of the population
has shown little change, and the pro¬
portion of the population with nutritio¬
nal deficiency has remained constant.
Malnutrition has actually increased, .
because of the population increase. It P
25

a^¿
.9*
«S?v$%*
í^«-«:**.
JBp.'^fkii
K.W
^A
r-i^Jçwî'
¿ Ï , i «*ï
is obvious, therefore, that limitation of
population growth is one of the most
important and urgent aspects in the
planning of nutritional improvement in
most developing countries.
In several countries, where intense
efforts are being made to limit family
size, family planning programmes have
failed to make the necessary impact.
Studies have shown that one of the
important reasons why rural women
refuse to accept family planning is the
high mortality rate, since children con¬
tinue to be considered as social
security for parents in their old age.
A comprehensive child care pro¬
gramme, of which nutrition must cons¬
titute an important part, may, therefore,
be expected to cut the vicious circle.
Of equal or greater concern today
is the state of those who survive the
moderate and severe forms of malnu¬
trition. As a result of improved treat¬
ment, a large number of children
suffering from kwashiorkor can now be
saved, but recent studies have indi¬
cated that malnutrition and under¬
nutrition in early years of life are
associated with long-term effects.
Evidence suggests that such children
fail to fully express their genetic poten¬
tial for physical growth in later life
and, even more important, that they
emerge from malnutrition with impaired
ability to learn and understand.
Assessment of intellectual ability in
children who had once suffered from
kwashiorkor and in children who are
chronically undernourished has shown
that not only do they perform less
well in intelligence tests, but also that
they have lower intersensory skills
which are essential for primary learn¬
ing. Studies on the biochemical com¬
position of brains of children who have
died of kwashiorkor and marasmus
have shown alterations, though the
functional significance of these chan¬
ges has yet to be fully understood.
It is, however, now being increasing¬
ly recognized that non-nutritional fac¬
tors may have an equally important role
to play in the poor mental development
seen in malnourished children. The
psychological environment in which the
child grows and the social stimulation
which it receives during its early
formative years appear to be particu¬
larly important. Even these, however,
may be indirectly related to malnutri¬
tion, since a malnourished, sick child
interacts poorly with its environment.
For many years it was believed that
the major factor underlying widespread
protein-calorie malnutrition in children
was lack of protein in the diet a belief
that greatly influenced thinking and
planning on the problem. Efforts were
directed to develop "protein concen¬
trates" to bridge this "protein gap".
Studies in recent years from several
parts of the world have shown, how¬
ever, that in the current o"iets of pre¬
school children, the primary bottleneck
is not protein, but calories. For dietary
factors involved in malnutrition appear
to be related more to total intake, and
hence to energy (calories) than to the
amount of protein supplied by the diet.
Therefore the problem of protein
malnutrition is secondary to inadequate
calorie intake.
What one is dealing with is more
a "food gap" (a problem of quantity)
than a protein gap, (a problem of
quality) and an appreciation of this
fact is essential in formulating proper
control and preventive measures.
Anaemia of nutritional origin is found
in many parts of the world and is a
major health problem. Though it is
more frequently encountered in dev¬
eloping countries and appears to be
more widespread among the poorer
sections of the population, affluent
groups are not free from the disease.
26

3ro»
V-.
Nurturing
tomorrow's
farmers
As part of its latest five-year
development plan, the Indian
Government has adopted a
far-reaching national policy for
children to improve child welfare
and nutrition. Special attention
is being devoted to the needs of
India's 115 million children under six,
the group most vulnerable to
malnutrition. Left, secondary
school-children at work in the fields
at a government agricultural school
near Madras, in Tamil Nadu
(formerly the State of Madras)
are taught to apply modern ideas
in farming, while using traditional
tools. Right, chicken rearing
to provide extra protein, a project
launched near Vellore by the Tamil
Nadu Ministry of Agriculture
under the auspices of UNICEF.
Iron deficiency appears to be by far
the commonest cause of nutritional
anaemias, although in many instances
folate deficiency (a vitamin B complex
factor) is an additional cause.
Anaemia occurs most often in women
of child-bearing age. Anaemia has
been recognized, in fact, as one of
the most frequent and serious compli¬
cations during pregnancy. Depending
upon the nutritional quality of the habi¬
tual diets and availability and utilization
of antenantal services and medical
care, between 20 and 80 per cent of
pregnant women in different parts of
the world are anaemic during the last
three months of pregnancy. The point
reached in the pregnancy and the
number of previous pregnancies are
two well-recognized factors which
influence the incidence of anaemia
during pregnancy.
Pregnancy anaemia plays a very
important role in maternal mortality and
disease; it also considerably influences
infant mortality and disease. Between
10 and 20 per cent of all maternal
deaths in India are believed to be
directly attributable to anaemia. Anae¬
mic pregnant women are also more
vulnerable to disease. Genito-urinary
infections during pregnancy, still
births, premature births and puerperal
infections are found to be several
times higher in women who are
anaemic.
Maternal anaemia also appears to
be related to the birth weight of a child.
There is a well-established social and
economic gradient in the birth weight
of infants, but in the low income groups
it has been reported that the mean
birth weight of full-term infants born
to mothers with severe anaemia is
over 500 grammes less than the mean
birth weight of infants born to non-
anaemic mothers.
In a great majority of such infants,
birth weights were below 2.2 kg.
Neo-natal and peri-natal mortality are
known to rise steeply as birth weight
falls, and the role of maternal anaemia
in infant mortality thus becomes ob¬
vious. Added to this is the contribu¬
tion of anaemia to prematurity, with
consequent low birth weight.
Anaemia is also a widespread prob¬
lem in children below the age of 5
in many parts of the world. In many
children, there are no clinical symp¬
toms when the anaemia is mild or
moderate. Hence it has been some¬
times argued that such children may
not be under any handicap. Recent
studies have, however, suggested that
iron deficiency and iron deficiency
anaemia may adversely affect host
defence mechanisms against infection.
Increased mortality and morbidity from
infectious diseases have, in fact, been
reported in anaemic children. The
mechanism by which iron deficiency
anaemia may lower the host defence
has not as yet been fully understood.
In most countries, widespread mal¬
nutrition is largely the result of poverty.
However, the effects of inadequate
dietary intakes are often considerably
exaggerated by infections and infesta¬
tions arising from poor environmental
sanitation and poor personal hygiene.
Ignorance, superstition and wrong
food habits are additional contributory
factors. Under these circumstances,
it must be recognized that lasting
improvement in the nutritional status
of poor communities is unlikely to be
achieved through nutrition programmes
alone, though this is a pre-requisite.
Nutrition programmes have to be
coupled with measures seemingly unre¬
lated to nutrition, such as the improve¬
ment of the physical environment, a
protected water supply, immunisation
programmes and improvements in the
general level of education.
Coluthur Gopalan
27
