by Aron I. Belkin
Masculine
feminine
or neutral ?
AN extremely important problem
related to the profound changes
which have occurred in Soviet, society
is raised in this letter (on right) which
appeared recently in the Moscow
literary review "Litteraturnaia Gazeta".
The access of women to equality
with men raises a whole series of
problems. For example, having won
equal rights and freedom in what
direction should women develop their
personality?
In her letter, Madame Lvova is in
fact claiming that there should be no
distinctions between women and men
at work, in social life or in the family,
that boys and girls should be brought
up in exactly the same way and that
equality of rights implies identical
behaviour and outlook In men and
women.
But opinion in many countries has
been seriously disturbed in recent
years by an increasing tendency for
men to become "feminized" and for
women to become "masculinized".
The legal equality of the sexes, the
radical changes which have occurred
in the professional, social and family
life of men and women, the growing
tendency to apply the same standards
of morality and conduct to men and
women, and finally a certain "hybrid"
character in the physical appearance
of many persons all create the im¬
pression that the distinction between
the "stronger" and the "weaker" sex
is becoming blurred, a situation which
causes heated controversy and some
alarm.
Where are these changes in our
civilization leading us? Are we, in
fact, witnessing the disappearance of
ARON 1SAAKOVICH BELKIN, an inter¬
nationally-known Soviet scientist, is head of the
psychiatric endocrinology laboratory at the
Moscow Institute of Psychiatry (Ministry of
Public Health of the Russian Federation). He
is the author of over 60 studies on problems of
psychiatric endocrinology.
" If the word ' emancipation ' nowadays elicits a sceptical smile it is
because as a concept it has so many inherent contradictions. What do sta¬
tistics tell us about it in their unemotional language? That in 1969, for
instance, there were 62 times more women with higher and specialized
secondary education in the U.S.S.R. than there were in 1928 : 9,500,000 wo¬
men altogether or 60 per cent of all graduates from those levels of education.
There have been many changes in the status of women, and yet something
is still lacking... I believe that women are psychologically unprepared for
the rights and freedoms which have been heaped on them.
Centuries of oppression have given women a mistaken view of their
own abilities which by the force of inertia still survives in the consciousness
of women today. It is time that women took stock of their new social status.
But how are they to do this?
Education, environment, books and works of art, as we know, play an
important role in the awakening and development of the human mind.
Women must therefore be given, from their early childhood, the kind of
moral training that will prepare them for the immense social changes that
have taken place in our country.
But so far, the education of girls has been characterized by an inertia that
persists with astonishing tenacity. Parents themselves instil in their daugh¬
ters specific attitudes which explain the gap that opens in later life bet¬
ween the basic aspirations of men and women.
Upbringing exerts an enormous influence on a woman's life and I believe
that if girls were guided correctly in developing a proper sense of values
all the arguments about the influence of women's biological characteristics
on their psychological make-up would be shown up as baseless. Polish
sociologists have concluded that feminine psychological characteristics,
to the extent that they actually exist, are more the result of cultural factors
than of inborn, sex-related ones. They result primarily from the way girls
are brought up, and this in turn depends to a large extent on society's concept
of the role of women."
N. Lvova
(Irom a letter to the Moscow "Litteraturnaia Gazeta")
the lines of demarcation between male
and female psychology and behaviour?
Obviously one should first consider
the nature of the psychological differ¬
ences between men and women. Are
they purely biological in origin or are
they caused entirely by social factors?
Would identical upbringing for both
sexes really disprove all the theories
about the influence of the biological
characteristics of women on female
psychology?
In the course of biological evolution,
many species have developed a
division into sexes which presents a
number of important advantages from
the point of view of adaptation to the
environment and of survival. These
advantages are not merely a matter
of genetics but also of behaviour the
natural division of functions more than
proves its worth when it comes to
rearing children, obtaining food and
resisting an aggressor. Thus, with each
sex evolving independently, strongly-
marked differences in physical appea- ^
58

In 1974, 20 million children in the Soviet Union spent their summer vacations
in nursery schools or holiday camps at the seaside or in the country.
These facilities are a tremendous boon to mothers in a country such as
the U.S.S.R. where 51 per cent of industrial and office workers are women.
Below, happy homecoming in Moscow.
59

( ranee, in behaviour and in "character"
' have become firmly established.
In the case of human beings,
masculine and feminine roles are of
course determined not so much by
biological factors as by social, econ¬
omic and cultural ones. But this does
not mean that today any more than in
the past, the nature of men's and
women's social roles can be changed
at will: they are based upon biological
foundations, and any failure to take
this fundamental truth into account
could have serious consequences.
The shaping of the individual per¬
sonality is closely linked with the un¬
conscious choice of a particular pattern
of conduct, a choice which the child
makes under the influence of those
around him.
To begin with, the child merely
imitates certain of the outward charac¬
teristics of the person whom he has
involuntarily chosen as a "model",
such psychological characteristics as
kindness, gentleness, responsiveness
or determination, courage and firmness.
Stereotypes of behaviour accepted
for the sex of the child are encouraged
and those which are not accepted are
discouraged: boys, for instance, are
shamed out of crying, while girls
are told off for tomboyish behaviour.
It has been shown that parents,
particularly the mother, unconsciously
adopt a different attitude to a baby
boy or girl right from its birth.
Research in the United States has
shown that in the first six months
mothers hold and handle sons con¬
siderably more often than daughters.
But after the period in which baby
boys are frequently fondled, mothers
try to wean them away. A year-old
girl is allowed' to spend much more
time with her mother and comes into
physical contact with her more often
than a boy of the same age.
As this lessening of the contact with
the mother increases the independence
of a child, researchers have concluded
that mothers intuitively try to develop
such Independence in their sons,
encouraging them to explore and
"master" the world around them.
But why does a child choose a
particular model of male or female
conduct? The' answer is that the
child's reactions depend on its bio¬
logical characteristics. A child chooses
the father or the mother as its model
primarily according to whether a
masculine or a feminine role comes
more easily to it.
This "principle of facility" is ex¬
tremely important in the choice by an
individual of a particular social role,
since it demonstrates that the role
in question corresponds with the
individual's natural characteristics. A
boy, for instance, may dream of
becoming a boxer but if by nature
he is highly sensitive to pain he will
soon give up this impossible ambition.
The same thing happens in the
choice of a sexual role. The ease
with which the individual can accept
his role depends on a biological pre¬
disposition, further reinforced by the
influence of the social environment.
The child thus gradually comes to feel
that it belongs to one or other of the
sexes, works out a particular type
of conduct and becomes definitively
aware of its own identity as a man
or woman.
Biologically speaking, human beings
are born either men or women, but
socially speaking they become men
or women through their contacts with
other people and under the influence
of society. Every social role which an
individual takes upon himself burdens
him with a heavy responsibility
towards society, which calls for con¬
siderable effort on his part if he is to
fulfil that role successfully.
It may be that those who vocifer¬
ously demand a single "identity" for
the sexes, or who call for a "sexual
revolution" and for freedom from daily
routine are merely demonstrating a
selfish and irresponsible desire to
escape from the role which nature and
society assign to every individual.
For many centuries the belief has
been firmly held that the psychology
and behaviour of girls and boys
should be different. The fact that this
conviction is now being reappraised
creates serious consequences both
for the individual and for society as
a whole.
Attempts by parents to "transform"
their sons into daughters or to make
little girls out of boys lead to equally
unfortunate results. Research shows
that mothers who have never played
with dolls during childhood often lack
motherly feelings and maternal skills,
while boys who have been pampered
grow up physically weak, cowardly
and dependent. When they reach
adulthood, such children often prove
incapable of fulfilling the role which
society requires of them.
In many modern families, the roles
of man and woman have become so
indistinguishable, the demarcation lines
between them so unclear, that a child
has no possibility of choice between
different models of behaviour. The
¡mages of the strong, brave, strict,
determined father and the tender,
gentle, understanding mother have
become blurred and indistinct. Which
of them should the child imitate?
With whom should it identify? The
problem has become so complex, as
we have personally seen from many
cases, that by no means all children
are able to find an answer.
Another aspect of the difficulties
that boys and girls today have in
establishing their own sexual identity
is the gradual, inexorable disappear¬
ance from the lore of children of
fairytales, nursery rhymes, etc., which
used to help them to build up a mental
ideal of masculine or feminine charac¬
teristics to which they could aspire.
In most modern poems, stories and
songs for children the conduct of
heroes and heroines is often indis¬
tinguishable, and the child's deep need
to set up an ideal of masculinity or
femininity is left unsatisfied.
Differences in psychology and behav¬
iour between men and women are thus
becoming less distinct with every
generation, and there is every reason
to fear that this process will continue.
Modern science has now sufficient
evidence to show beyond doubt that
a feeling of one's own sexual identity
as a man or a woman is an essential
attribute of one's personality and the
person lacking this is incapable of
leading a normal life in society.
Photo Henri Cartier-Bresson
60

Today doctors have unfortunately
to deal more and more frequently with
people who for one reason or another
have to some extent lost this feeling
of identity. The study of such cases
shows quite clearly that any voluntary
or involuntary psychological deviation
from the sense of belonging to one
or the other sex can lead to serious
psychological disturbance, to severe
pathological troubles and ultimately
to tragic consequences.
Loss of this sense of belonging
brings about profound changes in the
whole personality, along with symp¬
toms of "depersonalization". The
individual Is no longer sure of his place
in society. His whole system of
relations with others is disturbed and
he loses his sense of attachment to
friends and relatives, to familiar places,
to his work and to life itself.
The intolerable feeling of "sex-
lessness" expresses itself in anti¬
social behaviour such as alcoholism,
drug-taking and homosexuality. This
in turn creates bitterness and emotion¬
al instability that are sometimes re¬
sponsible for crime and for unhappy,
broken lives that not infrequently end
in suicide.
These misadventures, of course,
threaten above all those who have
suffered a profound disturbance of the
sense of sexual identity. Such cases
are relatively rare, but there are many
others in which similar symptoms are
present In a milder form.
There are of course no simple or
ready-made solutions to the problem.
Many contradictory ideas and preju¬
dices have emerged in the course of
human history concerning the signifi¬
cance of sexual awareness in the
shaping of human character, and many
are the problems that science still has
to solve ¡n this field.
One thing is certain, however:
equality of the sexes should not lead
to the blurring of the psycho¬
logical boundaries between them, to
"asexual" behaviour. The best guaran¬
tee of harmony in sexual relations is
the recognition that the natural roles
of the sexes are distinctive and
different, not identical.
For centuries the need to restrain
the sexual urge was propagated by
society, but no attention was paid to
the significance of sexual awareness
in the development of the human
personality. Today science must
contribute to the urgent task of
investigating the true laws governing
sexual behaviour.
Aron I. Belkln
DADDY WHEELS
AND MUMMY WELDS
In the Soviet Union, the majority of
workers in heavy industry are women.
On automated production lines, 77 per
cent of the personnel are women. Left,
two women workers fix an automobile
door in a Moscow factory. Right, two
father; wheel their babies along Gogol
Boulevard, in Moscow.
61
