IN THE NAME
OF THE LAW - HUBBY
WASH THE DISHES !
Since March 8, 1975, a law
adopted in Cuba obliges husbands
to help their wives with housework
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
18

Women have played a major part in Cuba's nation-wide campaigns to improve literacy, education
and health, while also making an important contribution to the country's economic development.
Many of their rights are now clearly established in Cuba's Family Code which, in reappraising
responsibilities in the home, requires men to share in housework and care of the children.
A church council meeting in
Rome in the 16th century came
to the conclusion that the Indians
encountered by Columbus in the New
World did, after all, have souls. About
the same time in France, Montaigne
recounted that the nuns in a certain
convent had one day made the start¬
ling discovery that a peasant was a
man.
Today Latin Americans are becoming
aware of the fact that women are
human beings (though when one thinks
of the favoured treatment given to
animals in some places, one might
well ask what real benefits this has
brought them).
In Cuba, which is from many points
of view an exception on the map of the
Americas, women are treated like
human beings.
But whatever Cuban women have
won thus far has not come to them on
a plate, as a gift from the powers-
that-be. History gave them no time
to engage in theoretical discussions
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian poet and writer, was formerly
National Director of Culture In Ecuador. For several years he collaborated
in Unesco's studies on Latin American cultures. He has made
many visits to Cuba and was there most recently early in 1975
as a member of the jury of the annual literary competition held by the
House of the Americas, in Havana. An anthology of his poems, "Informe
personnal sobre la situación" (Personal report on the situation) has just
been published in Havana. He is now a member of the editorial staff
of the "Unesco Courier."
about equality. On the contrary, they
became aware of their rights day by
day as they fought to change their
society, in a struggle culminating in
the victory of January 1, 1959, a
struggle in which many of them be¬
came heroines and martyrs.
Of the 270,000 volunteers in the
great Literacy Corps which reduced
illiteracy in Cuba from 23 per cent
to 3.7 per cent in one year, some
60 per cent were women. Similarly,
women have helped to retrain dom¬
estic servants for productive work, to
establish nursery schools, to carry out
vaccination campaigns and other public
health measures.
They have also co-operated in the
elimination of prostitution, not by
repressive measures but through
education and by making available jobs^
in other sections of the city or in other r
19

towns, to prevent the past from being
an obstacle to the incorporation of
these women in the new society.
Today in Cuba women are "in
transition" on the road to equality. By
1970, girls accounted for 49 per cent
of children In elementary schools,
55 per cent of those in secondary
schools, and 40.6 per cent of students
in higher education.
Prior to 1959 Cuba's 194,000 women
workers 70,000 of them domestic
servants represented only 9 per cent
of the country's total labour force. By
1974 the figure had reached 590,000,
or more than 25 per cent of all
workers, thereby freeing a large seg¬
ment of manpower for other occu¬
pations, such as sugar-cane harvesting.
Cuban women considered they had
won a victory when a provision stating
that every business enterprise should
reserve a certain number of posts "for
women" was removed from the Labour
Code. Today women are even work¬
ing in the docks and on building sites,
doing jobs which were traditionally
men's.
Whereas scarcely 20 per cent of
Cuban women could afford hospital
and clinical services before 1959,
today 95 per cent benefit from them.
This has reduced the death-rates of
babies and deaths in childbirth in
Cuba to the lowest levels in Latin
America. Death-rates of babies in
other Latin American countries are
sometimes as high as 150 or 200 per
1,000, but in Cuba only 26 babies died
for every 1,000 births in 1973 and
fewer than six mothers out of every
10,000 died in childbirth.
Nevertheless, just as everywhere
else in the world, Cuban women have
been, as it were, an occupied terri¬
tory, and liberation has not brought
instant emancipation from the colon¬
ized mentality, and still less from the
occupying power, the male.
At the closing session of the Second
Congress of the Federation of Cuban
Women, in November 1974, Prime
Minister Fidel Castro referred to the
fact that "(after more than fifteen years
of revolution)... there are still objective
and subjective factors that result in
discrimination against women."
Fidel Castro explained what struc¬
tural changes would be made by the
State in Cuba's next five-year plan to
attack various forms of discrimination.
Such measures include the construc¬
tion of 400 nursery schools (in addition
to those being built by volunteer
groups) with facilities for 150,000 chil¬
dren (three times the present number);
400 dey-boarding schools, which will
increase the present number of pupils
by 120,000; no fewer than 1,000
secondary schools, with places for
more than half a million rural students
who are now receiving scholarships;
special schools with 4,000 places for
children with learning problems; 49 new
hospitals, 110 polyclinics, 19 clinics,
51 homes for old people and 16 homes
for the disabled.
Referring to the need for a funda¬
mental change in attitude, he added:
"We still have to ask ourselves when
will we eradicate the age-old ways of
thinking, when will we overcome all
those prejudices?" And he declared,
"...when the objective of national
liberation is finally attained, women
will still need to continue the fight for
their own liberation in human society."
Following the proclamation of Inter¬
national Women's Year, and even
before, some of women's claims to
equality were immediately and uni¬
versally acknowledged (almost as
though no thought had been given to
the sweeping economic and social
reforms they imply).
But no matter how reasonable such
legal or political changes may be, they
can never be fully effective if they are
considered in isolation from the
general context of a country. This is
proved by the vigorous struggle that
usually has to be waged before a
principle, such as "equal pay for equal
work" or "men and women are equal
before the law", is actually put Into
practice.
It is open to question, for example,
whether the mere exercise of the right
to vote, which Ecuadorian women have
enjoyed since 1929, has brought them
a more favourable social situation than
that of Paraguayan women who have
only been voting since 1961. Or
whether Uruguayan women, who can
divorce without having to prove any¬
thing whereas their husbands must
establish grounds for divorce are
better off than women in Argentina
where there is no divorce.
Cuba has made it clear that "the
struggle for the equality of women is
not only the task of women but of
society as a whole," in other words,
that an out-and-out battle must be
waged against the ideology of the
occupying male.
This ideology finds its ultimate
expression in the reaction of the
Indian woman whose husband was
striking her. When someone inter¬
vened and tried to defend her, she
turned on her would-be rescuer and
cried: "But he's my husband, so he
may beat mel"
A century ago, Engels claimed that
monogamie marriage is a repro¬
duction in miniature of relations in
society, the husband corresponding to
the oppressor and the wife to the
oppressed class.
Since then, however, changes have
taken place in some societies. (In
some marriages as well: "There was
a man who beat his wife when he was
drunk and who was beaten by her the
rest of the time" is not only the
beginning of a short story but the
epitome of a situation which, though
infrequent, is none the less true to
life.)
Male supremacy in its extreme form
is known as "machismo" and is
attributed to Latin Americans as if it
were, an exclusive legacy from
ancient times, or something inherited
from Hispanic tradition. Its remote
origins are surely to be found In the
economic dependence that has always
been woman's lot, first under her
father (who at least considers it a
moral and legal duty to provide for
her), and subsequently under her
husband (who often hands her money
as if he were giving alms, disdain¬
fully like a millionaire or grudgingly
like a poor man).
But when women are economically
independent, as they are in Cuba, the
-die-hards who still defend the old
way of life turn to biological argu¬
ments, such as the weakness and
timidity of women (even though they
serve as soldiers and paratroopers),
or to historical arguments, such as
their supposedly greater aptitude for
housework than for creative activities
(though it now appears that both
sexes are equally capable of both
types of work), or even to some
distant justification taken from the
bible to the effect that woman was
created to be man's companion (in
which case man should automatically
become woman's companion).
Cuban men, like all other men, have
been accustomed to make a distinction
between Woman, as idealized in life
and literature, and woman spelt with a
small "w". Woman with a capital "W"
is the archetype of tenderness and
moral perfection if she is a mother,
and if she is a fiancée she is the
archetype of beauty as well. On the
other hand, woman, the wife, is stripped
of her capital "W", along with all the
qualities once extolled in her, all her
rights, and even her family name.
Latin Americans have been carica-
turized as sex overlords, and what is
worse we have accepted this image,
which portrays us as keeping our sub-r
A young mother anxiously waits for her
baby to be given medical attention at a
hospital in Honduras. For most women
in Latin America, motherhood and the
raising of children bring problems whose
harsh reality contrasts sharply with
the idealized image of a mother
seen on the wall above.
20

21

missive little wives huddled and trem¬
bling in a corner, preferably in the
kitchen, waiting for us to come home.
Yet paradoxically we break into
tears in our love songs, be they from
Mexico, Cuba, Argentina or Brazil,
over the Woman who has jilted us
heartlessly or because unkind fate has
willed it. When we squarely face the
fact that she left us for another man,
we insult her, but since we were not
yet married to her, we do so in verse
and to music.
As for woman with a small "w", she
only rarely finds a place in our songs,
such as the one that runs: "Victory,
victory I am in paradise, My wife has
gone." On the other hand, she is the
favourite target, along with mothers-
in-law, alcoholics, the mentally sick,
etc., of jokes and stories that women
themselves sometimes repeat blithely
and at others listen to with a sad
smile of resignation.
Such an. attitude is still prevalent in
Cuba, though the radio and television,
as well as cartoonists, are now being
encouraged to desist from this often
vicious type of humour which is either
an import or a throwback to the past.
The survival of this feeling of superi¬
ority in men coincides with an un¬
conscious acceptance of that superi¬
ority by women. In Cuba, in the
province of Matanzas, the number of
women candidates standing for elec¬
tion to the Poderes Populares (the
bodies through which government is
decentralized and which function at
the level of the city block, the neigh¬
bourhood, town, city and province)
was only 7.6 per cent of the total, and
a mere 3 per cent were elected, even
though women make up half the
population of the province.
Prime Minister Fidel Castro, in
stressing the fact that these figures
should be of concern to all Cubans,
added: "The day will have to come
when we have a Party of men and
women, a Leadership of men and
women, a State of men and women,
and a Government of men and women."
On the other hand, some men raised
objections to Cuba's Family Code in
the discussions that took place in the
various organizations of workers,
farmers, women and students through¬
out the country. This legal document,
which was promulgated on March 8,
1975, is perhaps the fairest and most
human legislation in the world govern¬
ing relations in the home.
The article that aroused the most
heated discussions was the one which
lays down that the husband and wife
must contribute to meeting the needs
of the family. . . each one according to
his abilities and his economic capacity.
Nevertheless, if one of the spouses
only contributes to that subsistence
through housework and care of the
children, the other should contribute
[financially] ... by himself alone, but
without being exempted from sharing
in the housework and care of the
children.
In her book La Mujer Cubana Ahora
("Cuban Women Now"), published in
Havana by the Instituto Cubano del
Libro in 1975, Margaret Randall, a
North American writer who lives in
Cuba, examines the interviews that
she carried out over a three-year
period. She makes a fair analysis of
the current situation, after which she
recounts some of the arguments she
heard presented when the bill was
being discussed at all levels of the
population before being passed.
"During a lively debate in which
both sexes took part, one woman
stood up and shouted: 'If they are
going to incorporate us in the labour
force, they will have to incorporate
themselves in the home, and there is
no more to be said!' " She was given
a standing ovation.
Other women stated that they did
not really expect the older men to
change. "One woman said: The
women around here drafted this law
before the Government even thought
of it . . . and there is nothing for the
young men to do now but accept itl' "
Such a re-appraisal of housework
and insistence on its being shared
frees woman from her status as head
servant in the home or as someone
supported by her husband. Formerly if
a young man earning a good salary
married a teacher or a nurse, for
example, he thought it unnecessary for
her to work, and thus the country lost
the services of a teacher or nurse.
Young men also used to object to
their fiancee's being involved in
political activities "because it was
obvious that such participation re¬
leased women from the direct control
which society had taught men to want
and to demand" (M. Randall).
These prejudices have been neutral¬
ized by Article 28 of the Code which
stipulates: "Both spouses shall have
the right to practise their professions
or trades and shall have an obligation
to show consideration and be helpful
to one another in that respect, and
also as regards studies or the improve¬
ment of their knowledge. . .". And it
adds, with a true sense of realism:
". . . but they shall in any case strive
to organize life in the home in such a
way that these activities are co¬
ordinated with the fulfilment of the
obligations that this Code lays upon
them."
Divorce no longer depends upon
the usual grounds required in other
Latin American countries, such as
"adultery" which in most of them is
only deemed a transgression when
committed by the woman or "mental
cruelty" or "abandonment of the
home".
Indeed, in some countries divorce
for adultery requires the testimony of
eye-witnesses, which, for obvious
reasons, is almost impossible to
obtain. The Code allows other more
human reasons, such as "mutual
consent", and grounds that are more
just, such as "causes as a result of
which the marriage has lost its meaning
for the spouses and for the children,
and hence for society as well."
In a society that thus establishes
the bases of human dignity (in which
women have achieved economic
equality with men; children receive an
education that combines study and
work so that by the end of their
secondary schooling they have a good
grounding in a freely chosen occu¬
pation; a society in which money has
ceased to be a fetish and has once
again become the medium of exchange
that it originally was; and in which the
State provides medical care and
medicines and guarantees a serene old
age) the many dreary arguments that
are usually put forward in Latin
America as reasons for marriage all
fall by the wayside.
The sole valid motive that remains
the Cuban Code does not say as much
but it is obvious is love itself, or the
closest thing to it, even if it is
occasionally only a mirage.
Equality, Cuba's Prime Minister has
said, is not to be confused with a lack
of consideration. And he adds: "If
there are to be any privileges in human
society, if there are to be any in¬
equalities in human society, then these
must be small privileges and small
inequalities in favour of women"...
"because women have tasks and
functions and human responsibilities
that the man does not have."
This applies with even more rel¬
evance to those Latin American
societies which are so full of privileges
and inequalities that have never been
in women's favour.
We may know or we may search
for the reasons for this situation and
we may even be aware where the
responsibilities lie. But one thing is
certain: since it is impossible to
conceive of man's happiness indepen¬
dently of woman's, the tragic and
shameful practice of discrimination is
a game in which all of us are losers.
Jorge Enrique Adoum
22
