S.O.S. CHILDREN
In over 130 countries
UNICEF is giving millions of children
a chance of survival
by William Tracy
IAJOR advances in agricultural
technology in the recent past
held out the hope that the world was
maintaining a balance between food
production and demand as its total
population climbed toward four billion.
Then a series of natural disasters,
widespread crop failures and an econ¬
omic crisis which disrupted world fuel
and fertilizer supplies revealed how
precarious the balance had been and
tipped the scale firmly in the direction
of famine.
Pessimists, looking at this food
crisis, say the situation is so grim that
the world will soon face difficult moral
decisions as to who will eat and who
will starve. They discuss it in terms of
the "lifeboat" analogy, our overloaded
lifeboat being so low in the water that
the sea is about to pour over the sides
and send us to the bottom. The boat
can't hold everyone, they argue, so
some must be thrown overboard if the
rest are to survive.
Others are more optimistic. They
feel that the analogy is incorrect, or at
the least it is incomplete there are
- ships on the horizon.
WILLIAM TRACY, American writer and
photographer, is currently working for UNICEF
In New York.
Whichever interpretation is closest,
both groups agree that the situation is
extremely serious. In either case one
thing should be remembered. Con¬
siderable wisdom, and not just chivalry,
lies behind the old cry when ships face
disaster, "Women and children first!"
It is perhaps surprising that so many
persons, even government ministers
and international development and
relief experts, often tend to overlook
this, because it is based on two simple
facts so important to the survival and
prosperity of any society. Children
(along with pregnant or nursing
mothers) have special needs. Chil¬
dren have special potential. It is
the role of UNICEF, the United Nations
Children's Fund, to keep reminding the
world of these two principles and as
much as possible within its limited
means to act on them.
Children grow most rapidly during
their first three years. For this reason,
and also for their mental and behav¬
ioural development, young children
need different food from the rest of
the family. They must have more food
per kilogramme of body weight, it must
be prepared in a form they can easily
digest, and their diet must be richer
in proteins, as well as in vitamins and
minerals, than that of adults.
Children are especially vulnerable
during the transitional period of
weaning, before they are able to
handle adult foods, and because
mothers themselves are often under¬
nourished, weaning is usually com¬
pleted -long before the desirable age
of 18 to 24 months. Low birth weight,
closely related to the expectant
mother's calorie consumption, also
brings higher risks of illness or death.
Immunizations and a clean water
supply are vital because not only does
malnutrition make children more sus¬
ceptible to such diseases as diarrhoea,
respiratory infections, malaria and
measles but in a vicious circle chil¬
dren suffering from such diseases are
less able to make use of whatever
food they do obtain. In times of
emergency special problems exist
when children are separated from their
mothers. Also, during times of stress,
turmoil and agitation a crying child
actually uses up twice as many
calories as a contented baby.
Mere survival of the young child is
not enough. Malnutrition and disease
can leave indelible scars. The more
severe the deprivations and the earlier
they occur, the less likely it is that
their effects can ever be reversed and
that the children will grow up to be¬
come healthy and productive adults
rather than stunted burdens on society.
Also, because children like canaries
in a coal mine are so particularly
vulnerable, their condition serves as
a kind of early warning signal for the
rest of the population. When society
closely monitors the nutrition and
health of children and anticipates their
needs, the effort promotes the well-
being of all.
In developing countries, working to
help children is the surest way to enlist
the co-operation of villagers In promot¬
ing local development in many fields
and, until couples can be certain that
their children have enough food and
the basic health services needed to
ensure that they will live to adulthood,
family planning and the resulting
eventual stabilization of demand on
world food supplies has virtually no
chance of success.
These two factors, children's special
needs and their special potential, help
explain why young children and their
mothers deserve society's best efforts
at all times, and why during times of
disaster or chronic emergency such as
much of the developing world faces
today, it is urgent that they benefit
34

from special programmes of assist¬
ance a priority claim to seats in the
"lifeboat".
UNICEF's ongoing development as¬
sistance programmes in more than
130 countries have aimed at improving
child health and nutrition at the level
of the village and the family in rural
areas and in urban slums.
Because its regular resources
$90 million this year, mainly from gov¬
ernments, but also from the public
at large have not permitted UNICEF
to engage in major capital development
projects or mass feeding schemes, it
has concentrated on such general
areas as monitoring the nutritional and
health status of children, encouraging
governments to establish national food
promotes breast feeding, the prep¬
aration and use of low-cost weaning
foods and family planning.
It works to prevent and treat severe
and moderate malnutrition and, on a
selected local basis, provides high-
protein, high-nutrition supplementary
foods for children and mothers.
UNICEF realizes that it cannot reach
all of the 200 million children whose
health and nutrition are threatened by
the economic and food crisis so it is
concentrating on reaching the most
severely affected by placing increased
emphasis for now on supplementary
feeding and has embarked on an
ambitious programme of child relief.
Among the developing countries
most seriously affected by the crisis
UNICEF is seeking more than
$50 million beyond its regular 1975
budget in special contributions from
industrialized countries and oil-pro¬
ducing nations to fund child relief
and emergency supplementary feeding
programmes for mothers and children
in the hardest-hit areas of 15 countries.
The special programmes will also
require some 140,000 tons of food
donations in kind, worth about
$70 million if it had to be purchased
on the open market and far beyond
UNICEF's limited means.
Yet, both the money and food
contributions are urgently needed if
the Children's Fund is to act quickly
to help at least an estimated 3.6 million
children among those who now risk
This little African boy is a victim of kwashiorkor, a disease of young children resulting from
protein malnutrition, which causes skin sores, a bloated belly, stunted growth and mental
retardation (sometimes irreversible). Youngsters with kwashiorkor often die from childhood
diseases such as measles and whooping cough that are rarely fatal in well-nourished children.
The most widespread of nutritional deficiency diseases, kwashiorkor is a primary target of
campaigns to improve child health and nutrition launched by UNICEF in over 130 countries.
Photo FAO © Len Sirman Press, Geneva
and nutrition policies and promoting
community co-operation and local
involvement.
More specifically it works to
strengthen and expand basic integrated
health services by immunizing children
against diseases, controlling diarrhoea,
developing adequate and accessible
safe water supply and training field
personnel.
It helps educate parents and com¬
munities in nutrition and village-level
food production and storage, and
there are areas where natural ca¬
lamities or war have created pockets
of extreme food scarcity and where
mothers and children are suffering
more.
Civil strife continues in many coun¬
tries, floods have struck in Honduras,
Bangladesh and parts of India; prolong¬
ed drought has destroyed crops in
the Sahel belt of sub-Sahara Africa,
Ethiopia, Somalia, Sri Lanka (where
rice production is affected) and other
regions of India.
death from severe malnutrition in these
areas of acute emergency. In the
meantime, UNICEF must continue to
help with its regular programmes arid
some supplementary feeding in other
areas where malnutrition, though not
acute, is chronic.
UNICEF undertook a five-year,
$56.8 million programme of assistance
for India from its regular budget
beginning in 1974. Among its key
elements were support for integrated .
child care services, applied nutrition r
35

k projects such as vegetable gardens
and fish farms, production of weaning
foods, health and family planning
services, village water supply projects,
food and nutrition education and sur¬
veys and monitoring.
As the serious dimensions of the
situation in food scarcity areas in those
states hit by floods and droughts in
1974 became apparent, the Govern¬
ment of India requested UNICEF's
special help in checking malnutrition
and providing rehabilitative services to
children and expectant and nursing
mothers.
UNICEF acted first by post¬
poning some portions of its regular
programme and diverting about
$4.3 million, one-third of its 1975
budgeted funds for India, for use in
special child relief to reach about
370,000 beneficiaries with drugs, blan¬
kets, clothing and tents as well as
supplementary food until May, 1975.
As the situation worsened, UNICEF
decided to seek $21.5 million in
additional funds plus special food
donations so that it could broaden its
supplementary feeding to reach about
two million people in parts of seven
affected states until May 1976.
The programme calls for three types
of food initially: Special Weaning
Food, a processed blend of soy,
wheat flour, minerals and vitamins,
will be given to infants from age 0-2;
Crude Balahar, a blend of wheat flour
and an indigenous legume called gram,
will be provided for the 2-6 age group
and for pregnant and nursing mothers;
K-Mix-ll (milk, calcium caseinate and
sugar) is reserved for severe cases of
protein-calorie malnutrition such as
kwashiorkor or marasmus, which
require therapy.
UNICEF is seeking additional foods
such as CSM (corn-soy-milk), dried
skim-milk and rolled oats and hopes
that these immediate relief measures
can be phased into integrated child
services that will also meet basic
longer-term needs of children. For
example, the special assistance in¬
cludes $1.5 million for hand-pumps,
pipes and spare parts to step up
village water supply programmes to
help control intestinal diseases in mal¬
nourished children in drought areas.
As lacge as this child relief pro¬
gramme for India seems, it will only
help in many cases save the lives
of some 2 million of the most severely
threatened children in food scarcity
areas until May 1976. The estimated
cost per child: about $36. Yet India
is only one of a number of developing
countries with regions acutely affected
by both the economic crisis and natural
disasters.
It is clear that UNICEF must both
continue to help where it can and to
remind the world of the needs of chil¬
dren and their potential until the
time when the lifeboat pulls up beside
the ship of abundance and that
potential begins to be realized.
William Tracy
1 % of salaries
to fight world hunger
A number of Unesco staff
members have decided to con¬
tribute 1 per cent of their an¬
nual salary to the fight against
world hunger. The proceeds will
go to UNICEF for its programmes
against hunger in needy coun¬
tries. It is hoped that this lead
will be followed by other Unesco
staff members and by those of
organizations in the U.N. sys¬
tem as a whole.

