THE THREE FACES
OF CELTIC WOMAN
by Jean Markale
THROUGHOUT the ages every
society has tried to define the
relationship between man and woman,
as a couple and also as members of
the prevailing social structure. To do
so society has given each a specific
place, which varies a good deal
according to the customs and traditions
of different peoples.
The social structures of the Celts
who include the ancient Gauls, the
Irish, the Britons from Britain who later
became the Welsh, and the Bretons
of the Armorican peninsula (Brittany)
were those of all the early Indo-Euro¬
pean peoples. Society was patriar¬
chal and men held first place.
But when we examine legal texts
and historical, literary and mythological
evidence, it is surprising to discover
the high status women were accorded
JEAN MARKALE, of France, is a noted au¬
thority on Celtic civilization. Writer and specialist
in classical literature, be has produced many
programmes on the Celts for French radio and
television and has published numerous books on
aspects of Celtic history and civilization. These
include Les Grands Bardes Gallois (The Great
Welsh Bards; Falaize. Paris 1956). Les Celtes
(The Celts. 1960). L'Épopée Celtique d'Irlande
(The Celtic Epics of Ireland. 1971) La Tradition
Celtique en Bretagne Armoricaine (The Celtic
Tradition In Armorican Brittany, 1975), all pub¬
lished by Payot. Paris. His latest book. Le Roi
Arthur et la Société Celtique (King Arthur and
Celtic Society) will appear shortly. Jean Mar-
kale's study on Celtic women, La Femme Celte,
was published this year In English as Women
of the Celts (Gordon Cremonesi, London).
among the Celts compared with some
other ancient societies especially
those of the Mediterranean. As regards
marriage customs, however, close
analogies exist between Celtic usages
and those of ancient India.
All Mediterranean peoples, particu¬
larly the Greeks and Romans, kept
their women in a permanent state of
inferiority. In contrast, the Celts
conferred on them rights of which
women in western Europe were still
deprived during the puritanically-
minded periods of the 19th and 20th
centuries.
There were various reasons for this
special feature of Celtic society, but
one of them stands out: the Celts who
invaded western Europe about the
5th century B.C. were few in numbers
and were essentially an intellectual
and warrior élite. In the territories they
occupied they found populations who
were much more numerous; on these
the Celts imposed their culture, their
language, their religion and their tech¬
nical skills. From them In turn they
took certain customs, especially those
concerning relationships between indi¬
viduals.
The very special status granted to
women which we see reflected in the
patterns of Celtic civilization were thus
inherited from the peoples who had
settled long ago in western Europe.
What strikes one forcibly is the
relative degree of independence en¬
joyed by Celtic women in relation to
their menfolk. Women could own
property such as everyday objects,
jewellery and cattle. The Celts allowed
personal ownership of goods side by
side with collective ownership of land.
So women could use their own goods
as they wished. They could part with
them if they felt so inclined, or acquire
others by purchase, in return for ser¬
vices or as gifts. When she married,
a bride kept her personal possessions
and took them back if the marriage
were later dissolved.
Celtic marriage was in any case a
flexible institution, based on a contract
that was not necessarily lifelong.
Women chose their husbands freely
at least in theory, for parents some¬
times wished to arrange marriages for
economic or political reasons. But
even in such cases the girl could air
her views on the subject.
Within the marriage everything
depended on the economic situation
of the two partners. If the woman
owned fewer goods than her husband,
the latter managed the household
affairs without reference to his wife. If
the fortunes of both partners were
equal the husband was obliged to
secure his wife's consent to his deci¬
sions. Finally and this is exceptional r.
in most legal systems when the 'r
18
Musée Historique de l'Orléanais, Orléans. Photo © Jean Suquet, Paris
In the splendid bronze figure, opposite
page, and repeated front and back (left)
a Celtic craftsman of 2,000 years ago
has captured the rhythm and vitality of a
woman performing a sacred dance.
The figure is from a large collection of
bronzes discovered at Neuvy-en-Sullias,
on the river Loire, in France. Other
figures found at the site include a male
dancer, also nude, musicians and a
"juggler" along with cult animals such
as stags and boars.

/

VIVE LA FEMME!
Women were accorded high
prestige by the Celts, and
female divinities played a
major role in their mythology.
The striking head of a
woman (3) was carved in Gaul
some 2,000 years ago. Celtic
artists portrayed the goddesses
in many guises. The 32-cm.
high statue (1 ) represents the
Celtic goddess Epona,
protectress of horses. She
was widely evoked in Gaul and
later throughout the Roman
Empire, where she was adopted
by the Roman cavalry. The
Celts believed in the magical
qualities of the number three.
The three-fold mother-
goddess (2), carved on a stone
stele from Burgundy (France)
was concerned with fertility,
childbirth and sometimes war.
Alesla Museum, Alise-Sainte-Reine. France
Photo © Archéologia magazine, Paris
W woman owned more property than her
husband it was she who ran their
household affairs, without even asking
her husband's opinion.
Historical records and old epic
poems have left us some striking
examples of such situations. They
illustrate eloquently the extent to which
women succeeded, in a patriarchal
society, in maintaining a certain pre¬
dominance and an incontestable moral
authority.
Equally important was the fact that
the wife never joined her husband's
family when she married. She con¬
tinued to belong to the family into
which she was born; the price that the
suitor paid to purchase his wife was
a sort of compensation given to her
family. And the woman returned to
her family if the marriage ended in
divorce.
In certain cases especially when
the husband was from another region
the new family created by the marriage
was attached to the wife's family; the
children born of it inherited exclusively
from their mother's side.
The same applied to the royal houses
where sovereignty could be transmitted
through the mother, or through the
maternal uncle. Irish literature and
European literature of Celtic inspi¬
ration provide notable instances of this
practice of making heirs of the off
spring of the mother's brother. The
most famous example is that of Tristan,
the hero of the medieval legend of
Celtic origin. He was the heir of his
maternal uncle, King Mark.
Outside marriage a sort of concubi¬
nage existed, regulated by very strict
customs. In Ireland this lasted a long
time, even into the Christian era. A
man could take a concubine whether
he was married or not. If he was
married he could do so solely with
the consent of his legal wife; but in
any case the concubine installed
herself in his home only after he had
made a contract with her.
The contract's terms included com¬
pensation for herself and for her
family, and she undertook to stay
exactly one year to the day. At the
end of the year the concubine could
regain her freedom unless she made
another contract with the man for the
same period.
This somewhat strange custom,
which has been called "yearly marriage"
or "temporary marriage", had the merit
of safeguarding the woman's freedom
and independence. She was not an
object bought one day and abandoned
the next; she was truly a person with
whom a contract was made. And if the
contract was not respected the con¬
cubine could appeal to a judge chosen
by herself among the wisest men of
the community. These were generally
the druids, who were legal advisers as
well as priests.
The marriage contract itself was
essentially only a provisional agree¬
ment that could be broken at any time,
so normally divorce was an extremely
easy matter. But if the husband decid¬
ed to abandon his wife he needed
serious grounds for doing so. If there
were none, he had to pay a heavy
compensation, exactly as in the unjus¬
tified breaking of any contract.
On her side the wife had the right
to leave her husband if he treated her
badly or kept a concubine in the house
whom she disliked. One well-known
example is that of a druid who wanted
to bring a concubine into his house
though his wife objected. When he
persisted, his wife threatened to
divorce him. As she owned most of
the couple's fortune, the druid thought
twice about it and finally gave up his
concubine.
Though it was in fact usually the
men who wanted to dissolve the
marriage, women were also perfectly
free to do so. Divorce could be vir¬
tually automatic, by a sort of mutual
consent. When a couple separated,
the wife took back her personal goods
and also received her share of all that
the household had acquired during
the marriage.
20

Museum of National Antiquities,
Saint-Germain-en-Laye. France Photo © Roger Ayral. Pans
Bourqes Museum, France
Photo © Franceschl-Zodlaque
This meant that the wife suffered
neither economically nor morally, for
divorce was in no way linked to the
idea of blame. It was simply a contract
that had become null and void, and the
divorce merely recorded this fact.
The problem of children of the
marriage naturally raised difficulties.
In principle, the children belonged to
their father's family; this meant that
they too were protected against any
injustice, for family solidarity worked
in their favour and they were never
abandoned.
They also benefitted from the special
Celtic custom of fostering, whereby
children were sent to learn manual,
domestic, intellectual or martial skills
in another family. This also consider¬
ably widened the framework of family
life by creating links between the child
and his adoptive parents.
Children could inherit from their
mother as well as their father. Daugh¬
ters also had their part in the inherit¬
ance, though their share was slightly
less than their brothers'. But on the
whole, in the historical eras (i.e. from
the 5th century B.C. to the 12th century
A.D.) in Ireland, in Welsh Britain and
in Armorican Brittany," Celtic society
seems to have done much to protect
woman's rights and dignity, including
her moral authority.
Examples abound of women who
attained power and played a leading
role in public life. Boudicca and Car-
' timandua, for instance, were British
queens who became oustanding figures
through their natural gifts of wisdom,
daring and ability to command.
Basically, the exceptional status of
women in Celtic societies comes from
the Celtic view of woman as a mys¬
terious creature, attractive and re¬
doubtable at the same time, and
possessor of the power of giving life.
The entire Celtic tradition, Welsh, Irish
and Breton, emphasizes the sovereign
quality of women.
The Irish epics, first set down in the
9th century A.D., show us an unusual
person, Queen Medb, the legendary
queen of Connaught. She incarnates
this sovereign quality and transmits it
not only to her husband, King Ailill, but
also to her numerous lovers to whom,
as the ancient texts charmingly say,
she was "generous with the friendship
of her thighs".
The descriptions given by the auth¬
ors of the Irish epics are corroborated
by the testimony of the Greek and
Roman writers of antiquity, who were
deeply impressed by the formidable
aspect and the burning energy of
Gaulish women, always ready to join
in a fight to defend their own and
their husbands' rights even taking
part in the battles, like veritable
furies.
The branch of medieval European
literature known as the Arthurian
cycle (from the name of the legendary
King Arthur) is unquestionably Celtic
in origin. It has bequeathed to us
feminine characters who are strange
in behaviour and unusual in their
degree of importance. King Arthur's
wife 0ueen Guinevere (which the old
Welsh texts write as Gwenhwyfar,
meaning "White Phantom") is perhaps
the model of these women who incar¬
nate the idea of sovereignty.
Guinevere is at the very heart of the
Arthurian universe. Through her
beauty and her talents she helps the
knights of Arthur's court to display
their, prowess and gallantry. Sir Lan¬
celot admits that all his valour comes
to him from his love of Guinevere.
And how is one to intepret the fact that
Queen Guinevere is repeatedly carried
off by mysterious warriors, except by
their wish to possess the power the
queen represents? In all the Arthurian
romances Queen Guinevere is pre¬
sented as the central figure of the
court, a sun whose rays illuminate the
knights, who can only live with the
approval she gives them in reward for
their feats of valour.
Like most of the heroines of Celtic
legends, Guinevere is a kind of echo
of an ancient sun goddess. In all the
Celtic languages the word for sun is .
feminine and that for moon is mascu- r
21

kline. Woman is the Sun, so we must
infer that in ancient times the Celts or
their predecessors in Europe worship¬
ped a female solar divinity. We find
the face of this goddess in Yseult, the
wife of King Mark, and heroine of the
story, known the world over, of the
tragic love affair she had with her
husband's nephew, the young and
handsome Tristan.
The legend of Tristan and Yseult
originates in Ireland, where we find it
in an archaic form that strikingly
illustrates the role of woman as postu¬
lated by the ancient Celtic peoples. It
is by no means a banal love story.
According to the Irish archetype, which
features Diarmaid and Grainne, it is
Woman, Grainne or Yseult, who com¬
pels the man to love her. It is she
who leads him on, driven by her
intense determination to escape for
better or for worse with the man she
loves.
Her feminine daring and her com¬
pelling wish to lead the man into a
passionate love affair have come down
to us in a very watered-down version
of the story of the love philtre that Tris¬
tan and Yseult drink unawares. In
reality this famous love potion is a
disguise for the woman's unshakable
and almost superhuman determination.
She wants to compel the man to love
her despite himself, at the risk of losing
his honour and even his life.
This literary reference leads nat¬
urally into Celtic mythology, where the
face of Celtic Woman has been
preserved in its purest form. One
theme recurs time after time: that of
the supremacy that must be conquered
not only by force but through love.
Many Irish and Breton legends tell
a story more or less on these lines:
a group of young men find themselves
in a desert, dying of thirst. An ugly
old woman offers them water on
condition that one of them will kiss her.
They all refuse except one, usually the
youngest. He overcomes his repug¬
nance and when he has kissed the
cheek of the hideous old crone, she
suddenly turns into a beautiful young
girl who says: "I am Sovereignty
incarnate. By your gesture of affection
you have won me."
This theme is found in many parts
of the world, but the Celts have given
it a special significance, and one that
does not alter its symbolic meaning:
the Sovereignty embodied by the old
woman represents a waning authority.
It needs to be regenerated; but only
a young man can restore its youth.
From this regeneration a new era will
arise, peaceful and prosperous for the
kingdom.
Many myths and legends have this
meaning and it explains, at the deepest
level, the famous Quest for the Grail,
22
whose primitive version, completely
pagan, not to say druidical in spirit, is
a passionate search for the sacred and
magic object that one can only reach
through the help of a woman with many
faces. She is constantly present in the
adventures of the hero, and her mission
is to lead him to his goal.
In the imagination of the Celts, in
their dreams that are symbolically
translated into their legends, Woman
was the Initiator. It was she who
introduced Man into a new world; it
was she who gave him his second
birth, in the world of higher reality
and awareness.
She was either a divinity herself or
the priestess of a divinity and the
messenger of the gods this is how
the Celts seemed to see Woman
thereby recalling the ancient cult of
an all-powerful sun goddess who
brings man the warmth of her radiance
and gives him power to accomplish
his destiny.
' But through the very power that she
incarnates, Woman alarmed the Celts.
They tried to master her, even in their
imagination. A Welsh legend which
has survived in one of the stories
of the Mabinogion (a collection of
medieval Welsh tales) tells how Man
tries to free himself from Woman's
domination.
The story is simple but eloquent:
Arianrod, daughter of Don, refuses to
recognize the child she has had by her
brother Gwyddyon and casts a triple
curse on the infant. He will never
have a name unless she gives him
one. He will never have any weapons
unless she provides him with them.
And he will never find a wife among
the human race.
Symbolically Arianrod is refusing her
maternal role, with all the social conse¬
quences that this brings. Without her
the child will have no legal existence;
he will be nothing. Only his mother
can make the child a member of the
community. All this indicates the
importance of the mother in the social
pattern that the legend describes.
Gwyddyon the father decides to fight
against the triple curse. With the help
of his uncle Math, who is a master of
magic and a druid-shaman, he makes
Arianrod speak the name that her son
will bear. He will be called Lieu Llaw
Gyffes, that is, the "Child with the
Sure Hand".
Using magic, Gwyddyon and Lieu
disguise themselves and get Arianrod
to supply them with arms. Later
Gwyddyon and Math literally "fashion"
a woman by charms and incantations
from the flowers and plants of the
hillside. They call this woman Blodeu-
wedd, "Born of the Flowers" and she
becomes Lleu's wife.
CONTINUED PAGE 31
Co/our pages
FABULOUS ART
OF THE METALSMITH
Page 23
Stadtmuseum, Hal
This 4th-cent. B.C. bronze face
once embellished a wooden
pitcher. The great lentoid eyes,
slender moustache and eyebrows
meeting above the nose, all de¬
picted by an interplay of curves,
are typical features of Celtic art
at the beginning of the period
known as La Tène (400-100 B.C.).
The work was discovered in a
Celtic grave at Dürrnberg, near
Hallein (Austria),
lein, Austria
*<*' >
Page 24
Birds play a major role in Celtic
mythology: soaring above the
earth they are in contact with the
Otherworld that the Celts attained
after death. The body of this
"cult wagon" is surrounded by
an escort of birds with curving necks and beaks. A
bronze work, it dates from what is known as the
Hallstatt period (700-500 B.C.) and was discovered
in Transylvania (Romania).
Naturhistorisches Museum, Vienna, Austria
Page 25
^^^^ ^ Above, face of a fabulous animal
Wbm-S forming part of a 10.5-cm-long
I bronze mount of the La Tène
I period. It was found in a grave
near Brno (Czechoslovakia).
Moravske Muzeum. Brno, Czechoslovakia
Below, a highly stylized human
face in bronze-covered iron (8.5
cms long) decorating a chariot
fitting. This 3rd-cent.-B.C. orna¬
ment, with its sharp features and
great protruding oval eyes is a masterwork of carica¬
ture, a comic detail being the large wart on the end
of the nose.
Museum of National Antiquities,
Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France
Pages 26-27		
The early Iron
Age Celts cre¬
mated their dead.
Among other of¬
ferings left in
the grave, they
placed near the
cremation urn a
miniature "cult
wagon", a sym¬
bolic substitute
for the dead person's own vehicle. This 7th-cent-
B.C. bronze wagon is 35 cms long and was found
in a grave at Strettweg in Styria (Austria). The
goddess dominating the group of warriors is 22.5 cms
high. The portrayal of the group suggests the in¬
fluence of archaic Greek art.
Landesmuseum Joanneum, Gratz, Austria
Page 28
This impressive bronze head of a
bull was wrought by a Celtic
craftsman some 2,300 years ago.
Depicted with a combination of
naturalism and fantasy, it may
have been the spout mount of a
jug or similar vessel. The work
was discovered at the same site as
the bird shown on our back cover.
Moravske Muzeum, Brno, Czechoslovakia
Photos © Erich Lessmg-Magnum, Paris
Page 29	
maàm%mfaa\m\\ % Copper pail with three friezes de-
I picting scenes of everyday life
Wl among the Celts. It was found
I in Yugoslavia in 1882 by a
I farmer of the Vace region and
I dates from the 5th century B.C.
I The great cremation cemetery of
I Vace marks the site of a major
I centre of Celtic culture of the
I Hallstatt period.
Photo Narodni Museum, Ljubljana, Yugoslavia

IRELAND'S BOOK
OF KELLS
Never having been invaded by the
Romans, Ireland continued
tenaciously to preserve its Celtic
heritage. Even when Christianity
supplanted paganism in Ireland,
the thread of Celtic continuity
was maintained. Irish monks
wrote down the traditional Celtic
vernacular literature which thus
became the oldest in Europe after
Greek and Latin. Traditional
Celtic art continued to flourish
well into the Middle Ages as the
magnificent art of Irish
Christianity. A masterpiece of
this Christian Celtic art is the
Book of Kelts, a large illuminated
manuscript (33 cm. by 24 cm) of
the Gospels, written in the late
8th or early 9th century on thick
polished parchment. Shown here
is the symbol of St Mark, an
enlarged detail from the opening
of St Mark's Gospel, from the
Book of Kelts. The first words of
each Gospel have a whole page to
themselves, richly decorated with
typical Celtic trumpet and spiral
patterns, stylized birds and beasts
and imaginary monsters. The Book
of Kelts originally had about
730 pages, of which some 670 have
survived and are now preserved
at Trinity College, Dublin (Ireland).
Continued from page 22
But at this point the paternal and
masculine power of Gwyddyon is
thwarted. Blodeuwedd marries Lieu
but she meets and falls in love with
another young man and runs away with
him after having Lieu killed. The rest
of the legend describes Gwyddyon's
revenge. He manages to bring his son
back to life and makes him kill Blodeu-
wedd's lover, who has abandoned her.
Then he goes after Blodeuwedd herself.
But Blodeuwedd is his creature, the
product of his mind. He cannot
destroy her without destroying himself.
In fact his creature has escaped from
him. This rebellion of the Flower-
Daughter is an intolerable blow to his
masculine authority, and to preserve
his self-respect Gwyddyon must punish
her. But he cannot make the culprit
disappear completely; so he transforms
her into an owl and relegates her to
the night. Symbolically, his masculine
vengeance consists in hiding woman
away, enclosing her in darkness and
thereby making her feel guilty and
rejected.
Thus the legend of Blodeuwedd the
Flower-Daughter who hoped to escape
from her father's authority and refused
to be an Object, claiming the right to
be free and to choose her own lover,
ends in defeat. This failure appears
to have many points in common with
what has in fact happened, not only in
Celtic societies but in others nearer to
our own times.
Woman has always tried to shake
herself free from the male yoke and to
regain her independence from man.
But man has always claimed rights of
possession; and as he cannot do
without woman as mother, wife or
mistress, he has imposed on her
taboos steeped in guilt that carry fear¬
ful penalties. Their myths reveal that
the Celts were very much aware of
this. And their society displays an
inherent nostalgia for an earlier age
when woman played a more important
role.
Moreover this woman who is rejected
and buried in the darkness of the sub¬
conscious Is not dead: she lives on,
as beautiful and mysterious as ever,
always ready to rise again into the
light of day, into the conscious mind.
Another Celtic legend, that of the
Town of Ys (a legend known throughout
Brittany), shows us how the ancient
image of woman persists on the
troubled waters of the memory.
The heroine of the story is Dahud,
whose name means "The Good Witch"
itself a revealing allusion to woman's
magical powers. She is the daughter
of King Gradlon of Cornwall, and has
built for herself a marvellous town on
the edge of the sea, or more exactly in
a hollow. The town, Ys, is protected
from the sea by a great dike (1).
But according to the highly Chris¬
tianized version of the legend that has
come down to us, Dahud led a very
dissolute life there. Condemned by
God and men, probably because she
defied patriarchal laws by being the
absolute monarch of her city, she is
doomed to perish, and the whole town
with her.
A tidal wave submerges the town
of Ys; but the legend tells that Dahud
still lives in her wonderful palace at
the bottom of the sea, and that she
is waiting for the right moment to
reappear on the surface of the waters.
When that day comes the town of Ys
will once again be the richest and most
beautiful city in the world.
The symbol is again very clear:
feminine sovereignty is hidden and
buried under the waters, in the dark¬
ness of the subconscious. But when
it reappears in full daylight the world
will regain its harmony and its lost
Paradise where the Woman-Sun will
reign, eternal and all-powerful, giving
life and the intoxication of Love.
This is why in the great wealth of
Celtic legends we find so many
marvellous adventures of heroes who
set out to seek woman in all her
aspects, even the strangest.
Somewhere in the Ocean towards
the setting sun exists a wondrous land
called the Isle of Avalon. It is the isle
of Appletrees. On Avalon are trees
that produce fruit the whole year
round, and sickness and death are
unknown. The island is the home of
beauty, harmony, colour, richness and
fertility; and it is inhabited by women.
They are mysterious faery women,
ancient goddesses, who await heroes
that have dared to risk the wildest
adventures. And men, having ban¬
ished women to darkness, spend their
lives seeking this Land of Enchan¬
tresses, because they know they will
.never attain happiness until they
rediscover their original purity, the
purity of a lost paradise. The Celtic
adventure always ends on the shores
of the Isle of Women.
Jean Markale
(1) The word Ys means "low". The town of
Ys is thus the Low Town.
©
31
