WOMEN PAINTERS
OF NORTHERN INDIA
The paintings reproduced on the following colour pages have been produced
by village women of Mithila, a province in Bihar State, in northeast India.
The women create these masterpieces in their spare time from the daily
routine of cooking, caring for children and working in the fields.
Mithila's women conjure up vivid colours by skilful mixing of minerals and
vegetables: blue from the leaves of the Indigo plant, yellow from orpiment
(a natural mineral form of arsenic), red from logwood or sandalwood.
Mixtures of these colours give them green and orange hues. Their paintings,
full of grace and elegance, portray scenes from the lives of the gods Krishna
with his flute, Shiva with his wives, some gentle, some fearsome to behold,
as well as episodes from the Hindu epic, the Ramayana, depicting exploits
of men and animals who are none other than gods in disguise. Delicately
executed with brushes improvised from bamboo splinters to which wads
of wild cotton are attached, the paintings are executed on the occasion of
various ceremonies and celebrations. They adorn the walls of marriage
chambers, embellish the wrapping paper for ritual gifts, and also decorate
the letters, known as "kohabars" in which Mithila's girls traditionally ask
for a husband's hand. Using rice-water and dung, Mithila's women trace
out remarkable images on courtyard floors, to mark the altars, or "Arlpanas",
where household rituals are performed.
In these many ways the women of Mithila apply their creative talents to
various aspects of everyday life, while adding colour and lustre to festivals
or prayer. Long unknown outside their province, their exquisite work is
today much sought after by art collectors and museum curators, and,
recognizing their talents, the government of Bihar now provides these women
with paper for their work.
Their art has now been revealed to the Western world through collections
brought back from Mithila a small province which 1,500 years ago was
one of India's first kingdoms by a French writer and teacher, Yves Véquaud.
Exhibitions have been held in Paris at the Musée de l'Homme (in 1973), and
at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs (early in 1975). They have shown how
Mithila's ancient traditional art, created entirely by the skill and talents of
women artists, has been preserved and enriched.
Colour pages
OPPOSITE PAGE. Portrayal of Shiva, god of
creation. He is both man (in blue) and woman (in
yellow). According to Hindu tradition, yellow
symbolizes the creative energy of the universe.
Snakes on each side of Shiva represent the unfolding
of life.
CENTRE DOUBLE PAGE. Shiva,
the ascetic of the mounta/n, in
meditation. From his piled-up hair
tumble streams flowing to form the
Ganges. The god is seated on a
tiger whose skin is represented by
squares. Traditional border of small
yellow and black squares within a
red surround is the "signature" of
the family which produced the painting.
Surabhi, the "Cow of Abun¬
dance", is revered as the re¬
presentative of the Earth
Mother goddess. On her back
are the god Shiva and his wife
Parvati. Border of parrot-fishes
symbolizes air and water.
O
Chandra ("The Shining
One") the Moon God,
traditionally depicted
with a crescent moon.
In this well-known epi¬
sode from the great
Hindu epic, the Rama¬
yana, the monkey-
general Hanuman finds
the heroine Sita captive
on the island of Lanka
(Ceylon). He gives her
the ring of her lover
Rama as proof of his
identity and tells her she
will soon be freed. (See
"Unesco Courier", Dec¬
ember 1967).
PAGE 38. This remarkable paint¬
ing depicts a traditional Tantric
theme: the goddess Kali cutting off
her own head to nourish her two
other forms. Beneath her feet lie her
god and goddess parents. The work
symbolizes the unity of the cosmos.
Photos Yves Véquaud, Paris
Mother and daughter at work on
a painting in a village of Mithila
(India). In wall painting at rear,
Krishna plays the flute for two
milkmaids, a country scene dear to
Hindu art. Mithila girls learn to
draw in Indian ink at an early age,
sometimes using a twig as a brush.
34


BHHB^BBS
/»////////"'
(9 m
I I
I
^^H
^B
\
]lT
¡ 1
maai
t~M'
uMW
'i
sàWKR
.....
' ...i m
-J
_
_]_


Lennox
