AFRICAN ART,
WHERE THE HAND HAS EARS
'Every work of art/ says old Africa,
'is like a silent word. Everything speaks.
Everything around us imparts a mysterious
enriching state of being.'
by Amadou Hampâté Bâ
THE meaning which we give
nowadays to the words "art"
and "artist" and the special place
which they occupy in modern society
do not entirely match the traditional
African way of thinking.
"Art" was not something separate
from life. It not only covered all forms
of human activity, but also gave them
a meaning.
Ancient Africa's view of the uni¬
verse was an all-embracing and relig¬
ious one, and acts, particularly acts of
creation, were seldom, if ever, carried
out without a reason, an intention, or
appropriate ritual preparations.
No one who considers traditional
Africa from a strictly secular viewpoint
can hope to understand it.
In traditional Africa there was no
AMADOU HAMPATE BA, of Mall, was a
member of Unesco's Executive Board from
1962 to 1970 and has been his country's
ambassador and minister plenipotentiary to the
Ivory CoastT'He ¡s-çurrently engaged on research
on African history; literature and ethnology,
with special reference to the peoples of the
Niger Bend area. Founder and later director of
the Institut des Sciences Humaines (Institute
of Human Sciences) of Bamako (Mali), he has
published many books and articles about Africa.
His L'Étrange Destin de Wangrin (The Strange
Fate of Wangrin) published in 1973 by Presses
de la Cité, Paris, was awarded the Grand Prix
Littéraire de l'Afrique Noire. He recently
contributed a chapter entitled La Tradition
Vivante (The Living Tradition) to Unesco's
major publication. General History of Africa,
currently in preparation. The author gave fuller
treatment to the subject of the present article in a
study prepared for an International symposium
on "The Artist in Contemporary Society"
organized by Unesco in Paris in July 1974.
division between the sacred and the
profane, as there is in our modern
society. Everything was interconnec¬
ted, because everything was imbued
with a profound feeling of the Unity
of Life, the Unity of all things within a
sacred universe where everything was
interrelated and mutually dependent.
Every act and every gesture were
considered to bring into play the invi¬
sible forces of life. According to the
tradition of the Bambara people of
Mali, these forces are the multiple
aspects of the Se, or Great Prime
Creative Power, which is itself an
aspect of. the Supreme Being known
as Maa Ngala.
In such a context, actions, since they
generated forces, were necessarily
rituals, performed so as not to upset
the balance of the sacred forces of the
universe of which man was traditionally
both the guardian and the guarantor.
The crafts of the iron-worker, car¬
penter, leather-worker or weaver were
therefore not considered to be merely
utilitarian, domestic, economic, aesthe¬
tic or recreational occupations. They
were functions with religious signifi¬
cance and played a specific rôle in the
community.
In the last analysis, in ancient Africa
everything was considered as art, as
long as knowledge of some kind was
involved and also the means and
methods of putting it into application.
Art was not only pottery, painting,
etc. but everything at which people
worked (it was called, literally, "the
work of the hands") and everything
which collectively could contribute to
developing the individual.
These creative activities were all the
more sacred since the world we live in
was considered to be merely the
shadow of another, higher world
conceived of as a mysterious pool
located neither in time nor in space.
The souls and the thoughts of men
were linked to this pool. In it they^
perceived shapes or impressions which
then matured in their minds and found
expression in their words or the work
of their hands.
Hence the importance of the human
hand, considered to be a tool which
reproduced on our material plane (the
"plane of shadows") what had been
perceived in another dimension.
The forge of the traditional ironsmith,
who had been initiated into both gen¬
eral and secret knowledge handed down
to him by his ancestors, was no ordi¬
nary workshop, but a sanctuary which
one entered only after performing spe¬
cific rites of purification.
Every tool and instrument in the
forge was the symbol of one of the
active or passive life forces at work '
in the universe, and could be manipu¬
lated only in a certain way and to the
accompaniment of ritual words.
In his workshop-sanctuary, the tradi¬
tional African ironsmith was thus
conscious not only of performing a
task or of making an object, but of
reproducing, by a mysterious analogy,
the initial act of creation, thus parti- ^
cipating in the central mystery of life, r
12

THE VOICE OF THE MASK.
Among the Guro people in
the south of the Ivory Coast,
the sculptor ¡s a revered and
influential figure. He owes
his prestige not only to his
manual skill but to his
contact with the unseen
forces of the universe, since
it is he who creates sacred
objects such as this mask
(58 cms. high) of polished
hardwood. Ritual marks
can be seen on the face. Photo © Luc Joubert, Paris
13

W The same was true, of other crafts,
in ancient traditional societies in which
the concept of the "profane" was vir¬
tually non-existent, the craftsman's
functions were not performed for
money or to "earn a living", but
corresponded to sacred functions, to
paths of initiation, each of which was
the medium for a body of secret know¬
ledge patiently handed down from gen¬
eration to generation.
This knowledge was always about
the mystery of the primal cosmic unity,
of which each trade was one particular
aspect and form of expression. There
were a great many craftsmen's trades,
because there were also a great many
possible relationships between man
and the cosmos, which was the great
dwelling place of God.
- While the art of the ironsmith is
linked with the mysteries of fire and
the transformation of matter, the art of
the weaver is bound up with the mys¬
tery of rhythm and the creative Word
acting through time and space.
In ancient times, not only was a
trade or art considered to be the em¬
bodiment of a particular aspect of the
cosmic forces, but it was also a means
of making contact with them. To guard
against an unwise mixing of powers
which might prove to be incompatible,
and to keep secret knowledge within
the family, these various categories of
craftsmen came to practise a system
of marriage within their group, regula¬
ted by numerous sexual prohibitions.
It is plain to see how these chains
of initiation or ramifications of know¬
ledge gradually gave rise, through
marriage within the group, to the spe¬
cial caste system of the area formerly
known as the Bafour (savanna region
stretching from Mauritania to Mali).
These castes enjoyed unique status
within society.
Let us take a look at the middle
class, which particularly concerns us
here, namely the class of the crafts¬
men called, in Bambara, the Nyama¬
kalaw.
Owing to the sacred and esoteric
origins of his functions, the Nyama-
kala could under no circumstances
become a slave, and he was absolved
from the obligation of war service
incumbent upon noblemen.
Each category of craftsmen, or Nya¬
makalaw, constituted not only a caste,
but a school of initiation. The secret
of their art was jealously guarded
within the group and strictly handed
down from generation to generation or
from father to son. Craftsmen were
themselves called upon to adopt a
hereditary way of life, with obligations
and prohibitions designed to keep alive
in t.hem the qualities and abilities re¬
quired by their art.
It cannot be emphasized too strongly
that ancient Africa can be understood
only in the light of an occult and reli¬
gious conception of the universe,
where there is a living, dynamic force
behind the appearances of all people
and objects.
Initiation" taught the right way to
approach these forces, which in them¬
selves, and like electricity, were nei¬
ther good nor bad, but which had to
be approached In the right way so as
not to cause short-circuits or destruc¬
tive fires.
We should remember that the first
concern was not to upset in any way
the balance of forces in the universe,
which, the First Man, Maa, had been
appointed to uphold and preserve by
his Creator, as were all his descen¬
dants after him.
At a time when so many dangers
threaten our planet because of human
folly and thoughtlessness, it seems to
me that the principle thus raised by
the old Bambara myth has lost none
of its relevance.
After the ironsmith come the tradi¬
tional weavers, who also possess a
high tradition of craft initiation. Ini¬
tiated weavers of the Bafour work only
in wool, and all the decorative pat¬
terns on their blankets or tapestries
have a highly precise meaning connec¬
ted with the mystery of numbers and
the origin of the universe.
Woodworkers, who make ritual
objects, notably masks, themselves cut
the wood they need. Their initiation is
thus linked to knowledge of the secrets
of the African bush and of plant life.
Those, who make canoes must also be
initiated into the secrets of water.
Then come the leatherworkers who
are often reputed to be sorcerers and,
finally, also belonging to the Nyamaka¬
law, there is the special caste of djeliw
or "public entertainers" also known as
"griots".
Griots are not only musicians,
singers, dancers and story-tellers.
Some serve as ambassadors or em¬
issaries, acting as intermediaries be¬
tween the great families; others may be
genealogists and historians They have
other roles but those I have indicated
are their principal functions.
The griots as a class do not have
their own initiation rites, although indi¬
vidually they may belong to particular
societies which do have such rites.
But they are nevertheless Nyamakalaw,
since in fact they manipulate one of
the greatest forces capable of acting
on the human soul: the spoken word.
While the nobles are bound by tradi¬
tion to observe the utmost discretion
in word and gesture, griots are com¬
pletely free in this domain. As the
spokesmen and intermediaries of the
nobles they enjoy a special status in
society.
As craftsmen in materials or in P
14

wsr
H
j*-:~^.¡
Photo © Luo Joubert, Paris
ART OF SITTING PRETTY. In Africa, the line between arts and crafts is less sharply defined
than in other parts of the world. The African craftsman is an artist in the fullest sense of the word.
Everyday objects, such as the two finely-wrought chairs shown here, display the same technical
mastery and wealth of inspiration as works of religious art. Left, farmer's chair from Togo
(78 cms. high). Made of two pieces of wood whose position can be adjusted by means of a slit
pierced through the backrest, it can be easily dismantled. The beauty of the chair lies in its grace,
simplicity and perfect balance. Above, side view of a chair of the Lobi people (Upper Volta) : seat
and back-support have been fashioned in the natural curve of the wood.

L speech, transformers of natural ele¬
ments, creators of objects and forms,
and manipulators of forces, the Nyama¬
kalaw occupied a place apart In tradi¬
tional African society. They fulfilled a
major rôle as mediators between the
invisible worlds and everyday life.
Thanks to them, everyday or ritual
objects were not simply objects but
repositories of power. Such objects
most often served to celebrate the
glory of god and of ancestors, to open
the bosom of the great sacred Mother,
the Earth, or to give material form to
Impressions which the soul of an ini¬
tiate drew from the hidden part of the
cosmos and which could not be clearly
expressed in language.
In the traditional religion-oriented
world, fantasy did not exist. A crafts¬
man did not make something in a spirit
of fantasy, by chance or to satisfy a
whim. The work had a purpose and a
function, and the craftsman needed to
be in a state of mind which matched
the moment of its creation. Sometimes
he would fall Into a trance, and when
he emerged from it, he would create.
In this case the object was not con¬
sidered to be his handiwork. He was
regarded merely as an Instrument or
medium of transmission. People would
say about his work: "God put it into
you", or "God has used you to create
a fine work".
Art was, in fact, a religion, a form
of participation in the forces of life
and a way of belonging to both the
visible and the invisible worlds.
The craftsman had to bring himself
into a state of inner harmony before
beginning his work, so that this har¬
mony might enter the "aura" of the
object and have the power to move
those who saw it.
He was thus obliged to perform spe¬
cial ablutions and recite litanies which
helped to put him "into the right frame
of mind". Once he had achieved this,
he accomplished his task and trans¬
mitted to the work his inner "vibration".
By sculpting, shaping, embroidering,
drawing geometrical lines on leather
or weaving symbolic patterns, the
craftsman gives material form and out¬
ward expression to this inner beauty
which is within him in such a way that
it enters the "aura" of the object, and
captures the attention of those who,
see it for centuries to come. This is
the whole secret of his creation.
"A thing which has not kindled beau¬
ty in you", says an old adage, "cannot
kindle beauty in another who looks
upon it". Artistic creation was there¬
fore the outward manifestation of an
inner vision of beauty which, according
to ancient tradition, was none other
than a reflection of the beauty of the
cosmos. Art was thus priceless be¬
cause this whole creative process was
something that could not be bought.
There are some statues which one
cannot call "beautiful" in the aesthetic
sense of the term, and yet they some¬
times move us more than a lovely
picture, because they are infused with
ANCESTORS AND RAINMAKERS! The M'Bembe people of eastern
Nigeria live in a savanna region where a slow-growing, dense-grained
wood is found. This tough material has led M'Bembe sculptors to
develop a distinctive style, emphasizing only the basic lines of the forms
they carve. Above, M'Bembe statue of an ancestor, relic of the
decoration of a great ritual drum between 400 and 500 years old.
(Our cover shows a detail of this work.) The tree's growth-rings
are clearly visible on the statue, showing that it was carved across
the grain of the wood. Right, two figures of rain spirits ("nommo")
of the Dogon people (Mali). Wrought-iron statues, 30 and 40 cms.
high respectively, their hands are raised in a gesture of incantation,
calling down life-giving rain from the sky.
a power which can attract or repel,
according to the intention behind the
work.
Occasionally, in the bush, one stum¬
bles unexpectedly upon a circle of
statues raised by the Komo (custo¬
dians of traditional customs and be¬
liefs among the Bambara people of
Mali) which seem to have sprung out
of the earth. The shock which they
produce is so strong that unless their
meaning has already been explained to
you, your first instinctive reaction Is
to run away.
An object may also serve as an ins¬
trument for the transmission of know¬
ledge by means of the symbols which
it bears, such as tapestries, whose
patterns may be deciphered, or carved
stools whose geometrical lines have a
precise meaning.
The work of art, whatever form it
takes, is viewed by traditional Africains
as a porthole through which one can
contemplate the infinite horizon of the
cosmos. One can see many things in
a work of art depending on one's own
degree of development. The seer can
use it to contemplate the occult world.
Secular art, which was certainly very
rare in ancient times, differed from
religious art only in the sense that the
secular object was not "consecrated",
and therefore not "loaded" with spiritu¬
al energy. And there can be no '
doubt that an object which has been
consecrated and used for ritual does
not make the same impression as a
secular object on anyone who is at
all sensitive.
Secular art was considered to be
the "shadow" of religious art. It was
the visible tip of the iceberg for the
uninitiated. One example of the
"shadow" role of secular art is the fact
that copies were sometimes made of
religious masks for the Koté, or
traditional theatre.
It goes without saying that secular
art has developed chiefly since the
colonial era and that it has become
very rare to discover an authentic
and spiritually "loaded" object.
As soon as a mask had been
consecrated, in the Komo tradition, for
example, or among the Dogon people,
it could no longer be seen in the open.
It was hidden from the eyes of the
uninitiated and remained either, in its
hiding-place in the bush or, in the case
of the Dogons, In the cave of the
masks. Some Dogon masks are so
meaningful and so sacred that they
are taken out only once every sixty
16

years for the great Sigui ceremony.
The conclusion to be drawn from all
this is that traditional African art was
not produced haphazardly, and that
it served a central purpose in the
human community.
Most works of art, whether plastic
or in the oral tradition, had several
levels of meaning: a religious meaning,
a meaning as entertainment and an
educational meaning. So it was
necessary to learn to listen to tales,
teaching and legends, or to look at
objects on several levels at once.
This, in fact, is initiation the profound
knowledge of that which is taught
through things, through appearances,
and through nature itself.
Everything which is, teaches through
mute speech. Form is language.
Being is language. Everything is
language.
But, you may say, all that was true
in the past. How do things stand
nowadays?
True enough, the past few decades
have witnessed the destruction, or!
systematic disappearance, of most of
the great traditional initiatory and
craft centres. This has happened for
several reasons: firstly, colonization
policy with its usual and universally
applied tendency of effacing systems
of values and indigenous customs in
order to replace them by its own; next,
the promotion of trade by chambers
of commerce. These, supported by
the authorities, harassed craftsmen
and drove most of the workshops out
of business.
To mention only two examples, the
¡ronsmiths were forbidden to make
certain tools that competed with manu¬
factured products imported from the
colonial mother country and plant-
healers were prosecuted for the
"illegal practice" of medicine.
Gradually, Negro-African art came
to be no longer tolerated except at a
"folklore" level, and, even then, only
If it was remodelled and adapted to
suit the tastes of the rulers.
The trend became even more marked
immediately after independence, with
the general spread of customs and
ideologies imported from abroad and
the invasion of values based on money.
Not only are initiation centres increas¬
ingly rare, but even where masters
still exist, disciples are lacking.
Western-type studies, the attraction
of large neighbouring towns and the
desire to earn money draw young
people like a magnet and carry them
off towards other aspirations.
Traditional African custodians of the
arts, sciences and ancient skills
still exist. But they are few and as
a rule fairly elderly. The treasure of
knowledge, patiently handed down
for thousands of years, can still be
retrieved and rescued if we act while
there is still time and are willing to
listen to what the old sages have to
tell us.
Since Independence, the modern
African artist has been struggling to
assert himself. His search for auth¬
enticity and originality is both difficult
and poignant, for it is not always free
from outside Influence.
Today's African artists are on the
threshold of a new era, during which
they will have a vital role to play. But
the importance of this role will depend
on how they respond to the challenge.
Ideally, no doubt, they should be
able to return to the very roots of
African tradition by seeking Instruction
from the masters who are still
alive instruction not so much in a
technique as in a way of "tuning in"
to the world.
The only message I have for young
African artists is to draw their attention
to the profound meaning of their
ancestral heritage. This would lead
them to take a fresh, more under¬
standing and, above all, more receptive
look at the works of art of the past,
for these were not only "aesthetic"
works (aestheticism had very little to
do with African art) but also a means
of transmitting something transcendent.
Each object from the past is like
a silent word. Perhaps the young
artists of today, more sensitive and
more receptive than most people, will
be able to hear this silent word.
I can only hope that the various
governments concerned, aided perhaps
by international institutions, will realize
the importance of this problem and at
long last recognize the full educational
and cultural importance of the arts.
We live in a very curious age.
The amazing development of science
and technology goes hand in hand,
contrary to all expectations, with a
worsening of living conditions. Along
with the conquest of space has come
a sort of a shrinking of our world,
which has been reduced to its material
and visible dimensions alone, whereas
the traditional African craftsman, who
had never moved from his little village,
had the feeling of participating in a
world of infinite dimensions and being
linked with the whole of the living
universe.
The old African saying goes (and
perhaps the artist of today can hear it)
"Listenl Everything speaks. Every¬
thing is speech. Everything seeks to
inform us, to give us knowledge or an
indefinable, mysteriously enriching
and constructive state of being."
"Learn to listen to silence", says old
Africa, "and you will discover that it
is music."
Amadou Hampâté Bâ
17
