by Elie A. Shneour
THE HUNGRY
BRAIN
A baby's brain can be irreparably
damaged because of the chronic
malnutrition of its mother
THE growth of the human brain
during gestation is one of the
earliest, most rapid and most extensive
developments of the whole organism.
The mature human brain contains
about 11 billion nerve cells embedded
in a matrix of "housekeeping" cells,
the neuroglia, whose number exceeds
100 billion. It is these nerve cells
which perform the functions we asso¬
ciate with intelligence, consciousness,
memory, biological control and inte¬
gration. Nerve-cell proliferation is
complete at birth, and none of these
cells are replaced thereafter.
One of the earliest recognizable
primordial tissues in the human embryo
is the neural plate, the first evidence
of brain development, which appears
by the 18th day of pregnancy. This
means that to generate the required
11 billion nerve cells by the end of
gestation requires the production and
differentiation of an average of 20,000
nerve cells per minute during this
period.
After birth the brain continues to
grow at a much faster rate than the rest
of the body, so much so that by the
time a child is four years old his brain
has reached 90 per cent of its adult
weight, while the rest of his body has
barely made it to the 20 mark. During
this critical period of rapid growth,
much more than just an increase in
weight is involved. The structures
ELIE A. SHNEOUR, of the United States, is
a neurochemist who has devoted many years
to brain research as well as problems of mal¬
nutrition and retarded mental development.
He examines these related questions in the ar¬
ticle published here. A complete treatment of
this subject is presented In his book The Mal¬
nourished Mind (Anchor Press, Doubleday
and Co. Inc., New York, 1974). He has edited
a major anthology on biology and the explora¬
tion of Mars for the U.S. National Academy of
Sciences and is co-author of Life Beyond the
Earth (1966).
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited
making up the brain undergo complex the embryo, which becomes the foetus
and profound changes in anatomy, when it acquires a human resemblance
chemistry and physiology. after six weeks, takes place through
, , , the placenta. Nutrients, oxygen, hor-
The extraordinary growth of the mQnes and waste products are
human brain is shown in the table exchanged by diffusing from one blood-
bel0W: vessel system to the other.
WEIGHT fa malnourished mother may be
^«£ OF BRAIN unable to keep up foetal demands for
(grammes) essential nutrients. The classic work
Newborn	 340 of Drs. R. A. McCance and E. M. Wid-
6 months 750 dowson demonstrated that a growing
j year g7Q organism is extremely sensitive to
2 vears	 1 150 variations in nutrition, and that mal-
_ i'onn nourished rats, for example, would be
J years , permanently stunted even if they later
6 years	 1,250 received an adequate diet, while over-
9 years 1,300 nourishment would result in perma-
12 years 1,350 nently larger animals.
20 years	 1,400
That the placenta was involved
While the rate of brain growth is was demonstrated in the U.S.A. by
highest before birth, the table shows Drs. J. K. Stephan and B. F. Chow at
that the weight of the human brain Johns Hopkins University (Maryland),
nearly triples during the first year of and by Dr. Myron Winick at Cornell
life. This outstanding growth rate is University (New York State). Mal-
not shared with any other mammal, nourished mothers produced smaller
and provides a clue to the important and lighter placentas than adequately-
role which the nutritional requirements fed mothers.
must play during this early period. _ _
Dr. S. Zamenhof at the University
The inescapable conclusion, there- of California at Los Angeles first
fore, is that the human brain is most showed that depriving pregnant rats
vulnerable to inadequate nutrition dur- of protein resulted in a reduced num-
ing the earliest period of life. Further- ber of brain cells in the offspring. This
more, the evidence available on the was confirmed by Dr. Winick, who
subject suggests that the entire course made the striking observation that new-
of human existence may be largely born animals from deficient placentas
determined by the nutrition received also had fewer brain cells,
during that time.
On the other hand, Dr. Zamenhof
The logistic problem of providing was able to raise very bright rats,
the nutritional requirements begins animals which he calls "rat Einsteins,"
shortly after conception and culmi- by providing abundant and well-bal-
nates in the development of the pla- anced food. Perhaps the most remark-
centa. This is a disc-shaped tempo- able observation he made was that
rary organ in which the blood vessels female rats born to malnourished
of the foetus and those of the mother mothers could not produce adequate
come together in an intertwined mass placentas, even if they were well-
without joining. Prenatal nutrition of nourished during their entire adult
20

Il ^i
o
x I
5
lives. Their offspring exhibited the
classic evidence of malnutrition, includ¬
ing a reduction in brain-cell numbers.
This work supports the finding of
Drs. J. J. Cowley and R. D. Griesel in
South Africa that the effect of prenatal
malnutrition on rat mental development
could affect growth and development
into the second generation. Thus mal¬
nutrition, an environmental influence,
can produce effects very similar to
those of hereditary origin. These
experiments were carried out mainly
with animals rather than human beings
for obvious reasons, but there is ample
clinical evidence available to suggest
that the conclusions are equally
applicable to human children.
Dr. J. A. Churchill of Wayne State
University at Detroit (U.S.A.) examined
black pregnant women in poor families
and their children and was able to
observe a definite relationship between
the amounts of amino acids in the
mother's blood streams during preg¬
nancy and the birth weights and skull
volumes of their offspring.
Mothers who had a low level
of these substances in their blood¬
streams as a result of a protein-defi¬
cient diet bore children who weighed
less and had significantly smaller
skulls than those of mothers whose
blood had a higher level of amino
acids. Since the duration of pregnan¬
cies was about the same for all women
tested, premature births played no
role in these results.
The relationship between low birth
weight and mental retardation had
been known for a long time, but the
interpretation usually given was that
premature birth was an important
cause of mental retardation. This kind
of explanation, while probably valid in
part, obscured the effect of malnutri¬
tion on subsequent mental retardation.
In fact, a number of investigators
showed that some of the most severely
mentally retarded children were the
least premature.
Dr. L. C. Eaves of the University of
British Columbia (Canada) reported
on the I.Q. (Intelligence Quotient) test
scores of children with a low birth
weight. The results of this 18-month
study with 502 children showed that
those with low birth weight consistently
scored lower than normal children.
Social and economic status played an
important role in these I.Q. deficiencies
and became even more significant with
increasing age.
Hunger and malnutrition play a vital
role in the growth of the human
brain. It is now recognized that the
child of a chronically malnourished
mother may suffer irremediable brain
damage. Malnutrition in early life
also impedes the maturation of the
brain and jeopardizes its later
development. More than 350 million
children in the world today suffer
from the effects of malnutrition. It is
almost impossible to calculate what
this may mean in terms of brain
damage and mental retardation.
At six months of age the I.Q. differ¬
ence between normal and malnou¬
rished children was only 5 points. The
spread increased to 17 points by age
4. However, when the low-birth-weight
children were contrasted with normal
children of comparable social and
economic background, the normal chil¬
dren still performed significantly better
on these tests than did their birth-
weight-deficient counterparts.
This observation, confirmed by other
investigators, is of capital importance.
It suggests that social and economic
status alone does not account for dif¬
ferences in the I.Q. test performance
of these children, and that the prenatal
environment must therefore have
CONTINUED PAGE 24
21

THE FIRST 4 MONTHS
OF LIFE BEFORE BIRTH
The remarkable photos on these two pages
show three stages in the development of
a child before its birth.
1. Eleven weeks after conception the foetus
floats buoyantly inside a membrane filled
with a salty solution. The foetus is linked by
an umbilical cord to the placenta. Tne
placenta is a temporary organ in which the
blood vessels of foetus and mother come
together without joining. Through these
vessels, in which as much as 300 litres
of blood circulate daily, food, oxygen,
hormones and waste products are exchanged
between mother and foetus, thus providing
vital nutrients for developing bone structures,
the nervous system and brain tissue.
2. By the 16th week the foetus has doubled
in size. It is now about 13 cm. long and is
clearly recognizable as a human baby. Its
face is completely formed but the eyes are
still closed. A network of veins shows
through the transparent skin.
3. At 18 weeks (4 months) the baby
measures over 15 cm. It begins to flex its
muscles. It sucks its thumb and may
scratch itself with its fast-growing finger
nails. At about this time (between the 15th
and 20th weeks) there is a major spurt in
the growth of the nerve cells of the brain,
followed by a second spurt after the 25th
week. Development of the child's
brain requires the production of 1 1 billion
nerve cells during gestation at the rate of
20,000 a minute. If a mother suffers from
malnutrition, her child's brain may not
develop fully. It may have a reduced number
of nerve cells, with a consequent effect
on the child's "Intelligence Quotient." 1
Wm
A
P :P'
:.-.*.v*,y.y"
Î* \±

MB
PÏ&, '
f',',1 :í}.y..'
'í;' I :J. .hK Yí.í^.Y.:r.i^
;,vWÍí-.s,¡.

AUSTRALOPITHECUS
500,000 to
2 million years ago
HOMO ERECTUS
200,000 to 700,000
years ago
NEANDERTHAL MAN
35,000 to 80,000
years ago
played an important role in the out¬
come. Children born small at term,
or premature children, do not seem to
reach their full biological potential, no
matter how well they are fed in later
years.
Such investigators as Dr. C. M. Dril-
lien at the University of Edinburgh
(U.K.) showed that there is among
these children a much greater inci¬
dence of mental and physical handicap,
and that the severity of the difficulties
rises strikingly with decreasing birth
weight. Less than one per cent of the
normal children were found to exhibit
mental deficiencies. But an astounding
54 per cent of them had these prob¬
lems with a birth weight of 1.36 kg
or less.
A vast amount of research work has
also been done with twin births. It
has been abundantly demonstrated that
nutrients generally do not reach each
twin equally during the prenatal period,
and that the smaller of the twins almost
always exhibits a lower mental poten¬
tial, as determined by I.Q. tests.
In the chain of evidence linking early-
life malnutrition to brain development,
the work of Drs. M. Winick and
P. Rosso of Cornell University Medical
College (New York) is particularly
significant. Examining 19 brains from
children who died accidentally in San¬
tiago (Chile), they found that while the
brains of well-nourished Chilean chil¬
dren contained the same number of
cells as those of well-nourished U.S.
children, those of severely mal¬
nourished children who weighed less
than 2 kg at birth had as much as a
60 per cent reduction in their brain-
cell numbers.
Numerous studies exist which relate
chronic early-life malnutrition to
lowered performance on I.Q. tests.
The word "chronic" is emphasized,
because "there is also good evidence
that even acute malnutrition during
pregnancy and in the early years of
life may cause no long-term damage
to cognition. It is primarily the chroni¬
cally poor of the world, the disad¬
vantaged minorities, who are the most
likely long-term victims of chronic mal¬
nutrition with all its tragic conse¬
quences.
Investigators have grappled for
years with the question of heredity
versus environment on human cogni¬
tion. Some of the arguments presented
in support of one over the other have
reached the point of sanctimonious
absurdity. The following three cases
will illustrate the reason why such
arguments are logically self-defeating:
1. A child is born with the inherited
error of metabolism disease phenylke¬
tonuria (PKU), which has a clearly-
defined genetic origin. If left untreated,
PKU leads to irreversible mental re¬
tardation. However, if the child is fed
a diet free of the amino acid phenylala¬
nine, his chances of growing up with
nqrmal mental faculties- are> excellent.
2. A foetus with genetic potential for
normal development is growing in its
mother's womb. During the third
month of pregnancy, the mother is
infected by the rubella (German meas¬
les) virus. The child is born with
severe and permanent defects.
3. An adult with light skin migrates
to a sunny southern climate and an
outdoor occupation. His skin darkens
considerably. Another person with
dark skin moves to a northern environ¬
ment and á sedentary job. His skin
eventually appears no darker than the
light-skinned person before the move
south.
Other factors being equal, how
would the relative influence of here¬
dity and environment on the outcome
TWO MILLION YEARS
THE human brain is the culmina¬
tion of almost three billion years
of evolutionary history. It represents
the most complex structure in creation,
and is the site of man's supremacy in
the animal kingdom.
The fossil record discloses that
increased brain size has been the
most striking sustained trend shown
in hominid (family of man and his
ancestors) evolution. A large brain
must have conferred a clear advan¬
tage, and through the ages this attri¬
bute must have afforded greater
opportunities for survival than did a
small brain.
While at first glance it might have
been difficult to tell Australopithe¬
cus from a contemporary ape, since
both could walk on two feet in an
upright position, had opposable thumbs
and stereoscopic vision, they never¬
theless differed in at least this funda¬
mental respect.
Australopithecus and his descen-
of the three examples just cited be
assessed? It is this dilemma which
confronts those who consider the emo¬
tionally-charged issue of race and
intelligence. Clearly there are many
more variables to be analyzed in this -
instance than in any of the three cases
just cited. It seems clear that chronic
malnutrition is a major environmental
factor in considering the issue as a
whole. The problem begins with what
is meant by "race" and by "intelli¬
gence."
The word "race" has almost always
been used to define a group of human
24

m\^-J I Pvy
CRO-MAGNON MAN
10,000 to 35,000
years ago
MODERN MAN ANTHROPOID APE
chimpanzee
Drawings © from "The Malnourished Mind", by Elle Shneour. Anchor Press, Doubleday and Co. Inc., New York, 1974
OF CRANIAL EVOLUTION
dants had larger brains and overwhel¬
mingly higher intelligence than the
apes that were contemporary with
them. The modem adult chimpanzee's
average cranial capacity is less than
400 cc. (cubic centimetres), the orang¬
utan's is slightly greater than 400 cc,
and the modern gorilla's exceeds
500 cc. By contrast, the cranial capa¬
city of the fossil Australopithecus was
about 500 cc, of Homo erectus more
than 900 cc, and that of modern man
(Homo sapiens) averages 1,400 cc.
These striking relationships are gra¬
phically shown in the silhouettes on
this double page. These data, however,
must be interpreted with some caution;
cranial capacity is not synonymous with
brain volume, and is only a useful
approximation of brain size. Brain
weight today varies over wide limits,
and size can no longer be used as a
determinant of intelligence. Some
very stupid people have large brains,
and some brilliant ones have small
brains.
E.A.S.
beings who are sociologically related.
The modern trend is to define race bio¬
logically. The two often coincide, but
they are not synonymous. A biological
n definition of race states that members
of a given human group share biologi¬
cal characteristics that make it pos¬
sible for that group to be differentiated
from another group. This does not
mean, however, that one group can
be considered superior to another
because of such characteristics.
All men- are created equal, but they
are not all alike. And at the root of
this diversity lies the assurance of
human survival. But diversity is often
confused with inequality. The essential
point to remember in this context is
that mankind belongs to a single spe¬
cies which has been derived from a
common stock. The biological differ¬
ences exhibited by human beings are
due to a combination of genetic and
environmental factors.
There exist no human groups to
which the attribute of "pure race" can
be assigned. Human hybridization has
been going on for a very long time,
and no human being alive today would
have got where he is without his
parents having mixed their genes
together on his behalf.
Intelligence is even more difficult to
define. A British psychologist, Harold
J. Butcher, has pointed out that the
word "intelligence" is a noun, and that
nouns refer to things. Intelligence is
not a "thing," but rather a sophisti¬
cated abstraction for the way people
beha've.
Intelligence is made up of a wide
variety of attributes which individuals
possess in varying degrees. Some
people have the ability to visualize
concepts in three dimensions and can
become outstanding architects or
sculptors, yet may be very poor at
manipulating mathematical abstrac¬
tions. Others have outstanding verbal
facility, yet may be unable to write a
declarative sentence even with extra¬
ordinary effort.
All intelligence-test designers, begin¬
ning with the French psychologist
Alfred Binet, recognize this problem.
They attempt with varying success to
probe a variety of factors which appear
to correlate with their understanding of
what cognitive faculties are.
The misleading simplicity and attrac¬
tive numerical expression of the I.Q.
test, and its predictive effectiveness
in assessing education or job potential,
very quickly caused enthusiasm for it
to overshadow the severe limitations
that responsible psychologists had
warned against.
Dr. W. M. Littell, of the United
States, emphasizes that these tests
have no adequate rationale, and that
they are yet to be placed on a firm
theoretical foundation. . Another U.S.
scientist, Dr. Arthur Jensen, states that
intelligence, like electricity, is easier
to measure than to define. He also
points out that all major studies in this
field have been based on the obser¬
vation of white European and North
American populations, and that know¬
ledge of intelligence in different racial
and cultural groups within these popu¬
lations (e.g., black populations in the
United States), is nonexistent.
While I.Q. tests do not necessarily
measure intelligence accurately, they
are, properly used, a useful research
tool and deserve further study and
development. I.Q. scores may be valid
for a given human group at a given
time and place only. There is no such
thing as a universal I.Q. determination;
therefore such numbers cannot be
used to measure intelligence for peo¬
ple tested once and for all.
Finally, while the issue of race and
intelligence cannot be dismissed out
of hand, the truth is that most conclu¬
sions drawn by scientists and others
on the subject are devoid either of
scientific validity or educational signi¬
ficance. It is far more productive to
examine those controllable factors
which are likely to affect cognitive
potential. Chronic early-life malnutri¬
tion, a probable cause of cognitive
deficiencies, is one such factor which
deserves attention.
Elle A. Shneour
25
