"The principle of dissent in a
democracy is so precious that
everything must be done to foster it",
declared Thomas Jefferson, principal
author of the Declaration of
Independence. That the principle is
still very much alive in the United
States is clear from these
demonstrations demanding full civil .
rights for Blacks, in Washington D.C.
in 1963 (above) and in Montgomery,
capital of Alabama, in 1965 (centre).
Far right, young couples and their
children turn out for a peace march
in New York.
Photo Bruce Davidson © Holmes-Lebel, Pari


U.S.A.
THE CONTINUING
REVOLUTION
by William W. Davenport
F
of
OR Americans, the bicentennial
of independence is an occasion
much nostalgia, some congratu-
WILLIAM W. DAVENPORT, U.S. writer,
Ulm director and university teacher, was
Director ofReidHall, then the most important
American university centre In Paris, from
1968 to 1974. A former professor of English
and Journalism at the University of Hawaii,
he is the author ofmany books and articles on
travel, art and cultural themes. Notable
among his publications are Art Treasures in
the West (Lane-Sunset Books, Menlo Park,
California, 1966) and 200 Years of Franco-
American Friendship (published by the
French Ministry of the Quality of Life, 1975).
lation, and more self laceration.
What we ought to have done long
ago was to extend the basic American
revolutionary principle that "all men
are created equal to Blacks and
other minorities, notably the Indians
whom our forefathers dispossessed.
The battle for civil rights for Blacks
continues. Its landmarks are the 1957
creation of the national Civil Rights
Commission; the 1960 U.S. Supreme
Court decision that stopped discrimi¬
nation in restaurants; the March on
Washington three years later of 250,000
citizens, white and black, demanding
civil rights and complete racial equa¬
lity: the formation in 1972 of the
"People's State of the Union", uni¬
ting twelve activist civil rights groups
from American Indians to senior
citizens.
More recently, on 6 August 1975,
the Voting Rights Act was renewed
to include more than a million Span¬
ish-speaking Americans and other
language minorities. A measure of
progress can be indicated in statistics:
in 1965 in the southern states of the
U.S.A. there were 72 elected black
legislators on the national, state and
44

municipal levels,
thousand.
Today there are a
There are a hundred civil rights
groups in the United States. Oldest
and most powerful is The American
Civil Liberties Union, founded in 1920
"to champion the rights of man set
forth in the Declaration of Indepen¬
dence and the Constitution". It now
has 50 affiliates in 46 states of the
Union with a membership of 250,000.
Its record of test cases fought to the
Supreme Court ranges from defending
the right of Jehovah's Witnesses not
to salute the national flag to lifting the
censorship ban on Joyce's Ulysses.
This Watchdog of civil liberties now
turns its attention to the plight of the
American Indians, the 400,000 des¬
cendants of the original settlers of
America. The expropriation of their
land, the destruction of their way of
life were vividly recounted in 1970 in
Dee Brown's Bury My Heart at Wound¬
ed Knee. This bestselling book, the
Uncle Tom's Cabin of our times,
aroused America to the existence of
one more racial injustice.
In 1973, 200 members of the Ameri¬
can Indian Movement seized the
South Dakota hamlet of Wounded
Knee to overthrow the elected tribal
government of the Sioux reservation.
Although it was an intramural struggle,
the White House sent representatives

to meet with the Sioux to discuss
compensation for the lost lands that
our ancestors expropriated and to
begin an intensive investigation of all
Indian grievances.
in the same year, one of America's
greatest actors, Marlon Brando, made
headlines by refusing to accept the
Academy Award and denouncing the
motion picture industry for "degrading
the Indian and making a mockery of
his character." Brando's efforts to
rectify the wrongs of the past enjoyed
the full support of the younger gen
eration of Americans, now called upon
to expiate "the sins of the fathers."
I wish to speak of this younger
generation, inheritors of the American
Revolution and the American pen¬
chant for self criticism, a virtue that
Professor Winks, elsewhere in this
issue, has properly identified as testi¬
mony that ours is a truly open society.
(See article page 9).
I was associated with this genera¬
tion during six crucial years, from w
1968 to 1974 when I was director of r
45

,Reid Hall, then the most important
American university centre in Paris.
My contacts with some 5,000 students
during this period taught me much.
Their passionate concern for justice,
peace, racial equality, and civil rights"
convinced me that the principles of
our revolution are very much alive,
that we are still a revolutionary
people.
The dominant tone of many of these
students, especially their leaders, was
that of rage. The students were enrag¬
ed, personally affronted by the social
injustice and the cruelty and stupidity
of the war in Vietnam. They protested.
They dissented. Those who condemn¬
ed them must have forgotten Thomas
Jefferson's words: "The principle of
dissent in a democracy is so precious
that everything must be done to foster
it."
It is a measure of the continuing
viability of the American Revolution
that an unpopular war could be stopp¬
ed by the disapproval of dissenting
citizens. It is another testimony to
the continuity of the revolution that an
aroused citizenry, fully informed by a
free press, could drive a president
from office for attempting to subvert
the American system of restraining
executive power through the revolu¬
tionary concept of checks and
balances.
We have the revolutionary tradition,
the indispensable freedom, the salu¬
tary habit of self criticism, the old
American belief in progress and self
improvement, above all the will to
implement the civil liberties explicit
in the Bill of Rights. America was
promises, and is.
William W. Davenport

