THE CHILDREN
OF THE WHALE
Extraordinary legends
make up the oral traditions
of Siberia's far north
by Yuri Rytkheou
WHY is It that research on oral
traditions, especially those
of the peoples of the North, has
concentrated mainly on tales of fantasy
or on heroic epics divorced from
everyday life? What has become of
all the realistic stories and historical
legends, many of which are sufficiently
precise and authentic to take the place
of written sources?
Could It be that this type of story
represented a mass culture which has
been gradually vanishing like an out-
YURI RYTKHEOU is a Soviet writer whose
work is rooted in the oral folk tradition of his
people, the Chukchi of far eastern Siberia. His
books on the Chukchi have been translated
Into many languages. Among his published
works are The Chukot Saga (1956), The Melting
of the Snows (in Russian, 1958) and A Dream
in Gathering Mists (1959). He has also produced
a collection of Chukchi tales, published In
French with Unesco assistance as Contes de
la Tchoukotka (Les Publications Orientalistes,
Paris, 1974). The complete version of the
present text has just appeared in Unesco's
international quarterly "Cultures" (Volume II,
No. 4, 1975).
dated fashion? I do not believe this
is the case.
I think It would be wrong to consider
the vast store of folklore which has
not been published in collections of
tales and legends as the mass culture
of the era before such stories were
recorded In writing.
We should remember that there was
an unwritten law, a kind of tacit
censorship Imposed by the rules of
society which restricted the diffusion
of these stories. The Chukchi people
of northeastern Siberia, near the
Bering Strait, for instance, have a
proverb about the power of the spoken
word. "A word can kill a man", they
say.
I heard Chukchi tales and legends
from the lips of my grandparents, who
brought me up. As I lay under the
cover of the reindeer-skin rug, my
heart would skip a beat when a passing
guest, come to seek the warmth of our
hearth, began to recount some tale^
unknown to me. "
24

The Chukchi and Eskimo peoples of northeastern Siberia have a rich folklore of tales, fables,
proverbs, songs and dances. One legend relates that they have a common ancestor, a whale-father.
Photo shows a famous Eskimo singer and dancer, Nutetein, who composed songs in the Chukcha
language, accompanying them on the ¡arar, the traditional Chukchi drum made from the skin of
a walrus's stomach stretched across a circular frame. . Photo was taken shortly before his death.
25

The folk tales of the Chukchi, unlike
modern written literature, contained a
wealth of circumstantial detail about
place and time of year, though the
hero of the tale was seldom named,
only his tribe and the language he
spoke.
How then were books reconciled
with this ancient and familiar art of
story-telling in the traditional setting
of the yaranga, the Chukchi tent of
seal or reindeer skins? When I was
a child, the Chukchi had already
ceased to look on books as an
unfathomable miracle. Some would
speak with a condescending smile of
the time when these solid slabs of
pages were mistaken for the well-
tanned skins of some mysterious
beast, and reading was likened to the
familiar process of nosing out tracks,
with the sole difference that ¡n this
case it was human speech that was
being "nosed out".
But in my childhood books were
already familiar objects; only their
contents were regarded as miraculous.
In the beginning, books naturally
ousted oral folk literature which, along
with the yaranga, skin boats and fur
thigh-boots, was regarded as a relic
of the past, a sign of backwardness.
At the same time we could not
discard folk literature completely.
In my own experience, oral literature
was a constant, familiar element in
our lives, and one which we accepted
as natural. Even at the time when
I was studying at the university and
helping to compile textbooks for
Chukchi schools and anthologies and
collections of stories, for me oral folk
literature was a reality, something
existing and developing Independently.
But it was only when I began my
career as a writer that I was led to
reflect about the role of the oral
tradition.
AD I not studied the history of
I B world literature and attended
lectures on folklore, aesthetics and
other academic subjects, I" might per¬
haps never have pondered on the
sources which were to provide the
roots for my literary work. These roots
went straight back to the oral folk
tradition of my own people.
But there was one thing that made '
me pause: contemporary literature is
so totally different from unwritten lore
and especially the tales, legends and
myths and moral stories of the Chuk¬
chi people. Who would listen to me
recounting these tales, however new
they might be, even if I wrote them
down? And what could I hope to
discern with the help of the artistic
vision of my forbears? Would I not
be like someone attempting to make
new discoveries in astronomy while
using a telescope as . rudimentary as
Galileo's?
At the time when I was writing my
first stories there already existed, in
both Soviet and world literature, a
quantity of works describing the
mysterious life of the land of the
midnight sun, the people of the Arctic
wastes, the realm of ice and snow.
A few books had been written by
captains of whaling vessels who had
observed the life of the shore encamp¬
ments through their binoculars and,
on the basis of what they saw, had
tried to describe the life and character
of the Arctic peoples. Most of the
other accounts of the Chukchi and
Eskimos expressed sympathy with their
struggle for existence, combined with
astonishment and admiration for their
achievements. These books credited
my people with all kinds of real virtues,
now half forgotten, such as their out¬
standing honesty and capacity for
self-sacrifice, their warm hospitality,
their readiness to help the traveller,
qualities described as now rare among
the peoples of so-called civilized
societies.
But surprising as It may seem, my
own feeling when reading these
stories was one of profound and
growing irritation. I could almost see
the well-meaning author making as
though to pat me condescendingly on
the head and with a pitying smile on
his face, offer me a crumb from his
table. It never occurred to him to
invite me to sit by his side, or even
simply to shake me by the hand. His
attitude was one of pity and sympathy
for his younger brother, whom he was
trying, perhaps even sincerely, to help
and please.
There were of course also some
works, European, American and Soviet,
full of genuinely humane feeling. But
all viewed the subject as It were from
outside, and while being enraptured
by It, the authors were no less en¬
raptured by their own nobility.
About the middle of the 1950s
I decided to write a story about a
contemporary of mine, a man who had
discovered modern culture through a
series of astonishing and often dis¬
tressing adventures. I wanted to find
out what happened when a man who
had his roots in an ancient culture
came into contact with a great modern
civilization with all its diversities and
uneven values. So I wrote the book
that was subsequently entitled The
Melting of the Snows.
I delved back into the memories of
my own childhood, to those moments
of vision when I suddenly seemed to
see things with extraordinary clarity.
I found it impossible, of course, to
convey the atmosphere of my child¬
hood days without recapturing my
attitudes and those of the people
amongst whom I lived. And it was
then that I saw how our whole way of
life had been coloured by the oral folk
traditions which formed the back¬
ground of our everyday philosophy.
The whole of The Melting of the
Snows was permeated by the tales
and legends of my childhood days.
And I realized that in a book of this
kind, I could not do without them.
Had I tried to eliminate all the folk
elements, there would simply have
been nothing left. And as time went
on, I found It more difficult to do
without the resources of folklore.
A few years ago, I set to work
on the novel A Dream in the
Gathering Mist. This is the story of a
Canadian man who is to spend all his
life amongst the Chukchi people. Its
principal theme is the brotherhood of
men regardless of their origins, the
colour of their skin and the stage they
have reached on the road to social
progress. j
I had to find a way of enabling the
Chukchi to convey to the Canadian
their ideas about the brotherhood of
man, so I made one of the heroes of
the novel, Toko the hunter, who had
given the Canadian shelter, recount
the ancient legend of the origin of the
seafaring folk, the hunters of the sea.
"...old men say that on these
shores, In days long ago, there lived
a young maiden. And so beautiful
was she that even the mighty sun,
gazing at her in wonderment, remained
always in the sky, and the stars
came out in daylight to behold her.
Wherever she trod, flowers sprang up,
and fountains of water spurted forth.
"The fair maiden went often down,
to the shores of the sea, for she loved
to watch the movement of the waves
and listen to their rippling. The
whisper of the wind and the waves
would sometimes lull her to sleep, and
then the beasts of the sea would
gather on the shore to gaze upon her.
The walruses would come up on to the
shingle, and the seals stared at the
maiden with their unblinking eyes.
"Then one day, an enormous
Greenland whale came swimming past.
His curiosity aroused, by the cluster
of beasts on shore, he came closer
in, perceived the maiden and was so
entranced by her beauty that he
forgot whither he was going, and on
what errand bent.
"And when the sun, exhausted, had
sunk down on the horizon to rest
awhile, the whale swam inshore again,
touched the shingle with his snout,
and turned into a comely youth. The
maiden, seeing him, cast down her
eyes. So the youth took the maiden
by the hand and led her into the
tundra, into the soft gras.';, and lay
with her on a carpet of flowers. And
so It was that, every time the sun sank
26

down on to the horizon to rest, the
whale swam inshore, turned into a man
and lay with the fair maiden.
"Time went by, and she knew that
she was with child. So the whaleman
built a large yaranga where he took
up his abode with the maiden, and
never again swam out to sea.
"Whale-babies were born, and their
father put them in a small lagoon.
Whenever they swam up to the shore
in search of food, their mother would
,go down to meet them. They grew
¡apace, and soon there was no longer
room for them in the lagoon, and they
began to yearn for the freedom of the
open sea.
"Their mother grieved to see them
go, but all to no avail, for whales are
beasts of the deep. So the whale-
children swam away out to sea; and
their mother conceived once more, but
, this time she bore not whales but
human children. The whale-children
never forgot their parents, and often
swam Inshore to gambol in their sight.
"Time passed. The children grew
up and the parents grew old. The
father went out hunting no more and
his sons procured the food. The first
time they set out to sea, the father
called them to him, and pronounced
these parting words:
" 'For the bold and the strong, the
sea will provide. But remember one
thing: your brothers also live in the
sea as well as your distant cousins the
dolphins and the finback whales.
Never raise your hand against them.'
"Soon after this the father died: and
the mother grew too old to accompany
her sons out to sea. The sons took
wives, and many children were born
to them. They needed more and more
food. So the whale children became
seafaring people Chukchi and Eski¬
mos living by trapping and hunting
the beasts of the sea.
"Then came a year when there was
little game to be caught offshore. The
walruses no longer followed the path
to the village, the seals swam off to
distant parts, and the hunters were
forced to ßo far out to sea where they
perished, some on the Ice-fields, some
in the ocean depths.
"Only the whales were always there,
gamboling merrily off the shore. Then
one day, one of the hunters said:
" 'Why do we not kill the whales?
Just think of all that meat and blubberl
Why, one carcass would suffice for us
all, both us and our dogs, the winter
through.'
" "But have you forgotten, then, that
the whales are our brothers?' the
others objected.
" 'How can they be our brothers?',
scoffed the one who had spoken first.
'They live not on land but in the water,
they have long, ungainly bodies and
they know not a word of human
language.'
" 'But legend says ..." protested
the others.
" 'A fine lot of old wives' tales . . .
the first hunter cut them short, and
went off to prepare his boat, taking
all the most skilled and stalwart
oarsmen along with him.
"Catching a whale presented no
problem, for they all swam up to the
boat, as they always did when they
saw their brothers putting out to sea.
But this time their trust spelled death
to one of their number.
"Once harpooned, It was a long
struggle, to drag the whale to shore,
and all the folk of the village, including
even the women and children, were
summoned to help.
"The man who had caught the whale
entered the yaranga to tell his mother
of the prey he had captured for the
people. But she already knew and
was dying of grief.
" 'I have killed a whale', he said as
he came in, "a solid mass of meat and
blubber."
" 'It Is your brother you have killed',
his mother replied, 'and if today you
are ready to kill your brother just
because he looks different from
you, what will you be ready to do
tomorrow?'
" "And so saying, she breathed her
last."
B;I Y using this ancient fable in my
novel, I was able to convey my
meaning without boring my readers
with a long didactic exposition.
There is of course nothing novel
about my discovery that works of oral
tradition may often be the only means
of reaching the modern reader, and
indeed increasing numbers of Soviet
writers are adopting this device.
It is impossible, for instance, to
conceive of Chlnghiz Aitmatov's tale,
The White Steamer, stripped of the
poetic legend of the Horned Deer
Mother, the ancestress of the Kirghiz
people.
Aitmatov has, I think, succeeded in
making the best possible use of the
ancient myths of his people, and he
has found the ideal solution to the
problem of the modern writer and oral
folk tradition.
The writing of the other newly
literate peoples of the Soviet Arctic
has developed along roughly the same
lines. Many of their writers are my
contemporaries, personal friends of
mine, and most of them studied with
me in Leningrad. But for all their
similarities, they differ widely from
one another both in the character of
their work and in their attitude to our
oral folk traditions.
Vladimir Sanghi, who Is of Nivkh
nationality, was born on the Island of
Sakhalin, in the easternmost part of
the Soviet Union. He was steeped
from earliest childhood in the en¬
chanted atmosphere of Nivkh oral
poetry with which are blended elements
of the culture of the North Pacific
Ocean, the transitional zone between
the warm tropical waters and the
frozen Arctic seas.
Sanghi, after completing his studies,
returned to Sakhalin and began to
make a collection of the island folklore.
He started his literary career by
publishing folktales in Russian and his
native language, and in this way he
discovered his vocation as a writer.
THE Mansi poet Yuvan Shestalov
belongs to a people of hunters
and reindeer breeders living in the
Arctic foothills of the Urals. The
Mansi, like the neighbouring Khanty
people, belong to the Finno-Ugrian
linguistic group. As a poet, Shestalov
draws deeply on the treasures of his
native folklore. Some of his poems
and song-cycles are based wholly on
subjects taken from oral poetic tra¬
dition, while others are simply a
transposition of folk legends.
So it Is clear that oral folk tradition
plays a considerable part in the
modern literature of the newly literate
peoples, even though writers rarely
draw on this material when dealing
with present-day society on the
grounds that it provides no solutions
for the urgent problems of our time.
And yet contemporary literature offers
many examples of the use of mytho¬
logical themes for the solution of vital
artistic problems.
But the question still remains as to
how to use this invaluable material
for the enrichment of contemporary
culture, how to find a place for it not
only in books, archives and recordings,
but also as a source for literary
creation. And this is a question to
which I can see no simple answer.
Indeed, there probably can be none,
for every modern writer evolves his
own individual attitude to the rich oral
heritage of his own people.
Yet a return to one's origins, to the
unsullied sources of folk art nearly
always leads to new artistic dis¬
coveries. No works of man breathe
such joy and optimism, such faith in
the triumph of good over evil, such
subtle humour and such sensitive
understanding of social harmony and
justice as we find in oral folklore.
These, I believe, are the qualities
that for countless centuries have
enabled oral folk traditions to shape
the attitudes of each new generation.
Yuri Rytkheou
21
