Was Atlantis
an island
in the
Mediterranean?
CAN the disappearance of the legendary
continent of Atlantis, described by
Plato in his Dialogues and the subject of so
much controversy and theorizing, be explain¬
ed in terms of an ancient seismic catastrophe
in the Aegean Sea? Some archaeologists
believe so or at least that the seismic history
of the eastern Mediterranean can throw
light on the sudden collapse, around
1500 B.C. of the Minoan empire and the
Cretan civilization, one of the greatest of
Antiquity.
v We now know -that 3,500 years ago the
eastern Mediterranean was the scene of
. one of history's most, gigantic natural disas-, ¡
ters: the explosion (around 1480 B.C.) of
the volcanic island of Santorin, 100ikm
north of Crete. The explosion sent millions
of tons of volcanic ash hurtling into the
atmosphere, giving rise to intensive atmos¬
pheric shocks and generating devastating
tsunamis that destroyed many ports and
towns of the Minoan empire.
Examining this cataclysm and the theories
that have been put forward about it, notably
by Prof. Spyridon Marinatos, Director of
the Greek Department of Antiquities, George
Pararas-Carayannis, Director of the Inter¬
national Tsunami Information Center in
Honolulu, writes : "Recent archaeological
work on the island of Santorin unearthed,
partly submerged below the sea, a comple¬
tely intact 3,500-year-old Minoan city.
Excavations by the University of Athens
uncovered one-, two-, and three-story
houses and numerous Minoan artifacts and
utensils. The absence of human skeletons
from the city indicates that the inhabitants
had advance warning of the oncoming
eruption of the volcano and had time to
evacuate the island". The volcanic eruption
and the tsunamis alone did not destroy
entirely the Minoan civilization. But for
two centuries the Minoan civilization on
Crete was weakened by numerous earth¬
quakes that destroyed its cities and caused
it to decline rapidly.
As for the legend of Atlantis, he concludes,
"Whether Santorin and the other Minoan
colonies on the Aegean islands actually
constituted the lost continent of Atlantis may
never be known with absolute certainty."
Santorin in the Aegean Sea (see map below) was once a volcanic island almost
1,500 metres high. Around 1480 B.C. it erupted. The crater blew sky-high,
and then the whole mountain collapsed, forming a huge cavity in the sea.
Into this cavity rushed some 62 billion m' of sea water creating waves that reached
hundreds of metres in height. Then just as quickly excess water rushed out
setting off giant waves (tsunamis) in all directions across the Mediterranean at
speeds of over 500 km per hour. Above, Thira, chief town of Santorin (also called
Thira) dominates a circular lagoon, where the sea replaced the vanished crater.
Of ancient Santorin there remains only the little group of islands seen in photo
below. This, according to one theory, is the source of the legend of Atlantis.
32
Photo O H.E. Edgerton from "The End of Atlantis - New Light
on an Old Legend", by J.V. Luce © Thames and Hudson, London 1969
