For the first time in history
CHINA PREDICTS A MAJOR
EARTHQUAKE AND SAVES
AN ENTIRE POPULATION
FROM DISASTER
by Dan Behrman
AN international scientific meet¬
ing at Unesco headquarters in
Paris took a dramatic turn recently
when, for the first time in such a sett¬
ing, the story was told of a successful
attempt to predict a major earthquake
and to get an endangered population
out of its way. The report was given
by China to the Unesco Intergovern¬
mental Conference on the Assessment
and Mitigation, of Earthquake Risk, at
a special session devoted to earth¬
quake prediction.
The Chinese delegation, headed by
Liu Ying-yung, director of his country's
State Seismological Bureau, told of
methods used to forecast the Haicheng
earthquake that occurred in Liaoning
Province on 4 February 1975 with a
magnitude of 7.3 on the Richter
scale (1).
The delegation also described Chi¬
na's effort to develop a seismological
network which has been termed "the
equivalent of an Apollo space pro¬
gramme". The genesis of the effort
was traced to the severe earthquake
that Struck Hsingtai in Hopei Province
in 1966 and led the late Premier Chou
En-lai to set a priority on seismology.
China now has 10,000 professional
and 100,000 amateur seismologists in
a network comprising seventeen stan-
DAN BEHRMAN is a Unesco science
writer well known to " Unesco Courier "
readers. He is the author of "The New World
of the Oceans" (Little Brown and Co.. Bos¬
ton, U.S.A.) also published in a paperback
edition, "In Partnership with Nature: Unesco
and the Environment" (Unesco, Paris, 1972)
and "The Man Who Loved Bicycles"
(Harper's Magazine Press, New York, 1973).
His latest book "Solar Energy and Awake¬
ning Science" will be published later this
year (by Little Brown and Co.).
dard stations and nearly 300 regional
stations. By enlisting amateur obser¬
vers who include farmers, workers,
teachers, telephone operators, meteo¬
rologists and radio broadcasters the
Chinese have sought to give the
population at large a role and a stake,
to put the citizen on the same side as
the scientist.
From the very start of the pro¬
gramme, Liaoning Province looked sus¬
picious. Following the earthquake at
Hsingtai, seismologists noted that the
epicentre of subsequent smaller shocks
seemed to be migrating northeast
towards Liaoning, heavily populated
and industrialized. In 1970, a decision
was taken to keep a close watch on
the province. This involved all the
techniques in the seismologist's pano¬
ply, starting with the study of past
earthquakes and local geology.
Geodetic surveying across a major
fault between September 1973 and
June 1974 showed that the earth's
surface there was rising twenty times
faster than in a normal year and tilting
towards the northwest. During the
same period, a change was recorded
in the earth's magnetic field and tidal
stations over on the shore of Liaotung
Bay showed a rise in sea level. Finally,
the number of small earthquakes in
1974 was five times higher than
normal.
These findings led the government
to warn the population that a bad
earthquake was in the offing. However,
no one could yet say exactly when it
would occur and other signs were
sought. Among these were changes
in the behaviour of animals.
The Chinese, in their report to the
Unesco conference, told of such ins¬
tances in the past. Two hours before
the Pohai earthquake of 7.4 magnitude
on 18 July 1969, a keeper at the Tient¬
sin zoo noticed that his tigers were
acting strangely and told local seis¬
mologists that "a big earthquake may
be approaching". And in Szechuen
Province in September 1972, a pre¬
diction team announced the onset of
another earthquake after observing
"the panic of chickens, pigs refusing to
enter pigsties, horses and sheep
running about frenziedly..."
The man in the street or on the farm
is considered by the Chinese to be a
valuable source of observations of
changes in animal behaviour or in the
level of ground water.
In December 1974, such changes
were seen and reported in Liaoning.
Wells in four communes suddenly
turned muddy and started to bubble;
rats and mice left their holes; hibern¬
ating snakes slithered out onto the ice.
Then a magnitude 4.8 earthquake
occurred seventy kilometres from
Haicheng, leading authorities to con¬
clude that something more serious was
on the way. The local population had
already been involved in "earthquake
manoeuvres"; now, a campaign began
to teach every household what to do
if an earthquake came.
Though a scientific paper, the Chi¬
nese report is almost a cliff-hanger,
leaving the reader to wonder what will
happen next. Early in February, ani-.-
mais were still acting abnormally and r
(1) A scale used to measure the strength
of earthquakes on which each higher num¬
ber represents a tenfold increase in the ma¬
gnitude of the tremors and a 30-fold increa¬
se In the energy released. A 2-point quake
is barely perceptible, a 5 may cause minor
damage, a 7 is severe, an 8 is a violent quake.
11

ANCESTOR
OF ALL
SEISMOGRAPHS
The Chinese have the double distinction of
having kept faithful records of earth¬
quakes from very early times since 780
B.C. and of inventing the first instrument
capable of detecting them at a distance.
The Chinese ancestor of all seismographs
was produced in 132 A.D. by a famous
mathematician, astronomer and geograph¬
er named Chang Heng (78-139 A.D.). His
instrument was fitted into a large orna:
mented bronze vessel (as ' shown . in
drawing on right and in facsimile, at left,
in the Museum of Geology at Peking)!
From Volume III, "Science and Civilization In China" by
, wells showed disquieting signs.
Twenty-two became artesian; in a
hot-spring resort, the opposite hap¬
pened when the flow of water was cut
off three times. The report stated:
"The most peculiar case took place at
the Shaozihe Commune in Youyan
Country where gas-bearing water
spouted forth from ice like geysers."
The pace of events quickened. On
2 February, an abrupt fall in terrestrial
electricity was recorded at one seis¬
mological station; at another, the tilt
of the earth's surface was seen to
move towards the southwest.
One wonders just what made the
Chinese decide when the earthquake
would strike. Apparently, the last
straw was a series of small earth¬
quakes that began on 1 February in a
region that had been almost non-
seismic previously.
Seismologists studied the location of
these shocks and the direction taken
by their so-called P-waves [seismic
waves that cause rocks in their path
to compress and then expand in the
same direction as the waves are travel¬
ling]. The scientists concluded that
these were the forerunners of a much
larger earthquake likely to hit the
Haicheng-Yingkou region.
The scientists passed their findings
to the local government. An hour and
a half later, a meeting at Haicheng
decided that it was time to move from
earthquake manhuvres to reality.
"Without delay, people were notified
to build temporary huts, to move
patients from hospitals, to concentrate
transportation facilities and important
objects, to organize medical teams, to
persuade people to move out of their
houses, to move the old and weak to
safe places. . ."
At 7:36 p.m. on 4 February 1975,
the Haicheng earthquake came at last.
But, reported the Chinese, loss of life
was greatly reduced because most
people had left their homes. Vehicles
had been moved from garages and
farm animals from barns. "Within
the most destructive area, more than
90 per cent of the houses collapsed
to some extent, but many agricultural
production brigades did not suffer
even a single casualty. In the Ding-
jiagou brigade of Haicheng, consisting
of more than 3,000 persons, only one
child was injured."
On one street in Yingkou, 3,470 per¬
sons came through with no casualties,
although 82 of their 801 homes collap¬
sed completely. "However," said the
report, "in certain communes and
brigades, such as the Shinpengyou
brigade, two commune members, in¬
fluenced by old ideas, did not believe
the prediction of a strong earthquake. .
They brought their children back to
sleep in the evening of 4 February.
As a consequence, among more than
3,400 people in this brigade, three
died in the earthquake".
This led the Chinese to conclude
that if earthquake losses are to be
reduced, one must not only estimate
the danger accurately but, at the same
time, educate those who are at risk,
making certain that the seismologists'
findings do not remain arcane
secrets. There is a human side as well:
"Let seismological work be really
considered as the task of the masses
of the people as well as of the govern¬
mental seismological brigades."
A similar attitude was expressed at
the Unesco conference by Rasnar
Stefansson of the Icelandic Meteoro¬
logical Office who told how an earth-
12

Drawings below explain how it functioned.
Inside the vessel was a heavy pendulum
connected to eight mobile arms. At the
end of each arm a crank operated the
jaws of a dragon head (eight heads in all).
Earthquake shocks vibrated the mechanism
causing the dragon's jaws facing the
direction of the shock to open, dropping a
ball into the mouth of one of the eight
toads placed around the instrument. The
position of the ball thus indicated the
direction from which the seismic shocks
had originated.
Prof. Joseph Needham © Cambridge Univ. Press, U.K.
quake swarm had struck the north of
his country near the end of last year.
Within a month, it generated no fewer
than 10,000 earthquakes that could
be felt without instruments, 100 of
them greater than magnitude 4.
On 25 December 1975, he was able
to tell local sheep-raisers that there ;
was no need to fear any more severe
shocks. He emphasized that the
population must be involved: "If you
explain wnat you know and what is
happening, people won't hold it
against you if you make mistakes."
This is all the more important in
China with a great density of popu¬
lation living in seismic zones. It was
in China that the most disastrous
earthquake of all time occurred at
Huahsien in Shensi Province in 1556,
leaving 820,000 dead.
Traditional Chinese houses are
built with heavy roofs that protect
them from the climate but can prove
lethal in an earthquake. Replacing
them with earthquake-resistant hous¬
ing ¡s a long job. Until it can be
done, prediction is the best safeguard.
The Chinese delegation stated that
more than ten earthquakes with a
magnitude greater than five have
been forecast. However, this is only a
"small percentage" of all that occur
because few observations are avail¬
able from remote areas in western
China.
Other countries, notably Japan,
U.S.A. and U.S.S.R., have been con¬
ducting research in earthquake pre¬
diction and reported some of their
findings at the conference. Dr Robert
Hamilton of the U.S. Geological Sur¬
vey told how the San Andreas Fault
in California has been instrumented
with fifty tiltmeters in deep and shal¬
low holes while laser-ranging instru¬
ments sensitive enough to detect one
centimetre of crustal deformation over
ten kilometres have been set up.
The tiltmeters have shown the most
promise. Since November 1974, three
earthquakes of magnitude 4 or greater
on the San Andreas Fault were all
preceded by a tilt anomaly. About a
month before the earthquake, the
instruments start to deflect and keep
on deflecting until it occurs.
"Precursors do exist and prediction
is feasible," Dr Hamilton said, "but
a prediction sufficiently reliable to be
useful to us does not exist." Never¬
theless, it was the policy of the U.S.
Geological Survey to inform the pub¬
lic of what it observes, rather than
withhold information for fear of rai¬
sing an alarm. "We see no alterna¬
tive," said Dr Hamilton.
One should note that stakes are not
the same everywhere. In the United
States, only 1,600 lives have been
lost to earthquakes during the entire
history of the country and the typical
American wooden dwelling can be
expected to ride . out most shocks.
Even so, earthquake prediction in *!
United States is a delicate matter an;,
is likely to be so in any developed
industrial country.
An American study has shown that
property values can be expected to
drop by as much as 60 per cent in
the event of the prediction of a
7.3 magnitude earthquake while cons¬
truction comes to a halt and overall
business activity declines by a quar¬
ter. Such are the problems that are
likely to appear in the not-so-remote
future as the prediction of earthquakes
is fined down to an exact science.
Dan Behrman
13
