EARLY MAN GOES THROUGH
THE SPEECH BARRIER
by Aleksey A. Leontyev
THE ancient Greeks believed that
field mice could read and there¬
fore used to scratch messages on
stones asking the mice to keep out
of their fields. Legends aboutspeech
and sound persist among many peoples
of the world. There are several Rus¬
sian folk tales in which the hero tries
to learn the language of birds and
beasts as well as the languages of
other peoples.
In one such tale, for instance, the
hero's parents send him out into the
world "to learn many different: lan¬
guages from a wise man so that he
may know what the bird says when
it sings, the horse when it neighs
and the sheep when it bleats."
Animals live in the same world of
sounds as man: the sounds, firstly,
of inanimate naturethe whistle of
the wind, the thunder of the water¬
fall, the rumble of the avalanche;
the sounds of other living creatures
the song of birds, the shriek of the
howler monkey, the snarl of the tiger;
and the sounds made by man and by
man-made things.
i It is the same world of sounds, but
yet completely different: animals are,
: as it were, completely separated from
that world by an impenetrable psy¬
chological barrier, a filter which lets
through only certain sounds. They
ALEKSEY A. LEONTYEV, head of the de¬
partment of Methods and Psychology at the
Pushkin Institute of the R ussian language, in
Moscow, is a leading Soviet specialist in lin¬
guistics and psychology. He is the author of
10 books and over 200 papers in these fields,
many of which have been widely translated,'
and was a contributor to Foundations of
Language Development, a two-volume work
published under Unesco's auspices in 1975.
hear sounds but heed only those
which are in some way connected
in their consciousness with their own
vital needs, those which have signi¬
ficance as a signal.
The female nightingale appreciates
the singing of the male as a signal
of the forthcoming satisfaction of its
sexual needs, whilst to a prowling
cat the same song conveys quite a
different messagea meal in the
offing. The roar of a tiger is a danger
signal for all other living creatures.
To an animal, human speech is just
another, more complex signal, ano¬
ther element of reflex behaviour.
Even such domesticated, animals as
dogs, which sometimes appear to
understand everything that is said
to them, are in fact responding to
the sound of the words (not to the
sense of those words) as research
by the eminent Dutch animal psycho¬
logist F. Buytendijk and the Soviet
physiologist Leonid Voronin has shown.
The essential difference between
man, even primitive man, and animals
is that man does not submit passively
to nature but pits himself against it.
He joins forces with others, helps
them and is helped in return. He
uses things made by others and co¬
operates with them in transforming
his environment. A new world thus
emerges, the world of man and of
man's achievements, material and
spiritual, the world of human culture.
Sound too forms part of this emer¬
gent culture. Primitive man needed
sounds in order to organize collective
labour. Whereas among ; animals
sound is identified with needs, with
man it became identified with activity.
It would be interesting to know
what these first truly human sounds,
the primitive speech of Neanderthal
man, were like. Early man obviously
had the necessary vocal apparatus,
but its functions were limited: the
edges of the vocal folds, or true vocal
cords, had not yet curved round and
the passage between the larynx and
the oral cavity was narrow, while the
soft palate was further away from
the back of the larynx than in present-
day man.
This means that the speech of
Neanderthal man must have been
accompanied by a lot of inharmo¬
nious, piercing, high-pitched noises-
whines, screeches, squeaks, etc.
This, however, was not the most
important characteristic of primitive
speech. Soviet anthropologists who
have studied the shape of the cere-'
bral cavity in the skulls of our early
ancestors have come to the conclu¬
sion that by Neanderthal times the
fronto-temporal region of the cerebral
Cortex, which is responsible for orga¬
nizing external stimuli, images and
signals into a coherent order, was
becoming highly developed.
This development signified a revo¬
lutionary change. Man had hitherto
simply allowed sound to break over
him like the waves of a great ocean,
distinguishing only certain "splashes"
of sound which carried some vital
message for him.
But when sound acquired a social
significance, man had an objective
criterion for comparing different so¬
cial sounds with each other: sound
became to some extent independent
of the perception of a particular hu¬
man being, and acquired an objective
content which was the same for all
hearers. Only then could man cap-
CONTINUED PAGE 25
22

H* .
Photo 'G Raghu Rai, New Delhi
23

MASKED VOICES AND
SPOKEN SIGNATURES
For centuries the plastic arts depicted the human voice simply as
an open mouth, suggesting the spoken word or a cry,
as in the head surmounting this pottery vessel from Zaire (left).
Below, decorative mask carved in stone and symbolizing tragedy,
in the ruins of a Roman theatre at Demre (Turkey). Like their
Greek counterparts, Roman actors wore masks, pierced
with enormous gaping mouths, indicating the nature
of the characters they played. Recently a Swiss musician
and painter, Aage Justesen, has succeeded in giving the human
voice visual form. The vibrations of the voice can be recorded
as a series of irregularly-shaped overlapping surfaces
which are then photographed. Justesen has used
this process to record famous contemporary figures pronouncing
their own name and has given the name "pictonoms" to the resulting
"spoken signatures". Below, in descending order, the "pictonoms"
of the celebrated violinist Yehudi Menuhin, Sherpa Tensing
(the Nepalese who reached the summit of Everest with
Sir Edmund Hillary in 1953) and the Spanish painter Joan Miró.
Photo © Hoa-Qui, Paris
YEHUDI MENUHIN
JOAN MIRO
Photo René Caloz, Paris
24

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 22
ture sounds and compare them with
other sounds, only then could he
put two meaningful sounds together.
Thus he acquired the faculty oí speech,
the faculty of communicating with
others.
As primitive man's activities be¬
came more varied and complex he
began to acquire a faculty which he
had previously lacked, that of per¬
ceiving his own actions as a chain
of separate but sequentially linked
operations. Previously he had to
indicate his activities by means of
single, unarticulated sounds, but now
there was no longer anything to pre¬
vent him articulating different sounds
to compose a complete, coherently
developing sequence.
This again represented a revolu¬
tion in the relations between man
and his world, and in his perception
of the world: sound now became
subjectively linked not with an acti¬
vity, but with a particular object used
in that activity. Sounds had become
symbols.
Words now began to represent
only that aspect of things which is
of practical utility. They conveyed
ideas about things themselves, about
the whole category of similar objects
and about the variety of functions
which such objects perform in social
life. As words developed this new
role, general ideas about objects
began to exist independently of the
particular situation in which the object
is being usedconcepts emerged.
The . next and vitally important
development was the appearance of
concepts which were not connected
"with any tangible object. Joy and
sorrow, time and space, life and
death have no existence in the world
of material objects, but they exist
in the world of words and the world
of concepts. Thus, thanks to sounds,
thanks to words, man could now juggle
with the most abstract concepts.
Words were now becoming more
and moo3 numerous, but the human
ability to pronounce different sounds
was still restricted. Such a skill
became increasingly necessary as
words could now be lifted from their
immediate context, that of practical
activity, and needed to be recognized,
distinguished, demarcated from other,
similar words. How was this to be
done?
One way of varying sounds is by
the pitch of the fundamental tone,
but here again the possibilities are
limited: the human vocal apparatus,
except for that of a Chaliapine, is
capable of producing sounds within
a register of only two octaves, and
the vocal apparatus of primitive man,
as we have already seen, was inca
pable of producing pure musical
tones.
A simpler way is to take variations
of timbre-the pitch and quantity of
overtonesi.e. to take as the criterion
for distinguishing between different
sounds the region in which the cha¬
racteristic resonance bands determin¬
ing the quality of a given sound are
to be found, a region known as the
formant of that sound. The formant
does not depend on the fundamental
tone with which a particular sound
is uttered. The concomitant noises
occurring along with consonants are
'also situated within the limits of par¬
ticular regions of the sound spectrum.
This was the way which nature
chose in creating human speech.
Each of the thousands of languages
in the world has its own system of
speech sounds. Each of these sys¬
tems satisfies at least two conditions:
all the sounds in that system are
sufficiently well differentiated in their
place and manner of articulation.
However, only those differences in
articulation which produce adequate
differentiation of formants, thus en¬
suring that the ear can distinguish the
different sounds, are actually used.
The criteria used for differentiating
the sounds of speech vary widely from
one language to another. In Rus¬
sian, sounds are differentiated by
place of articulation (labial, dental
and velar consonants), by whether
they are voiced or unvoiced, "soft"
or "hard", and by whether or not the
nasal cavity is involved in their pro¬
nunciation.
There is no distinction between
hard and soft in German, but there
is a distinction between strong and
weak. The aspirate-non-aspirate
distinction is important in Hindi. In
Fori, one of the languages of Papua-
New Guinea, none of these previous
distinctions is made and the important
differences are the presence or absence
of the nasal glide or the glottal stop
at the beginning of a consonant. The
length of the consonant is also an
important factor.
In the course of his development
man learned to organize word sounds
into coherent sequences. Why then
should he not apply the same prin¬
ciple to organizing sounds within the
word itself? This would obviously
give him even greater opportunities
for distinguishing words and in par¬
ticular for inventing new ones in order
to keep pace with the ever-increasing
variety of objects and concepts in the
world around him.
The task of shifting sounds around
and putting them into different orders
did not, however, prove easy. Even^
now it is not easy because of ther
II
o Ï
i. "
cz
ig
TO
o3
LISTENING
TO PREHISTORY
Thousands of years old, this strip
of reindeer horn (below) is one
of the most ancient musical
instruments yet discovered.
Covered with geometric incisions
and painted with red ochre, it
was found in the Dordogne
region of France. It bears a strong
resemblance to an instrument
known as a "bull-roarer" (above)
once used in Brazil during certain
mystic ceremonies. The bull-roarer
consists of a thin board that
the player holds by a cord tied
to one end and whirls over his head.
In whirling, the board also spins
around its own axis, thus
producing a roaring or wailing
sound. Today the bull-roarer
is simply an easily improvised toy.
25

, need to arrange sounds into basic
pronounceable unitssyllables. For
this reason, a particular sequence of
vowels and consonants is obligatory
in many languagesthe Polynesian
languages, Japanese and others.
In those languages where the
syllable can end with a consonant,
the choice of such final consonants
is always smaller than that of initial
consonants, and in the languages
of South-East Asia-Chinese, Viet¬
namese, Burmesethese are almost
exclusively the so-called sonants.
The combination of consonants in a
syllable thus always follows a definite
articulatory sequence.
To take an example from the Rus¬
sian language, we have the mono¬
syllabic word "vdrug", meaning "sud¬
denly", but .from the point of view
of articulation the syllables "drvug" or
"rdrug" are not possible words.
Another new world also emerged
alongside the world of words: that
of socially experienced feelings, ex¬
pressed in images specially created
for that purpose. Primitive art, pri¬
mitive sculpture and music were born.
The opinions of scholars differ as
to the origins of music. The com¬
monest theory is that man began by
mimicking the sounds of nature. But
there are no. clearly distinguishable
differences of pitch in nature, no cri¬
teria, that is to say, that the originator
of the first scale could work by. Why
for that matter did he need to fix, to
memorize a sound of a particular pitch
in order to compare it with others?
The most likely explanation is that
the first sounds of fixed pitch were
speech sounds which already had a
human significance. Musicologists
who have studied the music of
present-day peoples with archaic
forms of culture, such asthe aborigines
of Tierra del Fuego or the Vedda of
Sri Lanka, have found that singing is
the only form of music familiar to
them and that there is a striking simi¬
larity in the musical structure of
their chants, the overwhelming major-
pr
MUSIC FOR SEEING. The interplay of light, leaves, birds and wind¬
swept flowers in this drawing explains its title. Summer Sonata. It
was drawn in 1907 by the Lithuanian painter Mikhail Churlionis (1875-
1911) who sought to present the language of musicsonatas, preludes
and fuguesin visual terms.
ity of which consist of a sequence of
only two or three notes, not exceeding
the range of a minor third. The
songs of peoples with a more highly
developed culture such as the Hausa
of Africa have a similar recitative
form, a similar sequence of two notes
separated by a minor third.
The ability to distinguish the sounds
of music thus developed from the
ability to distinguish differences of
timbre, and is another physiological
mechanism peculiar to man. This
ability was systematized and dev¬
eloped as music itself developed.
Music, however, did not part company
entirely with speech. There are many
known languages in which differences,
of pitch help to distinguish different
words or even different syllables-
Lithuanian and Serbo-Croat, Swedish
and Norwegian, Japanese and Ainu,
most of the African languages, many
of the Amerindian languages, Chinese,
Vietnamese, Thai, Burmese, the
Austronesian languages and many
of the languages of Papua.
Sound was now broken down into
separate phonemes and syllables, but
in the form of stress or accent it
continued its existence. Accent
may be even or it may be musical,
using differences of pitch, or it may
take the form of stress, involving
differences of intensity. But there
is not à single language, nor indeed
a single word in any language,
without accent. Accent is a vestigial
fragment of the primitive speech
sound, but one which now plays a
new function.
Speech is, however, more than
the sum of the words which compose
it. Words flow together into com¬
plete utterances and the thing that
binds them together, which indicates
their special functions (question,
exhortation, exclamation), which
26

shows what elements of the utterance
the speaker considers most impor¬
tant, is yet again sound, this time
embodied in the speaker's intona¬
tion.
Intonation is another vestigial
trace of primitive, probably even
animal sound: "dumb" animals, al¬
though they are unable to imitate
speech sounds, can sometimes imi¬
tate human intonation quite
accurately.
The language of man contains yet
i' another leftover from its animal an¬
cestry: interjections, those inarticulate
utterances which facilitate the ex¬
pression of the simplest emotions-
fear, surprise, joy, sorrow, admiration,
etc.without the use of words. In¬
terjections are similar, though not
always identical, from one language
to another. To express surprise, a
Russian says "Akh!" or "Okh!", a
Frenchman "Oh-la-la!", an English¬
man "Oh!", a German "Ho Ho!", and
a Papuan of the Asmat tribe "Woo".
Another ancient stratum of sound
in various languages is onomatopoeia.
A Russian represents the crow of a
cock as "kukareku", a German as
"kikiriki" and an Englishman as "cock-
a-doodle-doo".
Sound has been socialized, it has
become the common property of all
humanity, but at the same time it
remains an essential element of that
which makes each individual human.
Soundthe sound of speechmakes
all the wealth of knowledge and social
experience available to us. Sound
the sound of musicenriches our
emotional world. The sounds of
man are social sounds and the world
of human sound is. a social world.
Underlying the system of sounds in
any given language is a particular out¬
look on the world which is expressed
in that language, in its sounds, its
words and its grammatical forms.
To be able to grasp this new, always
fresh, always surprising outlook, to
see the ßame world through different
eyes, is a great pleasure which is now
) accessible to more and more people.
Aleksey A. Leontyev
The wind sighing in the trees, ruffling water, beating across vast plains
and rushing through narrow mountain gorges produces some of nature's
most striking and memorable sounds. In the 17th century a German
Jesuit scientist, Athanasius Kircher, widely known for his writings on
acoustics and musicology, created this "wind harp", a curious
instrument whose strings vibrated in the wind to produce unexpected
and mysterious sounds.
WIND, WATER
AND TALKING BUSTS
Hero of Alexandria, the Greek
mathematician and writer on
mechanical subjects who lived
in the 1st century A. D. created
remarkable "water sculptures"
which delighted his
contemporaries. In this
ingenious example, the water
fills the box and drives out
the air, causing the birds to
pipe different notes. The water
is then emptied by means of
a syphon causing the owl to
turn towards the birds which
are now silent.
Engraving shows the creation of a sound environment as imagined
by Athanasius Kircher, inventor of the wind harp shown above, in his
work Phonurgia Nova (1673), a mixture of serious scientific exposition
and a kind of science fiction. A system of "acoustic horns" funnels
street noises to the "talking busts" inside the houses. A modern
counterpart exists in the U. S. A. today where a young American
composer, Maryanne Amacher, creates experimental "musical"
compositions out of natural and urban sounds. Such sounds are
relayed live to a concert hall and are blended into spontaneous
"musical" performances.
27
