NASRUDIN HODJA
THE MAN WHO RODE
HIS ASS BACKWARDS
mmffià y:':, y.. wÈËm H




the legendary hero
of Muslim humour
whose wit and jocular wisdom
have the world splitting its sides
with laughter
by Ivan Sop
EW comic folk heroes in world
literature rival Nasradin Hodja,
the author of innumerable pranks and
the subject of waggish stories which
amuse and delight people from Mor¬
occo to the frontiers of China and
from Siberia to the Arabian Peninsula.
Stories by Nasrudin or about him are
found in some forty languages.
For centuries the name of Nasrudin
Hodja (Hodja is a term of respect,
meaning teacher) has been associated
with tales that are amusing, somewhat
naive, ribald, and yet imbued with pro¬
found folk-wisdom. These stories also
exemplify the use of wit and irony as
weapons against brutal force and
oppression.
But who was Nasrudin?
Some think he never existed and
that he is part of the inexhaustible
IVAN SOP, Yugoslav writer and literary critic,
is an authority on the humour of the international
folk hero Nasrudin Hodja. He has written a
doctoral thesis on this subject lor the University
oí Belgrade and is the author oí "The Meta¬
morphoses of Nasrudin", a book published in
1973. He is currently working with the Belgrade
Institute oí Literature and Arts.
fund of popular legend. Others are
convinced that he was a man who
actually lived and was born in Turkey,
but many countries claim to be his
place of birth.
According to tradition Nasrudin
was born about eight centuries
ago in Turkey, in the little village
of Harto near the township of Bivrihisar
(to the west of Ankara). For over a
century scholars have been trying to
discover where he really came from. In
Akcheir, another town in Turkey which
claims him as a son, a festival is held
periodically in his honour. This is
where he is supposed to be buried
and an inscription on the wall of his
mausoleum suggests that he died
some time before 1392. But there
is no means of proving these assertions
and theories.
According to legend, his tomb
was surrounded by columns but was
without any railings and merely had
a massive door with a padlock and no
key. This was said to be an example
of the wisdom of Nasrudin who used
to say that the doors were "closed
for his friends and open for his ene¬
mies"
CONTINUED PAGE 20
SYMMETRY PRINCIPLES
AT HIGH ENERGY
JANLARV J»-H. IH4 / UNIVERSITY OF MIAMI
bwhram kurfurtr-flu * Arnold FarimuttM EftlTOU
THE GLOBE-TROTTER
Nasrudin Hodja Is often depicted sitting
backwards astride his donkey. He
explained to his students why he did this:
"If I rode facing ahead", he said, "you
would be behind me. If on the other hand
you were to walk in front, you would turn
your backs' on me. I think therefore that
to ride this way solves all these problems
and besides it's far more polite!" In
Turkey, Nasrudin has been represented
in many ways: right, 18th-century
miniature in the Topkapl Museum, Istanbul;
bejow, cover of an illustrated book of
200 tales of Nasrudin by Alfred Mdrer,
published in French, Istanbul 1975. This
picture has also been used as a postcard
in Turkey. Nasrudin and' his donkey have
even crossed the Atlantic. Above, they
figure on the cover of a collection of studies
presented at a conference on high energy
physics held at the University of Miami,
U.S.A. (Symmetry Principles at High
Energy, published by W.H. Freeman and
Co., San Francisco and London, 1965.)
Anecdotes and aphorisms of Nasrudin
are scattered throughout the texts.
ALFRED MÖRER
CONTES CHOISIS
16

17

WHERE THERE'S
LIGHT THERE'S HOPE
Someone saw Nasrudin searching for something
on the ground. "What have you lost, Mulla?"
he asked. "My key", said the Mulla.
So they both went down on their knees and
looked for it. After a time the other man
asked: "Where exactly did you drop it?"
"In my own house." "Then why are you looking
here?" "There is more light here than
inside my own house."
From "The Exploits of the Incomparable Mulla Nasrudin",
by Idries Shah, illustrations by Richard Williams © 1966,
Mulla Nasrudin Enterprises Ltd, published by Jonathan Cape
Ltd, London
A MAN OF HIS WORD
Nasrudin had some good news for the King, and after
a great deal of difficulty managed to gain an audience
although by tradition every subject theoretically had
the right of immediate access to the Court.
The King was pleased with what he had been told.
" Choose your own reward", he said. "Fifty lashes",
said Nasrudin. Puzzled, the King ordered that Nasrudin be
beaten. When twenty-five strokes had been administered,
Nasrudin called: "Stop!" "Now", he said, "bring in
my partner, and give him the other half of
the reward. The chamberlain, Your Majesty, would
not allow me to see you unless I would give him
exactly half of anything that I got for my good news."
From "The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin",
by Idries Shah, illustrations by Richard Williams and Errol le
Cain © 1968, Mulla Nasrudin Enterprises Ltd., published by
Jonathan Cape Ltd., London
ART OF IMPARTIAL JUDGEMENT
When the Mulla was a judge in his village, a dishevelled
figure ran into his court-room, demanding justice.
"I have been ambushed and robbed", he cried, "just
outside this village. Someone from here must have done
it. I demand that you find the culprit. He took my
robe, sword, even my boots."
"Let me see", said the Mulla, "did he not take your
undershirt, which I see you are still wearing?"
"No he did not."
"In that case, he was not from this village. Things are
done thoroughly here. I cannot investigate your case."
WHICH WAY ROUND ?
A man who had studied at many metaphysical
schools came to Nasrudin. In order to show
that he could be accepted for discipleship
he described in detail where he had been
and what he had studied. "I hope that you
will accept me, or at least tell me your ideas",
he said, "because I have spent so much of
my time in studying at these schools."
"Alas!" said Nasrudin, "you have studied the
teachers and their teachings. What should
have happened is that the teachers and the
teachings should have studied you. Then we
would have had something worthwhile."




THE
THOUSAND
AND ONE
PRANKS
OF .MULLA
NASRUDIN
Nasrudin Hodja, the great comic folk hero of the
Muslim world, whose origins go back to medieval
times, has become an international character of
universal appeal. The anecdotes of Nasrudin are
enjoyed for their exhilarating humour and admired for
their jocular wisdom.
"Good enough for Nasrudin" is the hallmark of a
rib-tickling story in Turkey. Egypt, Syria, Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria, Greece, Iran, Pakistan and India, and he is
increasingly read in many other countries ranging
from the U.S.S.R. and U.K. to the U.S.A. and China.
A Soviet film has also been made depicting Nasrudin
as a people's hero.
The stories and witty drawings on this double page and
our cover are from two collections of Nasrudin tales
told by Idries Shah, a writer born in India from an
Afghan family, and published by Jonathan Cape Ltd.,
London : "The Exploits of the Incomparable Mulla
Nasrudin" (1966) illustrated by Richard Williams and
"The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin"
(1968) illustrated by Richard Williams and Errol le Cain
(see also front cover). A third book, "The Subtleties
of the Inimitable Mulla Nasrudin ".illustrated by Richard
Williams and Richard Purdum was published by
Jonathan Cape in 1973.
LAST YEAR'S NESTS
"What are you doing in that tree, Mulla?" "Looking for eggs."
"But those are last year's nests!"
"Well, if you were a bird, and' wanted a safe place to lay, would you build a new
nest, with everyone watching?"
From "The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin", by Idries Shah, illustrations by Richard Wil¬
liams and Errol le Cain © 1968, Mulla Nasrudin Enterprises Ltd., published by Jonathan Cape Ltd., London
From "The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin",
by Idrles Shah, illustrations by Richard Williams and
Errol le Cain © 1968, Mulla Nasrudin Enterprises Ltd.,
published by Jonathan Cape Ltd., London
SEE WHAT I MEAN ?
Nasrudin's tomb was fronted by an
immense wooden door, barred and
padlocked. Nobody could get into
it, at least through the door. As his
last joke, the Mulla decreed that the
tomb should have no walls around it ...
The date inscribed on the tombstone
was 386. Translating this into letters
by substitution, a common device
on Sufi tombs, we find the word
SHWF. This is a form of the word
"seeing", especially for making a
person see. Perhaps It is for this
reason that for many years the
dust from the tomb was
considered to be effective in curing
eye troubles ...
From "The Pleasantries of the Incredible Mulla Nasrudin", by Idries Shah, illustrations by Richard Wil¬
liams and Errol le Cain © 1968, Mulla Nasrudin Enterprises Ltd., published by Jonathan Cape Ltd., London
18


Nasrudin Hodja is known by the name of
Goha in Egypt where many anecdotes are
told about him. "I saw your wife at the
market!" a neighbour remarked to Goha.
"That's right," Goha replied. "As it's her
fortieth birthday today, I propose to barter
her for two twenty-year-olds!" Widely popu¬
lar, Goha figures in a series of Egyptian
children's books, "Stories of Goha" by
Kamel Kilani, published by Dar Maktabaf .
al-Atfal, Cairo.. Drawing below Is from one;
of them, "The Sack' of Dinars".
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 16
He is always popularly represented
as an old man with a white beard
wearing an outsize turban, simply
dressed and sitting backwards astride
his donkey so as to be sure that he
is always facing in the right direction
for, as he says: "whatever I tell my
donkey to do, he does the opposite."
The character of Nasrudin, an aston¬
ishing blend of wisdom and native wit,
has long since gone beyond the
frontiers of popular Turkish literature.
He is part of the folklore of the Balkan
peoples, the Serbians, the Croatians,
the Macedonians, the Bosnian Muslims,
the Bulgarians and the Albanians.
His stories are also current in Iran,
Armenia, Georgia, the Caucasus, Tur¬
kestan, and in many other countries.
Nasrudin exemplifies the humour
that is deeply rooted in oral folk tra¬
ditions, so it is hardly surprising that
so many of his "brothers" are to be
found all round the Mediterranean.
The Arabs know him as Djuha,
Djoha, Djuhi or Goha, the Berbers as
.Si Djeha or simply as Djeha,. the
Maltese as Djahan, the Sicilians as
Giufa, the Calabrlans as Hioha or
Jovani.
In reality, Nasrudia is something of
an anti-hero, a parody of the epic hero;
he is poor, dirty, shabbily dressed and
uses coarse language. He steals
without hesitation when he has the
opportunity.
One day when he was singing while
washing himself, Nasrudin decided that
he had a very pleasant voice. When
he emerged from the bath house he
rushed to the top of the minaret of
the mosque and, although it was noon,
he called the faithful to evening prayer.
Someone shouted up from below:
"Fool. With such a horrible voice
you should be ashamed to give
the call to evening prayer when It's
midday." Nasrudin leant over and
shouted back, "If some kind person
had built a bathhouse on top of the
minaret you would see what a fine
voice I have."
Innumerable stories Illustrate his
character and behaviour. When his
wife died Nasrudin did not seem very
upset. Shortly afterwards his donkey
died and he wept bitterly. Someone
said to him, "The death of your donkey
seems to have upset you more than
the death of your wife." Nasrudin
replied: "That's quite easy to explain.
When my wife died my friends told
me, "We'll find you an even more
beautiful wife." But when I lost my
donkey nobody said to me, 'Don't
worry, we'll buy you a stronger donkey.
Surely I've every reason to mourn my
donkey."
One day, Nasrudin was throwing
fermented milk into Lake Akshir. A
passerby called to him, "What on earth
are you doing? "I'm making yoghurt."
"Do you think it'll take?" asked the
man in astonishment. "I'm quite sure
it won't", answered Nasrudin, "but just
supposing it did!"
Since folklore is a valuable well-
spring of literature, anecdotes about
Nasrudin have served as an inspiration
for poets and authors of many national¬
ities, Russian, Ukrainian, Romanian,
German, Serbian and Turkish among
others. In some cases one adaptation
Influences another. The Yugoslav
writer Slovko Micanovlc used a book
about Nasrudin by the Soviet author
Leonid Golovyov as a model, in writing
his novel "Nasrudin Hodja in Istanbul".-
Nasrudin appears to have been
everywhere as we learn from ubiquitous
legends about his life. According to
one such story Nasrudin was a sage
living in Baghdad around the tenth
century, at the time of the Abbasid
Dynasty. Having been accused of
heresy during a period of religious
strife, he is said to have feigned mad¬
ness in order to save himself from
the scaffold.
Other accounts say he lived in Asia
Minor, in Anatolia, in the 13th or 14th
centuries. Tradition also has it that he
lived at the time of Sultan Bayezit and
his wars with Tamerlane in the late
14th and early 15 th centuries. And an
entire cycle of tales about him and
Tamerlane exists in Turkish folklore.
Some stories about Nasrudin and
Tamerlane, reflect the spontaneous
popular resistance to the Mongol con¬
queror. In the following stories, for
example, the dialogue between Nas¬
rudin and Tamerlane initially seems to
be merely an exchange of ideas but
then a sudden flash of Nasrudin's wit
makes Tamerlane seem ridiculous.
Tamerlane said to Nasrudin, "All
the Abbasid Caliphs are known by a
nickname. Al-Mustansir means 'dep¬
endent on God's help', al-Mu'taslm,
means "seeking protection in God'
and al-Mutawakkil means 'trusting in
God'. What would you have nick¬
named me if I had been one of
them?" Straight away Nasrudin repli¬
ed, "Tamerlane God-help-us."
One day Tamerlane Invited Nasrudin
to the bathhouse and asked him, "If
I had been a slave what do you think
I would be worth?" "Fifty pence"
replied Nasrudin. Tamerlane was
offended: "Don't you realize that the
loin cloth I am wearing is alone worth
that?" "Yes, of course", replied Nas¬
rudin smiling, "That's my offer for the
lot!" , .-r
One day when Nasrudin was with
Tamerlane in his palace, a platinum
mirror was brought to the conqueror
as a gift. Tamerlane looked at himself
in the mirror and a. few tears came
into his eyes. Noticing this, Nasrudin
in his turn began to weep. Soon
Tamerlane recovered his composure
whereas Nasrudin was still sobbing.
"Nasrudin" said Tamerlane, "when
I saw how ugly I was in the mirror,
I was a bit upset. Knowing how
fond you are of me I wasn't sur¬
prised to see that you shared my
sorrow, and I thank you. But, tell me,
why are you still crying now that I
20

have got over it?" "Sire", said Nas¬
rudin, drying his tears, "seeing your
face for a moment in the mirror upset
you for quite a time. I see you all
day long. It's only right that I should
weep a little longer.
Variants of these stories occur in '
which ordinary people get the better ,
of the powerful and in which the
"adversary" who is made a fool of ¡s
not Tamerlane but a bey or a pasha.
However Nasrudin's witticisms some¬
times have quite a different character,
as in the following story. A man
said to Nasrudin, "Look at that goose
running over there." "And what's that
to do with me?" Nasrudin replied.
"But it's just gone into your house",
the man said. "And what's that to do
with you?" retorted Nasrudin.
Nasrudin, one of the poorest of men,
also stands up for a certain stan¬
dard of human dignity and moral inte¬
grity although it is the comic vein
which prevails, as in the following tale.
One day Nasrudin was a guest at
dinner and turned up wearing thread¬
bare clothing. Everyone ignored him.
Feeling his pride hurt, he slipped out
of a side door, hurried home, changed
into suitable clothing, put on a beauti¬
ful fur-lined cloak and returned to the
palace. This time he was welcomed
at the door with great ceremony and
was ushered to a place at the prin¬
cipal table. He was offered the best
dishes and every attention was lavish¬
ed upon him. After enjoying all his
favourite foods, Nasrudin took hold of
the fur on the ample sleeve of his
cloak, leant towards it and pushed it
affectionately towards a well-filled
plate saying "Eat, eat, my furl"
The other guests were intrigued
by this prank. "Nasrudin, what are
you doing?" With his customary good
humour, he described what sort of
welcome he had been given on his
first arrival and the reception that had
been accorded him when he returned a
second time. "As it is my fur that has
received the honour", he concluded, "it
too should share in the feast".
The humour of Nasrudin is not only
social satire, it is also a way of looking
at life which was obviously not always
in agreement with the ideology and
ruling powers of the time.
The character of Nasrudin is a pro¬
duct of anonymous creators: crafts¬
men, peasants, shopkeepers, donkey
drivers, carters, beggars, shrewd
townsmen and countrymen, dreamers,
all those who felt social injustice more
clearly than they understood the
reason behind it, and who expressed
their human predicament in stories,
tales, jokes and quips.
Nasrudin's stories have a value
which is universal: always using the
same effect, that of comedy, they
approach and sometimes even rival
the great works of world literature.
Ivan Sop
STROKE OF LUCK
Nasrudin Hodja lost his donkey and began to look for it crying "Thanks be to
God, thanks be to God". "Why are you thanking God?" people asked him.
"I'm thanking him because I wasn't on the donkey when It got lost, otherwise I
should have got lost with iL"
ONION MYSTERY
One day when Nasrudin Hodja was stealing onions in a field he was caught by the
owner, who asked what he was up to. "I was blown here by the wind", replied
Nasrudin unabashed. "And who uprooted the onions?" "I caught hold of them
to stop myself being blown away." "And how did they get in the sack?" "That's
just what I was wondering when you interrupted me."
21
