UNESCO'S
EARLY YEARS
by Julian Huxley
Unesco's first Director-General {I946-1948}
This year marks the 30th anniversary of the
foundation of Unesco. Born at the end of the
Second World War, on 4 November 1946, Unesco
has seen its membership grow from 20 countries
in 1946 to 136 today. On the one hand, this issue
focuses attention on Unesco's early years and its
first Director-General, Julian Huxley, who died on
14 February 1975. On the other hand it presents a
Unesco perspective on some of the major problems
of the world today. The August-September double
issue will present Unesco's 30 years of activity
in comic strip form.
My two and a half years incharge of Unesco affairs
were the most exciting period of my
life, but I must say also the most
exhausting.
It all started only through the acci-
dent of Sir Alfred Zimmern's sudden
illness early in 1945 when he was Sec-
retary of the Preparatory Commission
for Unesco. It was only because of
this that I was officially asked to take
over the Secretaryship of the Pre-
paratory Commission in London.
In spite of this, I didn't feel suitable
and when I entered the Commission's
office, I fe ! t, as) wrote in my diary at
the time, like the headmaster of a
school who is also its youngest pupil.
After settling down, I took a fortnight
off to write a pamphlet entitled :
"Unesco, its Purpose and its Philo-
sophy"to clarify my own thinking and,
I hoped, that of the delegates in the
forthcoming first General Confe-
rence (see passages from this docu-
ment, page 14). This was to be held in
Paris in December 1946 and would
decide the main outlines of Unesco's
policy. and programme and also elect
its first Director-General.
As it turned out, the humanist atti-
tude which I adopted in this pamphlet
led various delegates, quite er-
roneously, to think that I was anti-
religious, while my liberal views were
taken by others as communist.
While still in London, I had recruited
a number of the staff who would be
needed in Paris whoever was appointed
as Director-General. These included
such figures as Joseph Needham, emi-
nent both as biologist, historian of
science and, authority on Chinese
affairs-he was to head Unesco's
Natural Sciences Department ; the
cultured Jean Thomas, as Deputy
Director-General and the many-sided
Professor Pierre Auger,. as a physicist,
both of France.
We started work in January 1947 in
the Hotel Majestic, which had been the
Nazis'Paris Headquarters during the
Second World War. Ironically enough,
I, as Director-General of an Organi-
zation dedicated to peace, the promo-
tion of knowledge and culture, occu-
pied the room which had harboured
the very unpeacefd. repressive Nazi
Commandant.
The preamble of Unesco's Constitu-
tion, beautifully written by the Ameri-
can scholar-poet Archibald MacLeish,
proclaimed that Unesco was primarily
dedicated to peace-though through
education, science. and culture-and I
had often to defend projects that were
not specifically concerned with peace
by maintaining that the promotion of
education, science and culture, espe-
cially when involving the exchange of
ideas and personnel between different
regions was Unesco's primary task
and could and would indirectly te. ad to
peace through better mutual under-
standing.
In education, Unesco's first job was
obviously to promote literacy in a
largely illiterate world, but we soon
found that literacy in the customary
sense was not enough. Besides learn-
ing to read, write and do simple arith-
metic, the large mass of underprivi-
leged people needed to be educated
in hygiene, in improved methods of
agriculture and better care of their
environment. This comprehensive pro-
gramme we called"fundamental edu-
cation". It proved very valuable in our
early stages by lifting underprivileged
peoples to. a decent minimum of intel-
lectual and physical advance.
Later, the phrase"fundamental edu-
cation. was dropped and there were
separate projects for health, in con-
4
ooW..c: ;)
: Jo
E>-..en
,"0
'>Mo
o
Õ. r:;Q.

It is in the nature of things that all wars are waged against children. Some suffer
indirectly and others lose their lives, their limbs or their sight, like this young
Italian boy, blind and armless after a hand grenade explosion, here learning
to read Braille with his iips. One of Unesco's urgent post-war tasks was
educational reconstruction. It promoted emergency school-building programmes,
the preparation and distribution of textbooks and the standardization
of Braille systems and took many other steps to meet the immense
needs of children in war-torn countries.
It has also helped in conjunction with
the United Nations and its Specialized
Agencies in setting up the International
Biological Programme, which is at the
present moment surveying human
health-as wealth-and the conserva-
tion, and better utilization of the world's
biological resources.
junction with the World He, alth Orga-
nization, for general education, for
science, for population control, for
exchange of persons and for conser-
vation-a ! ! co-ordinated by the Techni-
cal Assistance Department of the
United Nations.
Besides this, there were numerous
non-governmental associations con-
cerned with different aspects of
Unesco's work. Some were alre, ady
in existence before 1945, like the Inter-
national Museums Office, which
I, as Secretary to the Preparatory
Commission, agreed should be affi-
liated to Unesco, helping Unesco with
advice, benefiting by grants or visits
by specialists financed by Unesco.
Others had to be deliberately
created, sometimes in thee face of
considerable opposition. This was the
case with the International Union for
the Conservation of Nature, IUCN for
short, consisting of specialists in eco-
logy, in establishing reserves to pro-
tect unspoiled scenery, rare and inte-
resting plants and animals and in pre-
venting pollution and unp !. anned urban
spread.
Many delegates to the Conference,
which we held at Fontainebleau in
1948, thought that preserving wild life
and the like was outside Unesco's
province, as it did not specifically
promote peace. But eventually, the
conference agreed to the formation of
the Union and its affiliation with
Unesco. I may add that the Union,
both on its own and with grants from
or personnel financed by Unesco has
achieved a great deal in preserving
much of the world's beauty and its
interesting plant and animal inhabi-
tants, though there is still much to be
done.
As regards Science, we found that
the scientists in one country in a given
region, like the Middle East, were often
more ignorant of the work of scientists
in other countries of their own region
than of the work of leaders of science
in more developed countries.
The Regional Centres for Science
established by Unesco put local scien-
tists in touch with each other so that
they could apportion research in rela-
tion to the area's need, and they also
put them in touch with world science
by the information we provided.
We also set up a scheme for the
exchange of individual experts ; post-
graduate students to work in the scien-
tifically more advanced countries ;
specialists to advise on projects in
so-called underdeveloped nations ;
exhibitions in world centres for artists 
5

in different regions ; visits by eminent
lecturers, and so forth.
In visual arts, we set up two special
projects. One was a catalogue of good
reproductions of well-known paintings
with miniature coloured photographs
of the originals and prices of the re-
production. This has proved extremely
useful in schools in many countries.
The other was the publication of large
folio volumes illustrating little known
works of painting and architecture and
sculpture, such as the cave paintings
of Ceylon and India. These were
more valuable to specialists but cer-
tainly disseminated knowledge and ap-
preciation which was otherwise un-
available.
I badly wanted to set up. a powerful
organization concerned with population
control in association with the U. N.
and, I hoped, its other Specialized
Agencies ; but religious and nationalist
prejudices permitted only a handful of
experimental projects. Today, I'm
thankful to say, not only Unesco but
the U. N. itself, the World Health Org. a-
nization and also the World Bank are
helping in this, in my opinion, the most
important task facing mankind.
I must mention one final project
suggested to me by Joseph Needham :
the writing and publishing of a world
history which would stress advances
in science and literature, in culture and
the. arts, rather than political changes
and military events, This was adopted,
though against considerable opposi-
tion, by the Unesco General Confer-
ence in Beirut (Lebanon) in 1948, when
my career as Director-General ended.
However, in 1949, Professor Paulo de
Berredo Carneiro of Brazil was ap-
pointed President and myself as Vice-
President of the Commission appointed
to supervise the writing of the work.
Today, the six volumes of the Cultu-
ral and Scientific History of Mankind,
bringing it right up to date, have been
published both in French and English,
numerous other translations have been
arranged and a pocket edition with
fewer illustrations is being published.
I have no hesitation in saying that this
is a valuable achievement (1).
Naturally the scope of Unesco's
activities has been much enlarged and
often redefined in slightly different
terms. I can truthfully say that my
two and half years at Unesco were the
high point of my life, a time when all
my capacities and all my knowledge
and energies were fully involved. I
fervently hope and indeed confidently
expect that Unesco will continue along
the same general lines as a promoter
of cultural advance and mutual under-
standing, but always on the lookout
for new problems and new ways of
tackling them.
From an interview with Sir Julian
Huxley recorded in 1970.
(1) At the end of World War II many of Europe's cities were as devastated
as this street in Sheffield (U. K.) after a bombing raid in 1940. Unesco was set
up immediately after the war with the aim of using the resources of education,
culture and science to contribute to international peace and security. Its
Constitution was signed in London on 16 November 1945 by the representatives
of countries from every continent. (2) Among the signatures on the Constitution
reproduced here are those of A. A. Hekmat () ran), Yuce) (Turkey), Naji al-Asil
(Iraq), E. Letts (Peru), Ellen Wilkinson (U. K.) John A. Beasley (Australia) and
Leon Blum (France). (3) A year later, on 20 November 1946, the opening
session of Unesco's first General Conference was held in the main amphitheatre
of the Sorbonne in Paris. (4) The Conference continued its work until
December 10 at Unesco's provisional headquarters in the Hotel Majestic, Paris.
(5) Julian Huxley, Unesco's first Director-General, addresses the General
Conference. On his left is Leon Blum (President of the Conference) and on his
right Jean Thomas, Deputy Director-General of Unesco.
(1) History of Mankind : Cutturat and Scien-
tific Development, published by George Allen
and Unwin Ltd., London (U. K.) and by Harper
and Row Publishers, New York (1963-1969).
It has also been published in French, Greek,
Serbo-Croat, Slovenian, and Spanish.
'"a.
a
en
: I
<&gt;
Õ. < :a.
1
(0"'0Co
: E
iii
ÕUJ
ooCD.,c
: >
o
Õ-'=D..
6

BUILDING FOR PEACE ON THE RUINS OF WAR
0o
W: >,<J)
oo"'<J)c
: : J
o
Õ-"(L
I
_I,
of
- !
oJi. 
ro
uu. J
o
'"
: J
o !
ÕJ0.Q.
32
7
5
o0'"Q)c
: J
o
Õ-'"0
