The art of the steppes portrays the griffin in an infinite variety
of forms that vividly convey the force and ferocity of this
mythical beast. With its powerful eagle's beak and sharp
eye, this head of a griffin embellishes the handle of a
5th-century B.C. Scythian sword, unearthed in the Kuban
region, to the east of the Black Sea.
Photo © "Miysl" Publishing House. Moscow



SHAMANS
AND
SHAMANISM
42

epic journeys
to a legendary land
by Grigory M. Bongard-Levin and Edvin A. Grantovsky
THE highly original culture of
the Scythians was influenced
by other peoples and in its
turn exerted a considerable influence
not only on classical societies and
the Ancient East, but, to an even
greater extent, on the vast tribal
world of Europe and northern Asia.
The Scythians possessed a vast
collection of epic tales in which their
spiritual culture was reflected. And
although the Scythian epic itself has
not come down to us, the search for
traces of it is quite feasible.
This search is made possible by
the ethnic links between the tribes
and peoples who lived in the south
Russian steppes during the Scythian
epoch and by the extensive contact
between the Scythians and their
neighbours. The latter ranged from
the population of the forest zone in
the north of Eurasia, whose descen¬
dants preserved their old folklore
traditions until recent times, to the
Hellenes (ancient Greeks) in the south,
with their rich ancient literature.
The Scythians also visited Greece.
Ancient writers and philosophers
often made use of the image of
Anacharsis, a Scythian whom the
Greeks included among the Seven
Wise Men of Antiquity.
The varied accounts of the Scy¬
thians found in ancient literature
make particular mention of epic
kings, heroes of Scythian legends,
the gods of the Scythian pantheon
and fantastical beings, such as the
one-eyed Arimaspean warriors and
GRIGORY MAXIMOVICH BONGARD-
LEVIN, Vice-President of the International
Association for Sanskrit studies, is engaged
on research at the Institute of Oriental
Studies of the Academy of Sciences of the
U. S. S. R. A Unesco consultant and a
winner of the . Jawaharlal Nehru prize, for
the promotion of international understanding
he is an authority on the culturalproblems and
history of Central Asia and India. A book
he has written jointly, with Edvin A. Gran¬
tovsky, From Scythia to India (Moscow,
1974) gives a fuller treatment of the subject
of this article.
EDVIN ARVIDOVICH GRANTOVSKY,
a specialist in the ancient history of Iran,
Central Asia and the Scythians, is engaged
In research at the Institute of Oriental Studies
of the Academy of Sciences of the U. S. S. R.
Among his many published works is his study.
The Early History of the Iranian Tribes of
Near Asia (Moscow, 1970).
the griffins which guarded a hoard
of gold. These accounts attested
the existence among the Scythians
of complex mythological and religious
conceptions and of a richly developed
epic.
Certain Scythian ¡mages worked
their way into the subjects of Hellenic
mythology, while some characters of
Greek myth share the attributes of
similar figures in Scythian mythology
and have "moved" from the places
they inhabited in more ancient Greek
tradition to the Scythian North.
It is fortunately possible to find
confirmation of the Scythian origin
of the motifs mentioned above among
the peoples of north-eastern Europe
and Siberia, far from the regions
of Scytho-Hellenic contact.
The folklore of these peoples fea¬
tures conceptions of one-eyed people
similar to the Arimaspeans, and
of winged monsters like the gold-
guarding griffins. These images
included some which are close to
the Greek and are endowed with
similar traits, such as the death-
bearing flying maidens, similar to the
gorgons, the winged daughters of a
Titan and also the cold wind whose
abode, like that of Boreas, god of
the north wind in later Greek tradi¬
tion, is a cave.
Can such coincidences be acci¬
dental when they occur in the legends
of countries as remote from each
other as Hellas and the forest regions
in the north of Eurasia, in legends
rooted in ancient literary traditions as
well as in those which have only
been recorded by modern folklorists
and anthropologists?
The Volga-Ural steppes, as far as
the Ural mountains, and the land
beyond the Urals were inhabited by
the Issedones and were known to the
Hellenes through the stories of the
Scythians and the Greek Aristeas,
who had been in Scythia in the 7th
century and had obviously reached
the Issedones.
The forests near the Ural moun¬
tains, evidently those along the Kama
and Volga rivers, were inhabited by
the Argippeans. Herodotus recounts
in this connexion that "those of the
Scythians who go to them (the Argip¬
peans) have to employ seven trans¬
lators and seven languages". The
existence in the Scythian epoch of a
trade route as far as the south Ural
region and the Volga-Kama forests
is confirmed by archaeological finds
in these regions of "imported" objects
from the northern Black Sea area.
The contacts between the Scy¬
thians and the forested Volga-Ural
regions from which the Finno-Ugric
languages spread explain the many
word borrowings from the steppe
peoples which have been found in
the Finno-Ugric languages, borrow¬
ings connected with both the mate¬
rial and spiritual culture and religious
and mythological conceptions.
These borrowings include the pas¬
sage of the name of the Wind God
("Vata") among the Eastern Indo-
Europeans and Scythians into the
name of the North Wind ("Vat") used
by the Ugrians beyond the Urals.
In addition, stories about "old man
North Wind" are very close to what
ancient literature tells us about
the "Boreas" who brought icy cold
into Scythia. Both of them find a
traveller, envelop him in their furious
breath and are capable of sweeping
him off his feet, carrying him away
or destroying him.
There can be no doubt that this
"Boreas", a character of purely Scy¬
thian mythology, was identified by
the Greeks with their North Wind,
the Boreas.
What do we learn from archaelo-
gical evidence? In the area round
the Kama River, for example, archaeo¬
logists have found cult figures of
creatures which are half-bird, half-
beast, with the head of a wolf or a
dog. Winged beasts or "griffins" are
also a frequent subject of Scythian
art, in which they usually combine
the features of an eagle and a lion
(or some other "feline" beast of prey).
However, several early Scythian
artifacts from the Black Sea area (of
the 6th-5th centuries B.C.) combine
the image of a bird-beast with the
features of a dog. And it is no acci¬
dent that Aeschylus (6th-5th centu¬
ries B.C.) in his Prometheus Bound
calls the bird-like griffins "silent" or
"unbarking" dogs (unlike the tradi¬
tional ancient description of griffins
as being like lions).
Ancient literature offers us signi¬
ficant information regarding the "geo¬
graphical" description of Scythia and
the lands beyond it if we base our¬
selves on the work of various authors k
of Antiquity. f
43

, From south to north lay regions
inhabited by peoples who really existed,
such as the Argippeans and the
Issedones. Beyond them, however,
and as far as the great northern
mountains, usually called the Ripas,
there lived fabulous tribes and fan¬
tastical creatures, including the now
familiar Arimaspeans, griffins and
others. Here also lay the abode of
"Boreas". These regions had been
abandoned by nature, were swathed
in darkness and covered in snow;
this was the kingdom of deepest
winter.
But even further north, in the
direction of the Ripas, the golden
peaks of which reached the sky, and
around which turned the sun and the
stars, on the mountainous heights
and the shore of the Northern Sea
beyond them lay a country with a
warm climate, free from the cold
winds and infinitely fertile.
In its woods and forests lived a
blessed and holy people, the "Hyper¬
boreans" of ancient tradition. The
sun here rose and set only once a
year: the day lasted six months, and
the night the six remaining months.
During the day the inhabitants sowed
crops in the morning, cut them in the
afternoon and in the evening gath¬
ered fruit from the trees.
Whose creation is this "geographi¬
cal" picture? That of the Greeks or
the Scythians? Or, to put it another
way, which elements of it belong to
which people?
The Ripa mountains might corres¬
pond to the Urals, while the legends
about their gold and the griffins who
guard it certainly reflect notions about
the mining of gold in regions round
the Urals, a notion which is borne
out by ancient workings in these
regions. But the Urals range runs
from south to north, whereas the
Ripa mountains extend in latitude
right across the land to the north of
the Scythian world.
The Northern Sea which stretched
beyond them may be an echo of
what the Scythians knew about the
Arctic Ocean, although the existence
there of a bountiful country with a
warm climate is a piece of fantasy.
Yet day and night last a half-year each
in this country, and it is difficult or
indeed impossible to treat this as
anything but the reflection of a real
fact, namely the rotation of the Polar
day and night (although, of course,
they do not last "uninterruptedly" for
half a year each).
The ancestors of the ancient Ira¬
nian and Indian tribes who lived
beside the ancestors of the Scythians
had much in common with them in
terms of economy, social structure,
culture' and religion.
On the basis of the remaining
fragmentary evidence about the
Scythians and their language, as well
as the parallels within the Indo-lranian
language system, scholars have estab¬
lished the basic features of the Scy
thian language and its dialects, and
the nature of the Gods in the Scythian
pantheon.
The details of some Indian and
Iranian epics and traditions also
correspond precisely to Scythian
conceptions about the North. In
the two great epics of India, the
Mahabharata and the Rämäyana, for
example, we find a geographical
foundation in the form of a "northern
panorama".
They relate how far away to the
north of India, beyond the real moun¬
tains and deserts, countries and
peoples, and beyond fabulous king¬
doms and tribes, stand the sacred
mountains of Meru. Their golden
peaks thrust into the sky and around
them revolve the heavenly bodies.
Beyond the mountains of Meru lies
the Northern Sea, identified with the
White, or Milky Sea. On its shores
and on the northern slopes of the
Meru live a fabulous, blessed people,
"divorced from all evil, indifferent to
all concepts of honour and dishonour,
wonderful in appearance and abound¬
ing in vitality."
There, beyond the mountains of
Meru, over whose summits "the
golden haired sun rises for half a
year"... "the day lasts half a year and
the night as long", and "one night
and one day together equal a year".
The stationary polar star is mentioned
as also are the position of constella¬
tions which can only be observed in
the Far North, above the latitude of
55 North. These descriptions of the
same inaccessible northern country
are "communicated" by the sacred
bird Garuda to the hermit Galava
before carrying him off to this far¬
away "land of blessedness".
It is important to note that the
information about "polar phenomena"
in Indian epic tales goes back to a
time when it could not have been
influenced by Indian astronomy.
Therefore, the "polar" motifs in the
tales of India must be seen as "infor¬
mation" gained from the north.
The whole epic and mythological
setting in which these polar allusions
appear in early Indian tradition indi¬
cates that they belong to the legends
which the ancestors of Indian tribes
had preserved since the time when
they were neighbours of related tribes
living to the north.
In the ancient Iranian Avesta (or
Zend Avesta) together with its affi¬
liated works of Zoroastrian literature,
similar mythological motifs have also
been preserved. These include men¬
tion of the blessed abode of a fabu¬
lous people who see the sun rise and
set only once a year and for whom a
day and a night last a year. Their
benevolent land is situated near cold
countries, where the winter lasts for
10 months and there are two months
of cold summer, beside great nor¬
thern mountains. These mountains,
which reach the heavens, play the
same "astronomical" role as in Indian
and Scythian tradition.
All this leads to the conclusion that
there is a common origin to the Indo-
lranian legends about countries in
the Far North and the tradition about
remote regions lying beyond the
Scythians. This whole cycle of
interrelated concepts has a single
archaic religious basis.
In each of the three traditions,
Indian, Iranian and Scythian, the
whole panorama is arranged in the
same order, proceeding from real
geographical areas in the south to
the legendary lands by the Northern
Ocean. In each tradition, this ocean
is inaccessible to mortals and their
attempts to make their way there end
either in failure or in the death of a
bold hero, whose route takes him
through the territory of fabulous
tribes and supernatural creatures.
At this point we have a clearer idea
of the "geographical" distribution of
those characters whom the Scythians,
and after them the Greeks, located
between Scythia and the northern
mountainsthe death-bearing mai¬
dens who lived in darkness, the
Arimaspeans, the griffins and others.
The Indian story-tellers, for exam¬
ple, warned that in the foothills of
the Meru there lay a deserted region
of gloom, which filled mortals with
fear of the dark. Monsters, vam¬
pires, female cannibals and evil giants
inhabited this dreadful place.
But the ¡mage of the "winter"
barrier has practically disappeared
from the stories of torrid India. The
legends of the Iranians, however, a
people geographically and ethnically
closer to the Scythians, mention the
fatal hard frost of winter, which
comes from the great northern moun¬
tains. They also refer to the death
in the foothills of heroes who freeze
in the snow carried by the hostile
wind. This role is obviously played
in Scythian legends by the North
Wind, which blows from the slopes
of the Ripas and destroys the traveller.
It is notable that Herodotus also
mentions several times that it is
impossible to penetrate the northern
regions beyond Scythia because of
the excessive snows and the coid.
He also held the view that in general
people did not live there. But the
north of Europe, as far as the Arctic
Ocean, was inhabited long before
the pre-Scythian and the Scythian
epochs. Even the Scythians referred
to several "peoples" as living there,
although they endowed them with
unusual features.
We find in the Indian and Iranian
stories that there is a direct link
between this theme and one of the
epic cycles, which concludes with
the victorious king (Yudhisthira in
the Mahabharata, and Khosrow in
Iranian epic) leaving his kingdom
and arriving alive in the blessed land
of the northern mountains. At the
same time, the heroes who accom¬
pany him perish in the snow, which
according to Iranian legend, and
44

CYCLOPS Vs.
WINGED
SENTINELS
Far beyond Scythia,
according to legend,
lived fabulous creatures
such as the Arimaspeans
and the griffins. The
winged griffins guarded
a store of gold from
the giant one-eyed
Arimaspeans who were
always trying to steal it.
Legends of their struggles
entered the mythology
of many peoples, as is
shown by these strikingly
similar scenes of combats
between the giant
Cyclops and the griffins,
found in two distant
places. The one above
adorns a gold ritual
headdress from a burial
mound at Great Blisnitza,
in the region east of the
Black Sea; the other
comes from a relief on
a tomb in southern Italy.
Both works date from the
4th century B.C.
Photos © "Miysl" Publishers,
Moscow
also to Herodotus, makes the route
to the north from the Scythian king¬
dom impassable.
Other chosen heroes and righteous
men could only reach this land on
their death. However, there existed
another "means" of getting there, for
a limited time, and this means was
available only to certain renowned
sages, priests and hermits. These
miraculous "journeys" also formed
the subjects of Indian, Iranian and
Scythian legends. Such, for example,
were the exploits of Galava, Narada
and Shuka in the Mahabharata and
of Arda-Viraz in Zoroastrian tradition.
In the ancient world there was a
story about the Scythian, Abaris,
who "arrived" from the land of the
Hyperboreans. He had "made his
way across rivers, seas and impas¬
sable places, as if he were travelling
through air" and during this time had
performed purifications, had driven
out pestilent diseases, predicted
earthquakes, calmed the winds
and soothed the waves of the sea.
The "information" about Abaris
was basically preserved by the Pytha¬
gorean brotherhood, who included it
among their conceptions about the
migration of the soul. But the
legends about him obviously emerged
independently. Herodotus also knew
about the "journeys" of Abaris and
related that "he did not take any¬
thing for food". But Herodotus pre¬
ferred to give a more detailed account
of that other legendary figure, Ari-
steas, relating how, while the body
of Aristeas lay in one place, he
himself appeared in another, or how,
while following Apollo, Aristeas took
on the form of a raven.
The basis of the legends about
Aristeas were traditions formed in
the time of the earliest contact
between Greeks and Scythians. There
was a definite similarity between
several aspects of Scythian religious
beliefs and practice and the Greek
cult of Apollo, of which Aristeas was
an initiate. And it was this simila¬
rity that led to the widespread
dissemination of the legends about
Aristeas.
The poem Arimaspea, reputed to
have been written by Aristeas, also
mentioned the journey to the land
of "the blessed people" lying beyond
Scythia and the great mountains on
the shore of the Northern Ocean.
The poem is in fact concerned with
a real journey through Scythia and
talks about the tribes which inhabit
it, their life and their customs.
The author of the poem was also
familiar with the subjects of the myths
and the epic which were current
among the Scythians and their neigh¬
bours. The "flight" of Aristeas to
the land of the blessed Northern
people is considered by several scho¬
lars to reflect conceptions about the
"journeys" of the soul. These con¬
ceptions had undoubtedly been bor¬
rowed from cults of a shamanic type.
"During ceremonies", writes the
eminent Soviet anthropologist Sergei
Tokarev, "the shaman frequently falls
unconscious; this is bound to make
the spectators think of the flight of
his 'soul'; the delirium and the hallu¬
cinations of the shaman often consist
in his seeing far-away countries and
talking loudly about hisjourneyings."
A particular role was played by the
cult of birds: the shaman or his soul
"set off" on their distant travels in
the form of a bird (most often, a
raven), "flying over" familiar or mythi¬
cal countries.
Shamanism was widespread in
Antiquity among the peoples of the
north, in Asia and in Europe. Butw
the religions of the ancient Indians, t
45

Jranians and Scythians belong as a
whole to another type despite some
similarities in their epic and myth to
the images of "northern mythology".
However, a good many Iranian and
Indian specialists consider that the
religious practice of the Indians,
Iranians and Scythians had features
that were similar to northern shama¬
nism, especially that of the Finno-
Ugrians.
Historians know something about
the earliest connexions between the
ancestors of the ancient Indians,
Iranians and Scythian tribes and the
ancestors of the Finno-Ugrians. They
know, for instance, of many simila¬
rities between the languages of these
peoples. Among these is the name
of the ecstatic medium with the aid
of which the shamans and priests
put themselves into a state of ritual
possession.
Various plants were used for this
purpose, including hemp. The Scy¬
thians also were aware of these pro¬
perties of hemp and used it in cult
ceremonies. The Greek lexicogra¬
pher Hesychius informs us that hemp
is "the Scythian smoking plant" and
is so powerful that it makes all parti¬
cipants in this ritual sweat. The
Western neighbours of the Scythians,
the inhabitants of Thracia, used
hemp in preparing a sacred libation.
This is what Herodotus has to tell
us about the practice: the Scythians
"place three poles leaning towards
each other, and pull onto them strips
of woollen felt, stretching these to
fit as tightly as possible. They then
throw red-hot stones into a vessel
standing between these poles and the
woollen strips.
"In their land grows hempa plant
very like flax, but much coarser and
taller; it grows wild there and is also
sown by the people... The Scythians
take the seeds of the hemp, crawl
under the felt strips and there throw
the seeds onto the heated stones;
these seeds give out such a vapour
as no Grecian steam-bath can exceed.
The Scythians enjoy this and howl
loudly..."
This probably reflects a ritual cere¬
mony which is reminiscent of shama-
nic practices. If this is the case,
then the "howl" represents the song
of the servant of the cult, in a state
of ecstasy which is attained by the
stupefying effect of the smoke from
roasting hemp seeds. Herodotus'
account and the ritual nature of the
custom he describes are confirmed by
the excavations of the famous Soviet
archaeologist Sergei Rudenko, in the
Altai mountains of Siberia (see p. 34).
In the burial mounds of the Altai
(5th-4th centuries B.C.) the perma¬
frost layer has preserved some small
huts made of poles lashed together
at the top (two of the huts had
covers on them, one of woollen felt
and the other of hide). In one of
these graves copper vessels were
On wings
of ecstasy
According to Scythian mythology a fabulous
land where day and night each lasted half
a year lay far to the north in the polar
regions. It was a bountiful country that
could be reached only by heroes and sages.
This belief, recorded by many Greek and
Roman authors of antiquity, closely
resembles those found in ancient Indian
and Persian mythologies and epics, which
describe an earthly paradise lying beyond
towering mountains towards the north.
How were the priests, sages and heroes
to reach this reputedly inaccessible land?
According to the Shamanic traditions of
the Asian steppes the journey could be
accomplished by entering into an ecstatic
state, the secret of which was known to the
shaman. Soothsayer and healer, the
shaman could transform himself into a bird
(Siberian shaman in drawing at left wears
costume with sleeves representing wings).
Photo and drawings © "Miysl" Publishers. Moscow.
46

Photos L. Tarassova © Aurora Art Publishers, Leningrad.
And his soul, leaving his body, took flight.
One way in which the shaman attained a
state of ecstasy was by inhaling the fumes
of hemp. The remains of a "hemp" tent
(seen at left) were found in a tomb at
Pazyryk. They consist of the tent poles
and a receptacle for burning hemp seeds.
In Indian legends the journey to the mythical
country was accomplished on the back of
sacred birds such as Garuda (above left
in a 19th-century Indian miniature). In
northern Europe and the Urals, the legendary
bird was depicted on metal plaques (drawings
opposite page). These plaques shaped as
bird-like creatures often bore representations
of the face or standing figure of a man.
Above, felt swans from a tomb at
Pazyryk. They were used as carriage
decorations 2,400 years ago.
found under such a structure: they
contained stones which had been
in a fire and partially charred hemp
seeds; in addition, a leather bag,
containing hemp seeds, was tied to
one of the hut poles. Similar sha-
manic ceremonies, performed in
yurts or chums (conical pole-huts
used by the Asian nomads) have been
described by anthropologists.
Facts are also known about the
use of other plants as a means of
achieving ecstasy during cult cere¬
monies and Indian and Iranian reli¬
gious texts record a legend derived
from a common source about the
theft of a cult plant, the soma-plant, .
from the great mountains by the
sacred bird Garuda, also called Sh'ena
in the Rgveda, a collection of Vedic
hymns to the deities. Iranian tradi¬
tion calls the same creature Saena,
and later Simurg.
Legends similar to those which
were told about Garuda in ancient
India and Simurg in Iran were cur¬
rent among the Scythians. This
huge "wonder-bird" was also one
of the mythological images used
by the forest tribes of north-eastern
Europe, the Urals and the land
beyond the Urals.
The same creature is also depicted
on the large number of metal plaques
portraying birds and bird-like crea¬
tures, on the bodies of which the face
or the standing figure of a man is
often represented. Excavations have
shown that such subjects were quite
common even in the Scythian epoch.
This mythology and epic reflects
not just legendary conceptions and
the products of fantasy but also
real facts about the surrounding
world. The mythology of the Scy¬
thians, as much ' as that of other
peoples, was a characteristic combi¬
nation of fantasy and the rudiments
of scientific thought.
Not only did the Greeks expand
their geographical horizon through
their contacts with the Scythians
but, as a result of their familiarity
with Scythian epic, myth and cosmo¬
logy, even in semi-legendary form,
they acquired new information about
the geography of the remote forest
zone, the northern Arctic Ocean, and
the "polar phenomena".
The "Scythian source" may be
viewed as the first stage in the his¬
tory of European science's know¬
ledge of the Far North. And although
new information was added to this
store later in Antiquity, Greek and
Latin authors, in describing the
northern countries, continued for
many centuries to refer to the tradi¬
tion which went back to the 7th-6th
centuries B.C. and was based on
information acquired from the Scy¬
thian world of the time.
G.M. Bongard-Levin
and E.A. Grantovsky
47
