THE SEARCH FOR A NEW WORLD ECONOMIC ORDER
Photo Marion Kaplan © Parimage, Paris

"a more equitable place
in the sun for the new nations'
by Trygve Bratteli
fr«.
MOST people are of the opi¬
nion that prevailing econo¬
mic and social inequalities
bring us face to face with a gap
dividing the peoples of the world that
is both intolerable and unacceptable.
And there are many who demand that
a more equitable sharing of burdens
and benefits should form the central
feature of a new and better world
order.
Here we come right up against
emotion-laden differences and con¬
flicts of interest which have dogged
mankind throughout its history.
Why are economic conditions and
levels of progress so different from
one country to another?
What have been the motivating
factors in those areas of the world
which today are well-established and
enjoy the benefits of advanced scien¬
tific and technological development,
high productivity and a high level of
income per capita?
What are the factors which have
kept back other areas, struggling in
varying degrees with primitive pro¬
duction methods and very low income
levels for all those hundreds of
millions who have an existence under,
subsistence levels? f
TRYGVE BRATTELI was Prime Minister ol
Norway from 1973 to 1976 and has been
chairman ol the Norwegian Labour Party
since 1965. We publish here passages from
the paper he presented to the round table
on cultural and Intellectual co-operation and
the new international economic order, orga¬
nized by Unesco, in Paris, in June 1976.
5

\
% e
High-voltage laboratory at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore, southern
India one of a series of scientific research laboratories that India has developed
during the past 20 years.
Very little is to be gained by assum¬
ing that some nations are rich be¬
cause they have robbed the poor
countries or that the poor nations
remain in a poverty-stricken . state
because the rich nations take from
them what little they have.
Basically we must be clear in our
minds that the picture is of a far
more complex nature than that. We
find countries at all levels from the
poorest on the lowest rung of the
ladder right up to the richest indu
strial countries at the top of the
economic scale.
But over and above this we have
the fact that regardless of the rung
on which we can place any given
country, each of them is also split
internally by wide gaps between poor
and rich individuals.
This applies in equal measure to
the poor as well as to the rich na¬
tions. It can even be said that in
the poor countries the gap between
the many poor and the few rich may
be greater and more provocative than
in many rich industrial nations.
Small exclusive groups in the Third
World are able to live in a state of
luxury to which it is difficult to find
a parallel in the modern industrial
states. The modern capitalist is more
interested in industrial enterprise,
trade and securities and not so much
in acquiring palatial homes and living
in ostentatious luxury.
All countries both rich and poor
depend for their further development
6

on increased international trade in
goods and services. All of them will,
to an increasing extent, make good
their opportunities through close con¬
tact with a world economy.
About 150 years ago life in Norway
was characterized by abject poverty,
back-breaking human labour, a high
infant mortality rate and a low life-
expectancy. Today, in economic
terms, Norway, with its four million
inhabitants is relatively speaking, one
of the "top ten" nations with a very
low rate of infant mortality and the
longest life-expectancy in the world.
The high level of economic activity
has been integrated in the world eco¬
nomy to such an extent that today
Norway sells half of its production
outside its own borders and imports
a corresponding amount.
On the basis of such a historical
experience, I have little faith in the
doctrine that the poor countries will
take the road to prosperity by wea¬
kening their ties with the international
economy. Progress and prosperity
for the poor countries also depend
on furthering an equitable division of
labour and the exchange of goods
and services between all nations.
Nor have I heard any representative
of the poor countries postulate the
doctrine that the salvation of these
nations lies in being left alone in
economic terms, each one in his own
back-yard so to speak. On the
contrary, they desire broad contacts
with countries all over the world.
The principal issue then is to pro¬
vide suitable opportunities and condi¬
tions for the exchange of goods
and services between countries at
very different levels of economic
development.
A strategy for a new international
economic order must consist of two
parts, both equally necessary.
We must try to clarify how in fact
economic forces operate and why
the benefits derived from the ex¬
change of resources and the interplay
between nations have come to pro¬
duce the results we have, been able^
to register up to the present time. r
Climbing tortuously up the steep flank of the Chala
mountains, in Angola, this recently completed road links
the port of Mossamedes with the interior of the country.
Manila's striking new cultural centre houses under one roof
exhibits from every group in Philippine society, so diverse
that linguistically alone the nine main groups can be
divided into 70 sub-groups.

We must agree on joint measures
which can enable the world economic
system to operate satisfactorily for
the benefit of the new nations, which
are now seeking to achieve a more
equitable place in the sun within the
system.
We must persist in this work
without being hampered by the idea
that some nations must necessarily
be the losers if others are to achieve
economic gain.
There is a growing mutual depen¬
dence between nations generally and
between regional groups of countries.
The rich industrialized countries can¬
not live a secure existence, protected
against the political and social effects
of the inhuman conditions of life
which are the lot of the broad, under¬
privileged masses of the world's
population. And these masses will not
be able to free themselves from their
destitution and achieve economic
independence without the active sup¬
port of countries which have pro¬
gressed further in technological in¬
sight and know-how.
Mutual dependence between the
main groups of developing and indus¬
trial countries, however, does not
operate equitably both ways. There
is here a lack of balance detrimental
to the developing countries. They
are therefore easily placed at a
disadvantage both with regard to a
balancing of interests on international
issues as well as in the competitive
system of the international economy.
This arises out of circumstances
which cause a serious lack of stabi¬
lity in the world economy and the
absence of a firm basis for the long-
term planning of International eco¬
nomic relations. As far as the deve¬
loping countries are concerned, eco¬
nomic planning in accordance with
national requirements is a necessary
prerequisite for progress.
The basic premise lies in the
exploitation of one's own resources
and how these may be utilized to the
best advantage within the framework
of a global economy. However, ¡t is
essential that this process should
lead to a distribution of income bet¬
ween the nations which ¡s politically
acceptable to all.
The efforts to achieve a better
balance must take into account cer¬
tain fundamental characteristic fea¬
tures of world trade which tend to
place the developing countries in a
very exposed position. Three-quar¬
ters of their foreign trade is with the
Western market economies. Western
Europe alone takes 40 per cent of
the developing countries' exports.
Trade between developing coun¬
tries makes up almost all the remain
ing quarter. The countries of the
East are a negligible factor in the
developing countries' economic rela¬
tions with the rest of the world. This
imposes a great responsibility on the
countries of the West, and espe¬
cially on Western Europe.
On the other hand three-quarters of
the Western industrially developed
countries' foreign trade ¡s conducted
between themselves. Only about 20
per cent of their exports go to the
developing countries.
As a group the developing coun¬
tries are net importers of foodstuffs.
In the main they are supplied by the
food surplus of the Western industrial
countries. In the case of some deve¬
loping countries the Imports of grain
from the West are of vital importance
for their nutrition. This seems to be
an unreasonable state of affairs con¬
sidering the unexploited agricultural
production potential existing in the
developing countries.
The developing countries' exports
consist mainly of raw materials, which
are produced under unstable condi¬
tions with regard to both prices and
profitability. But the developing coun¬
tries are not a dominant factor in the
world trade ¡n commodities. The
exports of raw materials from the
industrialized countries are almost
twice as great and the substantial
part of the trade in these commodities
is conducted between these Western
industrialized countries themselves.
The developing countries have here
only a marginal production and are
very vulnerably exposed during pe¬
riods of recession. Apart from energy
products, the industrial countries
themselves cover 85 to 90 per cent
of their raw material requirement.
It ¡s therefore not correct to des¬
cribe the developing countries as the
raw material producers and the In¬
dustrial countries as the producers of
manufactured goods. Some of the
very poorest and most populous areas
of the world are notable for their
lack of energy resources as well as
raw materials.
A high level of prices for commo¬
dities thus represents no key solution
for overcoming the poverty of the
developing countries. For some of
the poorest developing countries, high
energy and commodity prices are no
less than a catastrophe, as we have
seen in recent years. For some of
the richest Industrialized countries
higher prices for commodities repre¬
sent increased earnings.
All countries have a legitimate need
for a reasonably secure system of
supplies of energy and raw materials.
Traditional trading patterns provide
no solution to the highly differen
tiated and varied interests which
arise between the developing and the
industrialized countries when they
both engage themselves ¡n a world
economy.
It is in our common interest that
we preserve the multilateral nature
of world trade, and that it remains an
open, trading system with access for
all. However, this system must be
more firmly tied to the more basic
and broader tasks facing the coun¬
tries of the world in their economic
policies. ;
It is not possible to create a system
which automatically resolves all future
problems. Once-for-all solutions al¬
ways have a limited life-span. An
important aspect of a new economic
world order must therefore be to
reach suitable arrangements enabling
the countries of the world to solve
problems by means of joint measures
according to changing circumstances.
Some people may object that such
a continuous and lasting form of
cooperation between states will tend
to alter the character of what has
hitherto been regarded as the free
market economy of world trade.
However, without such extensive and
long-term joint measures there is a
real danger that trading patterns will
emerge which will exclude both free
trade as well as a well-planned
system for regulating the crucial pro¬
blems of markets and supplies.
We must therefore continue to per¬
severe in the work on the scope
of an international commodity pro¬
gramme and Its attendant financing
arrangements.
Trygve Bratteli
8
