Above, towering seismic sea wave, or tsunami, strikes the shore at Hilo (Hawaii). An
instant after the photograph was taken by an unknown seaman on 1 April 1946, the
man seen at left (arrowed) was swept to his death one victim among 300 killed or
injured that day in Hawaii. The tsunami had been triggered off five hours earlier by an
underwater quake in the Aleutian trench 4,000 km. to the north. Right, capsized fishing
boats and smashed buildings on a Japanese beach demonstrate the shattering force
of tsunami waves generated in May 1960 by an earthquake in Chile 16,000 km. away.



TO I I IVI A Ail I O ocean waves of death
I OUIMHIVIIO and destruction
EVERY island and coastal settle¬
ment in the Pacific Ocean area
is vulnerable to the onslaught of seis¬
mic sea-waves, the destructive oceanic
offspring of earthquakes (or seisms)
and volcanic eruption.
Some call them "tidal waves", a
name as misleading as it has been
persistent; these great waves are not
caused by tides. The Japanese, whose
islands have felt the destructive power
of the great waves for generations,
give us the name used internationally:
tsunami.
In 1868 and 1877 tsunamis devas¬
tated towns in northern Chile, and
caused death and damage across the
Pacific. A series of seismic sea-waves
generated by the eruption and collapse
of Krakatoa in 1883 killed more than
36,000 persons in the East Indies.
Japan lost 27,000 lives to the wave of
1896, and 1,000 more to that of 1933.
There have been hundreds more
RONALD FENTON is editor in charge of
the English-language edition of the Unesco
Courier.
whose effects were less spectacular
but which took many lives and did
much damage.
Tsunamis occur most often in the
Pacific. Around this immense ocean
runs a zone of extreme seismic ac¬
tivity crowned by a volcanic "Ring of
Fire."
This seismic belt extends along the
major geologic faults, or fractures, and
the deep oceanic trenches of South
and Central America and the United
States, turning westward along the
Aleutian Island arc, then southward
through Japan and the Philippine Rep¬
ublic; here it branches westward to
Malaysia and Indonesia, and eastward
through New Guinea, the southern
island groups, and New Zealand.
The phenomenon we call "tsunami"
is a series of travelling ocean waves
of extremely long length and period.
In the deep ocean, their length from
crest to crest may be a hundred miles
or more, their height from trough to
crest only a few feet.
They cannot be felt aboard ships in
deep water, and they cannot be seen
from the air. But the kinetic energy
the energy of movement represented
by a tsunami is impressive: a tsunami
"feels the bottom" even in the deepest
ocean, and it appears that the progress
of this imperceptible series of waves
represents the movement of the entire
vertical section of ocean through which
the tsunami passes. In the deep
ocean they may even reach speeds of
over 900 km. per hour.
As the tsunami enters the shoaling
water of coastlines in its path, the
velocity of its waves diminishes and
wave height increases. It is in these
shallow waters that tsunamis become
a threat to life and property, for they
can crest to heights of more than
30 metres and strike with devastating
force.
Tsunamis are believed to originate
as displaced columns of ocean water,
but the displacing agent has not been
positively identified. Seismic or vol¬
canic alterations of the ocean floor,
provided they impart some vertical
movement to the water column, may
cause tsunamis. Submarine ava-
30

Photo © The Mainlchi Graph, Japan
by Ronald Fenton
lanches on the slopes of the Pacific
trenches may also produce tsunamis.
Although it has been established
that a relationship exists between
seismic or volcanic disturbances and
tsunamis, the nature of this relation¬
ship is not well-defined. Tsunami
magnitude appears to be a function of
earthquake magnitude and depth,
water depth where the tsunami is
generated and the extent to which the
earth's crust is deformed by the earth¬
quake. But the combined effect of
these factors is still imperfectly under¬
stood.
The speed of tsunamis varies with
water depth, and it is this relationship
which permits prediction of tsunami
arrival times at all points in the Pacific
Ocean area.
A tsunami warning system and an
international tsunami information cen¬
tre serving all areas of the Pacific have
been set up at Honolulu, capital of
Hawaii. Their work has done much to
reduce the hazards of the tsunami the
most destructive of all waves.
Using seismographs and tide-gauges
scientists are able to predict almost
exactly when a tsunami will arrive at
a given seacoast since tsunamis are
known to travel at speeds that may
average from 650 to 800 kilometres an
hour, the exact speed depending on
the depth of water over which they
pass.
But it is still not possible to predict
what effect the topography of the
ocean floor will have on a tsunami.
It is not completely clear, for example,
why a tsunami's wave may be of negli¬
gible size at one beach, and of giant
proportions a few miles away.
What is certain, however, is that all
tsunamis like hurricanes are poten¬
tially dangerous, even though they may
not strike each Pacific coastline or do
damage at each coastline they strike.
So a constant tsunami watch has to be
kept and the peoples of the Pacific
alerted when the great waves roll
across the world's largest ocean.
International
warning system
THE Tsunami Warning System in the
Pacific is an international co¬
operative operation designed to predict
the arrival of seismic sea waves
(tsunamis) and to alert countries
throughout the Pacific region. In 1965
Unesco's Intergovernmental Océano¬
graphie Commission set up an Interna¬
tional Tsunami Information Center
which now works closely with the
Tsunami Warning System in the Paci¬
fic, operated by the United States
Weather Service from a headquarters
near Honolulu (Hawaii).
The International Information Center
provides aid in the establishment of
national tsunami warning systems and
technical advice on the latest warning
system equipment. It also maintains a
computerized storage and retrieval
system on tsunami data.
Unesco's Océanographie Commission
also established an International Co¬
ordination Group for the Pacific war¬
ning system which today numbers 15
member countries (1).
The first tsunami warning system in
the Pacific was set up in Hawaii by the
U.S.A. in 1948, two years after a
destructive tsunami took the islands
by surprise, killing or injuring over 300
persons and causing widespread
damage. Subsequently, the need for a
broader based international network
was shown when major tsunamis
swept across the Pacific from a
submarine quake off Kamchatka in
1 952 and from others near the Aleutians
(1957) Chile and Peru (1960) and
Alaska (1964).
The present Tsunami Warning System
in the Pacific operates primarily through
two lines of detection. The first is a
network of over 30 seismograph sta¬
tions which pick up the shock waves of
earthquakes and then determine their
magnitude and location. If the shocks
are strong enough and if the focus of
the quake is under the ocean or close
enough to it to disturb the ocean floor
a tsunami may have been generated.
The warning system H.Q. in Honolulu
reports the fact to all participant
countries and issues a preliminary alert
that includes the estimated time of
arrival of a possible tsunami.
The system then turns to its second
line of detection : a network of more
¿han 50 tide stations where gauges
record the cycle of the tides conti¬
nuously. Such gauges record tsunamis
as abnormal phenomena.
When confirmation is received by the
Honolulu H.Q. it alerts all countries to
the approach of a potentially destruc¬
tive tsunami.
New operational methods are now
being developed for the tsunami warn¬
ing system. Use of the latest technology
and instruments will reduce the time
needed to evaluate the tsunami hazards.
The system will use a large network of
ocean bottom and shore based seismic
and tsunami sensors to transmit data
to Honolulu and will eventually rely on
space communication satellites.
(1) Canada, Chile, China, Ecuador, France, Gua¬
temala, Japan. Rep. of Korea, New Zealand, Peru,
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, U.S.A., U.S.S.R.
