Photo Dave Repp (O Parimage, Paris
by Robin W. Winks



AMERICANS
AS THEY SEE
THE UNITED STATES
ROBIN W. WINKS, U.S. historian and
educator, is a leading authority on the
history ol North America to which he has
devoted many books and studies. He ¡s
Prolessor of History at Yale University,
where he has been a member of the faculty
since 1957. Among his most recent published
works are The American Experience (1970),
The Myth of the American Frontier (1971)
and Slavery (1972).
THIS is the year of the Bicenten¬
nial of the United States, when
Americans celebrate their two hun¬
dredth national birthday. As they do
so, most Americans see their nation
as at a crossroads, at once strong
and innovative, yet beleaguered and
suffering.
In the tension between these oppos¬
ing views, many Americans feel they
detect the very source of America's
continuing vitality: a tension between
goals, between regions, and between
conceptions of the past and the
present.
The United States came into being
by an act of revolution, and according
to accepted American scripture, in a
single moment in time: on 4 July
1776. Most nations see themselves as
the product of evolutionary forces, and
while all have conventionally agreed
upon dates on which they" celebrate
their national holidays, very few would
profess to identify the precise moment |
in time when they became a nation.!
9

In a sense, Americans are assert¬
ing that the United States was a
facf at the moment of its assertion,
for the two hundred years they cele¬
brate date from the Declaration of
Independence in 1776, not from either
the peace settlement of 1783 or the
formal ratification of the Constitution
in 1788.
Most nations celebrate the assump¬
tion of. nationhood in the moment of
constitution making; Americans, by
celebrating the declaration of their
independence before it was an accom¬
plished fact, continue to attest to the
vitality of the revolutionary tradition
in their history.
Americans are increasingly aware,
as well, that they are celebrating an
exceptional period of political stability.
In truth, few nations in the world are
older than the United States, in poli¬
tical terms, and while Americans may
speak of their relative youthfulness
culturally they now celebrate an
exceptional antiquity politically.
Great Britain, Switzerland, Sweden,
Denmark perhaps these may trace
their political continuity over more
than two centuries from an unchanged
constitution. But most of the nations
of the world have passed through
Third Reichs, Fourth Republics, and
Fifth Empires, while the United States
has continued to thrive under one
of the world's oldest constitutional
documents.
For this stability, Americans feel
they have much rightfully to cele¬
brate in 1776. They feel that, in gen¬
eral, nations are of three types: those
that imitate the goals of others; those
that have achieved their goals and
lack the vitality to define new ones,
so that though once dynamic they
become increasingly conservative in
their defence of the goals already
achieved; and those nations that have
defined for themselves goals so dyna¬
mic and so attractive as both to con¬
tinue to energize their citizenry and to
be the object of imitation by others.
Most Americans feel that the United
States is an example of this third type
of nation, while an increasing number
may, on this Bicentennial occasion,
be fearful that their nation is slipping
into the stance of the second type of
nation, defending the past rather
than continuing to seek out the future.
To be sure, most Americans recog¬
nize the inherent tension between the
national goals they so clearly stated
in 1776 and again in the Constitution,
and the continued effort to make those
goals real In the lives of all Americans.
Few nations have so boldly declared
their national course that all men
be guaranteed equality of opportunity
in their pursuit of life, liberty, and hap¬
piness and have so openly admitted
to the world their own shortcomings.
Yet most Americans also recognize
that in revealing their shortcomings
to the world, they also give testimony
that theirs is a truly open society.
All Americans can take pride, paradox¬
ical as it may be, in the fact that the
most anti-American information avail¬
able to the world is information pro¬
vided by America's own free press.
Some Americans also have come to
sense the making of another paradox,
as the media make known even the
minutiae of American daily life, and
feed back to the American an aware¬
ness of world feeling about the United
States. Much that we once were
inclined to see as anti-American¬
ism, we now realize is the disappoint¬
ment of those who are (or were) our
friends, who are unhappy that we have
not become that which they expected
us to be.
Those Europeans who in the nine¬
teenth century thought that the United
States had an opportunity to avoid
Leviathan, to forestall the rise of com¬
plex government, to preserve a pris¬
tine environment and to solve social
ills before they occurred, are disap¬
pointed to find that the United States
did not succeed in escaping history.
But as Americans contemplate their
two hundred years of history, many
recognize that the United States has
never had any obligation to become
what others wished it to be after
all, a nation's goals grow from its
soil, its people, and their experiences,
and they should not be borrowed from
the expectations of others.
In this sober paradox, many Am¬
ericans sense that this is a time less
for celebration than for introspection
a time to ask what has been accom¬
plished, and what remains to be done,
and how best one must move the
nation toward the goals already
so clearly, publicly, and long ago
defined.
In this mood of contemplation, many
Americans sense, too, that the United
States is experiencing a number of
profound changes. Three of these
changes are so profound as virtually
to make certain that the American five
decades hence will be a very different
person to the American of today.
The first of these changes is the
decline of the old, innovative influence
of the frontier in American life. While
Americans still enjoy a physical and
social mobility found in few if any
other societies, the mobility-factor in
their society is less significant today
than it was even two decades ago.
There is no longer a distinct fron¬
tier on which social and political
experiments are possible. That fron¬
tier helped make Americans the para¬
dox they became: aggressive, opti-
10

mistic, materialistic, philanthropic,
wasteful!
(To be sure, in one sense the fron¬
tier continues to operate through the
American federal structure, for each
state can be a social laboratory,
experimenting with legislation long
before the nation as a whole need
embark on an untried legislative path.)
The second of the clearly obvious
changes is in the gradual erosion of
a faith in universal economic abund¬
ance. Once the future seemed not
only big with blessings but there
seemed genuinely to be enough for
all if one did not prosper, this failure
was laid to laziness, or perhaps bad
luck, but not to the structure of
society.
If there were not "jam today" there
would be "jam tomorrow", for Am¬
erican history lay in the future, in the
presence of natural economic abun¬
dance. Increasingly today Americans
sense that economic abundance is at
risk, and that to protect it may require
the continued intervention of the big
government most instinctively suspect
of wishing to curtail local liberties.
The tension between the need for
predictive capacity in the economy,
and thus planning, and the older
conventional wisdoms of free enter¬
prise, is a tension that all can feel.
This tension may also be healthy, pro¬
ductive of a dynamic society, provid¬
ed a balance can be struck.
The third change in American life
is the most obvious of all. Americans
once enjoyed an unprecedented na¬
tional security, free of charge. Sep¬
arated by two great oceans from most
potential enemies, the United States
did not need to put large portions of
its national income into national
defence. There were no American
Maginot Lines, standing armies, or
entangling alliances.
Between 1815, when the last British
troops left Louisiana, and 1942, when
the first Japanese troops put ashore
in the Aleutian Island chain-off Alaska,
the United States was free of extra-
continental invasion. Few nations
have enjoyed 125 years of security
that was free of cost.
The United States no longer does
so either, as defence looms large in
the national budget. The awareness
that security is not without cost, finan¬
cial and moral, is also central to this
Bicentennial year.
But if Americans are contemplative,
sober, even nostalgic for a simpler
past, they also recognize that they
need not apologize for the main sweep
of their history. Americans know that
they have made mistakes and they
recognize that their mistakes count
heavily in the world's scales, for a
country that looms so large on the
world scene can have a staggering
impact when it stumbles.
Yet most Americans, however criti¬
cal they may be of their own nation,
also believe that the world is a better
place for two hundred years of Am¬
erican history. Can anyone but the
most committed ideologue truly be¬
lieve that the world would be a freer
place today had there been no United
States for these two centuries?
As Americans look back over their
secular scripture, they have reason to
be pleased that theirs is an entrench¬
ed Bill of Rights. Many nations have
bills of rights today; virtually none are
entrenched. Recent demonstrations
that no one may successfully maintain
that they are above the law empha¬
sizes anew that this is a government
of laws not men.
The continuing flurry of primary
elections at the state level, prepara¬
tory to the national election, reminds
Americans that their government truly
rests upon the consent of the govern¬
ed. Since no one may assign that
consent to another, the right being
truly inalienable, Americans are ever
more aware that, no matter how ex¬
pensive their elective process, it is
still one that works. To fail to exer¬
cise one's consent is to commit a
form of intellectual treason against
the nation. r
Of course, Americans are puzzled
today, as they were in 1776, by the
problems of foreign policy. Some
wish the world would go away. Un¬
happily, as a nation Americans risk
sinking further into a parochial ina¬
bility to speak the language of others.
Fewer and fewer students study a
foreign language; the number of Am¬
erican students studying abroad has
been cut in half in three years; many
argue that, since the world speaks
English, one need learn no other lan¬
guage, thus missing the important if
subtle point that a culture can be
understood only in its own terms
literally, in its own language. Still, the
world will not go away and intelligent
Americans know it.
What, then, do Americans want of
the world? Once It was said that
Americans wanted to be liked. They
complain that they are tired of being
told that they must understand the
problems of country x or y, when few
they feel attempt to understand their
problems.
They are a bit weary of self-styled
experts on America who in a few
sentences reveal that they do not un¬
derstand how the federal system
works, or how American regions have
retained their identities, or even what
the Constitution says.
They would like more serious study
of American history and literature by
students and scholars abroad, so that
CONTINUED PAGE 47
11

Americans as they see the United States
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 11
even hostile conclusions about the
United States might be rooted in solid
information. But they no longer ask
to be liked, for two hundred years of
history have surely taught this now
mature, even politically aged, nation
that one does not bank friendship
between nations as one does between
individuals.
One wit has suggested that Ameri¬
cans have left the play-pen for the
psychiatrist's couch, no longer want¬
ing to be liked so much as wanting
to be understood. Perhaps so; yet
one suspects that most Americans
would settle, two hundred years deep
into their history, for merely being
studied.
The year of the Bicentennial is a
year of reflection for many Americans.
Their political candidates, newspaper
editorials, university classrooms, and
television commentators, all are inter¬
rogating the past as a means of stak¬
ing a clear claim on the future. In a
sense America has always been a
land of beginning again, where the
myth of the eternal return has func¬
tioned with a peculiar strength. In a
sense, American history has always
been in the future.
Just as Americans carry their sense
of identity with them wherever they
go, remaining loyal to their roots
despite an oft-commented upon
wanderlust, they also question that
identity, wishing to press themselves
to do better. They are children of
pride, and they know that pride serves
them best when it is constantly chal¬
lenged, tested, and renewed.
In this era of the mass media, we
all are aware that much that passes
for truth, about America or any other
nation, is a series of images and slo¬
gans. To strike through the mask to
the substance, one must study Am¬
erica, as one must study any complex
society, and not be taken in by those
who, whether with favourable or nega¬
tive intent, offer up generalizations on
a nation they know only on the surface.
Americans remain optimistic in that
they feel it is not yet revealed to them
what they may be, that Walt Whitman
may still be their seer. They rest more
easily with their contradictions these
days, knowing that some are more
apparent than real and that many of
those that are genuine sustain the
dynamic tension of the society.
The American people are still di¬
verse, complex, a paradox; the tension
within them still manifests itself in that
dynamism; for as Whitman wrote, in
Song of Myself (for which he meant
America), "Do I contradict myself?
So I contradict myself. I am large.
I contain multitudes."
Robin W. Winks
