Portrait of Thomas Paine, an engraving based on a paint-
tkig by the 18th century English artist George Romney.



THOMAS PAINE
a reappraisal of 'Common Sense',
the most extraordinary pamphlet
of the American Revolution
by Bernard Bailyn
Text copyright © Reproduction prohibited
COMMON Sense is the most
brilliant pamphlet written dur¬
ing the American Revolution, and one
of the most brilliant pamphlets ever
written in the English language. How
it could have been produced by a
bankrupt Quaker corsetmaker, a some¬
time teacher, preacher, and grocer,
and twice-dismissed excise officer
who happened to catch Benjamin
Franklin's attention in England and
who arrived in America only 14
months before Common Sense was
published is nothing one can explain
without explaining genius itself.
BERNARD BAILYN, American historian
and educator, has since 1966 been Winthrop
Professor of History at Harvard University,
where he began his teaching career almost 30
years ago. His published writings, covering a
broad range of themes in American Intellec¬
tual, social and economic history, include
The Ideological Origins of the American Revo¬
lution (1967), which won the Pulitzer and
Bancroft prizes, and Pamphlets of the Ameri¬
can Revolution, the first volume of which was
awarded the Faculty Prize of the Harvard
University Press for 1965. Other major publi¬
cations are The Origins of American Politics
(1968) and (as co-editor) The Intellectual
Migration: Europe and America, 1930-1960
(1969) and Law in American History (1972).
A fuller version of this article was presented
as a paper to the second symposium on the
American Revolution, organized by the U.S.
Library ol Congress in Washington, in 1973.
For it is a work of genius slap¬
dash as it is, rambling as it is, crude
as it is. It "burst from the press,"
Benjamin Rush wrote, "with an effect
which has rarely been produced by
types and papers in any age or coun¬
try." Its effect, Franklin said, was
"prodigious." It touched some extra¬
ordinarily sensitive nerve in American
political awareness in the confusing
period in which it appeared.
It was written by an Englishman,
not an American. Thomas Paine had
only the barest acquaintance with
American affairs when he turned an
Invitation by Franklin to write a history
of the Anglo-American controversy
into the occasion for composing a
passionate tract for American Inde¬
pendence.
Yet, not only does Common Sense
voice some of the deepest aspirations
of the American people on the eve of
the Revolution but it also evokes,
with superb vigour and with perfect
Intonation, longings and aspirations
that have remained part of American
culture to this day.
What is one to make of this extra¬
ordinary document after 200 years?
What questions, in the context of the
current understanding of the causes
and meaning of the Revolution, should
one ask of it? ¡
Not, I think, the traditional one of
whether Common Sense precipitated
the movement for independence. To
accomplish that was of course its
ostensible purpose, and so powerful
a blast, so piercing a cry so widely
heard throughout the colonies every¬
one who could read must have seen
it in one form or another could
scarcely have failed to move some
people some of the way. It undoub¬
tedly caused some of the hesitant and
vaguely conservative who had reach¬
ed no decision to think once more
about the future that might be opening
up in America.
For it appeared at what was per¬
haps the perfect moment to have a
maximum effect. It was published on
10 January 1776. Nine months before,
the first skirmishes of the Revolu¬
tionary War had been fought, and
seven months before, a bloody battle
had taken place on Breed's Hill,
across the bay from Boston, which
was the headquarters of the British
army in America, long since surround¬
ed by provincial troops.
That a war of some sort was in
progress was obvious, but it was not
obvious what the objective of the
fighting was. There was disagree¬
ment in the Continental Congress as
to what a military victory, if it came,
should be used to achieve.
A group of influential and articulate
leaders, especially those from Mas¬
sachusetts, were convinced that only
Independence from England could
properly serve American needs, and
Benjamin Franklin, recently returned
from London, had reached the same
conclusion and had found like-minded
people in Philadelphia.
But that was nor the common opi¬
nion of the Congress, and it certainly
was not the general view of the popu¬
lation at large.
20

Not a single colony had instructed
its delegates to work for indepen¬
dence, and not a single step had
been taken by the Congress that was
incompatible with the Idea which
was still the prevailing view that
America's purpose was to force the
British Parliament to acknowledge
the liberties it claimed and to redress
the grievances that had for so long
and In so many different ways been
explained to the world.
All the most powerful unspoken
assumptions of the time indeed,
common sense ran counter to the
notion of independence.
If it is an exaggeration, it Is not
much of an exaggeration to say that
one had to be a fool or a fanatic In
early January 1776 to advocate Am¬
erican independence.
Everyone knew that England was
the most powerful nation on earth.
Anyone whose common sense out¬
weighed his enthusiasm and imagin¬
ation knew that a string of prosperous
but weak communities along the
Atlantic coast left uncontrolled and
unprotected by England would quick¬
ly be pounced on by rival European
powers whose ruling political notions
and whose institutions of government
were the opposite of what Americans
had been struggling to preserve.
The most obvious presumption of
all was that the liberties Americans
sought were British in their nature:
they had been achieved by Britain
over the centuries and had been em¬
bedded in a constitution whose won¬
derfully contrived balance between
the needs of the state and the rights
of the individual was thought through¬
out the Western world to be one, of
the finest human achievements..-
It was obvious too, of course, that
something had gone wrong recently.
It was generally agreed in the colo¬
nies that the famous balance of the
constitution, in Britain and America,
had been thrown off by a vicious
gang of ministers greedy for power,
and that their attention had been
drawn to the colonies by the mis¬
representations of certain colonial
officeholders who hoped to find an
open route to influence and fortune
in the .enlargement of Crown power
in the colonies.
But the British constitution had
been under attack before, and
although at certain junctures in the
past drastic action had been neces¬
sary to re-establish the balance, no
one of any importance had ever con¬
cluded that the constitution itself was
at fault.
No one had ever cast doubt on the
principle that liberty, as the colonists
knew it, rested on had in fact been
created bythe stable balancing of
the three essential soclo-constltutlo-
nal orders, the monarchy, the nobility,
and the people at large, each with Its
appropriate organ of government: the
Crown, the House of Lords, and the
House of Commons.
If the balance had momentarily
been thrown off, let Americans, like
Britishers in former ages, fight to
restore it: force the evildoers out, and
recover the protection of the only
system ever known to guarantee both
liberty and order.
America had flourished under that
benign system, and it was simply
common sense to try to restore its
balance. Why should one want to
destroy the most successful political
structure in the world, which had been
constructed by generations of consti¬
tutional architects, each building on
and refining the wisdom of his prede¬
cessors, simply because its present
managers were vicious or criminal?
And was it reasonable to think that
these ill-co-ordinated weak communi¬
ties along the Atlantic coast could
defeat England in war and then
construct a system of government
free of the defects that had been re¬
vealed in the almost-perfect English
system?
But Paine was certain that he knew
the answers to all these questions,
and the immediate impact that Com¬
mon Sense had was in large part
simply the result of the pamphlet's
ringing assertiveness, its shrill un¬
wavering declaration that all the right
was on the side of independence and
all the wrong on the side of loyalty
to Britain.
History favoured Paine, and so the
pamphlet became prophetic. But in
the strict context of the historical-
moment of its appearance, its asser¬
tiveness seemed to many to be more
outrageous than prophetic.
All of this is part of the remarkable
history of the pamphlet, part of the
extraordinary impact it had upon con¬
temporaries' awareness. Yet I do not
think that the question of its influence
on the developing movement toward
independence is the most useful ques¬
tion that can be asked.
For we can now depict in 'detail the
BOSTON TEA PARTY, shown here, was a protest by American colonists against
British policies on the importing of tea into America. On 16 December 1773,
colonists disguised as Indians boarded three British ships in the port of Boston,
on the Atlantic seaboard of America, and threw their cargoes of tea into the
harbour. The British retaliated with harsh laws, known as the "Intolerable Acts".
These further inflamed colonial public opinion against England and were one of
the factors, like Thomas Paine's pamphlet "Common Sense", that helped to
bring on the Revolutionary War in America. Some years earlier, in 1765, the British
government had tried through the Stamp Act to impose taxes on the colonists for
the upkeep of British troops in America, but American resistance forced the repeal
of the Act in 1766.
In the weeks when Common Sense
was being written the future even the
very immediate future was entirely
obscure. No one then could confi¬
dently say which course history would
later declare to have been the right
course to have followed.
No one then could know who would
later be seen to have been heroes
and who weaklings or villains. No
one then could know who would be
the winners and who the losers.
stages by which Congress was led to
vote for independence, and the closer
we look at the details of what happen¬
ed in Congress in early 1776 the less
important Common Sense appears to
have been. It played a role in the
background, no doubt; and many peo¬
ple, in Congress and out, had the
memory of reading it as they accepted
the final determination to move to
independence. But, as John Adams
noted, at least as many people were,
offended by the pamphlet as were per- 1
21

suaded by it, and we shall never know
the proportions on either side with any
precision.
What strikes one more forcefully
now, at this distance in time, is
something quite different from the
question of the pamphlet's unmeasur-
able contribution to the movement
toward Independence. There Is some¬
thing extraordinary in this pamphlet
something bizarre, outsized, unique
quite aside from its strident appeal
for independence, and that quality,
which was recognized if not defined
by contemporaries and which sets it
off from the rest of the pamphlet lit¬
erature of the Revolution, helps us
understand, I believe, something
essential in the Revolution as a whole.
A more useful effort, It seems to
me, than attempting to measure its
influence on independence is to seek
to isolate this special quality.
Certainly the language is remark¬
able. For its prose alone, Common
Sense would be a notable document
unique among the pamphlets of the
American Revolution.
In the first substantive part of the
pamphlet, ostensibly an essay on the
principles of government in general
and of the English constitution in par¬
ticular, the ideas are relatively
abstract but the Imagery is concrete:
"Government, like dress, is the badge
of lost innocence; the palaces of kings
are built upon the ruins of the
bowers of paradise."
, As for the "so much boasted cons¬
titution of England," it was "noble for
the dark and slavish times in which it
was erected"; but that was not really
so remarkable, Paine said, for "when
the world was overrun with tyranny,
the least remove therefrom was a
glorious rescue."
What of the true origins of the pre¬
sent-day monarchs, so exalted by
myth and supposedly sanctified by
antiquity? In all probability. Paine
wrote, the founder of any of the mod¬
ern royal lines was "nothing better
than the principal ruffian of some
restless gang, whose savage manners
or pre-eminence of subtillty obtained
him the title of chief among the plun¬
derers; and who, by increasing in
power and extending his depredations,
overawed the quiet and defenceless
to purchase their safety by frequent
contributions."
The English monarchs? "No man
in his senses can say that their claim
under William the Conquerer is a very
honourable one. A French bastard,
landing with an armed banditti and
establishing himself king of England
against the consent of the natives, is
in plain terms a very paltry rascally
original". The fact Is that everywhere
hereditary monarchy has "laid... the
world in blood and ashes".
It Is in the third section, "Thoughts
on the Present State of American
Affairs," that Paine's language be¬
comes most effective and vivid. The
emotional level is extremely high
throughout these pages and the lyric
passages even then must have seem¬
ed prophetic:
The sun never shined on a cause of greater
worth... 'T'is not the concern of a day, a
year, or an age; posterity are virtually involv¬
ed in the contest, and will be more or less
affected even to the end of time by the pro¬
ceedings now. Now is the seed-time of con¬
tinental union, faith, and honour. The least
fracture now will be like a name engraved
with the point of a pin on the tender rind of
a young oak; the wound will enlarge with the
tree, and posterity read it in full grown
characters.
The arguments in this section, prov¬
ing the necessity for American inde¬
pendence and the colonies' capacity
to achieve it, are elaborately worked
out, and they respond to all the objec¬
tions to independence that Paine had
heard. But through all of these pages
of argumentation, the prophetic, lyric
note of the opening paragraphs conti¬
nues to be heard, and a sense of
urgency -keeps the tension high.
"Everything that is right or reason¬
able," Paine writes, "pleads for sep¬
aration. The blood of the slain, the
weeping voice of nature cries, 'tis
time to part." Now is the time to act,
he insists: "The present winter is
worth an age if rightly employed, but
if lost or neglected the whole conti¬
nent will partake of the misfortune."
The possibility of a peaceful con¬
clusion to the controversy had vanish¬
ed, "wherefore, since nothing but
blows will do, for God's sake let us
come to a final separation, and not
leave the next generation to be cutt¬
ing throats under the violated un¬
meaning names of parent and child".
And the section ends with Paine's
greatest peroration:
O ye that love mankind! Ye that dare to
oppose not only the tyranny but the tyrant,
stand forth I Every spot of the old world is
overrun with oppression. Freedom hath been
hunted round the globe. Asia and Africa have
long expelled her. Europe regards her like a
stranger, and England hath given her warning
to depart. Ol receive the fugitive, and pre¬
pare in time an asylum for mankind.
In the pamphlet literature of the
American Revolution there is nothing
comparable to this passage for sheer
emotional intensity and lyric appeal.
Its vividness must have leapt out of
the pages to readers used to greyer,
more stolid prose.
But language does not explain itself.
It is a reflection of deeper elements
qualities of mind, styles of thought, a
writer's personal culture. There is
something unique in the intellectual
idiom of the pamphlet.
Common Sense, it must be said, is
lacking in close rigour of argumenta¬
tion. Again and again Paine's logic
can be seen to be grossly deficient.
The great intellectual force of Com¬
mon Sense, however, lay not in its
close argumentation on specific points
but in its reversal of the presumptions,
that underlay the arguments, a rever-

sal that forced thoughtful readers to
consider, not so much a point here
and a conclusion there, but a wholly
new way of looking at the entire range
of problems involved.
For beneath all of the explicit argu¬
ments and conclusions against inde¬
pendence, there were underlying, un¬
spoken, even unconceptuallzed pre¬
suppositions, attitudes, and habits of
thought that made it extremely difficult
for the colonists to break with England
and find in the prospect of an inde¬
pendent future the security and free¬
dom they sought.
The special intellectual quality of
Common Sense, which goes a long
way toward explaining its impact on
contemporary readers, derives from
its reversal of these underlying pre¬
sumptions and Its shifting of the
established perspectives to the point
where the whole received paradigm
within which the Anglo-American con¬
troversy had until then proceeded
came into question.
No one set of ideas was more
deeply embedded in the British and
the British-American mind than the
notion that liberty could survive in a
world of Innately ambitious and selfish
men only where a balance of the
contending forces was so institutio-
CONTINUED PAGE 27
22

, nalized that no one contestant could
monopolize the power of the state and
rule without effective opposition.
In its application to the Anglo-
American world this general belief
further presumed that the three main
socio-constitutional contestants for
power the monarchy, the nobility,
and the people had an equal right to
share in the struggle for power: these
were the constituent elements of the
political world.
And most fundamental of all in this
basic set of constitutional notions was
the unspoken belief, upon which
everything else rested, that complexity
in government was good in itself since
it made all the rest of the system
possible, and that, conversely, simpli¬
city and uncomplicated efficiency in
the structure of government were evil
in that they led to a monopolization of
power, which could only result in
brutal state autocracy.
PAINE challenged this whole ba¬
sic constitutional paradigm, and
although his conclusions were rejected
In America the American state and
national governments are of course
built on precisely the ideas he oppos¬
ed the bland, automatic assumption
that all of this made sense could no
longer, after the appearance of Com¬
mon Sense, be said to exist, and res¬
pect for certain points was permanent¬
ly destroyed.
The entire set of received ideas on
government, Paine wrote, was false.
Complexity was not a virtue in govern¬
ment, he said. The opposite was in
fact true: "the more simple anything
is, the less liable it is to be disordered
and the easier repaired when dis¬
ordered."
Simplicity was embedded in nature
itself, and if the British constitution
Opposite page above :
A wall is a wall is a wall is a wall.
It can serve in the game of
American handball or as the
explosive medium for budding artists
or the vehicle for intergroup
messages.


had reversed the natural order of
things, it had done so only to serve
the unnatural purposes of the nobility
and the monarchy, neither of which
had a right to share in the power of
the state.
The nobility was nothing but the
dead remains of an ancient "aristo¬
crática! tyranny" that had managed to
survive under the cover of encrusting
mythologies. The monarchical branch
was a more serious matter, and Paine
devoted pages of the pamphlet to at¬
tacking its claim to a share in the
constitution.
The "royal brute of Great Britain",
as he called George III, was no less a
ridiculous constitutional figure than
his continental equivalents. For
though by his constitutional position
he was required to know the affairs
of his realm thoroughly and to par¬
ticipate in them actively, by virtue of
his exalted social position, 'entirely
removed from everyday life ^"distin¬
guished like some new species" he
was forever barred from doing just
that.
In fact the modern kings of England
did nothing at all, Paine wrote, but
wage war and hand out gifts to their
followers, all the rest of the world's
work being handled by the commons.
Yet by virtue of the gifts the king
had at his disposal, he corrupted the
entire constitution, such as it was. The
king's only competitor for power was
the House of Commons, and this body
he was able to buy off with the re¬
wards of office and the intimidation of
authority. The whole idea of balance
in the British constitution was there¬
fore a fraud for "the will of the king is
as much the law of the land in Britain
as in France with this difference, that
instead of proceeding directly from
his mouth, it is handed to the people
under the formidable shape of an act
of Parliament."
. No one at least no one writing in
America had made so straightfor¬
ward and unqualified a case for the
virtues of republican government.
This was Paine's most important
challenge to the received wisdom of
the day, but it was only the first of a
series.
In passage after passage in Com¬
mon Sense Paine laid bare one after
another of the presuppositions of the
day which had disposed the colonists,
consciously or unconsciously, to resist
independence, and by exposing these
inner biases and holding them up to
scorn he forced people to think the
unthinkable, to ponder the supposed¬
ly self-evident, and thus to take the
first step in bringing about a radical
change.
So the question of independence
had always been thought of in filial
terms: the colonies had once been
children, dependent for their lives on
the parent state, but now they had
matured, and the question was wheth¬
er or not they were strong enough
to survive and prosper alone in a
world of warring states. This whole
notion was wrong, Paine declared.
On this, as on so many other points,
Americans had been misled by "an¬
cient prejudices and... superstition".
England's supposedly protective
nurturance of the colonies had only
been a. form of selfish economic ag¬
grandizement. The fact is, Paine
declared, that the colonies had never
needed England's protection; they
had indeed suffered from it. They
would have flourished far more if
England had Ignored them, for their
prosperity had always been based on
a commerce In the necessities of life,
and that commerce would have flour¬
ished, and would continue to flourish,
so long as "eating is the custom of
Europe."
So on the major questions Paine
performed a task more basic than
arguing points in favour of indepen¬
dence (though he did that too); he
shifted the premises of the questions
and forced thoughtful readers to come
at them from different angles of vision
and hence to open for scrutiny what
had previously been considered to be
the firm premises of the controversy.
Written in arresting prose and di¬
rected as a polemic not so much at
the conclusions that opponents of
independence had reached as at their
unspoken presumptions, and at their
sense of what was obvious and what
was not, Common Sense is a unique
pamphlet in the literature of the Revo¬
lution. But none of this reaches its
most important inner quality.
There is something in the pamphlet
that goes beyond both of these char¬
acteristics, and while it is less sus¬
ceptible to proof than the attributes I
have already discussed, it is perhaps
the most important element of all. It
relates to the social aspects of the
Revolution.
MUCH ink has been spilled
over the question of the de¬
gree to which the American Revolution
was a social revolution, and it seems
to me that certain points have now
been well established.
The American Revolution was not
the result of intolerable social or eco¬
nomic conditions. The colonies were
prosperous communities whose eco¬
nomic condition, recovering from the
dislocations that followed the Seven
Years' War, Improved during the years
when the controversy with England
rose In intensity. Nor was the Revo¬
lution deliberately undertaken to
recast the social order, to destroy the
last remnants of the ancien régime,
such as they were in America.
And there were no "dysfunctions"
building up that shaped a peculiarly
revolutionary frame of mind in the^
colonies. V
27

^ Yet in an indirect way there was a
social component in the Revolutionary
movement, but it Is subtle and latent,
wound in, at times quite obscurely,
among other elements, and difficult to
grasp in Itself. It finds its most force¬
ful expression in the dilated prose of
Paine's Common Sense.
The dominant tone of Common
Sense is that of rage. It was written
by an enraged man not someone
who had reasoned doubts about the
English Constitution and the related
establishment in America, but some¬
one who hated them both and who
wished to strike back at them in a
savage response.
The verbal surface of the pamphlet
Is heated, and it burned into the con¬
sciousness of contemporaries because
below it was the flaming conviction,
not simply that England was corrupt
and that America should declare its
independence, but that the whole of
organized society and government
was stupid and cruel and that it sur¬
vived only because the atrocities it
systematically imposed on humanity
had been papered over with a veneer
of mythology and superstition that
numbed the mind and kept people
from rising against the evils that op¬
pressed them.
The aim of almost every other nota¬
ble pamphlet of the Revolution was to
probe difficult, urgent, and contro¬
versial questions and make appro¬
priate recommendations. The aim of
Common Sense was to tear the world
apart the world as it was known and
as it was constituted. Common Sense
has nothing of the close logic, schol¬
arship, and rational tone of the best
of the American pamphlets. It was
not meant to probe unknown realities
of a future way of life, or to convince,
or to explain; it was meant to over¬
whelm and destroy.
In this respect Common Sense bears
comparison not with the writings of
the other American pamphleteers but
with those of Jonathan Swift. For
Swift too had been a verbal killer in
an age when pamphleteering was im¬
portant to politics. But Swift's chief
weapon had been a rapier as sharp as
a razor and so pointed that it first
entered its victim unfelt. Paine's
writing has none of Swift's marvelous-
ly ironic subtlety, just as it has none
of the American pamphleteers' learn¬
ing and logic. Paine's language is
violent, slashing, angry, indignant.
This inner voice of anger and indig¬
nation had been heard before in
Georgian England, in quite special
and peculiar forms. It is found in
certain of the writings of the extreme
left-wing libertarians; and it can be
found too in the boiling denunciations
of English corruption that flowed from
the pens of such would-be prophets
as Dr. John Brown, whose sulphuric
Estimate of the Manners and Princi¬
ples of the Times created such a sen¬
sation in 1757.
But its most vivid expression is not
verbal but graphic: the paintings and
engravings of William Hogarth, whose
awareness of the world had taken
shape In the same squalor of London's
and the provinces' demimonde in
which Paine had lived and in which
he had struggled so unsuccessfully.
In Paine's pamphlet all of these
strains and sets of attitudes combine.
In subdued form something of the
same indignation and anger lurks
around the edges and under the sur¬
face of the American Revolutionary
movement. It is not the essential core
of the Revolution, but it is an impor¬
tant part of it, and one of the most
difficult aspects to depict. One
catches a sense of it in John Adams'
intense hatred of the political estab¬
lishment in Boston. It can be found
too in the denunciations of English
corruption that sprang so easily to the
lips of the New England preachers;
and it can be found in the resentment
of otherwise secure Americans faced
with the -brutal arrogance and irra¬
tional authority of Crown officials
appointed through a patronage system
utterly remote from America and In
no way reflective of the realities of
American society.
Common Sense expresses all of this
in a magnified form. The pamphlet
sparked into flame resentments that
had smouldered within the American
opposition to England for years, and
brought into a single focus the lack
of confidence in the whole European
world that Americans had vaguely felt
and the aspirations for a newer, freer,
more open world independent of
England, which had not, until then,
been freely expressed.
Common Sense did not touch off
the movement for a formal declara¬
tion of independence, and it did not
create the Revolutionary leaders' de¬
termination to build a better world,
more open to human aspirations, than
had ever been known before. But it
stimulated both; and it exposes In
unnaturally vivid dilation the anger
born of resentment, frustration, hurt,
and fear that is an impelling force
in every transforming revolution.
Bernard Bailyn

