THE TAMING OF THE BULL. Photos opposite show Dr. José M. R.
Delgado, author of our article, stopping a bull in mid-charge by
radio stimulation of its brain. Standing alone in a bull ring in
Cordova (Spain) he waited until the bull was almost upon
him before pressing a radio control that sent a current through
electrodes planted in the bull's brain. Electrical stimulation of
specific areas of the brain caused the bull to stop in its tracks.



NEW MACHINES
TO EXPLORE
THE BRAIN
by José M.R. Delgado
A charging bull pacified, angry apes calmed:
some amazing results of electrical stimulation of the brain
IT would be naive to try to under¬
stand the reasons for a riot by
the electrical activity in the brains of
the participants. But it would be
equally naive to ignore that each
person has a brain and that determined
constellations of neurons (nerve cells)
are reacting to messages picked up by
senses that subsequently produce the
expression of violence.
Both neurophysiologies! and envi¬
ronmental factors must be evaluated,
and methods are available for their
combined study. Experimental inves¬
tigation of the cerebral structures res¬
ponsible for individual and social beha¬
viour in general, and for aggression in
particular, is an essential counterpart
of social studies, and this fact should
be recognized by sociologists as well
as biologists.
With the aid of recently developed
techniques it has been demonstrated
that we can investigate the neurological
JOSE MANUEL RODRIGUEZ DELGADO,
internationally-known Spanish neurophysiol-
ogist, is director of research at the new National
Centre "Ramon y Ca/al" in Madrid (Spain)
and chairman of the Department of Physiological
Sciences at Madrid's newly created Autonomous
University Medical School. For 20 years he was
a member of the faculty of Yale University
Medical School (U.S.A.) where he devised
many new techniques and instruments for
research on the brain, using electrical stimula¬
tion. He is the author ot "Physical Control of
the Mind : Towards a Psychocivilized Society"
(Harper Et Row, New York, 1969) translated
into six languages, and over 250 scientific
papers. Dr. Delgado now heads an interna¬
tional research team of neuroscientists in Madrid
mechanisms responsible for motor,
behavioural, and mental functions, and
also that we can influence them by
physical and chemical means. An im¬
portant group of these methods is
based on the insertion of very thin
electrodes in the depth of the nervous
system in order to activate specific
areas of the brain by means of elec¬
trical stimulation. These methods and
their results may be summarized as
follows:
Mapping of the awake brain. Needle
guides anchored to the skull of ani¬
mals have been used for a systematic
exploration of the brain and for the
detailed mapping of its functions. The
guides consist of pieces of stainless
steel tubing about 15 mm. in length,
piercing the skull at predetermined
points and ending outside the scalp.
A few days after surgery, the animal
has recovered from anaesthesia and its
fully awake brain is directly and pain¬
lessly accessible through the guides.
In one experiment with a gibbon a
total of 30 guides spaced 3 mm. apart
were used. Exploring electrodes may
be introduced through each guide in
1 mm. steps, permitting the systematic
study of over 1,000 cerebral points.
If necessary, the electrodes may be
fixed permanently in the most inte¬
resting areas of the brain for more
detailed experiments. Restriction of the
animal in a chair permits the analysis
of simple motor [voluntary] and auto¬
nomic [involuntary] responses, al¬
though the lack of free mobility may
influence these reactions and also pre¬
vents social contact with other ani¬
mals.
When the cerebral targets are
known, electrodes may be implanted
permanently. The terminal socket is
anchored outside the skull and elec¬
trical connexions for recording and
stimulation are established by means
of long leads. These allow for studies
of the animal either in a chair or free
to move on an observation stage (pho¬
tos 1 and 2, page 28). These experi¬
ments may be repeated indefinitely,
and some of our animals have been
kept for over four years with excellent
tolerance of implants and reliability
of results.
In one experiment a monkey was put
to sleep by electrical stimulation in the
septal area deep in the front of the
brain. After about 30 seconds, the
animal quietened down and slowly
closed its eyes, lowering its head. In
this relaxed state, the animal fell asleep
in about one minute.
While asleep, it responded to loud
noises or to touch by waking for a
few seconds, but then it fell asleep
again for as long as stimulation was
applied. The possibility of using sti¬
mulation in the septal area of the
brain for therapy of chronic insomnia
has been suggested, but further inves¬
tigations are required.
Close to the sleep-inducing areas,
there are other points stimulation of
which inhibits the spontaneous aggres¬
sion of rhesus monkeys. As shown
26

Photos © J.M.R. Delgado, Madrid
in photo 1 (page 28) this ferocious ani¬
mal usually attacks, grabs, and bites
any approaching object including a
human hand. Under stimulation of
inhibitory areas, however, the mon¬
key becomes peaceful without being
provoked by the proximity of the in¬
vestigator who can safely touch the
animal's mouth and pet him (photo 2,
page 28).
The monkey ¡s aware of the envi¬
ronment and reaches out to touch the
investigator's hand without any sign
of hostility. This experiment demon¬
strates that aggression can be inhi¬
bited by electrical stimulation of spe¬
cific brain areas without producing
sleep or depression.
Excitation of other parts of the
brain, especially the motor cortex, may
produce active responses affecting the
animal's behaviour. A typical example
of such motor effect elicited in a cat
is shown in photo 3 (page 29). Elec¬
trical stimulation of a point in the brain
known as the left sulcus cruclatus pro¬
duced a strong flexion of the cat's
right hindleg. This occurred without
disturbing the animal emotionally it
was actually purring and without alter¬
ing its equilibrium which was main¬
tained well on three limbs.
Depending on the stimulated point,
flexion and extension of the limbs,
turning of head and body, licking,
yawning, and a great variety of motor
effects may be electrically produced.
In general, the animal integrates the
artificial response with its ongoing
behaviour, and, for example, electri
cally evoked licking may be purpose¬
fully directed towards available food,
or towards the experimenter's hand,
Its own body, or the sides of the stage
on which the animal finds itself. The
Integration of spontaneous and indu¬
ced activities Indicates that electrical
stimulation of the brain activates pre¬
existing physiological mechanisms.
Radio communication with the brain.
To investigate brain structures which
play a role in social behaviour, con¬
necting wires cannot be used, and more
refined radio controlled technology is
therefore necessary.
An instrument developed in our lab¬
oratory (the "stimocelver") is small
enough to be carried on an animal's
collar, permitting two-way communi¬
cation to and from the brain without
27

Above, a normally ferocious rhesus monkey
becomes peaceful when a point in its brain is
stimulated by an electric current transmitted
through implanted electrodes. In photo 1, the
monkey attacks and tries to bite the
experimenter's hand (protected by a thick glove).
In photo 2, taken a few minutes later, when
the monkey's brain is stimulated (note the
time on both clocks) the animal has become
docile and has lost all trace of hostility.
L restricting in any way the animal's
movements.
With this technique it has been de¬
monstrated that the social relations
can be modified by the electrical sti¬
mulation of specific cerebral areas as
shown in photos 4 and 5 (page 29).
When the lateral hypothalamus of
the brain was excited in a previously
peaceful cat, rage was induced with
an aggressive display clearly directed
towards another cat which reacted
appropriately by facing the threat. Dur¬
ing radio stimulation, the animal start¬
ed prowling around threatening the
subordinate members of the group
but at the same time avoiding another
powerful cat.
The experiment demonstrated that
the stimulation of the brain had in¬
creased the cat's aggressiveness
without changing its awareness or dis¬
turbing the memory of previous ex¬
perience, because the stimulated cat
directed its hostility intelligently,
choosing its enemies and moment of
attack, and modifying its tactics to
adapt to the reactions of its opponents.
Brain stimulation had induced a state
of hostility but had not altered the
individual characteristics or skills of
the animal.
Further studies have been performed
outside the laboratory in a colony of
gibbons located on the island of Hall,
in Bermuda. These studies permitted
comparison of experimental results
with animals instrumented first in the
laboratory colony and then in a "nor¬
mal" free ranging situation.
Escape, fear, and lasting changes
of behaviour including decreased
friendliness were induced by radio sti-'
mutation of an area' located in the
stem of the brain known as the reti¬
cular formation. The stimulation of
the caudate nucleus of the brain resul¬
ted in a lowering of the social status
of animals as determined by the prio¬
rity they normally had in the pecking
order at mealtimes.
Brain-to-computer-to-brain exchange
of information has been established
in primates by means of radio links
(photo 6, page 30). In one case, the
spontaneous electrical activity of both
the left and right sides of the
amygdala was telemetered from an
ape free to move about and identified
by a linked-up computer.
The computer was set to identify
a specific pattern of "spindles"
(signals), produced by the amygdala.
Each time a burst of these waves
appeared a signal was triggered
through the computer to stimulate the
reticular formation of the brain of the
ape. These stimulations are known to
produce unpleasant sensations. In this
28

way the brain was motivated to sup¬
press the amygdala "spindles" and
the animal's behaviour was changed.
The ape became more peaceful and
less interested in food.
Clinical application of implanted
electrodes. Some human patients with
temporal lobe epilepsy do not respond
to the usual drug therapy and may
require brain surgery which calls for
a very careful study of the location
and reactions of the abnormal cerebral
areas. This information may be ob¬
tained with depth electrodes, and sti¬
mulations and recordings have been
performed using radio links.
Other patients may require pro¬
grammed long term stimulation of the
brain, for example, for the therapy of
intractable pain. Surgical experience
has proved that after the insertion of
electrodes, the implantation wound
usually heals without complications.
However, the opening around the elec¬
trodes is a potential risk, and the pre¬
sence of terminal sockets in the
patient's hair may be inconve¬
nient for grooming as well as aesthe¬
tically disturbing.
To solve these problems while re¬
taining the advantages of two-way
communication with the depth of the
brain, a new technique known as trans¬
dermal communication has been deve¬
loped (transdermal means across or
through the skin).
Transdermal communication. In order
to stimulate and to make recordings
to and from the depths of the brain
through the intact skin, we developed
a solid state micro-miniaturized ins¬
trument called the "transdermal stimo-
ceiver", which is totally implantable
underneath the scalp. Four channels
are available for stimulation and three
for recordings. Power and information
are transmitted through the skin by
means of specially coupled coils. A
goat with a subcutaneous stlmoceiver
is presented in photo 8 (page 30).
As no batteries are used, the duration
of the instrument is indefinite, and it
is always ready for use simply by
placing the external coil over the skin.
The great advantage of this techno¬
logy is that no leads pierce the skin,
thus increasing the safety, comfort,
and long term use of the procedure.
Possible applications of transdermal
technology include long term record¬
ing of depth electrical activity to
monitor physiological states, emotional
reactions, abnormal epileptic activity,
and effects of medication. Long term
programmed stimulation of the brain
has a wide range of uses to induce
autonomic, somatic, and behavioural
responses, and also to influence inhi¬
bitory systems.
This last procedure has already pro- ^
; ANIMAL c-6 X- 1
I
POSITION Y 6 - 7
INTENSITY i, vous
NCr" 260/xc
Experiments with cats and monkeys show that
the electrical stimulation of the brain can make
an animal move different parts of its body.
In photo 3, a cat raises its right hindleg when a
current is directed to left side of motor cortex.
Below, stimulation in a part of the brain
known as the lateral hypothalamus caused a
gentle cat (at left of photo 4) to become
violent and aggressive. It prowled about the
cage and attacked other cats (photo 5).
29

6
Recent development of miniaturized devices has given new
scope to the use of electrical stimulation of the brain for
research and medical treatment. This chimpanzee (6)
has a special radio transmitter-receiver (the
"stimoceiver") anchored in its skull (not shown in our
photo). This device permits two-way radio
communication between the brain of the animal and a
computer. A stimoceiver has been implanted beneath
the skin of a goat (8). Using a special external coil
(ring-shaped device clipped to goat's horn) it is possible
to transmit an electric current and two-way information
through the intact skin. A man undergoing a
psychological test (7) has a stimoceiver implanted beneath
his scalp. Radio-controlled "trans-dermal" (through
the skin) stimulation of certain points in the brain has
been successfully used for the relief of unbearable pain.
Photos © JM.R. Delgado. Madrid
ved its usefulness in the therapy of
pain in the patient shown in photo 7
(this page). We must consider this
method as far more conservative than
brain surgery which involves destruc¬
tion of cerebral areas and has been
recommended and employed ¡n many
cases of intractable pain.
Looking at the future. A possibility
of transdermal technology which has
been little explored is the sending of
information directly to pathways or to
receiving areas of the brain when nor¬
mal sensory receptors are damaged.
To give light to the blind and sound to
the deaf are within the possibilities of
present bioelectronics, although pro¬
viding suitable information by means of
these sensations would still be rather
difficult.
Transdermal stimoceivers allow the
simultaneous recording and stimula¬
tion of brain functions, permitting the
establishment of feedbacks and on-
demand programmes of excitation
with the aid of a computer. A reas¬
onable speculation is the transmission
of signals directly from brain to brain
of different individuals without the
intervention of the usual sensory
organs.
The recognition of specific brain
wave patterns to be used as a trig¬
gering device for the stimulation of
specific areas of the brain would
permit the modification of cerebral acti¬
vity as well as related behaviour, thus
offering great promise for- therapy and
research.
We .already have the capacity to
construct a microscopic computer
which could be implanted subcuta-
neously. These units would be able
to receive, analyze, and send back
information to the brain for the estab¬
lishment of artificial links between
unrelated areas of the nervous sys¬
tem.
Limitations of brain control. In spite
of spectacular achievements, the appli¬
cation of electronics to the brain has
important limitations which make
rather improbable the feared push¬
button control of behaviour. The elec¬
trical excitation of the brain can only
activate pre-existing cerebral func¬
tions but cannot create them. Passing
an electric current through electrodes
cannot be compared with the coding
of information which takes place at
the sensory receptors of the brain.
In general, we accept the influence
of mass media, education, and indoc¬
trination as part of "normal"' life,
without realizing that, as recent res¬
earch has demonstrated, these sen¬
sory inputs circulate as coded signals
within cerebral pathways and have a
decisive influence on the anatomical
shaping of neurons, in cerebral che¬
mistry and in the structuring of brains,
minds, and personalities. Language,
patterns of emotional and behavioural
responses, beliefs, and culture are
learned through the eyes and ears,
but cannot be introduced into the brain
by wires and electronics.
Brain research offers .a challenge
comparable to exploration of the atom
or of the universe, because to under¬
stand and influence the mechanisms
of the mind would allow us to direct
intelligently our own evolution and the
source of all human activities.
José M.R. Delgado
30
