PAZYRYK
a nomad way of life
"deep-frozen" for 25 centuries
in Siberian mountain tombs
by Manya
P. Zavitukhina
MARIYA PAVLOVNA ZAVITUKHINA,
Soviet archaeologist, is executive secretary
of the Department of History of Prehistoric
Cultures and curator of Siberian antiquities
at the State Hermitage Museum (Leningrad).
For many years she has directed excavations
of monuments from the Scythian period
in the Krasnoyarsk region and is the author
of many studies on Siberian archaeology.
Colour page opposite:
In the tombs of Pazyryk (Siberia)
archaeologists have discovered
clothing, wall hangings and carpets
perfectly preserved for over
2,000 years beneath the frozen earth.
Above left, detail of a felt saddle
cover from Pazyryk; the entire cover
is shown in lower photo. Its design,
in coloured felt appliqué outlined
with cords, shows a mountain goat
attacked by a griffin; its tassels are
fringed with horsehair and fur.
Saddle covers cushioned the riders'
thighs and were often embellished
with brightly coloured animal forms
or animal combats.
THE High Altai in Siberia is
severe, majestic country.
Over its steppes and moun¬
tain pastures, in the middle
of the last millennium B.C., roamed
the nomadic tribes which scholars
have associated with the gold-guard¬
ing griffins of legend. Following
their vast herds of cattle and horses,
they left behind them, in the upland
hollows, innumerable cairn-covered
barrows known as kurgans or burial-
mounds.
In 1 929, two scholars from Lenin¬
grad, S.I. Rudenko and M.P. Gryaznov,
began excavations in an ancient burial
ground in a place called Pazyryk,
1.600 metres above sea-level in the
remote Ulagan Valley, in Siberia.
The explorations of the first kurgan,
which proved to be frozen solid and
to contain goods which would nor¬
mally be called "perishable", aroused
unprecedented interest.
Rudenko's return in 1947-1949, at
the head of an expedition which
investigated four other frozen barrows,
produced sensational results. When
the "refrigerated" tombs yielded up
carpets, clothing and footwear, a
ceremonial chariot, the mummified
bodies of men and women, horses in
rich trappings, utensils of all kinds,
musical instruments and other objects
of them almost 2,500 years old
the little known name of Pazyryk be¬
came world famous.
The hollows where the barrows are
situated are outside the area in which
the ground is permanently frozen, but
the climate of the High Altai, with its
low mean annual temperatures, its
long and almost snow-free winters
and its short summers, when the
nights are still cold, led to the forma¬
tion of merzlota, or permafrost, under
the cairns themselves. Their stones
protected the earth from heat in the
summer, and permitted refrigeration
to a depth of seven metres, where the
temperature never rose above freezing
point. Water turned into ice as it
filtered into the tombs, whose con¬
tents, thus "deep-frozen", . were in
ideal conditions of preservation.
The archaeologists were faced with
an unusual problem. In order to see
inside the burial places, they had to
lay aside their trowels, knives and
brushes, and pour in vast quantities
of hot water to melt the ice.
The Altaians organized excep¬
tionally splendid burials, following
customs and rituals similar to those of
their kindred people the Scythians.
At the bottom of a deep and roomy
hole, they built a log-lined chamber
with walls and ceiling of double
thickness. On the floor they laid the
coffins which would receive the em¬
balmed bodies of the dead. They
decorated the walls of the tomb with
felt hangings, and furnished it with
the personal possessions of the men
and women they were burying, adding
tableware, food and drink.
Outside the burial chamber they
placed richly caparisoned horses,
killed on the day of the funeral. They
even left behind them some of the
tools used in preparing the tomb:
wooden shovels, picks and mallets, as
well as trolleys and ladders. Then
they carefully covered over the tomb
with layers of birch bark and the fo¬
liage of the "smoky tea" shrub, and
roofed it up to ground level with
larch logs. They heaped soil on the
top and then, finally, raised a cairn of
stones over the mound.
Objects found in the tombs and
data from radiocarbon analysis, indi¬
cate that these burial mounds were
constructed in the fifth or fourth
centuries B.C.
The excellent pastures and almost
snow-free winters provided the Al¬
taian nomads with year-round grazing
for their herds of horses and for the
herds of cattle, sheep and goats
which furnished all their everyday
requirementsfood, clothes and
shelter.
For these nomadic peoples, the
horse was the principal means of lo¬
comotion. In addition to their small,
locally-bred draught-horses, they
possessed highly-prized and swift-
footed thoroughbred fliers, gold and
chestnut in colouring, of Central Asian
origin. They even took these riding-
horses with them into the grave.
Thanks to the excavations, we now r
31

TREASURES SAVED BY FROST AND LOOTERS
Rich stores of normally perishable objects, yielding priceless information
about the steppe nomads, have been found almost perfectly
preserved in the extraordinary frozen tombs of the Altai mountains in
Siberia (6th-4th centuries B.C.). Below, cross-section of an Altai
tomb in the highland valley of Pazyryk, where graves were first excavated
by Soviet archaeologists in 1929. Tomb chamber shown, walled
and roofed with logs, was at bottom of a pit 5 metres deep.- At ground
level earth from the pit was formed into a low mound topped by piles
of boulders (see view of Pazyryk tombs in photo above). Cold winter air
settled between the stones and eventually a lens-shaped section of
ground around the burial chamber became perpetually frozen. Every
human burial chamber at Pazyryk was looted by robbers who dug down and
chopped through the logs (note disturbed v-shaped area of rocks
and soil in cross-section). Water seeped through the opening and froze,
preserving for all time the bodies of chieftains, their women, horses
and possessions of fur, fabric, leather and wood, left behind by
the looters. Drawing at bottom shows a Pazyryk horse burial, including
trappings and wheels and frame of a 4-horse carriage.
Drawing C Aurora Ad Publisher* Leningrad
;-y:vO
mmsmm :
Drawing © Scientific American, New York
know how the ancient Altaians sad¬
dled up. The saddle itself consisted
of two soft felt cushions, stuffed with
deer hair and secured by breast- and
crupper-straps which prevented it
from sliding forwards or backwards.
Stirrups were still unknown; they
were not to come into use for another
thousand years. The bridle was
formed by a headstall strap attached
to the bit, with side-straps, a throat-
lash and a single noseband strap.
The nomads of the Altai probably
lived in light, portable tents, or yurty,
in covered wagons when they were
on the move andif the skill with
which they built their burial chambers
is a guidein log houses. They
used wooden and earthenware
vessels, as well as leather pouches
and flasks.
Their clothing consisted of skirts
woven from kendyr or hemp fibres,
caftans of fur or felt, and patchwork
breeches made of soft, pliable leather.
Their footwear consisted of felt
stockings and high leather boots
with soft soles. This costume was
completed by a head-dress in the
form of a tall cap with ear-flaps, and
a silver-buckled leather belt.
Women's clothing included coats
of squirrel skin, fur inwards, with
narrow, decorative sleeves, and short,
fur-lined bootees, also with soft soles.
The nomads went to war with
bronze battle-axes, iron daggers and
bows and arrows, sheltering behind
shields made from whittled sticks
pleated through thin leather.
The ancient Altaians lived together
in clans or tribes, with distinct classes
of chieftains and property-owning
nobles. The patriarch, who bore the
double responsibility of stock-breeder
and warrior, played a leading role in
the family unit, although the matriarch
was also held in high esteem. Concu¬
bines figured among the womenfolk,
but probably only at the upper, pro¬
perty-owning levels of society, where
custom demanded that the favourite,
after the death of her lord and master,
be strangled so that she might follow
him beyond the grave.
Although the people of the High
Altai lived in out-of-the-way places,
far from the ancient centres of civili¬
zation, many of the objects found in
their burial mounds reveal a broad
network of trade and relations with
other peoples, from whom they
acquired precious goods: carpets,
richly-woven textiles and ornaments,
and the well-bred Central Asian riding-
horses which they prized above all
else.
The Altaians probably offered
cattle and horses from their own
herds, as well as furs, gold and sil¬
ver, in exchange for these goods.
Valuable pile carpets and woollen
cloth of a distinctive style from Iran
found their way through Central
Asia to the Altai, whose inhabitants
also obtained from their Eastern
neighbours embroidered silks which
CONTINUED PAGE 36
32

FABULOUS BESTIARIES
ON TAPESTRY AND SADDLE
Many elegant and richly worked textiles,
some imported from faraway Iran and China,
were found in the Pazyryk tombs, their
colours still unfaded. Tapestries and felt
hangings which adorned the tents of the
horsemen of the steppes were dyed in
vivid reds, blues, yellows and greens and
often covered with elaborate designs
depicting men and real or mythical creatures.
A prancing winged and antlered figure,
half-lion, half-human, decorates this
fragment of a felt wall-hanging from
Pazyryk (1). Horses had been decked out
with magnificent finery before being buried
with their masters. Felt saddle covers were
lavishly decorated with ornaments, mostly
depicting exuberant scenes of animal
combat. (See also colour photos page 30.)
Drawings below show four animal motifs
embellishing Pazyryk saddle covers; the
silhouettes were all cut from leather, partly
coloured and covered with gold leaf or
tinfoil: (2) Lion with massive head and
fanged open jaws; (3) Eagle-griffin pecks
fiercely into the neck of a lion-griffin; (4) A
griffin grips an elk in its talons; (5) Mountain
ram with tiger tearing at its throat has
collapsed onto its forelegs with its crupper
twisted round. (See also pages 34 and 35.)
Its body is slashed with stops, commas
and half-horseshoes, a technique vividly
used by the Altai artists to indicate the
principal muscles and ribs.
Photo A. Bulgakov © Aurora Art Publishers. Leningrad . Drawings
from Frozen Tombs of Siberia by Sergei I. Rudenko © J. M. Dent
and Sons, London 1970.
4 5
33


Cavorting
creatures
on the
tattooed man
of Pazyryk
rcsl
ï<m\
Photo L Tarassova © Aurora Art Publishers. Leningrad
Drawings from Frozen Tombs of Siberia by Sergei
Rudenko © J. M. Dent and Sons, London 1970.
One of the most exciting and puzzling
discoveries made at Pazyryk was that
of the embalmed body of an elderly
chieftain who had been covered in
intricate tattooing long before his death,
A mass of real and imaginary beasts
pouncing, galloping,
prancing and kickingtumble
helter-skelter down both arms and
cover parts of one leg, chest and back.
The designs, preserved by the freezing
temperature, were formed by first
pricking the skin and then rubbing soot
in the perforations. On this double page
we show drawings of nine cavorting
creatures on the tattooed man and a
photo (4) of an enlarged detail from
his right arm, depicting a prancing
deer with an eagle's beak and long
antlers that turn into bird heads.
Numbers on drawing 11, a front view
of the chieftain, indicate the position
of some of the creatures on his body.
Running from his left breast to his
shoulder is a griffin, its curling tail
tipped by the head of a bird or
snake (1). A fish (10) and a row of
mountain sheep run up one leg.
Fantastic procession winding up right
arm from hand to shoulder includes
a donkey (5), a winged monster with
a feline body (6), a carnivore with
gaping fanged jaws (9) and a horned
mountain ram (7). Notice the
extraordinary way in which the ram's
hindquarters are twisted right round
like those of fantastic beast (3) on
back of right arm. Animals were
often depicted in this way by Altai
artists, usually when being attacked
by stronger beasts. Among the motifs
on the left arm are an animal with
tucked-in forelegs, possibly a mountain
ram (2) and a fabulous beast combining
features of deer, eagle and feline
carnivore (8). What was the purpose
of this tattooing? In his book
Frozen Tombs of Siberia, Sergei I.
Rudenko, the Soviet archaeologist
who excavated the Pazyryk burial
mounds, suggests that it may have
"signified noble birth or was a mark of
manhood or both", while the whirling
monsters "had some magic significance
not yet understood". The tattooed
chieftain remains an enigmatic figure.
35

Photo © Aurora Art Publishers, Leningrad Photo L Tarassova © Aurora Art Publishers, Leningrad
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 32
must have been considered price¬
less, even in China.
Amid all the treasures unearthed
at Pazyryk pride of place must go to
a multicoloured pile carpet, woven
by a special knotted technique,
whose almost square surface (ap¬
proximately 2 m. by 2 m.) depicts
horses and riders, grazing deer,
griffins and stylized vegetation.
This carpet, the oldest of its kind in
the world, is a tribute to the work¬
manship of its Iranian weavers.
Close contacts with their neigh¬
bours led the nomads of the High
Altai into mixed marriages, and
although the physical features of
the men and women buried in the
tombs are mainly European, traces
of Indo-European and Mongoloid
may also be detected. The Altaians,
like the Scythians, are presumed to
have spoken a number of different
dialects of Iranian type.
The art of the ancient tribes of
the High Altai is astonishing in its
abundance and unique in its variety.
It constitutes an excellent corrective
to the one-sided notion that
Scythian art was a matter merely
of artifacts fashioned from metal,
bone or clay.
In their choice of images and
subjects, the Altaian artists followed
the so-called "animal style" of
Scythian art. The outstanding qua-
Jity of the many everyday articles
found in their tombs, of their clothes
and of the trappings of their horses,
indicates that artistic creation mat¬
tered to the nomads to an unusual
degree, and that they spent their
whole lives surrounded by aestheti
cally pleasing objects.
Art was indeed in the people's
blood. And the images of animals
and birds, whether wild or domesti¬
cated, real or fantastic, which
figured in their decorations were
more than brightly coloured orna¬
ments. They revealed the spirit of
the people, their beliefs, the way
they looked at things.
In their travels abroad, the ancient
Altaians absorbed what was best in
their neighbours' art, and then
added their own local colour and
interpretations. Thus, they found
place in their own creations for
griffins and sphinxes borrowed from
Western Asia, and for patterns of
lotus flowers, ornamental palm-trees'
and geometrical designs whose
origins were in the countries of
the near East and in Egypt.
It is possible that the artistic
leanings of the people of the High
Altai were stimulated by the abun¬
dance of materials which lay close
at hand. Stock-raising provided
them with a source of excellent
felt. They fashioned high-quality
leathers and furs. Their forests pro¬
duced the cedar-wood and larch
from which the finest carvings could
be made, while the plant world
placed henna, indigo and madder at
their disposal, and the ground under
their feet yielded ochre, colcothar
and cinnabar as mineral dyes, as
well as virtually limitless quantities
of gold, silver and other metals, which
they used widely for decorative pur¬
poses.
As we have seen the riding-horse
was the subject of lavish attentions.
Indeed, decked out in ceremonial
trappings, it must have been a fan¬
tastic sight. Its head was enclosed
in a decorated leather mask; its
bridle had carved wooden cheek-
pieces, pasted over with gold leaf.
The felt saddle-cushions and the
shabrack (saddle-cover) were trim¬
med with multi-coloured appliqué
work, while leather covers and
sheaths were stitched to the horse's
mane and tail.
The clothing and footwear of
the Altaians were decorated with
patches of coloured felt, fur and
leather, and embroidered with pat¬
terns in wool or sinew threads bound
round with strips of tinfoil. Their felt
carpets and wall-hangings, also exe¬
cuted in appliqué work, were colour¬
ful masterpieces, decorating the walls
and floors of their mobile homes, and
even the wooden legs of their low,
collapsible tables were carved in the
shape of tigers.
Colours also figured in the leather
and fur pouches in which they stored
cheese and other produce, and in
their purses containing hempseeds
and imported coriander seeds. Their
arrow-shafts and shields were painted,
too. One may well ask whether the
Altaians had a single object un¬
touched by the hand of an artist.
_Among their images, the favour¬
ites were beasts of prey (tigers and
wolves), and other wild animals (elk,
deer and mountain goats and rams),
whose lively and realistic portraits
reveal the Altaians' great familiarity
with their habits and movements.
But no less impressive are the ima¬
ginary creatures, devised out of
36

GAGGLE OF GRIFFINS
A griffin slaying a deer is a theme
widely used by the nomad artists
of the steppes (see back cover).
Example from Pazyryk at far
left was carved in wood in the 5th
century B.C. and is 35 cms
high. It shows an abbreviated
form of the subject, with the head
of each animal symbolizing the
entire beast. The comb, ears and
wings of the griffin are made
from thick leather, as also are the
ears and antlers of the deer.
Points of antlers consist of cocks'
heads on long necks. Left, two
griffins coil round a frontal piece from
a horse's bridle decoration found
in a tomb at Tuekta in the Altai
mountains. Right, astonishingly
well-preserved leather griffin's
head with curving beak and large
ears and antlers was unearthed
at Pazyryk.
Photo © Aurora Art Publishers, Leningrad
elements of living animals and
birdsthe griffins and winged tigers,
to which the Altaians returned more
frequently than the Scythians.
The skills which the Altaian artists
applied in so many creative ways
have survived until today, transmit¬
ted by succeeding generations from
the mainspring of an art which was
truly popular and never the jealously
guarded secret of a few masters.
The Altaian artist always excelled
in composition. With admirable
ease and virtuosity, the sculptors
in wood, bone and horn fitted their
subjects into the shape of the object
they were decorating, lengthening or
shortening the body of the animal,
enlarging its head, bending its
fore- and hind- quarters into curves.
The ancient Altaian sculptors passed
unconcernedly from one technique
to another, from shallow relief to
excised designs, and then to sculp¬
ture in the round.
An outstanding feature of Altaian
art is the manner in which the exe¬
cution of a single piece of work
involved all these techniques of
sculpture, as well as the use of
different materials, in which an
object could be simultaneously pain¬
ted in bright colours and pasted
over with strips of gold, tinfoil or
silver.
This complexity is particularly
evident in a carved wooden crest,
representing a griffin holding a
deer's head in its beak (see back
cover) while figures made of soft ma¬
terials, such as leather and felt, are
particularly well represented by the
swans, composed of pieces of col¬
oured felt, which may have adorn¬
ed the canopy of a burial carriage (see
page 47).
Altaian art often contains scenes
in which beasts of prey and griffins
are falling upon deer, elk, and moun¬
tain rams and goats. These ¡mages
possibly reflect a period when the
pastoral tribes were at war with
each other. This age of men in
arms produced its breeds of heroes,
in whose honour epic tales and
songs must have been composed.
It is not surprising, therefore, that
the burial chambers also contained
musical instruments, in the form of
multi-stringed harps and drums.
The excavation of the frozen
tombs of the High Altai revealed the
ancient, original culture of the Altai
nomads, which doubtless had a great
influence on Scythian art as a whole.
Now, the works of the Altaian masters
have found another resting-place,
among the collected treasures of
world art.
Mariya P. Zavitukhina
DISANTLED ELK
Wooden elk's heads (each just
under 10 cms. long) from Pazyryk
were used as bridle ornaments.
Their antlers have not survived.
The elk figures prominently in
the art of the northern nomads.
Photo © The Metropolitan Museum of Art. New York
37
