CAN WE
PREVENT
EARTHQUAKE
DISASTERS?
two billion people
live in the
world's seismic zones
by E.M. Fournier d'Albe
AT two minutes past three on the
morning of Wednesday 4 Feb¬
ruary 1976, the stresses that had been
gradually, accumulating deep in the
Earth's crust under the mountains' of
Guatemala reached the point of rup¬
ture. Within the minute that followed,
22,000 persons died, 75,000 were
injured and over one million left with¬
out homes in a broad zone, 100 miles
E.M. FOURNIER D'ALBE is Acting Direc¬
tor of the Division of Earth Sciences in
Unesco and is directly in charge oí the
programme in geophysics related to natural
disasters and their prevention. Before join¬
ing Unesco Headquarters Staff, he carried
out long-term missions for Unesco in
Pakistan, where he helped to set up a
geophysical observatory in the earthquake-
prone region of Quetta, and at the National
University of Mexico.
hi
long, running south and west of Guate¬
mala City.
Once again, an earthquake had
shown its immense power of destruc¬
tion, unequalled even by modern
weapons of war; once again, an earth¬
quake took its heaviest toll of human
lives, among the poorer sections living
in houses neither designed nor able
to withstand its force.
As soon as this disaster became
known, offers of help flowed into Gua¬
temala from the four quarters of the
world. The United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator sent a special rep¬
resentative to assist the Government
of Guatemala in co-ordinating this aid
and in dealing with the immediate
problems of rescue and relief. Unes¬
co's help was more concerned with
reconstruction after the disaster and
took the form of experts in seismology
in earthquake-resistant rural housing,
in school buildings and in the protec¬
tion of the cultural monuments with
which Guatemala is so richly endowed.
This was the immediate reaction.
The basic problem remained: how to
prevent such disasters from occurring
again in the future. The answer is
simple. The earthquake problem will
have been solved when every house,
every building and all the other works
of man in the world's seismic zones
will have been designed and built or
strengthened to resist earthquakes.
This will surely be done one day, but
it will probably take several genera¬
tions.
Why so long? The reason is, that
although the general principles of
earthquake-resistant design and con-
4

DEATH OF A 7-STORY BUILDING
IN 15 SECONDS
, This huge mass of rubble is all that remains of a seven-
story building (inset left of photo) that stood in the
port area of Agadir, on Morocco's Atlantic coast.
The building collapsed when a major earthquake
struck Agadir shortly before midnight on 29 February
1960. In 15 destructive seconds the city almost ceased
to exist: whole sections were totally destroyed,
10,000 persons were killed and 12,000 injured out of a
total population of 33,000.
Photo © Charles Vasseur,
pa .
Rabat
struction are known, and the details
have been worked out for modern
buildings. in steel and concrete and for
important public works, relatively little
effort has yet been put into the earth¬
quake-resistant design of rural and
low-cost housing.
In the world's seismic zones about
2,000 million people live in houses,
many of which they have built them¬
selves, not designed or engineered to
resist earthquakes. It will certainly be
many years before the principles and
practice of earthquake-resistant build¬
ing reach these grass roots. In the
meantime, even in the cities, we shall
have to continue for a long time yet
to live and work in older buildings
which are not earthquake-resistant but
which, for a variety of reasons, must
remain In use.
It is this that makes it so important
to develop means of predicting earth¬
quakes. This will not prevent damage
but at least it will save lives if predic¬
tions can be made with the accuracy
sufficient for public warning services.
The ultimate goal Is to achieve
immunity from earthquakes throughout
the world's seismic zones. But where
are these zones? It is important to
know, because earthquake-resistant
design and construction adds to the
cost of building (between 5 and 20 per
cent, according to the type of building,
the materials used and the magnitude
of the earthquake risk).
The main seismic zones of the world,
the circum-Pacific belt, the Mediterra¬
nean - Alpine - Hindu Kush - Himalayan
zone, etc., have been known for a long
time, but it is only recently that the
concepts of plate tectonics (continental
drift) have provided a logical expla¬
nation of the large-scale pattern of
seismicity.
What still remains to be done in
most parts of the world is to study
and define this pattern in more detail
and to express our knowledge of the
earthquake phenomenon in terms that
are useful to the architect and the
design engineer. For them, it is not
sufficient simply to know that the risk
of earthquake exists; this risk has to
be quantified in terms of the prob¬
ability of occurrence of certain accel¬
erations or velocities of ground
movement.
These and many other problems
were discussed at an inter-govern¬
mental conference on the assessment ^
and mitigation of earthquake risk that r

JAPAN 1923
143.000 deaths
World's great earthquake belts
* Disasters surveyed by Unesco earthquake reconnaissance missions
y was held at Unesco headquarters in
Paris on 10-19 February 1976, only a
few days after the catastrophic earth¬
quake in Guatemala. Over 180 per¬
sons attended this conference, includ¬
ing the delegates of 52 member states
of Unesco and the representatives of
15 international organizations.
The conference had two main objec¬
tives: firstly, to examine the present
state of knowledge regarding earth¬
quakes and the means of protection
against them; secondly, to identify the
obstacles which prevent the fullest
possible use being made of existing
knowledge, and to seek ways of over¬
coming them. In other words, the
conference looked at the earthquake
problem from the governmental rather
than from the purely scientific and
technical point of view.
The conference thus differed from
other international meetings on this
subject, in that it discussed not only
the nature of earthquakes and the
engineering means to reduce ' the
losses caused by them, but also their
human, social and economic impli¬
cations.
Some of the most interesting and
fruitful discussions were those which
took place between seismologists,
social scientists, insurance experts
and civil defence specialists. It was
clear that much still remains to be done
in order to provide policy makers with
the data on which to base government
decisions with regard to investment in
earthquake research, in protective
measures, or in insurance.
Another scientific subject with im¬
portant human, social and economic
overtones is that of earthquake pre¬
diction. The general feeling before
the conference was that, although the
prediction of earthquakes as a scien¬
tific exercise might well become
feasible within the next few years, at
least in areas subjected to intense
instrumental surveillance, it would
probably be a long time before the
degree of accuracy required by a
public warning service was achieved.
Furthermore, there was reason to
believe that, in many social contexts.
the announcement of an impending
destructive earthquake might have
consequences almost as serious as
the earthquake itself, not to speak of
the adverse reaction that might be
expected from the public to any false
alarm.
The conference therefore listened
with particular interest to the report
of the Chinese delegation on the
methods used in that country, and^
CONTINUED PAGE 8

CHINA 1920
180.000 deaths
1927
200,000 deaths
1932
70,000 deaths
GUATEMALA 1976*
22,000 deaths
NICARAGUA 1972'
5,000 deaths
PERU 1970 "
52,000 deaths
CHILE 1960
5,700 deaths
TRAGEDY
IN
GUATEMALA
More than 22,000 persons were killed and 75,000 injured,
over 250,000 houses were destroyed and a million persons
(1 person in 5 of the total population) made homeless by the
earthquake that devastated Guatemala on 4 February 1976.
Whole villages were demolished (above) roads were blocked,
and water, electricity and communications services badly
disrupted. Left, survivors line Up outside a food distribution
centre. The international community responded to the needs
of stricken Guatemala with public and private aid. The U.N.
and Unesco immediately responded; UNICEF (the U.N.
Children's Fund) made available $100,000 and began helping
with relief operations within hours of the quake, providing
tents and blankets for the victims as well as medical supplies
and water supply equipment.

W particularly on the successful predic-
^ tion of the earthquake at Hai Cheng
on 4 February 1975 (see article
page 11).
The wide range of scientific tech¬
niques employed and, above all, the
involvement of large numbers of ama¬
teur observers in efforts to detect the
signs of imminent earthquake shocks,
were of particular interest and demon¬
strated that, in the Chinese context
at least, an earthquake warning system
can be made to operate successfully.
The ensuing debate on this subject
showed that, while the general scien¬
tific approach to the earthquake pre¬
diction problem was the same in all
countries, the social problems raised
by earthquake forecasting were likely
to differ widely from country to
country.
The conference adopted over 40 res¬
olutions on technical matters, whose
implementation will demand many
years of effort on the part of Unesco
and of its member states. Will this
effort be made? In these days of
financial stringency, this is a question
that may well be asked. Although no
immediate answer can be given, it is
worth looking back at the years that
have passed since the first inter¬
governmental conference on earth¬
quakes in 1964 and noting the progress
that has been made since then:
establishment of an International
Seismological Centre (in the United.
Kingdom) which uses one of the
world's fastest computers to process
the data coming into it from observ¬
atories all over the world and to
produce its definitive monthly bulletin
of earthquakes;
creation of a Regional Seismolo¬
gical Centre for South America (Lima,
WHEN THE GROUND GAPES UNDERFOOT. Jagged crevasses in a road
at Niigata (Japan) after an earthquake on 16 June 1964. The frequency of
earthquakes in Japan has obliged Japanese architects and engineers to
carry out considerable research into earthquake-resistant construction.
EARTHQUAKES MADE TO MEASURE. Soviet Central Asia is a region of
intense seismic activity. Violent earthquakes destroyed almost all the old
buildings of Ashkhabad, capital of Turkmenistan, in 1948 and those of
Tashkent, capital of Uzbekistan, in. 1966. Earthquake risk was thus an
important factor in plans to rebuild these two cities. Soviet specialists have
developed special "vibrating machines" enabling them to subject buildings
to the equivalent of seismic shocks. Left, technicians set up the vibrating
machine on a rooftop in Alma Ata, capital of Kazakhstan. At the Research
Institute of Geophysics and Earthquake Engineering in Leninakan, Soviet
Armenia, scientists have established that there exists in certain rocks a
type of magnetization, sensitive to mechanical stress, whose changes
can be used to help forecast earthquakes. The Institute is therefore deve¬
loping the instrumentation required for monitoring these changes.

Peru) which acts as a link between
the national seismological services
and co-ordinates regional studies of
seismicity and earthquake risk;
establishment of an International
Institute of Seismology and Earthquake
Engineering (Tokyo, Japan) which since
1964 has trained more than 200 scien¬
tists and engineers from over 40 differ¬
ent countries;
planning and execution of a Survey
of the Seismicity of the Balkan Region,
which brought together seismologists,
geologists and engineers from five
countries in a pioneer effort to define
seismic risk on a regional basis and
in terms directly applicable to earth¬
quake-resistant design and construc¬
tion;
installation of a uniform network
of modern seismographs in four
countries of South-East Asia, and the
SKOPJE RESURGENT. The city of Skopje (Yugoslavia) was rocked in 1963
by a violent earthquake. Within 17 seconds three-quarters of the city lay
in ruins. The U.N. immediately organized an international relief operation,
and teams, supplies and equipment were rushed to the scene. A competition
was launched for the best plans for rebuilding the city centre. The winning
entry came from a team led by the famous Japanese architect Kenzo Tange.
Below, Kenzo Tange and colleagues with a model of their project. Since
then Yugoslav town-planners and architects have rebuilt Skopje, with the
collaboration of a number of international experts.
training of the scientific and technical
personnel to operate this network;
establishment at the University of
Skopje (Yugoslavia) of an Institute of
Earthquake Engineering and Engineer¬
ing Seismology. It has become one
of the leading centres of training and
research in this field;
launching of a large-scale research
programme in soil dynamics at the
National University of Mexico, directed
particularly at the design of foun¬
dations for buildings in earthquake
zones;
the holding of two international
symposia on induced seismicity, es¬
pecially that resulting from the filling
of large reservoirs (see page. 23).
Many of these achievements de¬
pended of course upon the financial
support received from the United
Nations Development Programme.
Others may be cited, but the point has
been made that progress in this field,
although slower than some might have
wished, has been steady and may be
expected to continue in the future,
despite financial uncertainties.
This is because there ¡s a basic
economic justification for this work.
A single earthquake may cost a
country more than its annual national
budget and may set back its economic
progress by 5 or 10 years. Since 1964,
more than 100,000 human lives have
been claimed by earthquakes and the
damage caused by them throughout
the world must be reckoned in billions
of dollars. The cost of seismological
research, of seismic zoning, of earth¬
quake prediction and even of earth¬
quake-resistant building is small in
comparison.
We now know enough about the
cause of earthquakes, the slow but
inexorable movements of the crust
driven by forces deep within the earth,
to be convinced that these movements
have been going on since our planet
was formed and will probably continue
for thousands of millions of years in
the future. They are part of the "life
process" of the earth by which the
crust is constantly renewed and which,
by the way, is responsible for the
formation of the minerals on which our
present civilization is based.
The instantaneous destruction and
loss of life inflicted by earthquakes
can only be compared with that inflict¬
ed by modern weapons of war. It
seems right, therefore, that Unesco,
which seeks to prevent such human
folly, should equally be concerned
with protecting mankind from nature's
violence.
We have been too long accustomed
to people dying in earthquakes. We
must learn to live with them.
£. M. Fournler d'Albe
