THREE IN ONE
Latin America's originality as a continent
of Indian, African and Iberian
racial and cultural mixture
THE vast ensemble of land,
history and peoples which we
call (inappropriately to say the least)
Latin America has a great variety of
distinctive characteristics. Racial inter¬
mixture (mestizaje) is its most typical
and striking feature.
This word, discredited because of
the derogatory connotations given to
it for many reasons by Europeans,
in reality implies much more than a
simple question of mixed blood.
It Is true that there has been a
considerable and significant inter¬
mingling of peoples in Latin America
during the past five centuries of its
history. The Spaniards Interbred
with the Indians. In fact the first
direct contact between Indian and
European was probably that of rape
and from the earliest days there were
countless mestizos born throughout
the length and breadth of the Spanish
Empire in the Americas.
The rise of new institutions and
political structures in the centres of
power In Lima, in Mexico City and
in Santo Domingo was contemporary
with the appearance of a large mestizo
population. But Spaniards and Indians
were not alone In this Intermingling
of peoples. Soon black slaves
appeared on the continent, forming
the principal If not the sole labour
force on the plantations, in cattle-
raising and in domestic service.
This intermixing of races, practised
to varying degrees depending on the
period or the region, was both wide¬
spread and significant. More import¬
ant than Its social effects, however,
was a much less visible and far more
profound process the meeting, con¬
frontation and fusion of living cultural
heritages.
The dominant and characteristic
heritage was brought in the 16th and
ARTURO USLAR-PIETRI, Venezuela's am¬
bassador and permanent delegate to Unesco, Is
one of Latin America's most famous writers.
Author of many novels, short stories and essays
such as La Otra América (The Other America)
he has been professor of Hispano-American
literature at Columbia University (U.S.A.). His
novel Las Lanzas Coloradas has been published
In English as The Red Lances (Knopf, New
York, 1962).
17th centuries by the Spaniards, in
the form and image of a closed
hierarchical society with its seigneurial
order, its Catholic faith, a disposition
for belligerence and mysticism, and a
scorn for work and manual occupations.
The second heritage was that of the
great indigenous civilizations, static
and marked by a concept of work,
order and values that was un-
assimilable in the new social context.
Finally appeared the heritage of the
Negroes from the west coast of Africa.
They were wrenched from a variety of
cultures and ethnic groups, thrust
forth from the holds of slave ships,
with their languages, beliefs, songs,
dances and traditions, and brought
face to face with two other cultures
in an unknown environment.
These three cultural heritages met
in confrontation and intermingled to
form an amalgam which was not
confined to particular areas but spread
in varying degrees throughout the
entire continent, forming the sub¬
stratum of its social and cultural life.
The encounter of these three
historical forces on this vast new
geographical stage wrought great
changes In each of them, and In time
forged the dominant characteristics of
the new society.
The Spaniard who had come to the
Indies was subjected to far-reaching
changes which affected almost every¬
thing he did. He soon ceased to
resemble those who had remained
behind in his native peninsula. His
language, his food, the rhythm of his
life, his relationships in work and his
place in the hierarchy all changed.
More often than not he had to learn
to live in a tropical climate, or in the
shadow of the all-pervading forest or
at heights where it was difficult for
him to breathe. The absence, at first,
of cows, oxen and beasts of burden
made his adaptation to the new
circumstances a traumatic experience.
Instead of wheat and beef he had to
eat new foodstuffs, Including hitherto
unknown South American produce
such as the potato, the yucca, the
tomato and maize.
The chroniclers of that time echo
the astonishment of the Spaniard faced
with this new experience. They tell
of the need to eat "roots" and they
seek Ingenuous metaphors to describe
and name new fruits such as the
guava, the avocado pear, the annona,
the coconut and the pineapple.
New objects brought with them
strange names. The Spanish language
became host to South American neo¬
logisms which not only designated new
things but also described new relation¬
ships. Words such as cannibal, hurri¬
cane, canoe, hammock and cacique
were destined to pass into all the
European languages. When the
Spaniard who had lived in South
America returned to Europe he was
considered a foreigner and given the
name "Indiano".
No less fundamental was the
change experienced by the Indians and
the Negroes. They were subject to
the working relationships of Europe
and to forms of servitude which they
had not known in the past. They saw
new types of -buildings arise" incor¬
porating Spanish and African features.
They became acquainted with articles
of furniture they had never seen
before, such as the bed, objects such
as the saddle, strange drinks, a new
language, new ways of behaviour, a
radically different form of worship and
an unaccustomed mode of dress.
Those who were born in the 'new
environment created by the mingling
of the three races were subject to the
continual interaction of the three
cultures. A child such as Garcilaso
de la Vega, called "El Inca" (1539-
1616) who was to be one of the
greatest chroniclers in Spanish of his
time, was born and brought up in a
house in Cuzco (Peru) that was typical
of this mixing of cultures.
In one wing his father, Captain Se¬
bastian Garcilaso de la Vega discussed
with his comrades in arms, his friars
and his counsellors the affairs "of
Castile and Almería from the view¬
point of an expatriate Castilian. In
another, his mother, the Inca Princess
Isabel Chlmpu Ocllo with her relatives,
members of the last Inca royal family,
would converse In the Quechua
language, recalling the annals and past
grandeurs of the Incas. .
A difficult and constant process of
interpénétration of these two contrary
28

The clothes worn by the Indians of Tarabuco In Bolivia are an
example of the assimilation and transformation of various aspects
of Hispanic culture in Latin America. As well as his cloak, the
traditional "poncho", this Indian wears a hat whose shape recalls
the helmets of the conquistadors. The instrument he is holding,
a charango, resembles the small Spanish guitar known as the
bandurria, although it is higher-pitched and has fewer strings. At
festival time, the Indians of Tarabuco wear spurs, possibly another
reminder of the conquistadors, to beat out their dance-rhythms.
visions of the world went on in the
child's mind, shaping a mentality and
a sensibility that could never be
completely either that of an Indian
or that of a Spaniard. It was this
particular sensibility and vision which
later enabled him to write his "Royal
Commentaries of the Incas", the first
great original testimony of the New
World as it faced Europe, and the first
expression of an awareness of what
it meant to be a Hispano-Amerlcan.
Two and a half centuries later, in
a house in Caracas (Venezuela), a boy
named Simon Bolivar was to inherit
the combined legacy of the three
races, by now mingled and modified.
His governess during the deeply
formative years of his childhood was
one of his family's slaves, a Negress
called Hipólita. Many subconscious
traces of the songs and fables that the
slave retained from her remote African
heritage must have remained in the
mind and sensibility of the future
Liberator of Latin America.
Years later, returning from his
extraordinary liberation campaigns
which had carried him as far as the
high-plateaux of Bolivia and Peru,
Bolivar was making a triumphal entry
into Caracas when he noticed Hipólita
among the crowds pressing round to
acclaim him. He immediately dis¬
mounted from his horse and went and
hugged her to the astonishment of all
around him.
This process of mingling and trans¬
formation extended to all aspects of
life.- Nothing could be adapted
and transplanted without undergoing
changes and modifications arising
from the interaction of the three
cultural heritages and the geographical
environment.
The mixture of influences was not
identical in all Its social aspects nor
in all countries. In music the presence
of the Spaniard and the Negro was
more predominant than that of the
Indian. The Spanish guitar and the
African drum began a long counter¬
point which has still not drawn to an
end and which has created original
rhythms and songs that have spread
across the entire world.
In architecture and decoration, how¬
ever, the influence of the Indian was.
more apparent than that of the Negro.
29

.The great blossoming of architectural
forms which has been called the
"baroque of the Indies" is one fruitful
instance and proof of this. All over
Latin America,. from the high-plateaux
of the Andean cordillera to the
Mexican meseta, admirable examples
exist of this new sensibility. The
baroque facade was endowed with a
fresh gracefulness and a wealth of
decoration wrought by local craftsmen.
Buildings such as the Church of
La Compañía in Quito (Ecuador) or
the Sanctuary of Ocotlan in Mexico
could never have seen the light of
day In Spain. The ruins which stand
in the forests on the sites of former
Jesuit missions in Paraguay are the
result of this remote and far reaching
encounter which took place throughout
South America.
The meeting of these cultures led
to their separation from their original
sources at a historic period in their
evolution. This too was part of the
great process of transplantation and
confrontation. Thereafter, Negroes
and Indians were cut off from any
further developments in the cultures
from which they had sprung.
This was true also for the Spaniards.
Spanish culture in Latin America
tended to become outmoded and to
lag behind the later changes that
occurred in Spain. In some cases
communication between the two conti¬
nents was inexistent and in others it
was slow and incomplete.
The Spain of the 17th century lasted
much longer in Latin America than it
did in the Iberian peninsula. The
changes introduced by the Bourbons
not only concerning customs and
values but also language reached
Latin America late and incomplete. A
Hispano-American of the 18th century
spoke a Spanish which was dated and
retained customs and tastes which in
Spain had almost disappeared.
Cultural intermixture and a different,
slowed-down historical "tempo" have
since been fundamental and lasting
characteristics of the whole of Latin
America.
This is not, however, a passive
originality created by contrasting
factors or a fortuitous mingling of
foreign elements. «It is an originality
that comes from a positive awareness
and acceptance of enrichment from
other sources which Is exemplified in
all the great epochs of Latin American
cultural creation, be It the "baroque of
the Indies" or modernism In literature.
Modernism flourished in Latin
.American letters between 1880 and
1914 and produced personalities as
outstanding as the poet and author
Ruben Dario. Here we have a man
born in the shadow of the volcanoes
of Central America, in a remote
corner of Nicaragua where cultures
mingled, who not only managed to
produce a miraculous symbiosis of
the most traditional and the most
modern in European letters but was
Photo © Vautier-Decool, Paris
also responsible for the greatest and
most fertile upheaval ever experienced
in the literatures of Spain and Latin
America.
Neither Spain nor any other Euro¬
pean country could have given birth
to a man like Dario. His native
cultural environment taught him to
receive and combine ancient and
modern, Spanish culture and Indian
culture, tradition and innovation,
standing apart from schools and
periods, with none of the historical
limitations of Europe.
The break for which Dario was
responsible was not the result of
dissension between various "schools"
but sprang from a free acceptance of
the whole varied, and even contradic
tory, cultural universe which was his
as a Latin American. He was able to
draw on what belonged to yesterday
and what belonged to today from the
heritages of the Chorotega Indians and
the Castilians of the past to the French
Influence of his own time, without feel¬
ing that he was breaking any bounds
or infringing any temporal standard.
This accretion of sources and this
mingling of periods and styles can be
found in all the major creations of
Hispano-American art. What in recent
years has been called the Latin Am¬
erican "literary boom" is nothing more
nor less than a somewhat belated
discovery, in the work of certain major
writers, of this mingling which, bowing
to European standards, some have
30

Photo © Eduardo Barrios, Paris
CARNIVAL IN ORURO (BOLIVIA)
The fusion of different cultures which has accompanied ethnic intermixture in Latin
America is one of the continent's most distinctive characteristics a unique, creative
process still going on today. The builders of the Church of Santa Prisca in Taxco near
Mexico City (opposite page) were influenced by and incorporated Spanish architectural
features in the building. But they transformed the baroque of the Iberian peninsula
into a rich, exuberant style that is characteristically Latin American. Above, carnival
scene at Oruro (Bolivia). The black-painted faces of the dancers and the shape of the
drums they beat recall the presence of the African Negro in Bolivia and his influence on its
life and culture. From the 18th century African Negroes settled in Bolivia's yungas
(tropical valleys) to escape the harsh climate of the high Andes and the arduous working
conditions of silver and tin mines situated at altitudes of up to 4,000 metres.
called "baroquism". In this particular
case, rather than "baroquism" it
should be called Hispano-Americanism.
In my opinion this is the great
contribution of the veritable creative
originality of Latin America to western
civilization. Western civilization is
the offspring of a wider and more
complex mingling which has gone on
for fifteen centuries between the
most contradictory of heritages and
influences.
The incredible and, at times, almost
Irreconcilable mixture of the Latin and
the Germanic, the Christian and the
pagan, created new cultural forms and
new languages. Into the melting pot
were cast German traditional law and
Roman Law, primitive beliefs and
Christianity, the poetic genealogy of
Barbarian deities and Jewish prophecy,
along with Greek philosophy, the
aesthetic norms of the classical world
and the concepts of a vast mosaic
of nomad tribes and primitive peoples.
From this amalgam sprang Roman¬
esque and Gothic and from It came
the languages of today. From this
source, too, came the fundamental
characteristics of the first civilization
which was to spread throughout the
entire world.
This process came to an end in
Europe many centuries ago. We could
perhaps say that it ended with the
Reformation and the Renaissance
which to a certain extent stabilized
and guided the future of Europe. But
today the only great ensemble of lands
and peoples where this process
continues with full creative force is
Latin America.
From Mexico to Argentina this
vast formative process Is still going
on with an intensity that varies from
region to region, characterizing the
identity and vocation of this entire
family of peoples. The great cultural
currents of the original three sources
and the others that joined them In the
making of the New World are today
developing, in fruitful and unexpected
associations, their capacity to produce
new possibilities of existence and
expression. '
Latin America, whose name is so .
inappropriate, is neither a new Europe ^
31

nor a "Far West" but a metamorphosis
'of what is Western on a stage open to
the influence of all that is non-
Western. This has never happened
elsewhere during any of the great
periods of the global expansion of
western culture.
Throughout most of Asia and Africa
the European presence had a marked
impact but it remained superimposed
and separate, as a kind of historical
exile which reproduced European life
and forms on top of the unasslmilated
and even segregated cultures of the
African and Asian peoples. In Asia
and Africa the original culture and
peoples were submerged under the
superimposed imported structures of
the countries and societies of Europe.
Only in Latin America do we find
a living process of cultural Intermin¬
gling similar to that which produced
the culture of the Western world.
And this is not only its principal origi¬
nality but also its most important
contribution to the cultural future of
the world society of tomorrow. In no
other part of the globe is there a
comparable example of the creative
interaction of different cultures.
The capital importance of this
process has been underlined by many
illustrious Latin Americans. Bolivar,
in the days of his struggle for the
political freedom of the South
American continent, spoke of this
characteristic and its consequences.
He even declared that Latin America
constituted a sort of "microcosm of
mankind", "neither Indian nor Spanish"
and that its full flowering on the scene
of history constituted "the hope of
the universe".
This ¡s a trait of major importance
for a vast family of peoples at a time
when the world is. advancing toward
the broadest forms of co-operation
and integration which have ever been
envisaged.
Today we talk of continental
integration and global systems of
International co-operation, and yet
constantly come up against the diffi¬
cult obstacles which history has
placed between peoples of the same
continent.
Europe and Asia are complicated
mosaics of languages and sub-cultures,
of religious differences and old
quarrels of identity which are a major
hindrance to the process of integration.
None of these conflicts exists in
Latin America. Shared by two sister
languages Spanish and Portuguese
which are practically identical means
of communication, Latin America has
one dominant creed and a similar
cultural past. Today it constitutes
the largest family of peoples united
by a community of language, culture,
religion, history and territory. Its
present population of almost 300
million will rise to 500 or 600 million
by the year 2000. The most elemen¬
tary sense of unity and collaboration
should transform their continent into
one of the most significant theatres of
future world history.
From the Tropic of Cancer to the
Antarctic, from the summits of the
Andes to the coasts of the Pacific
and the Atlantic, with every kind of
climate and type of soil, with all the
natural resources, land and water
necessary for immense development,
Latin America is today the world's
greatest reservoir of geographical inte¬
gration and united peoples. Moreover,
Its tradition of racial intermixture
enables it to draw close to and freely
communicate with all the cultures of
the modern world.
Arturo Uslar-Pietrl

