EARTHQUAKES
IN HISTORY
by Nicholas N. Ambraseys
EARTHQUAKES are the result of
very alow geological processes
and we need a very long period of
observation before we can deduce the
laws that govern them.
In spite of the" large amount of data
for earthquakes in this century, the
period of observation'^ tod short. To
increase this period one has to resort
NICHOLAS N. AMBRASEYS, protessor
at the University of London, is head ol the
Engineering Seismology Section of the
Imperial College of Science in London.
He has taken part in and led Unesco
earthquake reconnaissance missions to many
countries, including Turkey, Iran, Yugoslavia,
Pakistan, Nicaragua and Greece, and to Afri¬
ca. He has been a consultant to Unesco on
the restoration of the temple of Borobudur
(Indonesia) and of the Parthenon (Greece).
Since 1960 he has been a director of the
International Association tor Earthquake
Engineering.
to the study of earthquakes that took
place before this century and to
choose regions which have a long and
well-recorded history.
One area of the globe which has a
very long and well-doijumented his^
tory is , China. Scientists in that
country,-' studying reliable historical -
records over the past three millennia,
have recently made significant pro¬
gress in evaluating earthquake risk
and in predicting regions in China
where earthquakes are likely, to be
destructive (see article page 11). .
In the western hemisphere, another
region which has a long and well-
documented history is the area1
between Italy and Afghanistan. This
is currently under study at Imperial
College, London, with the object of
extracting from old documents such
information about early events that
could throw some light on the mech
anisms that produce earthquakes, on
the manner in which such events
migrate and, in general, on the evalu¬
ation of the earthquake risk in this
part of the world. (
"".The basic data ' for this study " is
retrieved from published and un¬
published 'documents, -local' "histories
and inscriptions written in Greek, Latin,
Syriac, Persian, Arabic, Slavonic,
Georgian and Turkish, as well as from
the field study of early, earthquake
sites. This is a long-term interdisci¬
plinary project, originally supported by
Unesco and subsequently by the
Natural Environment Research Coun¬
cil, London.
In these studies archaeological evi¬
dence is very important, particularly in
regions for which written evidence is
either inconclusive or scarce. Numis¬
matics also play a significant role in
assessing the destructiveness of early
24

Eighteenth-century engraving (opposite page) shows Lisbon ravaged
by the earthquake of 1 November 1755 at 10 A.M. Twenty minutes
after the tremendous shock destroyed most of the Portuguese capital
and caused fires to break out, seismic sea waves engulfed the ruined
city, then one of the most prosperous in the West. More than 60,000
persons died in the cataclysm. Below, late 16th-century mural in the
monastery of St. Dionysius, Mount Athos, overlooking the Aegean
Sea in northern Greece. The artist has sought to evoke the nightmare
atmosphere of a violent earthquake by depicting, in addition to
collapsing buildings, haloes around the sun and moon and falling stars.
earthquakes. The issue of new coin¬
age and the establishment of new
mints were often measures taken by
the authorities to relieve regions after
disastrous earthquakes.
Inscriptions recording public assist¬
ance and private generosity for the
reconstruction of destroyed towns are
equally valuable. Abrupt, changes in
building materials and methods of
construction as well as the relocation
of settlements are all useful in assess¬
ing the relative importance of early
earthquakes.
Other factors have also to be taken
into consideration. Among these are
population density; uniformity and
concordance of source material; natu¬
ral exaggeration in the description of
early earthquakes; and the varying
attitudes of historians and poets
throughout the ages to phenomena
such as earthquakes, which reflect the
importance they attach to the events
they are. recording.
One of the major aspects of the
research is the identification of large
earthquakes and the rate at which they
have been occurring during the last
2,000 years. Another is the assess¬
ment of their economic and social
impact on the people in the region
and their effect on the environment.
Search for large earthquakes is not
limited to the most populous centres.
It is usually possible to determine that
an earthquake felt in large towns,
where it may be well documented, was
felt even. more severely and destruc¬
tively in outlying, less cultivated areas
nearer to the true epicentre, where
some cloistered sage may have referr¬
ed to it* in the course of a voluminous
history of his sect or township, or in
a panegyric on his local ruler.
Large earthquakes can be identified
from the size of the area over which
they were felt, the duration of their
aftershocks, the degree of damage
wrought in the centre of the earth¬
quake area and from the economic
and social impact they have on those
involved.
There is little doubt about the size
of the earthquake of 21 July 365 A.D.
which affected an area of about two
million square kilometres in the
Eastern Mediterranean, between Italy
and Palestine, and Greece and North
Africa. This earthquake, one of a
dozen that have shaken the Eastern
Mediterranean during the last two and
25

Seismic whiplash
Earthquake shocks subject man-made structures to horizontal forces
that most of them are not designed to withstand. Though these
forces do not always totally demolish buildings, their "whiplash"
effect can result in freakish forms of damage particularly as shown
in photos 2 and 3.
1) During an earthquake at Dasht-e-Bayaz (eastern Iran) that caused
12,000 deaths in 1968, brick and adobe buildings collapsed into
rubble, whereas "windshafts", rooftop kiosques providing ventilation,
remained intact.
.2) Spire of the Mustapha Pasha mosque after the earthquake of
July 1963 in Skopje (Yugoslavia). Its tip has been knocked so far
sideways that the minaret seems to defy the laws of equilibrium.
The more flexible upper part of the spire reacted to the violent
accelerations with a "whiplash" effect, the base of the minaret
acting as the whip's handle.
3) Another example of the same effect is seen in the sections of this
Doric column, dislocated by an earthquake long ago. The column
supports the capital of an ancient Greek temple in Athens, dedicated
to Hephaestus, god of fire and blacksmiths.
4) Railway lines are buckled and twisted as if made of plasticine
in this photo taken after the 1964 earthquake at Niigata (Japan).
Four trains in the area were able to stop in time. Their 500 passengers
were obliged to spend the night in the carriages but escaped from
their terrifying experience unharmed.
1
> a half millennia, was associated with
a catastrophic sea-wave which in
Alexandria alone drowned 5,000 people.
Evidence of the social impact this
earthquake had is found in the church
calendar. For two centuries the event
was commemorated in- Egypt and
Greece by a yearly festival meant to
appease the sea and arrest the waves,
which in 365 A.D. carried boats over
the walls of towns and deposited them
on roof-tops, drowning thousands 'Of
people.
Recent archaeological evidence has
shown the effects of the 365 A.D.
disaster which marked the end of a
number of declining towns in Libya
and Sicily. Hoards of coins found on
the floor of public buildings trapped
by the tumbled down masses of mason¬
ry pre-date the disaster and testify to
the abandonment of these sites.
Evidence of catastrophic earth¬
quakes abounds in areas which today
appear to be free from earthquakes.
North-Central Iran is a typical example.
During the last two millennia, sites
such as Shahr-Reyy, today a suburb of
Tehran, Qumis near modern Semnan,
Nishapur and Juvain not far from
Mashhad, and other places in Kho-
rassan, were totally destroyed and
abandoned.
Indeed, Shahr-Reyy was well known
*A m
M"*
Jl**
9^
ft ^^h^^^^HK
Bk
S
2 Photo © M. Despeyroux, France

Photo <D N.N. Ambraseys. U.K Photo © The Mainichl Graph, Japan
for its earthquakes even during the
time of Alexander the Great and the
Greek name of the locality "Rhagae"
meant a place "rent in an earthquake".
Elsewhere, destructive earthquakes in
Baluchistan and Oman, in Lebanon and
Western Syria as well as near Kabul
and Rawalpindi are known, to have
caused widespread damage.
In many instances, particularly in the
western part of the area being studied,
official documents of the late Roman
and Byzantine periods give lists of
towns, that after destructive earth¬
quakes received financial assistance
from the government, as well as
remission of all contributions to the
exchequer for a number of years to
help their reconstruction. These lists
make it possible today to assess the
extent of the area affected by early
earthquakes.
The earliest written evidence re¬
questing such action was actually
found in tablets from Northern Iraq,
dating back to the later part of the
second millenium B.C. This particular
request came from an ill-defined region
north of Mosul, which today is con¬
sidered to be almost free from large
earthquakes. Similar second millen¬
nium B.C. notices have been found
referring to the inability of the local
rulers to pay tribute after destructive
earthquakes on the Mediterranean
coasts and in Syria.
During our research we have found
that deterioration of the local coinage,
taken together with other evidence is
a good indication of the damaging
effects of ancient earthquakes. This
was the case, for instance, in the
25 A.D. earthquake which destroyed
Taxila, in Northern Pakistan, very near
modern Islamabad. The earthquake
destroyed the mint and apparently kill¬
ed its engravers. Similar cases have
been found for Rhodes, Cyprus and
Western Anatolia.
After the Taxila earthquake, houses
were rebuilt stronger, with special
precautions to make their foundations
secure. In some cases these were
carried down as much as five metres,
a drastic change in building techniques
noticed also elsewhere, notably in
Western and Southern Anatolia and
Syria, where after destructive earth¬
quakes builders reduced the height
of new houses from three to one or
two storeys and the lower storey was
left half buried beneath the fallen
debris, and thus constituted a sort
of basement.
After destructive earthquakes, towns
were often rebuilt on an extensive
plan with marked changes in building
techniques such as unusual types of
foundations, consisting of a grid of
wooden beams on which the struc¬
tures are built, the introduction of
timber-bracing of houses and the
abandonment of ordinary unreinfor-
ced brickwork. It is often assumed
that these changes are due to tech¬
niques brought into the region by new
settlers, or by invaders. This is not
always the case.
The acknowledged advantages of
timber-braced constructions in regions
subject to earthquakes have condi¬
tioned building methods, for instance
in Anatolia, Crete, Northern Pakistan
and elsewhere, up to quite recent
times, and historical as well as ar¬
chaeological evidence shows that even
in antiquity such a device was inten¬
ded to give to a building that resilience
which would increase its resistance to.
earthquakes, although it would de¬
crease its fire resistance.
What puzzles archaeologists is the
use of timber-bracing as a building
technique in areas situated outside
the regions where earthquakes are
most prevalent today. This, however
can be explained.
Studies of areas that have been
damaged or devastated repeatedly by
earthquakes during the first 17 centu¬
ries A.D. reveal quite clearly that his-
torical earthquakes follow not only a ^
27

well defined partem but also that this
pattern in places fits surprisingly well
that of earthquakes that occurred du¬
ring this century.
However, studies also show the
occurrence of quakes in regions which
today are thought to be free from
large earthquakes, such as the Dead
Sea, southeast Turkey and northern
Syria and Iraq, the central Balkans
and eastern Iran. Study shows that
zones which were notorious for their
destructive earthquakes, such as those
in northern Syria and Iraq or east-
central Iran, are quiescent today, while
zones which are active today, such as
Anatolia and the Zagros, were free
from large earthquakes two genera¬
tions ago.
Individual zones may undergo long
periods of activity followed by equa¬
lly long periods of inactivity, lasting
many generations, during which pre¬
cautionary measures against earth¬
quakes in building houses are gra¬
dually abandoned only to be taken up
again a few hundred years later. As
was said earlier, the human time-scale
is minutely short when compared with
the time-scale involved in the geolo¬
gical processes leading to quakes.
EARLY and modern history shows
that the lasting effects of single
major earthquakes during the past
twenty-five centuries would not seem
to have been very significant for a
developed and stable community.
Soon after a large earthquake, vested
interests invariably led people and
their leaders to act once again with
disregard for the prospect of future
such calamities.
Yet modern writers have attempted
to use earthquakes to account for gaps
in the sequence of civilizations and
for large movements of peoples, hypo¬
theses for which there is little histori¬
cal justification. Earthquakes have had
little, if any, serious influence on major
or global historical developments.
They did often account for the prema¬
ture decline of a local economy or for
a crisis in local human affairs. But
they have never caused the ruin of a
culturally advanced state, far less the
end of a civilization.
In contrast with wars, epidemics
and other long-lasting calamities,
earthquakes, no matter how large,
seem to have had little long-term im¬
pact on Man. Personal, political, reli¬
gious and in particular economic inte¬
rests seem to overshadow the lessons
to be learnt from earthquakes.
Take for example, Antiochia, modern
Antakya in Turkey. Since its founda¬
tion the city, built partly on very soft
ground, had suffered from earthquakes.
In 115 A.D. the city was almost totally
destroyed, but because of its strategic
position was rebuilt on the same site.
In 458 A.D., Antiochia was almost tota¬
lly destroyed by another earthquake
and rebuilt on the same spot although
it was pointed out to those concerned
that reconstruction on the same site
was likely to be unwise.
The part of the city on the worst
ground, on the river, being settled by
merchants, was of course rebuilt, only
to be totally destroyed a generation
later with a loss of 200,000 lives. An¬
tiochia was again rebuilt on the same
site, this time becoming an important
religious centre, and was finally
destroyed in 540 A.D. by the Persians.
The economic effects that an earth¬
quake may have on a developing
country or on a poor community are
more important and they can lead to
serious and often uncontrollable di¬
sasters, far more important than the
immediate destructive effects of an
earthquake. The damage and sudden
crippling of an unstable economy may
lead to population movements, to a
latent emigration of skilled people,
increase in taxation and to undesira¬
ble, though unavoidable, loans from
foreign countries which may lead to
economic and social consequences.
For instance, as early as in the
5th century B.C. an earthquake in
Sparta gave the opportunity to the
subject helots to shake off the yoke
of their Spartan masters. In 978 A.D.
an earthquake marked the end of Siraf,
a declining port on the Persian Gulf.
In 1139 A.D., Gandja, the former Eli-
zavetpol, now Kirovabad, was des¬
troyed by an earthquake in which more
than 100,000 people perished; this
gave a chance to the Georgians to
sack the ruined city.
The earthquakes of 1157 in Syria
caused great damage, killing thousands
of people. They brought about a tem¬
porary peace between Moslems and
Crusaders who were too busy repair¬
ing shattered forts to think of serious
aggressive expeditions for some time
to come; these earthquakes caused
little change to the final outcome of
the crusades.
An earthquake in 1320 destroyed
completely Ani, the capital of the Ar¬
menian province of Ararat, causing
its inhabitants to disperse into various
parts of the world, as far as Poland
and Iran. The real cause for the deser¬
tion of the ruined city, however, was
the decadence of the Mongol dynasty
of Armenia.
In 1755, the Lisbon earthquake, on
the other hand, provided an opportu¬
nity for the rebuilding of the city on a
grand scale and also for reducing the
trading privileges of foreigners, thus
stimulating an already active economy.
At the present level of technology,
earthquakes cannot be prevented. Nor
for some years to come will it be
possible to predict them in the detail
required to safeguard the economy of
a developing country.
Earthquake prediction was a cons¬
tant preoccupation for the early sooth¬
sayer, astrologer or prophet, and there
are many instances recorded in his¬
tory of destructive earthquakes having
been forecasted. Earthquake predic¬
tion is also increasingly preoccupying
the modern seismologist. Even when
accurate, such predictions are not
particularly effective, since people
seem strangely reluctant to believe
that an earthquake will occur whether
it is a credited astrologer or a seismo¬
logist who tells them so.
History is full of such examples,
demonstrating that Man reacts to an
inevitable hazard in a special way,
distinct from a preventable hazard.
The earthquake of 1042 A.D. in Tabriz,
in Iran, was predicted by the chief
astrologer, who tried in vain to per¬
suade the people to leave. Earthquakes
had happened in Tabriz sufficiently
frequently to be likely to occur again,
yet the main reaction to the predic¬
tion was one of apathy. The earth¬
quake happened and more than 40,000
people perished. Subsequent pre¬
dictions, allegedly accurate, were in¬
variably ignored.
The earthquake of 1549 in eastern
Iran was also predicted by the Cadi
[judge] of that place who tried unsuc¬
cessfully to convince his people to
stay out in the open that particular
night. They refused to listen and
the Cadi stayed out alone, but finding
the night very cold returned to his
house where he soon perished with
3,000 people in the district. Apparen¬
tly, the Cadi himself was not too sure
about his prediction.
Our research shows that with earth¬
quakes it is not only the prediction and
warning problems that are important
but also the social and economic im¬
plications of forecasting such disas¬
ters. False alarms and inaccurate ti¬
ming might create more problems than
already exist.
TODAY, earthquake prediction
would be welcomed by scientists
and engineers, but for the general
public it is not certain whether this
would solve more problems than the
social, economic and even political
ones that it must create.
There is no denying that there is
at present a lack of knowledge of facts
regarding earthquake risk in many
parts of the world and that it is through
the study of the historical record that
such facts may become known. In
spite of the recent rapprochement
between archaeologists, historians and
earth scientists, a proper link for the
study of subjects of mutual interest
such as early earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, weather changes, droughts
and floods, has not been formed.
Work on these subjects is being
pursued singly and with little co-ope¬
ration or guidance from other fields of
knowledge, a process which is not
only painfully slow, but one which is
fraught with danger of misuse of other
disciplines.
The need for a co-ordinated re¬
search programme on historical earth¬
quakes and other natural hazards is
obvious. Such research, the scope of
which is international and global, will
give further dimension to our know¬
ledge of what Nature has in store
for us.
Nicholas N. Ambraseys
28

How
earthquakes
sign
their à
names m
>*
*
These curious squiggles are earthquake "signatures", recorded
on a seismoscope. The one above was made by a quake at
Bandar-Abbas (Iran) in March 1975. The others were registered in
December 1972 during an earthquake which struck Managua, capital
of Nicaragua, destroying three-quarters of the city and killing, 10,000 of
its 400,000 inhabitants. Results obtained from seismoscopes located
5 km west of Managua in an oil refinery at the very epicentre of the
earthquake showed shock waves accelerating towards the east, thus
causing the Managua disaster.
29
