Research
has shown
that the human
brain is really
two brains in one,
each hemisphere
having its own
independent
functions
ORTY years ago, the great physi¬
ologist Ivan P. Pavlov came to
the conclusion that people could be
broadly divided into two types artists
and thinkers. Neurophysiologists have
recently discovered an anatomical
basis for this assertion.
One of the specific characteristics
of the human brain is what is known
as the functional specialization of its
two sides, the left and right cerebral
hemispheres. It has been discovered
in the last few years that the left
hemisphere of the brain controls
logical and abstract thinking, whereas
the right controls concrete and im¬
aginai thinking. The personality and
VADIM LVOVICH DEGLIN, eminent Soviet
neurophysiologist, is senior specialist in this
field at the I. M. Sechenov Institute of Evolutio¬
nary Physiology and Biochemistry of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, in Leningrad.
He is currently engaged in research on the
functional specialization ol the cerebral cortex.
Author of more than 40 scientific studies, he
has participated in many international confer¬
ences on problems concerning the physiology
of the nervous- system. A fuller version of this
article was presented as a paper to the inter¬
national meeting of experts organized by
Unesco in June 1975, in Varna (Bulgaria) on
the ethical problems posed by recent progress
in biology.

A
WL
modes of perception of an individual
depend on which of his two cerebral
hemispheres is more developed
(whether as a result of inherited
characteristics or education).
Although the human brain is of
considerable size and weight, there
are animals with a larger and heavier
brain. The human brain is large in
relative terms, in other words the
brain is heavy in relation to the overall
body weight. But even in this respect
we are not superior to animals. Weight
for weight the cetácea (the family of
whales, dolphins and porpoises) have
even heavier brains.
Scientists have long assumed that
the area of the human cerebral cortex
was larger than that of animals, that it
contained more convolutions and that
its nerve cells were more numerous
and more densely distributed. How¬
ever, we now know that even accord¬
ing to these criteria we are inferior to
those legendary creatures, the dol¬
phins.
If neither size nor weight are the
distinguishing characteristics of the
human brain, what makes it unique?
Today there is only one characteristic
of the human brain which we can
H y I :

THE GEOGRAPHY
AND FUNCTIONS
OF THE BRAIN
Drawing at right shows, on a
schematic cross-section view of the
brain, areas which control the major
activities of the human body.
Drawings far right, on opposite page,
show the interior of the right
hemisphere of the brain and the
exterior of the left hemisphere. The
two halves, interconnected by a
bundle of nerve fibres known as the
corpus callosum, are identical in
structure but not in function. A
number of crucial responsibilities are
divided between them, thus giving
specific functions to one hemisphere
rather than to the other. Note that the
motor and receptive areas for language
(Areas of Wernicke and Broca) are
both located In the cortex of the left
hemisphere. Curves, folds and furrows
outline the main areas of the brain,
known as lobes, each of which is
responsible for various functions.
The parietal lobe, for example,
contains the areas responsible for
sensory inputs and motor responses.
The frontal and temporal lobes are the
centres of higher mental functions
such as language, memory, knowledge
and decision making.
, regard as unique, namely its functional
asymmetry.
The brain of all animals and of man
himself is symmetrical. Its right and
left halves are constructed identically.
In animals, the right and left halves of
the brain perform the same work. In
man, however, the right and left
cerebral hemispheres have different
functions and govern different types of
activity. It has long been known that
damage to the cerebral cortex (caused
by haemorrhages, traumas, tumours,
etc.) may result in total or partial loss
of speech a condition known as
aphasia. However, hardly more than
a century ago, it was proved that only
damage to the left hemisphere leads
to aphasia.
In the second half of the 19th
century and the early 20th century,
intensive research was carried out in
neurological clinics on deficiencies in
the complex activity of the brain
caused by damage to one or other
of the cerebral hemispheres. As often
happens, a mass of reliable facts was
interlarded with data selected in order
to support preconceived notions and
theories. Consequently, neurologists
associated not only speech with the
activity of the left hemisphere but also
all the higher functions of the nervous
system the intellect and complex
forms of perception and activity. The
left hemisphere therefore became
known .as the "major" or "dominant"
hemisphere.
The right hemisphere was regarded
as secondary and as subordinate to
the left. It became known as the
"minor" or "subdominant" hemisphere.
It was referred to in neuropathology
textbooks as the "mute" hemisphere,
for it was not known what symptoms
could be relied on in diagnosing a
lesion affecting it.
Until the mid-20th century, the
functional asymmetry of the brain was
of interest primarily to neuropathol¬
ogists endeavouring to find ways of
accurately identifying localized damage
to the brain. The detailed study of
lesions in the left hemisphere was
paralleled by intensive research on the
symptoms of lesions in the "mute"
right hemisphere.
Finally, in the early 1950s, came a
major breakthrough with the discovery
of functions which belong exclusively
to the right hemisphere. A series of
remarkable studies on the independent
functions of each hemisphere was
carried out by Dr. Roger Sperry and a
research team working at the Univer¬
sity of Chicago and later at the Califor¬
nia Institute of Technology. It became
clear that the right hemisphere
must not be regarded merely as an
adjunct to the leftf hemisphere, and
that it makes its own substantial contri¬
bution to nervous activity.
6

Right hemisphere
CORPUS CALLOSUM
(inter-hemispheric
connexion)
THALAMUS
(central "switchboard" of sensations!
HYPOTHALAMUS
(instinctive behaviour : thirst,
hunger, aggressivity, sex, fear)
PITUITARY GLAND
(hormonal equilibrium)	
HIPPOCAMPUS (memory)
CEREBRAL CORTEX
(upper surface of the brain
¡grey matter] 3-4 mm. thick)
VISUAL CORTEX
(sight)
AMYGDALA
(regulation of instinctive
behaviour!
MOTOR CORTEX
(body movements)
RETICULAR ACTIVATING SYSTEM
(sleep, wakefulness,
alertness)
CEREBELLUM
(equilibrium)
FRONTAL LOBE
(decision making)
BROCAS AREA
(motor area of language)
AUDITORY CORTEX (hearing)
Left hemisphere
TEMPORAL LOBE
(memory of language)
OLFACTORY BULB
(smell and taste)
SENSORY CORTEX
(body sensations)
PARIETAL LOBE
(area of sensory inputs)
OCCIPITAL LOBE
(sight)
WERNICKE'S AREA
receptive area
for language)
CEREBELLUM
(equilibrium)
SPINAL CORD
(transmission
inputs and outputs)
The result was a break with the
traditional approach. The idea that
one hemisphere was dominant was
replaced" by the notion that each
hemisphere ,..has its own specialized
tasks and functions. At the same
time, the problem of the brain's
asymmetry ceased to be the sole
province of neuropathologists and
attracted the attention of physiologists,
psychologists, specialists in the phy¬
siology of growth and even social
scientists. Today, functional asym¬
metry is emerging as perhaps the
main scientific problem in connexion
with the human brain.
The earliest source of information
on the specialization of the brain's
two hemispheres was provided by
observations of patients suffering
from localized damage in the right or
left hemisphere. This traditional clini¬
cal method of research continues to
yield new facts.
The development of neurosurgery
has paved the way for new methods
and techniques in the study of the
functional specialization of the hemi¬
spheres. In order to establish the
limits of a brain lesion, surgeons
sometimes stimulate .the brain by
means of a mild electric shock during
the operation. As many brain oper¬
ations are carried out under local
anaesthetic the doctor (who needs to
know about the condition of the
patient at particular stages in the
operation) speaks to the patient and is
able to find out what he feels when
the various portions of the hemisphere
being operated on are stimulated in
this way.
When patients are being prepared
for a brain operation it is sometimes
necessary to carry out a special test:
a soporific drug is injected into
the carotid artery supplying blood to
one or other of the hemispheres. The
hemisphere which is temporarily "put
to sleep" in this way ceases to
function, and all the complex forms
of nervous activity are carried out
only by the other hemisphere.
Although the hemisphere is "asleep"
only for a minute or so, this has been
long enough to provide fresh infor¬
mation on the functions of the right
and left hemispheres.
Nevertheless, the operation, the
electric shock and the test using the
soporific drug are generally confined
to one hemisphere only. There is
therefore no way of comparing the
function of. the right and left hemi¬
spheres in one and the same person.
However, a few years ago, a kind of
new operation was devised whereby
all the nerve fibres linking the two
hemispheres were cut.
This operation, which is known as v
commissurotomy, is performed when r
7

k it is essential to prevent the spread
of a pathogenic condition from one
hemisphere to the other. After the
operation the two hemispheres begin
to function independently. Although
commissurotomy patients differ little
from healthy persons it is possible, in
the course of treating such patients,
to discover what are the specialized
abilities of each hemisphere in iso¬
lation. However, as commissurotomy
is a very rare operation, it offers only
limited scope for such observation.
Experimental procedures, known as
"dichotic tests", have now been
developed to provide a means of
studying the functional specialization
of the hemispheres in healthy subjects.
These tests are based on the
peculiarities of the brain's structure.
It is known that the right ear and the
right field of vision are linked more
strongly with the left hemisphere, and
the left ear and the left field of vision
with the right hemisphere. If different
material is simultaneously presented
to the right and left sensory organs,
the two hemispheres compete with
each other and we can draw
conclusions about the specialized
functions of each hemisphere from the
way it perceives things.
Here is a specific example. By
using a special apparatus it is
possible momentarily to present
different letters to the right and left
fields of vision simultaneously. It
emerges that only the letters shown
to the right hand side of vision are
recognized. If geometrical figures are
presented in a similar way they are
recognized only in the left field of.
vision.
Scientists now have a fairly impress¬
ive array of procedures and methods
for the study of functional asymmetry.
Some of them have stood the test of
time whereas others have been
developed only recently. One such
method is connected with the form of
treatment known as electro-shock
therapy.
The use of electric shock in
treating mental illnesses became part
of psychiatric practice some forty
years ago when the possible forms of
treatment available to psychiatrists
, were extremely limited. Doctors who
had previously been powerless to do
anything about severe nervous dis¬
orders found that this afforded an
effective means of treatment. Mental
diseases which had been regarded as
hopeless and as leading inexorably
to chronic insanity turned, out to be
curable. Psychiatrists now have at
their disposal a wide range of effective
therapeutic drugs, but, even today,
there are certain mental illnesses
which respond only to electro-shock
therapy.
BRAINY HANDS
A series of experiments carried out recently in North America
tend to show that the left hemisphere of the brain (which in
most people governs speech) also has a special control over the
expressive, free-moving gestures people often make when
they speak. Persons whose speech is controlled by the left
hemisphere gesture primarily with the right hand, like the woman
shown in this sequence of film stills taken during an experiment
by a Canadian psychologist, Doreen Kimura. (If speech is
controlled by the right hemisphere, the left hand makes more
of the accompanying gestures.)
In this treatment, electrodes are
attached to the patient's head and a
precisely calculated electric current is
induced, thereby producing a state of
shock which lasts for a minute. For
some time after the shock patients
are unconscious and their brain ac¬
tivity is depressed. But in the course
of one or two hours this cerebral
depression wears off and the patient
regains full consciousness. A course
of treatment comprises between eight
and twelve shocks. The therapeutic
effect generally appears after three
to five shocks have been given and
gradually increases.
In order to induce the electric
shock, the electrodes are generally
placed on either side of the brain.
However, a few years ago, a British
psychiatrist, Stanley Cannicott, sug¬
gested that the electrodes be placed
only on the right hand side of the
brain; subsequently shocks were giv¬
en from electrodes placed on the left
side. These unilateral shocks, like the
traditional bilateral shocks, have great
curative powers but they are less vio¬
lent and are more readily tolerated by
patients.
Since 1967, the staff of the psychia¬
tric clinic of the I.M. Sechenov Institute
of Evolutionary Physiology and Bio¬
chemistry of the U.S.S.R. Academy
of Sciences have been carrying out a
study of unilateral electric shocks.
Over the last seven years electro-
shock treatment has been given to a
large number of patients in this clinic
and we are convinced of its great
efficacity.
Our observations have shown that
a unilateral shock does not depress
the entire brain but only the hemi
sphere above which the electrodes
have been placed. The other hemi¬
sphere remains active. Although it is
something of an over-simplification, it
may be said that after a unilateral
shock the patient feels, behaves and
thinks only with the active hemisphere.
Electro-encephalograms recorded af¬
ter the shocks reveal a striking picture:
one hemisphere is "asleep" whereas
the other remains active and can be
described as being "awake".
By placing the electrodes alter¬
nately on the right and left of the
patient's head during successive treat¬
ment sessions, it is possible, in effect,
to "switch off" either the right or the
left hemisphere of the same person's
brain. One is thus able to compare
a person's normal behaviour with his
behaviour when only one hemisphere
is active and to observe changes in
his behaviour after one hemisphere has
been made inactive. In this way, uni¬
lateral electric shocks, the primary
function of which is therapeutic, inci¬
dentally provide scientists with evi¬
dence of the fundamental functional
specialization of each of the cerebral
hemispheres.
. The best way to sum up the facts
which have been established is to give
an overall description of a person in
whom only one hemisphere is func¬
tioning. It must be pointed out, how¬
ever, that our "one hemisphere" person
is an invention. He is a collective syn¬
thesis of observations and research
bearing on a large number of patients
who have undergone electric shock
treatment. One further word of warn¬
ing: everything which follows applies
to right-handed people; for left-handers
all the facts are reversed.


OUR SPLIT BRAIN
I Left hemisphere :
speech, writing and abstract thinking
THE "left hemisphere" person is
someone whose right hemi¬
sphere is inoperative and whose
mental activity involves only the left
hemisphere.
The first and most important charac¬
teristic of the "left hemisphere" person
is that he retains the power of speech.
This is hardly surprising since the
faculty of speech is governed by the
left hemisphere. What is surprising is
the fact that such a person is more
willing and ready to engage in conver¬
sation and takes the initiative in dis¬
cussion. His vocabulary becomes
richer and more varied and his answers
more extensive and detailed. He is
excessively talkative and even garru¬
lous. At the same time he is more
receptive to what other people say.
In order to test speech perception a
technique known as speech audiometry
is used. Specially selected groups of
words recorded on magnetic tape are
played to the patient through head¬
phones to each ear independently. ;
First of all the threshold of speech
awareness is measured, in other words
the minimum intensity of the speech
signal at which a person can hear
speech sounds but is unable to identify
the words. The volume is then gradu¬
ally increased and the person is asked
to repeat the words he hears. A
measurement is made of his speech-
acuity the number of correctly re¬
peated words expressed as a per¬
centage of the total.
The "left hemisphere" person has a
lower threshold of awareness of
speech sounds, that Is to say he per¬
ceives quieter speech sounds than
when both his brain hemispheres are
working normally. He repeats the
words he hears more quickly and with
far greater accuracy. Generally, the
"left hemisphere" person has a higher
degree of speech activity and hears
speech more easily.
Do these facts justify the assertion
that speech activity is improved if the
right hemisphere is inoperative? If one
listens attentively to the "left hemi¬
sphere" person one observes that,
although he has become more talka¬
tive, his intonation is less expressive;
it is monotonous, colourless and
dull. Moreover, not only is his vocal
expressiveness reduced but the voice
itself changes: it acquires a kind of
nasal twang or becomes unnatural, as
though the subject were barking. This
speech defect is known as dysprosody,
the intonation and vocal components
of speech being known as prosodie
elements.
In addition to the "left hemisphere"
person's dysprosody, his perception
10
. of prosodie elements in the speech of
a .person addressing him is also
defective.
Two series of experiments have
been made in this connexion. In the
first, a person was presented with
short phrases played through head¬
phones and composed of nonsense
syllables pronounced with exaggerated
intonation interrogative, angry, plain¬
tive, enthusiastic, etc. The person
had to specify the meaning of the
intonation and define the kind of ex¬
pression with which the phrase was
uttered. In the second series of
experiments the person, again through
headphones, was presented with vowel
sounds uttered by a man and by a
woman. He had to repeat the sound
and say whether the voice was male
or female.
It was shown that the "left hemi¬
sphere" person loses the ability to
understand the meaning of speech
intonations. He listens attentively,
tries to make sense of the nonsense
syllables and repeats them with great
accuracy. But he is unable either to
identify the tone of voice (interrogative,
angry, etc.) or to distinguish between
a male and a female voice.
Everyone is aware that the same
words uttered with a different inton¬
ation can mean very different things.
Similarly, the same words uttered by
different people (i.e. in different voices)
can have a completely different mean¬
ing. The way in which one says some¬
thing is often more significant than the
actual words used. Prosodie compo¬
nents give the spoken word a' specific
reference, an expressiveness and an
affective colouring. If the spoken
word is deprived of such components
it sounds vague, formal and often
incomprehensible.
Thus, although the content of the
"left hemisphere" person's speech is
rich in formal terms, both lexically and
grammatically, and although his
speech activity increases and his
hearing for words becomes more
acute, he speaks without intonatlonal
or vocal expressiveness and what he
says is therefore less graphic and
specific.
This confronts us with a paradoxical
situation: certain aspects and charac¬
teristics of his hearing for speech im¬
prove while others deteriorate. What
has happened to his hearing? Has a
change occurred only in his perception
of speech sounds or has his general
faculty of hearing been affected? Let
us consider how a "left hemisphere"
person perceives sound ¡mages other
than speech.
Tape-recordings were made of
coughing, laughter and snoring, of the
sounds of natural phenomena such as
a thunderstorm and the roar of surf
breaking and also of industrial and
vehicle noises.
The "left hemisphere" person's
perception of such sound images is
seriously impaired and he is completely
baffled by many familiar noises. In
cases where he does manage to recog¬
nize them he requires a great deal
more time in order to identify them.
In fact the "left hemisphere" person
develops auditory agnosia the impair¬
ed perception of complex sounds. A
similar disturbance can be demonstrat¬
ed with regard to musical images.
The "left hemisphere" person not
only ceases to recognize well-known
tunes but is unable to hum them even
If he hears the music: he begins to
hum wrong notes and ultimately prefers
to tap out the rhythm without the
melody.
As he is unable to identify speech
images, the "left hemisphere" person
endeavours to overcome his difficulty
by the highly original expedient of
classifying them. Instead of saying:
"that's a dog barking" or "that's some¬
one laughing", etc., he says: "that's an
animal", "that's a person", or "that's
a folk-song". As a rule he is mistaken
but the very effort to classify and sche¬
matize is in itself symptomatic. As we
shall see later, this tendency' is cer¬
tainly not fortuitous.
How should one treat the findings
of research on the perception of sound
images? Perhaps the l "left hemi¬
sphere" person simply forgets familiar
sounds whereas his perception re¬
mains unimpaired. This hypothesis
can be verified.
Tape-recordings were made of pairs
of short musical phrases, each phrase
consisting of four notes. In some of
the pairs the phrases were identical
whereas in others they differed slight¬
ly. The subject was asked to state
whether the paired phrases were ident¬
ical or not. This test provides a
means of studying the ability to distin¬
guish between closely similar musical
patterns. There is no need for the
subject to recall what he previously
knew. This test is performed less well
by the "left hemisphere" person than
by the "two-hemisphere" person.
The "left hemisphere" person is
practically incapable of observing vari¬
ations and everything sounds alike to
him. Thus, it is not a matter of mem¬
ory impairment but of the specific
characteristics of auditory perception.
How is this to be accounted for?
Perhaps there has been some general
change in the sensitivity of his hearing.
Such is not the case. The acuity of his
CONTINUED PAGE 12

MONITORING
THE BRAIN
AT WORK
Recent developments in
electronics have provided
new tools for exploring the .
brain in minute detail.
The electroencephalograph, an
instrument long used to
amplify and record the brain's
electrical impulses, has now
been developed into a
phenomenally sensitive device.
Its electrodes, placed at
different points on the scalp,
as in the case of the prema¬
turely-born baby seen in photo
at left, record electric cur¬
rents at selected areas in
the brain. Below left,
image of a man's head
produced by thermography, a
method of recording variations
in temperature electronically.
Different areas of the brain
are revealed as "hot" or "cold"
according to cerebral activity,
whose pattern may be
modified by a tumour or other
lesion. Below, new type of
X-ray machine developed in
Britain, allowing doctorstosee
for the first time a living brain
in cross section, just like an
illustration in a book
on anatomy. The machine
can film any level of the brain,
producing and recording as
many as 25,000 images in a
matter of minutes.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
H

hearing remains as it was when both
halves of his brain were working.
However, let us remember all the
auditory deficiencies of the "left hemi¬
sphere" person, his difficulty in identi¬
fying musical and other sound patterns,
his difficulty in distinguishing between
male and female voices, his complete
failure to comprehend intonation. In
other words, every aspect of his ima¬
ginai perception of sounds has been
impaired. There can be no doubt that
we are here faced by a special situ¬
ation, a selective and specialized im¬
pairment of imaginai perception (as has
been stated, his perception of words
themselves was actually improved).
A deficiency in imaginai perception-
may also be observed with regard to
vision. If a "left hemisphere" person
is asked to select pairs of identical
geometrical figures such as triangles
and squares divided into coloured or
striped sectors, he is unable to perform
the task as he cannot at the same time
grasp the distribution of the sectors,
their colour and their stripes.
He continually sorts through the
figures, frequently comparing them, but
he is unable to pair them off correctly.
He is also unable to observe a missing
detail in uncompleted pictures: the fact
that a pig has no tail or that spectacles
have no ear-pieces, etc. Thus the
"left hemisphere" person is totally
unable to perform tasks in, which he
needs to grasp or recognize the speci¬
fic imaginai characteristics of objects
presented to his field of vision.
Situations in which the "left hemi¬
sphere" person is free to use his own
judgement in choosing whether to apply
visual or abstract criteria are of parti¬
cular interest.
Four cards were presented to such
a person. On one card was written
the Arabic numeral 5 and on another
the same digit in the form of a Roman
numeral (V). On the third card was the
Arabic numeral 10 and on the fourth
the same digit in the form of a Roman
numeral (X). He was asked to divide
these cards into two groups of
"similar" cards.
It is evident that this op¬
eration may be made on the basis
of the abstract numerical sign (in which
case the two fives and the two tens
will be in separate groups) or by the
external appearance of the symbol
(in which case the Arabic numerals
will be in one group and the Roman
numerals In the other).
In his normal state, a person is
usually in some doubt and points out
that there are two equally plausible
methods of classification. The "left
hemisphere" person unhesitatingly
chooses the abstract symbol, placing
the fives in one group and the tens
in another.
What has been said above makes
it clear that the mental activity of the
"left hemisphere" person is stratified.
His imaginai perception is defective
whereas his verbal perception is im¬
proved. His handling of objects in
terms of their visual, external appear¬
ance is defective but his handling of
concepts is improved.
This stratification also emerges in
studies on memory. The "left hemi¬
sphere" person retains the theoreti¬
cal knowledge which he learnt at
school; in other words his knowledge
obtained through the medium of words
remains unaffected. He also retains
the capacity to memorize new verbal
material and, as soon as he has heard
a series of words, he is capable of
repeating them.
He is also capable of remembering
them for a considerable period and
two or three hours later, by which
time he has returned to his normal
state, he is capable of picking out
from a large number of other words
those which he had previously been
given to memorize. However, if a
"left hemisphere" person is asked to
commit to memory not verbal material
but irregularly shaped figures to which
¡t is impossible to attach a descriptive
word, he is incapable of doing so.
There is another important feature
of the behaviour and mental activity
of such a person, namely his grasp
or, as neurophysiologists say, his
comprehension of his surroundings,
his orientation in space and time. If
one judges merely by the answers
given by "left hemisphere" people,
they appear to be well oriented. Such
a person correctly names the hos¬
pital he is in, the number of the ward,
the date and the day of the week.
But if one questions him
more closely it becomes clear
that although he has made
a correct verbal statement of
his whereabouts and knows that he
is in a hospital, the "left hemisphere"
person does not recognize specific,
rooms. He looks In bewilderment at
the consulting room to which he has
been a frequent visitor and says he
has never been there before. Or,
although he has given the date cor¬
rectly, he is unable to confirm his
answer by practical observations.
Sometimes the "left hemisphere"
person even looks out of the window
at the leafless trees and the snow¬
drifts and is unable to say immedi¬
ately whether it is winter outside or
summer. Indeed, if he answers that
"January is a winter month" this is
merely a formal inference and not a
result of direct visual impression.
Thus, although the verbal orientation
of the "left hemisphere" person is
unimpaired, his visual orientation in
space and time is seriously disturbed.
One of the most striking mental
changes in the "left hemisphere" per¬
son concerns his emotional outlook.
The attitude of mind of such a person
improves, he becomes more easy¬
going, sociable and cheerful. This
transformation is particularly striking
in the case of depressive patients,
that is to say those who have a
pathologically low morale.
"Left hemisphere" patients lose
their characteristic moroseness and
low spirits. Instead of being preoc¬
cupied with their own symptoms, they
become interested in topics uncon¬
nected with their illness. They begin
to take an optimistic view of their own
situation, believe they will be cured,
and regard the future as an encour¬
aging prospect.
Let us sum up what we have learnt
about the mental process of the "left
hemisphere" person. What defects
has such a person? What faculties
have been retained or enhanced?
A deterioration has occurred in
those aspects of his mental activity
which underlie imaginai thinking. Those
aspects of his mental activity which un¬
derlie abstract, conceptual thinking
have been retained and even improved.
This stratification of the psyche is ac¬
companied by an optimistic emotional
outlook.
LANDMARK IN BRAIN RESEARCH
The left and right hemispheres of the human brain are each responsible
for specific functions and are interconnected by nerve fibres (primarily
the corpus callosum) so that they work together. New and convincing
proof of the specialization of each hemisphere was provided about
15 years ago by the research of leading American neurologists such as
Roger W. Sperry, Joseph E. Bogen and Michael S. Gazzaniga. Their
work was a major breakthrough in the history of brain research.
Following operations which "disconnected" the two hemispheres (in
patients suffering from epilepsy which other treatment had failed to
relieve) it became possible to observe the functioning of each
hemisphere separately and thus to verify the specific mental functions
of each half of our brain. Diagram (right) shows how visual .messages
are transmitted to a brain whose two hemispheres have been
disconnected. If the word "Taxi" is flashed on the right side of a screen
placed before a person being tested, the image of this word goes to the
left hemisphere of the brain. It was found that a patient could "read"
and give a correct verbal description of Images received in the left
hemisphere, the one that controls speech. He could not describe an
image received in the right hemisphere, in this case a key, because the
right hemisphere does not control speech. He could, however,
recognize the key among other objects and pick it up with his left hand.
Drawing also shows that movements of the right hand are controlled
by the left brain hemisphere and vice versa. Other major specialized
functions are shown In the hemispheres that govern them.
12

OUR SPLIT BRAIN
I
LET us now consider the antith¬
esis of the "left hemisphere"
person, namely the "right hemisphere"
person. He is the same individual but,
in this case, his left hemisphere is
"switched off" and only the . right
hemisphere is operating.
Unlike the "left hemisphere" person,
the "right hemisphere" person has a
sharply diminished capacity for
speech. His vocabulary is impover¬
ished and does not include words de¬
noting abstract concepts. He has
difficulty in recalling the names of
objects, especially those which are
infrequently used, although he is cap¬
able of explaining the purpose of
any object and of showing how it is
used. This shows that he recognizes
such objects.
His comprehension of speech is poor
and it is necessary to speak to him in
very short and simply constructed sen¬
tences. His own speech is also made
up of simple sentences and often of
isolated words.
The speech activity of the "right
hemisphere" person is much reduced.
He is taciturn and, instead of answer¬
ing questions in words, he prefers to
Right hemisphere: non-verbal memory,
emotions and concrete thinking
respond by mime or gestures. It is
difficult to converse with him, and he
becomes silent after briefly answering
one or two questions. His attentive-
ness to speech is also reduced.
The "right hemisphere" person's
threshold of awareness of speech
sounds is high. He is aware only of
loud words. But even words which
are uttered fairly loudly he is often
unable to take in and repeat, although
this falling-off in his sensitivity to
speech sounds has nothing to do with
any impairment in his hearing.
At the same time, the voice of the
"right hemisphere" person remains as
it was before : although he is very
uncommunicative the intonation pat¬
tern of his voice remains unaltered.
Nor has his hearing of the
prosodie elements In speech been
affected : the "right hemisphere" per¬
son can distinguish between male and
female voices even better than before
and is more subtle and accurate in
interpreting voice intonations.
Although the "right hemisphere"
person is less attentive to words, he
is both attentive and active in listen¬
ing to various non-verbal sounds. He
recognizes such sounds even more
easily and quickly than when both hal¬
ves of his brain are working, whereas
the sound of surf breaking on the
shore, for example, is not often recog¬
nized by people in the normal state
and then only with great difficulty.
Listening to the tunes of songs, the
"right hemisphere" person recognizes
them much more quickly than usual.
Moreover, he feels an urge to hum
them without even being asked to do
so. In contrast with his own perform¬
ance when only his left hemisphere was
operative, he can now reproduce tunes
accurately, but cannot classify sound
patterns.
This indicates that the "right hemi¬
sphere" person's perception has been
restructured and is now the opposite
of what was observed in the "left
hemisphere" person. The "right hemis¬
phere" person shows a deterioration
in verbal perception and a selective
improvement in all aspects of imaginai
perception.
This observation is confirmed by
other research. The "right hemisphere"
person has no difficulty in selec-
ting pairs of triangles and squares^
Corpus callosum
LEFT HAND, RIGHT HAND
Drawings below illustrate the different capacities of the
brain's two hemispheres. They were done by a patient
whose left hemisphere had been separated from his right.
He was asked to copy the cross and cube (centre) first with
his left hand, then with his right hand. Although the
patient was actually right-handed, he did a far better job
with his left hand (controlled by the brain's right hemisphere,
which excels at space perception) than with his right
hand (governed by the spatially inept left hemisphere).
13

divided into striped or coloured sec¬
tors and he picks them out more
rapidly than in his normal state. He
experiences no difficulty in evaluating
unfinished drawings and quickly points
out what has been omitted. The
"right hemisphere" person's greater
capacity for imaginai perception stands
out particularly clearly ¡n situations
in which he is free to select symbols.
In classifying four cards bearing
Arabic and Roman numerals, he selects
the numbers by their visual appearance
rather than by their abstract numerical
values, putting the Roman numerals
into one group and the Arabic numerals
into the other. He recognizes all the
numerals but in classifying them he is
guided by the system of notation rather
than the meaning of the numerals.
The memory of the "right hemis¬
phere" person acquires characteristics
which are the opposite of those observ¬
ed in the "left hemisphere" person. The
theoretical knowledge he acquired in
school through the medium of words is
largely lost and his ability to memorize
words is also impaired.
He is not able to repeat Immediately
after hearing them a series of several
words and is able, at best, to repeat
two or three such words out of ten.
Even if he is able to retain these words
in his memory for a certain period of
time he forgets them within two hours
and cannot pick them out from among
other words. At the same time his
imaginai, non-verbal memory is unim¬
paired and he is capable of memorizing
oddly shaped figures and of picking
them out several hours later from nu¬
merous other figures.
The time and space orientation of
the "right hemisphere" person is also
affected but in a different way from
that observed in the "left hemisphere"
person. Judging by his answers, he
appears completely disoriented, not
knowing where he is, nor the date nor
even the year.
However, he notices details of his
surroundings and on the basis of his
observations is able to say that he is
probably in a hospital, without knowing
which one. He recognizes the consult¬
ing-room in which he is sitting although
he cannot say what its purpose is.
Although he is unable to name either
the month or the year he can tell what
time of year it is by looking out of the
window and says approximately what
the month is. Thus, although the
"right hemisphere" person has no ver¬
bal orientation his visual and practical
orientation is retained.
Just as the "left hemisphere" person
underwent a change of mood, so the
"right hemisphere" person undergoes
an emotional transformation in the
opposite direction, towards negative
emotions. His spirits decline, he be¬
comes morose and is pessimistic about
his present situation and his future
prospects and complains of feeling
unwell.
Let us sum up what we have dis¬
covered about the "right hemisphere"
person. It is evident that here again
we are faced with a disorganized
psyche but the disorganization differs
from what we observed in the "left
hemisphere" person.
The "right hemisphere" person mani¬
fests an impairment in those aspects
of mental activity which are the basis
of abstract, conceptual thinking while
those aspects linked with imaginai
thinking have been retained and even
improved. This type of stratification
of the psyche is accompanied by a
negative emotional outlook.
JOURNEY
THROUGH
THE BRAIN
BH9h
We present here and on the
following pages (also on back
cover) a series of remarkable
photographs of different parts
of the brain and its sensory
outposts taken by a Swedish
photographer, Lennart Nilsson.
Produced in co-operation with
doctors and research scientists
at laboratories in Stockholm,
these documents record stages
in a unique journey through the
human brain.
';&>&
aBBS
OUR SPLIT BRAIN
H Artist' and 'thinker':
two hemispheres in competition
WE have now made the ac¬
quaintance of two people
who differ widely in their psychic
make-up : the "left hemisphere" per¬
son whose thinking is highly abstract
but whose imaginai thinking is defec¬
tive and the "right hemisphere" per¬
son who has a highly imaginai mode
of thought but who is defective with
regard to abstract thought.
However, these two are the same
person, the only difference being that
in the first case his right hemisphere
has been inactivated and he thinks
and feels exclusively with the left he¬
misphere, and in the second instance
the opposite is the case.
We are now in a position to draw a
firm conclusion: there is a definite
principle behind the functional asym¬
metry of the brain, namely that the
14
left hemisphere governs logical and
abstract thinking, whereas the right
hemisphere governs concrete and
imaginai thinking. Apparently, each
hemisphere, each apparatus, has its
own set of instruments: its own speech,
memory and emotional tone.
Let us compare the instruments in
each of the two hemispheres.
As has already been stated, the
breakthrough in our understanding of
the functional asymmetry of the human
brain was the discovery of the ex¬
ceptional importance of the left
hemisphere in speech activity. Even
today, research workers use the
terms "left hemisphere" and "speech
hemisphere" as synonymous. However,
study of the "single hemisphere" per¬
son shows the truth is more complex.
Is it true that verbal speech in-
CONTINUED PAGE 16
>- I
Í
tri
zl
©I

s*%
PORTRAIT OF A NEURON
THE BRAIN'S SMALLEST COG'
The nerve cell, or neuron, is the brain's smallest working
unit. A human brain has 11 billion of them. Right, a neuron
photographed through a powerful scanning electron
microscope. Bulging out at top of photo is the body of
the cell. Branching out from it (enlarged detail, above) are
the dendrites, the neuron's receiving antennae. Left, a
different-shaped neuron. The central body of a neuron
often has a well-defined geometrical shape pyramidal,
star-shaped, lozenge-shaped or, like the one shown
here, it may be elongated.
CONTINUED PAGE 16
27^
\^Bk\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\r9^

k volving both the formation and per-
' ceptlon of words is entirely depen¬
dent on the activity of the left hemis¬
phere. The reason for this is obvious:
a system of words is a system of sym¬
bols and generalizations superimposed
on immediately perceptible individual
phenomena. A capacity for abstract,
theoretical thinking can only be based
on such a system of symbols or, to
use the now accepted phrase, on the
basis of a system of signs.
But speech also comprises a non¬
verbal means of communication and
information, namely intonation and
tone of voice. And the intonation one
gives to one's own speech, like one's
perception of the intonations used by
others, are both governed by the right
hemisphere. Only within a system of
intonations do words or phrases ac¬
quire a specific meaning which is ap¬
propriate to a given moment and given
circumstances. In the same way the
voice itself is an individual charac¬
teristic of speech.
The meaning of what is being com¬
municated also depends on whether the
communication comes from a man or
a woman, an acquaintance or a stran¬
ger, a friend or an enemy. This being
so, the connexion between the intona-
tional and vocal components of speech
and the right hemisphere is also easy
to understand: the right hemisphere
controls the world of specific, indivi¬
dual phenomena.
The intonational and vocal aspect
of speech is essentially a melodic and
musical one. But we already know
that musical aptitudes are also con¬
trolled by the right hemisphere and
it follows that in terms of their origin
too the prosodie (melodic) charac¬
teristics of speech are linked with the
activity of the right hemisphere.
In evolutionary terms, "right hemis¬
phere" speech is of greater antiquity
than "left hemisphere" speech.
Highly organized animals living in
herds transmit the danger signal and
other signals to each other vocally
by means of changes in intonation.
The great antiquity of this communi¬
cation channel emerges also in the
study of speech formation in children.
It is a biological law that the physical
development of the individual organism
(ontogenesis) repeats on a brief time
scale the evolutionary development of
the animal world (phylogenesis).
The sequence in which functions
come into existence in ontogenesis is
therefore a clue to the evolutionary
age of these functions. Research has
shown that intonations which are
characteristic of adults are present in
the cooing and babbling of infants long
before they have learnt to speak. It
is also known that the child begins
to understand intonations earlier than
words.
It is thus necessary to draw a dis¬
tinction between two channels of com¬
munication in human speech: verbal
communication which is a purely hu¬
man characteristic and which is young
CONTINUED PAGE 31
GREY MATTER. This photo of the brain (above) shows at left
the start of the deep fissure dividing the right hemisphere
from the left hemisphere.
JOURNEY THROUGH THE BRAIN (Continued)
SURFACE OF THE CORTEX. The interlocking ridges of the
surface of the cerebral cortex vary in shape from one person to
another, much like fingerprints. But the general pattern of
the cortex is the same in all human brains.
- -
16

THE CEREBELLUM. Seen here in cross-section, the cerebellum (or "tree of life" as it has
been called) is situated behind the brain. The size of a small fist, the cerebellum has even
more convolutions than the brain itself. Like the brain, it has its own cortex. The cerebellum
monitors and co-ordinates bodily movements.
OPTIC NERVES. The two diagonal columns branching up from each side of the photo are the
optic nerve tracts. Each tract links an eye to the hemisphere on the opposite side of the brain. CONTINUED PAGE 18
inffH
Hil
SHE
^m
il .;:.

'Y
IN THE OUTPOSTS OF THE BRAIN. Right, inner segments of cells
in the retina of the eye, magnified about 4,500 times. These cells,
known as rods and cones, transform light energy into the brain's
electrochemical language. Each retina contains some 120 million rods
and 7 million cones. The balance of the human body is controlled by
a labyrinth of chambers and tubes known as the vestibular system,
in the inner ear. Bundles of "sensory hairs" (detail above) form part
of this system and help record movements of the body. Another
unit of the vestibular system consists of sets of "receptor cells",
two in each ear, that measure the effects of gravity. These
receptors are connected to a membrane filled with minute crystals
of calcium carbonate (below). Whenever the body's angle moves, so
do the crystals, stimulating the receptors. This hypersensitive system
feeds the brain with the information it needs to control balance.
â
9uMr*< íB


OUR SPLIT BRAIN (Continued from page 1'6)
in evolutionary terms and is governed
by the left hemisphere ; and prosodie
elements which we have in common
with animals and which are more
ancient and are governed by the
right hemisphere.
Our study of "single hemisphere"
people has shown that the isolated
activity of each hemisphere is asso¬
ciated with a specific range of emo¬
tional states : the left hemisphere
_ with positive emotions and the right
hemisphere with negative emotions.
It is extremely difficult to account for
this unexpected fact. One can only as¬
sume that an important general prin¬
ciple underlies this "divergence" in
emotions and that a positive emotio¬
nal tone is more closely related to
abstract thinking, and a negative emo¬
tional tone to imaginai thinking.
This general principle has already
been noted by neurophyslologists. One
well-known specialist in the physio¬
logy of the emotions, P. V. Simonov,
drawing on his analysis of the
characteristics of conditioned reflexes
formed on the basis of negative and
positive emotional states, has expres¬
sed an interesting idea : "Negative
emotions have a propensity for con¬
crete images... whereas positive emo¬
tions favour the transition to abstract,
generalized models."
It is possible that the reason for
the connexion between various emo¬
tional states and various forms of
thinking and the activity of the two
hemispheres should also be sought
in evolution and in the history of the
formation of mental activity. N.N.
Traugott, a Soviet researcher, in
studying the general principles of the
depression and restoration of mental
functions in acute pathological states
of the brain, has shown that aspects
of mental activity which, in evolutio¬
nary terms, are more ancient become
depressed later than others and are
restored earlier than others.
It has also been established that, as
cerebral activity becomes depressed,
the first emotional reactions to dis¬
appear are the positive emotions and
the last of all are the negative emo¬
tions. When cerebral activity is res¬
tored the sequence is reversed. There
are therefore grounds for thinking that
negative emotions are older in evo¬
lutionary terms than positive emotions.
A further indication of this is the fact
that young children display negative
emotional reactions earlier than posi¬
tive ones.
We already know that the most an¬
cient components of speech are as¬
sociated with the right hemisphere.
We now see that the more ancient
emotions are also associated with
the right hemisphere. However, one
should not think that the emotional
mechanisms are localized in the cor¬
tex of the hemispheres. Emotional
reactions are connected with the activi
ty of the deep cerebral tissues the
sub-cortical nuclei. The cerebral hemi¬
spheres merely exercise a regulating
influence on these nuclei, each hemi¬
sphere, so we have become convinced,
in its own different way.
Our study of the "one hemisphere"
person showed that each hemisphere
has its own memory and its own
"archives". Physiologists and psycho¬
logists are well aware that the memory
is not merely a repository for the long-
term storage of material that has ser¬
ved its purpose. The memory is intima¬
tely bound up with current mental ac¬
tivity and plays an essential part in
the processing of information. We
have become convinced that each type
of thinking has its own working archive
in its own territory.
Obviously, the archive in the right
hemisphere is the memory for indi¬
vidual specific phenomena and is also
more ancient than its counterpart in the
left hemisphere which is a verbal
archive. Even animals which are on
a lower rung of the evolutionary lad¬
der than mammals have a well-dev¬
eloped memory for specific objects and
phenomena. Children who have not
yet learnt to speak already have an
imaginai memory. If brain activity ¡s
sharply depressed the verbal memory
is disturbed earlier than the imaginai
memory and is restored later ano¬
ther fact which points to the greater
evolutionary age of the imaginai
memory.
Thus, the more ancient components
of complex mental functions speech,
memory and the emotions are asso¬
ciated with the right hemisphere. But
imaginai thinking is itself more ancient
than abstract verbal thinking. We
resemble our younger brethren, the
animals, in having an accurate and
complex perception of the specific
phenomena that make up our environ¬
ment, while our capacity for abstract
thinking is the evolutionary achieve¬
ment which has set us above all living
creatures.
It is the functions of the left hemis¬
phere that have raised mankind to a
position of supreme eminence. Very
broadly, animals can be said to have
two right hemispheres although, of
course, one must not equate the right
hemisphere of the human brain with
the cerebral hemispheres of even the
most highly organized animals.
This brings us to one of the most
intriguing questions in the study of
the functional asymmetry of the human
brain: how did it come into existence,
how was the anatomically and func¬
tionally symmetrical animal brain
transformed into the functionally
asymmetrical human brain? It must
be said straight away that there ¡s
no categorical answer to this question.
The problem of the emergence of func¬
tional asymmetry remains a matter
of guesswork and surmise. This prob¬
lem has two aspects.
In the first place, why are the new
and specifically human functions of
verbal speech and abstract thinking as¬
sociated exclusively with the left
hemisphere? The most widely held
view is that the development of new
functions in the left hemisphere is to
be accounted for by the primacy of the
right hand (which is controlled by the
left hemisphere) in working activities.
This view is based on observations
of the fact that even in the higher
apes, our nearest animal relatives, one
of the upper extremities, either the
right or the left, is seen to be of
greater importance in performing
complex motor actions.
However, this assumption requires
further substantiation and research. An
American researcher, R.W. Doty, has
recently discovered that even the
cerebral hemispheres of rhesus mon¬
keys show a slight disparity in their
control of certain complex forms of
behaviour. If this is so, it is reas¬
onable to suppose that the precondi¬
tions for the functional specialization
of the cerebral hemispheres were al¬
ready present to some extent in our
remote ape-like ancestors.
Whatever the reason for the selec¬
tive evolution of the left hemisphere,
in all probability at the early stages of
human development, when verbal com¬
munication was beginning to come into
existence, this process was already
associated with the activity of the
left hemisphere.
The second aspect of the problem
may be formulated as follows: what
would have been the likely consequen¬
ces of the association of the left
hemisphere with the emergence of
speech? It is an established fact that
when a particular portion of the brain
acquires new and more complex func¬
tions, the old functions which were
formerly characteristic of this portion
of the brain are suppressed and be¬
come rudimentary.
It is obvious that such a process
must have taken place as verbal com¬
munication was coming into existence.
In the left hemisphere the functions
associated with imaginai thinking that
were inherited by it from our animal an¬
cestors must have been suppressed
and become rudimentary.
At the same time, the right hemis¬
phere evolved. But its evolution con¬
tinued and improved on the functions
which it inherited from our animal an¬
cestors imaginai thinking became
more complex and more highly dev¬
eloped. This is the origin of the unequal
distribution of cerebral activity the
functional asymmetry in the human
brain and of the emergence of two
independent thinking apparatuses.
It is an interesting fact that the pro¬
cess whereby the functions are dis¬
tributed between the hemispheres may
be observed in early childhood. We ^
have already stated that the develop- r
31

r ment of the individual organism is es¬
sentially a historical play, a compres¬
sed re-enactment , of the entire
evolution of the animal world. The
last act of this play is performed before
our eyes after the birth of the child.
The child is born with what may be
regarded as two right hemispheres and
has as yet no "verbal" hemisphere.
The findings of two Canadian scien¬
tists, Wilder Penfleld and Lamar Rob¬
erts indicate that during the first two
years of life either hemisphere may
take this distinction upon itself. Only
with increasing age does the division
of "spheres of influence" between the
hemispheres become established in the
healthy child. However, this does not
occur in all children. The cerebral
hemispheres of nearly one person in
three do not acquire a clear functional
specialization.
We have seen that the occupational
specialization of the brain's hemis¬
pheres in human beings Is completed
after birth and that a demarcation line
between the apparatuses for imaginai
and abstract thinking becomes estab¬
lished with increasing age. Moreover,
it appears that a person's individuality
and psychological make-up depend on
which of the thinking apparatuses be¬
comes dominant.
About forty years ago, Ivan Pavlov
wrote of these two types of people:
"Experience clearly shows that there
are two categories of people: artists
and thinkers, between whom there is
a sharp distinction. On the one hand
the artists grasp reality in its entirety,
as a complete, living and indivisible
entity. On the other hand the thinkers
divide up reality, temporarily making it
into a kind of skeleton, and only later
do they gradually reassemble its parts
and thus try to breathe life into it ... "
In Pavlov's time too little information
was available to scientists on the func¬
tional specialization of the cerebral
hemispheres and his classification of
people into two types was unsupported
by anatomical evidence. We are now
in possession of the necessary infor¬
mation. The "artists" are people
whose right hemisphere, governing
imaginai thinking, is dominant because
it is more active and powerful. The
"thinkers" are people who have a more
active left hemisphere, governing ab¬
stract thinking. The American research
worker Joseph E. Bogen has shown
that the dominant activity of one
hemisphere may be caused not only
by innate factors but also by pecu¬
liarities of upbringing and education.
So far we have considered the
activity of each hemisphere in Isolation
as though man had two separate and
unconnected brains, whereas, in fact,
normal mental activity implies that both
hemispheres work together. What do
we mean by working together? Neuro-
physiologists formulate this problem in
terms of hemispheric interaction.
The "right hemisphere" person
perceives the world in all its specific
richness and variety. But as he is
incapable of theoretical thinking he
cannot analyze his impressions, estab¬
lish a logical connexion between
them or assign them to particular cate¬
gories; and for this reason the richness
of his impressions bears no fruit.
When only his left hemisphere is work¬
ing, the same person retains his capa¬
city for analysis, generalization and the
handling of logical concepts but is
unable to use these faculties because
he has no impressions to analyze or
from which to draw general inferences.
It is obvious that only if both hemi¬
spheres are working simultaneously
and if the mechanisms for imaginai and
abstract thinking are somehow connect¬
ed can there be any all-round specific
and conceptual grasp of the pheno¬
mena making up the world around.
But our observations of the "single
hemisphere" person showed us some¬
thing else. When the right hemi¬
sphere is inactivated verbal activity
becomes easier, in other words the
activity .of the left hemisphere in¬
creases. If the left hemisphere is
inactivated the activity of the right
hemisphere is thereby increased and
imaginai perception is enhanced. This
means that in the normal "two-hemi¬
sphere" state, each hemisphere inhibits
the activity of the other.
The two hemispheres are not there¬
fore independent of each other. There
are complex and paradoxical inter¬
connexions between them. On the
one hand they co-operate in the work
of the brain, each complementing the
abilities of the other. On the other
they compete as though each
were preventing the other from doing
its own job. Although the significance
of co-operative, so-called complemen¬
tary interaction is clear, the signifi¬
cance of competitive or reciprocal ac¬
tivity is far from evident. Let us try to
clarify the matter.
In the nervous system, stimulation
is always accompanied by inhibition.
The inhibitory process prevents the
stimulus from spreading to areas which
should not be involved in the given
activity. It reduces the intensity of
the stimulus, so that it is just strong
enough for the effect in question and,
ultimately, damps it down when the
need for it has passed. Without this
inhibitory process the activity of the
nervous system would become chaotic,
undirected and self-destructive.
Accordingly, the greater the com¬
plexity of a particular portion of the
brain and the more complex its func¬
tions, the more complex is the structure
of its inhibitory mechanism. It is evi¬
dent that this mechanism is particularly
Important for the higher divisions of
the brain. Indeed, each hemisphere
has its own inhibitory machinery
(chains of special inhibitory neurons)
and the hemispheres are also subject
to the Inhibitory activity of the deep
tissues of the brain. We are now
convinced that each hemisphere is
subject to the inhibitory influence
stemming from its partner.
But the mutually inhibitory effect of
the hemispheres has one further
specific purpose. In order to react
satisfactorily to the changing circum¬
stances and varied situations with
which the individual Is faced in his
everyday life, it is essential sometimes
to combine the aptitudes of the right
and left hemispheres and sometimes
to use the capacities of one or. other
of them to the fullest possible extent.
When a mathematician is handling
concepts such as multi-dimensional
space and imaginary numbers he Is
thinking in a highly abstract way.
When the same man is faced, with a
sudden emergency while driving his
car he is able instantaneously to size
up real space and real objects and to
avoid disaster by' maximizing his ima¬
ginai perception.
The reciprocal interaction between
the hemispheres ensures that there Is
always something held in reserve and
enables a very subtle and accurate
balance to be maintained between their
activities. In this way it is possible
to preserve the optimum relationship
at any given moment between imaginai
and abstract thinking.
This may perhaps provide a clue
which will enable us to answer one
further puzzling question concerning
the purpose of functional asymmetry
and the "advantages" which it has for
the brain. Nature mercilessly sup¬
presses everything which is not an
advantage for the body but scrupul¬
ously selects and preserves everything
which is beneficial. As we have just
said, there are situations in which it is
essential to use one or other type of
thinking to the fullest extent. Obvi¬
ously, to enable the mechanisms for
imaginai and abstract thinking to be
used individually, it is essential that
they be separate from each other and
be situated in different parts of the
brain so that an intensification of cer¬
tain abilities does not entail an inten¬
sification of the others.
The purpose of complementary inter¬
action of the two hemispheres is to link
their abilities, while their reciprocal
interaction ensures that a balance is
maintained between the abilities of
each so that, at the required moment,
one pan of the scales is raised and
the other lowered. In general, the
complex, twofold nature of the relation¬
ship between the hemispheres ensures
the maximum efficiency of mental ac¬
tivity and behaviour.
Thus, it seems certain that it is
incorrect to speak of the main hemi¬
sphere and the subsidiary hemisphere,
the "major" hemisphere and the
"minor" hemisphere. The right hemi¬
sphere is the basis of imaginai thinking
and grasps the world of phenomena in
all its richness and variety. The left
hemisphere is the basis of abstract
thinking; it seeks and finds in the
world a harmonious pattern of causes
and effects. In order to use one's
mental faculties to the full the smooth¬
ly equilibrated operation of both hemi¬
spheres is required.
H Vadlm L. Deglin
32
