BLACK GOLD FROM THE JUNGLE.
The growing needs of world industry
have pushed the search for natural
resources into increasingly remote
places : from deserts to the high seas
and, as shown here, to the heart of
the Amazonian jungle. It was in 1971
that Peruvian geologists and engineers
first struck oil in the heart of the immense
Amazonian forest. Today, jungle-hopping
helicopters (photo 1 ) fly oil technicians
to the tiny patches of bare ground (2)
that mark the sites of oil rigs (3 and 4)
in a vast sea of green foliage.




THE SEARCH FOR A NEW
WORLD ECONOMIC ORDER
x Should we dump
the present economic systems
and start again from scratch? '
by Samir Amin
SAM I R AM I N, internationally known Egyptian economist, is Director
of the African institute for Economic Development and Planning,
in Dakar (Senegal) . A uthor ofmany studies on the economic problems
ol the Third World, he took part in the round table on cultural and
intellectual co-operation and the new international economic order,
at Unesco's H.Q. in Paris, in June 1976. We present here salient
passages from his contribution to the round table.
WHEN we examine the stages
in the struggle for a new
economic order, both national and
world-wide, we realize that this is not
an entirely new struggle and that it has
been carried on by the Third World
countries for at least twenty years
past. Nevertheless, it must be admitted
that it ¡s only during the last few years
that the actual subject of a New World
Economic Order has assumed the
importance it has today and become,
in a way, fashionable.
The Third World countries, particu¬
larly those of Asia and Africa, first
fought for their political independence.
After the Second World War, a long
series of political struggles and often
armed struggles were necessary be¬
fore the old forms of colonial depen-^
dence were eliminated. Over a score r
9

, of years, therefore, the countries of
Asia and Africa were mainly occupied
with the combat for political indepen¬
dence and with activities undertaken
in the interests of solidarity with those
countries which had not yet achieved
political independence.
The non-aligned movement which
was inaugurated as a result of the
historic Bandung Conference in the
middle 1950s was exclusively concern¬
ed, over about a decade, with the ma¬
jor problems of the political indepen¬
dence of the Third World countries,
with the problems of South-East Asia,
the Vietnam War, Palestine, apartheid,
the Portuguese colonial war, and
Cuba, which some powers wanted to
isolate. This was the almost exclusive
theme with which the States making
up the Third World were concerned.
The national liberation movements,
and therefore the governments which
emerged from such movements, did
not elaborate a new viewpoint on
economic affairs. They considered
that the development strategies used
during the colonial epoch could be
more or less pursued at the price of
a few minor adjustments, that the
integration of new States into the in¬
ternational division of labour and the
world economy presented so many
advantages in itself that there was no
point in calling it into question.
They thought that national indepen¬
dence would make possible, and in
fact almost automatically imply, poli¬
tical and economic independence,
which was the condition of a genuine
Interdependence, even if ¡t was only
interdependence between unequal par¬
ties. Within Europe there are countries
which are unequal not only in size but
also ¡n their degree of development,
and yet they may be considered as
interdependent.
The same cannot be said of the
world generally. We can scarcely
speak of interdependence in relation
to such an asymmetrical picture, and
that being so it is better to speak of
dependence.
It was only during a second stage
that Third World countries gradually
came to understand that, all things
being considered, political indepen¬
dence did not count for very much
unless it resulted in economic inde¬
pendence, and that the latter remain¬
ed to be achieved in the same way as
political Independence.
It would not come about of its own
accord and would not emerge from a
development strategy based entirely
or. almost exclusively on the interna¬
tional division of labour or the internal
growth and development which are
by-products of the development of the
world system and, therefore, the by¬
products of the development of the
most highly-developed centres, with
just a few minor adjustments here and
there.
Now unless I am mistaken, the idea
that economic independence had to
be achieved and that this would in¬
volve a struggle in the same way as
for political independence first be¬
came the theme of the; non-aligned
countries and therefore of the 77 de¬
veloping countries, at the Non-Aligned
Summit held at Lusaka in 1970. It may
have been a few years earlier, but it
was certainly not later than the Algiers
Non-Aligned Summit in 1973.
The New World Economic Order
which the Third World was beginning
to claim consisted mainly in two ideas.
One was that the producers of raw
materials ought to organize themsel¬
ves. It was necessary to set up pro¬
ducers' associations, taking into
account the producers' different situa¬
tions and the position of each of the
raw materials on world markets.
These associations could be diffe¬
rent in strength and would impose a
revision of the terms of trade, to¬
gether with a real and substantial rise
in the prices of raw materials. This
would make it possible to create. tho
conditions for a stabilization policy
which would not be a farce but a real
dialogue one between partners who,
in spite of divergent interests, know
that they can reach a real compromise
instead of attempting to impose the
view of only one side.
The second idea put forward by the
non-aligned countries at that time was
that, in order to engage ¡n this strug¬
gle and obtain results, it was neces--
sary that there should be solidarity
among the Third World countries. The
idea of setting up a solidarity fund
enabling the producers' associations
to join battle and reduce the pressure
exerted by developed countries on the
underdeveloped countries which had
gone furthest in this . direction was
based on this fact.
Today everybody is aware that one
of these associations, OPEC (Organi¬
zation of Petroleum Exporting Coun¬
tries) has been in existence since the
beginning of the 1960s, but it was
only ¡n 1970, and even more in 1973
that it was in a position to use a fa¬
vourable economic and political situa-
10

tion to impose a rise ¡n the price of
energy. Up till then the developed
countries of the ,West had not under¬
stood that the objectives in the strug¬
gle for economic Independence were
anything more than just pious wishes,
conferences, vague charters and
statements of good Intentions.
Nevertheless, the world economic
system and the Industrially developed
countries took all the necessary mea¬
sures to ensure that the danger of a
real struggle for economic indepen¬
dence was averted. The idea of an
organization of Third World countries
and the setting up of a solidarity
fighting fund was gradually replaced
by beautiful but quite harmless ideas
which would change nothing in the
economic order but merely reinforce-
the status quo and morally place the
victims of that status quo in the odd
position of aggressors if they should
happen to question some of its ele¬
ments unilaterally.
The Idea of a unilateral rise in prices
and of negotiations to be undertaken
by producers' associations from a
stronger position was therefore gra¬
dually replaced by that of a continuing
dialogue between producers and con¬
sumers, that of a stabilization fund, etc.
And yet, none of the proposals of the
Third World was included in the much
watered-down draft resolutions of the,
Non-AJigned Conference held at Da¬
kar in February 1975 or of the Manila
Conference which took place just
before the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development Session
in Nairobi.
Now this was very odd! For on the
other hand there is Increasing talk in
the developed countries themselves of
the iniquity and dangers of the vast
wastage of raw materials which occurs
on a world scale, of the growing
awareness of the price of economic
growth as it has been pursued thus
far, and of what ¡t costs not only the
peoples of the developed countries
(in terms of quality of life, deteriora¬
tion of the environment, pollution, etc.)
but also the victims of that same
growth, the peoples of the under¬
developed countries.
For three centuries past, these
peoples .have been subjected to the
rising prices imposed on them and
have been obliged to provide free, or
almost free, the wealth of the planet,
without anyone caring about their
future or, of course, the future of
mankind in general.
Should it be concluded that this
talk about the fears inspired by the
wastage of the planet's resources is
mere demagogy and that the institu¬
tions, governments and authorities of
the developed countries are incapable
of making the slightest concession
when Third World countries ask them
to agree to changes which logically
would result in a better use of the
world's resources?
I think an event like the rise in the
price of oil should have been greeted
Photo © Fotogram, Paris
The new international economic order should offer children
in the villages and cities in the Third World the prospect of
a future based on social justice and human dignity.
with open arms by all developed
countries if they were logical and
really wanted to conserve the resour¬
ces of the planet, and that this rise
should have been approved of and
supported by them. Hitherto there has
been little sign of this, and every op¬
portunity has been and still is being
sought of breaking up the association
of petroleum producers, which shows
that we really are faced with a battle.
But as it became apparent that the
struggle was having practically no re¬
sults, except where a group of dev- ,
eloping countries had managed to
impose its views unilaterally, and that
the struggle to change the World Eco¬
nomic Order was bringing to light all
the weaknesses of the system and the
Impossibility of achieving even the
slightest change in the terms of the
international system by means of talks
and negotiations, another idea began
to gain ground.
This idea was that the Third World
should count increasingly on its own
resources and that, therefore, the road
towards development should consist
in a more or less marked withdrawal
from the International system of divi¬
sion of labour if this system was going
to remain inequitable and continue to
be the basis of à world polarization
and exploitation.
For it may well be asked whether
integration .into the world economic
system is really necessary, at any rate
for Third World countries, since it ¡s
based on a division of labour which
is responsible for the inequitable dis¬
tribution of income and therefore for
Increasing the distortions (in terms of
the pattern of consumption) which
constitute a hindrance to real deve¬
lopment. It may also be asked, there¬
fore, whether such Integration should
continue to be considered as a condi¬
tion for development.
One therefore comes to wonder
whether, ¡n order to rebuild the world
system for this will, I think, have to
be done one day one should not
begin by destroying it (i.e. pulling out
of it) and whether ¡t is not by with¬
drawing from the system of the inter¬
national division of labour that we
shall create the objective conditions
for the possible rebuilding of a better
system which will bring out the real
potentialities of the various peoples.
The fact is that the resources of the
planet are not distributed evenly and
that consequently it would be advan- .
tageous to build a new world system r
11

Water from this recently completed dam on the Euphrates river (Iraq) will irrigate
new lands for crop growing. It will also generate electricity for industrial
development in Iraq.
L But any such withdrawal from the
world system is only a last resort and
an unhappy obligation. Is it caused
by some kind of cultural nationalism,
and can it be justified in terms of
specific patterns of development or
the preservation and development of
a national culture with its particular
features?
Circumstances are such that gene¬
rally, when an economic development
strategy is adopted, it is accompanied
by an ideological and political argu¬
ment which is compatible with it. I
personally therefore am not shocked
to see this strategy of withdrawal from
the world system accompanied by a
certain degree of nationalism.
There are various patterns of deve¬
lopment and all of them are universal
¡n character. Whether the pattern is
the capitalist one in existence in most
countries, which has been formed and
has imposed itself throughout the
world over a long period, having
started three centuries ago in many
countries and spread considerably
during the 19th and 20th centuries, or
the pattern which has emerged from
the experience of Eastern Europe,
particularly the Soviet Union, or again
that drawn from the current experience
of Eastern Asia, China, Vietnam and
Cambodia they are all universal in
character.
Capitalism has created a world-wide
system, and we can consider either
extending it and developing along the
lines and ¡n the logic of that system
or withdrawing from it. History cannot
be effaced.
We must therefore realize today
that any pattern for the organization
of society, no matter what its level
of development, presupposes short or
long-term objectives related to techno¬
logical development, production, con¬
sumption, the supply of mankind with
material goods and the provision of a
social organization, all of which are
necessarily universal in character.
The ideologies which accompany
these patterns are universalist. They
certainly converge at some points, if
only because this history exists and
productive forces exist at a certain
level of development. But they also
have many points of divergency, and
these are undoubtedly more marked.
Whereas science is universal, techno¬
logy, which is only putting science to
work in a social context, is probably
less universal than it appears to be.
The Third World, by which I mean
all the countries of Asia, Africa and
Latin America except the communist
ones, has not produced any particular
pattern, and I do not believe it is ca¬
pable of producing one in this sense,
because it is still economically subject
to the laws governing the development
of the world capitalist system, even
if it calls them partly Into question by
means of the World Economic Order.
I therefore think ¡t is useless to ask
ourselves whether we ought to leave
countries free to work out suitable
patterns for themselves or not, since
I think that they will either take such
liberty or not as they think fit.
The real question we ought to ask
ourselves is whether, among the pat¬
terns of universal character put for¬
ward there are some more likely to
respect diversity in global develop¬
ment. For I believe that there are
many advantages in diversity and that
these advantages are not only cul¬
tural but also economic.
Are there, then, patterns and ideo¬
logies which, while necessarily being
presented as they are that is of
universal character are more likely
than others to maintain diversity rather
than consider it as an obstacle to
development, and if so how can they
be applied?
I think that the capitalist system has
hitherto been extremely destructive
and has not looked upon diversity as
an asset. It has also been creative,
of course! It has created vast things
together with a level of development
of productive forces without which,
undoubtedly, nothing else would be
conceivable. !
And we ought to ask ourselves whe¬
ther this was not a stage in history,
whether ¡t did not merely create the
conditions for doing something better
and whether, consequently, the des¬
truction of cultures which it brings
about is not in accordance with its
most fundamental laws.
I do not believe it is the machine
itself which ought to be blamed but
rather the social relations which, by
means of certain forms of social orga¬
nization, division of labour, etc., dic¬
tate certain habits and a certain
subjection to the machine. It ¡s not
the technology itself but the social
relations within which the technology
is applied, which must be called into
question.
I cannot help thinking that any talk
of cultural diversity is always very am¬
biguous. I wonder whether it is a very
positive protest against the machine
which destroys cultures that the capi¬
talist system has been and still is, or
whether it is utterly inadequate.
In my opinion, the only proper way
of fighting the capitalist system is by
opposing it with a pattern which, while
of universal character, really respects
diversity and makes it an asset for the
enrichment of nations. Then undoubt¬
edly, the conditions will be achieved
for cultural and Intellectual co-opera¬
tion which in itself can only be consi¬
dered as positive.
Samir Amin
12
