Three vases
recount
the legend
of King
Targitaus
by
Dimitri S. Raevsky
DIMITRI SERGEEVICH RAEVSKY,
Soviet archaeologist, is engaged on re¬
search at the Oriental Institute of the
Academy of Sciences of the U. S. S. R.
in Moscow. He has written many stu¬
dies on the history and culture of the
Scythians and is the author of a book on
Scythian mythology, as it has been
recreated on the basis of archaeological
data and descriptions by authors of
Antiquity, to be published in 1977.

IN the 4th and 3rd centuries B.C.,
Scythian artists and Greek artists
who had settled in the Scythian
territories began to provide the local
Scythian nobility with beautiful pieces
of craftsmanship made according to
the tastes of their patrons and incor¬
porating many subjects and motifs.
Did these motifs merely depict
scenes from everyday life or were
they themes of greater significance?
Professor Boris N. Grakov, a leading
Soviet authority on Scythian culture,
has affirmed that the content and
style of these scenes are too specific
for them to be merely representa¬
tions of everyday situations. He
sees them as possible representations
of Scythian myths.
By comparing these portrayals with
the information given us by Classical
authors, we should be able to recon¬
struct Scythian mythology.
%&smio v K h.KS2***
The story of the first Scythian king, Targitaus, and his three sons depicted
on a frieze encircling a silver vessel (drawing no. 1, opposite page)
discovered in the north of Kuban. The old king converses with
his eldest son (4) and bids farewell to his second son (5) who, holding
two spears in his right hand, is about to set off on a journey. To his
beardless youngest son Targitaus proffers his bow, symbol of authority (6).
Photos © Institute of Oriental Studies of the Academy of Sciences of the U. S. S. R.. Moscow
Photo L Tarassova © Kiev State Historical Museum
6
Herodotus relates the Scythian
legend of the first hero, who was
known to the Scythians as Targitaus,
but whom the Greek colonists of the
Black Sea region, and Herodotus also,
referred to as Heracles, the famous
hero of Greek myth.
At the beginning of the 1950s,
Professor Grakov put forward the
interesting hypothesis that the num¬
erous Scythian representations of a
man fighting with a fantastic beast all
depict the exploits of Targitaus.
Professor Grakov also claimed that
such works were popular among the
Scythians because Targitaus, accor¬
ding to Herodotus, was considered
to be the direct ancestor of the
Scythian kings. Is it possible, then,
to identify features in Scythian art
which directly relate to the myth of
Targitaus ?
According to one version of this
legend, Targitaus-Heracles had three
sons. In order to determine which
of them was the most worthy of
becoming the ruler of the Scythians, ¡'
he decided to put them to a test.
Each had to attempt to string his
father's bow and strap on the belt
which he wore in battle. This trial
required, as may well be imagined,
great strength and skill, and only
the youngest of the brothers. Scythes,
succeeded. According to the legend
he then became the first ruler of the
Scythians and his two older brothers
were sent into exile.
This subject is depicted in an
astonishing number of works of
Scythian art. At the beginning of
this century a small ritual silver ves¬
sel (drawing 1) which clearly origi¬
nated from the Black Sea area, was
found in a tomb along the course of
the Don.
Six male figures are represented on
this vessel, grouped in three paired
scenes. One of the figures reappears
in all three scenes. He is an elderly
Scythian with long hair and a beard.
In one of the scenes (4) he is repre¬
sented in conversation with another
Scythian. Another scene (5) is more
important: the same character bids
farewell to a warrior who holds a
spear in each hand and may be
setting off on an expedition to distant
lands.
But it is the third scene (6) which
seems to be the most significant of
all: the same hero proffers his bow
to his companion, who is clearly the
youngest person in the grouphe has
not yet even grown the customary
Scythian beard.
/ZJX'
All the details of this composition
seem to indicate that it is a represen¬
tation of Targitaus and his three sons.
Two of them he is exiling from his
realm. Targitaus even holds up
three fingers to the departing warrior,
as if to remind him that all the bro¬
thers had been subjected to the test.
Meanwhile he proffers his bow to
the third and youngest son as a
symbol of his victory and as an
emblem of his power.
A few years ago, during the exca¬
vations at Gaimanova Mogila in the
Ukraine, a vessel (drawing 2, page 14
and photo page 17) was found
showing another young Scythian
taking an oblong object from the
hands of an older man. Unfortunate¬
ly that part of the vessel (drawing 7,
page 1 6) was seriously damaged and
the object cannot be made out.
But the content of the scene and
the appearance of the characters
make it possible for us to see here
the very moment at which Targitaus
hands his . bow to his youngest
son. On the opposite side of the
vessel are two other Scythians, who
may well be the victor's exiled
brothers.
Now let us turn to the most re-w
nowned Scythian ritual vessel (3). r
15

Drawing of circular frieze (left)
embellishing a gilded silver cup less
than 10 cms high (drawing n° 2,
I page 14, and photo opposite.
I Unearthed at Gaimanov (Ukraine),
y it dates from the 4th century
I B.C. At far right of drawing are
I two long-haired, bearded men
I dressed in Scythian fashion. At
centre left an old man is offering
something to a younger one. This
I scene may be a variant of the legend
I of the Scythian king Targitaus.
Photos © Institute of Oriental Studies
of the Academy of Sciences of the U. S. S. R.; Moscow
, Made of gold and 1 3 cm high, it was
found almost a century and a half
ago in the Kul Oba kurgan on the
Kerch Peninsula in the Crimea.
A frieze encircles the vase, repre¬
senting seven Scythians, busy at dif¬
ferent occupations. One of them
is kneeling on his right knee, his
left leg over a bow, stretching it,
while he strings it with the right hand
and holds it steady with the left.
This may be a representation of the
feat that Targitaus asked of his sons.
If this is so how can we interpret
what is happening in the other scenes
on the vase? One Scythian is ban¬
daging the wounded leg of another.
Beside him, another Scythian is
probing for something with his
thumb and forefinger in the mouth
of his companion. The explanation
of this somewhat unexpected scene
is as follows.
When unstrung, the Scythian bow
is curved at both ends in the opposite
direction from the bow-string (in the
form of a cursive letter "w" with a
hook on each end). If the archer
attempts to draw it tight in the
manner indicated on the vase, but
does not have the necessary strength
and dexterity, the wood can spring
back violently, wounding him by a
blow either on the left leg or the
lower jaw.
The force of the backlash is such
that it may be capable of breaking
a bone and could certainly dislodge a
tooth. Perhaps Targitaus's older
sons received these wounds, through
not being able to carry out their
father's test. Is this what we see on
the vessel from Kul Oba ?
What did the Scythians imaginé
happened to Targitaus's older sons?
Herodotus does not tell us, but
world folklore recounts numerous
versions of the rivalry between three
brothers, in which the youngest is
victorious. These versions differ in
many details but usually have the
same ending: the older brothers,
enraged by the younger's success,
slay him.
This is how the story ends in the
narrative of the three sons of Ferey-
dun, the hero of an ancient Iranian
epic, whose general characteristics,
resemble those of the Scythian
Targitaus.
The scene shown on the Gaimanova
Mogila vase described above sug¬
gests that the end of the Scythian
myth may be very similar. The two
From right to left: a Scythian wearing a pointed helmet
bandages his comrade's leg. Another seems to be acting
as a dentist, probing in the mouth of his companion. Yet
another is stringing his bow, a task said to have
been given to the sons of Targitaus. Two more
figures seem to be gossiping while they lean on their
spears. The drawing depicts a frieze decorating an electrum
(gold and silver alloy) vase discovered at Kul Oba
in the Crimea (drawing n° 3, page 14).
persons who represent, according
to our interpretation, the elderbrothers
are heavily armed, while the youngest
brother and the father have only
bows. Has the artist not por¬
trayed here the precise moment
when the two brothers hatch their
murderous plot against their vic¬
torious rival ?
Another renowned Scythian trea¬
sure is the gold comb (4th century
B.C.) from the Solokha kurgan, in
the lower Dnieper River region (see
photo page 8). Two Scythian war¬
riors, one on foot and the other on
horseback, are attacking and van¬
quishing a third one. Could these
also be the sons of Targitaus?
A Roman poet, Caius Valerius
Flaccus (Ist century A. D.) confirms
this theory in his poem "The Argo-
nautica!'
In the midst of items which have
nothing to do with the myth, he
suddenly mentions a combat between
two individuals whose names are very
similar in sound to those of Targitaus-
Heracles' sons. His description of
the combat also evokes that represen¬
ted on the comb: the warrior's horse
is dead, he himself is wounded, death
will soon overtake him...
Thus, such artistic representations
make it possible to link together the
fragments of Scythian myths preser¬
ved by different authors and to
reconstruct on this basis a single
connected narrative.
The popularity of the legend of
Targitaus and his sons and the fre¬
quent enactment of this subject on
ritual objects should not surprise us.
After all, this was a dynastic myth,
which supported the Scythian kings'
claim to the throne.
However, it must be admitted that
these interpretations are still not
unanimously accepted, and that
there are other possible explana¬
tions and approaches to this subject.
Meanwhile the search for the truth
continues...
Dimitri S. Raevsky
