For almost 40 years "Grandad" and
"Grandma" (below) lived happily in their
little wooden house with its garden (left) in
an industrial suburb of Nantes, in western
France. Then an "urban renewal" plan led to
their being rehoused in a modern block of
flats (right). For "Grandad" and "Grandma"
this meant not just having a new home but
having to accept a new and to them
unwelcome way of life, as they relate below.
GRANDMA: I lived in a wooden
house at Le Ranzay from the
time It was built. I was seven when
we moved in. It was 1920 and the
house wasn't even finished. We mov¬
ed out In 1965. I lived for 45 years in
the same house, with the same gar¬
den and more or less the same neigh¬
bours. That's where I spent my youth.
And how did we finally come to
move? Well, one day we started hear¬
ing bits of gossip. You know how
these things happen they always
start with rumours which you don't
know whether to believe or not.
People were saying that the Hal-
vèque and Baratte houses were going
to be knocked down and they were
going to build flats. That was when I
went to see the landlord's agent It
was about 1963. "Look", I told him,
"we'd like to build a porch where we
can put our boots and our outdoor
clothes". "All right", he said, "but
make sure you keep the bills so that
If ever you leave you can arrange to
get some money back from whoever
moves In after you."
So my husband and the two boys,
who were working as labourers then,
built a fibro-cement porch. Well, we
got a year or two's use out of It. Of
course we knew they'd started build¬
ing here on the Renaudière estate. A
few wooden houses had already been
knocked down and the people had
either gone into new flats or else into
other wooden houses on the Halvèque
and Baratte estates.



THE UPROOTED
the sad story of an old couple
who moved from their wooden cottage
to a concrete housing complex
The text we present here is a story told by a husband and wife, "Gran¬
dad" and "Grandma" who live in a suburb of Nantes (France). It is
taken from an inquiry carried out between 1968 and 1971 by a group
of teachers and students at the School of Architecture of the University
of Nantes. In September 1972 the French monthly. Temps Modernes
(No. 314-315) published a series of interviews from the same inquiry
in which people of Nantes and its suburbs talked freely to members
of the university team about the problems facing them, particularly
when they had been rehoused in new districts of the city.
People In Le Ranzay were telling
each other: "It's not our turn yet".
But as it happened Le Ranzay was
the first place to be demolished. One
day somebody came along and said,
"Let me give you a tip. You ought to
move Into the Renaudière flats now
while you can. First come first serv¬
ed", he said, "you'll be able to take
your pick if you get in at the start."
But we wondered what on earth we
would do with ourselves in a block
of flats. We'll be much better off stay¬
ing put in our own little house and
garden, we said... They aren't going
to come yet, we'll just wait and see
what happens when the bulldozers
arrive.
Well, we didn't have long to wait.
One day the roadmen turned up be-
24

hind the house. My husband asked
them what they were doing. "We're
laying out the line of the new road",
they said, "and your house Is going to
be cut in two. Yes", they told us, Le
Ranzay Is going to be knocked
down."
So what did we do? We came here.
We talked It over, and the boys said,
"We'd do better to stay In the same
neighbourhood and take one of the
new Renaudière flats." At least Gran¬
dad doesn't have too far to go to
work. He works shifts you see, a week
on mornings from 4 o'clock to 1
o'clock and then a week on afternoons
from 1 o'clock till 10 o'clock. He
doesn't want to change now at his
age. He's 59, and in the past 41 years
he's got used to the same hours.
You couldn't expect him to get up at
3 in the morning and ride across town
on his moped.
Here, at ¡east we'd still be in the
same neighbourhood, not too far from
our friends. So we moved in here,
into a brand-new 3-room flat. It took
a bit of getting used to, I can tell you.
There's nothing much wrong with
the flat, I suppose, but we don't like
any of the things that go with It.
Worst of all Is not having our own
garden. That's what made It so diffi¬
cult for us to get used to this place.
Of course we've got the central
heating, the hot water, and so on, and
you find these things a comfort as
you get older. But what we can't
stand In this flat Is the feeling of
being cooped up. And then there are
these big windows. They're supposed
to be the latest thing, but everyone
wonders why we need windows right
down to the floor. You get enough
light from the top of the window and
it would be a lot better if you could
move your furniture right under the
windows.
You know, when they build houses
they ought to get women to plan
them. They'd see things with a wo¬
man's eye; they know, what It's like
living in a flat and they wouldn't have
things like that In It.
And then it's such a job to keep the
place clean. You need big curtains
and there's lots of other things to buy
when you move In. What makes It
worse is that you get no allowance or
loan or anything else In fact you
have to pay your rent In advance!
And the amount of work you have
to get through cleaning these big
windows and the floors... Housework
can really get you down, you know.
Of course, we cleaned the windows In
the old place, but they were small,
four windows and that was that. The
real work was doing little jobs like
building an arbour In the garden, mak¬
ing a chicken coop or putting up
cupboards in the kitchen, but at least
you had something to show for It, you
were adding things to the house.
Here the only job is cleaning and
starting all over again the next week.
In the old place there were always
odd jobs to do, and we had a proper
workbench. You can't do anything
like that here. They don't let you
make holes in the walls and anyway
the noise would be bound to upset
the neighbours.
Grandad: We completely changed
that house. I made a sort of workshop
with my bench, because there was no
room In the cellar. We built a bike
shed, a chicken coop and a porch.
We added bits on. We completely
changed the Inside as well. We made
a little kitchen in the cellar and we
divided the main room to make a little
bedroom for dad. The rest of it was
our dining room.
We used to get our building mate¬
rials from the. works, it was cheaper
that way. You could always count on
your neighbours to give you a hand.
People were always adding to or im¬
proving their homes. Those who had
cars even built themselves garages.
Grandma: It's a good job we did
our own improvements, because the
houses weren't all that comfortable.
To start with we had to fetch water
from an outdoor tap. Later on we
paid for the water to be piped to the
house. You arranged with your neigh¬
bour for the two of you to be joined
up to the mains at the same time.
So you can see there was plenty to
do. Even so we had some spare time.
It was a good life. Nowadays people
never have a minute to spare, they're
always In a hurry. And another thing:
in the old days most of the wives
didn't work. That gave us time to do
everything. I used to do the washing
In the washtub, I had the lads to look
after and I still found time to knit and
make clothes. And I used to go out
into town. I was always cheerful.
I know I'm not getting any younger,
I haven't so much energy now, but I
always have to be on the go and yet I
feel lonely and fed up.
Grandad: It's true, people weren't
nervous and irritable like they are
now. I was able to relax while I work¬
ed quietly in the garden or did odd
jobs about the house. They're always
on about leisure nowadays, but it's not
the same thing, it sesms to make peo¬
ple even more tired.
Grandma: We had to look after the
animals as well. We kept chickens and
rabbits and pigeons. We could always
get plenty of grass for them in the
fields all round. I had a dog as well.
But the poor thing just couldn't get
used to being here. We'd only been
here a fortnight. I was downstairs.
The dog wanted to come to me. He
jumped out of our bedroom window
and was killed. He thought he was
still jumping out of a ground floor win¬
dow as usual but this time he was on
the third floor.
As for comfort, we've got central
heating here and that's convenient be¬
cause we don't have to fetch the coal
in and empty out the ashes... In the
old place we had a kitchen range and
we put an all-night burner In the
back bedroom. We certainly- needed
It, when the wind was whistling round ^
the house. But we never froze. r
25

But I'll 'tell you one thing, since
we've been here, I've never had so
many colds. . You've got to admit that
coal fires are healthier. Yet we used
to go out a lot; even in winter we'd
be out In the garden seeing if the
frost had got at the plants, and we'd
have a little chat with the next-door
neighbour over the fence when we
came back from the shops, even
when there was frost on the ground.
Yet we never caught colds I
And we got plenty of sun as well.
But in this flat, the sun just catches
the bedroom In the morning and this
room In the afternoon,' and that's
about it. You don't feel as if you're
living with the sun like you did before.
The sun used to go right round the
house. If It was too warm on one side,
you'd close the blinds and move to the
other.
People have said to me that it must
have been much too hot In a wooden
house in summer. But It was never
too hot for us: to start with, we were
outside all day long. I've sometimes
taken my sewing machine out In the
garden where Grandad had put down
some concrete. I used to cook out¬
doors all summer on an old stove;
we always used to eat outside, where
we'd fixed up lights for the evenings.
Here we may have big windows and
modern conveniences and the sun, but
you still have the Impression of being
shut In. Sometimes I get so desperate
that I feel like throwing my pots and
pans around just to let off steam.
When we lived In the cottages we
and the neighbours were like one big
family. When somebody died or when
a baby was born or when there was
something to celebrate, all the neigh¬
bours used to join In. We were always
In touch, we used to see each other
all the time, and that was because of
the gardens. To start with you had to
go down to the bottom of the garden
to the outdoor privy. You could
always stop for a chat. Not an ideal
place perhaps, but you got to see
each other that way.
I had a lilac tree and we'd stop and
have a gossip under the lilac, talk
about this and that, and tell each
other our troubles and how things
were going. Mind you we weren't in
each other's pockets all the time. You
didn't have to go Into your neigh¬
bours' houses to see them because
everybody lived outside. If you didn't
want to listen to what your neighbour
had to say, you just went Into the
house.
But the garden fence wasn't the
only place where we met. We used
to talk to each other from our windows
without even going outside. The
houses were grouped in fours, making
a sort of square. These were your
nearest neighbours and you always
knew whether they were in or not, you
knew when anybody needed you and
you knew when you could go and ask
them for something.
You knew whether you'd be disturb
ing them or not. It was all as natural
as could be and we didn't spy on each
other, either. If a neighbour was
going into town she'd say, "Will you
look after the boy?" or Can I leave
you the key so you can go and see
that they're asleep?". They were only
little things like that, but they kept you
in touch. That's what's missing here
and a lot of It's due to the way we're
housed.
Here we're closer to each other, we
live on top of each other, but we don't
feel we're neighbours. The staircase
Is the only place where you meet peo¬
ple, but you have to be there just at
the right time; it's not the sort of
place where you want to hang around.
And what do you see of other people's
homes? The landing door, and that's
always closed.
In this block I can sometimes go a
week without seeing even the people
I know well. The woman upstairs
doesn't go out to work, but we can go
three weeks or a month without seeing
each other. And when a new family
moves In, It can take ages before you
get to know them. At first, when
everybody was new here because the
place had only just been built, we
were completely cut off for a long
time.
I remember that we didn't know
who lived In any of the other flats
when we'd been here nearly a year.
That's what's so stupid. It was diffe¬
rent on the estate. When somebody
new arrived you'd help them to move
In to start with. Like that you soon
got to know them Where are you
from? and so on.
The awful thing about this place is
that you never meet people and yet
you seem to be living right In your
neighbour's flat, especially because of
the noise. .
In the house, once you closed the
front door you didn't hear a sound.
Here you're always worrying that If
you make a noise It'll disturb the
neighbours. On the estate you felt
really, at home, that the neighbours
were part of the family. Here you
seem to be living with other people
but you always feel you're alone.
What this place needs is some life.
There's nothing going on here. On a
Sunday It's as dead as a doornail.
They all get their cars out and off they
go, but that's not what I call an outing,
it's just getting out of the house. I can
remember when a lot of us used to
get together on Sundays with our
bikes, the kids sitting on the back, and
we'd go down to the river to picnic.
We'd spend the whole day like that,
we'd meet our old friends down there.
You went where you liked, nobody
bothered you. The menfolk would go
out on their boats, or stay on the bank
fishing. You could spend a nice quiet
day there.
I think It's worse for the teenagers
and the kids. Where can they go
round here? This used to be a quiet
neighbourhood, it was safe for the
youngsters and the best thing was
that they had plenty of room to play.
I remember how my own boys were
always outside playing on the tip,
where they used to dump the rubbish
from the factory, carbide, clinker from
the blast furnaces. They'd filled In a
hole and the tip had grown over with
trees and bushes. The children used
to play cowboys and Indians, they had
a whale of a time there.
When they'd had enough of playing
cowboys, they used to build huts.
They'd take their comics out there.
They used to live outside, either on
the tip or behind the house where
there was an old sandpit that had
been filled in. The lawns around the
flats certainly don't make up for play¬
grounds like that. The kids here can
ride around them on their bikes but
that's about all. And the lawns cost
us a lot of money. We have to pay for
them to be cut and watered and all
that... I'm not against having a few
lawns; they look nice and we need a
bit of greenery, being so enclosed,
but you can tell that the children
haven't got enough room.
I can see very, well that when a child
is cooped up all day It gets wild and
over-excited. But . they've nowhere
else to go. So they shout and scream,
they fight In the stairways or else they
can't sleep at night.
Grandad: It's all the same problem,
you see: the kids haven't a place of
their own, so they kick up a row In the
flats and on the staircases. Then that
gets the old people's backs up. In
some of these blocks they've put 6-
room flats and single-room places to¬
gether on the same landing so that
there are only old-age pensioners and
big families together. And that's
something that just doesn't work.
Grandma: The old housing estates
had a life of their own... There was
the mutual aid club which organized
entertainments. There were dances
and plays, . there was always some¬
thing going on. It was all done by the
working people. The entertainments
committee (this was In the days before
works' committees) prepared the 14
July celebration. It was grand! The
night before there was always a
"torchlight" procession. We used to
go all round the estate carrying lan¬
terns and the youngsters who kept
their candles alight right to the end
used to get a few coppers.
There was a horse-drawn cart deco¬
rated with chestnut branches; all the
big nobs used to get In it and we'd
drive them around. One of them was
the lady they called the super¬
intendent she was In charge of the
estate. She was also captain of the
local fire brigade and she was the one
who played the bugle calls at the
14 July parade.
The lads in our fire brigade came
from the Batignolles quarter of Nan¬
tes. One of them was only about four
foot ten, you could hardly see him
26

under his helmet. We used to have a
good laugh when we saw him next to
his great tall woman officer. On
14 July, the entertainments committee
organized games In a square full of
apple trees. There used to be a
bicycle race. The shopkeepers offer¬
ed prizes the first prize was always
a calf's head. There was the Bati-
gnolles orchestra as well.
Two or three times a year, the en¬
tertainments committee would get
buses from the works and we'd go
on excursions to Saint-Malo or to Les
Sables d'Olonne. Nowadays there's
only the social centre, but It's not the
same at all because we don't organize
It ourselves.
Another good thing about our estate
was that people used to come around
selling things. The coal merchant
turned up once a fortnight, the day
after payday! He was really marvel¬
lous, our coal merchant, he was a
friend of the family. He used to tell
us the news and If anybody was sick,
he'd let you have coal on credit
if you couldn't pay straight away.
There were a lot of others who sold
from door to door, the milkman, the
grocers, the fishmongers, the green¬
grocers with their horses and carts or
barrows. And people used to help
each other a lot: when somebody was
sick, we'd make soup for all the
family, or stew on a Saturday.
People still do that here, but not as
much as they used to. They just
haven't got the time now. The women
go out to work, they come back tired
out, and it's only right they should :
look after their husbands before they
start thinking about the neighbours.
There was another thing that was
different because of the gardens: peo
ple always sow too many seeds and
everything ripens at the same time,
so there were windfalls for everyone:
"Want some plums?" they'd say,
"some tomato plants, some leeks?".
Grandad: Some of the.shops on the
estate were actually run by the wor¬
kers. It started out with bulk buying
and after the war It became the Co-op.
It was the workers themselves who
started It, and you had to buy a mem¬
bership card.
They used to buy. in bulk from the
wholesalers, but then the government
tried to poke its nose in, and even
tried to close them down. They pass¬
ed laws about the co-operatives and
now of course we've got the super¬
markets.
I've heard the manager of the Co-op
say, "We pay the wholesalers more
for our soap powders than you pay
buying them retail in the supermar¬
kets." Well that couldn't go on for
long. And then the Co-op used to
give a lot of credit, people would pay
when they got their wages. You can't
do that sort of thing nowadays.
Grandma: We've noticed the diffe¬
rence In rent too since we moved. In
1965, to live In the cottage, cost us
less than 4,000 old francs a month,
and that Included electricity, chimney
sweeping, emptying the cesspool, and
the water we used. Here in the flat
we started paying 22,000 old francs
In rent alone with the service charges
and the rates on top of that.
Money went much further in the old
days. Between 1937 and 1939 It was
marvellous what you could buy. We
didn't earn so much perhaps, but
paying the rent and electricity bills
was never a problem. The first holi
day with pay we had, when my hus¬
band was earning 400 francs a week,
we spent one week In Paris staying In
a hotel and the next week with my
family in the country, and we still had
some money left over!
The garden was a help as well. We
grew our own fruit and vegetables...
we bought potatoes and dried b,eans,
that was all. We grew enough toma¬
toes and fresh beans to bottle and last
us all year: we made jam and bottled
our own gherkins. We did all right,
I can tell you.
Of course you had to save: it took
us twenty years to save enough fo.r a
new cooker. In 1938 we bought a
wireless. Before that I bought a pedal
sewing machine: I paid it off at
50 francs a month. It cost us 1,800
francs more than a month's wages.
Grandad: And I paid 700 francs for
my first bike. It was a good one with
drop handlebars. It was a Rafale, a
well-known make at the time; they'd
won the Tour de France.
Grandma: They tell you nowadays
"Advertising has such a hold on you
that you buy things you don't really
need." But you have to live some¬
where, and you need light and heat¬
ing, and that has nothing to do with
advertising. But even these cost far
too much; they take all your wages.
We didn't used to bother about the
rent, I don't suppose It was even
one-tenth of our wages, but now it's
at least one-third ot what you earn.
And now you have hire purchase to
push you into buying things, yet
without it we wouldn't have anything.
But It's the banks that do best out of
hire purchase: you end up paying pro¬
bably double the price for things.
27
