© Georgl Anastasov, Bulgaria; from the catalogue of the
2nd Int. Biennial of Cartoons and Small Caricatural Sculpture«,
published by the House of Humour and Satire,
Gabrovo, Bulgaria, 1975
Ahappy April Fools' Day to all
our readers! Even if this issue
didn't coincide with International
Laughter Day, I would still wish you
a happy April Fools' Day because for
people who like to laugh, the first
day of April lasts all year round. And
since one of the Specialized Agencies
of the United Nations and its magazine
are showing an interest in laughter,
this is just the moment to wish the
whole world a happy April Fools' Day.
What does the world have to do
with laughter and what is laughter
to the modern world? And what does
laughter have to do with Unesco?
I think it is all to do with the nature
of humour and its broad social rele¬
vance. As an organization dealing with
education, science and culture, Unesco
strives to express in its work the moral
awareness of mankind. Laughter, by
asserting the high ideals of goodness
and humanism, favours the develop¬
ment and heightening of this aware¬
ness and promotes the growth of the
ideals which guide it.
The dictionary tells us that to laugh
means "to give audible expression
to an emotion by the expulsion of air
from. the lungs..." This is true as far
as it goes, but if laughter were only
the expulsion of air, it would not be
much good for anything but blowing
down houses of cards.
Actually, as the great Russian satir¬
ist Mikhail Saltykos-Shchedrin has
pointed out, laughter is a very power¬
ful weapon, for nothing so discoura¬
ges a vice as the knowledge that it
will be perceived and ridiculed by
others. The- laughter of the great
French philosopher Voltaire strikes
and sears like a flash of lightning.
Laughter knocks down idols. Wit was
the favourite weapon of Vladimir
Mayakovsky, the greatest revolutio¬
nary poet of the 20th century. Char¬
les Chaplin holds that humour is to¬
day's antidote to hate and fear it
clears the fog of suspicion and anxie¬
ty that envelopes the world.
All panegyrics of laughter extol it
as a powerful weapon. But, unlike
other weapons, laughter is extremely
selective in its choice of targets. A
bullet does not care who stops it
but laughter always homes in on
scoundrels.



THE WORLD
WILL NEVER
DIE IF
IT DIES
LAUGHING
by Yuri B. Botyev
YURI B. BORYEV, Soviet writer and literary
critic, is a senior research associate at the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences' Institute of
World Literature. He participated in the 1975
international symposium on humour and satire
in Gabrovo, Bulgaria (see article page 9).
He is the author of over 250 articles and 1 0 books.
His works have been published in 17 languages.
We are talking here, of course,
about satire, for humour is always
harmless, though not toothless. Satire
is Indignant laughter, aimed against
vices of mankind. Humour is
friendly laughter, aimed against the
defects that are the other side of our
better qualities, laughter aimed at
friends and at things that correspond
to our ideals.
\ In the nuclear age, laughter is the
only weapon that may be praised
without violating humanitarian princi¬
ples, for laughter ¡s a creative, not
a destructive weapon, in other words,
an anti-weapon. Incidentally, every¬
thing there is to say about creative
laughter was said long ago by the
ancient Egyptians, who envisaged the
creation of the world like this: God
laughed, and the seven gods who rule
the world were born. After the first
burst of laughter there was light, after
the second, water, and so on until,
finally, after the seventh and last peal
of laughter, the soul was born.
This notion .that laughter was the
source of the world's creation is in
keeping with. a saying popular in the
Bulgarian town of Gabrovo: "The
world has not perished because it has
always laughedl" (see article page 9).
Humour and satire by their very
nature are democratic. Laughter is
very much a collective phenomenon,
tied up with a sense of community.
Henri Bergson, the great French phi¬
losopher, quotes an interesting exam¬
ple ¡n his book, Le Rire. During an
exceptionally inspired sermon by. a
well-known local preacher, only one
man failed to react in any way, being
moved neither to tears nor laughter.'
When asked why, he replied, "I don't
belong to this parish." Laughter is
a social reaction, it has a collective
nature: "Laugh and the world laughs
with you, weep and you weep alone."
Satire ¡s a special kind of social
criticism designed to organize public
opinion and orientate it aesthetically.
By its nature, therefore, satire is
linked to democratic traditions.
I am not, of course, suggesting that
humour and satire do not exist in
undemocratic societies, but that laugh¬
ter is part of the richest fabric of a
people's life. Democracy provides
the most favourable conditions for the
art of comedy, showing tolerance to¬
wards even the most caustic satire.
22

mnmmnnm
mmnmmn
© D. Koprlvchtenov, U.S.S.R.
The very fact that laughter ¡s addres¬
sed to public opinion and not to offi¬
cialdom shows its democratic nature.
Even the most ancient examples of
satire show its democratic origins and
character. Aristotle claimed that com¬
edy had its beginnings in ancient
Greece in the democratic period follow¬
ing the banishment of the tyrant
Theagenes. Only a democracy could
tolerate the frank personal nature of
the comedies of antiquity.
When the tyrant Dionysius wanted
to get to know Athens, Plato sent
him Aristophanes' comedies, saying,
"If he understands these comedies,
he will understand the Athenian
State." Born of and nurtured by demo¬
cracy, comedy has always been a
grateful child and repaid its mother's
kindness.
"If subordinates were allowed to
laugh in the presence of their supe¬
riors, then we could say farewell to
subservience," wrote the great 19th-
century Russian democrat and revo¬
lutionary Alexander Herzen. This cha¬
racteristic, the social function of laugh¬
ter, is what gives Andersen's mar¬
vellous tale "The Emperor's New
Clothes" its satirical point. The em¬
peror is an emperor only so long as
those around him maintain their ser¬
vile attitude towards him. But when
the people believed their eyes and
realized that the emperor had no
clothes on, it was indeed good-bye
to subservience the people began
to laugh.
As time goes by, the democratic
role of satire grows. . In the future,
it will no doubt be satire that will
replace the present agencies and me¬
thods for the prevention of anti-social
behaviour. The disturber of the estab¬
lished social order will be punished
by public ridicule, which will be a more
effective and perhaps an even more
severe kind of lesson and punishment
than the coercive measures hitherto
taken by society.
Powerful though the effect of laugh¬
ter in society may be, let us not over¬
estimate its possibilities. Ten years
after the publication of Gulliver's Trav¬
els, Jonathan Swift expressed his
amazement that toadying, stupidity in
high places, harebrained scheming,
vain ambitions and other human vices
could still exist after he had so harsh¬
ly and convincingly ridiculed them.
Laughter can be effective only ¡n
conjunction with other means, includ¬
ing action in the fields of politics,
economics and culture in general.
This is the right moment to recall
the Bulgarian town of Gabrovo I men¬
tioned earlier.
When, in the spring of 1975, I ar¬
rived from warm and sunny Moscow in
cloudy, rainy Gabrovo, and when the
next morning, wanting to shave, I spent
an hour searching for the shaver-plug
and finally found it, of all places,
under the table, I realized that I was
in the humour capital of the world and
that this was merely an example of
a Gabrovian practical joke.
Yet nowhere in the town did I find
a monument to Aristophanes, or a
street named after Gogol, or a Mark
Twain Square, or a Yelin Pelin Way,
or a Rabelais Avenue, or even a
dead-end named after the theoretician
of laughter, Yuri Boryev. However, I
did find the wonderful "House of
Laughter", where I saw a widely rep¬
resentative and well-presented inter¬
national exhibition of cartoons.
Some cities are built on oil, like
Abadan, or on coal, like Donetsk.
Gabrovo's mineral resource is the pure
gold of folk humour. What a good
thing it is that this resource is begin¬
ning to benefit the whole world. Fes¬
tivals of humour have become a tra¬
dition in Gabrovo. The Gabrovo car¬
nival is colourful, witty and full of
folk humour and the spectacle attracts
people from all over Bulgaria and
abroad.
And ¡t is good to know that the
idea has been taken up elsewhere.
The Soviet city of Odessa, famous
not only for its courage during the
Second World War, but also for the
quick wit of its inhabitants, has
started to hold an annual Spring Fes¬
tival of Humour. The main theme of a
recent Odessa carnival was: "What
have you done to bring the population
of'your city up to a million?"
But then there are also Tarascón
in France, birthplace of the famous
Tartarln, and Windsor in England, with
its merry wives, immortalized by ^
Shakespeare, and many other towns r
23

y throughout the world that are famous,
or worthy of being famous for their
wit.
It is worth recalling that even in the
darkest periods of the Middle Ages,
every European spent a quarter of his
life at carnivals, since the high days
and holidays of those times added up
to three months out of every year!
At one time, each of the seven
cities of ancient Greece contended for
the honour of being the birthplace of
Homer, incontestable proof that all
of Greece claimed the Iliad as its
own. For centuries, at least six cities
of the Middle East and Central Asia
have claimed and still claim to be the
burial-place of Nasrudin Hodja. If
the "disturber of complacency," as
Nasrudin Hodja is known, has six
different burial places in six different
cities, that means that he never died
and never will die. He, like all heroes
of folk humour, is immortal (see ar¬
ticle page 16).
Humour is national and internatio¬
nal national in its form but in its
content common to all mankind. Spring¬
ing from the depths of a people's
life, and drawing upon the incompara¬
ble wealth of experience, humour
in its highest classical forms of ex¬
pression always becomes international
property. Universality is of the very
essence of humour.
Every people has its own favou¬
rite quick-witted hero who embodies
all its joys and sorrows, all its skill,
cunning, common sense and resour¬
cefulness, in short, everything neces¬
sary to live in a hard world among
the strong and the all-powerful, whom
one must deceive and outwit if one is
to survive. Much can be said about
each of these heroes of folk humour.
IVANUSHKA - DURACHOKIvan
the Fool for instance, is a favour¬
ite of Russian folk stories. He en¬
joys neither wealth nor station, he
suffers many trials and tribulations, the
high and mighty of this world look
down upon him with disdain and take
him for a fool, and Ivan himself is not
averse to posing as a fool.
But he is always ready to come to
the aid of a friend or of any good,
deserving person in need of a helping
hand, and finally all the troubles that
he encounters end up bouncing off
him. He conquers the strong, outwits
the clever, surmounts misfortunes and
hardships, and copes successfully with
even the most hopeless and insolu¬
ble problems, usually with some gain
for himself.
Nesterko is a hero of Byelorussian
folk tales who is too lazy to work and
not bold enough to beg, and so lives
by his wits and the bold inventiveness
of his artful dodges.
The cheerful rogue Pácalá is a hero
of Moldavian tales who is charac
terized by the quality of "dor" a
mixture of hopefulness and nostalgia.
Arlecchino, (Harlequin) the hero of
Italian folk comedy, is a country lad
bright, naive and direct. He is not very
practical and does everything on im¬
pulse, for which he Is rewarded with
cuffs and blows. But this does not
diminish his gaiety or his open and
childishly naive view of the world.
The favourite character of the French
puppet theatre, Polichinelle, is a jolly
hunchback, a bully and a mocker.
Nasrudin, the hero of Eastern hu¬
mour, goes by many names: the Azer¬
baijanians call him Mulla Nasrudin, the
Tajiks Mulla Mushfiki, the Turkomans
Nasrudin Hodja, the Tatars Ahmed
Akai, the Kazakhs and Kirghiz Aldar-
Kose. He is a convivial fellow, a man
of wit and wisdom, a rebel and a pro¬
tector of the weak.
ALL these national heroes of folk
humour are basically similar in
that they stand up for the downtrodden
and abused, are optimistic and cheer¬
ful by nature, witty, cunning, resilient
and able to overcome any obstacle.
But they are as different as the
national characters of the peoples who
created them.
And how instructive, significant and
relevant for the modern world are the
heroes of the great classics of com¬
edy: Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry
Finn, Khlestakov and Chichikov, Fal-
staff and Monsieur Jourdain, Don
Quixote and Sancho Panzal
Cervantes' two heroes, for instance,
though opposites in many ways, share
a wonderful and rare human quality
unselfishness. Because of this quality
we are ready to forgive them their
eccentricities, follies, shortcomings
and foolishness. Sancho Panza, the
realist, is no less unselfish than Don
Quixote, the dreamer. He abandons
his position of power, of which he has
grown weary, taking only some oats
for his ass and half a loaf for himself
the only profit derived from his
governorship. Yet his "laws" stand
and are known as the "Decrees of the
Great Administrator, Sancho Panza".
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza are
not of this world, because they are
too good for it. We may measure the
world by their standards of humanity,
unselfishness and wisdom. In the crazy
world of these characters, there is
so much freedom and poetry lost by
people in their everyday lives that in
the final analysis the mad Don Quixote
turns out to be more sane than the
"normal" people, who are consumed
by greed and the lust for power.
We would like to believe that the
happy day will eventually come when
the wisdom embodied in the images of
these and other immortal comic heroes
will become popular not only among
the citizens but also among the leaders
of the countries represented in the
United Nations.
Humour and satire represent the.
two poles of laughter. In between is
a whole world of different tonalities:
Aesop's merry and bitter mockery, Ra¬
belais' rollicking fun, Swift's biting,
sardonic humour, Erasmus of Rotter¬
dam's refined irony, Voltaire's wise
ridicule, Béranger's alternatively care¬
free and satirical laughter, Beau¬
marchais' sparkling wit, Daumier's
caricatures, Goya's horrifically cruel
world of grotesques, the barbed ro¬
mantic irony of Heinrich Heine, Ana¬
tole France's scepticism, Mark Twain's
gaiety, Shaw's Ironic humour, Jaroslav
Hasek's mischievous wry comedy, Go¬
gol's laughter through tears, Saltykov-
Shchedrin's wrathful, scourging,
scalding, scathing sarcasm, Chekhov's
soulful, sad lyrical humour, Maya-
kovsky's triumphant laugh, Gorky's
optimistic satire, and the Irrepressible
humour of Tvardovsky's hero, Vasily
Terkin.
What riches! Aristophanes, Juve¬
nal, Shakespeare, Molière, Lope de
Vega, Goldoni, La Fontaine, Krylov,
Griboyedov, Dickens, Fredro, Chalup-
ka, Caragiale, and Delavrancea all
masters in using the multi-coloured
pallet of laughter.
True laughter is rich in different hues
and glows with the most diverse emo¬
tions. This was beautifully expressed
by Leonardo da Vinci in his Mona
Lisa. What an inspired smile on
her beautiful countenance, at once
mocking, mischievous, tender, pensive,
sceptical and melancholic and express¬
ing many other deep and contradic¬
tory emotions.
TO live aright, one must laugh, and
to laugh one must know what
laughter is and what laws govern it.
I therefore suggest to you, dear
readers, that you get hold of a copy of
my book, Comedy, or How Laughter
Castigates the World's Shortcomings,
Purifies and Reforms Man and Asserts
the Joy of Living (1) and keep it by your
bedside you will never suffer from
insomnia. But before you fall asleep
please think about whether or not your
town is worthy of staging a carnival;
of humour in its turn. And when. you
awake in the morning, don't forget to
smile and wish everyone a happy April
Fools' Day.
In the world of laughter and in the
laughter of the world lies one of the
hopes for peace on earth. The citizens
of Gabrovo are right: the world will
never perish so long as it can laugh!
In other words, the world will never
die, if it dies laughing.
Yuri Boryev
(1) It has been published In Russian, Bul¬
garian, and German, and I hope that
all the "Courier's" readers understand one
of these languages, at least in their dreams.
24
