Photo O Paul Coulaud

A NEW UNIVERSE
OF
SQUATTER-BUILDERS
millions of homeless people are creating
a new movement of self-built homes
by John F.C. Turner
JOHN F.C. TURNER is an international authority on the promotion and design of
community action and self-help housing programmes in villages and urban squatter
settlements. A British architect, he worked in this field for Peruvian government housing
agencies (1957-1965) and has been a consultant on housing and urban settlement
problems for national and international agencies in Latin America, India, East Africa
and the Middle East. Since 1973 he has been teaching at the Architectural Association
Graduate School and the Development Planning Unit of the University College of
London. A fuller version of the article published here was presented as a lecture to
the Egyptian Society of Engineers in Cairo ¡n May 1975. It summarizes the author's
argument in his'book Housing by People, published by Marlon Boyars, London, 1976.
PUBLIC housing projects are
now being seriously question¬
ed In many countries and in all world
contexts. New directions are emerging
that promise far better physical, eco¬
nomic, and social results for rich and
poor countries alike. Let us examine
some of the problems posed by such
housing projects and the alternatives
that progressive governments and in¬
ternational agencies are now moving
towards.
The new government policies are
policies that support the housing ac-
tions of ordinary people and local
enterprise, instead of government poli¬
cies that act to suppress local initia¬
tive and substitute it with massive
public housing projects.
One example of such support is
found In the squatter settlements of
Caracas, Venezuela.
Most squatter settlements or, as I
prefer to call them, uncontrolled ur¬
ban settlements, are really lower and
moderate income suburbs. Typically,
they start as collections of huts on
land without any services. But, In time,
the occupants build permanent single-
family dwellings, often to quite high
standards. Sooner or later these im-
12

A spectacular tidal wave of squatter
settlements (ranchos) seems to have burst over
the hillsides around Caracas in Venezuela
(opposite page). More than a billion people
n the world today live in substandard homes
and this situation is likely to worsen. Squatter
dwellings, generally built by the squatters
themselves, at least provide shelter but often
in appalling conditions. But with time and
encouragement squatters in many parts of
the world have upgraded their temporary
shanties into solidly built permanent dwellings
such as those shown in photo at left.
proved or Improving areas obtain the
normal services and facilities.
Settlers of permanently established
and progressively developing suburbs
are not the poorest citizens. Typically,
they are established and regularly em¬
ployed working class people who have
lived in the inner city before settling
on the periphery, even if they were
born in the provinces and came to the
city as young migrants.
The often overwhelming prolifera¬
tion of these uncontrolled settlements
is a direct consequence of the failure
of the private commercial and the
public sectors to provide the kind of
housing services the majority want
and can afford or even the land and
services with which they could build
for themselves.
Naturally, and inevitably when cities
are doubling their populations every
ten years or so, there soon comes a
time when people suddenly burst out
of the city's overstrained seams, and
flood uncontrollably over any land
they can take. No government that I
know of has ever succeeded in con¬
taining this.
In most rapidly urbanizing countries
with low incomes and small per capita
budgets, the settlements established
and developed by ordinary people are
growing at twice the rate of the city as
a whole. And the cities are growing
at twice the rate of the population as
a whole.
This means that If the rapidly urba¬
nizing nations are growing at between
2 1/2 and 3 1/2 per cent, as almost all
are, then the cities are growing at
between 5 and 7 per cent; and the
uncontrolled settlements are common¬
ly growing at between 10 and 14 per
cent each year. Some I know of are
growing much faster than that.
Obviously this creates major prob¬
lems for the city and the nation.
Equally obvious is the fact that no
government can hope to rehouse
such vast numbers in subsidized hous¬
ing projects. But, before going on to
discuss the alternative that is both
practical and far more desirable, I will
briefly describe the process of urban
settlement and progressive housing
development as I observed it In the
cities of Peru during the late 1950s
and early 1960s.
A typical example is San Martin de
Porres, a very large settlement In Li¬
ma. In fact, this huge area was settled
with the unofficial support of the then
President of Peru, General Manuel
Odria. Rank and file and junior and
non-commissioned officers of the
army and police took a very active .
part In the Illegal occupation actual¬
ly an organized invasion of this area.
A few years later, San Martin had a
population of over 100,000 moderate
and lower Income people in a
reasonable and rapidly Improving
environment.
In these areas, all structures are
built by those who acquire the build¬
ing plots, mostly ordinary low and
lower-middle income families. Most
of the labour is contracted by indi¬
vidual families but many participate in
the construction of their own homes,
and a few do all the building work
themselves.
It ¡s a long process, usually taking
between five and ten years to com¬
plete a first floor to modern space and
construction standard but they do
it very cheaply and without mortgages
or major debts that could threaten a
fairly precarious household budget, or
their security of tenure.
As I saw for myself In Peru, the
investment that one makes, and the
care that one takes of one's house ^
and home, depends very much onr
13

, knowing one can stay as long as one
needs, or that one can transfer to
another suitable dwelling without los¬
ing money. The investment of per¬
sonal care and savings in housing
depends on security of tenure.
This is in fact the most common
way in which houses have been built
from ancient times. For me it recalls
Thomas More's words in his famous
Utopia written well over 400 years ago:
"Houses in the beginning were very
low, and like homely cottages or poor
shepherd houses, made at all adven¬
tures of every rude piece of timber
that came first to hand, with mud
walls, and ridged roofs, thatched over
with straw. But now the houses be
curiously builded, after a gallant and
gorgeous sort, with three stories one
over another."
AT Arequipa, in southern Peru, I
saw a peasant's "homely cot¬
tage" with "ridged roof, thatched
over with straw" being enclosed by a
new structure. When ready for roof¬
ing the original cottage would be dis¬
mantled and a relatively "gorgeous
and gallant" sort of house would
eventually be built, perhaps even
"with three stories one over another".
The question which must be asked
in every country in the world Is: Who,
or what sectors in a society are best
able to organize, build, and maintain
peoples' homes and dwelling environ¬
ments? The private sector? The public
sector? The popular sector? Or some
combination of these?
I will not comment on the private
commercial sector because, although
obviously important, ft does not
actually concern Itself with low-
income housing and there is a far
greater promise in a co-operative
relationship between the people and
the government.
First, I will summarize what I be¬
lieve to be the common characteristics
of centrally administered housing pro¬
jects as opposed to user-controlled
housing. The essential difference bet¬
ween these two systems is the struc¬
ture of authority or control, that is,
who decides what. -
In a typicaLcentrally administered
project, \ylrtually all! design, location,
financing) building, and management
decisions "are made by a central
agency. However, In the typical and
traditional local housing system all
those same decisions are made by the
users generally owners in con¬
junction with local builders.
Geographically, centrally adminis¬
tered housing projects tend to be lo¬
cated on the periphery of the
built-up" area of large towns and cities.
They are rare In villages and small
towns. This Is mainly due to the size
of the organization administering
them, and the consequent need for
projects to be large in order to be
economic. Large tracts of land, and
land of low or relatively low cost, can
only be found on the peripheries.
On the other hand, user-controlled
housing occurs in all parts of cities,
towns and villages.
Not all public housing projects are
built In the form of blocks of flats, of
course, but this Is the tendency and
general rule. The Idea that tall build¬
ings provide higher densities Is not
always true although it Is generally
easier for a big firm to build big
buildings and anyway more profitable,
especially as labour-saving machines
like big cranes can be used to best
advantage. Big buildings, however,
adapt poorly to awkward sites.
Another major difference between
centrally administered projects and
user-controlled housing areas is that
project dwellings are highly standar¬
dized, and for the same administrative
and technological reasons. The num¬
ber of dwelling types must be reduced
to a minimum or the administration
becomes impossibly complex and
construction costs become impossi¬
bly high.
Typical local housing, sponsored,
built, and managed by local people
and their small organizations, not
only creates the needed variety of
housing to match the variety of house¬
hold needs, but they can build very
much faster, In the aggregate.
In Villa Salvador, a new settlement
to the south of Lima (Peru) sixteen
thousand families, organized by their
own associations, recently established
what is virtually a new satellite town,
practically overnight. Of course they
were living in shacks to begin with,
but a few months later, the great
majority were already building brick
and concrete houses.
TODAY, four years later, over
120,000 people are living there,
almost all of them In better conditions
than when they were living In the city
slums and tenements.- I challenge
anyone to tell us of a case where as
much, let alone more, was achieved
for so many, with so few resources, in
such a short time.
If we take a family lifetime from
the marriage of a couple to their
death, say 50 years and consider
the total cost and the total returns on
a flat built as part of a centrally admi¬
nistered housing scheme versus a ty¬
pical user-controlled house over that
period, we will soon find that the dif¬
ferences are vast.
In monetary terms the difference
may easily run Into thousands of per
cent, for the following reasons: initial
cost, or construction cost, for such a
flat is generally twice the cost of a
similar unit built by a private contrac¬
tor and developer, and often even
more than when built by a small
builder working directly for an owner-
occupier.
And, of course, when the owner-
occupier is also an owner-builder, the
difference is often 400 per cent. These
differences are then multiplied by the
interest and the duration of the loans
needed the bigger the sum, the
longer the amortization period, of
course.
In addition to initial costs, one must
consider operating costs. These are
notoriously high In publicly owned and
administered projects or, alterna¬
tively, the buildings deteriorate, often
very rapidly indeed.
I published a photograph in my
book, Freedom to Build, that
shows a public housing project in
St. Louis, Missouri, (U.S.A.) being
blown up by the U.S. Army. This pro¬
ject won an architectural award for
good design when It was built, just 20
years before it had to be destroyed
because management and mainte¬
nance had become so uneconomical.
This is not an Isolated Incident.
Several major projects are now being
torn down in England, the most recent
of which are two tower blocks near
Liverpool, built in 1957. These are
among the 100,000 unlettable public-
housing units built in Britain since the
end of the Second World War.
It is therefore hardly surprising that
housing costs are spiralling upward,
and out of sight of all low-Income peo¬
ple and low-budget governments,
wherever centrally administered hous¬
ing and building systems have inhi¬
bited user controlled housing.
This is true for the United Kingdom,
as well as the United States, and for
Turkey as well as Mexico only the
latter countries are more fortunate in
that the ordinary people still have
some freedom to build outside the
official administered system.
All countries, socialist as well as
capitalist, and those with mixed eco¬
nomies, are now discovering the truth
of this analysis. And they are also
discovering that the same Is true for
other personal services, most notably
in education and health.
Let me finally describe another
successful user-controlled housing
scheme in which I was Involved. In
1962 several thousand people Invaded.
Pampa El Ermitaño literally, The
Hermit's Plain on the northern out¬
skirts of Lima. Most had low incomes
and 15 or 20 per cent were desperate¬
ly poor.
Most of them were unable to stay
In the settlement and returned to the
central city slums or other more cen¬
trally located squatter settlements.
The great majority that took part In
this highly organized and somewhat
risky Invasion did so because they
could no longer afford to pay the es¬
calating rents for a tolerable dwelling
in the city. They desperately wanted
CONTINUED PAGE 33
14

a new universe of squatter-builders
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 14
a home of their own, free from fears
of eviction or slum clearance, and free
to build a permanent house, little by
little, and without mortgages and risks
of foreclosure. Most were young fa¬
milies, with their parents born in the
villages and towns of the provinces,
but with their children born in the city.
To begin with, the settlement was
nothing more than a shanty town on
a barren desert. So many people
took part, or followed the first settlers,
that the site became hopelessly over¬
crowded.
The government agency, with which
I was working at the time, stepped in.
Adjacent land was expropriated and
the whole area was redesigned
except for the few blocks already laid
out on which people had already
made substantial investments. Work¬
ing with the local association, the
government allocated plots to all the
previously registered members of the
association.
Within one year an astonishing
amount of investment in building had
taken place there was hardly a plot
without a substantial amount of brick
walling, and many had completed one-
story structures. No credit had been
made available, however, and we had
not been able to install the water
supply and electricity planned for the
first stage. These utilities were ins¬
talled later.
The schools that were initially
organized and staffed by the people
themselves became rehoused in per¬
manent structures, and now the main
roads have been paved and the area
Is much like any other established
working class and lower-middle in¬
come residential district of Lima.
The moral of this, and the earlier
stories, Is very simple: It is that the
proper role of government is to en¬
sure that those who are best able to
build, either for themselves or for
their neighbours, have access to the
tools or basic resources for the job.
By "tools" I mean the supports and
resources of the kind that the Peru¬
vian government provided for the peo¬
ple of El Ermitaño: land, or titles to
land illegally but rationally occupied;
technical assistance for the economic
design of subdivisions and dwellings;
and infrastructure In the form of
essential utilities and community fa¬
cilities that the people could not
Install themselves without government
credit and technical assistance.
In some other similar areas, un¬
secured, small, short-term supervised
credits were made available to owner
builders for completing unfinished
houses especially for roofing.
When governments want to increase
the supply of housing for the mass of
people, they must make every effort
to move large construction organiza¬
tions away from house building and
Into Infrastructure development and
into the manufacture of building
materials and the provision of land,
finance and tools. Only in this way
can there be a real, and a rapid
increase of housing for lower-income
people in the short run, and for
everyone In the longer run.
John F.C. Turner
33
