Y
Stanley Chung, Hong Kong
With a population density in some areas of up to 150,000 persons per sq.km. Hong Kong is one of
the world's most crowded cities. Above and opposite page, contrasting aspects of Hong Kong
caught by photos entered in "One World for AM", an international photo competition organized
jointly by Photokina (Cologne), the German Commission for Unesco (Fed. Rep.) and the North
Rhine-Westphalian Regional Committee for Youth Photography, in 1974.

HONG KONG
THE MOST URBAN
PLACE ON EARTH
by Dan Behrman
DAN BEHRMAN IsaUnesco science writer
we/I known to "Unesco Courier" readers.
He is the author of "The New World of the
Oceans" (Little Brown and Co., Boston,
U.S.A .) also published in a paperback edition,
"In Partnership with Nature: Unesco and the
Environment" (Unesco, Paris, 1972) and
"The Man Who Loved Bicycles" (Harper's
Magazine Press, New York, 1973). His latest
book ''Solar Energy and Awakeninr, Science"
will be published later this year (by Little
Brown and Co.).
HONG KONG, the most urban
place on earth (the density of
15fJ,000 inhabitants per square kllome-
tre>eached ¡h one of Its quarters is
the highest ever experienced by the
human species) has some lessons for
the rest of the world, particularly the
developing countries where, according
to a United Nations forecast, 51 per
cent of the population will be living In
cities by the year 2000.
Several of the lessons are unexpec¬
ted. Hong Kong tells us that, contrary
to findings in certain Western cities
and In experiments with animals,
anti-social behaviour need not rise in
direct proportion to crowding. The
quality of people would appear to be
as Important as their quantity : in
Hong Kong, the bonds of traditional
Chinese culture have held fast des¬
pite the pressure exerted on more
than 49 per cent of Its inhabitants who
have less than 3.7 square metres of
living space per capita.
Hong Kong also teaches that there
may be limits to the process of urban .
growth. One Is the very vulnerability r
29

- "-
^
^c. £ II
.5
Photo © Stanley Chung, Hong Kong - Unesco/Photokina/JPH
Wof the quality of life when more and
more energy from sources other than
human or animal muscle is brought
Into such a thickly-populated commu¬
nity as Hong Kong.
Expressed In terms of consump¬
tion of fossil fuels which consist al¬
most solely of petroleum in the case
of Hong Kong, energy use In the city
has doubled In the past ten years as
It continued to evolve from a trading
centre into a hive of manufacturing.
While the death rate from tubercu¬
losis was cut In half over this period,
the death rate from lung cancer doubl¬
ed and so did the rate of violent crime.
Otherwise, the city's health Is good
although modern medicine has had
much more success against bacteria
than viruses.
A second limit may lie in the feed¬
ing of a city of this size. From a Chi¬
nese type of agriculture in which noth¬
ing is thrown away and everything Is
recycled, Hong Kong Is moving
rapidly into Western styles of food
production and consumption. Organic
wastes once used on the land now
mount Into a pollution problem while
artificial fertilizer is imported from the
Federal Republic of Germany 24,000
kilometres away and hawkers' stalls
display lettuces wrapped in plastic
and shipped from California.
Hong Kong's thriving light Indus¬
tries based mainly on textiles can ex¬
port enough to pay for such luxuries
but such a use of scarce energy to
obtain scarce food would not appear
feasible for the mega-cltles that we
are likely to see In the Third World a
quarter of a century from now.
All these remarks are based on the
preliminary findings of a Hong Kong
Human Ecology Programme initiated
by the Urban Biology Group of the
Australian National University working
In co-operation with the University of
Hong Kong and the Chinese Univer¬
sity of Hong Kong as well as the
Government of Hong Kong. These
studies, which put emphasis on ener¬
gy use In the city and on-the enyirpn-
-mental of the_Jjfe~ofits-
inhabitants, have^becörnea pilot pro¬
ject under" MAB, Unesco's Man and
the Biosphere programme. Director of
the project Is Dr. Stephen V. Boyden
of the Australian National University.
Hong Kong lends itself well to such
research. Since It is, in effect, a city-
state bounded by an International
frontier, all flows of materials and
energy in and out of the city are mea¬
sured as a matter of routine and good
records are available for study and
comparison over a long period. At
the same time, It stands athwart the
industrial and the developing worlds,
thereby constituting a valid example
for both In many respects.
One way to integrate the complex
factors that constitute the life of such
a community Is to look at the energy
that drives It. This has been done by
Ken Newcombe, a research scholar at
the Australian National University, who
has gone at the problem from the
viewpoint of the ecologist.
In 1971, the population of the city .
was 3,939,000, Including 78,000 boat
people, and It was growing at the rate
of 2.2 per cent a year. The city
spreads over 1,046 square kilometres
of land, including 253 islands rising
from 1,823 square kilometres of water.
The rate of energy use in Hong
Kong has been growing much faster
than its population 8.9 per cent an¬
nually from 1964 to 1971. The city is
second only to Japan in per capita
energy consumption In the Far East
and It is almost unique in its depen¬
dence upon petroleum. In 1954, liquid
fuel met 70 per cent of Its needs and
solid fuel mainly coal and firewood
30 per cent; by 1971, petroleum was
up to 98.1 per cent.
Hong Kong understandably lost
little time switching, to cheap oil, so
much easier to transport and handle
30

Overcrowded
good
neighbours
Hong Kong's rehousing
programmes have
enabled well over one
million squatters to leave
the hillside shacks they
once occupied. Though
many thousands are still
accommodated in huts
(photo left) construction
of large apartment
blocks (seen at rear) is
improving living
conditions. Social
disorder is not a
major problem
in Hong Kong. Recent
studies attribute this to
the prevalence of
traditional Chinese values
and family cohesion.
These have reduced
tensions, enabling people
to adapt to conditions
in a high-density city
and to live as friendly
neighbours (right).
Photo © Ho Kwok Boon, Hong Kong - Unesco/Photokina/JPH
for a city that must import almost
every calorie of energy that it uses..
Petroleum products, all refined else¬
where, are used principally to gen¬
erate electricity. They are found, of
course, In the city's transportation
system unusual in the large part
played by 88 ferries carrying up to
600 passengers each but they are
ajso converted into town gas.
Restaurants, of which there are
swarms, use Diesel oil for cooking
but charcoal Is still a standby for
roasting meats and brewing Chinese
medicines. Wood, so Important a fuel
only twenty years ago in households,
has virtually vanished as an energy
source. It was replaced by kerosene
which, In turn, was being edged out
by liquefied petroleum gas until the
oil crisis of 1973-74 put the latter at a
price disadvantage.
This hard-working city does not
squander energy. Only 30 per cent of
the vehicles on the road are private
cars (as compared to 70 per cent in
a country like the United States) and
most people move about in buses,
some doubledecked along London
lines. Energy efficiency in transporta¬
tion Is dropping as the number of
motor vehicles rises while trains only
account for less than 3 per cent of
all passenger movements. The trend
will be reversed, however, In the 1980s
with the completion of an under¬
ground railway system. Even today,
Hong Kong's per capita consumption
of energy for transportation Is eight
times lower than In Sydney, Australia.
Hong Kong's biggest leakage of
energy occurs in the production of
electricity since its power plants are
only 33 per cent efficient, losing the
rest as waste heat and In transmis¬
sion. ON can be converted Into gas .
with an efficiency of 80 per cent and
Newcombe suggests that consumption
could be cut if more gas were used
for cooking and water heating.
Almost two-fifths of the fuel that
Hong Kong Imports Is thrown away In
the process of turning It Into electri¬
city. Newcombe comments: "Adver¬
tising by Hong Kong electricity com-
panles shows that they are now openly
soliciting Increased consumption of
electricity on the basis that there Is
no longer an 'oil crisis'."
Partially because of its dependence
on electricity, Hong Kong's energy use
per unit area is twice as high as that
recorded In any Western industrial
city. There is room for savings. New¬
combe estimates that solar energy,
applied to air conditioning, drying,
space heating and water heating,
could meet 5 per cent of the city's
total requirements with another 10 per
cent coming from methane gas pro¬
duced by the fermentation of animal
and human sewage.
He cites studies made during the oil
crisis showing that local factories
could easily cut their energy bills by
20 per cent. Transportation could be
made more efficient, he claims, If
more food were delivered to small
shops and stalls not In one-ton trucks
but with heavy-framed bicycles such
as those developed In Korea which
can carry loads of 140 kilogrammes.
He admits that such an innovation
must await Improved road safety.
It Is In the production and distribu¬
tion of food that the most striking re¬
volution In energy use has occurred in
Hong Kong, a revolution quite similar
to that now being wrought through¬
out the developing world. Hong
Kong is moving away from Its labour-
intensive Chinese type of agriculture
with a high return of energy In the
form of crops as compared to the
energy invested by the farmer. Sprin¬
kler irrigation and artificial fertilizer
Increase yields but at the cost of more
and more energy Imported from afar.
Nevertheless, Hong Kong's perfor¬
mance remains remarkable compared
to that of a typical Western Industrial .
city. With only 109 square kilometres r
31

k of arable land, the city manages to
grow 5 per cent of the plant products
It consumes.
Its fleet of 5,200 fishing vessels that
range the South China Sea bring
home 40 per cent of Its animal
protein needs. However, not every
growing city has such easy access to
the sea and Hong Kong Itself may run
Into trouble In the future world if fish
catches continue to remain stable in
the face of rising demand.
In overall terms, Hong Kong's food
supply system Is efficient because,
unlike that of Western countries, it
demands but little energy to move
food from the farm gate to the consu¬
mer. Since distances are short, trans¬
portation costs are low. Storage and
-packaging are not major factors: the
Chinese like their food as fresh as
possible and, most of the time, a piece
of seagrass tied around it is all the
wrapping it needs.
But changes are appearing here as
well. Plastic bags are replacing paper
for packaging and this represents a
loss. The plastic takes six times as
much energy to produce and it cannot
be recycled, unlike paper which is
picked out of refuse and sold for ex¬
port. This may be an entering wedge
for the system In Industrial countries
where everything done to food after it
leaves the farm accounts for far more
energy than that represented by the
food.
High-energy techniques, are also
appearing on the small farms of Hong
Kong which average only 1/3 of a
hectare. One example Is automated
sprinkler irrigation replacing the old
system of furrows, buckets and man¬
power. This leads Newcombe to re¬
mark: "Where labour Is abundant, it
is not a labour-saving device but a
labour-using device that Is required."
Traditional Chinese agriculture was
on the other extreme. A study made
of two southern Chinese villages,
Lutsun and Yunnan, in 1935-37 show¬
ed that the land was yielding about
34 units of energy for every unit Invest¬
ed. Of this investment, only 1 per
cent (representing mainly steel used
in hand tools) was supplied by fossil
fuels rather than muscle.
No one thinks that Hong Kong
should go all the way back to such
a system of food production but
Ken Newcombe thinks there Is much
to be learned from the Chinese. It was
from the 4th to the 1st centuries B.C.
that they began to forego beef and
mutton for pork because the pig was
so much more efficient in converting
plant matter into meat. For the same
reason, to get more food from the
same amount of land, the Chinese
(especially in the South) replaced
wheat and pulses with rice from the
3rd to the 6th centuries A.D.
HONG KONG grew food the
Chinese way In the past and,
even today, It still uses food wastes
to raise pigs and poultry. As a result
of such thrifty practices,.only ^hec¬
tares of "forage area" are needed to
feed a citizen of Hong Kong compared
to 1.12 hectares for his contemporary
In Sydney, Australia.
Again, changes are In sight. At
present, food wastes are hauled out
as swill to the New Territories of
Hong Kong where they are fed to
400,000 pigs. But the pigs create a
sewage problem and some consultant
engineers have suggested either
pumping, the pig sewage out, to
sea or getting rid of the pigs. This,
Newcombe comments, might eliminate
the pig sewage problem In the New
Territories but it would certainly add
to the problem of getting rid of food
wastes In central Hong Kong because
it could no longer be fed to the pigs.
A happy example of recycling which
could be of Interest elsewhere is the

developing countries... than they are
for the average citizen In many mo¬
dern Western communities."
A basis for his statement is the
work done by Sheelagh Millar on the
psychoblology of crowding In Hong
Kong as part of the project. While
high density has been correlated with
high crime elsewhere, she finds: "In
Hong Kong, evidence for any such
density-related pathology ¡s lacking.
In spite of the fact that few other cities .
In the world approach its level of po¬
pulation concentration, the degree of
social disorder or of crime In Hong
Kong is relatively low, and disease is
not at present an especially prominent
feature of life as it Is in some other
high density cities."
She attributes this largely to the
prevalence of traditional Chinese va¬
lues and family cohesion (many Hong
Kong factories are, in fact, family
enterprises) which reduce tensions
arising when scarce living space must
be shared.
Hong Kong's Inhabitants adapt well
to density. They can sleep In crowded
buses and on busy streets where an
Individual's desire for solitude might
well be frustrated. Millar remarks: "If
the desire for solitude Is weak or ab¬
sent, such frustration Is not likely to
occur. The Cantonese term for 'alone'
suggests that this Is the case in Hong
Kong. It translates as 'having no one
around whom one knows'."
Factors such as these have led the
Hong Kong project to shun the atti¬
tude that only what can be measured
mathematically is worth measuring at
all. Since the ultimate purpose of the
group's research Is to Improve the
health and well-being of people In
cities everywhere, It must take Into
account the "quality of human expe¬
rience" rather than just trends In the
building of roads, housing, hospitals
and other amenities. This has de¬
manded an integrated approach call¬
ing on a number of disciplines work¬
ing together dynamically. Boyden
puts it this way:
"An increasing number of 'us are
coming to appreciate that one of the
Important reasons why so many prob¬
lems in human settlements remain
unsolved is the fact that knowledge is
not put to best advantage, mainly be¬
cause of the fragmented structure of
our various institutions of learning.
"The academic world is In a state
of extraordinary imbalance, in the
sense that tremendous efforts in terms
of finance and man-hours are devoted
to highly specialized studies on very
narrow aspects of reality... If Improved
understanding is to be achieved, there
Is very much more involved than sim¬
ply collecting data from all these va¬
rious areas of specialism, feeding
them Into a computer or human mind
and expecting something meaningful
tome come out."
Dan Behrman

