CITIZEN
PAINE
by Jacques Janssens
JACQUES JANSSENS of Belgium is
a historian specializing in the 18th and
19th centuries. Notable among his
published works are : Petite Histoire des
Etats- Un ¡s (VI Short Historyof the United
States) published by Editions Mame,
Paris 1956 and Camille Desmoulins, le
Premier Républicain de France (Camille
Desmoulins, France's First Republican)
published by Editions Libraire Acadé¬
mique Perrin, Paris 1973.
28

THE first year of the War of In¬
dependence was already draw¬
ing to its close, but confusion was
still rife within the American ranks.
Despite the efforts being made by
patriot leaders to finalize the break
with Britain, the majority in the Conti¬
nental Congress was still reluctant to
sever all ties with the mother country
by proclaiming the independence of
the united colonies.
At this point, in January 1776, a
forty-seven page pamphlet was pub¬
lished in Philadelphia and exploded
on the public like a bomb (see article
page 20).
The repercussions of Common
Sense were tremendous: a hundred
thousand copies were sold with aston¬
ishing speed, encouraging the call to
insurrection throughout the colonies.
Common Sense was initially attribut¬
ed to Benjamin Franklin, but when the
real author eventually made himself
known, his readers were amazed to
learn that this champion of American
liberation and enemy of the British
oligarchy was none other than an
Englishman who had arrived in the
New World little more than a year
earlier. His name was Thomas Paine.
Thomas Paine was born on 29 June
1737, in Thetford, a small town in
Norfolk, England, of an Anglican
mother and Quaker father. It is very
probable that his later hatred of
violence, oppression and intolerance
in all its forms sprang from his up¬
bringing in the Quaker tradition.
His parents were not rich, and at
the age of thirteen he had to learn
the family trade of corset-making.
However, at the age of twenty-four
he became an excise officer engaged
in the suppression of smuggling.
Paine's energy made him stand out
amongst his colleagues, and when .
they decided to draw the government's
attention to their wretched working
conditions, he was chosen to draft a
memorandum setting out their grie¬
vances and stating their claims.
He travelled to London, where he
lobbied members of parliament and
other influential people in the hope
of gaining their support. Allegedly be¬
cause he had taken leave without
permission, but probably because the
government was glad of an excuse to
rid itself of a nuisance, Paine was
dismissed from his post.
The dismissal of Thomas Paine
appears at first sight to be a matter
of minor significance. It may none¬
theless have been a deciding factor in
Britain's loss of her North American
colonies.
Paine had made friends in scientific
circles, and through them he was in¬
troduced to Benjamin Franklin, who
was then living in London. Franklin
recognized Paine's talents, took a lik¬
ing to him, and saw that a man of his
calibre might be of use in America.
The former excise officer, for his part,
was particularly excited at the pros¬
pect of emigrating because he had
a. - / Indépendance/ on/ le'
Triomphe de/la/ltverte/
The events of the struggle for American independence had a far-reaching impact
beyond the shores of America, even in such unexpected ways as influencing Paris
fashions of the day. This engraving, entitled "Coiffure à l'Indépendance ou
le Triomphe de la Liberté" (Independence-style Hairdo or the Triumph of Liberty)
shows a typically highly elaborate 18th century hairstyle, here designed to
illustrate a current event. The "ship-shaped" headgear worn by the elegant
Parisienne commemorates a sea battle on 17 June 1778 involving the French' frigate
"La Belle Poule" which was sailing westwards to help the Americans in their
struggle for independence.
for years dreamed of visiting the
New World.
Paine left England in October 1774,
and on his arrival in Philadelphia did
some teaching for a while in order to
subsist. Then a printing and book¬
selling firm which had recently started
up a magazine gave him the job of
editor, and as a result of his efforts
the subscription list of the Pennsyl¬
vania Magazine rose within a short
time from six hundred to fifteen hun¬
dred, with Paine's articles playing a
considerable part in this increase.
He was the first person in America
to call for the emancipation of Negro
slaves, plead for women's rights, and
deplore the ¡ll-treatment of animals.
At the same time he discussed the
growing tension between Britain and
the thirteen colonies, and was overt
in his sympathies for the American
cause, though at the same time he
entertained hopes of reconciliation.
When gunfire echoed at the Battle
of Lexington in April 1775, Paine im¬
mediately set about rallying support
from patriots who, crying out for
"liberty or death", raised the standard
of the Revolution. Paine proclaimed
himself a citizen of the world. "My
country is the world. My religion is
to do good."
Himself a republican by virtue ofr
29

, reaction against the despotism of
monarchy, Paine endeavoured to
extinguish the last vestiges of royalist
sentiment remaining In the hearts of
his adopted compatriots; and indeed
succeeded in doing so. When the
United States faced the problem of
which form of government it was to
adopt, republican ideas did not take
long to prevail.
It was with this very goal in view
that Paine wrote Common Sense. In
it he set forth ideas for a constitution
and outlined a clear, practical and
powerful plan for government which
was later to serve as an inspiration
for legislators in Pennsylvania and
Virginia.
Only one of his ideas failed to be
adopted, namely the emancipation of
Negroes and their inclusion in the
"social compact", for which he put
forward moral, religious and economic
arguments.
The publication of this pamphlet
resulted in great acclaim for Paine.
People took to calling him "Com¬
mon Sense", and many of them never
knew him other than by this nickname.
Overjoyed by the Declaration of
Independence, but feeling that he had
not done enough for the cause of the
Revolution the military situation was
then critical Paine suspended pub¬
lication of his magazine and enlisted
in the army. His rifle on his shoulder,
he took part in the retreat which
followed the fall of Fort Lee.
When Philadelphia also fell, and
Washington's only possible course of
action was to retreat to Valley Forge
with five thousand exhausted men who
were without supplies, Paine followed
him and shared in the army's priva¬
tions and suffering.
Thomas Paine wrote the first of his
Crises after the fall of Fort Lee, by
the flickering light of the camp fire,
to give courage to the retreating
troops. His key words were hope,
steadfastness and confidence; and
the enthusiasm engendered in the sol¬
diers by his stirring prose finally de¬
cided General Washington to stand
firm and attack the enemy at Trenton.
When Congress set up a Committee
for Foreign Affairs in April 1777, Paine
was appointed its secretary. This
appointment did not, however, pass
entirely without opposition, for his
anti-slavery views had apparently pro¬
voked concealed resentment towards
him on the part of some southern
representatives. He had been given
his appointment because of his ta¬
lents as a writer, and he carried out
his duties conscientiously and with
efficiency for nearly two years.
In 1781 Congress, badly in need of
funds, asked Paine to draw up a re¬
quest for financial aid to the French
government. Paine had been about to
found a paper of his own, but gave
up his plans in order to accompany
Col. Laurens- to Paris where he stayed
with Benjamin Franklin. The mission's
successful outcome was mainly due
to his efforts, though most of the
praise for this feat went to Laurens
rather than Paine.
The aid granted by France enabled
General Washington to continue the
campaign which finally led to Lord
Cornwallis' surrender at Yorktown,
and marked the end of the War of
Independence between America and
Britain.
Paine's attitude to the above mis¬
sion, as to many other matters, reveals
a total lack of self-interest. He had
waived the copyright of all his pam¬
phlets, even Common Sense, whose
total sales had amounted to nearly a
million copies. The only people to
profit from his writings were his
printers.
He became so poor that he was
more than once forced to draw the
CONTINUED PAGE 46
WASHINGTON BIDS FAREWELL TO LAFAYETTE
George Washington has a lasting place in American history
as the "Father of his country". He commanded the army
that won independence ; was president of the Convention
that wrote the U.S. Constitution ; and became the first
President of the United States. Portrait, below, shows
Washington as a young man. Below right, Washington
on the terrace of his home at Mt. Vernon, Virginia,
bids farewell in 1784 to his lifelong friend, the French
soldier-statesman Lafayette, who joined Washington's
staff and fought gallantly for American independence as a
volunteer. Right, the famous Liberty Bell being tolled in
Philadelphia to mark the adoption of the Declaration of
Independence in 1776.
Photo USIS, Pari?
30

Citizen Paine (CONTINUED FROM PAGE 30)
attention of Congress to his penury.
"There is something peculiarly hard",
he wrote to Washington, "that the
country which ought to have been to
me a home has scarcely afforded me
an asylum."
A number of states finally recogniz¬
ed their indebtedness to this franc-
tireur who had done so much for the
Revolution, and they rewarded him for
his services. Congress followed suit
by voting him a gratuity of 3,000 dol¬
lars "In consideration of his services,
and the benefits produced thereby."
in the seclusion of his small farm¬
house in Bordentown, New Jersey,
Paine had planned to lead a peaceful
existence devoted to his scientific
hobbies (his favourite brain-child was
the model of a daringly-conceived
iron bridge). However, he decided to
revisit England, and when he set off
for Europe in the summer of 1787 he
had little inkling that fifteen years
would pass before he would return
to his "much loved America".
While in London Paine worked hard
at making facts about America known
to the English. But his real motive in
doing so was to provoke a reform of
the British Constitution and extend
the franchise. He restated his profes¬
sion of faith in his Prospects on the
Rubicon: "... above all, I defend the
cause of humanity."
When the French Revolution broke
out, Paine saw in it the influence of
its American predecessor, and he felt
that his dream of a world republic was
at last coming true.
He expounded his views in his most
important work, the Rights of Man: the
cause of the French people, he wrote,
was that of ail Europe and indeed of
the entire world. Through his travels
in France Paine made contact with the
leaders of the Revolution, and after
the flight of Louis XVi he published the
first republican manifesto.
The second part of Rights of Man
was published in 1792: it was consi¬
dered seditious, and Paine became
embroiled in legal proceedings. Pub¬
lic hatred of him was rampant, to the
extent that effigies of him were burn¬
ed: and the storm aroused by his
writings eventually led to his trial in
absentia and the verdict against him
of high treason.
Meanwhile the National Assembly in
France had conferred French citizen¬
ship on Paine, and four départements
had elected him to the Convention.
He was given a hero's welcome, and
chose to represent the Pas-de-Calais,
taking his seat amongst the moderate
group of deputies.
He was elected to sit on the com¬
mittee charged with the drafting of a
new constitution. But he also did all
he could to save the life of Louis XVI,
and courageously voted against the
death sentence passed on the "ty¬
rant", which incurred him the hatred
of the extremist followers of Robes¬
pierre in the Convention.
The Reign of Terror put an end to
Paine's high hopes of what he termed
a sovereign republic. His arrest, tra¬
ditionally blamed on Robespierre, was
in fact the result of a conspiracy
which involved the United States' Mi¬
nister in France, Gouverneur Morris,
an aristocrat and anglophile, together
with other of Paine's enemies.
First of all he was stripped of his
parliamentary immunity by a decree of
Robespierre which deprived him of his
French citizenship. Then, three days
later on 28 December 1793, it was as
a British subject that he was thrown
into prison. At the time he was about
to publish the first part of his Age of
Reason, a work in which his belief in
a Supreme Being is clearly manifest.
Paine tried in vain to plead his
American nationality, and Gouverneur
Morris, on whom he had been relying
for help, managed to prevent any in¬
tervention by the United States
government. Neither a petition signed
by American residents in Paris nor
all the efforts of Paine's own friends
met with any success.
Imprisoned at the height of the
Reign of Terror, Paine saw many rep¬
resentatives of the people go to the
guillotine, and he himself only just
avoided sharing their fate. Not until
three months after the fall of Robes¬
pierre, on 9 Thermidor (27 July 1794),
after eighteen months in prison, was
Paine released through the efforts of
Morris' successor, James Monroe, and
reinstated by the Convention as a
French citizen and deputy.
Although weak and ill from his im¬
prisonment, Paine continued to write,
and the fruits of his meditations in
prison, the second part of the Age
ot Reason, were published before
long. This contained criticism of the
Bible ; and other works developed
Paine's ideas on the French Revo¬
lution.
Ageing, saddened by circumstances
and disappointed in his hopes, Paine
finally returned to America towards
the end of 1802. He was warmly wel¬
comed by Jefferson, now President;
but his enemies, headed by Gouver¬
neur Morris, combined against him
and sought to deprive him of the right
to vote.
More persecution followed the pub¬
lication of the Age of Reason in Am¬
erica, and the various churches were
quick to malign this free-thinking infi¬
del, though Paine withstood their
attacks without giving way.
in spite of everything, the United
States remained for him the promised
land of freedom, apart from the shad¬
ow on the horizon of the "savage
practice" of the Negro slave trade,
against which he took up arms again.
He published several more pamphlets.
Paine spent his last years on his
farm in New Rochelle which had been
given to him by the state of New
York. The financial compensations
awarded him by his adopted country
enabled him to live the rest of his life
in comfort.
Thomas Paine died on the morning
of 8 June 1809 in New York, aged
seventy-two. The Quakers, who re¬
garded him as a renegade, refused
him the burial he had wished in their
cemetery, and in the end he was
buried on his farm in New Rochelle.
His remains were taken back to
England three years later, but their
final resting-place is unknown.
Even though the mortal remains of
Thomas Paine have disappeared, the
memory of this brave and compas¬
sionate man, who did so much for the
causes of freedom and the human
race, will continue to burn brightly.
o
z
<
CC
UJ
2
in
cc
LU
s
2
o
O
O
<
O
cc
<
o
o
cc
m
Jacques Janssens e
46
