Four Ukrainian archaeologists
present their latest finds
IN the steppes of Eastern Europe
large earthen mounds mark the
burial places of ancient Scythian
rulers. These royal "kurgans" were
in most cases plundered in antiquity
by thieves in search of the hoards of
gold hidden within the tombs.
For the first time, during the past
six or seven years, systematic exca¬
vations of Scythian kurgans have
been carried out on a large scale,
using the latest scientific methods,
by expeditions from the Institute of
Archaeology of the Academy of
Sciences of the Ukrainian S. S. R.
Undertaken in connexion with
extensive land improvement projects
in the south of the Ukraine, the
research on the royal tombs has
aroused tremendous interest. Al
though they were first excavated in
the 19th and at the start of the 20th
century, and had been pillaged in
ancient times, the tombs were still
found to contain an astonishing wealth
of treasures.
The many objects unearthed include
remarkable pieces of jewellery, orna¬
tely decorated weapons, gold and
silver vessels and other outstanding
works of ancient art. They have now
become part of the world's cultural
heritage.
Among the best known of the royal
kurgans dating from the 4th and 3rd
centuries B.C. are those of Chertom-
lyk, Solokha, Oguz, Alexandropol',
Kozel, Bol'shaia Tsymbalka and
Chmyrev, all situated in the Dnepro¬
petrovsk, Zaprozhye or Kherson
regions of the Ukraine. The famous
kurgan of Kul Oba, near Kerch, in the
Crimea, can also be included among
these tombs by virtue of the wealth
of objects it contained.
On the following pages, Ukrainian
archaeologists present a few of their
most recent discoveries.
Ivan Artemenko
Director of the Institute
of Archaeology of the
Ukrainian Academy of Sciences
2 - the golden cup of Gaimanov
DURING 1969-70, the Gaima-
nova Mogila kurgan, which
occupies a central position
among more than 50 burials of Scy¬
thian warriors, was excavated and
studied by an expedition from the
Institute of Archaeology of the Aca¬
demy of Sciences of the Ukrainian
S.S.R. Gaimanova Mogila is s¡tu-¡
ated near the village of Balka in the
Vasil'ievska district of the Zaporozhye
region.
In comparison with the other
kurgans, which are about 1 to 1.5
metres high, Gaimanova Mogila is
remarkable for its sizeover 8 metres
high and about 80 metres in diameter.
Its enormous size, its sharp outlines
against the flat steppe landscape and
its gleaming white stone facing
emphasized the exceptional impor¬
tance of the individual buried in it.
Gaimanova Mogila served as a
burial vault for Scythian royalty, and
the funeral objects discovered in it
correspond in many details to the
customs associated with the burial of
Scythian kings as described by Hero¬
dotus. We found golden and silver
vessels, the attributes of Scythian
royal power, cups, horns for wine, a
drinking bowl, a pitcher, and the bo¬
dies of those servants who, according
to Herodotus, were buried with a king.
However, Gaimanova Mogila's
fame as one of the most valuable
historical monuments of Scythia is
not solely due to the extremely rich
finds of eating and cooking utensils
and the several thousand excellent
pieces of jewellery. The most impor¬
tant discoveries were the objects
buried in the cache of the northern
tomb. These included golden and
silver ritual vessels, as well as three
17

UKTEST UKRAINIAN FINDS (Continued)
wooden cups with rolled gold discs
along the rim; also in the cache were
a flat silver drinking cup and two
drinking horns, with silver bases and
golden mouths and tips in the forms
of the head of a ram and a lion.
These objects were accompanied by
silver pitchers and a round drinking-
bowl placed in a gilded silver vessel.
With the exception of the large
drinking horn and the wooden cups
which are the work of a local Scythian
craftsman, the remaining objects in
the cache are made in the style of
Greek art of the 4th century B.C.
and show clear links with the jewel¬
lery workshops of the Bosphorus.
The most outstanding work of
Scytho-Classical art found in the
Gaimanova Mogila kurgan is a small
spherical gilded silver cup, with two
flat horizontal handles decorated with
rams' heads. The central design
on the cup is a wide frieze in high
relief, depicting Scythian warriors.
The warriors stand against a
background showing an open, stony
area and are connected with each
other by their involvement in com¬
mon activities. They are superbly
integrated into the form of the vessel.
The four major figures are displayed
in pairs on the surface of the cup; the
other two kneel under the cup's
handles. [For an interpretation of
these figures on the golden cup of
Gaimanov see article page 15].
On one side of the cup stand two
elderly warriors, engaged in conversa¬
tion. Long-haired and bearded, they
are dressed in rich clothing and carry
ceremonial precious weaponry. Their
long kaftans, with triangular gussets,
are trimmed with fur and embroidered
on the shoulders and chest with
fantastical designs. Their hairstyles
are highly distinctive, and their
weapons in particular betoken the
highest authority. The mace of the
warrior on the right and the two-
thonged whip held by the one on the
left, suggest that the two men belon¬
ged to the elite of Scythian leaders.
On the opposite side of the cup
an elderly bearded warrior and a
young Scythian are conversing.
Their clothing is just as luxurious,
their weapons just as costly, but
their poses are somewhat different.
The young Scythian holds in his right
hand a ritual drinking-bowl, and his
left hand is outstretched, like that
of the elderly warrior. Under one
handle of the vessel, a youth on his
knees is prostrating himself before a
wineskin, while the kneeling figure
under the other handle is an elderly
warrior, with his gorytus (the combi¬
nation quiver and bow-case typical
of the Scythians) beside him. He
has one hand stretched up to his
forehead and is gripping something
with the other.
All the figures are gilded, and only
the faces and hands are silver. Each
image is individual in style. It is
worth emphasizing that this is the
first known example of Scythian
décorative art depicting Scythian
leaders of the highest rank.
Vasily Bidzilia
Institute of Archaeology
of the Ukrainian Academy
of Sciences
Photo © Art Publishers, Moscow
18

Scythian idyll
on a royal
breastplate
On this gold pectoral or breast¬
plate (right) the artist has
depicted scenes in minute detail
making this masterpiece of the
goldsmith's art (30 cm. in diameter)
a vivid portrayal of Scythian
pastoral life. At centre of upper
frieze of the pectoral (detail left)
two men on their knees are holding
and sewing a sheepskin tunic.
They wear the typical trousers
and boots of the nomad horsemen
of the steppes. This 4th century
B.C. Greco-Scythian pectoral
was wrought near the Black Sea
and was discovered in the Ukraine
in 1971 in a Scythian ruler's tomb.
Photo O APN, Moscow
THE excavations in 1971 of
Tolstaya Mogila, one of the
most magnificent royal tombs
of Scythia, turned out to be a momen¬
tous event for archaeology. In thé
centre of the tomb was the burial
of the ruler himself, with beside him
two pits for the burial of horses and
the three tombs of his leading grooms.
In the south-western part of the
kurgan two dark patches marked the
entrances to a side tomb, which had
escaped plunder.
In this tomb lay the skeleton of a
young Scythian woman, probably the
wife of the ruler. All her clothesher
dresses, veils and sandalswere
embroidered with ornamental golden
discs. Her jewellery was of gold.
Beside the woman was an alabaster
sarcophagus containing the body of a
child who had died later and had
been carried into the grave through
a separate entrance. The whole of
its tiny skeleton was also covered in
golden plaques, rings, bracelets and
neck ornaments.
Everything was in a perfect state of
preservation when, 2,300 years after
the burial, the first archaeologists
entered the grave. But although the
central grave had been plundered,
in it were found the objects which
were to make Tolstaya Mogila world-
famous. These were the most pre¬
cious of the king's ceremonial
emblems of authority: a sword cov¬
ered in gold, a gold-wrapped whip,
and, most spectacular of all, a golden
pectoral, or breastplate.
The pectoral weighs 1,150 gram¬
mes. Its crescent-shaped surface is
divided into three bands by broad
elegant twisted cords of gold.
In the centre of the lowest band
three scenes show a horse being
attacked and pulled down by griffins.
Beyond them are depicted the com¬
bats of a wild boar and a deer with a
leopard and a lion, and at each end
of this band a hound chases after a
hare. In front of each hare two
grasshoppers face each othereternal
symbols of peace and tranquility.
The middle band is decorated with
plant motifs and among the wonder¬
fully interwoven flowers, shoots,
palmleaves, rosettes and leaves, five
lifelike figures of birds evoke the
atmosphere of a quiet sunny morning.
Linked with the lower band into a
single picture, the middle band forms
a kind of interlude between the large-
scale sculptural figures on the lower
and upper bands and gives the whole
work its unity as a great symphonic
poem about Scythian life and ideas.
In the upper band, four Scythians
go about their peaceful tasks sur¬
rounded by domestic animals. In
the centre two men, stripped to the
waist, their quivers and bows close
at hand, are sewing a sheepskin
tunic. To the left and right of them
a cow and a mare suckle their young
and further on two youths are milk¬
ing ewes. Birds in flight complete
the composition, communicating an
impression of the infinity of the world.
With its perfect proportions and the
outstanding beauty and naturalness
of its movements, each figure is a
sculptural masterpiece. An extra¬
ordinary composition, the work as a
whole undoubtedly has a complex
symbolic meaning. But, quite apart
from its true significance, it seems
clear that in this work the artist was
striving, directly or indirectly, to
convey a philosophical picture of his
world, with all its aspirations and its
dreams.
For the first time, we see on a
ritual royal object neither battle '
scenes nor noble warriors, but a vistas
of earthly life in all its harmony. f
19

LATEST UKRAINIAN FINDS (Continued)
Such a find was unprecedented in
the field of Scythian studies. It
reflected, as a drop of dew does the
sun, the full brilliance and radiance
of rpyal Scythian gold, much more of
which has been found at Tolstaya
Mogila than in Kul Oba, previously
the richest Scythian tomb ever
excavated.
Yet the importance of these finds
lies not in the gold, butin the priceless
historical-revelations that come from
every object in the Tolstaya tomb
and the imperishable artistic value
of its most exquisite works.
Boris Mozolevsky
Institute of Archaeology
of the Ukrainian Academy
of Sciences
DEER-STALKING LIONS. Each end of this solid gold neck-ring is decorated
with seven lions stalking a deer whose hindquarters merge
into the decorative pattern on the neck-ring. This ornament belonged
to a Scythian noblewoman buried 2,300 years ago with all her jewels.
It came to light in 1971 in the same tomb as the magnificent pectoral
shown on page 19. The tomb was robbed but both objects were missed
by the plunderers.
Photo L Tarassova O Kiev State Historical Museum.
ENIGMATIC GRIFFIN. Bronze ornament (left) in the form
of a stylized griffin may have surmounted a staff,
a ceremonial standard or the decoration of a catafalque.
Discovered in 1971, it dates from the 4th century B.C.
and is only 5 cms. high.
WELL-TRAVELLED BOAR. This gold boar with silver tusks
may have been the base of a wine-cup. The wild boar
was a cult animal for the Celts and this work
was probably made by a Celtic craftsman in Central Europe
in the 4th century B.C. Its discovery in the Ukraine
is evidence of the trade links that existed in ancient times
between the Scythian world and its Western neighbours.
Unearthed in 1970, the boar is 5 cms. long
and weighs less than 20 grammes.
Photo L Tarassova 'O Kiev State Historical Museum.

SCYTHIAN PANOPLY. Carved in limestone 2,500 years ago, this statue is
the full-length portrayal of a Scythian warrior in helmet and armour (see also
box page 13). From his belt hang the typical short Scythian sword (the akinakes)
a quiver for bow and arrows (the gorytus), a battle-axe and a sheathed dagger.
He is wearing a neck-ring and in his right hand he grips to his breast a rhyton,
a horn-shaped drinking cup. The 2-metre-high statue may originally have
topped a burial mound. It was found near the Black Sea in 1975 by
archaeologists of the Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine.
Photo O V. Kloshko. Kiev
a horse's finery
capped
by a goddess
of the chase
A 2,400-year-old Scythian or¬
nament of singular beauty
and originality was recently
unearthed in the Ukraine (the first
photo of this, work ever published
appears on the centre colour pages of
this issue).
The ornament, a horse's gold bridle
piece, came to light when the undis¬
turbed grave of a man and two horses
was uncovered at the end of a corri¬
dor. The discovery was made by
two specialists in the archaeology of
Early Iron Age cultures, I. P. Savovsky
and Yu. V. Boltrik, who were directing
excavations at the village of Giunovko
in the Kamenskoye-Dnieper district
of the Zaporozhye region.
A man of about 25 lay by the wall
of the passageway. The small num¬
ber and modest nature of the objects
near him (a gold ear-ring, an iron bra¬
celet, glass beads and a bunch of
arrows) showed his subordinate po¬
sition in society: he was most pro¬
bably a groom. The horse buried by
the opposite wall was also modestly
decorated: the archaeologists found
an iron bit and the fastenings of a
bridle.
In comparison, the decoration of
the second horse, lying in the middle,
was striking in its magnificence. It
consisted of a bridle frontlet in the
form of a lion, two cheekplates show¬
ing a lion pulling down a deer, four
phaleras, or discs with running spirals,
and two plaques without decoration.
All the objects were of gilded silver.
The horse's head was crowned
with a flat top-piece. This was
painted blue, with a leather base, and
had a delicate segment-shaped gold
plaque (33 cm by 20 cm) stuck to it.
The decoration on this "diadem for
a horse" is new for Scythian art. A
woman rider is firing arrows at a stag
under a tree which is crowned by two
enormous stylized flowers with red-
coloured outer petals.
Plant shoots are visible under the
feet of the horse and the stag, and
plant motifs dominate the scene.
The antlers of the stag are intertwined
with the branches of the tree and a
wide border of plant ornamentation i
wavy shoots with whorls sprouting I
21

LATEST UKRAINIAN FINDS
(Continued)
from themframes the perimeter of
the ornament. The top-piece is a
miniature decorative panel in which
the colourful effect is achieved by a
combined use of gold, blue and red.
The skilled craftsmanship has given
the work an appearance of delicate
gold lace.
The realism of the details in the
costume of the horsewoman and her
pose should not be allowed toobscure
the mythological nature of the subject
as a whole. The theme of the death
of a stag is repeated three times in
the decoration of the buried horse.
On the cheekplates the stag is shown
being eaten by a lion, on the gold discs
it is being pulled down by a griffin,
and in the top-piece it is being killed
by a human.
The hunt takes place in a sacred
grove in which trees and plants are
highly stylized, and the whole recalls
the legend of the virgin huntress of
the GreeksArtemis. This relates
how the hunter Actaeon strayed by
mistake into the sacred forest of the
goddess in the valley of Cithaeron,
where he caught sight of her bathing.
As a punishment, Artemis turned
Actaeon into a stag, which then
became itself the prey of hunters.
The image of the divine huntress
would naturally attract the Scythians,
whose religion, as Herodotus tells us,
underwent an intensive process of
anthropomorphisation of divinities
during the 5th and 4th centuries
B.C. But the discovery of this hunt¬
ing scene is still too recent for defi¬
nitive conclusions to be drawn about
its exact significance.
Vitaly Otroshchenko
Institute of Archaeology
of the Ukrainian Academy,
of Sciences
