by Yen Lu Wong
and
Herbert Chivambo Shore



A LIVING HERITAGE
OF MANY CULTURES
AND MANY PEOPLES
IN the Ballad for Americans, the
great voice of Paul Robeson sings
an anthem to a nation of immigrants.
Am / an American?
I'm just an Irish, Negro, Jewish, Italian,
French and English, Spanish, Russian,
Chinese, Polish, Scotch, Hungarian,
Litvak, Swedish, Finnish, Canadian,
Greek and Turk and Czech
and double-check American...
Today, two hundred years after its
birth, and after more than a century
of the myth of assimilation, the United
States is still a land of many peoples,
a vast interaction of diverse and dy¬
namic cultures.
In the pueblos of the Southwest,
they dance the Mattachines and the
Deer Dance, and tell tales of a time
when the Montezuma lived in nearby
Picuris. Cross over Grant Avenue,
in San Francisco or Mott Street in
New York and the signs are likely to
be in Chinese.
Take a test for a driving licence in
Southern California and you will be
routinely handed a set of instructions
in three languages. Telephone oper¬
ators can speak Spanish or Chinese
as well as English, depending upon
where you are in the country when
you pick up the phone.
The sights and sounds of the Afri¬
can heritage are alive in the churches
or on the streets of Harlem or the
YEN LU WONG of the United States, is an
authority on Chinese and Chinese-American
Theatre and Dance and problems of cultural
identity. A dancer, choreographer and spe¬
cialist in the art of movement, she is a
member of the faculty of the University of
California, San Diego,
i
HERBERT CHIVAMBO SHORE, U.S.
author, playwright, theatre director and
consultant on cultural affairs and the per¬
forming arts, is artistic consultant to the
Smithsonian Institution's "Festival ofAmeri¬
can Folklife". He is consulting Director of
Unesco's Project on Cultural Innovation and
was formerly Founding Professor, Department
of Theatre Arts of the University of Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania. He is a specialist in African
theatre andliterature, and Third Worldcultures
in the United States.
Sea Islands of the Georgia coast.
New Orleans is a Creole city, a blend
of French, African and Spanish
cultures.
There is an Irish Boston, a Polish
Chicago, a German Cincinnati, a Slavic
Pittsburgh, a Portuguese Gloucester,
and a Scandinavian Minneapolis.
There are Chinatowns, Little Tokyos,
and Little Italies in many cities, and
centres of Native American life like
Taos, Four Corners and Wounded
Knee.
The names across the land, names
of rivers and lakes, towns and cities,
streets, bear witness to the pluralism
of American culture. Mississippi, Mis¬
souri, Rappahanock and Monangahela
sing of the Native American heritage.
California, Santa Fe, Chimayo, San
Francisco, tell of a Spanish, Mexican
and Chicano past and present. There
are eleven cities named Athens, eight
Moscows, eight Frankfurts, ten Gen¬
evas, and seven Waterloos, as well as
a Holland in Michigan, Nebraska and
Minnesota, London and Odessa in
Texas, and Stockholm in South
Dakota.
In the 19th century, an observer
wrote, "On a board in front of a stage¬
coach office in Buffalo (in the state
of New York), I once read, 'stages
start from this house for China,
Sardinia, Holland, Hamburg, Java,
Sweden, Cuba, Havre, Italy, and Penn-
Yan.'" All are the names of places
in the United States.
American cuisine too is ethnic in
its diversity. It has adopted and
adapted a wide range of International
foods into a rich culinary variety.
Markets across the land sell soul food,
knishes and gefilte fish, bean curd,
won ton, ramen, Irish stew, scrapple,
sauerkraut, pilau and couscous, and
many more foods, frozen, fresh or
tinned, from the cultures of Europe,
Africa, Asia and the Middle East.
There are dishes with foreign
names that are American in origin,
such as chop suey and chili con carne,
and there are "old world" specialities
such as pizza which, in the American
milieu, have been developed into a
complex and appetizing art. A tour of
the restaurants in various regions of
the country would literally be a culi¬
nary trip around the world.
The growth of specific crafts, skills
and even entire industries are often
associated with particular cultures.
Black peoples, slave and free, left
their imprint on agriculture, textile
design, iron and wood, musical ins¬
truments and a variety of arts. "The
contribution of Native Americans to
the techniques of crop development
and the use of fertilizer is well known.
The Chinese built the railroads and
the mines of the American West with
intense labour and ingenuity, and
were industrious and innovative
workers in restaurants and pharmacies
as well. The Irish were strongly iden¬
tified with the networks of railroads
and canals of the East; the Jews with
the garment industry and needle
trades; Slavic and other Central
European peoples with iron and steel.
Italians founded the wine industry
of California and dug the subways of
New York. The lore of labour is filled
with tales and songs of Welsh miners,
Portuguese fishermen, Polish meat-
packers, Chicano and Navajo farm¬
workers, and, as the Ballad for Am¬
ericans says, "lots more too."
The "Festival of American Folklife."
presented each summer in Washing¬
ton, D.C, is a celebration of a nation
of immigrants who brought with them
crafts and skills, music and dance,
theatre, stories, ballads, languages,
culinary customs, and ways of life.
But there is something more to the
cultural pluralism of the United States
than the fact that a great many
cultures interact in the mainstream of
American life.
The cultures have mingled and yet
remained distinct. Some have formed
large centres in urban settlements;
some are scattered in diaspora
throughout the country. Some have
been forced into ghettos by prejudice
and economic control. Some live in
small and relatively isolated enclaves
34

Two hundred years after its birth, the United States is still a land of many peoples, a vast
interaction of diverse and dynamic cultures. There is an Irish Boston, a Polish Chicago, a Slavic
Pittsburgh, a Portuguese Gloucester and a Scandinavian Minneapolis. There are Chinatowns,
Little Tokyos and Little Italies in many cities, and centres of American Indian life in many States.
But there is also an increasing mingling of races and cultures. Here, a mixed family black and
white from the southern State of North Carolina.
of dignity, pride and special ways of
life. The struggle for cultural Identity
has been a long, difficult and im¬
portant part of the nation's history.
When independence was proclaim¬
ed in 1776, this was already a land of
many peoples. It had been explored,
visited and occasionally settled by
Spanish, French, Italians, Africans,
Portuguese, Greeks, Scandinavians,
Germans and Jews.
The very first immigrants those
who today truly have the right to
call themselves Native Americans
came across from Siberia about
22000 B.C. when the Bering Strait
was dry land. They numbered about
one million when Columbus arrived
and mis-named them "Indians". They
lived in different types of economic
and social organization, were allied
in complex confederations, spoke a
number of different languages and
had a variety of cultures.
In Common Sense, Tom Paine re¬
cognized that people from many na¬
tions helped to create and build the
thirteen colonies. He wrote, "Europe
and not England, is the parent coun¬
try of America." But even he missed
the fact that on the eve of the Revo¬
lution itself, about one-fourth of Am¬
erica's people were neither British
nor European and they played an im¬
portant role in the War for Indepen¬
dence. About one million were Native
American, and some 400,000 were
Black people from Angola and other
parts of West and East Africa.
That was only the beginning. The
movement of peoples and cultures to
the United States in the period from
1850 to 1920 is probably the largest
continuous human migration in his¬
tory. The growing country faced a
challenge to create a unified nation
and a coherent culture from its poly¬
glot population. Many of the newly-
independent nations of the world are
facing a similar challenge today.
Those in power and control feared
the pluralism of America's people and
their response to this challenge gave
birth to the myth of the melting pot.
It was pressed upon the country
through great efforts in almost every
aspect of society, enforced by pro¬
paganda, coercion and prejudice.
Schools, agencies, employers, indus¬
try and the media all joined to support
and teach assimilation. Former lan¬
guages, customs and values were to
be cast aside and exchanged for a
new "American culture."
In the 1920s, a theatre spectacle
presented to Its employees by the
Ford Motor Company summed it up in
visual terms. Actors dressed as Ita¬
lians, Poles, and other immigrant
groups sang their "foreign" songs
and danced their "foreign" dances
as they entered a huge pot. They
then emerged dressed in "American
clothes" and singing The Star-Span¬
gled Banner. The message was clear.
Actually the new "pure American
culture" being taught was really a
composite of the values, customs,
habits and manners of the Anglo-
Saxon immigrant groups. The idea
that Anglo-Saxon culture was some¬
how superior took shape in the early
19th century and was gradually ex¬
panded to include Teutons and Nor¬
dics, the blond Northern Europeans.
The contributions of other ethnic
groups were either ignored, minimiz¬
ed or Anglicized. The explorer, Gio¬
vanni Caboto became John Cabot,
and the jazz music of Black Ameri¬
cans was dubbed "Dixieland" to
emphasize the regional base of its
origins and play down the African
cultural roots of those who created it.
Hierarchies of cultures were estab¬
lished and peoples were actually
classified as assimilable and unassi-
milable. Racism was thus fostered ^
and strengthened and the develop- r
35

ment of ethnie stereotypes was inten¬
sified.
Cultural assimilation, especially in
the schools, had devastating effects
on family life and produced serious
conflict between generations. Chil¬
dren were taught to be ashamed of
the language, customs and manners
of their parents, and they shunned
their heritage. This came to be known
as the "second generation phenom¬
enon." President Theodore Roosevelt,
himself, in 1915, proclaimed, "There
is no room in this country for hyphe¬
nated Americanism."
BUT the great feminine social
reformer, Jane Addams, when
she founded Hull House, the commu¬
nity centre in Chicago, included the
first ethnic or immigrant museum in
the country to help children achieve
an understanding of and pride in their
cultural heritage.
She argued that ignorant teachers
in the schools were damaging Am¬
erican life by rejecting the cultures
of immigrants, rather than using this
diversity to give the children a broad¬
ening perspective of the world.
Francis Lieber, the German immi¬
grant intellectual, in his book, The
Stranger in America, advocated the
maintenance of cultural identity and
the retention of foreign languages in
the schools. At the same time, he
opposed isolationist or separatist
schemes of settlement, arguing that
they split the country into cultural
atoms and that settlers who clung
together suffered from "mental stag¬
nation."
Immigrant banks were formed, mu¬
tual aid societies, national associa¬
tions, co-operative stores, foreign lan¬
guage churches and synagogues,
foreign language newspapers and
radio stations. These helped to foster
a sense of cultural identity.
Other institutions developed, some
formal, some informal, such as the
Chinese tong, the Italian padrone sys¬
tem, the Hebrew Sheltering and Immi¬
grant Aid Society, to help new immi¬
grants make the voyage, find a place
to live, locate a job and supply moral
support.
Often torn between two worlds,
members of cultural and ethnic groups
faced an inner turmoil which only now
many are beginning to perceive and
understand. Stoyan Cristowe in Half an
American, written in 1919, expressed
the classic predicament of the ethnic
American. "While I am not a whole
American, neither am I what I was
when I first landed here; that is, a
Bulgarian. Still retaining some inherit¬
ed native traits, enough to bar me...
from complete assimilation, I have
outwardly and inwardly deviated so
much from a Bulgarian that when re¬
cently visiting that country I felt like
a foreigner and was so regarded."
More recently, one of the authors
of this article, Yen Lu Wong, visited
the People's Republic of China. In
the United States she is recognized
as Chinese, but in China, no matter
what her racial and cultural origins,
and no matter the genuine friendship
and affinities that were expressed to
her, she was clearly recognized as an
American.
Black Americans, visiting Africa,
have had the same experience, disco¬
vering their roots in Africa, but their
differences as well, and the measure
of these differences is what defines
their being American.
The ethnic cultures of America are
related to but distinct from those in
the countries of their origin. Two
sections of the Smithsonian Institu¬
tion's "Festival of American' Folklife,"
"Old Ways in the New World" and
"African Diaspora" demonstrate this
clearly, for they bring groups from
correlative cultures in the United
States and abroad to perform side by
side.
The enriching tie to the foreign land
is there, but what makes them dif¬
ferent is the sharing of the American
experience. This common sharing
among diverse groups, rather than an
enforced assimilation, forms the basis
for a sense of creative unity, or cross-
cultural interaction. It is a unity in
diversity, a new and exciting meaning
to the American motto, E pluribus
unum.
Militant assertions of ethnic and
cultural identity emerged in the 1960s,
and the nation discovered that it is no
melting pot and never has been. Led
by Blacks, Chícanos and Native Am¬
ericans, this new quest for Identity
spread rapidly to others, to groups of
Asian and European origin as well.
To be an American and to express
one's individuality did not require
shedding the characteristics of one's
cultural heritage. On the contrary, it
meant being truly an expression of
one's own culture within the frame of
time, place and circumstance.
Each person becomes a living mi¬
crocosm of the interaction of culture,
class, nation and time. To achieve the
universal means to probe the parti¬
cular to its very depths and express
It fully.
Young people in the United States
are beginning to discover that they
can enrich their lives by building on
valuable cultural characteristics in
their own and other ethnic groups.
Cultural identity and pluralism are
not restrictive but are points of crea¬
tive departure, if they reject assimila¬
tion on the one hand, and the narrow
chauvinism of ethnocentricity on the
other.
S. Dillon Ripley, Head of the Smith¬
sonian Institution, has pointed out,
"There is in mankind today a fear of
the loss of identity. We fear the union
of megastates and megacorporations
which for efficiency's sake would
mold us all our thoughts as well as
our actions to a new life where
differences between groups would be
smoothed out".
History, however, seems to demons¬
trate that people, individually and col¬
lectively, resist that "smoothing out."
Enforced assimilation, with all of its
inherent contradictions of power and
class, in the long run produces mili¬
tant reactions of ethnic and cultural
identity. A more creative solution
suggests itself in a cross-cultural plu¬
ralism, based on the dynamic and
constructive interaction among clear¬
ly identifiable cultural groups.
Cultural identity is a world-wide
force. Its concerns are intensified
by rapid technological development,
urbanization, and the growth of mass
communication. These concerns are
recurrent themes in a number of
Unesco projects and programmes
dealing with cross-cultural studies,
cultural innovation, and cultural dev¬
elopment. Millions are coming to see
that the heritage of their cultures,
adapted to the modern world, are a
resource of human values out of
which to forge richer human relations
In a technological age.
CULTURAL pluralism has come
to have new potential in the
United States. The consciousness of
one's own cultural identity can help
one to learn how to discern and in¬
terpret clues from others who differ
from them. It can produce a cohe-
siveness of interaction that is far more
unifying in spirit and reality than any
coercively imposed unity. It can mean
wider horizons, new competencies in
consciousness, new skills in self-
knowledge and the accurate percep¬
tion of those with different roots and
origins.
Myths of assimilation and hierar¬
chies of cultural superiority actually
blunt and dull a nation's sensitivity
to the cultural and intellectual cur¬
rents of the world. A revolution in
cultural awareness could have impor¬
tant consequences in both domestic
social policy and in international
affairs.
At this, the beginning of its third
century, the United States could cross
a new frontier. It could come to a
more accurate knowledge of itself
and create a social whole in which
pluralism is the well-spring of the
future, the presupposition and the
pride.
Yen Lu Wong
and Herbert Chivambo Shore
36

Indians rediscover
their identity
About 800,000 Indians live in the
United States. They are free to live on
a reservation or not as they please,
and more than half have chosen to do
so. Indians are rediscovering their past
and their old ways and at the same
time mastering the new. Photos show:
top, Navajo Indian community college
as it nears completion on the 25,000 sq.
mile Navajo reservation extending over
parts of Arizona, New Mexico and
Utah. Centre, Navajo children in their
local community school. Older Navajo
women also sit in at the lesson. Bottom,
at the annual Festival of American
Folklife, organized by the Smithsonian
Institution in Washington, D.C, Iro¬
quois Indians of eastern U.S.A. demons¬
trate an ancient Indian game. Lacrosse,
now widely popular in Canada and the
United States.
