These bird of paradise feathers form part of an intricate
headdress worn by the people of the New Guinea highlands.
The relationship between birds and men is strongly expressed
in the oral literature and art of Oceanic peoples, especially
those from New Guinea. Men identified themselves with
birds, and many masks and ceremonial costumes used
bird motifs and actual bird plumes to achieve this effect.
El
Ol
THE ANGRY
YOUNG MEN
OF OCEANIA
"




Young writers and artists
are leading
a cultural reawakening
in the Pacific
by Albert Wendt
ALBERT WENDT, of Western Samoa, is an
educator, novelist, short story writer and poet.
A former principal of Samoa College, Western
Samoa, he is now lecturer in Commonwealth
and South Pacific literature and creative writing
at the University of the South Pacific (Fiji).
Among his published works is a novel. Sons
for the Return Home (1973) and a collection
of short stories, Flying-Fox in a Freedom Tree
(1974). A full collection of his poetry entitled
Inside Us the Dead will appear in June 1976.
Mr. Wendt prepared a longer study on the
subject of his anlcle as a paper for the Unesco
meeting on the study of Oceanic cultures held
at Nukualofa (Tonga) in December 1975.
These Islands rising from wave's
[edge-
blue myth brooding In orchid,
fern and banyan, fearful gods
awaiting birth from blood clot
into stone ¡mage and chant
to bind their wounds, bury
their journey's dead, as I
watched from shadow root, ready
for birth generations after . . .
(from "Inside Us the Dead")
I belong to Oceania or, at least,
I am rooted in a fertile portion of
it and it nourishes my spirit, helps
to define me, and feeds my imagin¬
ation. A detached, "objective" analysis
I will leave to the sociologist and all
the other 'ologists who have plagued
Oceania since she captivated the
imagination of the Papalagi (1) in his
quest for El Dorado, a Southern
Continent, and the Noble Savage In
a tropical Eden.
Objectivity is for such uncommitted
gods. My commitment won't allow
me to confine myself to so narrow
a vision. So vast, so fabulously
varied a scatter of islands, nations,
cultures, mythologies and myths, so
dazzling a creature, Oceania deserves
more than an attempt at mundane fact.
(1) Papalagi: a Samoan word meaning
outsiders or non-Oceanians, and often applied
to Westerners.
4

J ééHP
ÎË^É^U ^" i
1 7
*%P¿-? 1 :^-^l
.
'-'au
1 Mil uUfl ^ 1 1 S * 1 a » ^l A v>> 'i»V
Only the» imagination In free flight can
hope if not to contain her to grasp
some of her shape, plumage, and pain.
I will not pretend that I know her in
all her manifestations. No one not
even our gods ever did; no one
does (Unesco experts and consultants
included); no one ever will because
whenever we think we have captured
her she has already assumed new
guises the love affair is endless,
even her vital statistics, as it were,
will change endlessly. In the final
Instance, our countries, cultures,
nations, planets are what we imagine
them to be.
In our various groping ways, we are
all In search of that haven, that Hawalki
(mythical homeland of the Maori
people) where our hearts will find
meaning. Most of us never find it,
or, at the moment of finding it, fail,
to recognize it. At this stage in my
life I have found it in Oceania: it is
a return to where I was born, or, put
another way, it is a search for where
I was born:
One day I will reach the source again.
There at my beginnings
another peace
will welcome me.
(from "The River Flows Back"
by Kumalau Tawall,
Manus, Papua New Guinea)
Our dead are woven into our souls
like the hypnotic music of bone flutes;
we can never escape them. If we let
them they can help illuminate us to
ourselves and to one another. They
can be the source of new-found pride,
self respect, and wisdom. Conversely
they can be the aitu (evil spirit or ghost)
that will continue to destroy us by
blinding us to the beauty we are so
capable of becoming as individuals,
cultures, nations.
We must try to exorcise these aitu
both old and modern. If we can't do
so, then at least we can try and
recognize them for what they are, admit
to their fearful existence and, by doing
so, learn to control and live honestly
with them. We are all familiar with'
such aitu. For me, the most evil is r
5

Photo © Luc Joubert, Paris
Carved figures with long faces, narrow
noses, barely indicated eyes and prominent
chins, like this one, are a distinctive feature
of wood sculpture in the Lake Sentani
region of western New Guinea. Related to
male initiation rites, the statues are placed
inside and outside the men's clubhouses
in this region. Lake Sentani artists decorate
a wide variety of objects, from drums and
hooks to household utensils, with highly
stylized plant and animal motifs.
k racism: the. symbol of all repression.
Chill you're a bastard ...
You have trampled the whole world
[over
Here your boot is on our necks, your
[spear
Into our intestines
Your history and your size make me
[cry violently
for air to breathe.
(from "The Reluctant Flame"
by John Kasaipwalova,
Trobriand Islands, Papua New Guinea)
The chill continues. to wound, trans¬
form, humiliate us and our cultures.
Any real understanding of ourselves
and our existing cultures calls for an
attempt to understand colonialism and
what it did and is still doing to us.
This understanding would better equip
us to control or exorcise it so that, in
the words of the Maori poet Hone
Tuwhare, "we can dream good dreams
again", heal the wounds it inflicted on
us, and with the healing will j return
pride in ourselves an ingredient so
vital to creative nation-building.
Pride, self-respect, self-reliance will
help us cope so much more creatively
with what is passing or to come.
Without this healing most of our
countries will remain permanent wel-
Right, housebuilding skills and
artistic talent harmonize in the
construction and decoration of
this "tambaran", or men's
clubhouse, from the Sepik River
region of northern New Guinea.
House seen here was displayed at
a Papua New Guinea arts festival
held at Port Moresby. Painted
bark panels on façade depict
ancestor heads and other motifs
(see detail of "tambaran" facade
on our back cover). Leaning
against the house are giant yams
decorated in the Sepik manner.
Far right, a village craftsman in
New Guinea thatches a house
with tough grass cut from the
nearby mountain slopes. In
contrast to such traditional-style
homes, a rash of "modern" box¬
like houses is beginning to erupt
across Oceania.

fare cases not only economically but
culturally. (And cultural dependency
is even more soul-destroying than
economic dependency.)
Without it we will continue to
be exploited by vampires of all
colours, creeds, fangs. (Our home¬
grown species are often more ra¬
pacious.) Without it the tragic mim¬
icry, abasement, and humiliation will
continue, and we will remain the often
grotesque colonial caricatures we were
transformed into by the chill.
As much as possible, we, mini in
size though our countries are, must
try and assume control of our destinies,
both in utterance and in fact. To get
this control we must train our own
people as quickly as possible in all
fields of national development. Our
economic and cultural dependency
will be lessened according to the rate
at which we can produce trained
manpower. In this, we are failing
badly.
"In a flash he saw in front of his
eyes all the wasted years of carrying
the white man's cargo."
(from "The Crocodile" by Vincent Eri,
Papua, Papua New Guinea)
If it has been a waste largely, where
do we go from here?
My body is tired
My head aches
I weep for our people
Where are we going mother.
(from "Motherland"
by Mildred Sope, New Hebrides)
Again, we must rediscover and
reaffirm our faith in the vitality of our
past, our cultures, our dead, so that
we may develop our own unique eyes,
voices, muscles, and imagination.
In considering the role of traditional
cultures in promoting cultural identity
in the Oceanic Islands the following
questions emerge: '
Is there such a creature as "tra¬
ditional culture"?
If there is, what period in the growth
of a culture is to be called "tra¬
ditional"?
If "traditional cultures" do exist in
Oceania, to what extent are they
colonial creations?
What is authentic culture?
Is the differentiation we usually
make between the culture(s) of our
urban areas (meaning "foreign") and
those of our rural areas (meaning "tra¬
ditional") a valid one?
Are not the life-styles of our towns
simply developments of our traditional
life-styles, or merely sub-cultures,
within our. national cultures? Why is
it that many of us condemn urban life¬
styles (sub-cultures) as being "foreign"
and therefore "evil" forces contami¬
nating and corrupting the "purity of
our true cultures" (whatever this
means)?
Why is it that the most vocal
exponents of "preserving our true
cultures" live in our towns and pursue
life-styles which, in their own termin¬
ology, are "alien and impure"?
' Are some of us advocating the
"preservation of our cultures" not for
ourselves but for our brothers, the
rural masses, and by doing this
ensuring the maintenance of a status
quo in which we enjoy privileged
positions?
Should there be ONE sanctified
official, sacred interpretation of one's
culture? And who should do this
interpreting?
These questions (and others which
they imply) have to be answered
satisfactorily before any realistic
policies concerning cultural conserv¬
ation in Oceania can be formulated.
Like a tree a culture is forever
growing new branches, foliage, and .
roots. Our cultures, contrary to the r

^simplistic interpretation of our roman¬
tics, were changing even in pre-
papalagi times through inter-island
contact and the endeavours of excep¬
tional individuals and groups who
manipulated politics, religion, and
other people. Contrary to the utter¬
ances of our elite groups, our pre-
papalagi cultures were not perfect or
beyond reproach. No culture Is
perfect or sacred even today.
Individual dissent is essential to the
healthy survival, development, and
sanity of any nation without it our
cultures will drown in self-love. No
culture is ever static nor can it be
preserved (a favourite word with our
colonizers and romantic elite brethren)
like a stuffed gorilla in a museum.
There is no state of cultural purity
(or perfect state of cultural "good¬
ness") from which there is decline;
usage determines authenticity. There
was no Fall, no sun-tanned Noble
Savages existing in South Sea para¬
dises, no Golden Age, except in
Hollywood films, In the insanely
romantic literature and art by out¬
siders about the Pacific, in the breath¬
less sermons of our self-styled
romantic revolutionaries.
I do not advocate a return to an
imaginary pre-papalagi Golden Age or
Utopian womb. Our quest should not
. be for a revival of our past cultures
but for the creation of new cultures
which are free of the taint of col¬
onialism and based firmly on our own
pasts. The quest should be for a new
Oceania.
Racism is institutionalized in all
cultures, and the desire to dominate
and exploit others is not the sole
prerogative of the papalagi. Even
today, despite the glib tributes paid
to a Pacific Way, there is much racial
discrimination between our many eth¬
nic groups, and much heartless
exploitation of one group by another.
Many of us are guilty whether we
are aware of it or not of perpetuating
the destructive colonial chill, and are
doing so In the avowed interest of
"preserving our racial and cultural
purity" (whatever that means).
To advocate that in order to be a
"true Samoan", for example, one must
be a "full-blooded Samoan" and
behave, think, dance, talk, dress and
believe in a certain prescribed way
(and that the prescribed way" has not
changed since time immemorial) Is
being racist, callously totalitarian, and
stupid. This is a prescription for
cultural stagnation, an invitation for
a culture to choke in its own body
odour, juices, and excreta.
Equally unacceptable are outsiders
(and these come in all disguises
including the mask of "adviser" or
8
"expert") who try to Impose on me
what they think my culture is and
how I should live it and go about
"preserving" it. The colonizers pre¬
scribed for us the roles of domestic
animal, amoral phallus, the lackey, the
comic and lazy and happy-go-lucky
fuzzy-haired boy, and the well-behaved
colonized. Some of our own people
are trying to do the same to us, to
turn us into servile creatures they can
exploit easily. We must not consent
to our own abasement.
There are no "true interpreters" or
"sacred guardians" of any culture.
We are all entitled to our truths,
insights, and intuitions into and in¬
terpretations of our cultures.
To varying degrees, we as indi¬
viduals all live in limbo within our
cultures: there are many aspects of
our ways of life we cannot subscribe
to or live, comfortably with. We all
conform to some extent, but the life-,
blood of any culture is the diverse
contributions of its varied sub-cultures.
Basically, all societies are multi¬
cultural. And Oceania is more so than
any other region on our sad planet.
Let me take just two facets of our
cultures education and architecture
and show how colonialism changed us.
Kidnapped
I was six when / Mama was careless J
She sent me to school J alone J five
days a week.
One day I was J kidnapped by a band J
of Western philosophers J armed with
glossy-pictured J textbooks and J regis¬
tered reputations / "Holder of B.A. J
and MA. degrees" J I was held In a
classroom J guarded by Churchill and
Garibaldi J pinned up on one wall /
and j Hitler and Mao dictating I from
the other / Guevara pointed a revol¬
ution I at my brains J from his "Guerilla
Warfare".
Each three-month term / they sent
threats to / my Mama and Papa.
Mama and Papa loved / their son and J
paid ransom fees / each time.
Each time J Mama and Papa grew J
poorer and poorer / and my kidnappers
grew / richer and richer / / grew whiter
and I whiter.
On my release / fifteen years after /
/ was handed I (among loud applause J
from fellow victims) J a piece of paper /
to decorate my walls / certifying my
release.
(by Ruperake Petaia,
Western Samoa)
This remarkable poem aptly de¬
scribes what can be called the "white-
fication" of the colonized by a colonial
education system. What the poem
does not mention is that this system
was enthusiastically welcomed by
A SIDEWAYS LOOK
IN MAORI ART
One of the most striking art objects of
the New Zealand Maoris is the hei-tiki.
a carved jade or greenstone pendant
worn by Maori women, depicting the
human figure with distorted head, body
and limbs. Jade hei-tiki below, with
sideways-tilted head, is 17 cm. high.
Maori artists also carve elaborate wood
statues of human figures, lizards and
other forms to decorate their houses.
Right, Maori sculptor Papariki Harrison
demonstrates his woodcarving skill at
Unesco headquarters, in Paris, during
a presentation of Unesco's travelling
exhibition on the Art of Oceania (See
"Unesco Courier", June 1975). Far right,
hei-tiki style sculpture carved by
Papariki Harrison.
Photo © Roger Guillemot,
Connaissance des Arts, Paris
many of us, and is still being continued
even in our independent nations a
tragic ironyl
The basic function of education in
all cultures is to promote conformity
and obedience and respect, to fit
children into roles society has deter¬
mined for them. In practice it has
always been an instrument for dom¬
esticating human kind. The typical
formal educational process is like a
lobotomy operation or a relentless
life-long dosage of tranquillizers.
The formal education systems
(whether British, New Zealand, Aus-"
tralian, American or French) that were
established by the colonizers in our
islands all had one main feature in
common: they were based on the
arrogantly mistaken racist assumption
that the cultures of the colonizers
were superior (and preferable) to ours.
Education was therefore devoted to
"civilizing" us, to cutting us away

from the roots of our cultures, from
what the colonizers viewed as dark¬
ness, superstition, barbarism, and
savagery. The production of bourgeois
papalagi seemed the main objective;
the process was one of castration.
The missionaries, irrespective of
whatever colonial nationality or brand
of Christianity they belonged to,
intended the same conversion.
Needless to say, the most vital
strand in any nation-building is edu¬
cation. But our colonial education
systems were not programmed to
educate us for development but to
produce minor and inexpensive cogs,
such as clerks, glorified office boys,
officials and a few professionals, for
the colonial administrative machine.
It was not in the colonial interests
to encourage industries in our
countries: it was more profitable for
them that we remained exporters of
cheap raw materials and buyers of
their expensive manufactured goods.
So the education was narrowly
"academic" and benefited mainly our
traditional elite groups who saw great
profit in serving our colonial masters
who, in turn, propped them up because
it was cheaper to use them to run our
countries. The elitist and "academic"
nature of this education was not
conducive to training us to survive in
our own cultures.
Colonial education helped reduce
many of us into a state of passivity,
undermined our confidence and self-
respect, and made many of us ashamed
of our cultures, transformed many of
us into Uncle Toms and what the
Trinidadian writer V.S. Naipaul has
called "mimic men", inducing in us the
feeling that only the foreign is right
or proper or worthwhile.
Let us see how this is evident in
architecture.
A frightening type of papalagi
architecture is invading Oceania: the
super-stainless, super-plastic, super-
hygienic, super-soulless structure very
similar to modern hospitals. Its most
nightmarish form is the new-type
tourist hotel a multi-storied edifice of
concrete, steel, chromium, and air-
conditioning.
This species of architecture ¡s an
embodiment of those bourgeois values
I find unhealthy and soul-destroying:
the cultivation and worship of medioc¬
rity, a quest for a meaningless and
precarious security based on material
possessions, a deep-rooted fear of
dirt and all things rich in our cultures,
a fear of death revealed in an almost
paranoic quest for super-hygienic
cleanliness and godliness, a relentless
attempt to level out all individual
differences in people and mould them
into one faceless mass, a drive to
preserve the status quo at all costs.
These values reveal themselves in
the new tourist hotels constructed of
dead materials which echo the spiri- .
tual, creative and emotional emptiness r

1 Photo John Hooper © Camera Press, London
, in modern man. The drive is for
deodorized, sanitized comfort, the very
quicksand in which many of us are
now drowning, willingly.
What frightens me is the easy,
unquestioning acceptance by our
countries of all this without considering
their adverse effects on our psyche.
In my brief lifetime, I have observed
many of our countries imitating what
we consider to be "papalagi culture"
(even though most of us will swear
vehemently that we are notl). It is
just one of the tragic effects of
colonialismthe aping of colonial
ways, life-styles, attitudes and values.
In architecture this has led and is
leading to the construction of dog-
kennel-shaped papalagi houses (mainly
as status symbols, as props to one's
lack of self-confidence). The change
from traditional dwelling to box-shaped
monstrosity is gathering momentum:
the mushrooming of this bewildering
soulless desert of shacks and boxes
is erupting across Oceania because
most of our leaders and style-setters,
as soon as they gain power and
wealth, construct opulent dog-kennels
as well.
Our governments' quest for the
tourist hotel is not helping matters
either; there is a failure to understand
what such a quest is bringing. It may
be bringing money through the middle-
aged retired tourist, who travels from
country to country through a variety
of climates, within his cocoon of
air-conditioned America-Europe-New
Zealand-Australia-Molochland. But it
is also helping to bring those bourgeois
values, attitudes and life-styles which
are compellingly attractive illnesses
that kill slowly, comfortably, turning us
away from the richness of our cultures.
I think I know what such a death is
like: for the past few years I have
watched myself (and some of the
people I admire) dying that death.
In periods of unavoidable lucidity,
I have often visualized the ultimate
development of such an architecture
air-conditioned coffins lodged in air-
conditioned mausoleums.
The population of our region is only
just over five million but we possess
a cultural diversity as varied as any
other in the world. There is also a
multiplicity of social, economic, and
political systems all undergoing diffe¬
rent stages of decolonization,* ranging
from politically independent nations
(Western Samoa, Fiji, Papua New
Guinea, Tonga, Nauru) through self-
governing ones (the Solomons, the
Gilberts, Tuvalu) and colonies (mainly
MUD MEN OF NEW GUINEA. With
their dried-mud masks and bodies
smeared with mud, these tribesmen
from Asaro River, New Guinea (above)
offer a fearsome spectacle. They
traditionally adopted this guise to
terrify their enemies. Today this
custom survives largely in the
colourful dance they enact here at a
gathering at Mount Hagen (Central
New Guinea) held every two years.
During this show, thousands of
brilliantly-decorated tribesmen from
all over New Guinea's Central
Highlands take part in displays of
dancing and spear charging. A time-
honoured feature of New Guinea life
is recalled by Port Moresby's Hiri
Festival (right) which commemorates
the great annual trading voyages
made by the Motu people along the
west Papuan coast. Traditional
singing and dancing and canoe races
take place at the festival.
10

French and American) to our oppressed
aboriginal brothers in Australia. This
cultural, political, social and economic
diversity must be taken into account
in any overall programme of cultural
conservation.
If as yet we may not be the most
artistically creative region in our
spaceship, we possess the potential to
become the most artistically creative.
There are more than 1,200 indigenous
languages plus English, French, Hindi,
Spanish, and various forms of pidgin
to catch and interpret the Void with,
reinterpret our past with, create new
sociological visions of Oceania with,
compose songs and poems and plays
and other oral and written literature
with.
We also possess numerous other
forms of artistic expression: hundreds
of dance styles; wood and stone
sculpture and carvings; artifacts as
various as our cultures; pottery,
painting and tattooing. We have a
fabulous treasure house of traditional
motifs, themes, styles, material which
we can use in contemporary forms to
express our uniqueness, identity, pain,
joy, and our own visions of Oceania
and the earth.
Self-expression is a prerequisite of
self-respect.
Out of this artistic diversity has
come and will continue to come our
most worthwhile contribution to human
kind. So this diversity must be
maintained and encouraged to flourish.
Across the political barriers dividing
our countries an intense artistic
activity is starting to weave firm links
between us.
This cultural awakening, inspired
and fostered and led by our own
people, will not stop at the artificial
frontiers drawn by the colonial powers.
And for me, this awakening is the first
real sign that we are breaking from the
colonial chill and starting to find our
own beings.
As Marjorie Crocombe of the Cook
Islands and editor of Mana Magazine
has written: "Denigrated, inhibited
and withdrawn during the colonial era,
the Pacific people are again beginning
to take confidence and express them¬
selves in traditional forms of ex¬
pression that remain part of a valued
heritage, as well as in new forms and
styles reflecting the changes within
the continuity of the unique world of
our island cultures . . . The canoe is
afloat... the volume and quality in¬
crease all the time."
One of the recent highlights of this
cultural awakening was the 1972 South
Photo Geoffrey Heard © Camera Press, London
Pacific Festival of the Arts during
which we came together in Fiji to
perform our expressive arts. Much of
it was traditional, but new voices and
new forms, especially in literature,
were emerging.
Up to a few years ago nearly all the
literature about Oceania was written
by papalagi and other outsiders. Our
islands were and still are a goldmine
for romantic novelists and film-makers,
bar-room journalists and semi-lit¬
erate tourists, sociologists and Ph. D.
students, remittance men and sailing
evangelists, UN "experts" and colonial
administrators and their well-groomed
spouses.
Much of this literature ranges from
the hilariously romantic through the
pseudo-scholarly to the infuriatingly
racist; from the "noble savage" literary
school through Margaret Mead and all
her comings of age, Somerset Mau¬
gham's puritan missionaries, drunks,
and saintly whores and James Miche-
ner's rascals and golden people, to
the stereotyped childlike pagan who
needs to be steered to the light.
The Oceania found in this literature
is largely papalagi fictions, more
revealing of papalagi fantasies and
hang-ups, dreams and nightmares,
prejudices and ways of viewing our
CONTINUED PAGE 32
H

THE ANGRY YOUNG MEN OF OCEANIA Continued from page 11
crippled cosmos, than of our actual
islands. I am not saying we should
reject such a literature, or that papalagi
should not write about us, and vice
versa. But the imagination must
explore with love, honesty, wisdom
and compassion.
Writers must write with aroha, aloha,
alofa, loloma (1), respecting the people
they are writing about, people who
may view the void differently and who,
like all other human beings, live
through the pores of their flesh and
mind and bone, who suffer, laugh, cry,
copulate, and die.
In the last few years what can be
called a South Pacific literature has
started to blossom. In New Zealand,
Alistair Campbell, of Cook Island
descent, is acknowledged as a major
poet; three Maori writers Hone
Tuwhare (poet), Witi Ihimaera (novel¬
ist), and Patricia Grace (short stories)
have become extremely well known.
In Australia, the aboriginal poets
Kathy Walker and Jack Davis continue
to plot the suffering of their people.
In Papua New Guinea, "The Crocodile"
by Vincent Eri the first Papuan novel
(1) Respectively Maori, Hawaiian, Samoan
and Fijian words each meaning love, com¬
passion, charity.
to be published has already become
a minor classic. Also in that country
poets such as John Kasaipwalova,
Kumalau Tawali, Alan Natachee, and
Apisai Enos, and playwrights like
Arthur Jawodlmbari are publishing
some powerful work.
Papua New Guinea has established
a very forward-looking Creative Arts
Centre, which is acting as a catalyst
in the expressive arts movement, a
travelling theatre, and an Institute of
Papua New Guinea Studies. Kovave
Magazine, put out by a group of Papua
New Guinea writers, is already a
respected literary journal.
Mana Magazine and Mana Publi¬
cations, established by the South
Pacific Creative Arts Society, have
been a major catalyst in stimulating
the growth of this new literature,
especially In countries outside Papua
New Guinea. Already numerous
young poets, prose writers and
playwrights have emerged. Some of
them, we hope, will develop into major
writers.
Our ties transcend barriers of
culture, race, petty nationalism, and
politics. Our writing is expressing a
revolt against the hypocritical and
exploitative aspects of our traditional,
commercial and religious hierarchies,
colonialism and neo-colonialism, and
the degrading values being imposed
from outside and by some elements
In our societies.
In the traditional visual arts there
has been a tremendous revival. That
revival Is also finding contemporary
expression in the work of Maori artists
such as Selwyn Muru, Ralph Hotere,
Para Matchltt and Buck Nin; in the
work of Alol Pilioko of the Wallis and
Futuna Islands, Akis and Kauage of
Papua New Guinea, Aleki Prescott of
Tonga, Sven Orquist of Western
Samoa, Kuai of the Solomons, and
many others.
The same is true in music and
dance. The National Dance Theatres
of Fiji and the Cook Islands are
already well known throughout the
world.
This artistic renaissance is enriching
our cultures further, relnforcinq our
identities, self-respect, and pride, and
taking us through a genuine de¬
colonization; it is also acting as a
unifying force In our region. In their
individual journeys Into the void, these
artists, through their work, are ex¬
plaining us to ourselves and creating
a new Oceania.
Albert Wendt
32
