ARSENIC
AND OLD PLATES
was there
a Copper Age
before the
Bronze Age?
This small copper bell (7 cm
across) dates from the second
millennium B.C. and was
discovered near Stavropol,
in the northern Caucasus (USSR)
It is covered with finely worked
decorations and the metal
contains 10 per cent of arsenic.
by Isa R. Selimkhanov
ISA R. SELIMKHANOV, distinguished
Soviet chemist, is head of the Laboratory
of Archaeological Technology of the Azer¬
baijan Academy of Sciences' Institute of
History. A specialist ¡n the history ol the
metals and metallurgy of the Ancient World,
he has published many books and studies
on research in these fields. Including the
dating of ancient metals.
Photo © APN, Moscow
Snaded areas on this map show zones of copper ores at the time of the earliest
copper metallurgy (7000 to 4000 B.C.). It now seems likely that metallurgy in bronze
(an alloy of copper and tin) was known to craftsmen thousands of miles away from
this region, at Ban Chiang, in Thailand, as early as the 4th millennium B.C.
ALL over the world, archaeolo¬
gists are continually discover¬
ing ancient artifacts made of
stone, volcanic glass, bone, wood,
minerals or metal. Metal objects are
particularly interesting because, al¬
though they may have been burled in
the earth for almost 5,000 years, they
are often found in remarkably good
condition.
I shall discuss only one of the ques¬
tions raised by ancient metals: whe¬
ther a Copper Age really existed be¬
fore the Bronze Age, as several
recent books claim.
The discovery of metal and metal
working were revolutionary in the his¬
tory of Man's development as he gra¬
dually changed over from the use of.
stone to the use of metal implements r
13

L whose superiority he prized. Metal
became a means of distinguishing
between the ages of history: Man's
development was divided Into the
Ages of Stone, Bronze and Iron.
Christian Jurgensen Thomsen, a
Dane, was thought to have devised
this "three-period system" in 1836,
although, in fact, the thinkers of anti¬
quity had already spoken of different
ages in the history of Man. As early
£ Lance head made of arsenical
< copper. Discovered near
® Stavropol, in the Caucasus,
o it dates from the second
£ millennium B.C.
as the 7th century B.C., the Greek
poet Hesiod wrote of five ages: gol¬
den, silver, bronze, "heroic" and iron.
Homer also mentioned bronze ¡n the:
Iliad. The Latin poet Lucretius, ¡n his
poem De rerum natura, written just
before the Christian era, and Yuan
Kang at almost the same time (the
Han Dynasty), had already divided
history into three stages: stone (or
bone), copper (or bronze) and iron. .
Yet no matter how Man's ancient
history was divided, none of the sys¬
tems makes a clear distinction be¬
tween the Bronze and Copper Ages,
due to these ancient writers' tendency
to call copper and bronze by the
same name. They thought that these
were the same metal because of their
similar appearance.
I want to stress that chemists, not
archaeologists, initiated the chemical
analysis of ancient metal objects,
which launched an active co-opera¬
tion between the two groups. The
German chemist, Martin Heinrich Kla-
proth, is generally considered the
pioneer of systematic analysis of an¬
cient metals, begun in the 18th cen¬
tury. Outstanding chemists such as
Jons Jakob Berzelius of Sweden, Karl
Fresenius and Justus Lieblg of Ger¬
many, and Marcelin Berthelot of
France continued the research.
The findings of these analyses
showed that the objects were made of
copper and not bronze. This was the
basis for the first theory in 1876 that
a Copper Age had existed, at least in
parts of Europe. From his later ana¬
lysis of Egyptian articles, Marcelin
Berthelot claimed that a Copper Age
had also existed in Egypt. Thus a
"four-period system" emerged for
much of the ancient world: Stone,
Copper, Bronze and Iron Ages.
Most books claim that tools at the
beginning of the Copper Age were
fashioned from native copper forged
cold. Yet a Soviet geochemist, Vladi¬
mir Ivanovich Vernadsky, had pre¬
viously expressed doubts about the
use of native copper by Man as the
first metal, except where there are
large deposits of native copper, as in
the area of Lake Superior (U.S.A.).
As a result of later laboratory exper¬
iments, the existence of a Copper
Age in most regions did not seem
plausible. By the 1930s, the old che¬
mical analyses of ancient metals
which had provided the basis for a
technological history of Man's use of
metal were largely invalid.
New physical and physico-chemical
methods have recently taken the
place of old methods, substantially
modifying earlier findings. Thus,
when I received a report in 1966 from
the American researcher and histo¬
rian, Cyril Stanley Smith, stating that
tests on the microstructure of ancient
copper Implements found near Lake
Superior revealed that they were not
fashioned from cold-forged native
copper, I was not surprised.
Emission spectrum analysis, used
not just on ancient metal objects but
also on the residue from smelting,
slag and moulds, brought about the
most important modifications. Spec¬
trum analysis of ancient metals was
first used in 1933 in Halle (Germany)
and a little later in Leningrad
(U.S.S.R.). However, quantitative
spectrum analysis of ancient metal is
the brainchild of the Baku Laboratory
of the History Institute of the Azerbai¬
jan academy of Sciences, where the
first significant results were obtained.
Metal objects found in the Trans-
Caucasus in monuments dating from
the third millennium B.C. had long
been attributed to the Copper Age.
While spectrum analysis confirmed
that these objects contained no tin, it
established the presence of large
amounts of arsenic.
Considerable admixtures of arsenic
were also found in objects discovered
in an ancient settlement on the Kultep
mound in the Nakhichevan Autono¬
mous Republic. Analysis of ¡terns
from various parts of the Northern
Caucasus and the Ukraine gave simi¬
lar results. The "copper" contained
up to 10 per cent arsenic in working
implements and 30 per cent or more
in ornaments. Further analysis of
casting residue, moulds and slag
showed that the arsenical copper had
been locally produced.
Still more ancient examples were
sought. During the on-going excava¬
tions . at the Kultep mound, seven
other metal items were discovered: an
arrowhead, an awl and various frag¬
ments dating from the fourth mllle-
nium B.C. Analysis showed that a
large proportion was made from arse¬
nical copper and that one also con¬
tained a considerable quantity of
nickel. Only a few were found to
contain ho arsenic.
A small knife and fragments from
the same period found in the ancient
settlement of Tekhuta, near Echmia¬
dzin in Armenia, are made exclusively
of arsenical copper. The use of ar¬
senical copper in the Trans-Caucasus
that long ago, meant that the Copper
Age in that region was hypothetical
and that Man's early use of metal
began simultaneously with arsenical
and unalloyed copper.
Later spectrum analysis carried out
on ancient metal objects from other
countries has shown that arsenical
copper was common from the Indus
Valley to the British Isles. It was
Axe head unearthed during
the ploughing of a field
near Stavropol. It is about
3,500 years old and its metal
contains a small amount
of arsenic.
14

found in various regions dating from
4,000 to 1,000 B.C.
How did ancient metal-founders
add arsenic to copper? Extremely
rare in nature, elementary arsenic was
not discovered until the 12th century
A.D. In 1954 we wrote that arsenical
copper was probably obtained by
smeltjng cuprous minerals together
with arsenical ones like realgar and
orpiment, large deposits of which are
found in the Trans-Caucasus.
¡, Why did metal workers of antiquity
choose to add to the copper arsenical
o
2
This medallion made of
arsenical copper with its
decorative motifs is
an elegant example of
the jeweller's art dating back
4,000 years. It was unearthed
from a grave near Stavropol.
rather than stannic [tin-bearing] mine¬
rals or lead or antimony-bearing
minerals which are very pleasing to
the eye? Man did not use stannic mi¬
nerals, which are uncommon in nature,
until much later. Lead was also used
from earliest times, in fact, but it was
alloyed with copper later and less
frequently since the smelting of lead
and copper alloys called for greater
skill and their mechanical properties
were inferior.
This was also true of copper and
antimony alloys. A fragment of an
antimony vase found in Tello in Lower
Mesopotamia and attributed to the
same chronological period as the
arsenical relics found in the Caucasus
confirms the use of metallic antimony
as early as the third millennium B.C.
Magical properties have been attri¬
buted to red minerals from earliest
times. Bright red realgar, commonly
encountered ¡n nature with gold-co¬
loured orpiment, could have caught
the ancient metal-founder's eye for
precisely that reason.
Six thousand years ago, the Egypt that preceded the pharaohs and the pyramids
already possessed a flourishing civilization. It has been named from Nagada,
a site 50 km. north of Luxor, where numerous artifacts dating from that period
have been unearthed. Among them are several unusual statuettes similar to
the one shown here carved in shale. Its high pointed bonnet recalls the white
crown that was later to become the traditional headdress of the kings of Upper
Egypt. Superimposed on photo are copper tools used by the people of Nagada.
From left to right: needle, awl, tweezers, fish hook, harpoon point, chisel.
Desert, near to Kerman
(Iran) a city known from
ancient times for its
deposits of copper ore,
the work dates from
the second half of the
third millennium B.C.
15

Egyptian copper seal
of the Pharaoh
Pepi I (Vlth dynasty,
2400-2200 B.C.).
The head of a
mouflon, or wild
sheep, with its large,
gracefully curving
horns, wrought in
bronze. It was found
in the necropolis of
Koban, near the
Caspian Sea, to the
east of the Caucasus.
Dating from the
1st millennium B.C.,
the ornament is made
of an alloy composed
of 90 per cent copper
and 10 per cent tin.
> Pieces of realgar obtained from a
settlement dating to the third mille¬
nnium B.C. on Geoy Tepe mound near
Lake Rezaiyyeh in Iran have confirm¬
ed the use of this substance in the
Middle East ¡n ancient times. Al¬
though the properties of arsenical
copper are as good as those of cop¬
per mixed with tin, production of ar¬
senical bronze declined gradually with
the appearance of the tin alloy, pro¬
bably due to the wholesale poisoning
of foundry workers by arsenical
secretions.
In such regions as Thailand and
Vietnam, arsenical copper never exist¬
ed. None of 80 fragments of metal
objects found ¡n excavations at the
Non Nok Tha mound in Thailand was
made of arsenical copper. At the
same time, it was established that the
most ancient tin bronze from Thailand
had a tin content of 20 per cent or
more and dates from 3,000 B.C. or
before (1).
English archaeologist James ¡Mel-
laart discovered even earlier metal ar¬
tifacts in a neolithic settlement dating
from about 6,500 B.C. at Çatal Hüyük
in Turkey consisting of copper and
lead beads and other objects. Study
of slag found ¡n one of the dwellings
confirmed that it had come from the
smelting of copper ore. The date
when metal smelting began was a
significant revelation.
More ancient metal was found in
Turkey at Çayonii Tepesi during the
digs conducted by American archaeo¬
logist Professor Robert Braidwood
and Turkish researcher and archaeo¬
logist Halet Cambel. They found
about 30 objects including small flat
disks, pins and awls in layers dating
from 7,200 B.C., which they claimed
were made from cold-forged native
copper. However, these artifacts, the
most ancient metal objects ever
found, had not been subjected to
spectrum analysis, making ¡t pre¬
mature to assert that they are made
from native copper.
Nevertheless, analytical research
makes it possible to affirm that in
many areas of the ancient world,
Man's development passed through
two major stages prior to the appea¬
rance of iron: the "arsenical" stage
of arsenical copper, provisionally
named arsenical bronze by scholars,
and the "tin" stage with the appea¬
rance of tin bronze, although arsenic
was still widely used due to the scar¬
city of tin.
Isa R. Selimkhanov
(1) An international symposium on re¬
search into bronze cultures in East and
South East Asia was organized by Unesco
and the Thailand National Commission for
Unesco, ¡n Bangkok (Thailand) in July
1976.
16
