Namibians
train
for
tomorrow
by Hage G. Geingob
THE Universal Declaration of Human
Rights clearly states that everyone
has the right to education and that
education shall be free. This right is denied
to almost the entire Namibian population.
In 1949, when the Nationalist Party came
to power in South Africa, the government
officially took over the administration of
African education in Namibia, which till
then had been in the hands of missionary
societies. Even though there is now a more
co-ordinated curriculum, the quality and
content of education have not improved. In
both South Africa and Namibia it could be
defined as an instrument to perpetuate
white domination.
The policies of the Nationalist Party are
the same in South Africa as in Namibia.
HAGE GOTTFRIED GEINGOB of Namibia has been
Director of the U.N. Institute for Namibia at Lusaka
(Zambia) since 1975. From 1964 to 1971, he was Chief
Representative of the South WestAfrica People's Orga¬
nization (SWAPO) to the United Nations and sub¬
sequently became a staff member of the Office of
the U.N. Commissioner for Namibia.
20

In Namibia race determines which school system white, coloured or African a child must enter. The
African system is further segregated, along ethnic lines: above (from left to right) a Herero, a Baster and a
Damara girl. In black schools the level of teaching is very low, and only a few dozen pupils graduate each
year from secondary school. To prepare for Namibian independence and to train administrators for the future
state, the U.N. in cooperation with Unesco has set up the U.N. Institute for Namibia in Lusaka (Zambia).
Apartheid permeates the entire educational
system in Namibia: there are three separate
school systems, one for whites, one for
coloureds and one for Africans. The Afri¬
can system is even further segregated
according to ethnic groupings: hence there
are Herero schools, Ovambo schools,
Nama/Damara schools, and so forth.
Education for whites is compulsory up to
age 16, whereas education for African chil¬
dren is not compulsory at any age. It is
extremely rare that an African child com:
pletes even primary schooling: 97.8 per
cent leave school before then.
In secondary education, the teachers
have a shockingly low level of education.
Over 60 per cent have only completed pri¬
mary school.
Students who complete their secondary
schooling and who wish to attend univer¬
sity must go to South Africa, for there are
no institutions of higher learning in
Namibia, for either Europeans or Africans.
It is very easy for whites to obtain passports
and financial assistance, whereas for Afri¬
cans it is very difficult.
Consequently, many Namibians have
been forced to go elsewhere in order to
avail themselves of U.N. scholarships and
other aid offered by various associations
and foundations. It was only after many
Namibians had left the country and had
obtained their degrees abroad that South
Africa allowed a few to enter universities in
South Africa. This decision was sparked by
a SWAPO (South West Africa People's
Organization) statement that, as a libera¬
tion movement, it had trained more people
in 14 years than South Africa had done in
over 60 years.
University education for Africans in
Namibia continues to be a dream. Two or
three African students who do very well
and whose political persuasion is deemed
acceptable to the régime may be selected
and given a scholarship to one of the three
Bantu Universities in South Africa. But they
are advised to study theology or teacher
training and not courses that contribute to
nation-building, such as engineering, medi¬
cine or the sciences.
In the final analysis, Bantu education is
designed to provide Africans with only that
measure of self-management which will
alleviate feelings of acute deprivation, thus
minimizing the possibility of African revolt
while perpetuating white economic and
political interests.
A new Namibia must therefore have a
new educational system. Both the U.N. Ins¬
titute for Namibia and SWAPO's Education
Centre at Nyango in Zambia are working
towards this end.
The Institute is to carry out research on
the educational system of Namibia to sug¬
gest solutions for the future Namibian
government. It is also training middle-level
administrative cadres in the field of
education.
Meanwhile, the SWAPO Educational Cen¬
tre has established its own primary and
secondary school systems and conducts
adult literacy courses. Its aim is to over¬
come an ingrained colonial mentality and to
restore to the Namibian his self-respect as a
citizen able to contribute to the new
Namibia which is about to be created... a
Namibia where all will be educated regard¬
less of colour, ethnic origin or sex.
Hage G. Geingob
21
