SEARCH OF
A LASTING PEACE
AT its 1 8th session in 1 974, the
Unesco General Conference
strongly emphasized that:
"Peace cannot consist solely in the
absence of armed conflict but implies
principally a process of progress, jus¬
tice and mutual respect among
peoples designed to secure the build¬
ing of an international society in
which everyone can find his true place
and enjoy his share of the world's
intellectual and material resources..."
What is at stake today, as far as the
issue of war and peace is concerned,
is the survival of the entire human
species, or at any rate of mankind as
the vehicle of civilization.
The relative calm that has settled
on relations between the industrial
nationsdue, at least in part, to the
balance of atomic terrorshould lull
no one into an undue optimism about
the future. Above all, it should not
delude us as to what is happening
here and now. War continues to
wreak havoc, the only difference
being that the theatre of war has
moved to the poor countries, where
the effects of the major international
antagonisms continue to make them¬
selves felt in various ways.
Without the guarantee of peace
and the reduction of tensions, the
solution to all the problems facing
mankind would be seriously jeopar¬
dized. Similarly, no international
settlement secured at the cost of the
freedom and dignity of peoples and
respect for individuals can claim to
be a truly peaceful one.
In view of the destitution and stag¬
nation which is the lot of a consid¬
erable proportion of mankind, and the
need to marshall all available resour¬
ces in order to satisfy the vital needs
of a rapidly expanding world popula¬
tion, the frantic arms race, which in
What the world
spends on arms
in one day would
finance all Unesco's
work for seven years.
itself constitutes a serious threat to
world peace, increasingly stands
condemned in the eyes of the world
as a scandalous squandering of ener¬
gies and resources.
True peace, in the sense intended
by Unesco"just, lasting and cons¬
tructive"should be seen not merely
as the absence of war but as an equi¬
table and democratic system of inter¬
national relations, entailing the es¬
tablishment and maintenance of an
order of friendly understanding and
co-operation based upon a commu¬
nity of interests among peoples,
rooted in respect for and the promo¬
tion of human rights.
Unesco is not competent to settle
specifically political disputes between
States. However, it has a mission
to work directly and explicitly for the
strengthening of peace. As its foun¬
ders stressed, Unesco is concerned
primarily with the minds of men, and
"it is in the minds of men that the
defences of peace must be cons¬
tructed".
Unesco must undertake the work of
educating young people and adults,
making an appeal to freedom, the
exercise of judgement and generosity,
so that the reign of fellowship may
prevail and the public at large may
acquire an informed understanding
of the conditions in which a just peace
founded on mutual respect may be
achieved.
For the price of a bomber...
nmWm HERE is an absolute prerequisite for any juster new order:
I peace and the removal of such obstacles as the arms race
B which undermine the very principles inseparable from the
establishment of such an order.
"Unesco is concerned with the arms race, and particularly with the
prospects for. at least gradual disarmament, from two points of view.
"In the first place, if only a part of the immense financial, human
and intellectual resources which are today being swallowed up
without any constructive result were allocated to more fitting ends,
this would be sufficient to remedy the most glaring forms of human
wretchedness and to make a decisive contribution to concerted and
resolute action by the international community for the benefit of
mankind.
"Secondly, it is important to dispel the artificial atmosphere of
distrust and mutual fear which is sustained by the arms race and to
remove the threats which the perpetuation of this situation leaves
hanging over world peace.
"Decisions in this matter depend in the last resort on governments
themselves. It is to them that I now turn, earnestly appealing to
them not merely to redouble their efforts to achieve agreed disarma¬
ment, but also to set aside part of the resources now being used for
the accumulation of weapons of destruction, for programmes which
serve the cause of mankind in Unesco's fields of competence.
"I will go even further and say that to make available to Unesco
itself the amount of money represented, for example, by the cost of a
modern bomber or any other expensive piece of military equipment,
would be on the part of the Member States taking such a step, both
a symbolic gesture of great importance and a direct contribution to
the cause of international co-operation in education, science, culture
and communication."
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
Reply to the general policy debate, Unesco
General Conference, Nairobi, November 1976
16

Cost of a new prototype
bomber with
full equipment ZZZ
i **** n
'^ -;<
*
One year's
salary for
250,000
teachers
man
Brfwa
¡aifs
¡H
30 science
faculties
each with
1,000 students
75 fully
equipped
1 00-bed
hospitals
r. In November 1964, when the Unesco Courier published
similar pictures and comparisons, world arms expenditure
~ amounted to S 120,000 million per year. Thirteen years
S later, this figure has risen to almost S 300,000 million,
£ but the comparisons are still valid.
Unesco has identified three mu¬
tually complementary objectives with
respect to the strengthening of peace:
The promotion of peace research,
with particular reference to viola¬
tions of peace, their causes and ways
and means of eliminating them, to¬
gether with steps to maintain and
strengthen just, lasting and construc¬
tive peace between groups, between
societies, and throughout the world.
O Promotion of the study of inter¬
national law and its role, as well as
that of international organizations, in
the creation of a peaceful world order.
Q The development of information
and of school and out-of-school
teaching programmes
promote peace and
understanding.
designed to
international
Unesco's programme as a whole,
beyond these three specific goals, is,
implicitly yet pervasively, a contribu¬
tion to the building of peace. In
helping to strengthen peace, educa¬
tion and information will also contri¬
bute to the establishment of a new
international economic and social
order. m
From Unesco's Medium-Term Plan (1977-
1982), Ch. II : Reinforcement ofPeace
17
