If more and more regions
are exposed to the danger
of desertification, one of
the major causes can be
traced to deforestation;
and one of the principal
causes of deforestation is
the need for firewood. In
Latin America, for
example, the lack of wood
and charcoal constitutes a
serious problem in
many parts of the Andes,
in Central America and
the Caribbean. The
shortage is so acute that
villagers are obliged to
search ever further afield
to satisfy their needs.



THE POOR MAN'S
ENERGY CRISIS
Firewood, the only fuel available
to over a billion people,
is becoming alarmingly scarce
by Erik P. Eckholm
ERIK P. ECKHOLM, specialist on environment problems at the "WorldWatch Institute" in
Washington, D.C, is the author of Losing Ground (published by W. W. Norton & Co. inc..
New York, 1976) as well as numerous articles on desertification. His research has been fi¬
nanced by the United Nations Environment Programme.
FOR more than a third of the world's
people, the energy crisis means a
daily scramble to find the wood
they need to cook dinner. Their search
for wood, once a simple chore and now,
as forests recede, a day's labour in some
places, has been strangely neglected by
governments, economists and the press.
At least half of all the timber cut in
the world still fulfills its original role for
manas fuel for cooking and, in colder
mountain regions, a source of heat.
Nine-tenths of the people in most poor
countries today depend on firewood as
their chief fuel, and all too often, the
growth in human population is outpacing
the growth of new trees.
The resulting firewood scarcity is prob¬
ably most acute today in the densely
populated Indian subcontinent, and in the
semi-arid stretches of central Africa fring¬
ing the Sahara Desert, though it plagues '
many other regions as well. In Latin
America, for example, the scarcity of
wood and charcoal is a problem through¬
out most of the Andean region, Central l
America, and the Caribbean. f
29

As firewood prices rise, so does the
economic burden on the urban poor. One
typical morning on the outskirts of Kat¬
mandu, Nepal's capital city, I watched a
steady flow of people men and women,
children and the very oldtrudge into the
city with heavy, neatly chopped and
stacked loads of wood on their backs.
I asked my taxi driver how much their
loads, for which they had walked several
hours into the surrounding hills, would sell
for. "Oh wood, a very expensive item!"
he exclaimed without hesitation. Wood
prices are a primary topic of conversation
in Katmandu these days. "That load
cost 20 rupees now. Two years ago it
sold for six or seven rupees." Firewood
prices have risen even faster than kero¬
sene prices.
Firewood and charcoal prices are climb¬
ing throughout most of Asia, Africa, and
Latin America. In Niamey, Niger, deep in
the drought-plagued Sahel in West Africa,
the average manual labourer's family is
now spending nearly one-fourth of its
income on firewood. In Ouagadougou,
Upper Volta, the portion approaches 30
per cent.
Those who can't pay so much may hike
out into the surrounding countryside to
forage if enough trees are within a rea¬
sonable walking distance. Otherwise,
they may scrounge about for twigs, gar¬
bage or anything that can be burned.
When I visited the Chief Conservator of
Forests in Pakistan's North West Frontier
Province, officed in the town of Pesha¬
war, he spoke in a somewhat resigned
tone of stopping his car the previous day
to prevent a woman from pulling bark off
a tree. "I told her that peeling the bark
off a tree is just like peeling the skin off a
man", he said.
Of course the woman stopped, intimi¬
dated by what may be the most personal
encounter with such a senior civil servant
she will have in her lifetime, but she
doubtless resumed her practice shortly,
for what else, as the Chief Conservator
himself asked, was she to do?
It is not in cities but in rural villages that
most people in the affected countries live,
and where most firewood is burned. The
rural, landless poor in parts of India and
Pakistan now face a new squeeze on their
meagre incomes.
In the past they have generally been
able to gather wood for free among the
trees scattered through farmlands, but as
wood prices in the towns rise, firewood is
being commercialized, and landlords nat¬
urally see an advantage in carting available
timber into the nearest town for sale
rather than giving it to the nearby
labourers.
With the farmland trees and the scrub¬
by woodlands of unfarmed areas depleted
by these pressures, both the needy and
the ever present entrepreneurs are forced
to poach for fuel wood in the legally pro¬
tected, ecologically and economically
essential national forest reserves.
The gravity of the poaching problem in
India has been reflected in the formation
of special mobile guard squads and mobile
courts to try captured offenders, but law
enforcement measures have little effec¬
tiveness in. such an untenable situation.
Trees are becoming scarce in the most
unlikely places. Nepalese foresters told me
that in some of the most remote villages
in the world, deep in the once heavily
forested foothills of Nepal, journeying out
to gather firewood and fodder is now an
entire day's task. Just one generation ago
the same expedition required no more
than an hour or two.
The firewood crisis has not provoked
much world attention. Fuel wood scar¬
city, unlike oil scarcity, is always localized
in its apparent dimensions.
Unfortunately, however, the conse¬
quences of firewood scarcity are seldom
limited to the economic burden placed on
the poor of a particular locality. The
accelerating' destruction of forests through¬
out Africa, Asia, and Latin America,
caused in part by fuel gathering, lies at
the heart of what will likely be the most
profound ecological challenge of the late
20th centurythe undermining of the
land's productivity through soil erosion,
increasingly severe flooding, creeping
deserts and declining soil fertility.
Oversized herds of cattle, goats and
sheep are the chief destroyer of grass¬
lands, but firewood gathering is the prin¬
cipal exterminator of trees in many regions.
Firewood is a scarce and expensive item
throughout the vast semi-arid zones of
Africa, Asia, and Latin America, but citi¬
zens in towns like Niamey are paying a
much higher price than they realize for
their cooking fuel.
The caravans that bring in this precious
resource are contributing to the south¬
ward encroachment of the Sahara itself
and, more important, to the creation of
desert-like conditions in a wide band
below the desert's edge. Virtually all trees
within 40 miles of Ouagadougou have been
consumed as fuel by the city's inhab¬
itants, and the circle of land "strip-
mined" for firewoodwithout reclamation
continually expanding.
In the Indian subcontinent, the most
pernicious single result of firewood scar¬
city is probably not the destruction of tree
cover itself, but the alternative burning
cow dungto which a good share of the
people in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh
have been forced. Between 300 and 400
million tons of dung is annually burned for
fuel in India alone, robbing farmland of
badly needed nutrients and organic matter.
The plant nutrients wasted annually in
this fashion in India equal more than a
third of the country's chemical fertilizer
use. Dung is also used for cooking rather
than fertilizer in the Sahelian zone of
Africa, Ethiopia, Iraq, and the nearly tree¬
less Andean valleys and slopes of Bolivia
and Peru.
Even more important than the loss of
agricultural nutrients is the incalculable
damage done to soil quality through the
failure to return manures to the fields.
Organic matter' preserves soil structure
and fertility, reduces erosion by wind or
water, and helps the soil withstand
droughts.
Progressive deforestation on steep
Himalayan slopes is bringing with it a
special set of problems. Nepal is best
known to outsiders as the home of Mount
Everest. Perhaps the chief distinction of
this land, however, is the world's most
acute national soil erosion problem.
Ground-holding trees are disappearing
fast as population growth forces farmers
onto slopes too steep for sustained farm¬
ing even with astonishingly elaborate
terracing, and as villagers roam far and
wide to collect fuel and animal fodder.
And once procuring wood takes too long
to be worth the trouble, some farmers
start to use cow dung, which was formerly
applied with great care to the fields, as
cooking fuel. As this departure from tra¬
dition spreads, the fertility of the hills, al¬
ready declining due to soil erosion, will
fall sharply.
30

The Indian subcontinent is one of
the regions where the lack of
firewood is endangering the
environment. In Nepal, for example,
the shortage is so acute that the
price of firewood has tripled in the
last two years. At left, two
Nepalese have just spent a day
finding a load of precious wood and
are now making their way horns.
This same cluster of phenomena threat¬
ens the future habitability of the entire
stretch of Himalayan foothills, from
Afghanistan through northern Pakistan,
India, and Nepal to Burma.
The negative consequences by no means
stop at the base of the hills. When soil
washes away, it must relocate some¬
where, and the rising load of silt carried
by Asia's rivers is choking up expensive
reservoirs and irrigation works.
Also threatening the Indian subconti¬
nent's food production prospectsand
hence the world's, for nearly one in every
five human beings lives in the subconti¬
nent a rise in the frequency and se¬
verity of flooding in Pakistan, India, and
possibly Bangladesh, the result of denud¬
ed watersheds off which rainfall rushes
rather than seeps downward, and of the
excessive load of sediment from upstream
that builds up river beds, reducing their
capacity to channel water.
Firewood scarcity, then, is intimately
linked to the food problem facing many
countries in two ways. Deforestation and
the diversion of manures to use as fuel are
sabotaging the land's ability to produce
food.
The firewood crisis is in some ways
more, and in others less, intractable than
the energy crisis of the industrialized world.
The poor, like the rich, are faced with the
necessity of energy conservation. Millions
of families cook over wood or charcoal
stoves that are extremely inefficient in the
use of heat; many cook over open fires.
The dissemination of cheap, simple wood-
stoves that waste less heat could substan¬
tially reduce per capita firewood con¬
sumption.
Even if more efficient stoves are adopt¬
ed, however, future firewood needs in
developing countries will, in the absence
of alternative energy sources, be heavily
influenced by population growth. Fire¬
wood scarcity will undoubtedly influence
the urgency with which governments
address the population problem in the
years ahead.
The demand for basic resources like
firewood will still push many countries to
their limits. Fortunately trees, unlike oil,
are a renewable resource when properly
managed. The logical immediate response
to the firewood shortage is to plant more
trees in plantations, on farms, along
roads, in shelter belts, and on unused
land throughout the rural areas of the
poor countries. Often fast growing tree
varieties are available that can be culled
for firewood inside of a decade.
The concept is simple, but its imple¬
mentation is not. Governments in nearly
all the wood-short countries have had tree
planting programmes for some time, but
several problems have plagued these pro¬
grammes from the beginning.
One is the sheer magnitude of the need
for wood, and the scale of the growth in
demand. Population growth has swallow¬
ed the moderate tree-planting efforts of
several countries almost without any no¬
ticeable impact.
The problem of scale is closely linked
to a second major problem: the perennial
question of political priorities and decision¬
making time-frames. It is hard for any
politician to concentrate funds and atten¬
tion on a problem so diffuse and seemingly
long-term in nature.
Even when the political will is there and
the funds are allocated, implementing a
large-scale reforestation campaign is a
surprisingly complex and difficult process.
Planting millions of trees and successfully
nurturing them to maturity is not a tech¬
nical, clearly boundaried task like building
a dam or a nuclear power plant.
Tree planting projects almost always
become deeply enmeshed in the political,
cultural and administrative tangles of a
rural locality; they touch upon, and are
influenced by, the daily living habits of
many people, and they frequently end in
failure.
Most of the regions with too few trees
also have too many cattle, sheep and
goats. Marauding livestock are prime
destroyers of tree planting projects
throughout the less developed world.
Whatever the success of tree planting
projects, the wider substitution of alterna¬
tive energy sources would contribute
greatly to solving the firewood problem.
Even in the poor countries, the propor¬
tion of wood users is falling gradually, but
the hopes of foresters and ecologists for
a rapid reduction of pressures on retreat¬
ing woodlands through a faster shift to
kerosene usually the most feasible wood
substitute withered overnight in Decem¬
ber 1973, when OPEC (Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries) announced
its new oil prices.
Fossil fuels are not the only alternate
energy source being contemplated. Indian
scientists have experimented for decades
with an ideal-sounding device that breaks
down manures and other organic waste
into methane gas for cooking and a rich
compost for the farm. Tens of thousands
of these bio-gas plants, as they are called,
are now being used in India, and many
more than that are being used in China
and elsewhere.
But a substantial reduction in cost and
further technological simplification are
needed. Still, relatively simple, small-scale
devices like these will likely be the fuel
source of the future in the poor countries.
The firewood crisis, like many other
resource problems, is forcing governments
and analysts back to the basics of man's
relationship to the landback to concerns
lost sight of in an age of macro-economic
models and technological optimism.
The attitude of people toward trees is
being brought into sharp focus. In his
essay "Buddhist Economics", E. F. Schu¬
macher praises the practical as well as
esoteric wisdom in the Buddha's teaching
that his followers should plant and nurse a
tree every few years.
Unfortunately, this ethical heritage has
been largely lost, even in the predomi¬
nantly Buddhist societies of Southeast
Asia. In fact, most societies today lack an
ethic of environmental cooperation, an
ethic not of conservation for its own sake,
but of human survival amid ecological
systems heading toward collapse.
This will have to change, and fast. More
than anything else, the inexorable growing
demand for firewood calls for tree planting
efforts on a scale more massive than any
most bureaucrats have ever even contem¬
plated, much less planned for. The suici¬
dal deforestation of Africa, Asia, and Latin
America must somehow be slowed and
reversed.
Deteriorating ecological systems have a
logic of their own; the damage often
builds quietly and unseen for many years,
until one day the system collapses with
lethal vengeance. Ask anyone who lived
in Oklahoma in 1934, or Chad in 1975.
Erik P. Eckholm
31
