BROTHER¬
HOODS
OF THE
BAZAARS
the guild system
united apprentices,
artisans and
master-craftsmen in
the service
of a common ideal
12

Photo J.-N. Reichel © Top-Réalités, Paris.
by Yusuf Ibish
IN Islamic cities, everyone engaged in
economic production, distribution and
services belonged to the guild system.
With the exception of high government
officials, army officers and theologians,
the population was organized into guilds
according to their crafts and trades.
Not only artisans and merchants belong¬
ed to guilds, but also people such as
singers, brokers, auctioneers, musicians,
story-tellers, donkey drivers and boatmen.
The guild system embraced owners of
starch factories, tanneries, dye-works,
sulphur workshops and similar activities
which were located, not in the bazaars but
on the edge of the city, "because of the
bad smell".
There is ample evidence that other guilds
existed for those who had no shops but
worked outdoors or at home, such as
YUSUF IBISH is professor of political sciences at the ;
American University of Beirut (Lebanon) where he '
specializes in Islamic literature and thought. A fuller »
version of this article will appear in a forthcoming
study on the Islamic city, to be published by Unesco.
painters, pipe-cleaners, water carriers,
sherbet vendors, barbers, couriers, lamp-
bearers and midwives, as well as such
government employees as slaughterhouse
workers, employees at the mint and tax
collectors.
In fact, everyone belonged to the guild
system, whatever his status : rich and
poor, Christians, Muslims and Jews, native-
born citizens and resident aliens.
The social and conceptual basis of the
guild system was transmitted orally from
generation to generation. The members
of a guild in a traditional Islamic city con¬
sidered themselves first and foremost as
members of the community of believers
(Ummah). The bond that held them
together was neither nationality nor ties of
race or blood but a belief in the Oneness
of God and in the duty to bear witness to
Him not only through lip-service but
through all their daily endeavours.
Hence there wasand still is no sepa¬
ration between religious and secular acti¬
vities in Islam. Before God and under the
. revealed Law, a Muslim stands on an equal
footing with other Muslims.
The guilds were integrated in a social
and conceptual system closely connected
with the mystic Sufi orders. By joining a
Sufi Order, a Muslim attached himself to a '
master (shaykh) and, through him, to an
unbroken chain of masters going back to
the Prophet and through him to ail the
previous Prophets as far as Adam and his
Divine Creator.
Usefulness to the community consisted
of being truthful, helpful, generous and
kind to other men, and also of achieving
proficiency in a craft or trade and provid¬
ing services needed by others.
Such proficiency could only be acquir¬
ed through hard work under the skilful
guidance of a master-craftsman and
through being initiated in a guild. Like the
religious orders, each guild had a chain
leading from its master back to the patron
saints. The concept of the guilds was thus
perfectly harmonious : each guild was
linked to the others by a common origin.
As far as the links governing relations
between different guilds are concerned,
we know that the masters of guilds attend¬
ed the initiation ceremonies of guilds other
than their own and gave proficiency certi¬
ficates to craftsmen from other towns.
They corresponded with and occasionally
visited one another, to harmonize stan¬
dards of production, beauty and prices in
their respective cities.
The first connection between a young
apprentice and his craft came when a
master took him into his workshop. In the
presence of members of the guild the!
Fatihah (the opening chapter of the1
Quran) was recited and the apprentice was1
said to have entered the guild's first»
"gate". I
13

An apprentice received no wages for a
number of years, his family comforting
themselves with the thought that he was
learning a craft from his master and was
being integrated into the community
through his guild. Until he was initiated,
he was not allowed to open a shop of his
own.
When an apprentice had mastered the
craft which he had been learning since
boyhood, the members of the guild began
urging his master to initiate him. The
master would often delay the ceremony,
but without discouraging the apprentice.
"This man is doing well," he would say,
"but his time has not yet come." Or else:
"That fellow has the makings of a good
craftsman, but his syrup is still thin",
meaning that he should remain eager and
diligent in his work.
When the master felt that the time was
ripe, he ordered the shawish, an official
specially appointed to supervise the
markets, to give the candidate a green twig
of basil or some other fragrant plant. The
apprentice took the twig with a great show
of gratitude, kissed it and placed it on his
head.
The master registered his name with
those of other candidates, if there happen¬
ed to be any, so that they might be initiat¬
ed together, and the date of the ceremony
was fixed. The shawish then went off to
invite the elders of the guild, and anyone
else he wished to have at the initiation
ceremony.
Since guilds had no house of their own,
the ceremony took place in one of the city
gardens or in the house of a member of
the guild. The ceremony began when the
shawish led in the initiate, with his hands
folded respectfully on his breast, to a green
carpet in the middle of the assembly.
Thereupon the deputy master of the guild
ordered the shawish to recite the Fatihah
in a loud voice, while all present prostrat¬
ed themselves on their knees.
After everyone had recited the Fatihah,
the deputy proceeded to "the girding of
the belt" (either an ordinary sash or a
shawl). He raised the candidate's hands
from his breast to the top of his head,
stretched out the belt, and wound it round
the initiate from his waist to his ankles.
Drawing the edges of the sash from the
back to the front, he tied them in three
knots, in honour of the master of the
guild, the initiate's own master, and the
shawish.
Only the head of the guild was allowed
to untie the first of the three knots, so that
the initiate knew beyond any doubt that it
was to him that he owed obedience. The
second was untied by the master-crafts¬
man, so that the initiate should know that
it was to him that he owed his skill. The
shawish untied the third knot.
These knots also symbolized the pact
that bound the initiate to the other mem¬
bers of the guild, who henceforth consider¬
ed him as their brother. When the three
knots were untied, the deputy then ap¬
pointed one of the masters present to be
the initiate's "trade father". More often
than not, the initiate's own master became
his trade father, but he was allowed to
choose someone else if he wished. The
trade father had to guarantee the initiate's
conduct and be answerable for all his
offences.
Next the master of the guild gave the
initiate the following advice: "My son, all
the guilds are trades which hold a position
of trust as regards money, property and
lives. Your trade is like your property;
guard it with all your might. If you receive
people's money, do not abuse their trust
by squandering it. Beware of betraying
the members of your guild, for the traitor
shall surely be judged."
He then turned to those present, and
asked: "What say you, brethren and
artisans and masters; is this initiate worthy
of becoming an artisan?" To which they
replied: "Yes, he is worthy and deserving."
The trade father then approached the
initiate to administer the solemn pledges.
Facing one another, they both bent down
with their right knee touching the floor,
before approaching each other until their
right thumbs and their left knees were
touching.
Next, the trade father grasped the
initiate's right hand in his own, and each
held the thumb and forefinger of the other
with his own thumb and forefinger.
Meanwhile, the shawish covered their
hands with a handkerchief or towel, so that
outsiders could not see the sign they were
exchanging. The father then said to the
postulant: "Swear to me by the oath of
God and His Apostle that you will not
betray the members of the guild or play
false with the trade." To which the pos¬
tulant agreed.
Then the shawish led the initiate, with
the sash over his shoulder, round to the
guild elders to receive their recognition
and congratulations.
When the initiation was finished, every¬
one sat down to a simple meal called the
Tamlihah (Salting). Salt had great sym¬
bolic value for the guilds, because it
created a bond among men who shared it,
and because artisans were known as "the
14

salt of the bazaars", meaning that they
earned their living by sweat and patience.
An artisan could graduate to the rank
of master by passing an examination of
proficiency in his craft. If he qualified he
was brought before an assembly of the
guild which decided whether or not he was
worthy of promotion.
In some cases, the artisan was required
to produce a sample of his finest work
before his promotion was considered. This
"masterpiece" was put before the assem¬
bly, and if found to be defective, the
man's promotion was postponed, for the
guild was above all concerned to maintain
its reputation and high standards.
Masters who had attained an influential
position were called elders or notables.
They assisted the master of the guild in
his functions and helped the market in¬
spector (the muhtasib) to keep law and
order in the bazaars. They were known
for their conscientiousness, high moral
character and thorough knowledge of the
affairs of the guild.
The appointment of a new master of a
guild was not always easy and smooth,
because it was usually decided by con¬
sensus, although in some guilds the office
was handed down from father to son. . This
was not considered inconsistent with the
principle of selection, for the office could .
only be inherited with the approval of the
elders of the trade who took into consid¬
eration the candidate's past services and
reputation.
The master held office all his life, that is,
as long as he was physically and mentally
able to discharge his duties in a just and
upright manner.
It was also the duty of the master to
ensure that the regulations of the trade
were respected and to penalize those who
infringed the privileges of the craft. For
example, when a weaver produced a piece
of cloth that fell short of the customary
standards of length and breadth, the
master of the guild would cut it into pieces
and hang it up in the market as a warning
to all.
Similarly, when a member of a guild
was found guilty of sharp practice, the
master sent the shawish to shut his shop,
which could not be opened again without
his approval and that of the elders. If a
goldsmith was found guilty of adulterating
his metal, the master of the goldsmiths
overturned his anvil so that he was unable
to work until the master gave his permis¬
sion. Traitors and thieves were usually
expelled and "a war without quarter was
waged against them."
The master of a guild was also called
upon to find work for labourers, whom he
recommended to master-craftsmen. He
alone had the right to initiate skilled ap¬
prentices and to promote artisans to the
rank of master-craftsman.
It was also his privilege to grant permis¬
sion to a master to open a new shop in
the guild's bazaar or its section of the
bazaar. He negotiated with the govern¬
ment on matters concerning his guild,
especially those relating to taxation.
He settled disputes among the guild
members, mobilized them in emergencies
and led them in public ceremonies and
processions.
In short, the master of a guild was not
only its head but the symbol of its very
existence. Furthermore, his powers trans¬
cended the bazaar, for he was an important
figure in the residential areas where the
guild members lived.
The grand master of the guilds enjoyed
great authority in the Islamic city, for he
was the head not of only all the guilds but
also the Sufi orders. In some cases he
was also the doyen of the Ashraf, the
descendants of the Prophet. In this triple
capacity he ruled over the guilds and
through them the bazaars, which meant
that everything that was produced and
distributed in the city as well as all its
services were under his control.
As grand master of the Sufi orders, he
co-ordinated the affairs of the "Lodges"
and supervised their trust funds. High-
ranking civil servants and army officers
who were not organized in guilds generally
belonged to a Sufi order and so they too
fell under the authority of the grand
master.
His authority in the city was such that
he only nominally acknowledged the
suzerainty of the political rulers. In various
ways his spiritual authority counterbalanced
the temporal power of kings and sultans.
It should not be forgotten that many
rulers in Islamic history were also members
of the Sufi orders and submitted to their
inner hierarchy even if they were political
rulers. This of course does not mean that
the grand master was a "political" figure
in the modern, Western sense of the term;
it simply means that he was, in the ab¬
sence of a caliph, the symbol of stability
in Islamic society.
Under the influence of Sufism, Islamic
guilds emphasized the moral and spiritual
basis of manual skills. Craftsmanship had
to reflect the artisan's "inner state", regard¬
less of economic incentives or other
rewards. When an artisan seeking promo- \
tion presented a sample of his work to his t
^^^^\#AW VU ! Will
<mti
Dazzling patterns
The carpet weavers' corporation
(far left a Berber woman at her loom)
was always one of the major guilds
in Arab-Islamic cities. Not only did
Muslims need prayer mats but also,
reminiscent of their nomadic origins,
brightly coloured ornamental rugs
to decorate their walls. At left,
cloth-sellers in the sun-stippled
bazaar of Marrakesh, in Morocco.
15

, guild his own spiritual evolution was
evaluated, as well as his handiwork.
Perfection of human nature and striving
in the path of God were seen as twin ideals
for every artisan, no matter how humble
his craft.
The 19th century saw the decline and
gradual disappearance of various guilds in
the Muslim world.
The influx of competitively priced Euro¬
pean manufactured goods in the wake of
colonial rule or under colonial pressures
put local artisans out of work. In many
instances, the colonialists were looking for
raw materials and markets and hence
their first victims were the local manufac¬
turers.
The reorganization of government under
colonial rule and the introduction of new
systems of taxation weakened thé powers
of the traditional authorities and hit the
crafts severely. For example, the authority
of the guild masters was undermined when
they lost their power to decide who could
open a shop in the bazaars. New, oppres¬
sive taxes and duties caused many trades
to be taken over by Europeans because
they were exempted from taxes.
Modern transportation systems changed
not only methods of carrying goods back
and forth, but also the traditional trade
routes. From 1880 onwards, the hajj
(pilgrimage) from North Africa no longer
passed through Cairo, a change which
had a devastating influence on local trade.
The building of the Hijaz railway linking
Damascus and Medina had similar
consequences.
The population explosion in the 19th
and 20th centuries accelerated the pace of
sedentarization and urbanization in the
Muslim world, and many cities became
overcrowded. This process was accom¬
panied by the erosion of traditional social
and economic ties.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the
guild system in the Islamic city is gradually
coming to an end, and with its disappear¬
ance more than an outward expression of
social and economic solidarity is being lost.
It is a direct spiritual threat. The Swiss
Orientalist Titus Burckhardt has summed
up the situation in a masterly way (1):
"I knew a comb-maker who worked in
the street of his guild. He was called
Abd al-Aziz (the salve of the Almighty)
and always wore a black /el/abathe
loose, hooded garment with sleevesand
a white turban with a litham, the face veil,
which surrounded his somewhat severe
features.
"He obtained the horn for his combs
from ox skulls, which he bought from
(1) Fès, Stadt des Islam (Fez, City of Islam), Fribourg,
Switzerland, 1960.
butchers. He dried the horned skulls at a
rented place, removed the horns, opened
them lengthwise, and straightened them
over a fire, a procedure that had to be
done with the greatest care, lest they
should break.
"From this raw material he cut combs
and turned boxes for antimony (used as
an eye decoration) on a simple lathe; this
he did by manipulating, with his left hand,
a bow which, wrapped round a spindle,
caused the apparatus to rotate. In his right
hand he held the knife, and with his foot
he pushed against the counterweight. As
he worked he would sing chapters of the
Quran in a humming tone.
"I learned that, as a result of an eye
disease which is common in Africa, he
was already half blind and that, in view of
long practice, he was able to 'feel' his
work, rather than see it.
"One day he complained to me that the
importation of plastic combs was diminish¬
ing his business: 'It is not only a pity that
today, solely on account of price, poor-
quality combs from a factory are being
preferred to much more durable horn
combs,' he said. 'It is also senseless that
people should stand by a machine and
mindlessly repeat the same movement,
while a craft like mine falls into oblivion.
" 'My work may seem crude to you, but
it harbours a subtle meaning which cannot
be explained in words. I myself acquired
it only after many long years, and even if I
wanted to, I could not automatically pass
it on to my son, if he himself did not wish
to acquire itand I think he would rather
take up another occupation.
" 'This craft can be traced back from
apprentice to master until one reaches our
Lord Seth, the son of Adam. It was he
who first taught it to men, and what a
Prophet brings for Seth was a Prophet-
must clearly have a special purpose, both
outwardly and inwardly.
" 'I gradually came to understand that
there is nothing fortuitous about this craft,
that each movement and each procedure
is the bearer of an element of wisdom.
Not everyone can understand this. But
even if one does not know this, it is still
stupid and reprehensible to rob men of the
inheritance of Prophets, and to put them
in front of a machine where, day in and
day out, they must perform a meaningless
task.' "
Yusuf Ibish
16

A thousand-and-one
trades and crafts
Everyone, from sherbet vendors and
midwives to donkey drivers, belonged to
a trade corporation in the old Arab cities.
At left, the bustling market at Gardaia,
Algeria.
God's gift of writing
Scribes enjoyed great prestige, as writing
was considered one of the major skills
God gave to man. A numerous and
powerful group in Islamic society, they
were employed in the civil administration
of the caliphs and were often very highly
paid. Much of classical Arab literature
is a product of the scribal profession.
Medieval
department stores
Retail selling in the Muslim world has
changed little since medieval times. The
suq, a large covered market with shops
grouped according to the goods sold, is
still, after a thousand years, one of the
most characteristic features of Islamic
towns. Below, a view of the vaulted
suq at Aleppo (Syria).
Photo Unesco.
Lessons for a lifetime
Apprenticeship to a master craftsman
was the only way to learn a trade and, as
such, was an integral part of the guild
system. Above, boys learn how to emboss
copper plates at a school of Islamic arts
and crafts in Tripoli (Libya).
17
