Pericles
as seen by
Plutarch
Below, a bust of Pericles, the
5th-century-B.C. Athenian states¬
man. His achievement in building
the Acropolis monuments was
recorded in the 1st century A.D. by
Plutarch, the Greek historian.
26

I T is no more than fair", Pericles told the Athenians, "that after
Athens has been equipped with all she needs to carry on the
war, she should apply the surplus to public works, which,
once completed, will bring her glory for all time, and while they are
being built will convert that surplus to immediate use. In this way
all kinds of enterprises and demands will be created which will
provide inspiration for every art, find employment for every hand,
and transform the whole people into wage-earners, so that the
city will decorate and maintain herself at the same time from her
own resources."
Certainly it was true that those who were of military age and
physically in their prime could always earn their pay from the public
funds by serving on Pericles' various campaigns. But he was also
anxious that the unskilled masses, who had no military training,
should not be debarred from benefiting from the national income,
and yet should not be paid for sitting about and doing nothing.
So he boldly laid before the people proposals for immense
public works and plans for buildings, which would involve many
different arts and industries and require long periods to complete,
his object being that those who stayed at home, no less than those
serving' in the fleet or the army or on garrison duty, should be
enabled to enjoy a share of the national wealth.
The materials to be used were stone, bronze, ivory, gold,
ebony, and cypress-wood, while the arts or trades which wrought
or fashioned them were those of carpenter, modeller, coppersmith,
stone-mason, dyer, worker in gold and ivory, painter, embroiderer,
and engraver, and besides these the carriers and suppliers of the
materials, such as merchants, sailors, and pilots for the sea-borne
traffic, and waggon-makers, trainers of draught animals, and
drivers for everything that came by land.
So the buildings arose, as imposing in their sheer size as they
were inimitable in the grace of their outlines, since the artists
strove to excel themselves in the beauty of their workmanship.
And yet the most wonderful thing about them was the speed with
which they were completed. Each of them, men supposed, would
take many generations to build, but in fact the entire project was
carried through in the high summer of one man's administration.
On the other hand we are told that when Zeuxis the painter
once heard Agatharchus boasting about how swiftly he painted
his figures, his retort was, "Mine take, and last, a long time".
Certainly mere dexterity and speed of execution seldom give a
lasting value to a work of art or bestow a delicate beauty upon it.
It is the time laid out in laborious creation which repays us later
through the enduring strength it confers.
It is this, above all, which makes Pericles' works an object of
wonder to us the fact that they were created in so short a span,
and yet for all time. Each one possessed a beauty which seemed
venerable the moment it was born, and at the same time a youthful
vigour which makes it appear to this day as if it were newly built.
A bloom of eternal freshness hovers over these works of his and
preserves them from the touch of time, as if some unfading spirit
of youth, some ageless vitality had" been breathed into them.
The Propylaea, or portals of the Acropolis, of which Mnesicles
was the architect, were finished in the space of five years. While
they were being built, a miraculous incident took place, which
suggested that the goddess Athena herself, so far from standing
aloof, was taking a hand and helping to complete the work.
One of the workmen, the most active and energetic among
them, slipped and fell from a great height. He lay for some time
severely injured, and the doctors could hold out no hope that he
would recover.
Pericles was greatly distressed at this, but the goddess
appeared to him in a dream and ordered a course of treatment,
which he applied, with the result that the man was easily and
quickly healed. It was to commemorate this that Pericles set up
the bronze statue of Athena the Healer near the altar dedicated to
that goddess, which they say was there before.
But it was Phidias who directed the making of the great
golden statue of Athena, and his name is duly inscribed upon the
marble tablet on the Acropolis as its creator. Almost the whole
enterprise was in his hands, and because of his friendship with
Pericles all the artists and craftsmen came under his orders.
From "The Rise and Fall of Athens" by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert (Penguin
Classics 1960) pp. 178-180. Copyright © Ian Scott-Kilvert 1960. Reprinted by permission
of Penguin Books Ltd.
27
