by Pablo Macera
THE
LIVING LEGACY
OF
THE ANDES
Photos Hans Silvester ©Rapho, Paris
The conquistadors transformed Cuzco, ancient capital of the Inca
empire, into a Spanish city. Almost all the buildings in the centre of
modern Cuzco rest on Inca foundations. Opposite page, entrance of the
Inca Temple of the Moon at Ollantay Tambo near Cuzco. Andalusian
influence is strongly marked in the narrow Cuzco street above.
THREE South American countries,
Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia, consti¬
tute the heartland of the ancient
civilization of the Andes. Other countries
like Colombia and Chile also played some
part in this civilization, whose influence
can be felt even in the extreme north of
the Republic of Argentina.
Over an area of almost 3 million square
kilometres, millions of people thus live
often without realizing itaccording to
norms of conduct that evolved thousands
of years ago.
In speaking of "the civilization of the
Andes," we are not merely referring to the
famous Inca emperors of Cuzco. The
Incas were to Andean civilization what the
Romans were to classical Mediterranean
civilization or the Persians to Mesopo¬
tamia: an end rather than a beginning.
A simple date demonstrates this fact.
The Incas began their conquests in the
middle of the 15th century and their
empire was only 80 years old when it was
destroyed by the Spanish invaders. Andean
civilization, on the other hand, had begun
to take shape thousands of years before.
The most ancient inhabitants of what is
today Peru and Ecuador lived 20,000 years
ago alongside the giant sloth and the
sabre-toothed tiger.
Around 2000 or 3000 B.C., the popu¬
lation began to domesticate numerous
plants (Lima beans, kidney beans, cotton,
potatoes and maize) and such animals as
the llama, the guinea pig and the duck.
The invention of pottery, which also dates
from this period, allowed them to make
more efficient use of fire and water.
Some 3,000 to 4,000 years elapsed
between the formation of the first agrarian
societies in the Andes and the Spanish
conquest in the 16th century. Empires
rose and fell during this time, and many
highly complex and sophisticated cultures w
were implanted in various parts of the vast t
PABLO MACERA, Peruvian historian, is a professor
at the university of San Marcos in Lima (Peru). A
specialist on economic history and the history of art,
he is director of the Centre of Andean Rural History.
39

Threading through
the centuries
Andean region. Three of these cultures
Chavin, Tihuanaco and Inca (dating from
1000 B.C., 800 A.D. and 1400 A.D.
respectively) still constitute a unifying
link between Peruvians, Ecuadorians and
Bolivians. We can say that geographically
Chavin was an "Ecuadorian" culture,
Tihuanaco a "Bolivian culture" and that
of the Incas was a "Peruvian" one, al¬
though this is an approximation since Peru,
Bolivia and Ecuador are very recent cre¬
ations, barely 150 years old.
How much of these ancient Andean
civilizations disappeared when the Euro¬
peans arrived? How much still survives?
Even in the Andean countries, no-one
knows for certain, and the question
arouses vigorous controversy in which
scientific considerations take second place
to political passions.
Those who hold conservative political
views claim that they belong to a Western,
Christian society. For them, Andean
culture is only of marginal' importance
within the framework created by European
colonialism. Moderates say that theirs is
a mixed society a mestizo culture
whereby they try to mask the conflicts
that exist between Andean and European
culture.
The truth is quite different. A provincial,
Western-type culture does of course exist
in these South American countries, but it
is found primarily in certain urban areas,
where its future is in question.
The mestizos, members of a group
which is difficult to define from a scientific
standpoint, have never since colonial
times managed to emerge as an entity
independent of Andean or European
culture.
But for most of the population, Andean
culture is still the only frame of reference.
This is true not only of the Amerindians
belonging to different ethnic and linguistic
groups (Quechuas, Aymarás, Urochipayas
and Yas) but of all the other inhabitants of
Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia.
At least 90 per cent of the place names
in these countries come from the Andean
languages. But more important, Andean
and not European culture shapes economic
and social structures in the rural areas of
Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia, and this is
where the overwhelming majority of the
people live. South American farmers
were of course subject to the feudal system k
of the hacienda, or ranch, and the Spa- Y
An ancient civilization flourished in the Andes many centuries before the
arrival of the Spanish invaders. From its heartland in what is now Ecuador,
Peru and Bolivia, its Influence stretched as far as northwest Argentina. In
the rural areas of the Andes today, a popular tradition survives of hand-
woven objects whose patterns and vivid colours recall those of the Incas.
The works shown here display animal motifs a serpent, a two-headed
condor or eagleas well as stylized representations of the human form
and geometric designs.
40


niards tried to introduce new crops and
^ farming techniques. But 400 years later,
the Amerindian ways still prevail.
The ancient crops such as the potato,
maize, and yucca still form the basis of
their diet, and the people of the Andes
practise many of the neolithic farming
techniques used by their ancestors before
the Spanish Conquest. Oxen, ploughs,
wheels and metals are practically un¬
known; farmers still use wood and stone
tools, without the help of animals.
But Andean civilization has not only sur¬
vived at the economic and technolog¬
ical level; it also shapes the people's ways
of thinking and their most sophisticated
art and religious forms. The peoples of
Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia do not perceive,
organize or represent Space or Time like
Westerners.
Europeans think of time in terms of
progress and are sure that the future is
bound to be better than the past. But in
Andean civilization, time is cyclical, with
an ascending and a descending phase
leading to a great Universal Crisis (Pacha¬
cutec) which may bring about the end of
the world.
This is a cosmic vision no doubt suited
to ancient agrarian societies subject to
seasonal cycles. It is also appropriate in
an environment in which natural disas¬
ters floods and droughts-
are so frequent.
This notion of Pachacutec explains the
importance of certain Catholic cults like
that of the Lima Lord of Miracles, who is
none other than an ancient god, Pacha-
camac, dressed up as a Christian. The
same could be said of the "Taitacha Tem¬
blores" (earthquakes) of Cuzco.
Nevertheless, Andean culture does not
express an attitude of pessimism and
resignation. Instead, it embodies the idea
that man's mission is to re-establish a
cosmic balance through such concepts as
Tinkuy and Paikiki. Tinkuy denotes the
idea of struggle but also of union. Paikiki
is the magic counterpart which compen¬
sates and counterbalances. The people
of the Andes still think of their lives in
terms of Pachacutec (crisis), Tinkuy (strife
and union) and Paikiki (parity and equU
librium).
When they are confronted with des¬
perate hardship and poverty which give
the lie to the Western idea of progress,
they do not lapse into pessimism, "fhey
know that their duty is to join with the
positive forces in the universe to overcome
The gods dance at Oruro
42

Above, masked dancers parade
through the streets of Oruro,
capital of the mining region of
Bolivia, at carnival time. The
festivities closely resemble the
ancient rites of the Indians in the
region of Lake Titicaca, and
illustrate how pre-Columbian
myths and forms of expression
have survived in the high
plateaux of the Andes. Although
the devils' masks worn during
the carnival display Spanish and
Catholic influences, they are
inspired by religious images
such as that of the great Inca
god Viracocha. Left, one of the
oldest masks worn at Oruro;
right, a modern devil's mask.
Photo ©Dominiaue Desjardins, Paris
Pachacutec. This cosmic vision is reflected
in the way space is used and represented
in poetic symbolism.
Like all agrarian societies of the oriental-
despotic type, that could tap large man¬
power reserves, the Andean societies
erected buildings that required enormous
masses of material.
This practice survived into the Spanish
colonial period because the Spaniards had
the same abundance of workers as the
Inca emperors and the Chavin priests.
Egyptian and Babylonian architecture
also used enormous masses of material.
All these edifices are designed according
to a special order, or rule, which in the
case of Andean civilization may be des¬
cribed as the horizontal principle. On the
coasts and in the mountains, everything
was built on the horizontal: human cre¬
ations were parallel to the landscape, so
that the buildings seem designed to
express the hidden potential of natural
shapes.
We find this principle throughout the
region: in a temple of the pre-ceramic
period on the coast; in sanctuaries of the
Chavin and Tihuanaco cultures; and in the
ranch houses of the colonial and repub¬
lican periods. It has also survived in
mid-20th century buildings such as the
Lima Civic Centre, where a young Peruvian
architect made bold use of concrete to
create large masses which, far from clash¬
ing with the urban surroundings, actually
reflect them.
43

But this use of parallel and horizontal
lines is nowhere more evident than in
Cuzco, where all is sad and grandiose.
Nothing is more Andean than Cuzco
cathedral, built nevertheless by a Spanish
architect. The massive cathedral stretches
along one side of the square like an
immense parapet defending the Sacsahua-
man fortress, unlike the Jesuit church of
La Compañía which rises vertically towards
the sky.
It is important to remember, however,
that the economic and social foundations
of Andean civilization were profoundly
altered by the European invasion of the
16th century. The conquerors demanded
recognition as conquerors, and to survive,
the conquered peoples had to dissimulate.
Dissimulation is the second principle of
Andean civilization under Spanish and
creóle domination. For the last 400 years
Andean civilization has worn camouflage.
In Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia, "yes"
can mean either "yes", or "no" but one
can never be sure unless one is an initiate.
Language not only enshrines the legitimate
and necessary hypocrisy of the underdog,
but it is also a tactical device for preserving
what is one's own and triumphing over a
dominant culture by taking over one of its
power bases.
It also presupposes a generalized use of
metaphor. Whites and creóles in South
America today contemptuously describe
the Indians as liars because they cannot
understand that metaphors have become
an underpinning of Andean culturea
structure reinforced by the colonial situa¬
tion. Let us examine some results of this
process in the vast area stretching from
Quito (Ecuador) to the frontiers of Bolivia
and Argentina.
Until the arrival of the Europeans,
Andean women fastened their cloaks with
a brooch shaped like a waxing moon
whose masculine counterpart was the
Tumi or sacrificial knife. This ambivalent
sexual shape (Moon-Tumi) did not dis¬
appear in colonial or republican days but
tended to oe replaced by the shape of the
soup spoon introduced by the Spaniards.
In Andean civilization there were two
basic ritual objects: the Conopa, a stone
figure shaped like a llama, and the Kero,
a wooden receptacle with straight sides.
The Conopa-llama symbol changed into a
pottery bull, and in Ecuador the Kero was
turned into a cup. The progression is
suggestive: from moon to spoon; from
reclining llama to bull; from Kero to cup.
In each case the utilitarian shapes of the
triumphant culture have been incorporated
by the defeated culture, which apparently
renounced its own sacred forms.
Among the Chinchero Indians of Peru
and the Urochipayas of Bolivia, the qui¬
pus, a form of writing that uses knotted
string, imitates a girl's tresses, since both
words and hair come out of the head. No
scribe was allowed to read the sacred
letters without first donning a female wig.
This special reading wig was kept in a fox-
skin bag, the fox being a female deity
symbolizing cunning and cleverness.
An even more famous example appears
in the Oruro carnival in Bolivia and the
Puño fiesta in Peru. They are basically the
same feast, which derives from ancient
pre-Spanish rituals practised between
lakes Titicaca and Poopo. The devils'
masks in these rituals are doubtless influ¬
enced by Catholic iconography, but they
are variations of religious images of much
earlier date: the heads of the god of
44

European soldiers; in the 18th century
they were dressed like provincial governors,
and in the 19th century they are shown
wearing the military uniforms of creóle
generals.
The St. James of Callapa had moved
even further into the future: stripped of
the silks he wore a mere ten years ago,
he was wearing green battle-dress.
The Callapa St. James also reflects
another historical experience: he has the
wig and glasses which, according to the
sacristan, were worn by the guerrilleros.
What is the future of Andean culture?
Many fear it will disappear in the process
of industrialization which is under way in
Latin America. For many, industrialization
and modernization mean adopting Western
cultural models.
This danger is compounded by the
social structure of the Andean countries.
A city-based white and mestizo minority
dominates a great majority of poor, rural
Indians and mestizos. To understand this
phenomenon one must remember that the
independence revolutions led by Washing¬
ton in North America and by Bolivar in
South America were basically oligarchic
revolutions.
In countries like Peru and Bolivia, the
Creoles have been in power for 150 years,
and of course think of themselves as
Europeans who happened to be born in
another continent.
The cultural uniformity which today's
world is heading for is a danger for the
whole1 human race. The survival and free
development of cultures like that of the
Andes broadens the scope of man's
heritage.
Pablo Macera
PANPIPES AND STORIES IN STRING. The Incas invented a remarkably efficient
substitute for writing known as quipus, knotted strings of various colours (see
drawing above left). A 16th-century Spanish chronicler noted that "It is incredible to
see what the Incas can record in this way. All that books can present in the way of
history, law, ceremonies and commercial accounts is expressed in Quipus with
astonishing precision". Quipus are still used in many Indian communities in the
Andes. Another survival from ancient times is the rondador, a kind of panpipe
played by the Indians of Peru (above).
Chavin and that of the great deity Viraco¬
cha which has survived at Tihuanaco.
The Andean gods worshipped more than
4,000 years ago are still dancing in the
20th century.
A few months ago, while visiting the
Callapa sanctuary in the Department of
Oruro (Bolivia), I was struck by the naive
mural paintings of Noah's Ark, and even
more fascinated by the figure of St. James
over the main altar. The St. James Mata
mores (the Moor-slayer) of the Spanish
reconquest of Spain from the Moors had
been transformed into St. James Matain-
dios (the Indian-slayer) of the Spanish
conquest of Latin America. The Amer¬
indians took over St. James and identified
him with lllapa, the thunder-god of their
own religion.
Indian depictions of St. James were
decked out with all the trappings of the
enemy. The oldest look like 16th-century
45
