by Mario Ruivo
OCEANOGRAPHY
AND THE LAW OF
THE great ocean expedition of
the British corvette, H. M. S.
"Challenger" (1872-1876) was
a landmark in the development of the
marine sciences. It was the first
océanographie venture organized on
a world scale to learn more about the
oceanstheir depths, waters and
living things.
Such knowledge was not only seen
as important in itself. The need for
making practical use of it was also
recognized. And océanographie re¬
search was made easier by the prin¬
ciple of freedom of the seas, allowing
scientific observations and activities
to be freely carried out.
The growing interest in the seas
led to the creation of marine labora¬
tories specializing in areas of parti¬
cular scientific interest without any
restriction on the part of local autho¬
rities. Scientists from many coun¬
tries, including those without a sea¬
board were thus able to conduct
research in coastal waters that were
subject to national sovereignty.
Among such laboratories were the
Russian Zoological Station (1884) set
up at Villefranche-sur-mer (France),
and the Naples Zoological Station
(1872) founded by F. A. Dohrn and
other German scholars for Mediter¬
ranean studies. These institutions
were the precursors of forms of
extended co-operation which were to
develop almost a century later under
the auspices of international bodies,
but this time with stricter national
limitations.
The beginning of the 20th century
saw the birth of the first organization
for inter-governmental co-operation
in this field, with the creation in 1 902
of the International Council for the
Exploration of the Sea, founded by
the countries of Northern Europe.
Its aim was the promotion of exchange
of information and ideas concerning
MARIO RUIVO, Portuguese biologist, is
chairman of the Intergovernmental Océa¬
nographie Commission's working committee
on the global investigation of pollution in the
marine environment. Director of the depart¬
ment of research and the protection of
living resources and the marine environment
at the State Secretariat for Fisheries, Lisbon,
he was chairman of the Portuguese delegation
to the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea.
biological resources and their fluc¬
tuations, and other questions affec¬
ting fisheries, with a view to better
and more efficient exploitation and
the co-ordination of océanographie
research.
At that time the only restrictions
on ships taking part in océanographie
expeditions were those resulting from
the three-mile limit of territorial
waters. International collaboration
was increasing, especially between
the institutions of the developed
countries of the northern hemisphere.
But this process was interrupted by
the Second World War.
The immediate post-war period and
On 30 December 1872,
the British corvette
H.M.S. "Challenger"
(above) brought up its
first samples from the
ocean floor at the start
of a 3-year research
expedition that marked
the start of modern
oceanography. Criss¬
crossing the three
great oceans, it
accomplished a gigantic
task (the results of
which filled
50 volumes) making
use of the most
modern equipment
then available (left).
Photos Unesco
the 1950s were marked by a revival
of the peaceful uses of the oceans,
initially by the maritime powers and
then, progressively, by a growing
number of developing countries,
which saw the exploitation of marine
resources as an aid to economic and
social development. In this context,
the problems and conflicts resulting
from intensive exploitation were
becoming more acute.
They became even more serious
when they ceased to be local ones
(as in the case of the overfishing of
a species in a specific area) and
instead had regional or even global
repercussions (coastal pollution resul¬
ting from accidents to oil tankers at
10

THE SEA
sea and consequent damage to living
resources and tourism). Thus new
hazards were created and the need
arose to adopt international standards
and laws to meet the new situations
and take account of the world com¬
munity's growing involvement.
To protect their resources, some
Latin American States, headed by
Peru, have formulated the concept of
"patrimonial sea" as a zone of sov¬
ereignty extending 200 miles from
the coast.
The United States with its advan¬
ced technology extended, through
President Truman's Proclamation of
1945, its jurisdiction over natural
resources of the sea-bed and its
subsoil up to its continental shelf.
In general, this period was marked
by an extraordinary development of
scientific research stimulated by
concern for a better knowledge of
the sea, and by the practical need
to collect data for developing new
technologies, for the rational exploi¬
tation of marine resources and mea¬
sures for protecting and conserving
the marine environment.
The post-war period has thusbeen
marked by a spectacular revival of
collaboration between scientists and
institutions, especially those of the in¬
dustrially developed countries. These
activities, in which a growing number
of developing countries are beginning
to participate, may cover an entire
region (International Indian Ocean
Expedition) or focus on specific
themes (productivity, evaluation of
resources, pollution, etc.)
The application of marine sciences
for peaceful purposesand, behind
the scenesfor military and security
purposesis intensifying and be¬
coming increasingly complex. Océa¬
nographie research is tending to
become multidisciplinar/. By the
end of the 1960s it had come to
be regarded as an integral part of
any programme of economic deve¬
lopment.
The establishment of the United
Nations (in 1945) and its Specialized
Agencies, some of which are exclusi¬
vely or partially concerned with ocea¬
nography (U. N. Food and Agriculture
Organization, World Meteorological
Organization, Intergovernmental Ma¬
ritime Consultative Organization, etc.)
has helped to promote friendly colla-
A spectacular tool of modern
oceanography, the U.S. research
vessel "Glomar Challenger"
is named after the world's first
océanographie vessel (see opposite
page). Piled on its forward deck
are the tubes it uses for drilling
in deep waters (several thousand
metres) to bring up samples of the
earth's crust from 1,500 metres
below the sea bed.
boration among States aimed at solv¬
ing economic, social and cultural pro¬
blems, including fields relating to the
use and investigation of the seas.
In this context, Unesco has played a
major part in promoting marine
sciences and training scientific and
technical staff.
During the past two decades many
newly-independent nations have join¬
ed the ranks of the developing
countries. Increasingly aware of the
factors uniting them and of the ine¬
qualities separating them from the
industrially developed countries, they
began to organize themselves to
defend their interests in matters rela¬
ting to scientific research, including
oceanography.
With more intensive use of the
seas, contradictions arose between
maritime practice and traditional ma¬
ritime law. The first and second
United Nations Conferences on the
Law of the Sea, in 1958 and 1960,
were thus convened with a view to
working out a regime better suited
to the realities of that time.
The four Conventions resulting
from these Conferences contained
provisions for the regulation of scien¬
tific research. They maintained the
principle of freedom of the seas
except in the case of prospection of
the continental shelf. They also
contained provisions under which
coastal States should not normally
withhold their consent to a request
from a qualified institution to conduct
purely scientific research on the conti¬
nental shelf as long as they were
allowed to participate in the research
if they so wished. If the principle of
a 12-mile maximum territorial sea
limit were adopted restrictions on
research would . be correspondingly
greater.
However, many of the newly inde¬
pendent countries held that the Con¬
ventions reflected the interests of the
big maritime powers and did not feel
bound by them, either because they
had not shared in framing them or
because they did not consider that
their interests were properly pro¬
tected.
The promotion of economic growth
in the developing countries calls for
a tremendous effort to exploit natural
resources, including those of thek
oceans. This in turn demands in- F
11

y vestment, scientific research, coupled
with appropriate technology and the
training of enough local scientists
and technicians.
Recently co-operation in océano¬
graphie research, although still do¬
minated by the industrialized coun¬
tries, has been increasingly shared
in by institutions and scientists of
all continents. This trend has been
helped by the creation of new inter¬
national organizations, in particular
Unesco's Intergovernmental Océano¬
graphie Commission, one of whose
functions is "to promote the scien¬
tific investigation of the oceans with
a view to learning more about their
resources through the concerted ac¬
tions of Member States."
Initially established in 1960, it
came to be regarded by 1970 as a
specialized body serving other U. N.
Agencies with responsibility for the
investigation, use and management
of the seas.
Science policies of developing
countries depend on the training of
specialized local staff through natio¬
nal efforts and also with bilateral
and multilateral aid. This will be¬
come an important factor in their
assessment of the implications of
océanographie research, with criti¬
cism already being voiced over the
differentiation being made between
"pure" and "applied" science and
regarding scientific dependence on
other countries, which is viewed as
contrary to national interests.
At the Third Conference on the
Law of the Sea criticisms were level¬
led against the regulations governing
océanographie research (see page 4).
Among other causes of growing con¬
cern were the activities of long¬
distance fishing fleets, with the
threat of over-fishing and depletion
of resources, the problem of marine
pollution, and the extraction of oil,
natural gas and other non-biological
resources at ever greater depths.
A further reason for disquiet is the
knowledge that valuable mineral re¬
sources (such as manganese nodules)
exist on the ocean floor, as revealed
by the océanographie expeditions of
the research institutes of the major
countries, and the economic viabi¬
lity of exploiting them in the near
future.
This explains why, at the start of
the Third Conference on the Law of
the Sea in 1974, there was a clash
between two opposing viewpoints on
océanographie research : one prima¬
rily reflecting the developing coun¬
tries' position, and the other that of
the major powers and other indus¬
trialized countries.
Most of the developing countries
refuse to make a distinction between
"pure" and "applied" science, affir¬
ming that there can be no divorce
between the acquisition of know¬
ledge and its application. They
point out that in some cases know¬
ledge may be directed towards non-
peaceful ends and in others, directly
or indirectly lead to an overexploi-
tation of resources. Hence the
possibility of potential security risks
to the coastal countries and of
threats to their economic interests
if a 200-mile exclusive economic zone
is adopted.
These countries are firmly convin¬
ced of the need to protect their inte¬
rests and to consolidate their rights
on the Continental Shelf, already
embodied in the 1958 Convention
on this question. They are calling
for the adoption of regulations gua¬
ranteeing that coastal States are
informed in advance of research pro;
jects proposed by other States in
order to be able to comment on them
and also to control and benefit from
the knowledge and information deriv¬
ed from those activities.
Developing countries favour regu¬
lations which require the prior con¬
sent of coastal States for océanogra¬
phie research by other countries or
institutions. Industrially developed
countries, however, argue for com¬
plete freedom of research.
These countries consider their vital
interests, including questions of de¬
fence (though this is not said in so
many words) are at stake, as well
as global economic considerations.
In this contention they are backed
up by their own scientists who main¬
tain that the unravelling of some of
the remaining mysteries of the seas
12

OCEAN SIMULATOR
Despite recent advances in knowledge and equipment, underwater exploration
has still many major physiological and technological obstacles to tackle. To
study these problems scientists use a variety of devices capable of reproducing
in the laboratory the conditions found at various depths. Below left, water filled
"ocean simulator" chamber at the Institute for Environmental Medicine of the
University of Pennsylvania (U. S. A.). The diver is dismantling an oil wellhead
in conditions simulating a depth of almost 500 metresthe first experiment of
work at this depth ever made. Below, 16th-century Indian painting showing
Alexander the Great being lowered to the sea bed in his glass diving bell.
The Macedonian monarch (4th century B.C.) is said to have tried his hand
at underwater exploration.
and also the solution of practical
problems stemming from the growing
use of the oceans and their resources,
depend on complete freedom of the
sea.
There is, however, a growing trend
towards the possibility of a compro¬
mise solution. The regime of consent
should include provisions meeting
some of the developing countries'
demands. Such arrangements could
include the adapting of oceanography
programmes to meet local require¬
ments and could provide for local
scientists to be on board during
research expeditions. This would
be a form of co-operation and tech¬
nology transfer, as well as a gua¬
rantee against possible abuses.
On the other hand, there are other
trends running counter to the indus¬
trially developed countries' views and
favouring the enlargement of the
areas of exception to the regime of
consent.
The experience gained during the
past few years by international and
regional organizations concerned with
marine sciences could help to solve
some of these problems, thanks to
new forms of scientific co-operation
devised to fit in with the future law
of the ocean.
Under this new regime, internatio¬
nal organizations such as the Inter¬
governmental Océanographie Com¬
mission, among others, would be
able to set up machinery for negotia¬
ting joint research programmes for
maintaining essential services inclu¬
ding documentation centres and data
banks, and for facilitating technology
transfers and mutual assistance.
This approach would lead to active
participation by all States, and parti¬
cularly those directly concerned in
a given case, whatever their level of
development. Steps could be taken
to guarantee the national interests
involvedthose of the coastal States
and those of the States carrying out
researchas well a§ the interests of
the world community.
Countries and scientists will need
to adjust themselves to new rules of
procedure for océanographie research
based on negotiation and the spirit
of compromise. These rules will
require a more rational and systema¬
tic use of international co-operation
machinery within the United Nations
and its agencies, either in their exis¬
ting form or in a form still to be
created.
Mario Ruivo
13
