Unesco's first teleconference
by satellite
THE SYMPHONIE'
EXPERIMENT
by E. Lloyd Sommerlad
TELECOMMUNICATIONS will
eventually replace travel to
international, conferences of
the future by support staff and, in due
course, by participants themselves.
The first successful large-scale
experiment in "teleconferencing" pro¬
vided satellite links between Unesco
Headquarters in Paris and the Ken¬
yatta Conference Centre in Nairobi,
Kenya, for Unesco's 19th General
Conference in October and November
1976.
To the surprise of Unesco staff
members and delegates alike, and
despite organizational difficulties, the
conference, the first to be held away
from Headquarters for 20 years, pro¬
ceeded with almost the same ease
and speed as in Paris. This would
not have been possible without the
satellite.
During the five weeks of the confe¬
rence, instantaneous communication
was provided directly from the Confe¬
rence Hall in Nairobi via satellite to
Unesco in Paris, 6,400 kilometres
away. The Governments of France
and the Federal Republic of Germany;
which have been developing the
experimental satellite system called
"Symphonie" since 1967, placed it
and the necessary ground facilities
and technical staff at the disposal of
Unesco.
Launched in 1975, the satellite is
in geostationary orbit at an altitude of
36,000 kilometres, maintaining the
same position in relation to the earth
as it rotates. It is currently used for
various experiments in the technical,
scientific and educational fields.
E. LLOYD SOMMERLAD, Acting Head ot
Unesco's Division of Free Flow of Infor¬
mation and Communication Policies, is in
charge of Unesco's programme on the use
of space communication for education and
development. He was general co-ordinator
of the experimental satellite link between
Unesco's Paris H. Q. and its General Confe¬
rence in Nairobi (October-November 1976).
A small ground station with an
antenna measuring four and a half
metres in diameter was installed in
the grounds of the Conference Centre
in Nairobi, and began operating a
few days before the opening of Unes¬
co's General Conference. At the
other end, radio signals were trans¬
mitted from Unesco Headquarters in
Paris to an antenna at Pleumeur-
Bodou in Britanny (600 km. from
Paris) and thence to the satellite.
The objectives of the tele-confe¬
rence experiment were:
to determine the extent to which
the use of a communication satellite
link would enable the Unesco Secre¬
tariat and the permanent delegations
remaining in Paris to be directly asso¬
ciated with the conference activities
and to contribute to them;
to measure the utility of the satel¬
lite's various technical facilities (tele¬
phone, telex, facsimile, data trans¬
mission, radio and visiophone) for
the improvement of conference ser¬
vices (e.g. information, documenta¬
tion, translations, minute-writing,
interpretation) and to facilitate press
and broadcasting coverage;
to evaluate the extent to which
retention of certain staff groups at
Headquarters would be feasible if
similar conferences were held away
from Headquarters in the future.
One of the major functions of Sym¬
phonie was to relay to Paris the pro¬
ceedings of three conference meet¬
ings taking place simultaneously in
Nairobi. Each day's conference
schedule was transmitted to Paris by
facsimile, and the closed circuit tele¬
vision system at Headquarters indica¬
ted where and when the various
meetings could be followed.
Staff, delegations and press repre¬
sentatives could thus select the meet¬
ing that interested them and listen
to the debates in either English or
French. These six radio transmis¬
sions were also distributed to more
Unesco's General Conference in
Nairobi (Kenya) in 1976 was the
occasion for a number of experiments
in audio-visual communication via
satellite. Top, the parabolic antenna
in the grounds of the Kenyatta
Conference Centre in Nairobi.
Centre, model of the French-German
telecommunications satellite
"Symphonie", which orbits 36,000 km
above the earth. Bottom, a
"visioconférence": in an office at
Unesco's Headquarters in Paris,
members of the staff and journalists
confer with the Director-General
in Nairobi. All the participants can
see as well as hear each other.
32

than 100 offices in the Headquarters
buildings through an internal com¬
munication system.
Another important feature of the
experiment was the flexibility of the
instantaneous communication facili¬
ties available. The system provided
six telephone lines, four telex circuits
and two facsimile machines at each
end. An urgent request for infor¬
mation or copy of a document could
be received by telephone and within
a few minutes the reply could be
delivered through telex or facsimile
to the central registry in Nairobi.
The facsimile machines, which
have great potential for expanded
use at future conferences, could
transmit a page of typed or printed
matter, tables or diagrams in about
three minutes. During the confe¬
rence, some 4,000 pages of docu¬
ments were transmitted to or from
Nairobi. These included the daily
Journal of the Conference, press
clippings, reference documents and
the texts of speeches and reports.
One important experiment involved
the transmission to Paris of facsi¬
miles of original texts in one language
(e.g. Arabic or Chinese), which were
translated into other languages, and
then retransmitted in facsimile to
Nairobi. A conclusion of this experi¬
ment is that it might be possible for
Unesco translators to remain at the
Paris Headquarters during future
conferences held elsewhere.
During the five weeks of the Nai¬
robi conference, more than 2,000 te¬
lephone calls and 1,500 telex mes¬
sages were exchanged via the satel¬
lite between staff members or
delegations.
Two circuits on the satellite were
reserved for a computer experiment.
A terminal in Nairobi linked to the
computer at Headquarters provided
access to stored documentation and
administrative information. It imme¬
diately answered questions in every
field of Unesco's activities.
A permanent radio link between
studios in Paris and Nairobi trans¬
mitted programmes originating in
Nairobi for copying and distribution
from Paris. It also permitted direct
transmission recording, and the edit¬
ing of important speeches made
during the conference's plenary meet¬
ings. This radio link also permitted
a series of group discussions between
Unesco staff members in Paris and
Nairobi.
The most spectacular facility was
the visiophone, which was used for
one hour a day, during which all
other communications were sus¬
pended due to the limited radio band
available from the small antenna in
Nairobi.
Studios in Nairobi and Paris were
equipped with monitors like small
TV screens and linked by the satellite,
permitting face-to-face meetings,
with communication both by ¡mage
and sound. A series of press confe¬
rences was organized, debates were
held between leading personalities,
and there were round-table discus¬
sions between members of Unesco's
staff.
The visiophone also provided an
opportunity for experiments in remote
simultaneous interpretation. But,
while this was a technical success,
the interpreters taking part later ex¬
pressed the need to see the room
and feel involved by the speaker's
presence.
The Symphonie experiments de¬
monstrated the utility of direct, large-
scale telecommunications in the serv¬
icing of distant conferences.
This pilot project was only a
beginning. Further technical ad¬
vances and organizational refine¬
ments will allow not merely two,
but many points on the earth's sur¬
face to be linked for stay-at-home
"tele-conferences", while the costs
of major international gatherings
should be greatly reduced through
savings in transport and travel as a
result of providing many conference
services by telecommunications.
E. Lloyd Sommerlad
