An art that explains
the universe
by Paul Ahyi
NOTHING in the Negro art of the Benin Coast seems designed
simply to pander to taste or to provide merely fleeting
enjoyment. In this part of the world, the purpose of art is to
express the significance of human life. It is an expression of the
Negro's need to balance the forces within him with phenomena
that are external to his nature as a human being.
To seek the meaning of art in this.region of Africa, one must
"attempt to enter its warm milieu and to penetrate its most
intimate, delicate and secret relationships".
And yet what is often looked for in Negro art is realism,
picturesqueness, odditya tawdry exoticism rather than creati¬
vity in its purest form, originating in man's communion with the
universe.
For a work of art shows man face to face with nature. It is
the artist's response to the external world. It is also the embod¬
iment of knowledge, prescience, divination and magic. Through
the transposition of forms, the serene gravity of movements
and attitudes, Negro art has links, transcending time and place,
with the evocative power of ancient Egyptian, Assyrian and
Pre-Columbian art.
Works of art, whose forms and proportions by no means
correspond to a "natural" perception of things, provide the
Negro with moral and intellectual support. Vehicles for the
acquisition of knowledge, they also express the questions posed
by the universe and the Negro's answers to these questions at
different stages of his history. "They convey ideas, relating the
cosmic and social laws that governed the world at the time of
their creation. Throughout the hundreds or thousands of years
of their existence, these works of art will retain this meaning".
If the Negro artist dissociates and associates natural features
according to his own laws, it is because he seeks to perpetuate
and accentuate what is permanent rather than incidental in living
creatures, the core of their being rather than mere appearances,
the enduring rather than the transient. His aim is to impress on
the mind the reality of the living being and not its outward ¡mage.
In Equatorial Africa, when a Bantu dies, his statue is carved
in wood or some other material. This statue is a representation,
not a likeness. It is a structure which replaces the body from
which life has fled and returned to the earth. In this immortal
"counterpart", the spark of life will henceforward reside. And
if the sculptor decides to enclose this spark in a form different
from that which it originally occupied, it is because he cannot
conceive in his mystical way of thinkingthat the spirit would
wish to re-inhabit a form which it had abandoned out of weariness
or infirmity. Hence, an entirely new creation is called for to
harbour the vital spark.
There is a story, which may well be true, that an explorer
friend of Picasso once told the great master of modern art that
"in Africa, he was curious to see how the Negroes would react
to a photograph. And so he showed them a photo of himself,
dressed in a naval officer's uniform.
"A Negro took it, looked at it from all angles and finally
returned it to him, puzzled. The explorer tried to explain to him
PAUL AHYI is a Togolese writer who currently teaches the plastic arts
at Tokoin high school in Lomé. The text published here has been
adapted from a longer study on The Present Significance of the Cre¬
ative Arts in Africa and their Influence outside Africa, written at
Unesco's request as a working paper for a symposium on Black Civi¬
lization and Education held during the Second World Black and African
Festival of Arts and Cultures (Lagos, Nigeria, 15 Jan. - 12 Feb. 1977).
This bronze head, made in the 13th century A.D.
using the "lost wax" casting process, is an
outstanding example of the art of Ife (Nigeria).
For hundreds of years Ife was an important
cultural centre of the Yoruba people. Since the
magnificent bronze sculptures of classical Ife art
(12th to 15th centuries) were revealed to the world
in 1910, the town has become one of the major
centres of world art.
that the photo was his image. The Negro laughed disbelievingly,
and taking a pencil and paper, set about drawing the officer's
portrait. He drew in his way the head, body, legs and arms in
the style of a Negro idol and handed the drawing to his model.
Then, on second thoughts, he took the drawing back he had
forgotten the shiny buttons on the uniform. He began adding
the buttons to the drawing. But instead of putting them where
they belonged, he set them all around the face".
This anecdote vividly conveys the Negro's attitude towards
the "being". It is a striking example of freedom of expression
and execution in the creative process. For the Negro what
counts is not the outward appearance but the spiritual essence
of the human being. The brass buttons added to the drawing as
an afterthought denote the frippery, the artifice that has only a
remote connexion with man's true worth. They are ornaments
added to life, but they are not part of life.
21
