WHERE
GODS
AND MEN
HAVE
MINGLED
by Jorge Amado
JORGE AMADO, Member of the Brazilian Academy,
is one of Latin America's most widely read novelists.
Since the appearance of his novel Mar Muerto ("Dead
Sea", 1961), which won him a reputation throughout
Latin America, he has published over 15 books that
have been translated into some 30 languages. Among
his more recent works published in English are Gabriela
(Chatto and Windus, London, 1963) and Doña Flor
and Her Two Husbands (Weidenfeld and Nicolson,
London, 1970).
BRAZIL is a country of racial mixture.
This is an obvious and incontro¬
vertible fact. The Brazilian experi¬
ment is of immense importance in the
search for a solution to the terrible racial
problem that afflicts the world. For in
Brazil the most diverse races have con¬
stantly been mingled.
What Brazilian could honestly claim to
be of "pure" descent in a country where
Iberians, Slavs, Anglo-Saxons, Magyars
and others have become inextricably mix¬
ed with black and Amerindian peoples
and with Arabs, Jews and Japanese?
This continuing process is the funda¬
mental reality of life in Brazil, and repre¬
sents our own special contribution to
world culture and the humanist tradition.
We are a racially mixed people, and
the mixture has depended as much on
the contribution of the black as on that of
the white. We owe to the black peoples
some of our most outstanding character¬
istics: our ability, for example, to endure
misery and oppression, to survive in the
toughest conditions, and to love life and
laughter.
18

tN
K
Photo © Dominique Desjardins, Paris
It is to them that we owe the unfailing
joyfulness that inspires our efforts to fight
against and defeat backwardness, poverty
and the many obstacles on our path to
development. We owe this toughness
and fighting spirit to the black blood
which flows not only in our veins but also
in our music, dance and other forms of
artistic expression.
The culture of Brazil was formed in the
struggle against racism and was born of
the mingling of whites, blacks and Amer¬
indians. The black element in Brazilian
society is inextricably mingled with the
white, and Africa is a maternal presence
in our midst.
But it would be ridiculous to claim that
there are no racists in Brazil, for there are
many. On the other hand, we do not
have a racist philosophy of life: our out¬
look is fundamentally anti-racist, based
as it is on intermingling.
The vigorous "negro" art of the sculptor
Agnaldo da Silva, without equal in Brazil
today, is not exclusively black. It bears
traces of white and Iberian influences in
both form and subject: Agnaldo's Oxossl
is also St. George.
It is all the more unfortunate, then, that
a distorted image of our way of life is
sometimes presented abroad. The African
contribution, which is of fundamental im¬
portance to Brazilian culture, is glossed
over or pushed into the background.
This is a totally false approach. Through
a curious reversal of the colonial mentality,
there is a tendency to put the spotlight on
painters, writers and singers with the
blackest possible skins. This attempt to
prove the absence of racial prejudice in
Brazil actually indicates a preoccupation
which is totally alien to the Brazilian philo¬
sophy of life.
The blackest girls are chosen to sing,
but no attention is paid to the fact that
they sing songs more strongly marked
by Iberian than black influence, although
Brazilian music derives primarily from the
atablques of Africa.
The paintings shown tend to be typical
examples of the Paris School the
important thing is that the artists' skins
are black. Brazilian painters like Tarsila
and Di Cavalcanti are neglected, although
their work displays the black African in¬
fluences which, along with white, Amerin
dian and Japanese elements, have pro¬
duced an art which is uniquely Brazilian.
We must proclaim to the world at large
the tremendous importance of the African
presence in Brazil, in our life, culture and
in the faces of our people.
The black African has contributed to all
the great achievements of Brazil. The
presence of Africa with its sunlight and
shadow can be felt in the prophets, saints
and angels which the mestizo sculptor
Aleijadinho (1730-1814) carved in the
mining region of Minas Gerais.
Africa is present in the music of Villa
Lobos and Dorival Caymini, in the Orixas
and Madonnas of Agnaldo, in the poetry
of Gregorio de Matos, Castro Alves and
Vinicius de Moraes. It is present in the
dancing, and the singing, the gentleness,
the friendliness and the expansive imagi¬
nation of everything great in Brazil.
For here in Brazil gods and men have,
happily, become inextricably mingled.
Jorge Amado
19
