The delights of music ranked even
higher than the pleasures of the chase.
Below, musicians and hunting scenes on
an 11th-century ivory plaque, produced
under the Fatimid dynasty which rose
to power in northwest Africa in the .
10th century.


CLASSICAL ARAB MUSIC
The making
of a mode
by Bernard Moussali
THE study of music was an indispensable
part of every cultured man's education
in the Arab world between the 9th and
the 13th centuries. No fully educated
man could afford to be without at least a work-
ing knowledge of the subject nor without some
degree of mastery of its skills.
An epicurean love of life, eroticism and praise
of the Muslim city were among the favourite
themes of musicians of this period, who drew
their inspiration from pre-lslamic and classical
Arab poetry, especially from the qasida or ode.
A collection of their works, the famous "Book
of Songs" transcribed in the ,10th century by
Abu-I Faraj al-lsfahani, reveals a society that
was at once complex, highly cultivated and
open to all kinds of intellectual speculation. .
In the 9th century, the practice of classical
music reached a peak of accomplishment at the
court of the Abbasid caliphs of Baghdad. This
led, from the 9th century on, to far-reaching
advances in musical theory and the creation of
a musical terminology which formed the basis
for the subsequent development of Arab, Per¬
sian and Ottoman music from the 14th to the
19th centuries.
At the beginning of the 9th century, classical
Arab music was already a century and a half
old. It had evolved from its pre-lslamic origins
and had undergone Persian and Syrian influ¬
ences, to form a tradition that was essentially
vocal. It could be rhythmic or non-rhythmic,
and was probably based on a number of series,
or "scales", comprising five or in a more
refined formseven "sounds" of varying
importance.
BERNARD MOUSSALI, Lebanese musicologist, is
currently engaged in research on the development of
Arab music in Egypt, Syria and Iraq during the 19th
and early 20th centuries.
It was thus a modal system, involving notes
of indeterminate pitch, specific scales and
melodic improvisations.
This music was defined in terms of naghma,
or melody, which concerned its vocal com¬
ponents, and isba' (literally "finger"), whichas
the name suggests concerned the position of
the fingers on the accompanying stringed
instrument.
The performers of a given melody all obeyed
the same rhythm, singing in unison or at inter¬
vals of an octave. Polyphonythe combination
of two or more melodic lineswas only an
accidental or secondary feature used for pur¬
poses of momentary embellishment.
The instrumental accompaniment, which was
closely related to the text, was provided by
percussion or plucked string instruments. The
former consisted for the most part of small
drums of the tambourine family, such as the
duff, which was sometimes fitted with small
copper cymbals. The latter comprised instru¬
ments of the lute family, including the two-
stringed tunburs of Baghdad and Khorasan (prob¬
ably of Arab and Persian origin respectively)
which were similar in their narrow-bodied, long-
necked form but different in their tuning. Also
used were the '"ud" lutes, four-stringed instru¬
ments with wide bodies and short necks which
were invented by Mansur Zalzal at the end of
the 8th century in an attempt to combine in one
instrument the sounds produced by earlier
models.
This chamber music, although governed by
strict rules, left performers a large measure of
freedom to display their imagination through
improvisation. Pride of place went to soloists,
whose aim, whether as singers or instrumental¬
ists, was to provoke in the listener an emotional
response known as tarab, which was specific |
to music. I
23

Arab music was created by three categories
of performers. First came the singers, some of
whom, like Ibrahim al-Mawsili (c. 743-806),
attained great celebrity. Next came their
accompanists, who were either native-born
Arabs or Arab by adoption and protégés of the
Abbasid caliphs. Finally there were the famous
female musicians and dancers who were
brought as slaves from many countries and
were generally trained in their art by the singers.
Each composition, jealously protected by its
creator against plagiarism, was transmitted by
ear, sometimes with the help of private systems
of notation, secret codes and, other aids to
memory. Transmission took place either from
father to son or from master to pupil on a fee-
paying basis, with the master repeating the song
until the pupil had learned it by heart. In the
case of pupils who were slaves, apprenticeship
was paid for by their owners.
Unlike the merchants and shopkeepers (see
article page 12), musicians were highly com¬
petitive and not interested in forming lasting
associations or guilds. Solidarity was con¬
spicuous for its absence. Ziriyab, who was
expelled from the court of the Abbasids as the
result of the schemes and threats of the il¬
lustrious Ishaq al-Mawsili, was only one musician
to undergo the bitter experience of being oust¬
ed by a rival.
Instrument-making was an equally individua¬
listic process, each musician manufacturing his
own from models handed down by his teacher.
The Caliph al-Ma'mun (786-833) created at
Baghdad a "House of Wisdom" where Greek,
Syrian and other manuscripts were translated
into Arabic. One result of this work was to make
known the musical theories of Aristotle, Aristo-
xenes, Nicomachus and Ptolemy. Ishaq al-
Mawsili was among the first to adopt the
Greek notion of music as "the science of
making melodies" and as the study, on the
basis of ancient principles,' of vocal and instru¬
mental sounds alike.
In the late 9th century, musicians, writers and
philosophers began to speculate on the nature
of their music, initiating a movement which
lasted until the 13th century. In Iraq and Iran,
the outstanding representatives of this wave of
speculation were the mathematician al-Kindi
(d. 874), one of the earliest musicologists; a
circle of anonymous Shiite philosophers known
as the "Brothers of Purity" (late 10th century);
and the physician and philosopher Ibn Sina,
also known as Avicenna (980-1037).
Another great theorist was Al-Farabi (d. 950),
a Syrian philosopher who wrote a famous
"Treatise on Music". (See "Unesco Courier",
June 1973). In Egypt, Ibn al-Haytham (c. 965-
1039) was a versatile writer who produced
numerous commentaries on the work of his
predecessors. Finally, the new musical theories
reached the Maghrib, through the work of the
Andalusian philosopher Ibn Baja (d. 1138).
The volume of these studies and exchanges
points to a musical life of great intensity. All
the authors and theorists considered music to
be a "scientific art" comparable to arithmetic, '
geometry and astronomy, and devoted their
attention to acoustics, composition and rhythm
as well as the study of musical instruments. Big .
gaps still remained in the study of the transmis¬
sion of sounds and the relationship between
acoustics and physiology, but instrument-making
took a step forward with the development of
the qanun, a form of cithar whose strings are
plucked.
None of the scholars working between the
10th and 13th centuries found a satisfactory
solution to the problem of recording Arab music
through a system of notation. Although some
attempts were made to introduce a form of
alphabetical notation, it was not widely adopt¬
ed because musicians were afraid of plagiarism.
Music also gave rise to a branch of the occult
sciences. This was the science of "correspon¬
dences", which was practised in such esoteric
circles as the Brothers of Purity and involved
investigation of the relationships between
music and the elements, the animal, vegetable
and mineral worlds, and colours.
The practical outcome of all this research was
the extension of the Abbasid mode throughout
the Arab-Islam world.
In the Maghrib ancient musical traditions
were renewed and the notion of related com¬
positions, or "suites", was developed. In
Andalusia, the late 9th century saw the creation
of the muwashshahah songs, poems set to
music and freed from the constraints of classical
Arabic metre. Under the influence of Ziriyab
and his followers, this new wave of exploration
in the field of rhythm sent out ripples to all the
corners of the Arab-Islam world.
Another major source of musical development
was created by the "whirling dervishes" {Maw-
lawiyya), a brotherhood founded by Jala! al-din
al-Rumi in the 13th century. The dervishes
devoted themselves to musical studies which
may have been based on Pythagorean theories
and systematized the processes of initiation to
music and sacred dance.
In the late 13th century, Safi al-Din al-Urmawi
established a musical terminology and solved
the problem of scales in Arab music in his
"Epistle to Sharaf al-Din" and above all in his
seminal "Book of Musical Modes". Even more
important was his methodical use of the term
maqam (position), a mode in classical Arab and
Turkish music which heralded their modern
forms.
The homogeneity of Arab music has thus
persisted until the present day. Notwithstand¬
ing differences of mode, rhythm and composi¬
tion, it remains firmly rooted in the "classical"
artistic and cultural heritage of the Arab world.
Bernard Moussali
