For four centuries, black Africa has exercised a strong influence In Brazil, alongside the
Amerindians and the European colonizers. Black African cultures and peoples played a
major part in the development of a new type of civilization, which is neither European nor
African, but distinctively Brazilian. Below, an Afro-Brazilian family out for a stroll in
Salvador de Bahía. On the walls in the background, scenes from the conquest and
colonization of Brazil.



THE AFRO-BRAZILIAN
EXPERIMENT
GILBERTO FREYRE of Brazil is an internationally
known authority on sociology and social and cultural
anthropology.. He has served as a consultant with the
United Nations and Unesco on questions concerning
racism and social tensions, and has taught in a number
of American and European universities. His works
translated into English include: The Masters and the
Slaves (1956), New World in the Tropics (1959) and
The Mansions and the Shanties (1966), all published
by Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
by Gilberto Freyre IT is an irrefutable historical fact that
Brazil was initially a "pre-Brazil"
historical and human outpost of Eur¬
ope, and specifically of Portugal. But this
is not enough to explain either Brazil's
emergence as a new social and cultural
entity in the modern world and its evolu¬
tion as a cultural and social system based w
on coexistence. Y
13

Rhythms of bondage
The cultural "consolidation" of Brazil
,was a complex and far-reaching process
brought about by an intermingling of both
European and non-European elements. Of
the latter, the Amerindian peoples and
cultures have played an important and
lasting part. But another non-European
element was subsquently to share in the
process: the black African.
From the 16th century on, black African
cultures and peoples played a part in the
formation of an ethnically mixed type of
human being and a pre-national type of
culture.
Their contribution was so dynamic, and
their Africanizing influence so vigorous,
that even though they had come as slaves
to Brazil, the black Africans became colo¬
nizers, as it were, of this part of America.
Alongside the European founders of the
new culture, they came to outweigh the
influence of the Brazilian Indians.
For four centuries now, the black Afri¬
can has made his presence felt from both
a biological and cultural point of view.
Intermingling has given rise to new types
of human beings and new kinds of femi¬
nine beauty. Cultural intermixing has
produced new cultural blends which
have left their mark not only on the Amer¬
indians, but also on the values which were
imported from certain regions of Africa
and from the Iberian Peninsula, the basic
source of Brazilian colonization, which
was itself already impregnated with black
African influences.
To these ethnic and cultural contribu¬
tions, one must add an ecological factor
tropics. Inevitably, the tropics in¬
fluenced the Brazilian, fostering a readi¬
ness to try bold experiments. This can be
seen today in certain distinctive economic
and governmental institutions, most of
which are still at an experimental stage of
development.
But when Brazil embarks on such ex¬
periments, this does not reflect anti-
European feelings; it shows, rather, that
Brazil is aware of the fact that in many
areas of its social and cultural behaviour
it must be non-European. This fact was
stressed more than 50 years ago by
Brazilian thinkers and social scientists who
laid down sociological and anthropological
guidelines which, while still universally
valid, . were nonetheless Brazilian and
"Euro-tropical" in scope and outlook.
Brazil's experience can be useful to new
nations in Africa, Asia and elsewhere for,
after four centuries of pre-national and
national development and more than a
century of independence, Brazil is now
emerging as a civilization in search of
forms of expression suited to a tropical
environment. This civilization does not,
however, repudiate the European values
which are so basic to Brazil's national
heritage.
Brazil now boasts its own types of
architecture, music, painting, cooking,
Christianity, social life, attitudes towards
health and hygiene, and footballa more
dionysiac Brazilian kind of football than
the apollonian English one. All of these
express a new type of civilization whose
novelty derives as much from : racial
intermingling as from an intermixing of
cultures.
14

Influence of African religions can still be felt in the rhythms and mythological
symbolism of Brazilian dances such as the maracatu (below left) and the macumba (see
colour photo page 35). Dancing was one of the rare forms of expression allowed to the
African slaves, from whose senzalas (slave houses) African cultures spread throughout
Brazil. Below, a senzala at Olinda, today transformed into an antique shop.
The black African has been integrated
not only biologically, but also sociologi¬
cally. A case in point is Brazilian Catholi¬
cism which is becoming a strongly Afri¬
canized religion: its officially Roman Ca¬
tholic, and originally European, rites and
symbolism are being transformed by the
admixture of pure African religious beliefs
and practices.
The cult of the Virgin Mary is an exam¬
ple of this: elements have been assimilated
from the Yemanja cult (the female counter¬
part of Orixa, a secondary divinity in the
African jeje-nago cult). Brazil has black
Virgins like the Virgin of Rosario and mes¬
tizo Virgins like Our Lady of Guadalupe,
whose devotees pledge themselves by
offering ex-votoswood and clay sculp¬
tures whose expression and colour sym¬
bolism are more African than European.
This African influence is also felt in the
maracatu, a dance whose deeper meaning
reveals a complex infiltration of African
elements into the Brazilian religious spirit.
Other examples of this infiltration are found
in the many saint cults common in Brazilian
Catholicism, such as those of St. George,
St. Barbara or St. Damián.
Brazilians do not consider themselves
less Catholic because elements of African
rites or beliefs have been incorporated
into their religious worship. Though their
Catholicism is more tropical and less Euro¬
pean, believers do not feel it has been
corrupted or de-Christianized.
The same holds true for Brazilian cook¬
ery, music, sculpture and painting of
European origin: African penetration re¬
presents not a corruption of values but an
enrichment.
It is of course true that European colo¬
nization gave this new type of society and
culture a means of communicationthe
Portuguese language, heir to the noble
and prestigious Latin of ancient Rome. But
it is also clear that none of the European
languages imported into America is be¬
coming so intensely "tropicalized" as
Brazilian Portuguese.
This process, due in part to de-Euro-
peanization, stems primarily from African
influence, and only secondarily from
Amerindian influence. As a literary lan¬
guage, it is no longer considered as inferior
to the academic language of Portuguese
purists.
Less and less academic, the Brazilian
language is daily acquiring new rhythms
and expressions whose musicality and
forcefulness are deeply marked by their
African origins. Not so long ago, how¬
ever, these expressions were restricted to
the vernacular and were considered ple¬
beian, vulgar, "blacks' talk" or "slaves'
talk".
What conclusions can be drawn from
these observations about the importance
of black or African elements in the society,
culture and language of Brazil? One result
seems to be that the people are becoming
increasingly but not exclusively brown-
skinned and that Brazil is witnessing the
formation of an increasingly extra-Euro¬
pean culture.
Segregationist attitudes such as exclu- 1
sive Aryanism or exclusive "négritude'' are I
15

Gods, legends and figureheads
> countered in Brazil by a general move
towards synthesis, whether biologically
through intermingling or sociologically
through the intermixing of cultures, some
of which are more markedly non-European
than European.
Today Brazil tends to look on its own
independenceespecially its political and
economic independence, but also its so¬
cial and cultural independence as a result
not so much of a sudden decolonization
but rather of a rapid process of "self-
colonization" (another sociological neo¬
logism coined in Brazil).
This self-colonization no doubt develop¬
ed because Brazil found itself opposed
to Portugal, which was less tentacular
and less interventionist than other Euro¬
pean colonial powers, and thus less able
to impose its will. As a result Portugal
was more apt to compromise and to let
the people there practise self-colonization,
allowing the African to become a partner
in the process.
The Amerindian mestizo joined forces
with the Portuguese and even outstripped
them in this colonizing activity, as is
shown by the great part played in the
building of Brazil by the bandeirantes,
associations formed to capture Indian
slaves and to explore for mines. But most
important was the part played by the
black ladinos, slaves who spoke Portu¬
guese and had some notions of Christian
religion and domestic or agricultural prac¬
tices. They worked alongside the Portu¬
guese and even outdistanced them in
many fields thanks to the ease with which
they adapted to the Brazilian tropics. They
withstood the difficult working conditions
in the flooded or marshy Brazilian lands
better than the wholly European settlers.
The fact that Brazil could express its
creativity in a non-European way, even
when it was still officially a Portuguese
colony, explains some of the characteris¬
tics that distinguish Brazil from other
decolonized countries.
Consider, for example, the sculpture of
Antonio Francisco Lisboa, better known
as Aleijadhino (1730-1814): it seems to
come straight from the tropics. It is no
copy of a European style, but rather a
bold and original Brazilian creation.
It is clear that in the aesthetic field
Brazilians have special African connexions
which differentiate them from other Latin
Americans even from those tropical
American regions where the African
influence is strong.
16

African religious beliefs and practices have been incorporated into Catholic ritual In Brazil,
where the cult of the Virgin Mary is strongly coloured by that of lemanjá, a female divinity
of Nigeria. Below left, the ceremony of the cult of lemanjá. An Afro-Brazilian legend of
the African divinity Oxosse is the theme of a ballet created by the choreographer Clyde
Morgan. Below, a scene from the ballet performed by the Contemporary Dance Group of
the Federal University of Bahia. Bottom left, a curious example of Brazilian folk art: one of
the famous figureheads which decorate canoes on the San Francisco river.
In Nigeria, for example, there is a Bra¬
zilian style in both architecture and in
interior design; it even makes use of
typically Brazilian animals and plants. A
special Brazilian flavour has also crept into
Nigerian cooking, dance, recreation,
worship and folklore.
Some art critics see links between the
works of the Spanish painter Joan Miró
and those of the young Nigerian sculptor
Jacob Afolabi. One good turn deserves
another: was it not another giant of Span¬
ish painting, Picasso, who developed
African art forms and transmitted them to
artists in Europe and elsewhere in the
world?
Jacob Afolabi and other African artists
have affinities not only with Picasso, but
with Brazilian artists too. It seems clear
that Nigerian artists today find something
familiar in much authentically Brazilian art,
something fraternally related to what they
themselves consider to be art.
The Brazilian heritage explains why
African artists like Afolabi are linked more
closely to such Brazilian artists as Ciceros
dos Santos Dias, Emiliano di Cavalcanti
and Lulas Cardoso Ayres, than to artists
like Miró. It also explains why the work
of Nigerian craftsmen like Adebisiwho
deliberately cultivates the so-called Brazi¬
lian-Nigerian style in his artshows simi¬
larities with the painted pottery of a Bra¬
zilian artist like Francisco Brennand.
Does Brazilian artists' sensitivity to their
African roots reflect an exclusive attach¬
ment to "négritude"? If so, then Brazilians
of African descent would tend to draw
away from Brazilians of different descent.
Would this make for a "black Brazilian"
like the black North American? Not at all,
for Brazilians are conscious of the fact
that they are brown-skinned people
"brown" here meaning every shade, up to
and including black. Hence the Brazilian
concept of "meta-race" or "going beyond
race", which makes Brazilians unconcerned
about ethnic origins: they do not affect
one's status as a citizen. .
Such concepts are of immense impor¬
tance for anthropologists and sociologists
because they prove that it is not colour or
race which makes a man what he is, but
rather his personal tastes, motives and
outlook including artistic ones.
In Brazilian folklore there is no lack of
idealized or romanticized African figures.
They have been incorporated into Brazil's
essentially . patriarchal society. Among
them are such figures as the mae prêta,
(black mother), the ba (nurse), the negro k
velho (old black man) and the negrinho do Y
Photo © Rivaldo C. Leite, from Cultura magazine. Ministry of Education and Culture, Brasilia
17

¿pastoreio (a kind of good angel of the
; pampas).
Brazilian authors have been inspired by
the figures of "Isaura the Slave" (Ber¬
nardo Guimaraes), the "mulatto" (Alui-
sio de Azevedo), the "good creóle"
(Isaias Caminha), "little black Ricardo"
(José Lins do Regio), "Balduino" (Jorge
Amado), "Falo the Black Girl" (Jorge de
Lima). Nor should one forget the mulat-
toes of the painter Emiliano di Cavalcanti,
who are sometimes of à pure black now
so rare in Brazil after years of intermingling.
More has been written about the African
influence on Brazilian music than on any
other Brazilian art form. It is apparent not
only in popular music but also in some of
the country's most serious music. The
composer Hector Villa Lobos (1887-1959)
was influenced both by African and even
more by Amerindian musical themes, which
he considered basically Brazilian.
The cultural affinities between Brazil
and Africa are, as we have seen, strong.
But we must not forget that another
factor, besides the historical one, has
contributed to these similarities: a common
tropical environment undergoing the
process of modernization. It is important,
though, that modernization must not turn
these peoples against their environment
and cut them off from the sources of
their national cultures. This would risk
reducing their national artistic and cultural
forms to parodies of the modern art
forms prevailing in economically and tech¬
nologically advanced regions that now
tend to dominate the cultures of the
developing countries.
There is no question of rejecting Euro¬
pean cultural elements, or even North
American ones, for they can be adapted
to non-European conditions. But there is
also no question of turning Brazilians into
sub-Europeans or sub-North Americans.
What Brazil is trying to do may well pro¬
vide valid examples for the young African
nations, who may find that they can apply
them to their new social and cultural
situations.
Gilberto Freyre
THE THREE RACES, a canvas by the Brazilian painter Emiliano di
Cavalcanti, symbolizes the harmony reigning between the ethnic
groups that went to form the population of Brazil.

