Books
in 151 languages
A major exhibition of translated works-
one of many events marking the
60th anniversary of the October Revolution
by Boris I. Stukalin
Photo © Tass, Moscow
Each year in June, the village of
Mikhailovskoye in'the Pskov region
of the U.S.S.R. holds a book fair to
commemorate the great Russian
writer Pushkin, who spent part of his
life there.
AN important exhibition of translated
books was held in Moscow last
July. Over 13,000 exhibits were on
show, but they represented only a fraction
of the total Soviet output: since the founda¬
tion of the U.S.S.R., more than 2 billion
copies of over 73,000 translated works have
appeared. This impressive total is made up
of books written by authors from 136 coun¬
tries and published in 151 languages.
BORIS I. STUKALIN is chairman of the State Commit¬
tee of the U. S. S. R. Council of Ministers on Publishing,
Printing and Book Distribution.
As the U.S.S.R. developed, culturally as
well as economically, there was a corres¬
ponding growth in the publication of books,
including translations. In 1961, some 67 mil¬
lion copies of books and booklets by
foreign authors appeared in the U.S.S.R.
Five years later the figure had mounted to
97 million. During the same period 11,497
titles were translated, of which 457 million
copies were printed. Over 4,000 of these
titles (357 million copies) were fiction.
These translations were made not only
into Russian but into dozens of other lan¬
guages spoken by the different nationalities
and ethnic groups of the U.S.S.R.
For many foreign writers printings, are
bigger in the U.S.S.R. than in their own
countries. Over 200 of them have had
works published in the Soviet Union in edi¬
tions ranging from 1 million to 40 million
copies.
In 1976, for example, there were 65 print¬
ings of works by modern American
authors translated into nine languages of
the U.S.S.R. in either book or serial form,
and 25 printings of contemporary French
authors translated into 10 languages. Works
by modem writers constituted 50 per cent of .
the translations from English literature, and L
85 per cent of the Italian literature total. Y
33

UNESCO NEWSROOM
, diplomas of honour to the U.S.S.R. ice hockey
team, the Luxembourg racing driver André Bas¬
tin, and Chris Ripard, a 12-year-old yachtsman
from Malta who successfully opposed the dis¬
qualification of an opponent during an interna¬
tional race, thus losing his chance to take part in
an international regatta. The committee also
made a posthumous award to Juan Manuel San-
tistéban, the Spanish cyclist who was killed in an
accident during the Tour of Italy.
Unesco award for
International Catholic Centre
The Paris-based International Catholic Centre for
Unesco tells Catholics in 100 countries about
Unesco's work through "The Month at Unes¬
co", a newsletter published in English, French,
Spanish and German. To mark the 30th anniver¬
sary of the Centre's creation, Mr. Amadou-
Mahtar M'Bow, the Director-General of Unesco,
presented Unesco's silver medal to Mr. Jean Lar-
naud, Secretary-General of the Centre since its
foundation.
Medal for a militant
Dorothy Nyembe, a leader in the struggle for
human rights in South Africa and in the wom¬
en's and rural labour movements, was sentenced
in March 1969 to 15 years' imprisonment under
the country's apartheid laws. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) has issued a medal portraying Dorothy
Nyembe as Ceres, the Roman goddess of agri¬
culture. Ears of wheat are incorporated into the
portrait design, depicting Dorothy. Nyembe
against prison bars. The reverse side of the
medal shows a woman's hands breaking chains
and supporting a pot in the shape of southern
Africa, from which maize is growing. For further
information, please apply to the FAO Money and
Medals Office, FAO, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Education and the
environment
An intergovernmental conference on environ¬
mental education was held from 14 to 26 Octo¬
ber 1977 at Tbilisi (U.S.S.R.). More than 150
governments, nearly 80 international and regio¬
nal organizations and over 100 non-governmen¬
tal organizations were invited to attend the con¬
ference. Organized by Unesco with the co¬
operation of the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), the conference was con¬
vened to work out recommendations for action
to promote and develop education at national,
regional and international levels that will help
solve and prevent environmental problems.
Unicef greeting cards
Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund,
today "helps 116 developing countries to help
themselves", providing needy children with bet¬
ter nutrition, improved health care, clean, safe
water, and educational opportunities. For
nearly 30 years, sales of its greeting cards have
enabled the public to contribute to Unicef's pro¬
grammes. This year Unicef offers a wide selec
tion of cards ranging from five designs in mini-
format to full-size cards designed by artists from
some ten countries and a stationery portfolio
containing' ten different cards and five post¬
cards. All these cards are now available at
Unicef sales points throughout the world. A
1978 Unicef desk calendar is also available in two
versions, one trilingual (English, French, Span¬
ish), the other bilingual (French and German).
The calendar's theme is "the tree of life". Card
shown here is one of five designs from a 15th-
century Italian treatise on medicinal herbs.
BOOKS IN 151 LANGUAGES
Since the end of World War II about 1 bil¬
lion copies of books from Western coun¬
tries have been published in the U.S.S.R.
This figure includes: American authors,
7,377 works (221 million copies); French
authors, 4,664 works (298 million copies);
British authors, 4,590 works (230 million
copies); Italian authors, 901 works (16 mil¬
lion copies); Danish authors, 482 works (61
million copies).
The publication of translated works by
Asian, African and Latin American writers
is being stepped up. So far 764 books by
Indian writers have appeared (over 30 mil¬
lion copies), 288 translations from Turkish
(over 12 million copies) and 295 from Japa¬
nese (some 12 million copies).
In the last few years there has also been a
growing trend to publish anthologies of
poetry and prose from developing
countries. Four recent examples are: Above
All, a collection of stories by African writers
from Zambia, Kenya, Mozambique, Nigeria
and Uganda (translated into Armenian); a
volume of short stories by 30 modern Latin
American writers from Argentina, Brazil,
Venezuela, Mexico, Uruguay, Peru and
Costa. Rica (translated into Georgian); The
Poetry of Struggle, an anthology of writing
from Angola, Mozambique, Sao Tomé and
Principe, and the Cape Verde Islands; and
This is Our Land! a collection of patriotic
poems from Latin America (both published
in Russian).
A new series entitled "Writers and Think¬
ers of the Orient" has just been launched. It
aims to inform a non-specialized public
about Asian writers and thinkers from anti¬
quity, through medieval times to the pre¬
sent day.
The first Moscow International Book Fair,
held in September this year, marked a new
contribution to the implementation of the
agreements concluded at the Helsinki Con¬
ference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe, held in 1975. More than 1,500
publishers from 67 countries took part.
In the early days of the Soviet Union's
existence, Lenin paid special attention to
the development of book publishing, often
pointing out that only an educated person
can take an informed part in his country's
political life and in the management of the
state. .
In 1913, there were 62 books and booklets
for every 100 persons in Russia. By 1925 the
figure had risen to 153, and in 1974 it rea-'
ched 672. It now stands at over 700. In the
U.S.S.R. today there are some 200 large
publishing houses, two-thirds of which are
based in the national republics, and in
regions and districts. The Soviet Union also
has 360,000 libraries which provide free ser¬
vice to 180 million readers from their fund of
4,000 million books.
But this does not mean that Soviet pub¬
lishing does not come up against difficulties.
For one thing, it cannot keep up with the
constant and rapidly growing demand for
books. Thanks to a far-reaching cultural
policy, almost all Soviet citizens today are
regular readers.
Another problem is the paper shortage.
This cannot be solved merely by felling
more trees each year, even though the
Soviet Union has immense forests. One
method being used to decrease wood con¬
sumption is the collection of waste paper
from the general public. Persons who hand
in a certain quantity of paper are given a
token which enables them to acquire books
that are otherwise difficult to find.
Some 380,000 tons of waste paper have
already been collected for recycling. In this
way 20,000 hectares of forest have been
saved and millions of new books have been
published. This voluntary programme is to
be stepped up, and, combined with mea¬
sures being taken to improve the paper
industry, is enabling us to satisfy the
demand for reading materials more fully.
No matter how quickly the audio-visual
media develop, we are convinced that
books will never lose their place as the
heralds of the ideals of peace, progress and
cooperation between peoples.
Boris I. Stukalin
34.
