Among the great civilizations of world history, Arab Islamic culture of
the classical age occupies a place of major importance. Between the
9th and the 13th centuries this brilliant and original civilization left a
distinctive mark on a vast territory stretching from Baghdad on the
Tigris, across the Near East, the Middle East and North Africa to the
Iberian peninsula. Its influence was felt in many other parts of the
world, and it served as an indispensable link between Antiquity and
the medieval Western world.
by
Mohammed
A. Sinaceur



A GOLDEN AGE OF ARAB CULTURE
Cities
that blossomed
in the desert
NO lapidary phrase, however brilliant,
can fully evoke the complexities
of a culture, and anyone who sets
out to describe the achievements of a
civilization should take care to avoid over¬
simplification. This warning has particular
force in the case of Arab civilization, whose
origins lay in a message of universal sig¬
nificance among a people which stormed
the ramparts of Eastern and Western
powers alike.
Time-honoured judgements of the type:
"Arab civilization is above all a reflection
of its nomad ancestry" are neither wholly
true nor wholly false. They should be
regarded as shortcuts across a dual reality:
the reality of facts and the reality of the
impressions that the facts provoke.
For although Islam was born in the
desert, its development was accompanied
by urbanization on a remarkable scale. The
builders of the Muslim empire were also
great founders of cities such as Kufa,
Basra, Baghdad (the largest city in the
world during the 9th century A.D.), Shiraz,
Damascus, Aleppo, Cairo, Kairouan,
Tunis, Mehdia, Algiers, Tlemcen, Cordoba,
Saragossa, Sijilmasa and Timbuktu.
It is undoubtedly a paradox that a people
born and raised in the desert wastes should
be inspired to create or revive so many
cities. Where did this impulse come from?
MOHAMMED ALLAL SINACEUR, head of Unesco's
Division of Philosophy, was formerly a department head
at the French National Centre for Scientific Research
and laterprofessor of sociology at Hassan II University
in Casablanca (Morocco). He has published a number
of articles, most of them on philosophical problems
and the history of mathematics.
Did it reflect a need to settle down, to
create "with the solidity of stone" a cradle
for the infant religion? Was it to provide
the body politic the statewith continuity
and stability?
This was certainly the case. But there
was also another factor: the crucial import¬
ance of trade (to which Mecca owed its
very existence) and its expansion on a scale
matching that of the then-known world.
The great economic and social revolution
that was Islam may explain how a desert
civilization also came to have the strongly
urban flavour whose importance has all
too often been neglected by the historians
of world urban movements.
Arabia was a thoroughfare, the cross¬
roads of trade routes linking the great
civilizations of East and West. At its hub,
halfway between the Yemen and Syria,
was Mecca, whose interests lay in secur¬
ing the highways along which its fortunes
flowed. To keep peace, it wove a fabric
of alliances between the desert nomads
and the city clans.
Islam brought into contact, and fre¬
quently supplanted, the earlier civilizations
along this thoroughfare, reviving the
embers of many an ancient settlement and
building new cities, either to control the
trade routes that stretched from China to
Spain, or to serve as staging posts on
them.
Muslim conquest opened vast territories
to the city-builders. Urbanization progress¬
ed by leaps and bounds, from Mesopota¬
mia, where it existed already, to Syria and
Egypt, where it was in decline, and to
Africa, where it had long been dead.
Ancient settlements enjoyed a new lease
of life, and their size, population and
social and economic importance increased
accordingly. Thus, 10th-century Baghdad
had more than a million inhabitants,
Damascus and Cordoba between 300,000
and 400,000, and Cairo half a million.
These figures are all the more impressive
when we remember that the flourishing
cities of medieval Europe had populations
of scarcely more than 30,000 or 40,000, and I

In this issue of the Unesco Courier writers and historians from the Arab
world examine some facets of this great cultural flowering.
Unesco is currently developing a comprehensive programme of studies
on Arab culture. It aims to bring out the "authenticity, cohesion, unity
and universality" of Arab culture, as well as throw light on the
contribution of Arab Islamic culture to other cultures, and their
interrelations. Finally, in 1979 Unesco will organize a major conference
on cultural policies in the Arab world.
The city is one of the most
outstanding achievements
of Arab civilization, often
representing a triumph of
ingenuity over
unfavourable natural
conditions. And at the
heart of the city is the
mosque. Left, the
precinct of the great
mosque at Samarra (Iraq),
capital of the caliphs of
the Abbasid dynasty
between 838 and 889 A.D.
Covering an area of some
38,000 sq. metres, it was
one of the largest
mosques in Islam. The
outer wall, with its 16
entrances, is still
dominated by.the 50-
metre-high Al-Malouiya
spiral minaret (right)
once linked to the
mosque by a bridge.

that Paris, for example, did not reach the
300,000 mark until the 14th century.
Such rapid growth established the city's
ascendancy over the surrounding country¬
side, which became a source of food and
manpower. It would be wrong, however,
to assume that the city lived entirely off
the land, for the latter was generally too
poor to provide all the commodities requir¬
ed by a sophisticated society. Indeed,
isolated and backward rural communities
were more of a threat than a help to the
cities, whose preoccupation with the need
for security along the caravan routes led
them to form alliances with nomadic
tribes and to leave the peasants in a com¬
mercial backwater, cut off from the tide of
orthodox Islam.
The 14th-century Arab historian Ibn
Khaldun noted the stubbornness of these
country-dwellers, frequently entrenched
in mountain fastnesses, and their meagre
contribution to the prosperity of the great
Muslim cities.
This dependence on trade explains the
importance of the merchants, not only
along the highways of Arabia but in far-off
Africa as well. It was they who fitted out
the caravans which made their way across
the sandy, stony wastes towards Tinduf,
Tripoli and Benghazi in the north, and
towards Timbuktu, Kano and Abech in the
south.
All these cities shared a common origin
as meeting-places for the enterprising
camel-drivers of the Sahara and a handful
of equally enterprising businessmen from
the towns of the Mediterranean coast.
Their creation was -a complex process,
sometimes involving the settlement of
previously nomadic tribes along the fringes i
of the desert. I
Mazy desert townscapes
In the midst of barren desert, tightly
packed settlements have formed and
clustered around wells and waterholes.
Left, three aerial views, each taken from
a different height and angle, show the
one-storey houses and labyrinthine alleys
of Souk El Oued (Algeria). Each dwelling
has a courtyard that is separated from
yet at the same time joined to its
neighbour by windowless walls.
One of the most delightful literary
portrayals of everyday life in Arab
countries during the Middle Ages is the
Maqamat (or "Assemblies"), a collection
of tales written bv Al-Hariri (1054-1122).
Opposite, a scene painted for an
illustrated edition of the Maqamat
produced in Baghdad (Iraq) in 1237. It
shows two travellers in conversation
with a passerby near a village. In
background are the mosque and its
minaret, and the arches of the bazaar,
thronged with merchants and their
customers.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris


AVA«#^rAW/uu'#/'#
* ! » » t
M »MlZ». » m
«» J
W&

Compass points
of Islam
Frontispiece of a 16th-century
atlas by Muhammad Sharfi
of Sfax (Tunisia). Round the edge
of the circle are the names of the
Islamic countries. They are
connected by lines to the Ka'ba
(at centre), the sacred shrine at
Mecca containing the Black
Stone, an object of veneration
dating back to pre-lslamic times.
The corner in which the Stone is
fixed is known as the black
corner, the others being named
the Yemen (south), Iraq (north)
and Syrian (west) corners, from
the lands to which they
approximately point. Note that
the north is shown at bottom
of "map", according to a practice
often followed by Arab
cartographers.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.
k The prosperity of these trading centres
'and the wealth and prestige of the great
merchant adventurers were reflected in
their buildings in palaces, mosques and
colleges known as madrasahs. (See article
page 35).
The layout of the city reflected its eco¬
nomic and social role. At its heart lay the
suq, the market district, and at the heart
of the suq stood the principal mosque,
symbol of a discipline which transcended
the petty constraints of day-to-day affairs.
This marriage of the sacred and the secular,
of piety and profitwhich can still be
seen today in the suqs of such cities as
Fez and Tunis recalls the remark attribut¬
ed to the Caliph Omar, that "in all things,
the bazaar and the mosque are in
harmony".
Not far from the suqs were the funduqs,
warehouses and lodgings for the mer¬
chants, and the qaysarriyya, where pre¬
cious goods were kept under lock and key.
The same neighbourhood contained the
place of the money-changers and some¬
times a mint.
This was the core of the city. Around
it lay a veritable labyrinth of little streets
and lanes, each lined with the open-fronted
workshops of groups of craftsmen busily
weaving, carving, dyeing, beating out
copper and generally engaged in the
thousand-and-one activities of their trades.
To an outsider, fascinated by the
mystery of blind, trellis-shaded alleys,
streets that kept the secrets of houses
hidden behind high, windowless walls,
and thoroughfares noisy with the hubbub
of the market, this workaday world, in
which merchant and broker rubbed shoul¬
ders with journeyman and porter, must
have seemed like chaos.
But system was there, and nowhere
more so than in the person of the muhtasib,
who as the symbol of municipal authority
was responsible for the regularity of deal¬
ings and for the maintenance of Islamic
order, the overriding precept of which was
to do good and to prevent evil.
The muhtasib's specific functions varied
from city to city. In Fez, for example, he
was officially appointed by the central
authorities to supervise transactions, to
inspect weights and measures, to fix
prices and to oversee the functioning of
the ovens, the markets, the manufactories
and the public baths.
In Ottoman Cairo, this task was assumed
by a senior officer of the Odjaq (the militia
of the pasha's government), assisted by
a team of agents including a treasurer, a
secretary, a scalesman and a punishment
squad.
His writ ran over much of the Cairo
markets, and more particularly over activi¬
ties connected with the production of
edible and consumer goods. He was also
responsible for the collection of taxes levied
on imported foodstuffs. On his tours of
inspection he was preceded by a scales-
man, carrying a weighing instrument
fitted with standard weights, and followed
by a punishment squad, ready to administer
summary chastisement which was some¬
times severe.
But the tiresome business of quality
control was less appealing than pomp and
circumstance, and the "inspector of
weights and measures" tended to be seen
more frequently at the official ceremonies
of the trade guilds than among the stalls
of the market-place.
Like those of the muhtasib, the functions
of the guilds also varied in different times
and places, but the guilds were all related
in one way or another to the futuwwa, a
complex institution characteristic of the
Islamic city.
The futuwwa (a name derived from the
word "fata", meaning a young man, and
by extension a "gallant and generous
person") was a professional association of
craftsmen, membership of which was
subject to initiatory rites. According to
the great traveller Ibn Batuta, who en¬
countered such groups in the 14th-century
Muslim world, the creation of these
brotherhoods of young men pledged to
comradeship and mutual devotion probably
originated at an early date, before the
reign of the Abbasid dynasty (which began
in the mid-8th century).
These groups strengthened the structure
of the guild system, which imposed disci¬
pline and cohesion on the urban commu¬
nity in cities such as Fez, where the term
futuwwa appears to have been unknown.
Through the guilds everyone knew every¬
one else, everyone was linked by the same
grapevine of information and subject to
the same unwritten laws, transgression of
which was discouraged by the deterrent
of judgement by one's peers.
In some parts of the Muslim world,
particularly in Egypt, detailed and syste¬
matic treatises were written about the
futuwwa, describing such rites as the
initiation ceremony, in which new members
were invested with a knotted waist-cord.
(See also article page 12).
These texts ascribed to the futuwwa,
and to the different trades and crafts of
its members, a mystical or religious origin.
Thus, the ceremony of the waist-cord was
traced back to the investiture of Ali,
"Commander of the Faithful" and cousin
and son-in-law of Muhammad, around
whose waist the cord was placed by the
Prophet himself, who had been initiated in
the same manner by the angel Gabriel.
The whole question of initiation and the
transmission of skill and authority inevitably
brings to mind the religious fraternities,
the mystical equivalents of the guilds.
The religious order of the dervishes
recruited most of its members from among
the artisans and merchants, who also
provided the membership of most of the
guilds. The relationship between the two
types of association is a complex one,
reflecting the deep interpénétration of
spiritual and professional life. Moreover,
both types assumed a more or less defini¬
tive form at the same moment in history.
The moral code thus drew its strength
from the well-spring of religion.
From the 16th century onwards, the
guilds and religious fraternities seem to
share the same attachment to tradition
and the same principle of submission tok
authority. Thus apprenticeship of all*

y kinds, whether manual or intellectual, was
seen as a process of initiation involving
the transmission of knowledge through a
master-pupil relationship.
In cultural terms, this is significant. The
world of the corporations of craftsmen
and traders and the worlds of the mosque
and the university had many points of
contact. The "wise man", who was both
the caretaker of religion and the guarantor
that its laws were applied, became a
dominant figure in the intellectual and
moral life of the urban community.
Intellectual life was dominated by the
traditional Islamic sciences, inherited from
the Greeks and subsequently developed.
The new Islamic city, whose foundations
were set in the soil of more than one
ancient civilization, provided favourable
conditions for the development of medi¬
cine, astronomy and mathematics,
sciences which could be applied to satisfy
new needs.
Intellectual activity was intense, nurtur¬
ed sometimes by polemics, frequently by
research, and invariably by the spirit of
inquiry which underlies all human contact
and which served as the tap-root of an
urban culture that was cosmopolitan in its
diversity.
Among many controversies which illus¬
trate this intellectual ferment is one con¬
cerning the relationship between Arabic
grammar and Greek logic. In the course
of a debate on the subject, recorded by
Abu-Hayyan at-Tawhidi, the distinguished
philologist As-Sirafi confounded the logi¬
cian Matta by obliging him to admit that
linguistic precision took precedence over
logic, since imprecision was a source of
obscurity and nonsense, and was thus
totally illogical.
We may detect behind this spirited
defence of Arab culture the pride of men
whose empiricism and open-mindedness
led them to prefer the deciphering of
divinely inspired realities to the sterility of
deductive reasoning.
But if the outlook that was advocated,
taught and ordained was an essentially
pragmatic one, this urban cukure, imbued
with liberty and humanism, by no means
neglected its religious origins. Nor did it
neglect the diverse and powerful currents
of pre-lslamic Arab culture, whose value
was increasingly recognized, firstly as a
component of a specific cultural. identity
and later as an indication that a society
which had not lost its vitality was determin¬
ed to resist decline.
But there came a moment when the
tide of, innovation was checked by a
counter-current which carried it into trie
backwaters of traditionalism. The result
was that thought, creativity, teaching and
belief became increasingly hidebound. In
an atmosphere of rigidity, stratification
and introspection, the religious fraternities,
the guilds and the principle of authority in
education became the pillars of religious,
economic and intellectual life.
In spite of such setbacks, however,
Arab culture continued to evolve . under
the profound imprint of the city.. The
university, practising the "commerce" of
science, was in itself a guild par excellence.
It played an essential role in urban life as a
school for the city's administrators and
the source of its moral inspiration, while
its activities, like those of business and
trade, generated a culture that facilitated
communication.
And if, as we have seen, the rural world
was neglected in the alliance between the
cities and the nomad tribes, there can be
no doubt that urban prosperity, cultural
efflorescence and commercial prosperity
invariably went hand in hand.
Thus the cities were not merely dots on
the economic map. They were also focal
points of an intellectual network, centres
of religious life and stages on the pilgrims'
ways.
It was traffic, the coming and going of
persons and goods throughout the Muslim
world, that unified all aspects of Islamic
life. The journey to a centre of trade was
also a journey to a centre of study and of
culture. A pole of attraction for the
merchant . was also a magnet for the
scholar.
This explains why culture leap-frogged
over the peasantry from metropolis to
metropolis, uniting almost all the cities of
Islam in a single pattern. There was a
greater degree of mutual understanding
and communication between Cordoba,
Fez, Baghdad and Samarkand than be¬
tween these cities and their surrounding
rural areas.
Islamic culture thus served not only as
a highway for communication but also as
a bridge which facilitated the creation and
maintenance of a strong degree of unity
in urban life. It is significant that through¬
out the territories of Islam there was no
real system of hostelries or inns. It was
the funduq and the mosque that welcom¬
ed the traveller and found him lodging.
The urbanization of Islam spread far and
wide, bringing wealth and the civilization
of the city to the doorstep of the West,
whose own Renaissance developed out of
this flow of learning.
This phenomenon was unprecedented
in the history of cultures and civilizations.
Never before had there been a movement
as complex, as vast or as rich in potential
for unification on a world-wide scale. From
Baghdad in the East to Cordoba in the
West, from the West to Byzantium, and
from Christian Byzantium to the Muslim
Orient, new territories were opened up for
trade and new circuits established for the
transmission of religious, intellectual,
economic and political ideas.
Under the impact of the city-builders of
Islam, the pulse of universal history assum¬
ed a different rhythm, one that would be
felt right up to the present day. What
traveller could deny the truth of these
words: "You will discover no new coun¬
tries; you will discover no new shores. The
city will be with you everywhere". The
omnipresent city!
The cities of Islam were garden cities.
Jealously guarded behind walls whose
height discouraged curious eyes lay an
enchanting domain of water and domesti¬
cated greenery. Gardens brought life to
"a patch of desert", provided a setting for
"unworldly dreams" and offered an
invitation to "thoughtless yet thoughtful"
reveries.
Such silence and immobility were
luxuries, perhaps; they are even more so
in today's fast-moving industrial age. But
should we not endeavour to preserve and
restore something of this peaceful universe
of infinite horizons, where beings and
elements alike sing praise to human friend¬
ship in a world eternally young?
Mohammed A. Sinaceur
10

Preserving
the historic Medina of Fez
One of the most prestigious centres of ancient Islam and once
the capital of Morocco, the labyrinthine Medina of Fez still
looks much as it did in medieval times. With its industrious
population of artisans and tradesmen leatherworkers,
saddlers, potters, tanners, tile-makers and enamellers,
woodcarvers and weavers the Medina is bursting at the
seams. The conservation of such a unique site, rich in historic
monuments, poses difficult problems. The Moroccan
government, in collaboration with Unesco, is drawing up a
master plan to preserve the historical character of the Medina
while adapting it to modern needs.
CONTINUED PAGE 12
Photo Lengyel-Unesco.
1. Monumental gateway was part of the ramparts
surrounding medieval Fez. Its elegance attests to the
city's reputation as a great artistic and intellectual centre.
2. Olive groves surround the jumbled rooftops and slender
minarets of Fez. In the foreground, the old city.
3. Stalls line the narrow, cobbled streets of the Medina.
On this "thoroughfare" sheltered by bamboo matting,
everything from herbs to jewellery is sold.
4. Muqarna, or "honeycomb" ceiling graces AI Qarawiyin
Mosque. The largest in north Africa, it can accommodate
some 22,000 worshippers.
11

FEZ (continued)
Fez is known in Arabic as Fas or pick. According to one tradition, the city
is so named because its founder Moulay Idris buried a pick on the site of the new
settlement in 790 A.D. to symbolize its vocation as a centre for craftsmen.
Craftsmen belonged to a trade corporation, or guild, which supervised the
training of apprentices and carefully controlled the price and quality of
manufactured goods. At right, a tannery where workers dye leather in large,
round vats. Tanneries, like other trades involving pollution, tended to be located
on the edge of Islamic cities. Nearby, a vendor (far right) proudly displays his
woven baskets, another of Fez's traditional crafts. In the Middle Ages, raw
materials and finished goods were stored in lavishly decorated warehouses
. known as funduqs (below).
Photo Roland Michaud © Rapho, Paris.
Photo Louis-Yves Loirat © Rapho, Paris.

