SPANISH
OVERSEAS
Born 1,000 years ago,
the Spanish language
is today spoken by
200 million Latin
Americans
by Marcos A. Morinigo
MARCOS A. MORINIGO, Argentinian philologist,
is director of the Institute of Philology at the university
of Buenos Aires. He has taught at several universities
in North and South America and has published many
studies on Spanish literature and philology.
62

WHEN Castile recently celebrated
its 1,000th anniversary, no one
thought to have a special cere¬
mony for the 1,000th birthday of the Cas-
tilian language. This is most certainly an
oversight, for over the centuries it has
become a living bond between peoples and
continents.
The history of a language is closely linked
to that of the people who speak it. When
their fortunes run high, the language is
invested with vigour and prestige, but when
times are less fortunate, it begins to atrophy.
The first appearance of Castilian as a
written language dates back to- the 10th
century A.D., in the form of a scribe's gloss
on a manuscript written in low Latin. Even
at this date, Castilian possessed certain
forms of its own, which distinguished it
from neighbouring dialects. These inno¬
vations were to render the other dialects
archaic.
Castilian began to appear in literary form
to describe the exploits of great popular
heroes and to narrate local events. Else¬
where in Spain, Latin continued to be used
for these purposes, although the scribes no
longer had a sufficient grasp of the lan¬
guage and sprinkled their manuscripts with
the vernacular, with which they were more
familiar.
The oldest Castilian literature probably
consists of short poems about famous
court figures. These were followed by more
ambitious works on similar themes.
The form of Castilian spoken In the
capital of Castile, Burgos, became Spain's
literary language, in which lyric and epic
poetry, novels, and historical, religious and
scholarly works would be written. Writers
from parts of Spain speaking other dialects
would opt for Castilian when seeking to
reach a national audience.
In 1492, the Reconquista, the conquest
of Moorish Spain by the Spaniards, came to
an end with the fall of the Muslim Kingdom
of Granada. In the same year, Christopher
Columbus brought a "new world" to the
kings of Castile and Leon, an unhoped-for
gift which fate had laid in their hands.
The Spanish monarchs were eager to find
out the exact size of their vast new posses¬
sions, and were hungry for information
about the people, the natural life and pro¬
ducts of the New World. Countless expe¬
ditions set sail from the ports of Castile to
the Americas.
Mariners set out In search of gold and
spices. At one point Columbus and his
crew thought they had reached the coasts
of the fabulous Golden Peninsula orCipango
(Japan). The Spanish adventurer Lucas
Vasquez de Ayllon made landfall on the '
snow-bound coasts of Virginia, to the vast
disappointment of the gold-hunters. For,
according to a widespread belief which
Columbus shared, gold was the son of the
sun and only to be found in hot countries.
It was gold that determined the direction
of Columbus's voyages and took him to the
coasts of Venezuela and Colombia, to
Panama. Nicaragua and the Caribbean.
The lure of gold also drew the conquis¬
tadors Grijalva, Cortés and Panfilo de
Narvaez to the coasts of Mexico, Spaniards
and Portuguese to Brazil, Soils to the Rio
del Plata, and Pizarro to Peru.
The Spanish kings set themselves the
goal of snatching the souls of the infidels
from the jaws of Hell and converting them
to Christianity.
The Spanish- humanists, for their part,
saw the whole of America as .a vast region
where Spanish would be spoken.
Following in the footsteps of the Spanish
grammarian Debrija (1444-1522), the human¬
ists identified the glory of the Spanish
language with their nation's imperial des¬
tiny and were ready to see parallels between
Spanish and the Latin which had been prop¬
agated by the armies of the Roman empire.
"If Spain rules and has contacts with other
parts of the world, the old and the new, the
Spanish language must be taught in the
same way as Latin".
Within 20 years, the Indians of the Antilles
were speaking Spanish with Bartolomé de
n *y- J 7?
J^uJeaot-sa^fOfU^.^tArnoénáí
l*J . V-» ".-J-' I
/w^-ittf-. Qu*4m-fu£tun*.'naUwfu-
<t>*lk-£<«"3!rn orflb«fVMntYl«nfb.
fita': awmcn 'men «nfaf^iñiVvJ-ui».
I lmpvAtf»«ffí,¿M*^it«lmuír-T
î>>»* 1 MVu*«in« rifa Inúyoo ¿oí ¿
.CrfOt
Above, the earliest known text in the Castilian
language, written 1,000 years ago in 977 A.D.
It consists of 43 words penned by an
anonymous monk of the monastery of San
Millán de la Cogolla, in Logroño, northern
Spain. Today Castilian is spoken by almost
300 million persons, mainly in Latin America
and Spain.
Las Casas. Soon after, in Mexico, the
Tlaxcaltecas began to learn Spanish, fol¬
lowed by the Aztec nobles and their sons.
Further south, the household of the Inca
studied Spanish, and when the navigator
Alvaro Nuñez reached the forests of Para¬
guay in 1541, it was in Spanish that the
Guaranis greeted him.
Indeed, by the middle of the 16th century,
Spanish was the only language spoken in
the streets of Potosi (Bolivia), as well in
Cajamarca and Cuzco (Peru) and in Quito
(Ecuador).
The conquistadors felt that it was not for
them to learn the languages of the conquer¬
ed territories, but that their vassals should
speak the language of their victors. In La
Araucana, his great epic about the struggle
of the^Araucanian Indians against the
Spanish invaders, the poet Alonso de Ercilla
(1533-1594) noted with astonishment that
three of the conquistadors, including "the
valiant Ibarra", had learned the Indians'
language.
The cities of the Rio de la Plata region,
such as Asunción, Corrientes and Concep¬
ción, where a high percentage of the popu¬
lation was Indian, were bilingual. But Santa
Fé and Buenos Aires, which were founded
by bilingual mestizos with a large following
of Indian servants, became completely
Spanish cities.
Spanish has always been intensively
taught in Latin America. In May 1770,
Charles III signed the Real Cédula, royal
letters ordering the colonial authorities to
do everything within their power to promote
the teaching of Spanish to the Indians. In
most cases the king's instructions were not
carried out, but the future governments of
independent Latin America were to carry
out his wishes, and the use of Spanish
spread rapidly in the 19th century.
Local languages did not, of course,
disappear and, with the exception of Uru¬
guay, they are still spoken from Mexico to
Patagonia, though less so today than in the
past.
Literacy campaigns and the development
of public schooling obviously promote the
teaching of the official language of the
country Spanish. Whether admitted or
not, such programmes push indigenous
tongues into the background, where they
fall into oblivion.
In a world where standardization is
progressing by leaps and bounds, a stan¬
dard language is an excellent way of spread¬
ing culture.
In Latin America today, local languages
are little more than archeological relics and
Spanish is the only substitute for them, not
only because it is spoken by 200 million
people; not only because for five centuries
their most eloquent spokesmen have used
it; nor because Latin America's greatest
works of literature have been written in it:
but because the Spanish language has
given those who can speak it the concepts
and forms of Western culture.
Marcos A. Morinigo
63
