by César
Fernandez Moreno


THE TANGO
TANGLE
WHEN we Argentinians set out in
search of our identity, we usu¬
ally encounter a void.
The landscape of the pampa is not a
landscape at all; in the words of the Span¬
ish essayist Ortega y Gasset, it is no more
than a promise of one. In the northwest
there are a few lingering remnants of the
Inca culture and in the northeast something
of Guarani culture. But only "frontier"
forms of these cultures have survived.
Patagonia is an immense region, virtually
uninhabited, nothing but a road.
For the people of Buenos Aires, known
as Porteños to mark the capital's role as a
great seaport, the problem is even more
serious. Buenos Aires is such a cosmopo¬
litan city that it is almost impossible to
define its identity.
So we must start with the assumption
that the typical Porteño has no cultural
identity of his own or, put in another way,
his cultural identity lies in not having one.
This is a fair criticism, and one which
Argentinians from outside the capital
would level against the Porteños a criti¬
cism which is serious as well as just since
more than one-third of Argentina's popu¬
lation lives in the Buenos Aires conurbation.
Most Porteños are second- or third-gen¬
eration immigrants. They often tease each
other about the nationality of their fore¬
bears. The Gallego (the nickname given
the Spaniard) makes fun of the Ruso (the
Jew); the Ruso mocks the Tano (the
Italian) and the Tano derides the Gallego.
In short, everyone makes fun of everyone
else. Yet beneath it all runs a deep feeling
of brotherhood.
At what level of society is the typical
Porteño to be found? Certainly not among
CESAR FERNANDEZ MORENO, Argentinian essay¬
ist and poet, is director of Unesco's Regional Office
for Culture in Latin America and the Caribbean and
head of the Unesco programme of cultural studies on
Latin America. Among his published works on culture
are La Realidad y los Papeles ("Books and Reality",
1967) and Argentina (1972). He has founded and
directed various literary magazines and has written for
and about radio, television and the cinema in Latin
America. His principal work of poetry is Argentina
hasta la Muerte ¡"Argentina to the Death", 1963).
the landowners, for they have been "deper¬
sonalized" by their rural and nationalist
commitments; they resemble equivalent
élites in other countries. Not among the
executives, filled with admiration for "the
American way of life". Not among the
intellectuals, who are for the most part set
on behaving like Europeans. Nor among
the working class, whose life is suburban
rather than urban.
The typical Porteño is found primarily
in the heart of Buenos Aires, in a social
class consisting mainly of shopkeepers,
small manufacturers and office workers.
It is here that one finds all the traits
of the Porteño: a comfortable, reasonably
hedonistic life, a certain awareness of this
hedonism, an irreverent and flaccid political
involvement. As many of these character¬
istics are also found in the neighbouring
city of Montevideo, a friendly rivalry has
grown up between the Porteños and their
Uruguayan brothers.
A brief list of Porteño characteristics
would include:
A love of café life (no doubt imported
from Spain) and its activities: dice and
billiards. Café life tends to be identified
with friendship.
' A fondness for cabarets (a term obviously
taken from the French) and a dash of
machismo, accompanied by respect for
one's wife, the patrona.
' A taste for asado (beef grilled over a
slow fire) which these city people have
borrowed from the gauchos.
A healthy appetite, which is usually
considered a virtue in well-fed commu¬
nities. The Porteño has enriched his
traditional meat diet with Italian pastas
and pizzas (bound up with the mamma,
the mother figure).
A liking for mate, the Latin American
equivalent of tea. Originally a Paraguayan
brew, it is now the national drink of
Uruguay and Argentina as well. As the
French writer Raymond Queneau ironic¬
ally noted: "Drink mate and you turn into
an Argentinian."
1 A use of language swinging between
lunfardo, an Ítalo-Porteño dialect that
originally developed in the Buenos Aires
underworld, and the vernacular. Other
60

An Argentinian writer unravels
the mystery surrounding Buenos Aires'
favourite song and dance
The tango, according to the
Argentinian writer Ernesto Sàbato,
"is perhaps the most original
creation of the Rio de la Plata."
As such, it has inspired numerous
artists, three of whose drawings are
shown here.
Porteño linguistic peculiarities include the
use of reversed syllables "tango", for
example becomes "gotan"and of
borrowings from other immigrant dia¬
lects.
Last but not least, an inordinate love of
the tango, which the Porteño considers as
the purest form of music and philosophy.
But here we come up against a problem:
is the tango really Argentinian?
The origin of the tango is a hotly dis¬
puted point in the Rio de la Plata region:
did it begin in Argentina or Uruguay? To
solve this problem it is necessary to go
back to the musical folklore of Andalusia,
since the striking similarity between the
words "fandango" and "tango" is matched
by the closeness of their musical relation¬
ship. But let us move a little further south,
to Africa.
For if is very likely that the tango origi¬
nated in Africa and then developed in
Spain. Its original version was probably
brought to America by black slaves and
Andalusian settlers, whose music had
already been influenced by African rhythms.
The Cuban musicologist Argeliers León
has pointed out that the first blacks reached
America in the ships of Christopher Colum¬
bus, which, of course, sailed from Spain.
Once in America, they kept up their own
festivals, which, however, slowly blended
with those imposed on them by the Catho¬
lic Church. "In Uruguay," he notes, "these
processional celebrations bring together
such dance and musical forms as the
calenda, the tango, the candomblé, the
chicha, the bambula and the samba."
Latin-American Africanists and anthro¬
pologists have paid particular attention to
the origin of the word tango. Some say it
derives from the Congolese word iango (a
type of dance); others maintain that it is an
onomatopoeic rendering of the sound of a
drum-beat. The French specialist on Latin
America, Roger Bastide, believes that
tango comes from the Bantu word tamgu,
which means "to dance". For the Argen¬
tinian specialist on Africa, Ortiz Oderigo,
"the expression tango is purely and simply
a corruption of the name 'Shango', the god
of storms and thunder in the mythology of
the Yorubas of Nigeria.
So much for philology. Ortiz Oderigo
does not put forward an opinion about the
relationship between the earliest negro
tangos and the later Rio de la Plata ver¬
sions. He does, however, present a list of
antecedents which, starting in the 15th
century, indicate a direct continuity with
popular Latin American and even with
Andalusian music. And he states cate¬
gorically that the Andalusian tango "results
from a blend of Afro-Spanish music".
During the colonial period, the Spanish
Viceroy Vertiz allowed popular dances to
be held in the Ranchería theatre in Buenos
Aires. The favourite dance was the fan¬
dango, which already foreshadowed some
of the steps of the tango. This custom of
popular dancing reached the height of its
popularity in the mid-19th century, during
the dictatorship of Juan Manuel de Rosas.
It was to disappear a little later in the gen¬
eral vogue for Europeanization.
Around the turn of the century, as the
cities expanded and the less-favoured
classes became better-off, the tango again
emerged as the "typical" music of the Rio
de la Plata cities.
In 1870, the blacks of Buenos Aires
organized themselves into "nations",
according to their countries of origin, and
groups of carnival masqueraders appeared
in Montevideo. In Uruguay, the tango
appeared in a particularly authentic form,
since Montevideo had a bigger black popu¬
lation than Argentina, whose blacks had
begun to emigrate to the mines in the north.
The Porteño tango was born sometime
around 1880 in suburban bars, in bordellos
and among "women of ill repute". Some
specialists even claim to know the actual
place: the Corrales Viejos slaughterhouse.
The tango was also enriched by improvised
poems sung by the muleteers and gaucho
minstrels of the pampas.
Two currents, then, flowed together to
create the tango: a musical current of
negro-Andalusian origin and a literary one
of gaucho origin. The gaucho's mastery of
the guitar was passed on to city-dwelling
composers, and his gift for improvising
verse was taken up by poets writing ink
dialect. As any budding Argentinian poet f
61

can testify, these two great poetic achieve¬
ments gaucho lyrical poetry and the tan-
!go are not easy to live up to.
About the same time as the first tangos
with lyrics appeared, the first sencillismo
!( easy-to-read) and vanguardismo (avant-
garde) texts were published. They pointed
the way to all later developments in Argen¬
tinian poetry. Thus the incorporation of
verse into the music of the tango created a
common denominator between it and the
great literature of Argentina.
Argentinian literature and the tango
share another common feature: nostalgia.
The tangos express a longing for the
adventurous life of the gaucho or the
criminal, of the man whose luck has run
out or whose woman has deserted him.
In the same vein, serious Argentinian
poetry of the early 20th cefitury sprang
from the nostalgia of the uprooted immi¬
grant. The urban poetry of Jorge Luis
Borges in the next generation also express¬
ed nostalgia for the Buenos Aires under¬
world.
Such is the story of the tango's social
climb, if the conquest of the privileged
classes can be considered a climb. From
the slaves it passed to the poor, from them
to the middle class and the aristocracy.
Between the two World Wars, the tango
made its way to Europe, reaching the height
of sgccess with the triumph of its greatest
exponent, the singer Carlos Gardel.
Through personal appearances and films,
Gardel brought the tango to a wider
audience, first in France and the United
States and then throughout Latin America.
With Gardel, the tango reached its widest
public but not its highest musical develop¬
ment, which had already been achieved
before Gardel's "tango-song".
With his great gifts as a singer and his
personal charisma, Gardel projected the
¡mage of the masterful Argentinian male.
At that time, anything from Argentina was
assured of success. The country exported
commodities of all kinds: from its grain and
meat to its football and its tango. But to be
perfectly honest, one must admit that this
national Argentinian idol was... French. He
was born in Toulouse in 1890 and arrived in
Argentina at the age of three.
Although they may not know much
about him, Europeans identify the gaucho
with the tango, and in the 1920s and 1930s,
the European public considered that no
tango could be genuine unless danced and
sung by people dressed up like gauchos.
In fact they were not far wrong, consider¬
ing the gaucho's contribution to the tango.
When performed in films or plays today,
the tango generally brings a slightly ironic
smile to people's lips. Nevertheless, its
rhythms can still be heard in many a French
hit song, and in Japan it is so popular that
bands reproduce with oriental precision the
rhythms that have reached them from
Buenos Aires.
The tango has also been used to express
more deep-seated emotional tensions, as
in the play Tango by the Pole Slavomir
Mrozeck and in the film Last Tango in Paris
by the Italian director Bernardo Bertolucci.
In Argentina today, the tango is paradox
ically on its way in. ..and out. On the one
hand, it is looked on as a relic from the
past, since only the older generation still .
remembers how to dance it; the younger
generation has replaced Carlos Gardel with
more vociferous idols. On the other hand,
an "avant-garde tango" is making its mark,
backed by the composer Astor Piazzolo
and by the intellectuals.
The tango has been aptly defined by the
film director Simon Feldman as "the
sound of the life of Buenos Aires, a dis¬
tillation of the city". But there are times
when the city seems indifferent, if not
hostile or repressive, towards its own
sound. When Feldman finished his full-
length documentary on the tango in 1970,
he had great difficulty in getting it shown in
Buenos Aires, . whereas in Europe and
North America it was snapped up by
television.
A final pessimistic note: the great expo¬
nents of the tango have been short-lived.
There is even a tradition that tango singers
die in accidents, beginning with the great
Carlos Gardel, who was burnt to death in
a plane crash in 1935.
But sometimes the dead survive in myths
which make them larger than life. People
still say, metaphorically, of Gardel, 42 years
after his death: "Carlos is singing better
every day". There are even fans who
believe, or who wish to believe, that he is
still, alive somewhere in Latin America. In
some Latin American countries the anni¬
versary of his death is commemorated each
year.
In one way or another, the tango still
asserts its vitality in Argentina and else¬
where in the world. It is one of the most
universal products that the Porteños, and
Argentina itself, could present when wish¬
ing to affirm their cultural identity.
César Fernandez Moreno

