SPINOZA
PHILOSOPHER OF
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM
by Ben Rekers
THREE hundred years ago, on 21 '
February 1677, Benedict de Spino¬
za, the great seventeenth-century
forerunner of modern agnostic thought,
died at The Hague.
The contents of his desk, containing
his last writings, were in accordance with
his wishes taken that very evening to
Amsterdam, where the bookseller Jan
Rieuwertsz made an immediate start on
the printing of the Opera Posthuma (Post¬
humous Works).
Within a few months a translator, Jan
Glazemaker, had produced a Dutch ver¬
sion of these works so as to render their
contents accessible to those who did not
know Latin.
In 1632, when Spinoza was born in
Amsterdam, the country was enjoying a
period of tolerance and great prosperity.
The latter, resulting from successful trad¬
ing with the Dutch overseas colonies, had
its focus in the Beurs or stock exchange
of Amsterdam.
Power in this city was in the hands of
the burgomasters, an oligarchy drawn
from a small circle of patrician families.
The religious tolerance of Amsterdam's
cosmopolitan citizens sprang from their
tradesman's mentality one does not,
after all, question the religion of people to
whom one is trying to sell something.'
During the first 15 years of his life Spi¬
noza had little or no contact with the
Dutch. Even though its members enjoyed
the rights of citizenship, the Jewish com¬
munity, to which Spinoza's family belong¬
ed, lived in isolation in its own quarter of
the city.
Spinoza spoke Portuguese at home and
at school (1). His father ran a highly
successful business trading in products
from the Levant. From the age of five.
Spinoza attended a Jewish school where
he learned excellent Hebrew and scripture.
When aged about 14, he left the school
in order to help in his father's business,
and after the latter's early death Spinoza
ran the business for some years on his
own. He probably had little talent for
commerce, but it is known that he was
delighted to leave school.
At the Amsterdam stock exchange he
made the acquaintance of other young
merchants like himself, such as Jarig
Jelles, Pieter Balling and Simon de Vries,
all of whom were Collégiants (2). Their
piety reflected the simplicity and austerity
of the early Christians and they professed
a religion with pronounced spiritualist
leanings.
The young Spinoza, who was himself
sober and serious-minded by nature, was
attracted to them, and they were to remain
his closest friends throughout his life.
Their ways of thinking were more sympa¬
thetic to him than those of the capitalist-
minded Jewish milieu.
Around this time Spinoza also met
Francis van den Enden, an ex-Jesuit from
Flanders who was now married and living
in Amsterdam. He had opened an excel¬
lent Latin school there, where the sons of
rich merchants could be prepared for their
studies at the University of Leiden.
Spinoza went there to learn Latin, with
the particular purpose of acquainting him¬
self with contemporary European science.
He then began to read Giordano Bruno,
Bacon, Hobbes, Machiavelli and, most
important of all, Descartes, who had be¬
come famous in the Netherlands when his
BEN REKERS, Dutch university teacher, is an
assistant professor at the University of Utrecht. His
study on Arias Montano, the 16th-century -Spanish
Orientalist who directed the translation of the Antwerp
polyglot Bible (see page 12) has been published in
English as Benito Arias Montano 1527-1598 (The
Warburg Institute, London, 1972).
(1) Like many of its neighbours, Spinoza's family
was descended from immigrants of Iberian origin who
had fled the Inquisition.
(2) The collégiants constituted an important movement
of religious dissidence in Dutch Protestantism. From
1620 onwards they set up "colleges" which met in the
village of Rijnsburg near Leiden, where they underwent
rebaptism by immersion. They respected all religious
beliefs since they felt that no denomination could
claim a monopoly of the truth. They did not recognize
any religious services or dogmas, and attached more
importance to love of their fellow beings than to love
of God.
first works were published in 1637, and
for whom there was a veritable passion at
Leiden University.
Van den Enden introduced Spinoza to
the philosophy of scepticism, of which he
was himself an advocate, and in return
Spinoza gave lessons in Hebrew grammar
to the school's pupils, who included the
young intellectuals Lodewijk Meijer and
Adriaan Koerbagh, with whom he became
great friends.
Their nafnes occur in his correspondence
right up to the end of his life, and it was
they who eventually persuaded him to put
his ideas down on paper. They were acti¬
vely involved in publishing his work and
drew on Spinoza's philosophy in their own
writings.
As a result of this contact with liberal
Dutch intellectuals, Spinoza became in¬
creasingly estranged from the milieu of his
birth. However, the leaders of the Jewish
community, who would have been glad to
have had such a brilliant young man to
their credit, tried to win him over, even
going so far as to offer him a thousand
florins in return for his silence.
But in his discussions with the rabbis,
Spinoza refused to change his ideas, per¬
sisting in them with, if anything, greater
vehemence.
By 1656, when Spinoza was 24, the
synagogue had had enough and proceed¬
ed to excommunicate him. He was cursed
to future generations, and no Jew was
allowed to have anything to do with him
or even approach him closer than ten
paces.
History is, however, guilty of a certain
misinterpretation, or at any rate misunder¬
standing, with respect to the much-quoted
text of Spinoza's excommunication. Less
well-known than the actual text is the fact
that such bans were a frequent occurrence
in Jewish communities, often being rescind¬
ed after as little as a week.
In any case Spinoza seems to have been
totally unconcerned by the event, and did
not even bother to defend himself or take
any steps to have the excommunication k
withdrawn. His choice had been made*
28

Portrait of Spinoza by an anonymous 17th-century Dutch painter
29

voluntarily. His new circle of friends was
* like a family, with the advantage that they
^hought as he did.
Spinoza's separation from the Jewish
community meant that he could no longer
carry on his business, so he learned to
grind lenses in order to make a living.
There was a great interest in experi¬
mental natural science at this time, espe¬
cially microscopy and astronomy. Through
the work of Descartes, Spinoza had already
come into contact with the investigations
being made in the Netherlands by the
young Christiaan Huyghens, van Leeuw¬
enhoek (see article page 34) and Swam-
merdam, and he knew of the experiments
being carried out by Newton and Boyle in
England. He felt that his occupation had
a promising future.
For another four years Spinoza continu¬
ed to live in Amsterdam, until the fanatical
rabbis managed to persuade the city coun¬
cil to declare him persona non grata. After
this he spent some months at the summer
residence of a rich friend in Ouderkerk,
15 kilometres away from his Amsterdam
friends, who were thus able to pay him
regular visits.
In the mid-17th century Amsterdam was
referred to by foreigners as Irenopolis
(city of peace) or Eleutheropolis (city of
freedom). The city opened its doors freely
to all those who were undergoing religious
persecution elsewhere in Europe: Span¬
ish Jews, French Huguenots and Soci-
nians from Poland could speak, write and
publish there unmolested.
The city council, by reason of its busi¬
nessman's mentality, was tolerant, for
prosperous trade was irreconcilable with
fanatical idealism. Anyone who had ex¬
pertise or good trade contacts to offer
was welcome and of potential use to the
economy.
During his Amsterdam period, Spinoza
learned to value highly the climate of free¬
dom which reigned in the city, and later
sang its praises in the following splendid
passage:... "the city of Amsterdam, whose
enjoyment of this freedom had made it
great and admired by the whole world. In
this flourishing state, this city without a
(3) From chapter 20 of the Tractatus Theologico-
Politicus, 1670, translated by A.G. Wernham in Spi¬
noza's Political Works, (Oxford 1958).
peer, men of every race and sect live in
the greatest harmony, and before they
entrust their goods to anyone, there are
only two things they want to know :
whether he is rich or poor, and whether
he is honest or dishonest. His religion or
sect does not matter, for it has no influence
on the decision of lawsuits. And no sect
whatsoever is so detested that its mem¬
bers (provided that they harm no one,
give every man his own, and live decent
lives) are refused the protection of the
civil authorities." (3)
In 1660 Spinoza moved to Rijnsburg,
where he knew he would find an atmos¬
phere of peace and seclusion in the com¬
pany of the Collégiants. He lived in the
village in a small house for three years,
making optical instruments, reading and
above all writing.
He corresponded frequently with Hein¬
rich Oldenburg of the Royal Society in
London on the subjects of refraction and
Boyle's experimental physics, and received
regular letters containing questions from
his Amsterdam friends Meijer, Balling and
de Vries.
Two scenes of life in Amsterdam in Spinoza's time. Below right, the Stock Exchange, where the tolerant and enlightened Dutch
merchants met not only to talk business but to discuss the latest ideas. In the 1650s, when Spinoza worked for his father, a prosperous
merchant, his duties often took him to the Stock Exchange. It was there that he met and befriended a group of young Protestants
belonging to the "Collegiant" movement (so named because its members were organized in small congregations or "colleges"). Below, an
assembly of Collégiants, who, like the young Spinoza, were critical of existing social and religious institutions.
30

They had formed a discussion group
which met weekly in Jan Rieuwertsz'
bookshop, the centre for freethinkers.
Spinoza also received visits from states¬
men and scholars such as Burgomaster
Hudde, who ordered lenses from him, and
probably from the well-known diplomat
van Beuningen, a Collegiant who came to
Rijnsburg every year for a retreat.
Another visitor was the powerful Grand
Pensionary Jan de Witt, who was a mathe¬
matician by training and the author of a
well-known mathematical treatise. De
Linearum Curvarum.
A student from Leiden by the name of
Casearius paid regular visits to Spinoza in
order to have the work of Descartes
explained to him. As a result, a collection
of notes came into being which were also
read by the members of the discussion
group in Amsterdam, who urged Spinoza
to have them published.
He agreed, and the notes became his
first work to appear in print, entitled "Prin¬
ciples of the Cartesian Philosophy toge¬
ther with Metaphysical Thoughts".
His friend Lodewijk Meijer, the doctor
and philologist, wrote a preface to the
book. The corn-chandler. Jarich Jelles,
who in the meantime had sold his business
in order to devote himself to philosophy,
financed the printing.
Jelles did not know Latin, and consider¬
ed that at his age it would be a waste of
time to learn it, and so he paid for a trans¬
lation of the book into Dutch, which was
undertaken by Jan Glazemaker. This and
subsequent translations were of consider¬
able importance in making Spinoza's phi¬
losophy known to a wider public at an
early stage.
During this period Spinoza began to
formulate his own philosophical system,
in the first version of his Ethics, in which
he moved right away from Descartes.
Passages of this began to circulate in
manuscript form and were read and com¬
mented on with eager enthusiasm by his
friends.
Their admiration was so great that the
merchant Simon de Vries, a bachelor,'
named Spinoza as his sole heir, although
the philosopher, whose way of life was
still modest and frugal, only accepted an
annuity of 300 florins. Without a doubt
the generous offers of help to Spinoza and
the interest taken in his ideas from an
early stage were invaluable to his work.
At this point a gradual change began to
form in Spinoza's attitude to life. He felt
that he could no longer allow himself to
share in the Spiritualists' lack of political
commitment. His thoughts had been
turned in this direction by reading Pierre
de la Court's Maximes Politiques pour les
Etats de Hollande, which defended a form
of liberal republicanism. According to de
la Court the system of government was
determined by economic freedom, and
political and religious freedom were close¬
ly linked. The church should not be al¬
lowed to dominate the State.
Spinoza now abandoned isolation and
abstract thought in order to give active
support, through his writing, to the liberal
politics of Jan de Witt. He moved to
Voorburg on the outskirts of The Hague
so as to keep in closer touch with his
friends in the government.
During this period he wrote his Tracta- j
tus Theologico-Politicus, which contained I
31

a fierce attack on the so-called "theocra¬
tic" Calvinist mode of government, and
on the greed for power of the clergy, who
pandered to popular feeling.
Spinoza categorized military patriotism
as one of the basest human passions. He
thought that the most suitable form of
government for the country would be the
rule of an oligarchy composed of a small
intellectual élite drawn from the upper
merchant classes.
In the theological part of the Tractatus
he pointed out that the Bible was only the
work of man, and had been used time and
time again to enslave the people. Spinoza
also indicated various chronological inac¬
curacies in the Bible.
The work was published in 1670, the
author's name only being indicated by the
initials B.D.S.
During this period, Jan de Witt's politi¬
cal power began to wane. A rationalist
politician, he had never curried, favour
with the mass of the people, and now he
was making mistakes, particularly in his
foreign policy towards England.
In 1672 he was suddenly faced with a
joint attack by the French army of Louis
XIV and the English fleet. This year of
invasion became known in Dutch history
as the Rampjaar or year of disaster. De
Witt's fall is partly attributed to his refusal,
during his period in power, to allocate
sufficient funds for Dutch military forces.
This decided his fate: he was lynched by
the mob at The Hague.
When Spinoza, normally so disciplined
in his emotions, heard of his friend and
kindred spirit's brutal murder he was over¬
come with rage. He wanted to go out in
the street to challenge the hateful mob,
and was only dissuaded from doing so
with the greatest difficulty. That night he
wrote a short pamphlet, Ultimi Barbaro¬
rum (the very lowest of the barbarians),
which he posted near the place of the
assassination.
In the same year, the young Prince
William III of Orange was appointed Stad-
tholder and Captain-General of the Army.
He was already much liked by the people,
as a "child of the state". Admiral de
Ruyter was able to make his mark on the
English fleet; and so the disaster-ridden
nation was saved.
On the home front, however, a period
of repression was under way. University
professors who had been won over to
scepticism were dismissed and censorship
was reintroduced. The city councils, which
for years had ignored the condemnations
of the Calvinist synods, were purged. Mili
tary patriotism had prevailed.
Spinoza now belonged to the ranks of
the persecuted, whose spokesman he had
been in his writings. His Tractatus Theo-
logico-Politicus was banned: it is thought,
though not known for certain, that it had
been commissioned by Jan de Witt. In
any case it was denounced by the censor¬
ship as a work "forged in hell by a rene¬
gade Jew and the devil, and issued with
the knowledge of Mr Jan de Witt"
Spinoza's subsequent fear, especially in
a man of such natural caution, is under¬
standable, particularly in view of the fate
of his disciple Adriaan Koerbagh. After
writing a Spinozist work, A Light Shining
in Darkness, Koerbagh had in 1668 been
imprisoned and tortured, and had died in
gaol.
In addition, Spinoza had learned that
his former teacher van den Enden, who
had gone to France, had been beheaded
in 1674 for his involvement in the republic¬
an plot of the Chevalier de RoJ/ian against
Louis XIV.
During the remaining five years of his
life Spinoza lived in a rented room in The
Hague, secluded and disillusioned, work¬
ing on a new Political Treatise and com¬
pleting his Ethics. He received a number
of important visitors, particularly from
abroad where his reputation was already
high, such as a representative of the Prince
de Conde, the French general, and also,
the young Leibniz, St-Evremont, and the
Elector Palatine, who offered him a chair
at the University of Heidelberg.
He refused the offer because of his
desire to complete his life's work in peace
and isolation, and almost achieved his
wish. Unfortunately he left his Political
Treatise unfinished, in the chapter where
after discoursing on the subject of monar¬
chy and oligarchy, he had intended to
deal with the advantages and disadvanta¬
ges of democracy.
Spinoza died of tuberculosis at the
early age of 45. Right to the end of his life,
he applied himself to his writings and
correspondence, often working at night.
Towards the end a doctor friend from
Amsterdam stayed with him, and after¬
wards took the manuscript of the Ethics
back with him to van Rieuwertsz, the
publisher.
The philosopher was buried in the
Nieuwe Kerk (new church) at The Hague,
and his hearse was accompanied by six
carriages occupied by important admirers
whose names have not come down to us.
The house on the Prinsessegracht where
he spent his last years has recently been
restored and opened as a museum.
As we have seen, even during Spinoza's
lifetime he had followers who saw in his
thought the ultimate truth and who, often
simplifying his philosophy, made
extreme and radical deductions from it in
their own writings.
These followers included Lodewijk Meijer
32

Opposite page: 17th-century engraving of
a district of Amsterdam. The Dutch
voyages of discovery and the founding of
the Dutch East India Company in the
early 17th century made Amsterdam the
world's major commercial city, and its
policy of religious toleration attracted
waves of Jewish refugees from Spain and
the Spanish Netherlands as well as
Protestants from many countries. Left,
77;e Geographer (1658) a work by one of
the great Masters of Dutch painting, Jan
Vermeer of Delft, who, like Spinoza, was
born in 1632. He died in 1675.
in his Philosophia S. Scripturae Interpres
("Philosophical Interpretation of the Holy
Scriptures")an eloquent titleand also
spiritualist believers such as Pieter Balling
("The Light on the Candlestick") who
modified his philosophy into a vague mys-
ticism, and Jarich Jelles, who in his "Pro¬
fession of the Christian Faith" presented
Spinoza as a kind of evangelist.
These spiritual free-thinkers were of
great value to Spinoza when it was a
question of giving him practical help, but
they were somewhat naïve and only had a
partial grasp of his metaphysics, which
are far more complex than those of
Descartes.
Shortly after Spinoza's death, a minister
from the town of Zwolle, F. van Leenhof,
wrote "Heaven on Earth", an epicurean
work in which he drew on Spinoza's work
to advocate free sexual morals. He was
given a savage sentence in 1712 after a
long trial.
The orthodox Calvinists had been right
in realizing early on that Spinoza's philo¬
sophical system contained dynamite. It is
difficult to be sure whether Spinoza was
essentially an atheist in his Ethics, as
modern interpretations of his work are
greatly at variance.
What is certain is that his pantheism
(Deus sive Natural, his lay rationalism and
his philosophical free-thinking prepared
the way for the crisis of the European
conscience and the Age of the Enlighten
ment. Later on Schelling, Goethe, Schlei-
ermacher and Hegel were to build on his
foundations, and in 19th-century France
his influence on Victor Cousin, Paul Janet
and Ernest Renan was considerable. Ein¬
stein in the 20th century was an admirer
of his work.
	 Many of Spinoza's biographers have
painted a highly sentimentalized picture of
him as a poor spectacle-maker who lived
his life in poverty and obscurity. The truth
is that, along with Huyghens, he was one
of the most famous experts in optics of
his day.
He is often depicted as a dreamy abstract
thinker living in seclusion, whereas he
numbered many influential politicians
among his friends and acquaintances.
Finally, his often-cited excommunication
by the Jewish authorities was a frequent
and relatively insignificant occurrence at
the time.
Recent historical research, in some cases
undertaken on the occasion of the tricen¬
tenary of Spinoza's death, has set out to
expose a number of legends concerning
his life and to distinguish fact from fiction.
Nevertheless, there are still some gaps
in Spinoza's biography. Evidence dating
back to the 17th century, apart from the
biased and unreliable entry in Pierre Bayle's
Dictionary, is confined to descriptions of
him by his contemporaries Lucas and
Colerus. They did not know him perso¬
nally, and were obliged to rely on informa
tion given them by the painter from whom
Spinoza rented a room. There are many
discrepancies in the works of these early
biographers.
The surviving correspondence to and
from Spinoza is scant, consisting of a
mere 84 letters whose texts are often in¬
complete. . Personal news was . regarded
by early scholars as unimportant and was
cut out, so that most of the letters read
more like treatises on philosophy or natur¬
al science. '
Even so, they provide much useful clari¬
fication of the Ethics and also illustrate
Spinoza's kindliness, revealing the patien¬
ce with which he explained his ideas to
the often simple people who wanted to
understand his work.
Spinoza was a highly original thinker
who evolved his philosophical system quite
independently. Yet it should not be for¬
gotten that he was able to work so
successfully partly because he lived in one
of the freest nations in Europe, where the
intellectual climate was salutary and sti¬
mulating and where he was able to find a
circle of friends who could support him
morally and financially.
One might even wonder whether this
modest and cautious man would ever have
committed his thoughts to paper, let alone
published them, had it not been for the
pressure exerted by these friends.
H Ben Rekers
33
