Aristotle
An architect
of modern thought
2,300 years ago
by Constantine Despotopoulos
MORE than any other thinker, Aris¬
totle has influenced philoso¬
phical and scientific thought in
Europe, in the non-European countries of
the Mediterranean basin, and in all those
whose cultures are fashioned on European
lines.
This influence, whether direct or indirect,
has been felt by thinkers as diverse as Karl
Marx, who admired Aristotle's work, and
the French philosopher Henri Bergson,
who described his great predecessor's
metaphysical theory as that which most
closely reflects the nature of the human
mind. For centuries, philologists, philo¬
sophers and historians have studied Aris¬
totle's writings from every possible angle.
The bibliography of Aristotelian studies,
already enormous, still continues to grow.
This is mainly due to the extraordinary
diversity of Aristotle's work, which repre¬
sents an essential phase in the development
of ancient Greek thought, to which it
brought a new scientific dimension. To a
great extent, this work has shaped or
crystallized philosophical problems, con¬
cepts and terms for all succeeding gene¬
rations, and has made a decisive contri¬
bution to the development and indeed the
creation of a number of scientific disci¬
plines. Finally, it constitutes the first
methodical attempt to organize morals
and law into a philosophical system and to
lay the foundations for a scientific exami¬
nation of politics.
Seen at a distance of so many centuries,
Aristotle's writings may. appear to us as
something to be taken for granted, an
intellectual treasure of which we happen
to be the fortunate beneficiaries.
Yet this great body of work was brought
forth arduously and gradually, following a
pattern that remained consistent despite
frequent fluctuations and digressions. It
was produced by a man of genius who was
also a tireless worker, in the course of a
life that was marked by ordinary human
vicissitudes such as family losses, personal
disappointment and bitterness, but which
was also enhanced by the support of loyal
friends, by constant contact with Plato,
the supreme philosopher of ancient Greece,
and by the stimulating collaboration of
chosen disciples.
Aristotle was born in 384 B.C. in the
small Greek colony of Stagira on the Chal-
cidic peninsula of Macedonia in northern
Greece. He spent his childhood in Pella,
where his flather, Nicomachus, was court
CONSTANTINE DESPOTOPOULOS, an authority
on the philosophy of Aristotle and Plato, is a professor
at the Panteios School of Political Science in Athens.
Bust of Aristotle in the
Capitol Museum, Rome
physician to Amyntas II of Macedón. He
lost his father at an early age, and at 17 left
for Athens, the centre of Greek civilization.
In Athens he acquired the rich experience
of living in a multi-faceted society, acquain¬
ting himself with all its political, economic
and cultural currents. Above all, he fami¬
liarized himself with the Attic use of lan¬
guage, which the orators and teachers of
rhetoric then cultivated almost to excess,
but which was a magnificent vehicle for
contemporary judgements and observa¬
tions concerning human values.
This was the period when the Academy,
the school of philosophy founded by Plato,
flourished in Athens. At the time of Aris¬
totle's arrival, Plato was absent in Sicily
and the Academy was provisionally headed
by the astronomer and philosopher Eudoxus
of Cnidus. Aristotle became an active
member of the Academy, where he was
to spend 20 years of his life, from 367 to
347 B.C.
During this long and fruitful period,
Aristotle lived in close contact with Plato
and. other eminent thinkers and received
continuous intellectual stimulation from his
association with them. He soon distin- .
guished himself for his acute intelligence
and passionate thirst for knowledge, for his
vigorous mind and dialectical prowess.
Most important of all, he finally emerged
as a totally original and independent thinker.
After Plato's death, Speusippus became
head of the Academy. Aristotle decided
that it was time to leave Athens. He
departed, somewhat embittered at not
being appointed Plato's successor, and
settled in Assus, a little town in the Troad,
in northwest Asia Minor. There, in colla¬
boration with several other Platonists, he
founded his first school, as a kind of annex
to the Academy.
He taught in Assus for three years (347-
344 B.C.) and then moved to Mytilène on
the nearby island of Lesbos. There he
worked for two years on biological research
with Theophrastus, a native of the island,
and also pursued his other studies, particu-,
larly in the field of logic.
At the invitation of King Philip II of
Macedón, son of Amyntas II, Aristotle left
Mytilène in 342 B.C. to return to the court
at Pella, where he was entrusted with the
education of Philip's heir, the future Alex¬
ander the Great, then a 13-year-old boy.
For three years Aristotle concentrated on
this task and then, from 340 to 335 B.C.,
devoted himself more fully to his own
research and writing.
The year 335 B.C. marks the beginning
of the most important period in Aristotle's \
life. Once again he settled in Athens, and t
31

y founded his second school, the Lyceum,
where for the next 12 years he proved to
be an admirable teacher, a great philoso¬
phical innovator, a creative scientist and an
incomparable organizer of methodical
enquiry by teams of scientists and scholars.
During this time he completed his many-
sided contribution to human thought and
gave final form to his writings, which were
to serve through the ages as a landmark for
those seeking to establish the fundamental
principles of intellectual activity.
In 323 B.C., there was a violent outburst
of anti-Macedonian feeling in Athens.
Aristotle suffered a certain amount of
persecution and escaped to Chalcis, his
mother's birthplace, leaving both the
school and his manuscripts in the care of
Theophrastus. He died in Chalcis a few
months later, a sad and lonely man (1 ).
Content apart, the sheer quantity of
Aristotle's writings constitutes an amazing
achievement. The most important of his
surviving works, which represent barely
one-quarter of his entire output, deal with
many branches of human knowledge,
including logic, physics, biology, meta¬
physics, morals, politics and psychology.
The idea that population
growth should be
controlled In the interests
of balanced economic
development is often
thought to be a modern
one. However, it was
foreshadowed, 2,300 years
ago by Aristotle, who
declared in h\s.Politlcs
that overpopulation
caused poverty, crime and
other social evils.
«'
r
'
" XS i
'vf3i ç 3
j
ce r
° «5
ÎH
Q '
Universal education is another "modern" idea discussed by Aristotle in
his Politics in the 4th century B.C. He stresses that education must
prepare the citizen to use leisure, for a state that cannot use its leisure
properly will collapse. Above, athletes on a Greek vase.
It is generally accepted that his greatest
achievement was the decisive contribution
which he made to logic. Not only did he
re-examine, supplement and classify his
predecessors' discoveries in this field, he
also enriched them with his own discove¬
ries and finally organized the existing body
of knowledge on the subject into a complete
philosophical science.
Aristotle's works on logic deal with
human thought not only at the scientific
level but also in relation to everyday life.
They are divided into two parts, the analy¬
tical (which is the more important) and the
(1) In 1978, the Greek government plans to
commemorate the 23rd centenary of Aristotle's
death by organizing a world congress on
"Aristotle and Contemporary Thought".
dialectic. The Analytics, which deals prin¬
cipally with reasoning and logical demons¬
trations, has made an invaluable contribu¬
tion to the methodology of the exact
sciences. The balanced construction of
Euclidean geometry owes much to Aristo¬
tle's Analytics.
However, the "Father of Logic" was
fully aware that reasoning cannot cover the
entire field of the cognitive process, (that
is, the action and faculty of knowing) and
that the knowledge of first principles, on
which we base our judgements and there¬
fore our reasoning, is obtained by a direct
process which is based less on reasoning
than on a kind of intuitive vision.
For Aristotle, reasoning is not the sole
method of enquiry into philosophical and
scientific problems. He also uses obser¬
vation, analogy and the historical-evolu¬
tionist method.
'
... i.
:
When investigating a philosophical
problem, he prefers to begin by analysing
the meaning of words and then proceeds
to an analysis of the subject, including an
exposition of views contrary to his own.
Aristotle's work in the field of physics is
held in lesser esteem today, despite its
undoubted importance. Here he is concer¬
ned with "natural" beings, in other words
those which are endowed with the capacity
for motion, whether in the spatial sense, or
through increase or decrease, or through
mutation. Such beings include animals,
plants and the four"simple bodies" earth,
fire, air and water.
These four elements serve as a starting-
point for Aristotle's explanation of a num¬
ber of changes affecting corruptible natural
beings, without however presupposing any
strict teleology the doctrine that final
goals and purposes rather than mechanical
causes order reality. According to Aristotle,
nature is not to be considered equal to
matter. It is both "daemonic and divine."
In his desire to place physics on a sturdy
theoretical foundation, Aristotle studied
with almost mathematical rigour the infi¬
nite, the void, the continuum, space,
time, motion and energy. He formulated
bold theories, especially concerning the
problem of time, which were to exert a
fruitful influence on later thinkers such as
Newton, Husserl and Bergson.
He also considered the possibility that
the earth might be spherical in shape. A
passage in one of his works is believed to
have encouraged Christopher Columbus
to follow a westerly course in his attempt
to reach the Indies.
Eminent modern biologists have expres¬
sed their admiration for Aristotle's contri¬
bution to the development of this science.
Darwin described Linnaeus as a mere
apprentice in comparison with Aristotle,
whose biological treatises list 500 different
varieties of animals and include a wealth of
information on comparative anatomy and
32

embryology, as well as the principles of
physiology.
The notion of "organism" appears for
the first time in Aristotle, and the gene¬
ration of life is given a teleological inter¬
pretation, based on the concept of ente-
lechy, the realization or complete expres¬
sion of potentiality.
The soul is considered as a life-giving
principle, the basic condition for existence
in living beings. It both shapes and sustains
the organism, and generates and directs'
motion and sensation, volition and mental
energy.
Aristotle makes a distinction between a
merely "nutritive" soul, such as exists in
plants, a sensitive soul which coexists with
the nutritive soul in animals, and a rational
soul coexisting with the former two in
human beings.
As for psychology, Aristotle was the
forerunner of theoretical trends which were
to emerge in later times in the work of such
thinkers as Kant and Fichte and the foun¬
ders of configurative and associative
psychology.
Among the principal concepts introduced
for the first time in his theory of psychology
are the passions, the faculties or dispo¬
sitions, sensation, appetite, the intellect,
desire and volition.
\ Aristotle's study of morals is the product
of a critical elaboration of the moral beliefs
held by the Greek people and scholars of
his time, and the integration of these
beliefs into his own psychological and
metaphysical concepts, combined with a
philosophical enquiry into man's practical
functions.
The basic concepts of this open-ended
system are: the good, happiness, virtue,
and moral choice a notion which presup¬
poses freedom in a very practical sense.
Happiness is defined as "the activity of the
soul in a state of virtue", in other words as
a condition closely related to freedom,
though dependent on the individual condi¬
tion determined by the circumstances of a
person's life.
Aristotle's theory of law exerted a pro¬
found influence on Roman, late medieval
and modern jurists, particularly his notions
of distributive law, corrective law, contract,
retaliation and leniency. Moralists and
jurists were also much influenced by Aris¬
totle's theory concerning the family.
In his Politics, Aristotle put forward the
notion that man is by nature a political
animal, thus implying that society, in the
political sense, is not an artificial product
but the outcome of something inherent in
human nature. His use of the citizens'
common interest as the supreme criterion
in distinguishing "good" from "bad"
societies emphasized the interdependence
of society and justice.
Aristotle's Politics became widely
known in Western Europe in the late
Middle Ages and made a decisive impact
on modern political science. Political
theories and concepts such as the state,
law, forms of government, the citizen,
politics as the art of the possible, the sepa¬
ration of powers, the antagonism between
rich and poor, can all be found in Aristotle.
The Poetics, only parts of which have
survived, deals mainly with the subject of
artistic creation considered as an imitation
of nature by means of form, colour, sound,
motion and words.
Since the Renaissance, it has proved a
major influence on literature and literary
criticism. His definition of tragedy, in
particular, which features the celebrated
notion of catharsis (purification), has
provided a stimulating source of debate
and comment among many poets and
critics.
However, Aristotle's greatest work is his
Metaphysics, the main subject of which is
the nature of being, which he presents as
an inexhaustible source of conjecture for
the human mind.
This fundamental philosophical work,
which nurtured the philosophy of medieval
Europe, as well as Arabic philosophy (with
certain variations), still provides the
groundwork for the philosophical doctrine
of the Catholic Church. In it, Aristotle
advanced such important dual concepts as
form-and-matter and potentiality-and-
actuality, the first designating the structure
of each being and the second the move¬
ment of each being towards realization.
He also posited and envisaged such
eschatological problems as the generation
and corruption of beings as opposed to
the eternity of the world; the first cause
and the principles which activate the world;
and finally the fundamental concept of
human conscience which Descartes was
to formulate many centuries later when he
wrote: "Cogito, ergo sum" (I think, there¬
fore I am).
Constantino Despotopoulos
