Namibia
moves towards
independence
by Sean MacBride
VERY few now can have any doubts
as to the future of Namibia. It will
acquire full independence in the
near future; it is now only a question of
when and how. But before dealing with
this aspect let us look at Namibia.
In order to place Namibia geographically
and historically for those who are not Afri-
canists, let me briefly summarize; Namibia
is one of the larger African countries, with
an area of some 820,000 square
km.about the size of Texas and Florida
combined or, in an international context,
the size of Germany and France.
It lies along the South Atlantic Coast of.
the African continent. The Orange River is
the boundary between Namibia and South
Africa, which lies to the south. Namibia
has a frontier of some 1,300 km. with
Angola. It also has a short frontier with
Zambia about 130 km.along the nor¬
thern side of the Caprivi Strip. (See map
page 7.)
At the eastern end of the Caprivi Strip it
barely makes contact with Rhodesia. On
the southern side of the Caprivi Strip it has
a border of 500 km. with Botswana. On its
eastern side Namibia has a frontier of over
1,000 km. with Botswana. The fighting
between South Africa and SWAPO
South West Africa People's Organization)
has been taking place mainly in the Caprivi
Strip and along the frontier between Nami¬
bia and Angola.
SEAN MacBRIDE, the distinguished Irish politician
and jurist, was United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia from 1973 to 1976. He was awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize in 1974 and the International
Lenin Peace Prize in 1977. One of the founders of
Amnesty International (Nobel Peace Prize 1977), he
was chairman of its international executive from 1961
to 1975. He has ¡ust been appointed by Unesco to
head an international commission set up to examine
world communication problems (see news item
page 33).
Namibia consists primarily of desert and
a semi-desert central plateau, where cattle
and karakul sheep are widely grazed.
Beneath the soil lies a wealth of minerals:
copper, lead, uranium, and many others.
The population is officially claimed to be
around 800,000, although I believe it to be
well over a million. Some 90,000 are
white, primarily of South African and Ger-,
man origin.
Namibia, formerly called South West
Africa, became an Imperial German colony
in 1884. This occurred at the great "Colo¬
nial carve up" which took place at the Ber¬
lin Conference of 1884, when the European
colonial powers divided Africa among
them.
The German Empire then conquered the
area most ruthlessly and colonized it. It
became German South West Africa. It was
ruled with an iron hand; entire population
groups including women and children were
exterminated. The surviving African popu¬
lation became virtual slaves. German cul¬
ture and the German language were
implanted.
During World War I British and South
African forces successfully invaded and
took over the entire territory. The territory
became a League of Nations mandate at
the end of World War I. When World War
II ended, South Africa alone among the
former mandatory powers refused either to
free its mandated territory or to place it
under the United Nations trusteeship
system.
South Africa also refused to recognize
the right1 of the U.N. to supervise its
administration of the territory. Unable to
resolve this issue by negotiation or by deci¬
sion of the International Court, the General
Assembly finally revoked South Africa's
mandate in 1966 and established the Coun¬
cil for Namibia to administer the territory
until independence.
Let us now look in more detail at the his¬
torical development of international legal
responsibility for Namibia before analyzing
the current situation.
Apart from gradual outlawing of slavery
and the slave trade, international protec¬
tion for people under colonial rule scarcely
existed in the 19th century. They were
regarded as "outside the law". Indeed, the
main responsibility for them seems to have
been to ensure their orderly and effective
subjection to colonial rule.
Thus South West Africa, as Namibia was
then called, was brought under the "pro¬
tection". of the Imperial German Reich in
accordance with the rules issuing from the
Berlin Conference of 1884-1885, which was
called to legitimize the division of Africa
and to prevent the! European powers
from going to war with each other over
the spoils. '
The first expression of general interna¬
tional legal responsibility for colonial peo¬
ples came with the creation of the mandate
system at the end of World War I and
even that had to be forced on the victorious
allies by President Wilson. Under Article 22
of the Covenant of the League of Nations,
the former German protectorate of South
West Africa was placed under South Afri¬
can administration as "a sacred trust of
civilization"
The mandate agreement granted the
mandatory "full power of administration
and legislation over the territory... as an
integral part of the Union..." and directed it
to "promote to the utmost the material and
moral well-being and the social progress of
the inhabitants of the territory... "
In the years between the two World
Wars, the League Council, aided by the
Permanent Mandates Commission, exerci¬
sed limited supervision over South African
administration of its mandate. It forced
South Africa to modify a number of lightly
veiled attemps to claim outright sove¬
reignty over the territory; but it could only
censure the Union for sending its air force
to bomb Bondelswarts women and child¬
ren when the men of that small Nama com¬
munity rose up with ancient hand weapons
against the government.
After World War II, the Union sought
United Nations approval for the annexation
of Namibia. The Organization exercised its
responsibility by refusing to agree to the
annexation and by urging South Africa to
place the Territory under trusteeship.
South Africa in turn refused. Claiming
that the mandate had terminated with the |
demise of the League, the Union govern- I
16

South Africa's illegal occupation
of a neighbouring territory
must inevitably come to an end
In defiance of the United
Nations, South Africa
continues to administer
Namibia (the name given by
the U.N. to the former
territory of South West
Africa) and has introduced
apartheid laws there.
Thousands of Africans have
been forcibly removed to
"homelands" in those parts
of the country most devoid
of wealth and resources.
Thus many Namibians seek
contract jobs outside these
"reserves". These migrant
workers are often wretchedly
housed in compounds and
spend up to two years apart
from their families. Left, a
migrant worker returns to his
home village.
17

ment quit reporting to the General
} Assembly on its administration of the Terri¬
tory and began to impose its apartheid
system there.
In response to requests of the General
Assembly for guidance on issues raised by
South Africa, the International Court of
Justice advised the Assembly, inter alia,
that the mandate still existed, that the
Assembly should supervise its administra¬
tion, and that South Africa could not alter
the international status of the Territory
without United Nations approval.
The Assembly was, however, unable to
translate the Court's advice into effective
action. So, in 1960, Ethiopia and Liberia
brought a contentious proceeding i.e.,
one in which the judgement binds the
parties against South Africa, charging
the Union in substance with maladministra¬
tion of the Territory.
However, in somewhat dubious circum¬
stances, six years later the Court held that
the complainants had no standing to bring
the proceedings and thus avoided ruling on
the merits of the case.
Unable to persuade South Africa, by
either negotiations or judicial proceedings,
to live up to its mandate obligations, the
General Assembly thereupon took an histo¬
ric action: it revoked the mandate and
made itself responsible for administering
the Territory until independence.
Subsequently, it established the Council
for Namibia, composed at present of 25
Member States, to act on its behalf. The
name of South West Africa was changed
to Namibia by General Assembly resolution
2372 (XXII) (of 1968), and the name of the
Council for South West Africa, as it was
originally called, was correspondingly
changed to Council for Namibia.
South Africa, however, refused to recog¬
nize the Assembly's right to take these
steps. Consequently, the International
Court of Justice was asked to rule on
States' obligations in the situation.
The new Opinion dealt with the issues in
considerable depth and included the fol¬
lowing findings (given hereunder in a con¬
densed and re-arranged form for clarity): .
1. The termination of the mandate by the
U.N. General Assembly was legal and
did not require South African consent.
2. It follows that the continued presence
of South Africa in Namibia is illegal and
South Africa is therefore under an
immediate obligation to withdraw.
3. States that are members of the U.N.
have an obligation to recognize the ille¬
gality of South Africa's occupation and
are to refrain from any acts or dealings
with the South African régime implying
recognition of a legal South African pre¬
sence in Namibia.
4. In terms of Article 25 of the Charter
of the United Nations, Member States
are obliged to comply with Security
Council decisions even if they had voted
against such decisions.
5. South Africa remains accountable for
any violations of the rights Of the people
of Namibia. (Author's italics)
The Opinion of the International Court of w
Justice was accepted by the General*
Photo Jan Kopec © Parimage, Paris
White villas
and black
shanty-towns
Namibia is a prosperous country, but its wealth is
almost entirely in the hands of a white community
numbering some 90,000, about a tenth of the total
population. Above, a tree-shaded residential quarter of
the capital, Windhoek (estimated population 76,000),
dominated by the spire of a Dutch Reformed church. It
makes a stark contrast with the shanty-towns (below)
where many black Namibians live. The name of
Windhoek's main street, the Kaiser Strasse (below
right), is a reminder that this vast corner of southern
Africa was once a German colony (1884-1919). Right,
black policemen and two traditionally-clad Herero
women in a Namibian town.
'-V-. ****7.- *
4t 2
%n
*>
Photo Peter Fraenkel © Parimage, Paris
18

Photos Jan Kopec © Parimage, Paris
19

^Assembly and- the Security Council.
Basically the obligations imposed on
States by the International Court required
States to treat South Africa as having no
rights whatsoever in Namibia. South Africa
is declared to be a naked usurper; an oc¬
cupier on a par with the Nazi forces occupy¬
ing Norway, Belgium, or other parts of
Europe and it should be treated as such.
The mere fact that the wrongful occupa¬
tion has stretched on for over a decade is
no ground for automatically upgrading it to
that of being a de facto government. The
lapse of time can certainly not legitimize in
any way, or to any extent. South African
illegal occupation.
States are bound to make it clear at all
times that South Africa has no legal auth¬
ority to levy or collect taxes in Namibia.
Consequently, governments whose natio¬
nals invest in Namibia should not grant
them tax credits for "taxes" paid on such
investments to the South African Govern¬
ment or its local surrogate.
Similarly, States should recognize that
the Republic of South Africa has no valid
authority to issue permits, concessions,
licences, mining and prospecting rights,
and so on. For this reason the Council for
Namibia has issued a decree, approved by
the General Assembly, making it unlawful
to exploit any Namibian natural resource
without a licence from the Council, or the
Commissioner acting for it. Under General
Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) the United
Nations Council for Namibia was given full
authority "to promulgate laws, decrees
and administrative regulations as are
necessary..."
Resources exported without a United
Nations licence are subject to seizure and
forfeiture to the benefit of the Namibian
people, wherever in the world they may be
found.
The legal basis for the decree adopted by
the United Nations Council for Namibia and
approved by the General Assembly is quite
simple:
1. The United Nations has given full
powers to the United Nations Council
for Namibia to protect the natural
resources of Namibia on behalf of the
people of Namibia.
2. The mining and export licences issued
by the South Africans in respect of
Namibian resources were granted by an
illegal authority and are null and void.
3. The natural wealth of Namibia belongs
to the people of Namibia and not to the
illegal administration set up by the
Government of South Africa nor to
South Africa nor to any firm authorized
by South Africa to despoil Namibia of its
natural assets by an illegal authority.
4. In these circumstances it is open to the
United Nations Council for Namibia to
have these seized and held in trust for
the people of Namibia. These assets can
be pursued as stolen property illegally
taken from the people of Namibia.
There are ample precedents and auth¬
orities to support this view.
The decisions of the International Court
of Justice and the Security Council are
clear and unambiguous. South Africa
must relinquish all claims over Namibia and
surrender the Territory to the United
Nations. It will then be for the United
Nations to ensure the holding of free elec¬
tions on the basis of universal adult suf¬
frage for the whole Territory as one entity;
such elections to be held under the super¬
vision and control of the United Nations.
The elections will be to á constituent
assembly which will choose an interim
government and adopt a constitution for
Namibia.
The Security Council has also insisted on
a number of preliminary steps such as an
immediate amnesty for all political priso¬
ners and freedom of movement and free¬
dom of association for all SWAPO mem¬
bers in the Territory. While South Africa
does not accept SWAPO as representing
the majority of the population of Namibia,
it does reluctantly agree that SWAPO is the
biggest single political entity in the country.
The danger is that unless the South Afri¬
can Government agrees rapidly with the
terms laid down by the United Nations, the
existing armed conflict will escalate, thus
rendering a peaceful transfer of power
much more difficult.
The United Nations, in cooperation with
Unesco, has established in Lusaka the U.N.
Institute for Namibia. This is an institute for
applied research and training to prepare the
nucleus of a civil administration for an inde¬
pendent Namibia. The students over 100
of them are all Namibians.
The very highly qualified staff are all Afri¬
cans and many of them are Namibians.
Even now, the institute is in a position to
provide Namibians who could assume
administrative responsibilities. Ultimately
it is the intention that the institute will form
the nucleus of the future University of
Namibia.
The initiative of the United Nations in the
setting up of the Institute for Namibia was
constructive and far sighted. It will do
much to remedy the effects of South Afri¬
can misrule of the Territory.
Sean MacBride

