
Unesco and
news agency development
F OR several years, a great number of Unesco's Member Statesmost
of them developing countrieshave been appealing to Unesco for assis¬
tance in their efforts to correct the imbalance in the flow of information
between North and South, through the promotion of news agencies,
which are an essential link in the chain of communication.
Studies in this connexion were initiated as early as the 1950s. Unesco
began by proposing a number of amendments to the telegraph regulations
applying to the press: further rate reductions for the transmission of
ordinary press telegrams, reduced rates for press messages exceeding
100 words in length and extended facilities and lower charges for press
messages sent by radiocommunication to any destination.
More recently, Unesco joined the International Press Telecommunica¬
tions Council in defending before an ITU (International Telecommunica¬
tion Union) commission the continued availability of the special "press
cable" rate.
Asia and the Far East. A first meeting concerning the development of
the mass media was held in Bangkok (Thailand) in January 1960. Ata
second meeting in December 1961, which dealt specifically with the
development of news agencies in Asia, participants from 14 countries
recommended the establishment of a regional news agency.
The Organization of Asian News Agencies (OANA) was established in
1963 and has since been actively promoting collaboration and news
exchange between its members.
Latin America. The first regional meeting on news agencies was held in
Santiago (Chile) in 1 961 . But the situation in this region was vastly diffe¬
rent from that in Asia, and 15 years later the number of national agencies
in Latin America remained limited, despite the fact that a second meeting
had been held in Quito (Ecuador) in 1971.
In July 1976, the first Intergovernmental Conference on Communica¬
tion Policies in Latin America and the Caribbean, meeting in San José
(Costa Rica), recommended "the establishment of a Latin American and
Caribbean news agency, or a consortium of agencies, in the region".
But the participating States also stipulated that its establishment should
"in no way impair the free operation of existing agencies or their future
development".
Africa. At the first conference on news agencies, in 1963, specialists
from 29 countries recommended the creation of a Union of African News
Agencies. Recently, this idea has been revived in a study conducted by
the Union of African States.
Furthermore, at a conference of Arab and African news agencies in
Tunis in 1975, Unesco was requested to make a detailed study of national
and regional facilities for news transmission throughout the African and
Arab States, with due reference to existing and planned news agency and
telecommunication facilities.
Lastly, and in addition to regional assistance, Unesco has provided a
number of individual countries (Somalia, Libya, Cameroon, Nepal, Malay¬
sia,. Upper Volta and Thailand) with technical aid in the preparation and
development of national agencies.
"issuing from a few centres mainly
located in the industrialized countries.
Such information perforce reflects
the concerns, aspirations and even
the point of view of the societies in
which it originates and on whose
media it depends, and their mass
communication organizations tend,
whether they will or no, to exercise a
de facto domination which may im¬
pose cultural models."
This imbalance in the use of the
mass media constitutes a global
challenge which has prompted Unesco
to take action in view of its obligation,
as set out in its Constitution, to
"collaborate in the work of advan¬
cing the mutual knowledge and under¬
standing of peoples, through all
means of mass communication and to
that end recommend such interna¬
tional agreements as may be neces¬
sary to promote the free flow of ideas
by word and image."
Unesco has indeed taken such
action since its early days. In the
1950s it embarked on a series of stu¬
dies on world-wide facilities for mass
communication, issuing the findings
in its publication World Communica¬
tions, the latest edition of which
appeared in 1975.
In 1957, a report to the United
Nations General Assembly called
attention to an "information famine",
showing that two-thirds of the world
population lacked even minimum
access to information. This provok¬
ed more decisive action.
. Unesco embarked on 1 5 years of
intensive, mainly technical assistance
to the development of mass media.
Its achievements in these years
included:
the establishment of an Asian
Institute for Broadcasting Develop¬
ment in Malaysia in co-operation
with the Asian Broadcasting Union;
assistance in the development of
national and regional news agen¬
cies (BERNAMA in Malaysia, CANA
in the Caribbean [see article
page 10]);
the establishment of a national
centre for documentary film pro¬
duction in Latin America (Costa
Rica);
the promotion of radio as an ins¬
trument of rural development (India,
Ghana, Senegal);
the development of newspapers-
daily and rural press(Togo, Mali,
Kenya, Ghana, Tanzania, Tobago);
assistance in the establishment of
institutes for communication train¬
ing and research (Senegal, Ecuador,
Nigeria, Kenya, India, Malaysia, the
Philippines, the Caribbean);
the development of methods for
training, planning and management
of media institutions and systems;
the adoption of a series of interna¬
tional agreements (on the circula¬
tion of visual and auditory materials
and on the importation of educa-
