In the Arab Islamic world, calligraphy was widely used in architecture both for the message of
its text and as pure decoration. Architects and sculptors sometimes covered entire walls in
palaces or mosques with rich combinations of Arabic script, stylized plant motifs and geometric
forms. The walls of the Alhambra palace (below) in Granada (Spain) abound with Arabic
inscriptions exquisitely carved in stucco. Built in the 14th century, the Alhambra is one of the
oldest Arab palaces to have survived intact and one of the jewels of Arab architecture.
bpv
Photo Cart-Unesco
m mm¿m ^TZVfTT/TÇW
,\ rTF^r-,
SUSS cH
ifl

by Mustapha El Habib
THE Arab contribution to the histori¬
cal, religious and linguistic aspects
of Islamic civilization can be easily
identified and distinguished from the other
great creative forces that shaped the
world of Islam. It is much less easy how¬
ever, to disentangle the Arab thread from
the skein of influences that went to form
the art and architecture of the Muslim
world.
And yet the Arabs and the Arab genius
undeniably left a mark on the plastic arts
of Islam. There is, after all, a fundamental
difference between the art of such ancient
and homogeneous cultures as those of
Mesopotamia, Egypt and Persia, and the
art forms that were rapidly developed by
the earliest Islamic societies.
But let us first examine some key facts
about the culture and history of the world
that confronted the Arabs as they moved
up out of the Arabian Peninsula towards
the Middle East.
Modern studies tend to focus mainly on
the Greco-Latin and Persian cultures which
played a fundamental role in shaping the
profile of Islamic civilization. But other
forces were at work, too, and none more
so than the Yemen with its ancient
and distinguished Arab culture. According
to Arab authors, the Yemen contributed
to such important features of Islamic
civilization as civil engineering and the
organization of urban life.
We also known that in the north of the
Arabian peninsula, on the frontiers of
Byzantium and Persia, there were other
centres of Arab culture, influenced by
many years of contact with their powerful
neighbours, yet conserving a distinct
personality of their own.
Among the most important of these
centres were the principalities of the
Palmyrenes (in present-day Syria), the
Lakhmids (Iraq) and the Ghassanids (Syria).
Situated at an oasis in the Syrian desert,
on the caravan route from Damascus to
the Euphrates, the city of Palmyra is noted
for its economic, political and artistic
achievements. During the 3rd century
A.D., the Palmyrenes joined forces with
Rome in challenging the power of the
Sassanid dynasty, which ruled Persia from
226 to 651. The rapid conquest of Egypt
and Asia Minor by Zenobia, the celebrated
queen of Palmyra, foreshadowed Arab
expansion a few centuries later. Rome,
not yet in decline, was startled by this
lightning progress and turned against
Zenobia. Her troops were defeated and
Palmyra was sacked by the emperor
Aurelian in 272 A.D.
MUSTAPHA EL HABIB, Tunisian specialist in Arab
Islamic art, lectures at the Ecole du Louvre, Paris, on
Arabic epigraphy and paleography. Curator of the
Maghrib (North African) arts department at the
Museum of African and Oceanian Arts in Paris, he has
written widely on many aspects of Islamic art and
civilization.
The fall of Palmyra paved the way for
the arrival of another Arab people on the
Middle-Eastern stage. These were the
Lakhmids, who originated in the Yemen
and whose capital was the city of al-Hira
in Iraq. By faith Nestorian Christians (1),
the Lakhmids struck a delicate balance in
their relations with Rome and Sassanid
Persia.
Patrons of the arts, and of poetry in
particular, ' they enjoyed considerable
influence at the Sassanid court, while
their own capital, according to ancient
texts, was a place of exceptional beauty,
with numerous princely palaces.
Al-Hira was the meeting-point of three
different cultural streams: Persian, indig¬
enous and pagan Arabic, and Byzantine.'
It was here that Arabic writing was develop¬
ed, that an urban Arab culture flourished,
and that Christianity assumed the form in
which it would be carried into the deserts
of Arabia.
The Ghassanids, another Yemenite Arab
people which had settled in Syria, profess¬
ed a Monophysite form of Christianity (2).
In the early 6th century they joined forces
with . Byzantium against Persia and the
Lakhmids.
The Ghassanid rulers carried the develop¬
ment of Arab culture to a high pitch of
refinement. They played an active role in
the urbanization of Syria and were once
thought to have been the founders of
Damascus.
The defeat of the Ghassanids by the
Byzantines in 592 A.D. and of the Lakh¬
mids by the Persians in 613 A.D. left the
Arabs . of the Syrian and Mesopotamian
deserts in disarray.
But it was not long before they found
new allies. Doubtless remembering their
common origins in the southern part of the
(II Nestorianism: the doctrine imputed to Nestorius
(c. 380-451) according to which distinct divine and
human natures are to be attributed to Christ:
(2) Monophysitism: the doctrine that recognizes in the
person of Jesus Christ only one nature rather than
two, divine and human. It is today professed by the
Armenian and Syrian churches as well as the Coptic
Church of Egypt and Ethiopia.
Peninsula, and united in hatred of their
former overlords, they welcomed the new
wave of conquerors which, shortly before
the death ot the Prophet, swept up north¬
wards from the Hejaz region of the Red
Sea coast. They rallied to the banners of
their Islamic kinsmen, and eventually
adopted their religion.
The progression of the Arab converts
to Islam towards the Fertile Crescent the
semicircle of rich land that stretches from
Egypt to Mesopotamiawas thus more
than an isolated and unexpected event
which challenged the supremacy of the
Greco-Latin and Persian civilizations. It
was a chapter of history deeply rooted in
the Middle-Eastern past, and one which
marked revival as much as revolution.
The nomad of the Hejaz and his Arab
kinsmen drew their inspiration from a
historical, cultural and religious heritage
which had been steadily growing along
the banks of the mainstream of history
since the pre-Christian era.
Any assessment of Arab artistic creativi¬
ty should not be confined to a purely
quantitative analysis of the plastic arts of
the nomads. It should take into account
the whole of Arab society of that time,
whose common experience, shared by
nomadic and sedentary Arabs alike, rang¬
ed beyond the limits of the Hejaz region,
and even of the Arabian Peninsula. This
approach should help us to understand
the rapidity with which an original Islamic
art came into being.
When he built the house in which he
would spend his exile in Medina, the
Prophet Muhammad created a new type
of construction whose layout was to
inspire the so-called hypostyle Arab mos¬
que (whose ceiling is supported by pillars).
All forms of creativity involve borrowings
and outside influences, but one basic
feature that distinguishes the mosque
from the places of worship of other reli¬
gions, such as Christianity, is a direct
reflection of the ancient nomadic custom
of sitting side by side in a row during |
desert halts. As worshippers, they adopted I
"Eternal glory and everlasting renown", reads the Arabic inscription on this small ivory
plaque. Carved with the flowery, cursive script known as "thuluth", the plaque was
produced in Egypt or Syria in the 13th or 14th centuries.
Photo Luc Joubert © Réunion des Musées Nationaux, Paris
39

1 ï
\i \
>t jl. u.c.tillA-^K.
Il I
ft
fcU»§JU!fÍ¿V
The Holy City of Jerusalem
Jerusalem is one of the holiest places of Islam. In earliest Islamic
times, milestones were set along roads leading to the city for the
benefit of travellers and pilgrims. Above, a milestone inscribed with
its distance from Jerusalem and with the name of the Ommayad caliph
Abd al Malik, the builder of the famous Dome of the Rock (right).
Inside this sacred shrine, which was completed in 691, a circular
colonnade surrounds the Holy Rock (below). Also known as the
Mosque of Omar, the Dome of the Rock was built in the ornate
Byzantine tradition and was lavishly decorated with polychrome
mosaics. Together with the nearby Mosque of AI Aqsa, it is one of
the most important of all Islamic shrines.
40

, the same alignment, and this explains why
their prayer halls were of greater width
than length.
This architectural innovation accompan¬
ied the Prophet's revelation of a new type
of religious institution: one in which every
political, religious, moral or social issue
concerning the community could be raised.
Additions to mosque architecture after
the death of the Prophet are all direct or
indirect consequences of his original initia¬
tives. Among the former are the minaret
the tower from which the faithful are
summoned to prayerwhich is a develop¬
ment of the custom practised during the
Prophet's lifetime, of issuing such sum¬
monses from the highest roof in the vicinity
of the mosque; and the columns and
capitals which are derived from the roof-
supporting palm-tree trunks of the original
prayer hall at Medina;
Indirect consequences are seen in the
mihrab, the prayer niche in the centre of
the wall closest to Mecca, the holy city of
Islam; and the epigraphic decoration which
replaced the figurative ornamentation of
pre-lslamic Arab monuments.
Islamic architecture was carried to
perfection as a result of constant technical
improvements under the first Arab dynas¬
ties. Thus, written sources state that a
kind of concrete was used during the first
centuries of the Hegira. It was made
of chalk, sand, clay and rubble which
hardened to a rock-like consistency.
This explains why Arab Islamic monu¬
ments are not merely graceful, but extra¬
ordinarily resistant to wear and tear. Some
9th-century mosques and castles in the
Iberian Peninsula have survived until today
in a perfect state of preservation.
The problem of roof supports was solv¬
ed in different ways. Sometimes, columns
from earlier monuments were used, but in
Eastern and Western Islam, the columns
of antiquity gave way to slender shafts
and expansive capitals reminiscent of the
world of plants and trees, and more parti¬
cularly of the palm groves among which
Muhammad and his companions lived.
The specific character of the Arab mos¬
que was finally established when the
architects revolted against the bare sur¬
faces and the angular and rectangular
forms favoured by their Greek prede¬
cessors. This refusal found expression in
two new lines of research, one concerning
the structure of the mosque, the other con¬
cerning its decoration.
In each case, the aim was to dispense
with angularity, and to revive the orna¬
mental tradition which, in Mesopotamia,
Persia and Byzantium alike, had been
brought to a peak of perfection after
thousands of years spent in repeating the j
same patterns. I
Built before 850 A.D., the
Great Mosque at Susah
(Tunisia) is one of the
oldest in the Arab Islamic
world. Right, a corner of
the main courtyard, lined
with arcades. A frieze
in ornamental Arabic
script runs along the
top of the wall, forming
part of the fabric of
the architecture.

Places for worship
in desert and city
Left, in Southern Algeria, deep in the Sahara,
passing worshippers have used rows of
stones to mark out an enclosure for prayers.
A Muslim can pray to Allah wherever he
happens to beas long as he faces Mecca.
To designate the direction to be faced during
prayer, mosques have a niche or alcove
known as the mihrab in the wall facing
Mecca. In the great mosque of Cordoba
(Spain), the mihrab consists of an entire
room, resplendent with a forest of columns
and a cupola (right). Built by Abd ar Rahman
in 785, the mosque is an outstanding example
of Arab Islamic architecture in Andalusia,
complex in design and rich in decoration.
A more modest example of Islamic religious
architecture is the mosque of a Mauritanian
desert community at Chinguetti (below).
At the other end of the Arab Islamic world,
the muezzin (below . left) calls the faithful
prayer from leaning minaret of Mosul (Iraq).
to
Photos Naud © Afrique-Photo, Paris.
a»-* J<
- ,
i .
*,-. M
'y
1
42

Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris.
, The first line of research led to the
development of the cupola, the dome, the
arch and the so-called muqarna work,
which had the ornate appearance of a
honeycomb or stalactite.
Research in decoration led to the inven¬
tion of the arabesque, a style of ornamenta¬
tion involving fancifully-twisted plant
motifs, capable of expressing rhythmic
movement and suitable to the Islamic
preference for completely filled surfaces.
The mathematical precision of the
arabesque would in the 16th century find,
an admirer in the Italian painter Raphael,
who introduced it into the art of the
Renaissance.
But no account of the quest for new
ways of decorating the mosque would be
complete without mention of Arab orna¬
mental epigraphic art, whose history is
closely related to that of the arabesque.
No civilization has made more use than
Islam of writing for ornamental purposes.
A written Arabic alphabet, composed of
somewhat rudimentary Semitic characters
inscribed from right to left, either separ¬
ately or linked in a cursive hand, was already
being used in the Arabian peninsula in the
5th and 6th centuries A.D., before the
appearance of Islam.
Early Arab authors mention the import
ance which the Prophet Muhammad
attached to writing as a means of propagat¬
ing the Muslim faith, pointing out that his
entourage included not only his compa¬
nions, whose task was to learn the revela¬
tions of the Quran by heart but also a
number of scribes entrusted with the task
of transcribing the revealed message.
As Islam spread throughout the Arabian
Peninsula, there was an increasing need
to instruct the faithful in the art of writing
the Quranic language, and we are told
that after the battle of Badr against the
pagan Meccans, the Prophet liberated
every literate captive who agreed to teach
the art to ten young Muslims.
With the extension of the faith, and in
the space of a few years, Arabic writing,
as the vehicle of the divine revelation,
was adopted by all the converted peoples.
Today the script is used not only in Arabic,
but also in languages as varied as Persian,
Hindustani and Malay, as well as a number
of languages of Black Africa. Until the
reforms of 1928, it was also used in
Turkey.
The aesthetic qualities of Arabic script,
which were clearly apparent early in the
Islamic era, stem from the individual
characters themselves and the symmetrical
manner in which they are related to each
other in composition.
These qualities, coupled with the reli¬
gious prestige of the Quranic language,
soon made Arabic writing the object of
embellishment, and led to the creation of
calligraphy, the earliest and the most
"Arabic" of all the plastic arts of Islam
whose invention is ascribed by modern
specialists to Ali ibn Abi Talib, cousin and
son-in-law of the Prophet.
Rapidly "democratized", because it was
an art which all literate Arabs could prac¬
tise without distinction of wealth or social
status, calligraphy was also considered to
be the noblest of occupations, since it was
through writing alone that the revealed
message of the Quran could be given a
tangible form.
After the initial, formative period con¬
sidered to cover more or less the first
century of the Hegira Arabic writing in
its two forms (angular and cursive) was
systematically developed. From a number
of possible alternatives, the angular form
which finally emerged as the basic model
is the script known as "Kufic", from the
city of Kufa in Iraq, which was one of the
greatest centres of classical Arab culture.
This script was used at an early date to
transcribe the text of the Quran, so that
it came to be used throughout the Islamic k
world. Y
43

Photos © Yvette Vincent Alleaume, Paris.
Kufic writing employed characters
reduced to their simplest form, so that
decipherment depended as much on their
context as on their shape. It became the
subject of artistic experimentation which
reached a peak of perfection in the late
8th and early 9th centuries in a type of
ornamental inscription which determined
the whole art of Arabic calligraphy.
Angular Kufic served as the basis for
other styles of writing, which included
"foliate" Kufic (in which the spaces be¬
tween the strokes were filled with plant
motifs which at first sprang organically
from the letters themselves), "plaited"
Kufic (in which a procession of upright
letters stretched away towards infinity
against a floral background, and which
found particular favour in the Maghrib);
and "geometrical" or "quadrangular"
Kufic, generally used for decoration on
buildings, in which the letters of the in¬
scriptions were made from materials such as
baked or unbaked brick.
In the 10th century, a fluent cursive
script known as Nashki and used by scribes
and scholars for inscriptions on papyrus,
began to be employed for the transcription
of Quranic texts. The main difference
between Kufic and Nashki is that Kufic
letters are static, while Nashki characters
are linked together in an undulating,
uninterrupted line.
Guided for the most part by the rules of
angular writing, the famous calligrapher
and Abbasid minister Ibn Muqla (d. 939-
940) invented a mathematically proportion¬
ed cursive script. This writing was perfect¬
ed and amplified by another great Arab
calligrapher, Ibn al-Bawwab (d. 1022),
who laid down the rules of cursive script
which would enable subsequent genera¬
tions to practise the art of calligraphy in a
manner that was both free and rational.
In this brief survey of the Arab mosque
and Arabic calligraphy, we have tried to
throw light on a little-known aspect of the
Arab contribution to Islamic civilization
and to place the Arabs in their context
among the other great creative peoples of
the Arabian peninsula, with whom they
lived in close contact for so long.
However, until a comprehensive history
of pre-lslamic Arab civilization is written,
the nomad of the Hejaz and his kinsmen
in northern and southern Arabia will remain
shadowy figures, and their contribution to
the art of Islam will remain a matter of
conjecture.
Ancient Arab sources, which have up
to now been victims of neglect of misinter¬
pretation, contain a wealth of information
which might be used in the investigation
of monuments which the historians of
Antiquity described as magnificent, but
which have long since disappeared.
Only when these sources are tapped
will the history of Arabia cease to be
merely a field for speculation on a mun¬
dane sequence of battles, diplomatic
intrigues and genealogies, and will help us
to appreciate the true originality of Arab
art. Only then will it be possible to write
the history of an art that is truly Arab, and w
Mustapha El Habib
not merely Islamic.
44

Embroidery in brick and stone
The Yemen is one of the oldest centres of Arab civilization.
Throughout its history, this mountainous yet fertile country
(widely known in Antiquity as Arabia Felix fortunate Arabia)
has always preserved distinctive and original forms of
cultural expression. It today comprises two independent
states: the Arab Republic of Yemen and the People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen. Yemeni towns and cities
are renowned for the beauty of their architecture. Left,
townscape in Sanaa, capital of the Arab Republic of Yemen.
The façades of the tall terraced houses are resplendent with
white, brown and green ornamentation; the windowpanes
are of multicoloured stained glass. Right, a cascade of
domes and arches in the ancient town of Sadah. Below,
ablutions basin in one of the many mosques in Zabid.
*Aj!rt«rtÉH**vni
45
