RUBENS
Aportrait of the artist
as a universal man
by Roger A vermaete
THE great Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens was born
400 years ago, on 28 June 1577. Although known to
contemporaries as "the painter of Antwerp", he was not
born in Antwerp, as was long thought, but in Siegen, a small
town in Westphalia.
A trivial detail, one might suppose. And yet it throws an
interesting light on life in western Europe in the late 16th century.
Jan Rubens, the painter's father, was a rich and cultivated
burgher of Antwerp. An alderman of the city and a Protestant,
he was an opponent of the Duke of Alva, then governor of
Flanders and a notorious slaughterer of Protestants. In 1568
the alderman and his family were forced to flee the dreaded
Duke's wrath.
They settled in Cologne, where Jan Rubens became involv¬
ed in an intrigue which led to his being imprisoned for five years.
On his release he was allowed to live with his family in Siegen.
So it came about that "the Painter of Antwerp's" birthplace was
determined by Europe's religious conflicts.
Jan Rubens renounced his Protestantism and died a Catho¬
lic, and in 1589 his widow, Maria Pypelinckx, obtained permission
to return to Antwerp with her children.
Peter Paul was about 12 years old at the time. In 1590 he
became apprenticed to a well-known landscape painter, Tobias
Verhaecht, with whom he spent two years before going on to
spend two years in the studio of Adam van Noort. After a
further spell of apprenticeship under Otto van Veen, in 1598 he
was accepted as a Master by the Guild of St. Luke, the Antwerp
association of artists and artisans.
It is hard to tell what exactly Rubens learned from his mas¬
ters, solid painters untouched by genius. Tobias Verhaecht was
an unremarkable landscape painter who also depicted Towers of
Babel and scenes from the Apocalypse. It was his misfortune to
work several generations after Bruegel the Elder.
Adam van Noort, whose reputation had a moment of glory
in the 19th century when a number of works were wrongly
attributed to him, was a mediocre artist who belonged to Ant¬
werp's group of "Romanists", painters who had studied in Italy w
and whose work was imbued with the humanist learning of the Y
Renaissance.
ROGER AVERMAETE, internationally known Belgian writer, is the author of an
important study of Rubens' life and work, Rubens et Son Temps (Rubens and his
time), published in French and Dutch versions by Arcade publishers, Brussels, 1976.
A member of the Royal Flemish Academy of Sciences, Letters and Fine Arts of
Belgium, he has published novels and plays as well as art criticism and historical
studies. Tvo of his works, Guillaume le Taciturne /William the Silent) and Rem¬
brandt et Son Temps /Rembrandt and his time) have been awarded prizes by the
Académie Française.
One of Rubens' most remarkable works is an
altarpiece he painted for Antwerp cathedral
between 1611 and 1614. It was commissioned by
the Arquebusiers, an Antwerp brotherhood, for
their side-chapel in the cathedral. Rubens
produced a magnificent triptych whose central
panel was the Deposition from the Cross; on the
left was the Visitation, and on the right the
Presentation in the Temple. The Deposition
established Rubens as the foremost religious
painter of his time and has for over 300 years
been admired for its breathtaking virtuosity.
Painted with a dramatic intensity which is all the
more poignant for its restraint, the Deposition
scene is composed with powerful sweeping
curves that lead the eye directly to the dead
Christ, at the moment after his body has been
released from the Cross and is about to slump
into the arms of St. John. Rubens was
unsurpassed at creating a sense of dynamism
and movement through the use of curves and
counter-curves, but this was the first time that
he had achieved such a powerful effect with such
economy of means.

*"*
Photo © Bulloz, París

> The most interesting of the trio, Otto van Veen, produced
pale imitations of the works of the Italian masters. A cultivated
man with a passion for the art "from beyond the mountains", he
whetted the curiosity of his young apprentice and filled him with
impatience to travel to Italy.
We know little of Rubens' work during this period, except
that he painted an Adam and Eve in Eanhly Paradise (today in
Rubens' House, Antwerp), a conventionally classical work in the
manner of Otto van Veen, and a portrait of a man statedwith
unusual precision to be "26 years old". This work, now in a
private collection in New York, seems to herald later develop¬
ments in the art of portrait painting.
The impact of Italy
In 1600, Rubens set out for Italy, as many Flemish painters
had done before him. To Complete their education, they regard¬
ed a journey "across the mountains" as indispensable, although
for some of them the experience proved fatal. More than one
Flemish painter lost the roots of his originality in Italy. Only
Bruegel the Elder managed to resist the siren-call and emerge
triumphant. As for Rubens, his great achievement was to create
a style that was all his own, reconciling the opposing forces of
North and South.
Hardly had Rubens arrived in Italy (doubtless furnished with
impressive testimonials) than he was taken into the service of
Vincenzo de Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua. Like all Italian princes
of his age, Vincenzo lived in sumptuous style. He was a great
collector and a man of boundless curiosity.
However, it seems that Rubens did not find Mantua an ideal
setting for his work, since he managed to get himself sent to
Rome, ostensibly to complete his studies. The Eternal City was
then the capital of the arts. The great masters of the Renais¬
sance were dead, but a number of brilliant painters still worked
there, including Caravaggio, the Carracci brothers and Guido
Reni. Artistic life in Rome was passionate and turbulent.
In 1603, Rubens was entrusted by the Duke of Mantua with
the task of taking a number of presents to King Philip III of Spain
and to other influential people. Some have claimed that this
was a diplomatic mission. But Rubens thought otherwise and
complained that he didn't even get an opportunity of presenting
the gifts to the King himself. In compensation, though, he was
commissioned to paint an equestrian portrait of the King's chief
minister, the all-powerful Duke of Lerma.
On his return to Italy, Rubens did his utmost to remain in
Rome, although his master, the Duke, demanded his return to
Mantua.
In 1608, on receiving news from Antwerp that his mother
was seriously ill, he packed his bags and left for the North "in all
haste" (he wrote) without waiting for permission from the Duke,
who was away travelling at the time. He said he would soon
be back, but in fact he never returned.
Too little attention has been paid to the fact that a year
earlier Archduke Albert of Austria, Governor-General of the
Spanish Netherlands, had already asked Vincenzo I to grant
Rubens leave of absence to settle some matters in Antwerp and
that the Duke had refused. This may well have been a first,
unsuccessful attempt on Rubens' part to break free from Mantua.
A number of paintings have survived from Rubens' eight-
year stay in Italy. Of the great triptych 77?e Holy Family being
adored by Vincenzo de Gonzaga and his family there still
remains The Baptism of Christ, The Transfiguration and two
fragments of the central painting, which was mutilated in the
18th century. One is in the Academy of Mantua and the other in
the Academy of Vienna.
Other works which have survived from this period are a
triptych painted on slate for the Church of Santa Maria in Valli-
cella. The Adoration of the Virgin by the Saints, a St. George
and the Dragon, a portrait of The Marchesa Brígida Spinola Doria
and other portraits of noblewomen. Some portraits of men have
also survived, such as the curious Moulay Ahmed, today in the
Boston Museum of Fine Arts.
These works all display sound craftsmanship, but none ^
escapes the influences of the great Renaissance masters. Their r
MANSION FOR
A MASTER
When Rubens bought a large house in Antwerp
about 1610, he was a rich man, the most famous
painter in Europe. Commissions were flowing in,
and he was surrounded by pupils and assistants.
He carried out extensive alterations to his new
house before moving in five years later. As an
annex he built a two-storey studio (centre of lower
photo, opposite page) for which he designed an
Italianate façade decorated with statues and
Baroque stonework. Here, in a room over
10 metres long and 8 metres wide, he could work
on as many as three large compositions at once.
The studio was joined to the house by a triumphal
arch (left of same photo), giving onto a garden
with a classical pavilion (detail below). Almost
entirely rebuilt in the 18th century, Rubens' house
was bought in 1937 by the city of Antwerp,
restored to its original state and transformed into a
museum. Opposite page above, Antwerp Town Hall
in. 1609 during the Twelve-Year Truce (see article
page 23), in an engraving by Visscher, a
contemporary of Rubens.
Photo © Almasy, Paris
8


k composition is calm and ordered; the colours lack any personal
touch.
Rubens received a warm welcome from the rulers of the
Spanish Netherlands, who immediately commissioned portraits
of themselves from him. The painter decided to settle in Antwerp
and made his home there for the rest of his life. Commissions
soon began to pour in. He painted an Adoration of the Kings for
Antwerp's Town Hall which made a great impression. Traces of
Caravaggio's influence can be detected in this work.
The Elevation of the Cross which he executed for St. Wal-
burga's Church in Antwerp marks a further stage in Rubens'
development and is still one of his most popular works. Cons¬
tructed along a diagonal, the painting creates an impression of
dynamism and movement, with its astonishingly muscular figures
and its athletic Christ on the Cross. In fact it looks more like a
hymn to life than a death-scene.
In Rubens' next major painting, the Deposition from the
Cross, the effect is less tempestuous and the colours are in gene¬
ral more sombre, although the figures are just as muscular as in
the Elevation and the gloominess of the scene is mitigated by a
fine sweep of red.
Thus Rubens embarked upon his extraordinary career in
Antwerp. He was soon inundated with commissions. There
was a great demand for paintings of religious subjects, reflecting
the spirit of the Counter-Reformation sparked off by the Council
of Trent. The Catholics countered the severity of the Lutherans
and the Calvinists with ¡mages that were more numerous and
above all more attractive. At the same time, the influence of
humanism made it permissible to depict mythological themes.
This was an ideal climate for an artist like Rubens who loved life
in all its multifarious forms, especially men, women, children,
and animals.
The nude triumphant
This love of life found expression in his work through his
exaltation of the nude. The masters of the Renaissance, from
Michelangelo to Titian, had given the nude figure a prominent
place in their work, but none of them ever showed such a mark¬
ed predilection for it as Rubens. The Old and the New Testa¬
ments certainly offered a wealth of subjects, but afforded few
opportunities for painting the female nude. In mythology, on the
other hand, nymphs and goddesses abound, and since in
Rubens' imagination they were never clothed, they provided him
with an inexhaustible supply of models.
PHILOSOPHERS AND CLASSICISTS
This painting, executed around 1612, is entitled "The Four
Philosophers", although not all those portrayed were, strictly
speaking, philosophers. Grouped beneath a bust of Seneca are
(from right to left) the Latin scholar Jan Woverius, the Stoic
philosopher Justus Lipsius, Rubens' brother Philip a disciple of
Lipsiusand Rubens himself. The work, with its background of
Classical ruins, documents the vogue for Greek and Latin learning
in early 17th century Europe.
10

Gradually there emerged a type of woman, buxom and pale-
skinned, which was to recur so often in Rubens' painting that
people came to believe that it was a representative likeness of
Antwerp women in general. (However, it is known that the
models for the naiads in The Reception of Marie de Medici at
Marseilles were Italian.)
Some of Rubens' vast canvases are crowded with nude
figures. Among them are two Last Judgements depicting clusters
of mingling men and women, and a delightful panel entitled The
Infant Jesus, St. John and two Angels, showing four children,
one of them a cherub with a lamb and a basket of fruit.
Rubens derived constant inspiration from men, women and
children. The nude is everywhere triumphant in his mytholo¬
gical paintings such as Nymphs and Satyrs; Ceres, Bacchus,
Venus and Love; Neptune and Amphytrite; and even the Four
Parts of the World. Obviously it was more difficult to introduce
nude figures into paintings of religious subjects. Christ, and the
Infant Jesus in the Holy Family were the only appropriate occa¬
sions the possible exception of the Adoration of the Kings.
In the latter, however, one of Rubens' favourite subjects, the
crowds thronging the scene and the splendour of the costumes
tend to distract attention from the newborn babe.
Rubens was a competent portraitist, but during these early
years, not a brilliant one, although an exception should perhaps
be made for the portrait he painted of himself and his young
wife, Isabella Brant, whom he married in 1609.
Another much admired work from this period is the painting
known as The Four Philosophers, a portrayal of the scholar
Justus Lipsius with his pupils Jan Woverius and Rubens' brother
Philip on either side of him, and, in the background, Rubens
himself.
Later Rubens was to develop a more expansive manner, but
he had already moved far from the style of his predecessors. To
appreciate this one has only to look back to the portraits of the
16th-century Dutch painter Antonio Moro, with their deep concern
for visual analysis, where truth comes before beauty.
Rubens saw things otherwise. He did not forget the manner
of the Renaissance masters and idealized his models with a subt¬
lety that delighted them. Van Dyck was to learn this lesson and
make his fortune thereby.
For a long time, landscape merely served as a background
for the groups of people which occupy the centre of the stage.
Later, however, it came to occupy a far from negligible place in
Rubens' paintings, bearing as always the unmistakable stamp of
his genius.
It was probably to give free rein to his taste for movement
that Rubens painted a series of hunting scenes: depicting a wolf;
a lion and a leopard; a crocodile and a hippopotamus; a wild
boar; and a lion. These are tumultuous paintings in which men
and beasts are locked in furious combat.
Rubens' horses are always magnificent animals of unrivalled
beauty. In his first equestrian portrait, depicting the Duke of
Lerma astride his mount, the steed is drawn with unequalled
grace. Mane and tail streaming in the wind, Rubens' horses are
involved in countless adventures. They are the main protagonists
in The Battle of the Amazons, a masterly example of perfectly-
balanced composition despite the turmoil of the scene.
In the midst of all this activity, Rubens still found time to
indulge in architecture. He bought a house on the Wapper (a
canal which had once formed part of the moat of Antwerp's
fortifications) and spent three years carrying out alterations to it.
His designs were clearly inspired by the Italian palazzi he had so
admired. He even published a book on Genoese architecture,
Palazzi di Genova, with the declared aim of combatting the
Gothic style which, like Vasari, he thought barbaric. .
People said that his house, together with that of his friend Y
Wealthy and successful, a happy
husband and father, Rubens felt an
increasing need as he grew older to
withdraw from his crowded
professional and social life in
Antwerp. In 1635 he bought a
country retreat, the Château of Steen
(left), a manor in the Flemish
Renaissance style with a moat, a
drawbridge, an orchard and gardens.
In addition he purchased woods and
fields nearby. Here he began to
paint peaceful landscapes, depicting
the lush farmland in all its variety of
light, mood and season. In one of
his most beautiful portrayals of the
countryside around the château
(opposite page), the mellow evening
light strikes through trees onto the
façade and glinting window-panes of
the mansion (far left of painting).
These "sunset years" in the Flemish
countryside also inspired him to paint
the famous scene of peasant revelry
known as La Kermesse. ,
11

Photo © Almasy, París
Photo © Bulloz, Paris Plantin Museum, Antwerp
RUBENS THE
As well as producing a gigantic output of paintings, for
25 years Rubens supplied the Plantin printing-house in
Antwerp with many designs for title pages and book
illustrations. The Plantin press was founded by
Christophe Plantin (1530-1589), a Frenchman who settled
in Antwerp and became the most celebrated printer of his
time. By 1576 he had 16 presses and was working
virtually on an industrial scale. In 34 years he published
oyer 1,500 works, ranging from anatomical treatises and
atlases to Bibles, Including the renowned "Polyglot
Bible", an ambitious attempt to fix the original text of the
Old and New Testaments on a scientific basis. Rubens
,was a lifelong friend of Balthasar Moretus, Plantin's
grandson, who became head of the press and had
unlimited confidence in Rubens' capacities as an
illustrator. In his work for Moretus, Rubens developed a
new style of book illustration through designs displaying
a wealth of allegorical motifs, symbols, emblems and
L Balthasar Moretus (the grandson of the great printer Christophe
Plantin) was one of the finest in Antwerp. ' Rubens wanted to
furnish it with antique marble statues and to this end he began
negotiations with the English Ambassador, Sir Dudley Carleton.
The resultant haggling between these two equally wily dealers,
each out to get the better of the other, is. a highly entertaining
episode.
In 1619, Rubens painted The Last Communion of St. Francis
of Assist'. Despite the angels thronging the scene, this is one of
his few paintings expressing pain. Not long afterwards, he
received an important commission for 36 ceilings and three altar-
pieces for the new Jesuit church in Antwerp (today the church
of St. Charles Borromeo). The church was gutted by fire in 1718
and all Rubens' work perished in the flames, except for the three
altarpieces.
A helping hand from
van Dyck and Brueghel
A mounting flood of commissions meant that Rubens had
to take on experienced assistants to help him. These were not
mere pupils as has often been suggested; even renowned artists
such as Jan Brueghel and Frans Snyders were happy to under¬
take this sort of work.
Antony van Dyck also worked for a time with Rubens, after
being received into the Guild of St. Luke. This collaboration
between the master and his young rival produced at least one
masterpiece, the Rape of the Daughters of Leucippus. Rubens
and van Dyck also worked together on the cartoons for a tapes¬
try recounting the story of the Roman Consul Decius Mus.
Van Dyck did not stay long in the service of Rubens. Other
assistants took his place. There was never any lack of applicants.
Jan Wildens and Lucas van Uden painted landscapes; Theo van
12

Photo © Bulloz, Paris Plantin Museum, Antwerp
BOOK-ILLUSTRATOR
figures from Greek mythology.
Although not himself an engraver, Rubens
was instrumental in creating a whole new school of
engraving, working closely with a carefully-chosen group
of print-makers and often correcting the first pulls of a
print with pen or brush. As an illustrator he turned his
hand to a variety of subjects, from treatises on optics to
historical compilations, travel books and philosophical
works. Photos on this double page show (1) the
courtyard of the Plantin printing house in Antwerp, today
the Plantin Museum; (2) a portrait of Christophe Plantin
by Rubens ; (3) Martine Plantin, Christophe's daughter;
(4) printing presses (left) in the Plantin workshop; and (5)
. a title page designed by Rubens for a historical work,
La Reddition de Breda (The Surrender of Breda). It is seen
at various stages of production. Above left, Rubens'
original design; above right, the engraved copper plate;
and below right, as it appeared in the book.
Thulden, Justus van Egmont, Abraham van Diepenbeek and
Erasmus Quellin specialized in figures; Paul de Vos painted ani¬
mals. This list of Rubens' collaborators is far from complete.
Curiously, once these painters set up on their own account they
seemed to run out of inspiration.
Rubens was a hard task-master, but he was perfectly capable
of adapting to the manner of a talented assistant. Adam and
Eve in Paradise, painted in collaboration with Jan Brueghel, has
been called "a masterpiece of understanding between the great¬
est genius and the subtlest talent in 17th-century Flemish
painting".
While never ceasing to paint, Rubens gradually became
involved in other activities. Events were to provide him with an
opportunity of playing a part in politics, in which he was passion¬
ately interested. The Twelve-Year Truce between Spain and the
United Dutch Provinces expired in 1621 and a resumption of
hostilities seemed inevitable.
Rubens was a staunch pacifist, and he set out to promote
peace no easy task at that time. Spain was proud and Holland
was unyielding., The painter sought to use his brilliant circle of
friends and acquaintances to ease his entry into public life. After
the death of the Archduke Albert, in 1621, the Archduchess
employed his services on more than one occasion. He was sent
to Holland to sound out the prospects for peace, but in vain.
Scenes from the life of
a scheming queen
Rubens the artist, on the other hand, was as successful as
ever. In 1622, he was summoned to Paris, where Marie de Medi¬
ci, the Queen Mother, asked him to decorate a gallery in her
newly-built Luxembourg Palace.
The subject was a tricky one. The artist was asked to paint
20-odd episodes from the scheming Queen Mother's none-
too-glorious life. But imagination can help to surmount most
obstacles. A combination of allegory and symbols, with a sprink¬
ling of mythology, provided a brilliant camouflage for history,
and Rubens managed to skirt round a number of embarrassing
episodes (although not quite enough for Richelieu, who ordered
certain alterations).
Thus was created the famous Medici Gallery, today one of
the glories of the Louvre. It is not Rubens' greatest work, and
certain contemporaries criticized him for his excessive and often
obscure use of allegory. Even so, it was a gigantic undertaking,
one that few painters could have brought to completion. It
required two years' work, although it did not prevent him from
completing other works in the meantime, notably his finest ver¬
sion of The Adoration of the Kings (Antwerp).
After completing the Medici Gallery, Rubens returned once
more to Paris to discuss the pictures needed for a second gallery,
whose decoration was to be devoted to the life of King Henry IV.
This project never came to fruition, and only a few brilliant
sketches have survived to testify that the lusty king inspired the
artist better than his scheming wife.
Fortunately, there were compensations: Louis XIII had com¬
missioned the designs for 12 tapestries telling the story of the
Roman Emperor Constantine. At this time, Rubens also made
the acquaintance of the Duke of Buckingham, the all-powerful
favourite of two English kings, James I, and his son Charles I.
He painted a portrait of the flamboyant Duke and cultivated
his company. Their relations were not without political overtones
on either side, and Buckingham, probably eager to win over a
man of such high standing at the Brussels court, paid Rubens a
fabulous price for the collection of statues that the painter had
earlier purchased from Sir Dudley Carleton.
In quest of peace
in Madrid and London
- For several years, Europe had been involved in the bloody
conflict known to history as the Thirty Years' War. Buckingham
was seeking peace with Spain and Rubens embarked on skilfuj
manceuvrings that led to his being summoned to Madrid to pre:
Dare the around for discussions.
rQIS ""¡»luuiiu u»i,umiuiiíi. CONTINUED PAGE 16
13

Vive la femme !
Portrait of Isabella Brant (Dijon Museum, France)
Rubens was one of the greatest painters of women and
especially the nude female formwho ever lived. He excelled in
depicting milk-white flesh, glossy curls, graceful gestures,
the hollows and curves of the body. When a widower of 53, he
married the 16-year-old Hélène Fourment. Breaking the news to
one of his friends, he wrote, "It would have been hard for me to
exchange the priceless treasure of liberty for the embraces of an
old woman." He painted many portraits of Hélène, sometimes
playing with her children, sometimes richly adorned, and once
clad only In a fur cloak. She also served as a model for many of
his mythological and religious scenes (such as 77ie Education of
the Virgin, opposite page below, and The Judgement of Paris,
below, where she appears as the naked Venus in centre of
painting). Of his first wife, Isabella Brant, who died prematurely
in 1626, Rubens also painted unforgettable portraits reflecting the
gentleness and serenity which enchanted him both as husband
and painter.
Self-portrait of Rubens painted around 1624 (Windsor
Castle, England)
14
The Judgement of Paris (Prado Museum, Madrid)

The Education of the Virgin
(Musée Royal des Beaux-
Arts, Antwerp)
15

y The Spanish prime minister. Count Duke Olivares, was
unenthusiastic about opening peace negotiations with England,
but Rubens won over Philip IV, who preferred painting to poli¬
tics. At all events, the painter was eventually entrusted with- an
official peace mission to London. Before he left he was given
the honorific title of "Secretary to the Privy Council", since it
was considered unfitting that proud Spain should be represented
by a man who "worked with his hands"
While in Madrid, Rubens spent much of his time painting,
and is said to have produced 30-odd works during his stay. He
also managed to persuade the King to buy the paintings he had
had the foresight to bring with him. In his spare time, he met
and frequently conversed with the young Sevillian, Velasquez,
the indefatigable painter of the Spanish king and his court.
Rubens' visit to England was a personal triumph. The king
commissioned a series of paintings, representing the blessings of
his father's reign, to decorate the ceiling of the great Banqueting
House in Whitehall, and knighted the artist on the eve of his
departure. Diplomatically, the trip was less successful. After a
year and a half's absence, Rubens returned home disappointed.
The records tell us nothing about the work of his studio during
this period.
In the year of his return to Antwerp, he married Hélène
Fourment, then aged 16. His first wife, Isabella Brant, who had
died in 1626, had borne him a daughter, Clara Serena (who died
young) and two sons, the elder of whom was the same age as
his new wife.
This plump, blond young woman was henceforth to appear
in many of his works, as Venus, Andromeda, St. Cecilia, Diana,
one of the "Three Graces" and as a goddess in the Judgement
of Paris. She also posed as plain Hélène Fourment, richly
adorned, with her husband or with her children, or even virtually
naked, as in the painting known as The Little Fur.
It seems that Rubens wished to abandon politics at this
time, for he turned down an offer to return to England on ano¬
ther mission. The next year, however, he was once more in the
thick of things. Marie de Medici had been forced to flee from
France and arrived in Mons, where Rubens was delegated to
welcome her. The Queen Mother's misfortunes led him to urge
Olivares to support armed intervention on behalf of her intrigue-
ridden entourage. The peace-loving Rubens had become over¬
night an advocate of war! However, his petition came to naught,
for Madrid would have none of it. The artist returned to his
brushes and easel, the best thing he could have done.
The last ten years of his life were as prolific as those that had
gone before but his style became increasingly subtle. As in the
past he continued to paint both religious and secular subjects.
The latter became more and more sensual, while his treatment
of religious themes reflects a greater tenderness and tranquility
than his earlier work.
Paintings such as the Offering to Venus, with its angels
dancing about the goddess or perched in the trees above her,
and with its amorously entwined couples, exude Joie de vivre
through their fresh colours, their spirited sense of movement and
the gaiety of the children.
Rubens loved children and they abound in his paintings,
even in such dignified works as the Triptych of St. Ildefons,
which had been commissioned by Archduke Albert and his wife,
who were portrayed on the side panels. Children appear in The
Education of the Virgin, looking down on Hélène Fourment as
the Virgin Mary, and in the Holy Family and the Saints.
These are the paintings of a happy man. His varied expe-
RAVISHED
BEAUTIES
According to a Greek myth, Phoebe and Hilaria,
daughters of King Leucippus of Messene, were
snatched away from their husbands-to-be by
Castor and Pollux, the twin sons of Zeus. Rubens
delighted in such stories, which provided him with
almost inexhaustible opportunities to portray his
favourite subject: the female nude. The Rape of the
Daughters of Leucippus (2.25 m by 2.10 m), painted
around 1619, is not a tragic picture: the maidens,
like the impish cupid clinging to the horse's bridle
at left, do not seem unduly perturbed by what is
going on. Rubens has enclosed the action within
a circular compositional frame (see schematic
presentation above). Within the circle tensions are
expressed through sweeping intersecting arcs and
the scene is organized in a series of rectangles.
(The size of each rectangle is determined by the
"golden section", a canon of proportions which
Rubens had studied intensively in Italy.) To create an
atmosphere of motion and excitement, Rubens has
systematically used contrasting surfaces and
colours. It is remarkable that the same techniques
could create such different effects as the high
tragedy of The Deposition from the Cross (see page
7) and the "comic opera" atmosphere of the
painting shown here.
16

riences in public life had not affected his art. When the Arch¬
duchess Isabella asked him to attend negotiations between the
Estates General of the Spanish Netherlands and the United
Provinces, he was confronted by a storm of protest from his
countrymen, outraged by this interference in their affairs. This
time, Rubens had had enough, and he bade farewell to politics.
Staging a mammoth pageant
with an army of
artists and craftsmen
The Archduchess died in 1633 and was succeeded as
Governor General by the Cardinal-Infant Ferdinand. To celebrate
his ceremonial entry into Antwerp, Rubens designed elaborate k
street decorations that are probably unique in the history of art. f
HELL'S TORMENTS
AND EARTHY DELIGHTS
The works shown on this page are characteristic of two
distinct stages in the development of Rubens' art. In 77ie
Last Judgement (right), a great turmoil of figures hurtles
down towards the middle of the picture, whence devils
drag their tortured bodies to the fires of Hell. This
painting, commissioned for a Bavarian church, displays
Rubens' delight in depicting whirling movement, nudes
in abundance and strong contrasts of light and shadow.
Below, La Kermesse, a village carnival painted in the
1630s when Rubens was concentrating more and more on
landscapes and pastoral subjects. In this scene of
uninhibited revelry, harking back to the world of Bruegel
the Elder, Rubens has rediscovered his roots as a
Flemish painter.
i
jl *. r
{Pi »» V
*
W^ mmw *7V Am
r \j* i_i é¿ wÈmm^m^Ë^^^W&^wT^j- * ^r^ - ^flH ^ÊÊ
mmm\W ^ ^vJ r^^fctt ^2mW0+ - v " «1^1 uàmmk i
HJH i t» I^Hl "ZA * 5» mJB
mr^mw^ i m\ lun ^H m^r *
17

As architect, chief designer and impresario of this grandiose
pageant, he marshalled an army of assistants. Among them
were 20-odd painters, including Jacob Jordaens, Cornelis de
Vos, Erasmus Quellin, Theodore Rombouts, Cornelis Schut,
Theodore van Thulden, the two van Balen sons, and six sculp¬
tors, including Quellin, van Mildert and Van den Eynde.
The inscriptions were done by his friend Gevaerts, the poet
and scholar. A multitude of carpenters, painters, gilders, black¬
smiths, drapers, firework-makers, weavers, tinsmiths and glaziers
were also engaged on the colossal undertaking, aimed at turning
the whole city into an immense theatre. Floats were set up in
the streets and no fewer than 11 triumphal arches were erected.
The most resplendent of them was decorated on one side with
12 white stone statues of the emperors of the House of Austria,
and with paintings illustrating their achievements. Decorations
were everywhere and no expense was spared.
The city council wanted to raise new taxes to cover the
enormous costs of this gala occasion, but higher authorities
refused. However, these were mere details; the important thing
was the magnificence of Rubens' achievement. Several sketches
for the reception still survive, in a number of museums, notably
the design for the monumental "Pompa introitus", showing
sculptures and paintings by van Thulden and a text by Gevaerts.
During the same year, 1635, Rubens purchased the château
of Steen at Elewyt, in Brabant, where from now until his death
he would spend part of each year. Steen influenced the deve¬
lopment of his work: he began to use its trees, and sometimes the
COLOUR PAGES
Opposite page: Detail from a painting by
Rubens snowing the artist, his young wife
Hélène Fourment and one of his sons strolling
in their Antwerp garden.
Photo Blauel-Pinakothek, Munich
Centre double page:
The Marchesa Brígida Spinola Doria, a Genoese
noblewoman. Rubens painted this portrait
around 1606.
Photo © National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C, U.S.A.
STAMPS TO HONOUR
RUBENS
Belgium
Paraguay
! 1377
;1,o
MONACO 1»,;
3;j>*dH Pét, '
P.P. R
-'"'' :
UBENS 11573 -1640) '
Monaco
Liechtenstein
Cook Islands
surrounding countryside and its people, in the background of his
paintings. The painter's imagination reached new heights in
romantic scenes such as the Landscape with Ulysses and Nausi-
caa and the Shipwreck of Aenaeas. In these last years he conti- ,
nued to develop, applying his art to what he saw around him.
In some paintings, reality mingles with the imaginary: the château
serving, for example, as the backdrop to a tournament scene.
Gradually, human figures began to dwindle in importance
until they became no more than tiny actors; their presence re¬
mained necessaryartistic tradition demanded itbut the land¬
scape now dominated the entire painting. A light breeze rustles
the leaves; the sky, strewn with light clouds, becomes more
vast; horizons stretch out in the distance.
Gardens of love and peasant frolics
This development also influenced his choice of figures. In
the lavish canvas known as The Garden of Love, well-dressed
figures stroll, sit and flirt outdoors but still maintain an atmosphere
of polite restraint. In the marvellous Kermesse (Carnival), painted
with light, deft brush-strokes, restraint has been cast to the
winds: peasants and their women dance, drink and embrace in
a veritable explosion of joy. This is the work of a painter expres¬
sing himself with total freedom, in full possession of his creative
powers. The time had come to discard the mask. The Peasants'
Dance is a joyful reel, a prelude to the Shepherd Embracing a
Woman in which Hélène Fourment's legs entwined around the
legs of a man leave little to the imagination.
One last major commission arrived from Spain. Philip IV
wanted a series of paintings to decorate the Torre de la Parada,
his hunting lodge near Madrid. The subjects chosen, "Ovid's
Metamorphoses and the Labours of Hercules", were just the
kind of thing to delight the painter, providing him with endless
opportunities to depict the nude.
At the same time, he continued to paint religious subjects,
and his customers went on plying him with commissions. Some
of his works from this late period are outstanding, especially The
Virgin with the Saints, which he planned for his tomb, 777e Road
to Calvary and The Martyrdom of St. Llvinus, painted with
breathtaking energy. His brushstrokes were growing lighter and
lighter, barely skimming the canvas.
As for the dazzling nudes of his last years, many of them
depicting Hélène Fourment, surely they are the best and most
convincing answer to those who, glancing at his last self-portrait,
have assumed that he was an unhappy husband. Nothing could
have been further from the truth. His last known letter, written
CONTINUED PAGE 3«


'c.
.
¿
r

>
H
É
m
b!!
Ï
if
h
a
*
'


RUBENS (CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18)
less than two months before his death, provides ample proof to
the contrary. And his work, it must be repeated, is that of a
contented man.
Rubens died in Antwerp on 3 May 1640. He had been the
: crowning glory of the Antwerp school, which virtually died out
with him. Van Dyck followed him to the grave in 1641, although
' Jordaens, the Antwerp school's last representative of note, sur¬
vived until 1678. After that, the school went into a more or less
final decline. However, Rubens' work continued to exercise
great influence, especially on French artists, from Watteau,
' Boucher and Fragonard, to Delacroix, and even Renoir.
Rubens, a fascinating and many-sided personality, loved
corresponding with the great men of his time, especially with
humanists such as Fabri de Peiresc, the famous Provencal scholar
who, right up to his death in 1637, lost no opportunity to show
his admiration for the painter.
As a result of his formative years in Italy, Rubens was most
at ease when writing in Italian, which he used whether commu¬
nicating with Spanish grandees such as the Archduke and his
wife, or Count-Duke Olivares, or with his French scholar friends.
Sometimes he wrote in Frenchto Buckingham among others
or in Flemish, to some of his colleagues. His letters contain a
liberal sprinkling of Latin phrases.
His prodigious capacity for work enabled him to amass an
impressive fortune, despite the hard times in which he lived. He
was tireless in defending his own interests. For example, he was
greatly interested in engraving, realizing that the circulation of
prints was an excellent means of getting his work widely known.
In addition to obtaining privileges for the distribution of his works
in several countries, he made a close study of engraving tech¬
niques, even giving impetus to a new school of engraving, differ¬
ing from earlier schools in its concern to render subtle gradations
of light and shade.
In his search for the most faithful possible rendering of his
coloristic richness into linear black and white, he helped to
train a galaxy of engravers, including Cornelis Galle, the Bolswert
brothers, Lucas Vorstermans and Paulus Pontius. These engrav¬
ers took the rapid sketches he prepared for his friend Balthasar
Moretus, who had inherited the Plantin press, and completed
them in accordance with his instructions. These sketches became
the sumptuous title pages which lent the books coming off
Plantin's presses their entirely new, pure baroque style.
Rubens was a draughtsman of astonishing skill. When pre¬
paring his portraits, he would make a study of the model from
life, thereby enabling us to gauge just how much liberty he took
when he came to apply the paint. Here too, his powerfully deco¬
rative style helped save his models from banality. What is most
striking in these sketches, which usually served as a guide for the
final composition, is his sureness of touch. . Everything fell into
place at once; there was no need for second thoughts. The
sketches, done on little wood panels, with brush and sepia, with
the occasional underscoring of colour here and there, furnish
striking evidence of Rubens' genius. Even at this stage, every¬
thing was already in its intended place, and the final painting
could be executed to scale from these invaluable documents.
On more than one occasion, as we have seen, the paintings
were done by teams of assistants, with the master adding the
finishing touches. Not that there was ever any attempt to de¬
ceive the client. Rubens graded the prices of his work according
to whether it was entirely "by his hand", as he put it, or simply
supervised or revised by him. ,
In any case, the skill of his assistants was such that specia¬
lists still argue over who exactly did what.
One expert tried to sidetrack the problem by asserting that,
with two exceptionswhich were undeniable on account of
evidence that has survived in Rubens' correspondenceall the
paintings were by the master himself. But this view is untenable.
The fact is, Rubens relied heavily on his assistants, and painted
very few works entirely by himself. This in no way detracts from
his creative genius, one of the greatest in the history of art.
H Roger Avermaeta
36
