The promotion of books and reading, the development of communication
media, and the very nature and quality of information itself are occupying
an increasingly important place in Unesco's programmes. Although an
ever-increasing number of relatively inexpensive, good-quality books are
now being produced (above), they remain inaccessible for many peoples.
Audio-visual equipment sometimes takes their place, as in this literacy class
in the Ivory Coast (opposite page) where children and grown-ups are
learning from a television programme.



Books for all
Without books, the implementation of cultural, educational and
communication policies would be impossible.
Although about 70 per cent of the world population lives in the
developing countries, these countries produce a fifth of the books
published in the world, the remainder being concentrated in about
30 industrialized countries.
Cost is the chief obstacle to the development of book production
in the developing countriesauthors' fees, acquisition of copyrights,
financing of translation, and the cost of manufacture.
The developing countries are obliged to look elsewhere to meet
their home demand, which is increasing with the spread of education
and the advance of literacy. This involves heavy financial outlays.
Moreover, imported books are by no means always suited to the
aspirations of their peoples, most of which could be satisfied by
national authors, who are often obliged to publish abroad because
there is no place for them in the economic pattern of local publishing.
Although the reading public has approximately doubled during the
past 25 years and the number of potential readers continues to grow,
as a result of the population explosion and the general advance of
education, several surveys have shown that, even in countries whose
publishing industry is flourishing, the percentage of those who do not
read books is often high, sometimes exceeding 50 per cent.
From Unesco's Medium-Term Plan (1977-1982),
Chapter III: Man as the Centre of Development
