RUBENS
A 400th ANNIVERSARY TRIBUTE
w
E celebrate this year the 400th anniversary of the birth of Peter Paul Rubens,
one of the world's most outstanding painters.
The sensuous exuberance, the overwhelming vitality of Rubens, the greatest
exponent of Baroque painting, is a joy for ever for all those who have eyes to see.
Seldom in the history of art have all the good things that enhance the value and
beauty of life been represented with such strength and eloquence.
Through the genius of Rubens, the great traditions of the north and south of
Europe of Dutch and Flemish painting on the one hand, and of Italian painting on
the otherwere to combine in unrivalled masterpieces.
Rubens' inspiration had robust roots in the life of the Flemish people that he
knew from his earliest childhood. And through his artistic skill this people has
become dear to art lovers all over the world. Though he never severed his roots, he
spent long years studying Italian art at the court of the Gonzagas in Mantua and
then in Rome, where he acquired new techniques and became aware of the new
visions of the Carracci brothers and Caravaggio.
It is thus that he was able to reconcile in his person and in his art theirs Nova
of the north and the Buona Pratica of Florence. All that was most traditional and
most modern in the painting of his time found equally vigorous expression in his
work. This towering personality, poised astride two centuries, was the most
accomplished figure of the Renaissance and a herald of modern times.
From Mantua, Genoa and Rome, Rubens brought back not only new art forms,
trends and perspectives, but he was also able to complement his vast knowledge in
different fields, and to acquire, in the six languages he mastered, all the Western
culture of his time.
IMo wonder, therefore, that his house in his beloved city of Antwerp was to
become one of the great schools of painting of all time. Many masterpieces now
hanging in galleries all over the world come from that school.
Man of genius, man of culture, man of education, Rubens was also a man of
peace. It is not surprising, therefore, that he spent a great part of his extraordinarily
active life in the service of international understanding. His intelligence, his charm,
his exceptional knowledge of political affairs and his perfect command of the
major European languages made him a first-rate diplomat.
But though he served different courts, he always acted as a universal messenger
of peace. He fought to protect his country's interests among the tensions of the
great powers of the time. In Madrid, in Paris and in London he was always to
oppose war and to advocate a policy of negotiation and understanding.
The horrors of war are expressed with agonizing reality in his wonderful
masterpiece in the Pitti Palace in Florence, and the blessings of peace are immortalized
with equal eloquence in his great canvas in the National Gallery in London.
Genius of the arts, scholar, fighter for peace: all these qualities make Rubens
dear to all men of goodwill dedicated to serve international understanding.
Makaminan Makagiansar
Unesco's Assistant Director-General for
Culture and Communication
Self-portrait of Rubens, executed some time after
his marriage to the beautiful young Hélène
Fourment in 1630.

