A CASE STUDY
IN SURVIVAL
How animal life has adapted
to impossible desert conditions
by Claude Grenot and Roland Vernet
CLAUDE GRENOT, French research
scientist. Ecole Normale Supérieure In
Paris, specializes In desert fauna and
is the author of numerous articles on
ecology and the physiology of repti¬
les. Ha is a consultant for the Addax
Oryx project at the International Union
for Conservation of Nature and Natu¬
ral Resources at Morges, Switzerland.
ROLAND VERNET, French biology re¬
searcher. University of Paris, is a
specialist on Saharan ecology. He has
published numerous articles on ecolo¬
gy and the physiology of reptiles.
THE Sahara has not always been a
desert. It became one gradually
over a long period, which seems to
have begun in earnest some 8,000 years
ago, during the late Stone Age.
In prehistoric times, the Sahara was a
very different place. Long before the
Libyan horsemen and camel drivers
ancestors of the modern Berber nomads
its inhabitants were farmers, herdsmen
and fisherman, living beside lakes whose
only trace today is found in fossilized
remains.
From their chipped stone tools and the
engravings and paintings of their cave wall
art, we know that their settlements were
numerous and widespread throughout the
Saharan region.
Contrary "to what one might imagine,
the number of species of mammals found
in the Sahara today is relatively high,
amounting to 65 (including 24 which are
native to the region) as compared with
115 in France. "Genuinely" Saharan mam¬
mals include the majority of its rodents,
the fennec fox, the white gazelle and the
addax antelope.
As far as birds are concerned, 90 spe¬
cies are found in the Sahara, 18 of which
are native to the region and actually nest
there (the white-rumped black wheatear,
the bifasciated and other larks, the crow,
the trumpeter bullfinch, the desert warbler,
the houbara bustard, the courser and vari¬
ous grouse).
Spendidly adapted, the reptiles have
colonized all desert wastes. The authors
of this article have identified 32 species in k
25

, the northwestern Sahara (23 lizards and
9 snakes), seven of which are found in the
shifting sands of the great dunes. Twenty-
five of these 32 species are authentically
Saharan. Lizards are the last vertebrates
to survive the intensification of drought
conditions.
The smaller animals burrow under the
surface or hide in the vegetation to escape
from high temperatures and to avoid
dehydration. Shrubs, crevices, rock slides
and the burrows of lizards or rodents
create "microclimates", where tempera¬
tures are cooler than in the surrounding
area. A mere 20 cm. beneath the surface,
the temperature is virtually constant, with
only two or three degrees of variation
during a 24-hour period.
The arachnids, which include spiders
and scorpions, dig long, sloping galleries
into the ground, but some spiders bore
perfectly cylindrical and vertical holes,
sometimes to a depth of 40 cm., which
they line with silk.
Unlike the surface mounds of more
humid regions, the termite colonies and
ants' nests of the Sahara are complex
networks of underground galleries, linked
to the surface by a single opening which
is often virtually invisible. The drier the
surrounding environment, the deeper the
nest, and some species even provide their
nests with water by digging down to the
damper sand.
Most rodents choose their homes where
there is most respite from desert condi¬
tions, and burrow beneath shrubs and
plants, taking care not to destroy the
roots, which are a precious source of
moisture. They drive numerous galleries
to a depth where the temperature remains
below 35°C, and where the humidity is
highoften near to saturation-point. In
this way, they surround themselves with
an environment very similar to that of the
temperate regions.
Of the reptiles, the so-called medicinal
skink, one of a large group of semi-
burrowing lizards, actually "swims" like a
fish through the sand, and rapidly dives
to a considerable depth, thus escaping
not only from the heat of the surface but
also from its enemies, the desert monitor
and the sand viper.
The sand-viper behaves differently; in¬
stead of diving head-first, it remains appar¬
ently motionless on the surface and then
means of lateral undulations from
the tail towards the headslowly sinks
under the sand, in the manner of a sub¬
merging submarine.
While some creatures go underground
in search of cooler temperatures, others
seek respite above the surface. Many
insects, reptiles and birds (larks and war¬
blers) which are diurnal (mainly active by
day) spend the hottest hours perching in
bushes. During these periods there may
be as much as 20°C of difference between
the surface and air temperatures.
Changes of routine are common among
the desert animals, and are basically sea¬
sonal in nature. Some species (snakes)
are diurnal in the spring, become noctur¬
nal as summer advances, and return to a
diurnal existence in autumn. Many spe¬
cies are, however, entirely nocturnal.
Most Saharan animals do not have
regular feeding habits or diets. Conditions
may vary considerably for the same spe¬
cies during the course of the year, and
nowhere more spectacularly than in the
case of the herbivorous, or plant-eating,
creatures. Thus, the whiptailed lizard,
whose intake of plant matter during the
spring accounts for 40 per cent of its
weight, can survive lean periods on a diet
of dry wood, insects and gazelle-droppings.
Many Saharan invertebrates (scorpions,
ticks, etc.) have an astonishing resistance
to famine, and can live for months, or
even years, without food. Among the
vertebrates, the herbivorous reptiles hold
the record for fasting. The whiptailed
lizard can survive for almost a year with¬
out eating, at a temperature not exceed¬
ing 30°C, and can then regain in just over
a month the 40 per cent of its body weight
lost during the process.
Some desert creatures have long legs
which raise their bodies well above the hot
surface of the ground. Their feet are
often provided with tufts of hair or bristle
which, in the manner of snowshoes, facil¬
itate movement over soft sand.
The feet of many Saharan mammals,
including the rodents and hoofed animals
(ungulates) are broad-soled and hairy. The
gundi, which is a diurnal rodent, has
thickly padded feet which absorb the
shock as it leaps from rock to rock and
which to some extent insulate it from the
heat of the ground.
The addax antelope and the drome¬
daries have broad hooves which are out¬
standingly useful on soft surfaces. The
skink lizard's slender body and flattened
toes help it to burrow deep into the sand.
Creatures of the Sahara
Three typical examples of Saharan fauna
are, from left to right; the lanner, a falcon
that lives in the North African desert; the
skink, or "sand fish," which is in fact a
lizard but which gets its name from its
capacity to wriggle like a fish into the
sand; and, lastly, a gundi, a short-tailed
rodent that lives by day rather than by
night, like most of the Saharan rodents.
26

Crocodiles from lost rivers
It is now known that crocodiles lived in streams and rivers .'
that flowed through the Sahara in very ancient times. Proof
of their existence is provided by, among other things, prehistoric
paintings; shown here, an etching in sandstone found in
Nabater, in southern Libya. It is part of a group of prehistoric
works, some of them portraying mammoths, that dates back
from 7,000 to 15,000 years. The crocodile skull shown here is
much older; paleontologists estimate it is about 100 million years
old. As it measures 1.10 metres long, the crocodile itself was
about 6 to 7 metres long. It was found on the edge of the
Tademait plateau, in the northwestern part of the Sahara, where
forests and the mouth of a great river existed at that time.
Its smooth scales, similar to those of a
fish, reduce friction with the sand.
The most remarkable adaptations of
desert animals are physiological, and relate
to temperature regulation and water
balance.
Reptiles are "ectothermal" and can only
warm or cool their bodies by moving to a
warmer or cooler spot of their environ¬
ment. Thus, when the outside tempera¬
ture is cool, diurnal lizards place them¬
selves at right-angles to the sunlight and
swell up their bodies so that the greatest
possible surface is exposed to its warming
rays.
When their body temperature reaches
"normal" (about 40°C), they resume their
activities. In the late afternoon, they flat¬
ten themselves against the hot sand and
absorb by conduction à further store of
heat, which enables them to lengthen
their "working day".
The desert monitor and the whiptailed
lizard can survive for long periods with a
body temperature which could kill most
other vertebrates (42°C to 46°C). Lizards
exposed to extremely high temperatures
are often observed to pant in an effort to
reduce their body temperature.
The skin coloration of reptiles can chan¬
ge according to their temperature and the
amount of sunlight to which they are
exposed. Light colours, which reflect a
large amount of solar radiation, act as a
protective screen against the heat.
Most Saharan reptiles do not drink. The
moisture contained in their food is suffi¬
cient to compensate for losses through
evaporation. Under humid conditions,
their skin, which is normally waterproof,
can become porous, to permit hydration.
The urine of desert reptiles, like that of
insects, is a sludge, containing a large
quantity of uric acid crystals, with very
little water. Certain speciesthe masti-
gures, or Uromastyx lizardssecrete their
salt wastes by means of special glands
situated in the nasal cavity.
Desert rodents hardly drink at all, and
must economize as much water as possi¬
ble. During the night, they coUect dry
seeds from the surface and stock them in
their burrows, where the relative humidity
is close to saturation point. The water
vapour contained in their breath con¬
denses on the seeds and most of it is thus
reabsorbed when the rodents eat.
Having only a limited number of sweat
glands, they lose very little water through
perspiration. Their urine is highly concen¬
trated, and may contain up to two or
three times as much salt as sea-water.
The urea content may be as high as 24 per
cent (five times as much as in human
urine).
Large herbivorous mammals such as the
gazelle, the oryx, the addax antelope, the
dromedary, the ass and the sheep, are
unable to escape from high temperatures
like the rodents, by hiding underground.
The adaptation of the dromedary, the
famous "ship of the desert", is directly
linked to a number of anatomical and
physiological peculiarities. The thick
fleece covering its back acts as a screen
against solar radiation: an outer surface
temperature of 70°C is matched by a skin
temperature of only 40°C. The dromedary
wastes very little water; its many sweat
glands only function at temperatures
above 41 °C.
In contrast with most mammals, the
dromedary's body temperature is not
constant and may, like that of reptiles,
rise by 6°C during the summer, rang¬
ing from 34.5°C to 40.5°C in the course
of a single day. As the outside tempera¬
ture rises, it accumulates a stock of calo¬
ries which it releases by radiation in the
cool of the evening, without sweating.
On a diet of dry fodder, it can survive
without drinking for 30 to 40 days in
winter, but only for ten days or so in
summer.
The dorcas gazelle cannot modify its
body temperature like the dromedary, but
it can survive without drinking for 9 toi
12 days in winter and for 3 to 4 days in f
Photos © Claude Grenot, Paris
27

summer, with a . corresponding loss of
some 14 per cent to 20 per cent of its
body weight. Under such conditions, the
gazelle reduces the amount of urine ex¬
creted to a third or a quarter of the normal
quantity and doubles its concentration, at
the same time economizing water loss by
limiting its activities to the cooler hours of
the day. .
The addax antelope of the Sahara lives
on desert vegetation and does not drink.
Its stomach is full of a liquid which the
nomads drink after passing it through a
rough filter. Its urine is of limited quantity,
and highly concentrated.
All these ungulates, and the addax
in particular, have survived in the Sahara
until a very recent date, thanks to their
astonishing adaptation to desert condi¬
tions. It is certain, however, that human
intervention has accelerated the reduction
of their habitat which increasing aridity
had already begun.
A vast project for the preservation of
the addax, the oryx and similar species in
the Sahara and the Sahel has been launch¬
ed by the International Union for Conser¬
vation of Nature and Natural Resources
(IUCN), and detailed prospections have
already been carried out in Mauritania,
Sudan and Chad.
The white gazelle and the dorcas gazelle
are two other species which are doomed
to extinction within a relatively short space
of time unless steps are rapidly taken to
protect them.
In a period in which truly "natural"
environments are obviously shrinking, the
methodical study of the deserts has be¬
come a necessity.
Claude Grenot and
Roland Verriet
Deserts of Central Asia abound in a variety of fauna that are, generally speaking, highly
specialized, like these outsized lizards called varans (below, right). Rodents are numerous
and are preyed on by small wildcats (below, left). A number of ungulates, like the kiang,
the djeiran antelope and desert sheep (above) provide food for large carnivorous animals
like the leopard and the cheetah. "Natural reserves," according to the Soviet zoologist
Andrei G. Bannikov, "play an important role in the preservation of species... Their total
area now covers over 500,000 hectares in the deserts of Central Asia, and is growing yearly.
Thanks to these reserves and to appropriate legislation, a number of rare species of desert
fauna in the U.S.S.R. are not only being protected but are increasing ."
Photo © A.G. Bannikov, Moscow
28
