SIGNPOSTS
FOR 1982
Introduction to Unesco's
Medium-Term Plan
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
The Unesco Courier presents on these pages key extracts from
the introduction to the Medium-Term Plan (1977-1982) adopted
by Unesco's General Conference during its recent session at
Nairobi (Kenya). This issue also contains a selection of salient
passages from the Plan itself, which constitutes a landmark in
the history of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization.
IN a world that is constantly shrin¬
king, as far as both information
and action are concerned, a global
viewpoint becomes imperative. World
problems cannot be considered in
isolation; they are closely bound up
with each other.
At the same time, modern societies
display the greatest varietyeither
as a result of events beyond their
control, such as the growing diffe¬
rences in levels of development and
living standards, or through the deli¬
berate desire of individuals and
groups to assert their identity and
originality.
The crux of the problems facing
today's world lies perhaps in this
constant tension between a unity
which, rising above disparities, seeks
realization in a respect for differences,
and a diversity which, transcending
inequalities and conflicts, is rooted in
man's common vision of the future.
This becomes apparent as soon as
one broaches the fundamental issue
of human rights, which are now ac¬
knowledged to be indivisible and
universal in their application. Even
partial and localized violations of
those rights undermine and negate
their very principle.
Peace, too, is one and indivisible.
As a manifestation of tensions and
friction on a world-wide scale, each
individual conflict seriously threatens
world peace.
Peace itself can only be conceived
on the basis of justice: respect for
human rights and the right of self-
determination of peoples.
Peace is more than simply a matter
of refraining from war. If individuals
are deprived of their rights and liber¬
ties, if peoples are oppressed by
other peoples, if populations are
beset by poverty or suffering from
malnutrition and sickness, if there
is no determination to build a just
world, there can be no lasting peace.
The arms race, which is the most
obvious symptom of today's world¬
wide tensions, devours vast resources
which, directed to other ends, could
substantially improve the lot of the
least favoured peoples and give a
possibly decisive impetus to the
development of their societies.
The unity of the world is also seen
in the global crises which jeopardize
man's future: problems arising from
population growth, the risks of ex¬
hausting natural resources by despoi¬
ling the heritage of mankind and by
continual damage to an environment
which is the collective and irrepla¬
ceable setting for all human life.
The dangers threatening the world
in which we live are of concern to
each and every one of us.
Lastly, development, as the inter¬
national community must now con¬
ceive it, is a global, multidimensional
process taking account of economic,
political, social and cultural factors
in societies considered not in isola¬
tion but as parts of the complex net¬
work of relations and forces which

uiui
"A future world civilization would be
devoid of meaning if it were to be based
on standardization and banality and not
on a wealth of original cultural features. "
This little girl lives in the mountains of
Hazarajat. in central Afghanistan, an
isolated region where life is hard.
t »;
? :
1
P
characterize the present state of
world affairs.
To be set against these ties, which
make a unified and global view of
world problems so necessary, are the
contradictions, the confrontations,
the tensions and the many deep-
rooted disparities which typify the
present situation. Threats of con¬
frontation persist.
Violations of human rights in asso¬
ciation with certain concepts of power
and various forms of racialism or
intolerance are examples of inhuman
behaviour at its most insane and
underscore the difficulties which
obstruct the progress of the ¡deal
of human unity and solidarity.
The inequalities in the modern
world have reached unprecedented
dimensions: economic growth, in
favouring particular societies, has
often taken place at the expensé of
other particularly numerous and
deprived groups. Such inequalities
may comprise overall disparities in
income between countries, due not
only to historical factors but also to
the different conditions in which
material goods are produced and to
the frequently inequitable terms of
international trade.
In the past, the inequalities bet¬
ween societies were relatively minor,
since all were at the pre-industrial
stage; the ratio between the average
income of the richest and the poorest
was approximately 3 to 1.
At the present time, however, the f

, ratio between average per capita
income in the most and least deve¬
loped countries often stands in the
region of 30 to 1, rising in extreme
cases to as much as 80 or 90 to 1.
There are also inequalities between
different social categories within
each nation.
These material inequalities apart,
equally serious discrepancies also
exist with regard to the possession of
and access to cultural goods and
amenities.
The very fact that there are still
some 800 million illiterates in the
world and that this number, far from
decreasing, has, because of popula¬
tion growth, slightly increased over
the past few years constitutes the
most glaring inequality as far as edu¬
cation is concerned. Inequality bet¬
ween the sexes in regard to education
also remains widespread.
Analysis of scientific development
shows that research potential, mea¬
sured either by the number of research
workers or by the level of research
expenditure, is concentrated in the
industrialized countries. The deve¬
loping countries, though they contain
the large majority of the world's popu¬
lation, possess only between 5 and
1 0 per cent of this potential.
To eliminate inequalities, and re¬
verse the present alarming trend
towards a widening of the gulf
between developed and developing
countries, due largely to the world
economic crisis and the acute wor¬
sening of the terms of trade, is a
matter of extreme urgency.
This is not to advocate integration
in a system in which all distinctions
would be obliterated. Alongside the
disparities which must be removed
there exist certain deliberate, posi¬
tively sought differences.
Individuals and groups, in a great
variety of circumstances, affirm their
desire to remain themselves, to avoid
standardization leading to loss of
their cultural characteristics, their
way of life and their own particular
conception of the well-being of the
individual and his relations with his
fellow men.
More, perhaps, than any other age,
ours is a period of profound and rapid
change. The transformations are
extremely varied, but in most cases
they appear to have one thing in
common: growth.
The modern age has been marked
anddespite certain doubts which
are beginning to emergecontinues
to be marked by virtually constant
growth. But growth directed towards
quantitative increase also results in
other disquieting and undesirable
forms of accumulation, such as the
wilful and constantly increasing pro¬
duction and stockpiling of nuclear
weapons and missiles capable of
carrying warheads of ever greater
destructive power.
Growth itself also has negative
consequences in the form of wastes,
pollution and the general effects of
those human activities which strike
at the overall balance of the planet.
All growth problems raise a number
of fundamental questions. First,
there is the question of inequality.
Far from diminishing it, growth really
seems to make for greater inequality.
Economic growth has undoubtedly
conferred major benefits, particularly
Because of
its effects, science
is not neutral.
The activity of
the scientist is
a social fact... 9
in today's industrialized countries,
where people can on the whole
satisfy their basic needs in terms
of food, housing, clothing and edu¬
cation. This is not so in the deve¬
loping countries, which are, one
might say by definition, unable to
provide their inhabitants with these
fundamental necessities of life.
But within developing countries
there are also often very great dispa¬
rities between those in -charge of
economic, administrative or political
affairs and the broad strata of the
population. Here, it has been noted
that even rapid economic growth
patterned on that of certain industria¬
lized countries has very little impact
on the people at large.
On the other hand, many developed
countries are showing symptoms of
malaise and deep-seated dissatisfac¬
tion due to the uneven distribution of
the benefits of growth. There are
still inequalities based on sex. Des¬
pite progress in this field and the fact
that earlier stigmas have to a greater
or lesser extent disappeared, women
often remain at a disadvantage, par
ticularly in matters of income. There
is also a great deal of inequality
between social categories.
Twilight areas of poverty still exist
in the most developed regions, in
city centres or in distant, neglected
and marginal provinces. The poverty
of the least favoured sections of the
population is of course much worse
in the developing countries, whether
among the rural masses or the often
unemployed inhabitants of the over-
populated fringes of the large towns.
Unemployment is particularly se¬
rious in developing countries where
growth, often limited to the modern
sector, has not succeeded in ensuring
full utilization of human resources.
But it has also assumed such propor¬
tions during the last few years in
certain developed countries that it
is now a major source of concern.
The equally fundamental issue of
the way of life engendered by eco¬
nomic growth is giving rise to in¬
creasing concern with regard to the
ultimate goals of development.
Consumption, which is an essen¬
tial element in sustaining economic
growth, is often diverted to the satis¬
faction of inessential needs. Pro¬
ducts and material objects arouse
needs where needs should determine
economic choices.
This is doubtless the source of
the alienation which many people
feel when confronted with the mecha¬
nisms of the consumer society.
In any case, it is insufficient to
consider the problem in quantitative
terms. The real problem is to know
where growth is leading, and to what
ends, and how man is to find self-
fulfilment through this process.
Only when growth is directed
towards goals which individuals and
groups set themselves, can it become
development in the full sense of the
term, that is, the full flowering of
all man's innate qualities, the expres¬
sion of his creativity in all its many
forms.
Science and technology have
brought great benefits to the human
race and have contributed to freeing
menor at least large numbers of
themfrom the constraints imposed
by nature.
But this power itself is fraught
with dangers, either because of the
damage inflicted by man on the
natural world, of which he is a part
and whose very survival is threatened
by the harm he does, or because of
the more effective means he has
acquired for dominating his fellow-
men. The destructiveness of modern
weapons and the opportunities for
8

tampering with the biological or
social existence of individuals are
extreme instances of these dangers.
Because of its effects, science is
not neutral. The activity of the
scientist is a social fact, and in this
respect it has political implications.
The universality of scientific know¬
ledge, which goes hand in hand with
its objectivity, should lead us to
consider the whole stock of such
knowledge as the common heritage
of mankind and to challenge any bid
for the exclusive appropriation of
scientific knowledge. If we adopt
this attitude, it is right that such
knowledge should be made available
to all without reservations of any
kind.
The problems of science and tech¬
nology are thus central to the search
for a fairer and more equitable world
order. While it is necessary for
all countries to develop their scien¬
tific and technological potential, this
task is particularly vital and urgent
for the developing countries.
Instead of importing technologies
designed for another environment,
it is better to try, whenever possible,
to devise appropriate technologies in
the developing countries themselves,
taking into account a set of specific
factors, including available resources,
forms of energy to be used, the coun¬
try's human potential.
In this connexion, it would be wise
to envisage the deliberate revival
of technical traditions based on age-
old skills which have long been
neglected in the name of modernity.
Because they tend to be regarded as
a way of reasserting the cultural
characteristics of a society, they can
be an excellent means of winning the
confidence of the whole population,
and not just of an élite, thus initiating
a general movement towards a form
of development benefiting widely from
the participation and initiative of.
every individual. f
"To eliminate inequalities, and reverse the
present alarming trend towards a widening
of the gulf between developed and developing
countries... is a prime necessity."
For this Latin-American woman (above left)
survival is the sole reward for exhausting
labour. Only the new economic order which
the world so urgently needs can improve her
existence and provide her with some of the
advantages (left) of an industrialized society.

As a result, there is a more acute
need to insert the development of
science more effectively within the
whole spectrum of society's ultimate
aims. It is absolutely essential to
reconcile the claims of the world of
learning and those of policy-makers.
The development of science and
technology cannot be left to chance
or to forces which would use them
for their own ends.
Neither economic growth nor the
development of science and techno¬
logy should be achieved at the cost
of sacrificing a people's cultural iden¬
tity. A future world civilization
would be devoid of meaning if it
were to be based on standardization
and banality and not on a wealth of
original cultural features.
Inasmuch as it is rooted in tradi¬
tion, culture has sometimes been
regarded as an obstacle to moderni¬
zation. But far from being a draw¬
back, the fact that countries refuse to
surrender their identity by accepting
alien models should, from both the
national and the global points of
view, be welcomed.
For what is rejected never amounts
to more than an imitation lacking the
authenticity that gives human enter¬
prises their- vigour and value. On
the other handand there are exam¬
ples to prove itthe Third World
countries can modernize themselves
without passively adopting processes
copied from foreign models.
A people's awareness of its cultural
identity can be a force that supports
economic development and moderni¬
zation and gives them a special dyna¬
mic quality.
The demand for recognition of
cultural identity, which is one of
the most characteristic features of
our time, is not a futile, nostalgic
attachment to the vanished past.
It is, of course, linked with tradition,
that record of experience accumulated
throughout the course of history by
a community. But its real signifi¬
cance lies in the use of the past as
a leaven for the future.
The notion of cultural identity,
which crystallized the aspirations of
the peoples of the Third World once
freed from colonial domination, is
still a decisive factor in their deter¬
mination to tackle the future in their
own way, untrammeled by the various
in some cases insidiousforms
of alienation sometimes impressed on
them by societies whose structures
and ways of life and development
imposed themselves as models at
some point during the past.
To assert one's cultural identity is
to resolve to be one's self, but this
does not imply withdrawal and isola¬
tion. On the contrary, it is by remain¬
ing true to themselves that cultures
can evolve harmoniously, grow stron¬
ger and maintain a fruitful give-and-
take relationship with other cultures.
Thus, the preservation of the cul¬
tural heritage, in its more diverse
aspectswhether by safeguarding
monuments and towns from the ra¬
vages of time, pollution or the effects
of human action, or by ensuring the
vitality of languages, oral traditions
and performing arts and musicis at
one and the same time, and indivi-
sibly, an endeavour to strengthen
cultural identity. It is the essential
condition " for making one culture
available and receptive to all others,
é The demand for
recognition of
cultural identity
is one of
the most
characteristic
features
of our time. '
and a source of enrichment for all
mankind.
Accordingly, it is through mutual
knowledge of, and respect for, the
different cultures of the world that
they may all be brought together in
a genuine cultural whole that is free
from domination by the limited values
of its individual components, yet
which eschews the mere pooling of
commonplaces that smacks of cul¬
tural cosmopolitanism.
Nothing is harder to define, how¬
ever, than what a given culture really
is. The same difficulties arise in
defining culture as a whole. Narrow,
elitist definitions of culture, viewed
as a system of fine arts and literature,
and as a luxury reserved for the pri¬
vileged few, must be superseded.
Culture, in the full sense of the
term, is essential to the vitality of
any society; it is the sum total of a
people's creative activities, of its
ways of producing and acquiring
things, its forms of organization, its
beliefs and sufferings, its work and
its leisure, its dreams and its suc¬
cesses.
This being so, policies confined to
culture alone are not enough; policies
in other spheres of human activity,
particularly in education and commu¬
nication, must be devised.
Together with the quest for cultur¬
al identity goes the clearly affirmed
determination of each society to plan
and carry out educational action
geared to its own particular objectives,
rejecting anything that may imply
the imposition of knowledge, attitudes
and patterns of behaviour which are
inconsistent with its real aspirations
and needs.
Very often, the educational systems
of the developing countries are mere
copies of systems devised in indus¬
trialized countries for the benefit of
other societies, employing other
means and serving other values. It
is an essential task of educational
policy-makers to redefine and remod¬
el their educational systems in the
light of their countries' own aims
and their actual social, economic and
cultural conditions.
As far as communication is concer¬
ned, it is equally necessary to steer
clear of the threat to cultural identity
which may lie in the fact that all
countries are not equally well equip¬
ped with communication media.
At the present time, the dissemi¬
nation of information is largely a
one-way process, issuing from a few
centres, mainly in the industrialized
countries. Such information must
reflect the concerns, aspirations and
even the point of view of the societies
from which it stems and on whose
media it depends; their mass commu¬
nication organizations tend, wittingly
or unwittingly, to impose cultural
models.
It is vitally important to establish
the necessary conditions for a truly
balanced exchange of information,
which is the only base for any attempt
to create genuine international soli¬
darity.
These reflexions on individual f
"It is a fact that when even rapid economic
growth is patterned on that of certain
industrialized countries, it has very little
effect in the developing countries on the
people at large. "
Right, foodstuffs being transported by
dug-out canoe on an African river.
10

&
*>
-#>
Photo O Erwin Kneidinger, Austria
v:
, "i

"Economic growth has undoubtedly conferred major
benefits, particularly in the industrialized countries, where
people can on the whole satisfy their basic needs in
terms of housing, clothing and education; but this is not
so in the developing countries, which cannot provide
their inhabitants with these fundamental requirements of
life." (Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow)
sa
tm\Í& 1 » i»nA"V
-H'^TTV'
Above, the Kenyatta Centre at Nairobi, wherein the
autumn of 1976Unesco's General Conference studied
the problems of a new world economic order. Below,
street scene in the suburbs of Manila, Philippines.

é A truly balanced
exchange of
information is
the only base
for any attempt
to create genuine
international
solidarity.
> aspects of the problems facing the
modern world lead to a more general
themethe development of peoples
and societies.
Although the problems of deve¬
lopment are foremost among the
concerns of the less advanced coun¬
tries, they also concern the so-called
developed countries. It has rightly
been said that the world contains
only developing countries.
Many industrialized countries are
going through economic and mone¬
tary crises, experiencing serious
shortages in a given sector of pro¬
duction, and are facing environmental
problems or difficulties affecting this
or that part of the community.
Under the pressures for uniformity
imposed by the industrial machine
and aggravated by mass media whose
domination is ill-checked; faced with
changes in economic and social struc¬
tures which sever the individual from
his roots; confronted with crises
affecting youth, urban life and popular
culture, many developed countries
are being obliged to seek new types
of development.
Growth has no meaning unless it
contributes to the fulfilment of indi¬
viduals and of the community, unless
it offers greater chances to be human
and to create.
Such a view of development is
obviously far removed from one that
takes into account only its economic
aspect, that is to say growth meas¬
ured in quantitative terms, for ex¬
ample, the level of the Gross National
Product.
Development of this kind, based
solely on market forces, can only
lead to greater disparities and more
dissatisfaction of all kinds.
Development in its universality and
diversity is a process which is found
everywhere, but its centre is nowhere.
The conviction that this is sobased
on a careful analysis of the problems
of the world situationnaturally leads
us to question the validity of an
international system which, explicitly
or implicitly, assumes that certain
centres of economic power are pre¬
eminent and that international rela¬
tions have a rationale of their own.
Recent crises, such as those in the
monetary and energy fields, have
indeed revealed the limitations of
this system.
In point of fact, there is a deep-
seated contradiction between the
logic underlying the present inter¬
national system, centred as it is on
the industrialized countries, and the
demand for an overall solution of
problems, based on solidarity and
justice.
The clearest proof of this contra¬
diction lies in the demand of the
developing countries for a new kind
of economic relations with the
industrialized countries, ensuring that
each country could control its own
natural resources and use them for
the benefit of its people, participating
on an equal footing in decisions con¬
cerning the operation of the interna¬
tional economic system.
In short, the developing countries
are calling for the adoption of new
and more equitable rules in inter¬
national economic relations.
These aspirations have focused on
the idea of a new international eco¬
nomic order, whose formulation by
the international community has led
to the adoption by the United Nations
General Assembly of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on the
establishment of a new international
economic order (1 May 1 974) and the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States (12 December 1 974).
In reality, if we take a global view
of these problems, one which is
consistent with Unesco's specific mis¬
sion to reflect upon the various pro¬
blems of our day in their relation
to science, culture, education and
information, we shall see the move¬
ment towards a new international
economic order in its broadest sense,
as a movement towards a world
order embracing its economic, social
and cultural dimensions and satisfying
the basic human aspirations towards
progress, peace and justice.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
13
