by Badr Eddin Arodaky
The Madrasahs
The first universities
in the Arab world
THE first school in the Arab world was the mosque built at
Medina in the 7th century by the Prophet and his Compa¬
nions. From then until the 10th century mosques were used
to bring the new faith to the people and to instruct them in their
religion. But, as social structures and the values and rules that
governed social life became more complex, the Islamic community
began to face new problems.
A century after the Prophet's death in 632 new forms of teaching
became necessary: study circles were held not only in the mosques
but also in the palaces, in the streets and even in the market
places. The teaching was no longer limited to the Quran but also
covered literature, poetry, grammar, and other subjects.
Groups of grammarians, students and onlookers gathered in
Baghdad's Mirbad Square, and classes in jurisprudence, poetry
and grammar were often held in one and the same mosque.
These classes and study groups constituted a kind of "free
university", for the teachers were not subject to any particular
restrictions or obligations and students were free to choose
among the available classes, discussion groups and study circles.
This ferment of activity shows a high degree of social and
cultural cohesion. The transmission of knowledge by men and
books and the contribution made by the various cultures which
came together in the melting-pot enabled Arab culture to achieve
unprecedented development and impetus in every field of learning.
During the reign of the Abbasid caliphs in Baghdad (from 750
A.D. to the end of the 13th century) religious education became a
branch of learning in its own right, with some teachers specializ¬
ing in the Quran, the hadith (acts and sayings traditionally attribut¬
ed to the Prophet) and jurisprudence, while others studied Arabic
language, literature and history. The study circles also grew in
number and quality during this period, forming the nuclei of what
were to become the madrasahs, colleges intended for adults who
had already received primary education in private schools or
mosques.
In the 10th century, the madrasah emerged as an independent
institution distinct from the mosque, although madrasahs at least
in the early days were set up either for a single jurist or for
teaching the tenets of a particular school of jurists
These establishments soon came under the control of the ruling
power and were subject to its "planning". The degree of control
and the type of planning were partly determined by the very nature
of the conflicts between the Abbasid caliphs and the Fatimid
dynasty.
The Fatimids, who controlled Syria and Egypt after 969 A.D.,
tried to wrest power from the Abbasid caliphs in Baghdad, whose
rule was based on the strength of the Seljuq Turks and who, from
1055 onwards, controlled the entire eastern flank of the Muslim
world.
This power struggle was paralleled by a religious struggle, a
frequent occurrence in Islam, where religious, political and tem¬
poral issues so often intermingled.
The Fatimids spread their doctrine of Shiism through intensive
preaching, chiefly in the mosques of areas outside their control.
These preachers, who were trained at the university of Al-Azhar in
Cairo, the chief seat of Shiite learning at that time, met with stiff
resistance from the Seljuqs.
Nizam al-Mulk (1018-1092), Grand Vizier of the Abbasids, drew
up an educational policy whose long-term aim was to contain and
BADR-EDDIN ARODAKY, Syrian sociologist and writer, is a staff member of the
university of Damascus. He has published many studies on the sociology of
culture..
subsequently smash the Fatimid advance. The implementation of
this policy began with the creation of the Nizamiyah Madrasah
(named after the Grand Vizier), the first "university" of the Arab
world. It was founded by the public authorities, who controlled,
financed and administered it.
Located in Baghdad, the political and intellectual centre of the
caliphate, the Nizamiyah was much more than the first public
college. Officially opened in 1065 under the patronage of the
caliph himself, it was to serve as a model for all the madrasahs of
the Muslim world during the next 200 years.
First of all, other madrasahs modelled their organization on that
of the Nizamiyah, whose status as a public institution was explicitly
set out in the foundation deed drawn up by its head, Nizam al-Mulk.
The establishment was managed by the Vizier himself or by his per¬
sonal representative. For the duration of their studies (from four to
six years), the students received a grant covering the cost of food,
accommodation and miscellaneous expenses. The madrasah also
contained a large number of masters' and students' lodgings, while
its library received gifts and legacies of books.
Its methods of recruiting staff were also imitated. The teachers,
who had to belong to the Shafii school, were appointed by the
head of the Nizamiyah or by his representative. Their salaries
were drawn on a special account, something like a modern endow¬
ment fund.
Its curriculum was also imitated by other madrasahs. Students
and teachers alike had to belong to the Shafii school, and while
teaching methods depended on the individual teachers (who were
chosen from among the great scholars of the age), the syllabus
had a purely religious purpose, being designed to equip students
to defend the principles of Shafiism against Fatimid and Shiite
propaganda.
The madrasah was thus an institution of higher education in
which religious disciplines such as the study of the Quran and
jurisprudence were complemented by Arabic language and litera¬
ture, poetry, arithmetic and other subjects. Students were only
admitted after attending schools or study circles in mosques.
Two centuries later, the Nizamiyah was overshadowed by ano¬
ther madrasah, Al-Mustansiriyah, created in 1227 and named after
its founder. Caliph al-Mustansir. The caliph wanted to make the
new madrasah into an intellectual centre capable of reviving the
cultural splendour of the golden age of such caliphs as Harun al-
Rashid or Al-Ma'mun.
Unlike the Nizamiyah, it did not limit its teaching to that of a
single school but taught the doctrines of the four schools of law
of orthodox Islam. This intellectual open-mindedness was reflect¬
ed in the madrasah's construction, which comprised four ¡wans
(porticoes or wings), one for each school. In addition to religious
knowledge, many other subjects, such as mathematics, medicine,
pharmacy and geometry, were taught there.
It also differed from the Nizamiyah in that the number of
students was fixed, being limited to 308: 62 in each of the four
schools, 10 for the study of the Quran, 10 for the hadith, 10 for
medicine, and so forth.
Thirty years after its foundation, the Mustansiriyah was des¬
troyed by the Mongols who captured and destroyed Baghdad in
1258. The madrasah's books were thrown into the river, and its
teachers were drowtlfcd. After this assult the conquerors rebuilt
the madrasah, and it continued to function as such until the com¬
ing of the Ottoman Turks, who turned it into a caravanserai.
The third great madrasah, Al-Azhar in Cairo, remained a
sanctuary of Shiism and a training centre for its new converts
right up until the fall of the Fatimids. With the advent of the I
35

, Ayyubite dynasty in Egypt in 1171, its influence waned, only to
revive some years later when it became the centre of Sunnite
teaching. Al-Azhar was modelled on the other two great
madrasahs.
During the 13th century all three served the same cause, but,
whereas Al-Azhar continued to develop and spread its influence
throughout the Islamic world, the other two madrasahs, weaken¬
ed by the ravages of the Mongols and torn by the conflicting
ambitions of local rulers, declined and eventually disappeared. Al-
Azhar, on the other hand, is still over 1,000 years after it was
founded in 970 the greatest religious university in the Arab world.
(See facing page).
Al-Nizamiyah, Al-Mustansiriyah and AI-AzKar, the three great
universities of the Muslim world between the 11th and 13th
centuries, were taken as models for educational institutions in
other Arab cities: the Zahiriyah in Damascus (1264), the Nasiriyah
in Cairo, the famous Zaytunah of 14th-century Tunis, and the
equally famous Qarawiyin at Fez in Morocco.
For four centuries all these madrasahs played a major role not
only in the political and religious spheres for which they had been
founded, but also in the expansion and enrichment of Arabo-
Islamic culture.
Badr Eddin Arodaky
Cupola and minaret dominate the courtyard of Al-Azhar ("the splendid"), the great Cairo mosque which has been a
teaching centre for the entire Muslim world for more than 1,000 years. When the great Egyptian writer Taha
Hussein was a student there at the turn of the century, education at Al-Azhar was still much as it had been in
medieval times. Today Al-Azhar has facilities for studying every discipline of the natural and social sciences, in
addition to its institutes for traditional Islamic and Arabic studies.
Photo © Almasv. Paris
