THE ACROPOLIS IN DANGER
An appeal by the Director-General
of Unesco
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
The Acropolis is in danger...
After resisting the onslaughts of weather and
human assailants for 2,400 years, this magnificent
monument, on which Ictinos and Phidias left the
imprint of their genius, is threatened with destruction
as a result of the damage which industrial civiliza¬
tion has increasingly inflicted on it for a number of
years past.
So far, thanks to the restoration work carried out
since the 19th century by the Greek Department of
Archaeology, supplemented more recently by special
conservation measures, the three million or so visitors
who now throng to the Acropolis each year have still
been able to admire, in the splendour of the incompa¬
rable Attic light, the glorious testimony to that excel¬
lence which characterized the Golden Age of Pericles
and which has remained, throughout the centuries,
for so many countries of the world, a unique source
of inspiration in the field of art and thought.
Today, however, the dilapidation has reached such
proportions that the temples, sculptures and foun¬
dations can no longer be preserved unless a vast
and complex programme- of conservation work is
put in hand without delay. From the technical and
scientific point of view, this calls for detailed studies,
for which it would be difficult for the Greek Govern¬
ment to accept sole responsibility, despite all it is
doing already.
Some of the damage is caused by water seeping

Photo Dominique Roger - Unesco
into the cracks and by frost. Elsewhere, the marble
is splitting because of the rusting of the iron bars
and ties used in the past to keep the stones safely
in position. Steps, pavements and rock are being
worn away by the feet of countless visitors. But
to all this has been added another cause of damage,
far more serious even than these. This is atmo¬
spheric pollution, the price we pay for industrial
progress, which is causing the rapid deterioration of
the stone by the action of factory gases and smoke
from domestic hearths.
Until such time as a suitable zone of purified air
can be established round the Acropolis, simultaneous
action is needed so that on-the-spot protection can
be provided for whatever sculptures can be so pre¬
served, so that the remainder can be removed and
transferred to the Acropolis Museum, being replaced
for the time being with plaster-casts, and so that
rusting trusses can be replaced with a non-rusting
alloy, improved paths and intersections provided in
order to channel the flow of visitors, and the rock
strengthened where landslides and subsidence occur,
and the necessary restoration work put in hand
wherever this is possible.
The work needing to be done is, by its very extent,
a challenge to the international community which
cannot accept with resignation the catastrophe
threatening the Parthenon, the Erechtheum and its
caryatids, the Propylaea and the temple of Athena
Nike. For this reason, and in response to the
appeal made to it by the Greek Government, the
General Conference of Unesco, at its nineteenth
session recently held in Nairobi, by acclamation
declared itself in favour of a world-wide campaign,
to be conducted under the Organization's auspices,
to rally public and private support with a view to
safeguarding the Acropolis.
Unesco, whose Constitution lays upon it respon¬
sibility for the conservation and protection of the
world's inheritance of works of art and monuments
of history and science, is thus called upon to encou¬
rage the international community to make common
cause in order to save cultural treasures which,
although they belong to the heritage of Greece, are
also part of the shared inheritance of mankind. In
doing this, its intention is, by publicizing needs,
co-ordinating offers of help, soliciting external contri¬
butions and seeing that they are made available as
and when most effective, in agreement with the
Greek authorities, according to needs and possibi¬
lities, to support the work of the many friends of
Greece throughout ^he world who are ready to pro¬
vide direct assistance and co-operation.
This is why I am launching here a solemn appeal
to the conscience of the world so that the Acropolis
may be saved, just as my -predecessors appealed for




the monuments of Nubia in Upper Egypt, for Venice,
for the temple of Borobudur in Indonesia, for the
archaeological site at Mohenjodaro in Pakistan, and i
for Carthage in Tunisia. I
ñ

, In the name of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, I invite govern¬
ments, the National Commissions for Unesco, public
and private institutions and the general public in the
Organization's 141 Member States to be generous
in providing the assistance, whether money, equip¬
ment or services, needed to carry out the great task
on which the Greek Government has embarked.
Though the resources with which it has done so are
considerable, they are insufficient to complete a
project which will necessarily last several years.
I invite the intergovernmental organizations of all
continents, and in particular those of Europe, as
well as all foundations whose activities contribute
to cultural progress, to join in the immense task
which the Greek Government is undertaking in co¬
operation with Unesco.
I invite the international specialist organizations
which participate with Unesco in safeguarding
mankind's cultural heritage, such as the Interna¬
tional Centre for the Study of the Preservation and
Restoration of Cultural Property, the International
Council of Monuments and Sites and the Interna¬
tional Council of Museums, to support the activities
undertaken as part of the world campaign and to
encourage further steps to the same end.
I invite museums, art galleries, libraries and
theatres, in which the resplendent genius of Athens
is reflected, to arrange exhibitions, performances and
displays devoted to safeguarding the Acropolis, the
proceeds being paid into the funds set up in Member
States or the International Fund established by
Unesco.
I invite artists, writers, critics, historians and
composers the well-springs of whose work are in
Ancient Greece, and all those whose task is to pro¬
vide information, such as newspapermen, coluprtnists,
press, radio and television journalists and film¬
makers, to assist us with their knowledge and their
talents in arousing the support of the general public
in all countries.
I also invite schoolchildren, students and teachers
in all schools and universities to organize collections,
especially in conjunction with the National Com¬
missions for Unesco in their countries. The pro¬
ceeds from these collections will go towards preser¬
ving the crowning glory of a civilization to which art,
science and philosophy, even in our modern world,
still owe an immense debt of gratitude.
Finally, I invite all those millions of people who
have already visited or who intend to visit Athens,
as well as those who perhaps will never have that
opportunity but who sense clearly, whatever the
cultural area to which they belong, that the treasures
of the Acropolis testify in the highest degree to the
creative genius of man, to make a contribution,
however modest, which will enable them to give
a little of themselves to the collective effort.
I do not doubt that mankind will once more rise
to the need and prove equal to the task of saving
its heritage, and that in this way, over and above
the diversity of ideologies and systems, further
progress will be made in realizing that spiritual unity
sought by the nations of our world, in their growing
awareness of interdependence and a common
destiny and their desire to establish a new order
founded on the brotherhood of their peoples.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
lost metropolis
r

