THE
NEW WAVE
IN
OCEANOGRAPHY
scientists from 50 countries
chart the latest discoveries
in marine research
In 1960 Unesco created the Intergovernmental Océanographie
Commission (IOC) to promote international co-operation
in océanographie research. Today the Commission has
91 Member States and has launched major programmes
such as the International Decade of Ocean Exploration
(1971-1980). Above, the German (Dem. Rep.) ocean
research vessel Alexander von Humboldt, veteran of a
number of international expeditions. Below, the Japanese
océanographie submersible Kawasaki (7 metres long.).
Right, the French floating laboratory BORHA 2 in the
Mediterranean. The 80-metre-high structure, three-quarters
of which is submerged, carries a crew of 8, including
6 scientists who collect a wide variety of océanographie
and meteorological data.
by Dan Behrman
OCEANOGRAPHY, once so
hypothetical a science that it
was almost an art, has now
reached the point where it can track
the movement of a continent over
1 00 million years or the migration of a
single flatfish over the continental
shelf. It can measure the state of
the sea with satellites looking down
from outer space or beams of sound
focussed up from remote depths.
It^has turned man's image of the
ocean topsy-turvy, transforming the
stately waltz of currents into a
variable pattern of eddies which pro¬
mises, however, to produce a truer
picture of how the seas function.
Yet with all these new accomplish¬
ments to their credit, the marine
sciences are now considered by some
to be in the gravest of dangers as the
politicization of the oceans proceeds
apace.
Such are the main impressions
DAN BEHRMAN, a Unesco science writer
well known to Unesco Courier readers, is the
author of The New World of the Oceans
(Little, Brown and Co., Boston, U.S.A.).
His latest book. Solar Energy, the Awakening
Science, was published in 1976 by Little,
Brown and Co.
conveyed by the Joint Océanographie
Assembly, held in September 1976
in Edinburgh (U. K.) with 700 scien¬
tists from some fifty countries in
attendance. Organized by six major
scientific associations and Britain's
Royal Society, it also received support
from the Food and Agriculture Orga¬
nization, the Intergovernmental Océa¬
nographie Commission, Unesco and
the World Meteorological Organiza¬
tion.
In some respects, the Edinburgh
Assemblythe fourth of its kindwas
more subdued than its predecessors.
Much conjecture has been removed
from oceanography with the mopping-
up of the scientific controversy that
used to rage over "continental drift".
Only ten years ago, marine geologists
were still going at each other hammer
and tongs over the question of
whether or not the continents had
been pushed apart during geological
time by the sea floor spreading out
from mid-ocean ridges (1 ).
Everyone now agrees that this is
precisely what happened to give
birth to the present map of the earth,
its surface divided into great inter¬
locking plates grinding together where
their edges converge in zones of high
(1) See "Are the Continents
(Unesco Courier, October 1963).
Drifting"
seismic activity. At Edinburgh, geo¬
logists were able to apply the theory
of the moving continents to recons¬
truct the oceans of the past or to
indicate places where mineral re¬
sources may have developed.
The worldwide economic slowdown
of recent years has acted as a brake
on oceanography, a form of environ¬
mental research probably second only
to space exploration in cost. The
operation of a large research vessel
runs to thousands of dollars a day; the
figure can be doubled in some cases
if a submersible is involved.
But the biggest cloud of all is uncer¬
tainty over the way that marine
research will be carried out in the
future. The United Nations Confer¬
ence on the Law of the Sea has yet
to agree on the rules under which
oceanographers will operate in the
coastal waters where they do most of
their work.
In a public lecture that he gave in
Edinburgh in connexion with the
assembly, Dr. Roger Revelle, former
director of Scripps Institution of Ocea¬
nography, in La Jolla, California, and
later Professor of Population Policy
at Harvard University, saw in certain
tendencies at the Conference on the
Law of the Sea "an especially terri¬
fying threat" to océanographie
research.'
16

lit
Photo Gamberonl © Museum of Natural History. Pans
They imply, in his opinion, the pla¬
cing of limitations on coastal research
in economic zones extending 200
miles or more offshore. "Fish cur¬
rents and geological phenomena do
not understand economic zones,"
Dr. Revelle said, "but most geological
and geophysical phenomena occur
within two to three hundred miles
offshore.
"If the present tendency at the
Conference on the Law of the Sea
continues, it will likely be the death
of the ocean sciences as we have
known them for the last 25 or 30
years." Dr. Revelle thought they
would have to take on a new form
which would investigate special phe¬
nomena instead of seeking "a real
understanding of the oceans."
Dr. Revelle made a point of punc¬
turing certain widely-held illusions
about the role that the oceans are
likely to play in the future of man.
The sea will not be a source of fresh
water to make deserts bloom. Costs
of desalinating seawater are from ten
to sixty times higher than what far¬
mers pay for irrigation water.
However, seawater itself could be
used for the purpose. "Marine
grasses know how to live in salt water
thanks to a piece of DNA. It may be
possible to tear this gene out of salt
marsh plants and put it into corn.
wheat, rice or potatoes so that they
will grow in salt water."
Nor is the sea likely to feed the
world. The annual marine fish catch
runs around 60 million tons and,
Dr. Revelle said, it is not likely to
amount to more than 100 million
tons. This represents 20 million
tons of protein, as against the 100
million tons that would be needed
every year by a world population of
6,500 million at the end of the cen¬
tury. In terms of calories, he said,
the sea could only supply five per cent
of world needs.
He regarded the space that the sea
will be able to offer as a resource for
the future. Floating structures built
on deep spar buoys remain almost
motionless in the ocean. They
could be used to house activities that
are not wanted on shore, such as
nuclear power plants or industries
carrying a threat of pollution. "Solar
energy will need space, too," he said.
"One could imagine great fields of
solar power generators at sea."
Dr. Revelle took up the part that the
sea might play in future climatológ¬
ica! change. During the industrial era,
we have burned the equivalent of
100 million years of solar energy
stored in coal, oil and natural gasthe
fossil fuels. A large part of the
carbon dioxide released during this
process has been taken up by the
ocean but its capacity is not infinite.
"If we double the present amount of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,
only one-third will be absorbed into
the ocean."
This could lead to an intensifica¬
tion of the so-called greenhouse
effect in which excess carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere acts to trap the
heat the earth receives from the sun,
inhibiting its radiation back into space.
Terrestrial temperatures could build
up to the point where the Antarctic
and Greenland ice caps would melt,
raising sea level by several hundred
feet, with obvious consequences.
Other scientists at the Edinburgh
Assembly brought up this possibility
which had been discounted in recent
years as an apparent worldwide
cooling trend set in. One of them.
Dr. Wallace S. Broecker of the
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observa¬
tory in Palisades, N.Y., has postulated
that we may be on the brink of a
several-decades-long period of rapid
warming.
Examination of an ice core taken in
Greenland, which has enabled scien¬
tists to read past changes in tempera¬
ture, indicates that the present
cooling is one of a series of natural
fluctuations. Thus it may have ser¬
ved to mask the effect of the release
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17
of carbon dioxide (C02). The ice
core indicates that the drop in temp¬
erature may end during the next
decade and then the greenhouse
effect would serve to accelerate a
natural upturn.
"The major point of the argu¬
ment," Dr. Broecker has written, "is
that over the past 30 years the warm¬
ing trend due to C02 has been more
than countered by a natural cooling.
This compensation cannot long con¬
tinue both because of the rapid
growth of the C02 effect and because
the natural cooling will almost cer¬
tainly soon bottom out. We may be
in for a climatic surprise. The onset
of the era of C02-induced warming
may be much more dramatic than in
the absence of natural climatic
variations."
Another of man's effects on the
ocean came up at Edinburgh with a
report on the long-term pollutant
effects of DDT and PCBs (polychlori-
nated biphenyls). It was found off
southern California that while the
amounts of these substances dumped
into the ocean had been cut almost
tenfold, their levels in the muscle
tissue of Dover sole caught in off¬
shore waters had not decreased at all.
Researchers could only conclude
that marine sediments are acting as
reservoirs for these pollutants.
Disposal far out at sea may not be
an answer, either. Experiments
made at the Woods Hole Océanogra¬
phie Institution in Massachusetts
indicate that phytoplankton (that is,
marine plant life) in estuaries stands
up much better under physical
stress, such as exposure to toxic
compounds in the water, than species
living in the more stable conditions of
the open ocean.
THEbehaviouroftheopen ocean
on a large scale is undergoing
a serious reappraisal by phy¬
sical oceanographers. Dr. Walter H.
Munk, director of the Institute of Geo¬
physics and Planetary Physics at
Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
pointed out that oceanographers had
hitherto charted the oceans in terms
of current systems and thought they
merely needed to keep filling in their
charts with more and more tempera¬
ture and salinity measurements.
It turns out that these current sys¬
tems represent only one per cent of
the kinetic energy of the oceans.
The other 99 per cent is contained in
the exceptions to the rule, the eddies
that break off from the major currents
and move through the oceans the way
storms move through the atmosphere
(See article page 24).
Improved observations from artifi¬
cial satellites could help keep track
of oceanic circulations and Dr. John
Apel of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, in the
U. S., told of several promising dev
elopments. In particular, satellites
should be able to measure sea surface
temperatures with an accuracy of
1.5 °C, halving their present margin
of error and providing a valuable tool
for spotting the eddies and rings that
the Gulf Stream generates.
Like other océanographie tech¬
niques, the satellites are becoming
more and more finely tuned. At first,
they were good for not much more
than scanning the surface of the
ocean; now they can see fifty or
sixty metres down, enabling them to
do some rough charting of the bottom.
As pollution monitors, they are in
a class by themselves. Dr. Apel
displayed slides showing how acid
dumping off New York City stains the
sea as if it were being dyed with a
marbled effect on the surface nearby,
an indication of light oily cover.
Another spacecraft can measure wind
speeds virtually on a global scale.
Abreakthrough of much greater
proportions has been achieved
in the study of the oceans of
the past. The Deep Sea Drilling Pro¬
ject, managed by Scripps for the Na¬
tional Science Foundation in the
United States, has punched more
than 400 holes into the sea floor with
its drilling ship, the Glomar Challenger
article page 30).
The cores that the drilling project
has brought up can be dated with
uncanny precision by correlating them
with reversals in the earth's magnetic
field registered by the spreading
sea floor acting like a tape recorder.
Changes in the minute fossil animal
life contained in the cores indicate
rises or drops in the temperature of
the sea that could occur with the
end or the beginning of an ice age.
Drilling in the Antarctic Ocean, as
described by Dr. James P. Kennettof
the University of Rhode Island, indi¬
cates that glaciers appeared on Antarc¬
tica 38 million years ago when
Australia had drifted away, opening
up the southern ocean with its in¬
tense round-the-world circulation
braked by no intervening land mass.
Other researchers working on the
North Atlantic have been able to
trace the movements of the Polar
Frontwhere cold Arctic and warm
Atlantic waters meetover a period
of 65,000 years. As Dr. William F.
Piuddiman of the City University of
New York, remarked, the position of
the Polar Front is one of the funda¬
mental controls of the earth's heat
budget. It acts as a gate that either
channels or bars the northwards
transport of energy by the ocean.
This quest through the past has
its relevance in present-day investi¬
gations of how changes in the earth's
climate appear. There are imme¬
diate economic applications as well.
Dr. John G. Sclater, of the Massa¬
chusetts Institute of Technology, ob
served that it is easier to look for oil
off the shores of Africa if one knows
exactly how that coast was once
joined to the Americas where petro¬
leum-bearing formations have been
extensively charted.
Dr. K. 0. Emery of Woods Hole
Océanographie Institution talked of
some of these economic implications.
Virtually all the oceanic resources
now being exploited are on the conti¬
nental shelf. Oil and gas lead with
a value in 1975 of $44,000 million,
followed by fishing with $ 15,000 mil¬
lion; sand and gravel for construction
purposes $400 million and mining of
placer deposits, mainly tin, titanium
and zircon, and magnetite $ 40 mil¬
lion. The future might see more
attention paid to deeper waters on the
continental margin.
Dr. Emery spoke of that process by
which new sea floor is formed, rising
from the earth's mantle through the
mid-ocean ridges. Seawater in¬
filtrating this molten material is bound
to pick up heavy metals and eject
them, an event that had apparently
occurred in the middle of the Red Sea
where mineral bearing sediments es¬
timated to be worth billions of dollars
have been found.
FAMOUS, the survey of the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge conducted by French
and American oceanographers (see
article page 30) was able to pick up a
geological sample only two metres
from the vent of such a hydrothermal
source.
Analysis of the sample showed that
it consisted of iron, pure manganese
and silicate left by the shells of small
animals. Ten metres from the vent,
the composition of the bottom mat¬
erial had already changed. French
scientists estimate the age of the
sample at 47,000 years, but its first
layer of consolidated sediment
1.1 millimetres thick was only 50
years old.
SO far, no metal-rich sediment
beds similar to those of the
Red Sea have been found near
the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Emery ad¬
vised geologists to look instead for
areas where spreading ended millions
of years ago after material first welled
up from the mantle, leaving plumes
such as the famed diamond pipes of
South Africa. Lines of plumes might
now be buried under sediments along
continental margins and prospection
there could be more fruitful than
around the mid-ocean ridges.
There is not too much hope of
finding oil where great plates converge
because they grind up and wipe
away the ocean's sediments. But
areas where plates diverge offer the
possibility that a large amount of
sedimentsand oilmay have accu¬
mulated along the sides of continental
margins at depths much greater than
those now being worked by the
offshore oil industry.
20

Dr. Emery pointed out that the
Deep Sea Drilling Project avoids such
areas out of fear of finding oil. What
is needed is a bigger ship with valves
and blowout control" equipment to
handle an oil strike without creating
an almost insoluble pollution problem.
The Assembly heard several reports
of possible new sources of marine
wealth. Dr. George P. Woollard of
the Institute of Geophysics at the Uni¬
versity of Hawaii, told of recent
research in the Bauer Basin 4,000
metres down and more than 2,000
miles off the coast of South America
between two major sea floor features,
the Galapagos Rise and the East Paci¬
fic Rise.
HERE scientists found a 20-metre
thickness of metal-bearing se¬
diments on the bottom con¬
taining copper, nickel, zinc and iron
in amounts "several orders of magni¬
tude larger than in the Red Sea".
Woollard estimates that there are
a trillion dollars of gold down in the
Bauer Basin and that is the rarest of
the metals in its sediments. The
catch is that all this treasure is not
only 2,000 fathoms deep but spread
over an area measuring 600 by
1,000 nautical miles.
Prospection for manganese nodules
is much further advanced. Deposits
in the Pacific Ocean were investigated
early in January 1976 by a research
vessel, the Valdivia, for the Federal
Institute for Geosciences and Natu¬
ral Resources in the Federal Republic
of Germany. Dr. H. Gundlach repor¬
ted that nodule samples were found
to be inhabited by large bacteria and
this has led German scientists to
conclude that the start of the process
of the formation of the nodules is
microbiological.
One should not jump to conclusions
about skyhigh returns from the bot¬
tom of the sea. An economic ana¬
lysis by another scientist from the
German Federal Republic, Dr. F. Neu-
weiler, concluded that deepsea mi¬
ning of manganese nodules is not
economic at present mineral prices.
This may change as land reserves are
depleted and ecological factors come
into play when new deposits are
sought, but the political and legal
problems of marine mining are
equally large.
Dr. Neuweiler estimated that a
plant processing three million tons a
year of manganese nodules would
need 80,000 square kilometres of
seabed to be assured of a twenty-
year supply of raw materials. Des¬
pite all these obstacles, he noted
that three firms are already testing
methods of mining nodules.
One should not lose one's sense of
proportion in discussing deep-sea
mineral deposits. Copper and nickel
are the two most valuable metals
present in the 18 trillion tons of
manganese nodules on the ocean
floor. Dr. Emery reminds us that
total world production of these two
metals in 1 975 amounted to $ 1 0,000
million. If the ocean were to take
10 per cent of the market, this would
run to only $ 1 ,000 million, a fraction
of the revenue represented by fishing,
that most traditional of all ways of
working the sea.
Here, oceanographers at Edinburgh
were cautious in evaluating the
future. Notwithstanding improve¬
ments in fish-finding gear and the
launching of more efficient vessels,
catches do not rise accordingly.
They follow a bell curve, climbing
steeply at first when a new fishery
expands, then falling.
The literature is littered with
accounts of vanished fisheries. A
typical case is that of the West
Greenland cod reported by two
Danish researchers, F. Hermann and
Sr. Aa. Horsted. In 1962, 451,000
tons were caught; in 1975, 46,000.
Heavy fishing takes some of the
blame but environmental changes
are held to be mainly responsible.
Water temperatures rose off West
Greenland in the 1920s and 1930s,
then suddenly dropped to their pre¬
vious levels.
ON E apparent exception has been
the North Sea. Dr. Gotthilf
Hempel of the Institute for
Marine Sciences at Kiel in the Federal
Republic of Germany showed how
fish catches there, after running bet¬
ween one million and 1 .5 million tons
since the start of the century, shot up
during the 1960s to reach 3.7 million
tons in 1974. Species like the herr¬
ing and the mackerel are on the wane
while new industrial fisheries have
sprung up, their catches destined
for conversion into animal feed
instead of direct human consumption.
There was a good deal of discussion
as to whether heavy waste discharges
by countries bordering the North Sea
are fertilizing its waters and thereby
maintaining increased fish popula¬
tions but no satisfactory answers
have been found.
Arthur J. Lee of the Fisheries Lab¬
oratory at Lowestoft, in the U.K.,
thought that some of man's acti¬
vities in the North Sea might
threaten its fish population in the
future. "Cod, haddock, whiting and
sprat all spawn in the centre of the
North Sea where oil is produced. No
one has calculated the possible
damage to a year class that would
be caused by an oil spill and the use
of dispersants."
Some highly sophisticated tech¬
niques have been developed to
explain the movements of fish.
F. R. Harden Jones of the- Fisheries
Laboratory at Lowestoft has been
studying the migration of commercial
species from the viewpoint of the
fish itself whose aim in life is to find
food without burning up too much
energy in the process. Herring
will migrate 1,600 kilometres in the
North Sea and 3,000 in the Atlantic;
the corresponding figures for cod are
1,300 and 2,600 kilometres.
TO track a moving fish, the
Lowestoft laboratory devised
an acoustic tag about the size
of one's little finger and weighing only
1.5 grammes in water. They attach
their tag to a plaice and throw the
fish overboard, following it aboard
a ship equipped with a high-resolu¬
tion sonar that can locate it to
within one or two metres in depth.
In one experiment, they tailed a
plaice for twenty-six hours on a
southward course from Lowestoft
and learned how the fish gets the
most ground speed over the bottom
for the least swimming effort. It
simply swam with the tide and then,
during slack water, dropped to the
bottom.
Harden Jones believes that the
fish used the tide as its clock, not
the sun. Near the end of a six-
hour tidal period, it would drop to
the bottom then come up again
when it sensed that the water was
still moving the way it wanted to go.
With regions like the North Sea at
the limit of their yields, fishermen
are constantly seeking new seas to
conquer. But some cold polar water
was dashed on the often-expressed
hope that the Antarctic Ocean can
meet the protein demand of an ever-
multiplying world population by
Dr. Sayed Z. El-Sayed, of Texas
A & M University, a leading autho¬
rity on the Antarctic.
The primary productivity of the
Antarcticthat is, the rate at which
photosynthesis is carried out by the
phytoplanktonhas been found to
run as high as 3.62 grammes of car¬
bon per square metre per day west
of the Antarctic Peninsula, a figure
comparable to the major highly pro¬
ductive areas of the world ocean,
such as the Peruvian coast where
the anchovies swarm in the world's
largest fishery.
But the average value for the
Antarctic Ocean as a whole is only
134 grammes of carbon per square
metre per day, a figure more or less
comparable to primary productivity
in the Gulf of Mexico and the Carib¬
bean Seahardly major productive
regions.
Dr. El-Sayed found several factors
to explain this sharp downward revi¬
sion. It was previously thought that
some species of plant plankton
could achieve rich growth in waters
as cold as -1 .5°C. Recent research,
however, indicates that low tempe¬
ratures will inhibit growth of even
the phytoplankton species adapted
to the Antarctic.
There is a physical explanation as
well. Antarctic water varies little in
temperature from top to bottom
21

^and, consequently, the ocean is not
"stratified" in layers of different
temperatures. So the water mixes
easily in depth, carrying the phyto¬
plankton below the sunlit and hence
more productive zone of the ocean.
Nevertheless, Dr. El-Sayed believes
that this rate of primary productivity
is high enough to support the
animal population of Antarctica
which requires some 200 million
tons of food, mostly krill, every
year. Because of this relative sim¬
plicity is, heavy dependence
on a single species, krillthe An¬
tarctic ecosystem is more vulnerable
than those of other oceans. "We
need to intensify our research effort
and to gain a deeper understanding
of the Antarctic ecosystem before
exploiting its resources," Dr. El-
Sayed said.
That is no easy matter in the
Antarctic or any other ocean where
nothing holds still to be studied.
Dr. John H. Steele of the Marine
Laboratory at Aberdeen, in the U.K.,
summed up the problem: phyto¬
plankton live from one to ten days
and move from one to ten kilometres
during this period; Zooplankton (the
small animals that graze on the phyto¬
plankton) live one hundred days and
drift one hundred kilometres during
their lifetimes; fish are around for
years and cover thousands of kilo¬
metres.
Biologists have tried to sample an
area of 100 square kilometres for
100 days, but 20 ships were needed.
It is much cheaper and convenient to
work with captive oceans, enclosures
of sea water where at least vertical
movements of the plankton can be
studied at something like their true
scale without any outside interference.
Several approaches were described
at Edinburgh: plastic bags can be
placed in the sea to isolate anywhere
from six to 2,000 cubic metres of
water, giving the researcher a control¬
led environment; a tower tank can be
erected on dry land and filled with
seawater as has been done at Scripps
and at Dalhousie University at Halifax
in Canada; bell jars can be placed on
the sea floor to set off a few square
metres so that the growth of bottom
organisms may be watched; or, as the
Belgians have done at Ostend, a huge
artificial lagoon covering 86 hectares
and originally built as a reservoir for
flushing harbour channels is used to
study the life cycle of oysters.
On the Pacific coast in an inlet
near Vancouver Island Canadian
researchers have used bags holding
some 2,000 tons of water to run
Controlled Ecosystems Pollution Exp¬
eriments, adding minute quantities
of copper, mercury and various types
of petroleum to see their effect
on marine life (see article page 28).
Imagination is in demand in ocea¬
nography for new ways must always
be sought to look at the sea. "Look"
is a manner of speaking; seawater is
almost impenetrable to light and even
the laser cannot carry more than a
few hundred metres.
Sound is a different matter. Acad¬
emician L. M. Brekhovskikh from the
U.S.S.R. talked to the Assembly
about acoustic sensing of what
occurs in the ocean. Here is a ver¬
satile tool. A sound wave with a
frequency of 100,000 herz (that is,
cycles per second) will carry only
200 metres, but sound at a frequency
of 1 00 herz can be detected 1 00 kilo¬
metres away. This property, as we
have seen, has been used to follow
floats measuring the movement of
currents in the deep oceans.
Academician Brekhovskikh sug¬
gested listening to the ocean itself.
"One can detect many things. One
can hear surface waves, turbulence,
the waves of remote storms, and
seismic activity on the bottom."
He made a strong case for acoustic
sensing. "We have entered an era in
which we need more information
about the ocean. We get 1,000
times less from the ocean than we do
from the atmosphere. We cannot
learn much when we work in contact
with surface water masses. We
must use remote sensing and acou¬
stics gives us this possibility. "
Prof. John Isaacs of the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography brought
up an unexpected topic: salinity po¬
wer. As is well known and as
Dr. Revelle recalled, it takes a great
deal of energy to desalinate water.
Energy therefore should be released
by salinationthat is, when a river
meets an ocean. Prof. Isaacs turned
to his Edinburgh audience: "Who
could consider that the River Tweed
flowing smoothly into the sea repre¬
sents as much energy as if it were
poised 700 feet above sea level ?"
Research on salinity power was
described by Dr. Sidney Loeb of the
Research and Development Authority
at the Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev in Israel. If one places a
semi-permeable membrane between
fresh and salt water, osmosis will
drive the fresh water into the salt
water. The energy obtained is repre¬
sented by the osmotic pressure"an
osmotic waterfall". Dr. Loeb called it.
It amounts to 1 5 atmospheres, not
at all negligible, but a tenth of what
could be obtained if seawater were
combined with brine such as, for
example, the waters of the Dead Sea.
The catch lies in the cost of the mem¬
branes which drive the price of
osmotic power up four times as high
as the rate for a kilowatt-hour of
electricity in the United States.
Dr. Loeb spoke of another approach,
a "dialytic battery", a reversal of the
technique of electrodialysis in which
a current is used to desalinate sea
water. "The costs of the dialytic
battery are much higher now, but the
future looks much more promising.
We should be able to reduce the cost
of membranes by a factor of ten while
doubling membrane life."
Dr. Isaacs called salinity power an
"immense, hidden and almost invi¬
sible source of energy", equal to that
represented by the difference in tem¬
perature between the surface and the
deep in tropical Oceans. While effi¬
ciency is low, only 3 per cent at pre¬
sent, this did not worry him. "If
we got only one hundredth of one
per cent for a little village at the
mouth of the Ganges River, this
would be appreciable."
Summing up the subject, which
had been presented for the first time
to an international océanographie
assembly, he declared: "It epitomizes
the large class of surprises the ocean
will ever hold for its students."
Dan Behrman
22

THE TRAGEDY OF LEVIATHAN
All species of "great" whalesthe leviathans of
the oceanare threatened with extinction because
of intensive whaling. The International Whaling
Commission was established in 1946 to protect
whales from overexploitation. It fixes annual catch
quotas and has prohibited the hunting of some
species such as the humpback whale (photo left)
since 1963 and the blue whale since .1965.
Howeverrno measurable increase in~thë"numbers of
even these "protected" species has occurred since.
Clusters of tiny creatures in photo below are white
whales basking in the sea off Somerset Island
(Canada). One of the smaller species the white
whale is exceptional in not being currently in
danger of extinction. This remarkable photo
was taken from 300 metres above the sea with
a special "water penetration film".
Dr. Roger S. Payne of the Institute for Research
in Animal Behaviour, New York, recently discovered
that whales "sing", producing repeated sequences
of strange, ethereal sounds. Opposite page,
shorthand "score" by a spectrograph machine of
part of the "song" of a humpback whale which
Dr. Payne recorded in the Atlantic off Bermuda.
Photo J Douglas Hevland © Kodak
