Stigma
on South African
sport
by Stéphane A. Ogouki
OVER the last decade, the Supreme
Council for Sport in Africa, which
has 43 Member States, has been
one of the harshest critics of racial discri¬
mination in sport.
Though the white minority régimes in
South Africa and Rhodesia are champions
of racial discrimination today, it should not
be forgotten that racism is nothing new in
Africa. Racist attitudes date back to the
time when the whites first settled in black
Africa: as the indigenous inhabitants were
not really human beings, it was better not
to mix with them.
Apartheid in South African sport is sim¬
ply the application of the official policy of
"separate development" to the playing
field. Athletes are divided according to
race into whites, Asians, coloureds and
blacks, the latter being further subdivided
according to ethnic groupings.
Articles 1 and 24 of the Charter of the
International Olympic Committee (IOC)
expressly forbid any form of discrimina¬
tion, and their spirit is echoed in the sta¬
tutes of the various international sports
federations. It was because they did not
comply with these articles that South Afri¬
ca and Rhodesia were excluded from the
Olympic movement, the. former in 1970,
the latter in 1975.
"Separate development" in South Afric¬
an sport means that non-white athletes are
barred from joining white sports clubs,
that white teams may not compete against
non-white teams ("mixed" teams do not
exist), and that games and sports are admi-.
nistered by organizations corresponding
to racial groups. Lastly, only white sports
organizations represented South Africa at
the international level.
It goes without saying that the best
sports facilities are found in areas reserved
for whites. Non-whites have no access to
them, except on special occasions such as
visits by foreign dignitaries or committees
investigating racial integration. Even then,
non-whites are confined to areas fenced
off with barbed wire, and in no circum¬
stances can they use the facilities for their
own competitions.
Some putative attempts at integration
have been made, the most spectacular
being the so-called "multi-racial" games.
Anyone can attend these events, but each
racial group of spectators is confined to a
specific area which is separated from the
others by barbed wire. The whites com
pete among themselves to select their
champions, then the non-whites do the
same. Black athletes are obliged to wear
jerseys bearing the name of their ethnic
group in capital letters.
The only real efforts made by the lead¬
ers of South African sport have been the
direct result of internal opposition to apar¬
theid. This opposition was sparked off by
South Africa's exclusion from almost all
the governing bodies of international sport,
a situation which many South African
athletes cannot accept.
HHHHHMBHBBHMHIH
Because of its persistence in practising racial segregation in sport. South
Africa has been expelled from the Olympic movement (1970) and many
other international sports federations, including the International
Federation of Football Associations (FIFA) in 1976. Above, a
Johannesburg mine-worker joins in an improvised soccer game.
26

The Supreme Council for Sport in Africa
is convinced that the Pretoria régime will be
forced to liberalize its policy, so that all
South African athletes will enjoy the same
opportunity to compete and be judged ac¬
cording to their prowess as athletes and
not according to the colour of their skin.
In Rhodesia, racial discrimination is not
institutionalized as it is in South Africa,
but this does notmean that sport is inte¬
grated. A series of legal provisions inherit¬
ed from the British colonial period was up.-
dated, enabling the Salisbury régime to
practise apartheid in sport just like South
Africa.
The laws governing land allocation have
divided the country into two zones, one for
whites, the other for non-whites. Sports
facilities are by and large in the white areas,
and are managed by private clubs whose
rules discourage non-whites from apply¬
ing for membership.
Should these obstacles prove insuffi¬
cient, they are reinforced by laws obliging
people to practise sports only in areas allot¬
ted to their racial group. As there are very
few sports facilities in the black areas, the
Africans are to all intents and purposes
banned from sport.
The Supreme Council for Sport in Africa
is fighting this curious conception of sport
because all its Member States are pro¬
foundly hostile to apartheid and have broken
diplomatic relations with Pretoria and Salis¬
bury. They were spurred to take action
because the International Olympic Commit¬
tee did not attack the problem until 1963,
although by then apartheid had already
been practised for some years. The mem¬
bers of the IOC knew what was happening
in South Africa, but they did not admit the
facts until they had heard evidence from
. a number of committees of inquiry.
Putting South African sport in quaran
tine is the only way to get the Pretoria
régime to admit that in sport, as in other
fields, people should be judged solely on
merit. In August 1977, came news that the
four South African sports federations were
to merge into a single, fully integrated non-
racial association. If this is true, and if the
South African government does not veto
the merger, this first step will constitute
a great victory.
S.A. Ogouki
STEPHANE A. OGOUKI, Senegalese journalist, is
head of the press and information services of the
Supreme Council for Sport in Africa, which seeks to
develop sport throughout Africa and fights all forms of
discrimination in sport.
27
