TOWARDS
A NEW WORLD ORDER
A document without precedent
in Unesco's history :
the Medium-Term Plan (1977-1982)
THIRTY years old, Unesco has paused to take stock,
to look at the world as it is today and to suggest
what it could be like tomorrow. This, in a nutshell, is
the substance of Unesco's Medium-Term Plan (1977-1982),
presented in this issue to readers of the Unesco Courier.
To prepare, for education, science, culture and commu¬
nication, a six-year programme of action corresponding to
what the international community united in Unesco can
and should expect of its joint undertaking implies both a
backward- and a forward-looking stance.
What the enterprise involves is a clear-eyed analysis
of the present situation, together with an exploration and
a signposting of those paths by which, through successive
stages of international action, each society and each dif¬
ferent group of human beings may, each in its own way,
carry the hopes of mankind towards the horizon of 1982.
It is this horizon which Unesco's Member States must
keep in view as they consult together, when they meet in
the Executive Board and at the General Conference which
is Unesco's sovereign body. This is the context in which
on a world-wide scale a series of guidelines have been
prepared, to serve national policy-making and regional and
international co-operation alike.
The Plan is the product of a collective effort. But it is
not an impersonal document. When, early in 1976, Unes¬
co's Director-General and his staff prepared the text which
was to be submitted to the Member States and examined
by the General Conference, they were able to draw on
contributions from several sessions of the General Confer¬
ence and of the Executive Board whereafter far-reaching
consultations with the Member States, both the content
and the methods of medium-term planning had been
discussed.
The Plan is indeed a collective one. But if its authors
are the Member States, as well as the Director-General
and his staff, they speak with a single voice. Each chapter,
whether it is general in scope or whether it examines a
specific problem, echoes the aspirations of mankind, the
true "centre of development". From beginning to end, the
Plan sounds a note of hope in the quest for "greater
chances to be human and to create". This message comes
from the depths of the human spirit; it reaches back to
time immemorial yet is constantly renewed.
The hope that the Medium-Term Plan would meet
with consensus proved to be justified, since the General
Conference was unanimous in approving its objectives and
guiding principles.
Consensus but not compromise. In the Plan a large
number of outlooks and approaches are reconciled in a sin¬
gle, all-embracing vision of unity in diversity. It proclaims
that the world is a whole whose parts are bound together
in solidarity, but that this solidarity is meaningless unless
rooted in respect for differences between individuals and
cultures and in respect for paths towards development
which have been freely chosen.
This' issue of the Unesco Courier presents only a se¬
lection of texts from the Medium-Term Plansome of
them given in full, others in abridged form. It should not
be forgotten that these extracts, chosen to illustrate the
main guidelines of the Plan, are part of the larger structure
of analyses and historical surveys which underlie the Plan's
specific proposals and point the way to action that will
enable us to meet the challenges of the future.
Casting his shadow before him, this
Walking Man, a metal sculpture by the
famous Swiss artist Alberto Giacometti
(1901-1966), seems to be striding out boldly
towards new horizons. A similar figure by
the same sculptor stands in a patio at
Unesco's Headquarters in Paris.
Photo © André Villers, Paris

' API
m r
-.y
