South Africa
facts
and fiction
by Leslie Rubin
LESLIE RUBIN, professor of Comparative Government at Howard University, Wash¬
ington D. C, was a Senator, representing Africans, in the South African Parliament
from 1954 until he left South Africa in 1960. A formerNational Vice-President of the
Liberal Party of South Africa (1953-1960), he presented a petition to the U.N. Special
Committee on Apartheid in 1963. Among his many published works are Apartheid in
Practice, published by the U.N. in 1970 and translated into eight languages, and (with
Brian Weinstein) Introduction to African Politics: A Continental Approach, published
by Praeger, New York, 1974.
8

Behind a barrage of propaganda,
the grim truth about apartheid
SINCE 1948, . when Afrikaner
nationalism came to power in
South Africa, the outside world
has become increasingly aware of what is
being done in the name of apartheid by
4.5 million whites to more than 22 million
non-whites: 19 million Africans, 2.5 million
coloureds, and some 800,000 Asians <1).
South Africa has responded to growing
international criticism by mounting a
massive propaganda campaign designed
U) The term "white" is used for people of European
stock. The term "African". replaces the word "Bantu"
which is at present used by the South African govern¬
ment to designate people of African stock, except in
direct quotations where, if the word "Bantu" was
originally used, it is retained. The term "Asian" is used
for people of Chinese or Indian descent, and "colour¬
ed" for those of mixed European and African or Asian
background. In this issue the use of these terms
"white", "African", "Asian" and "coloured" has been
unavoidable because of the nature of apartheid
itself. However, Unesco rejects the concepts of race
and ethnic group relations that such terms imply.
to present a favourable image of its racial
policies.
Government spokesmen, including the
Prime Minister, make frequent use of the
media. A generously-financed propa¬
ganda machine pours out information
through embassies, the Information Ser¬
vice, and unofficial bodies like the South
African Foundation, and the Committee
for Fairness in Sport.
Leading European and American news¬
papers carry full-page advertisements
asserting the contentment of all South
Africa's peoples. Illustrated publications
describe the successes of apartheid.
Well-trained, persuasive officials of the
information Service attend the opening of
every session of the United Nations.
In 1948 the information budget was
$ 140,000; by 1969 it had grown to
$ 5 million. For 1976-1977 it was more
than $ 15 million.
All this costly propaganda is intended
to demonstrate that apartheid is a just and
viable system. The methods" used are
usually sophisticated, subtle, and shrewd:
but deliberate misrepresentation is
common. Taken as a whole the propa¬
ganda offers a grossly deceptive picture
of South Africa today.
What follows is an attempt to expose
this deception by looking at some of the
claims made by South African propa¬
ganda in the light of available facts.
The indigenous
of South Africa
inhabitants
CLAIM: South Africa persists in claiming
that the white man and the African came
to South Africa at about the same time.
Addressing the Los Angeles World Affairs
Council on 6 June 1975, the South African
Minister of Information said, "The Bantu were
not indigenous. They came after the Dutch I
and the British". f

Three months after the first Soweto riots, black African
demonstrators (right) badly jolted the white community when they
dared to turn out in force in the white districts of Johannesburg.
They were promptly arrested by the police. In another, more ominous
police crackdown in October 1977, the government arrested or banned
persons, organizations and newspapers considered till then to be
moderate. Under existing Internal Security legislation, political
opponents can be detained for up to 12 months at a time.
In the last year, some 20 blacks have died in detention. The General
Assembly of the United Nations has proclaimed 11 October the
Day of Solidarity with South African political prisoners.
, FACTS: Anthropological and archaeo¬
logical research has established that
settled African communities existed in
South Africa several centuries before the
first white man arrived in 1652.
An archaeological group reported in 1966
that there were settlements in what is
today Johannesburg "as early as
1060 A.D." The distinguished anthropo¬
logist, Monica Wilson, writing in 1959,
cited 15th-century Portuguese records
proving that shipwrecked sailors had
encountered settled black communities in
South Africa, and added: "None of these
facts is new, all have been published at
one time or another, but their implica¬
tions appear to have been overlooked by
the myth-makers of this generation".
In 1966, Professor Vernon McKay of
the School of Advanced International
Studies, Johns Hopkins University
(U.S.A.) told a Congressional committee:
"A second popular theme to divert atten¬
tion from the real issues is the argument
which implies that South Africa's policy is
just because 'the white man got there first'
or, in the amended version used by South
African officials today, blacks and whites
arrived 'about the same time' or 'more or
less simultaneously' . . . Although the
above argument is largely irrelevant, it may
be worthwhile to point out that South
Africa's own scholars have proved that it
is also untrue".
Separate development
CLAIM: The South African population consists
of whites, several distinct African nations, the
coloureds, and the Asians. The policy of sepa¬
rate development is Just, ensures a sound poli¬
tical, social and economic future for each
group, and is in the interest of the country as a
whole.
In May 1977, in an article published in the
Los Angeles Times, the South African Secretary
for Information wrote that "a plurality of
democracies" was coming into being... "The
homelands of black people who settled in what
is today South Africa, either have been given
back to them or are in the process of being
handed back"... The Asian and coloured com¬
munities, through their elected representative
councils already administer most of their own
affairs".
FACTS: No African, coloured or Asian has
the right, either directly oc through repre¬
sentatives," to take part in thé government
of South Africa.
The Bantu areas, arbitrarily reserved by
the whites for exclusive African occupa¬
tion, amount to 13 per cent of the total
land area of South Africa; the remaining
87 per cent is reserved for exclusive white
occupation.
Leo Marquard, a noted authority on
South Africa, has described the Bantu
areas as "poverty-stricken areas, incapable
of standing up to the periodic droughts
and floods of South Africa, and unable to
support the existing population... They are
in fact vast rural slums whose chief export
is their manpower, which goes to the
mines and factories and farms to earn
enough money to pay taxes and support
the families".
These, comprising 10 fragmented terri¬
tories allocated to 10 African "nations" are
the so-called homelands of the African
people.
One of them, the Transkei (population
1.9 million), was granted "independence"
by South Africa in 1976, but every country
in the world (except South Africa) has
refused to recognize the Transkei as an.
independent state.
Another, Boputhatswana, is due to
become "independent" in 1977. The
remaining eight have rejected "indepen¬
dence". In 1976 their leaders said, "...We
do not want to abdicate our birthright as
South Africans, as well as forfeiting our
share of the economy and wealth which
we have jointly built".
The functions of the Coloured Persons
Representative Council and the South
African Indian Council are consultative and
advisory. The coloureds and the Asians
do not share power with the whites.
Government plans do not envisage such
power-sharing in the future.
Personal freedom, education,
work, health and housing
CLAIM: In October 1975 the Information
Counsellor of the South African Embassy in the
United States wrote in the New York Times
Magazine: "...Blacks in South Africa enjoy
more personal freedom than probably else¬
where in Africa and, in fact, have a more effec¬
tive political voice than in much of Africa;
South African blacks have the best educational
facilities on the continent of Africa; there are
a/most 4 million black schoolchildren in South
Africa; blacks in South Africa enjoy better
health services,' better housing, and a higher
standard of living across the board than any¬
where else in Africa ".
FACTS: A network of laws and regulations
(the notorious pass laws) severely restrict
African movement, " while maintaining a
controlled supply of African labour for the
needs of commerce and industry. All Afric-
, ans whose labour is not required are
removed to putative "homelands".
Every African must carry a reference
book; failure to produce it on demand by
a policeman or other official is a criminal
offence. Prosecutions under the pass laws
for the period 1974-1975 totalled 386,000,
equivalent to 989 trials for every day of the
year.
Right to work: There are laws that
prevent an African from doing skilled work;
empower the government to reserve
specified occupations exclusively for
whites, and deny to Africans the generally
accepted rights to strike and organize in
trade unions. An African worker's oppor-
tunity to acquire skills and efficiency is
limited by the grossly inferior educational,
facilities available to Africans... The
earnings of African workers are conside¬
rably lower than those of white workers.
Employment of Africans as shop mana¬
gers is prohibited. In March 1977 a white
divisional manager of a national retailer
and his African shop manager both
received a suspended sentence of a
$ 230 fine or imprisonment for 3 months.
The permanent ban on black managers
was confirmed by the Minister of Bantu
Administration and Development in July
1977.
10

J
"41 Í r- 7
The "homelands" are not alleviating
African unemployment. In 1971 and 1972
barely 10,000 jobs were created annually
through industrial development in the
"borderlands" and "homelands". Mean¬
while 60,000 persons were sent to the
Bantustans each year. In 1968-1969 alone,
26,736 Africans lost their jobs in the white
urban areas.
In 1973 the per capita earnings of
whites in Johannesburg were $ 131 per
month. Africans in the adjoining town¬
ship of Soweto earned $ 19 per month.
Health: The health system for South
African whites is one of the best in the
world, whereas African medical services
are characterized by inadequate hospital
facilities and a serious shortage of
doctors.
According to a report published in June
1977 by the U.N. Centre Against Apar¬
theid, there is one doctor for every 400
white South Africans as against one for
every 44,000 Africans. Of the 693 medical
practitioners who graduated in 1975, 601
were white and 6 were African. Facilities
for training African doctors have been
reduced.
South Africa does not provide statistics
of African infant mortality but those avail¬
able for the city of Johannesburg indicate
that the African rate is the highest of all
ethnic groups.
In 1977 the World Health Organization
reported that "Mental health services for
the non-white groups, especially for the
African population, are inadequate in
quantity and very poor in quality... There
is not a single black psychiatrist in
South Africa".
Housing: Speaking in Parliament on
28 April 1976, opposition leader Helen
Suzman said Soweto, with a population
of at least 1 .3 million, had an average of
14 people living in a house. She warned
that Soweto and other townships were
becoming "gigantic overcrowded slums".
Education: Almost 30 years of rigidly
separated and white-controlled schools
and universities have resulted in grossly
inferior education for blacks, both quanti¬
tatively and qualitatively. The cause of the
1976 Soweto riots and demonstrations
since then, that resulted in extensive loss
'of life and damage to property, was the
strong resentment of this system.
In 1976 per capita expenditure on white
education was $ 696; African, $ 45. The
teacher-pupil ratios for that year were:
white, 1 : 22; African 1 : 60. The over¬
whelming majority of African children stop
schooling at the primary level; only
5.5 per cent are in secondary schools.:
Schooling for white children is free and
compulsory; for Africans it is not compul¬
sory, and African parents have to find the
money for fees, uniforms and books.
Integrated education is prohibited in
private schools. In 1977, two Roman
Catholic schools were officially threatened
with closure unless a few African and
coloured children "admitted in the past
few days" were removed. .
In 1975, 15,467 degrees and diplomas Y
11

SOUTH AFRICA:
"SOME ARE
MORE EQUAL
THAN OTHERS
WHITES
4.5 million Population
BLACKS
19 million
87 per cent
75 per cent
Land allocation
Share of national
income
13 per cent
less than 20 per cent'1'
14
Ratio of average
earnings
750 rands
Minimum taxable
income 360 rands
1 for 400
27 per 1,000
Doctors/population
ratio
Infant mortality rate
$696
Annual expenditure on
education per pupil
1 for 22 Pupil/teacher ratio
1 for 44,000
200 per 1 ,000 in urban areas
400 per 1,000 in rural areas
$45
1 for 60
(1) The remaining 5 per cent is divided between the coloureds and the Asians.
awarded at South African universities went
to white students, 1 ,757 to Africans.
Police have assaulted, arrested, and
prosecuted hundreds of students at South
African universities. Student leaders, stu¬
dents, and school pupils have been
detained under Security legislation.
Freedom of the press: The law penalizes
criticism of apartheid. There is also increas¬
ing government interference with news¬
paper investigation and reporting, by
Facts and figures in this table are drawn from U.N. sources
and from the article on these pages
means of harassment, threats, arrests,
and detention of newspapermen, partic¬
ularly African reporters describing condi¬
tions, and police behaviour in African
townships.
In 1976 nine journalists were detained
under the Internal Security Act, many of
them while they were covering the
Soweto riots. In December 1976 Percy
Qoboza, editor of The World, South
Africa's leading African newspaper, was
detained by the police following an edi¬
torial which described Prime Minister
Vorster as "sleeping through one of the
country's' most dangerous times". He
was released the same day following
widespread protests. In October 1977 he
was again arrested and The World was
closed as part of a general crackdown on
the black civil rights movement, in which
some 70 leaders were arrested.
In 1977 Winnie Mandela, wife of the
imprisoned African leader Nelson
Mandela, was banished from Soweto.
The Security Police officer in charge of a
12

force of 20 policemen carrying out the
removal from her home, told reporters
present that if they took photographs
they would be detained for 14 days.
The family
CLAIM: The pass laws, which deny Africans
the right of permanent residence in a South
African urban area, are justified by the govern¬
ment on the grounds that they do have such a
right in their "homelands".
FACTS: More than half the total African
population about 8 million live in the
towns of white South Africa, and their
number has increased steadily since 1970.
The pass laws continue daily to disrupt
and undermine the family life of these
millions. One of these laws, the Urban
Areas Act, makes it a criminal offence for
an African woman to live with her husband
for more than 72 hours if she has not
received a permit from a white official to
do so.
White students from the University of Cape Town (above) manifest their
solidarity with black African pupils during the 1976 Soweto riots.
A number of South African whites writers, politicians and schoolteachers have
been actively engaged in combatting apartheid ever since the 1950s. Some are
now in exile or, like the distinguished poet Breyten Breytenbach, in prison.
In his essay "Vulture Culture", Breytenbach summed up the insidious effects
of apartheid on South Africa's whites as follows:
"Apartheid isolates the white man...
His windows are painted white
to keep the night in."
Sport
CLAIM: A full-page advertisement in an
American newspaper in 1977, with photographs
of black and white competitors, claims: "... our
teams are selected on merit and merit only...
South Africa has been barred from the Olympics
and many other international sport organizations
on the pretext that it practises discrimination
in sport..."
FACTS: On 23 September 1976 Dr. P.H.J.
Koornhof, Minister of Sport and Recre¬
ation, announcing the government sport
policy, declared that "white, coloured,
Indian, and black sportsmen and women
should all belong to their own clubs. Each
should control, arrange, and manage its
own sporting fixtures." The government
approved of consultation between "the
different race groups wherever possible,
practical, and desirable", and of competi¬
tion between teams "from different racial
groups... by mutual agreement in consulta¬
tion with the Minister".
In October 1976 Dr. Koornhof said that
a rugby match played between a white
and a black team was contrary to sports
policy, which did not provide for mixed
teams. In July 1977 the Minister rejected
a formula providing for multiracial play
which had been adopted by all four na¬
tional rugby bodieswhite, African, Asian
and coloured. (See also page 26).
The rule of law
CLAIM: South Africa proclaims its adherence
to the rule of law, pointing to the fact that
apartheid is applied in terms of laws which are
passed by Parliament and interpreted by an
independent judiciary.
FACTS: The blacks have no say what¬
soever in the making or the application of
the law. As Nelson Mandela put it, "The
white man makes all the laws, he drags us
before his courts and accuses us, and he
sits in judgement over us."
To curb black opposition to apartheid,
South Africa has created a draconian
police state apparatus. Since 1950, 60
laws relating to "internal security" have
been enacted. These laws grant to Cabinet
Ministers, policemen, and other officials,
widespread powers of arrest, detention
(often incommunicado), house arrest,
search of person and property, interroga¬
tion, banning, and banishment, without
right of recourse to a court of law.



During the past 17 years thousands of |
men and women have been deprived of I
13

y freedom under these laws. The Christian
Institute of South Africa estimates the
government does not provide information
that several hundred are in detention at
the present time. From April 1976 to
August 1977, 19 persons died while in
detention. The police claimed they were
all suicides. Urged repeatedly to appoint a
judicial commission to enquire into police
behaviour. Prime Minister Vorster has
refused to do so.
The future of apartheid
CLAIM: Roelof Botha, South African Repre¬
sentative at the United Nations, said on
18 October 1974: "...My Government does not
condone discrimination purely on grounds of
race or colour. Discrimination based solely on
the colour of a man's skin cannot be defended.
And we shall do everything in our power to
move away from discrimination based on race
or colour. "
FACTS: Since 1974 blacks have been
permitted access, formerly denied to them,
to some of the country's public amenities.
But the changes that have taken place are
minimal and peripheral. They leave the :
essential structure of apartheid unaltered.
On 10 March 1977, Prime Minister
Vorster told the South African Parliament
that his party "did not and never would
support power-sharing" with the blacks.
In June 1977, United Nations Secretary-
General Kurt Waldheim said that the past
17 years had "seen racism progressively
institutionalized in every aspect of South
African society."
Leslie Rubin

