OUT OF THE TROPICS,
AN AVANT-GARDE ART
by Arturo Uslar-Pietri
OVER the past 20 years, in a sur¬
prising and significant departure,
a group of Latin Americans has
taken the lead in one of the most novel
developments in contemporary art: kinetic
art (See Unesco Courier, September 1963).
In going beyond abstraction and in for¬
mulating what must be regarded as a new
plastic language rich in possibilities, these
artists have contributed to the creation
and definition of a new dimension in art.
Kinetic artists have discovered the ele¬
ments of a new language . and a new
relationship. They believe that works of
art, instead of simulating space and
movement, should create their own move¬
ment and a new spatial relationship with
the people looking at them. Instead of
contemplating a work of art from the
outside, people participate in it. In some
instances, they can actually install them¬
selves physically inside it, like being in a
forest or in a rainstorm.
The fact that artists from Latin America
have become some of the leading creators i
of the new kinetic language in the world's ?
ARTURO USLAR-PIETRI, Venezuela's ambassador
and permanent delegate to Unesco and member of
the Organization's Executive Board, is one of Latin
America's most famous writers. He is the author of
many novels, short stories and essays such as La Otra
América ("The Other America") and has been profes¬
sor of Latin American literature at Columbia University
(U.S.A.). His novel Las Lanzas Coloradas has been
published in English as The Red Lances (Knopf, New
York. 1962).
30

Much of Latin America is situated in the tropics. The vast impenetrable forests,
rugged high plateaux, mighty rivers and endless beaches of the tropical landscape
constitute a hostile, menacing presence whose multifarious forms and colours are
constantly changing. This landscape has inspired a major development in modern
art, kinetic art, in which three Venezuelan artists, Jesús Soto, Carlos Cruz Diez and
Alejandro Otero play a leading role. For the close link between their work and
natural life in the tropics (below) see also page 33 and centre colour pages.
31

, art centres has caused surprise and given
rise to controversy.
There are some who claim in rather
simplistic fashion that this type of art is
not suited to the development of Latin
America and its social and historical back¬
ground. Latin American artists, they feel,
should confine themselves to popular
realism or political expressionism instead
of forging ahead in search of new forms
and types of expression that are in the
forefront of Western artistic creation.
However, the fact is that these artists
have not broken with their past, nor have
they gone against their own sensibility.
Anybody who has been in contact with
them or has heard them speak soon dis¬
covers that there are solid ties between
what they are creating, what they them¬
selves are and what, as Latin Americans,
they are keeping alive.
I would go even further and suggest
that it is the very fact that they are Latin
Americans that has prompted them to
strike out in search of new spatial forms
and movement. Kinetic art is not merely
an offshoot of machines and big cities: it
reflects the changing relationship of man
with his natural environment and with
the movement in which he participates.
This could largely explain why Latin Amer¬
ican sensibility is suited to the creation of
kinetic art.
Latin Americans have always had a
special relationship with nature. They
have never seen it as a mere backcloth,
for nature has always conditioned their
way of life. Most of Latin America is
situated in the tropical or sub-tropical
regions, where the landscape assumes
proportions that are unknown in Europe.
Quite apart from the sheer mass of the
inaccessible snow-capped cordilleras, the
ocean-like expanses of the plains, the
incredible vastness of the impenetrable
forests and the majesty of the heaviest-
flowing and most fickle rivers in the world,
nature itself is particularly hostile and
aggressive. Its vastness and magnitude
are a threat to man. Vegetation prolif¬
erates and is all-devouring. From time to
time, floods turn the plains into inland
seas. In a matter of hours, one can move
from dense, humid forests to bleak and
barren uplands.
The people of Latin America have lived
for centuries in open conflict with nature.
Plants and animals have been their tradi¬
tional invaders. The landscape is always
on the move, lying in wait. To venture
into the realm of nature is to court danger.
Moreover, in the tropics, nature is con¬
tinually changing even in the course of a
single day. In the morning, it flares up
with life, at midday it is obliterated by the
dazzling whiteness of the sun and, as the
evening draws in, it breaks down into an
endless profusion of tints and hues before
turning at night into a frenzied theatre of
moving shadows and indistinct noises.
In Latin America, man's relationship with
space has a dynamic and dangerous qual¬
ity that is unfamiliar to Europeans. It is
space which man has still scarcely manag¬
ed to subjugate or penetrate.
'Kinetic art
reflects man's
changing
relationship
with his
environment'
Man has not succeeded in creating a
stable relationship with the shifting, trem¬
bling earth, the bursting torrents, the arid
or inundated plains, the volcanoes belch¬
ing fire into the sky, or the stealth of rav¬
enous and hostile animals.
In the Latin American cultural melting
pot, there is an all-pervasive impression
that the white and the black, the two pro¬
tagonists who came from outside the
continent, are still somewhat ill at ease in
their environment. Only the Indians have
succeeded in establishing a harmonious
and balanced relationship with nature in
Latin America.
We have no record as to how the blacks
reacted, but we have ample evidence of
the fear and anxiety which gripped the
Spaniards when they were confronted with
nature in Latin America. A work such as
that written by the Jesuit priest José de
Acosta at the end of the 16th century
echoes their apprehension at having to
contend with the landscape and the plant
and animal life. For Europeans, the Atlan¬
tic crossing alone represented a sudden
break with centuries-old norms, distances
and living patterns linking them with their
natural environment.
This break in continuity and the appear¬
ance of a new set of dimensions were
bound to affect the psychological make-up
of these people and their attitude to life.
Their whole frame of reference was sud¬
denly transformed.
Concepts of altitude and distance
changed, as did the significance of natural
phenomena, and the impact this had on
people's minds was far-reaching. It gave
rise to a sort of instability psychosis and
an agonizing break in man's day-to-day
relations with his world. Everything was
different, changing and unfamiliar. Rain
was a torrential downpour unleashed from
the sky and rivers were such vast expanses
of water that the other side did not exist.
Fear of warlike Indians was only one
thing: dread of the uncharted and menac¬
ing wilderness was another. We do not
knowbut it is easy for us to imagine
what enormous psychological pressures
the conquistadors must have been sub¬
jected to when they felt that all the spatial
relationships which had hitherto governed
and secured their lives were collapsing.
We cannot know what the companions
of Francisco d'Orellana must have felt
when, like dwarfs in an infinite fastness,
they sailed down the immense and unfa¬
thomable Amazon, or what Hernando de
Soto and his handful of men sensed when
they entered the Mississippi basin, which
could have contained the plateau of Cas¬
tile a hundred times over and the waters
of the Guadalquivir as many times again.
Or, for that matter, what Vasco Nunez de
Balboa felt when he first glimpsed the
Pacific; or what the straggling bands of
adventurers thought as the days went by
and they saw no end to the oceans of
grass of the Orinoco and La Plata plains;
or the feeling of awe which gripped Piz-
arros's comrades in arms when they first
set eyes on the wall of rock and snow
formed by the Andes.
Perhaps a good many of the psychotic
and criminal reactions engendered by the
conquest of Latin America stemmed from
the fact that man had taken so enormous
a step and had broken his normal, tradi¬
tional relations with space.
32

This state of mind has survived in
various forms among the descendants of
the Spanish conquerors and the black
peoples; they are heirs to a disorder that
has never been completely overcome. For
thousands of years, Europeans, Africans
and Asians have adapted to the dimensions
and characteristics of their environment
and have assimilated them. But the
culture, language, historical vision and
sense of landscape which have prevailed
in Latin America are those of the European
transplant.
'Nature has
played a
decisive
role in man's
adventure on
this continent'
Cultural intermingling has not solved
the problem; in fact, it has kept some of
the contradictions alive. The image
which present-day Latin Americans have
of volcanoes, rivers, alligators, snakes, and
so on, is not that of the Indians. It is
closer to that of the Europeans who expe¬
rienced the initial shock of transplantation.
They still find nature threatening and
strange. They apprehend it as an immea¬
surably large being which is gravitating
around them and fighting them, and with
which they cannot live on confident and
stable terms.
Nature has been a dominant theme in
Latin American literature right up to the
present day because it was not only an
impressive new experience but also played
a decisive role in man's adventure on the
continent.
To my mind, this has also been a deci¬
sive factor in the part which Latin Amer¬
ican artists have played in the develop- j
ment of kinetic art. I
Photo © Alejandro Otero, Paris
The Venezuelan artist Alejandro Otero has created
giant metal structures with mobile sections, which
are remarkable examples of the integration of works
of art into the landscape. Pablo Neruda, the great
Chilean poet and Nobel Prize-winner, once wrote of
these outdoor structures: "Now they are shimmering
lights, now playing water. They are vibrant
structures, whose loftiness is both material and
spiritual." Below, one of a group of three works
entitled Delta Solar created by Otero in
Washington D.C.
33

r Of many possible examples, I shall dis¬
cuss three leading Venezuelan artists I
know well, who came to Paris in the early
1950s at a time when abstract painting
seemed to have exhausted its possibilities
and who produced work whose originality
was instrumental in charting new directions
in art.
Jesus Soto came from the most tropical
and forested region of Venezuela. He was
brought up in Ciudad Bolivar on the
Orinoco on the edge of the Guyana forest,
in a geographical setting in which, per¬
haps unlike any other, human beings were
puny compared with the subjugating and
manifold presence of a natural environ¬
ment that was imbued with strength,
dynamism and myriad forms. Ciudad Boli¬
var was not a centre for training in the
arts but a long-established settlement on
the banks of a vast river and at the edge
of an impenetrable tropical forest. The
most striking presence that Soto witnessed
until he was in his teens was that of the
forest.
After studying at the School of Plastic
Arts in Caracas and spending some time
teaching in an art school in Maracaibo,
Soto came to Paris filled with youthful
enthusiasm. He arrived in postwar Paris,
where total anarchy reigned as all kinds of
abstract art were being taught. Soto was
captivated by all the possibilities which lay
before him and, after a short breathing-
space, he ventured boldly along a new
road: the art of movement and spectator
participation.
With amazing speed, he became an
innovator. He sensed that it was possible
to create a new space in which the work
of art and the spectator were merged and
in which movement would not be simu¬
lated or mechanically generated but would
be created by the spontaneous and delib¬
erate participation of the spectator.
He was to claim later that his aim was
to "integrate time into art", in other
words, to go much further than Mondrian,
Kandinsky and Malevich.
He began by assembling piles of super¬
imposed translucent or opaque elements
in varying patterns, which interacted with
one another as the spectator's eyes moved
across them. He created new visions and
optical illusions which, through their action
on the eye, set up endless vibrations of
lines and colours to give an impression of
fluid and ¡iving space endowed with a
fourth dimension.
These new spaces created by Soto,
where the spectator enters into, and forms
part of, a new relationship involving
movement and variations in colour, line
and perspective, are strongly reminiscent
of some of the features of his native tro¬
pical landscape. The movement of vertical
rods superimposed in differing thicknesses,
and the colours and forms which appear
to move and change, produce an effect
very similar to that of the palm fronds,
creepers and ferns in the dense tropical
forest, where the interplay of light and
distance seems to subject them to per¬
petual variation.
Between Soto's works and certain
aspects of nature in the tropics there is a
correlation whose existence has, in fact,
been demonstrated in a film.
Soto did not make a conscious and
deliberate effort to' produce this effect; it
simply emerged during his search for a
new art form because of the way in which
his responses had been conditioned.
In his constant endeavour to encourage,
the participation of spectators and actually
integrate them into works of art, he has
succeeded in creating new forms which
offer the most extraordinary possibilities.
In his "ambiguous spaces", for instance,
he uses large plexiglass compartments in
which the transparent surfaces and visitors'
movements create an effect of contin¬
uously vibrating shapes, colours and
perspectives.
One of his most recent experiments
along these lines are the "penetrables",
dense hanging columns of nylon rope
which visitors enter, in which they lose
their bearings and are swallowed up, as if
in dense jungle or a tropical cloudburst.
The visual sensation is enhanced by the
experience of being in physical contact
with a tentacular and amorphous material
which covers and envelops the participant
like the spray from a waterfall.
Soto has also created "audio-pene-
trables" made of resonating metal rods.
As the spectator passes by, these rods set
up a continuous metallic vibrating sound
which adds to the vibrations of light and
CONTINUED PAGE 66

AVANT-GARDE ART FROM THE TROPICS
(continued from page 34)
form. Participants literally have to force
their way through the object, and the
conventional act of contemplating a work
of art is thus transformed into an ines¬
capable living experience.
Carlos Cruz Diez expresses himself in a
different way but his aims and his concep¬
tion of art are the same. He sets out to
make colour "speak" with all its creative
power. The main virtue of light is its
protean ability to keep on changing. This
is what the Impressionists tried to capture
when they painted series of pictures of
the same subject, but they only managed
to achieve their aim in a representational
and allusive manner.
Cruz Diez sets out to portray the contin¬
uous transformations occuring in light
and its independent creative power. In his
paintings, he attempts to achieve an
"open-ended" situation that is constantly
evolving. He believes that, in traditional
painting, time is constricted and space is
falsified or simulated. His aim is to replace
"the representation of space by real
space." He believes that a work of art is
a reality in itself "autonomous reality".
Cruz Diez has embarked on this voyage
of discovery and conquest through his
"Physiochromes" and "Chromosaturations"
and induced colour effects. One has only
to approach some of his colours for them
to start vibrating and moving. Not only
is it impossible to see them twice in the
same way, but the painting itself starts to
produce new colours which the artist did
not paint but which the existing colours
induce on the retina. In this way, the
painting embodies a time element, as well
as creating its own space dimension in
which the spectator plays an active role.
Although Cruz Diez's experimentation
follows quite different and original lines,
his aims coincide with those of Soto. They
are both intent on banishing simulated
space and time in art and on creating
autonomous space and time in which the
spectator can actively participate. There
are no moving elements in Cruz Diez's
work; instead, movement is created on
the surface through the dynamic effects
of colour. His paintings come alive, cons¬
tantly changing in appearance and nuance
depending on one's viewpoint and the
light penetrating them.
Carlos Cruz Diez acknowledges a debt
to his experience as a graphic artist. For a
long time, he was an advertising designer
and draughtsman. This can clearly be seen
in many aspects of his work, especially at
the outset of his career. However, some¬
thing must have conditioned him at an
earlier stage for his sense of space and its
independence to have developed as it did.
Cruz Diez is also a child of tropical Latin
America and this must have had a pro¬
found influence on his feeling for space
and colour.
A third Venezuelan who was also born
on the banks of the Orinoco arrived in
Paris with his two compatriots in the 1950s.
His name is Alejandro Otero. Though he
moved from Picasso-like works to abstract
and kinetic art, his aims were the same:
he set out to create a new form of space
in works of art that also embody time and
light.
He began by painting on canvas and
wood, evolving the highly expressive and
original manner to be seen in his Co/orit-
mos, in which lines of pure colour criss¬
cross each other and create new colour
and dimensional relationships. Then he
went on to create objects in space. Using
the vibration of metals ionized by light, he
erected giant structures which, under the
effect of the wind and the time of day,
change shape and colour as if they were
alive. The vibrations of the light on the
polished surfaces rise up like mirages or
unexpected patterns of reflection on clouds
and buildings. This is what he calls
"vibrating integrals" or "solar wings".
His structures are like endless perfor¬
mances which unfold before the spectators
in a continuous display of shapes and
colours. His works are designed for large
spaces, and merge into the landscape.
The artist has erected these dazzling and
fascinating "reflecting hills" in Washington,
D.C, Bogota, and Ciudad Guayana in
Venezuela.
The changing environment of tropical
Latin America and its ambiguous rela¬
tionship with man have molded the cre¬
ative sensibility of each of these three
outstanding Latin-American artists. It is
no mere coincidence that each of them,
in his own way, has played a leading role
in the development of kinetic art.
Arturo Uslar-Pietrl
66
