Too much or
too little
It sometimes happens that the desert
gets too much water. A case in
point is the Ouaar wadi, in southern
Morocco (above), where sudden
storms can produce flash floods.
The same situation, growing worse
in some areas, prevails in many arid
zones and poses the problem of
worldwide changes in climate.

The climate
as accomplice
DESERTIFICATION
T
by F. Kenneth Hare
F. KENNETH HARE, Canadian c/imatologist, is Direc¬
tor of the Institute for Environmental Studies at the
University of Toronto. A member of the Canadian
Environmental Advisory Committee, he is Director of
"Resources for the Future" in Washington, D.C. He
is also the principal author of the report "Climate
and Desertification" prepared for the United Nations
Conference on desertification to be held in Nairobi in
August and September, 1977.
have always been deserts on
earth. They are natural creations,
locked in place by endless subsi¬
dence of the overlying atmosphere. Rain-
making disturbances are weakened or
destroyed by large-scale downward settling
of airstreams. Subsidence is natural to
the sub-tropics of our rotating earth it
has been, and always will be.
Yet the desert margins have shifted, and
the aridity of the interior regions has waxed
and waned. Until about 2,700 B.C.,
cattle-herding nomads roamed over pro¬
ductive savannas in what is now the arid
eastern Sahara. The civilizations of the
Indus Valley flourished under moderate
rainfall in the margins of the present-day
Rajasthan and Thar deserts, created by
sudden desiccation nearly 4,000 years ago.
It is thus natural for societies that live
along the margin of the deserts to fear
that these encroachments will continue.
"Desertification" is a shocking and visible
reality for many of the peoples of North
and East Africa, as it is for many countries
in southern Asia and the tropical Americas.
A recent survey in the Sudan suggests
that the southern edge of the Sahara
moved southwards almost 200 kilometres
between 1958 and 1975 not by remorse¬
less expansion across fertile lands, but by
the patchy deterioration of the marginal
areas until, in effect, they joined the desert
to the north.
Are these changes due to a harshening
of world climate? Can we expect them to
continue? Is there something we can do
to stabilize matters? Or is the process too
powerful and overriding?
To the first question we can return a
reasonably confident "no". There is no
evidence of a lasting deterioration of cli¬
mate. The Sahelian drought of 1968-1973
has given way to moderate or generous k

í iT5TTTT
rainfall in the past three years, in most of
the affected areas.
The severe drought of 1972 in the Aus¬
tralian interior (which was the culmination
of a long phase of desiccation) has been
followed by several years of excessive
rainfall. We can point to no area of the
world where desiccation of the desert
margin has continued through the whole
period of record.
Variability is characteristic of rainfall in
such climates. In a given rainy season,
the distribution of rainstorms is patchy,
erratic and unpredictable, so that wide
differences of available moisture occur
within each year.
Differences of relief accentuate this
effect by concentrating run-off water into
basins, while the nearby slopes gain little
stored moisture. Large differences occur
between successive years. In many regions
several dry years follow in succession.
"Drought" in the semi-arid lands is often
taken to mean such prolonged rainfall
failures.
Natural ecosystems "remember" such
phenomena, and are well adapted to
them. Each plant and animal species has
a specific genetic specialization that per¬
mits it to tolerate the stress normal to
such climates.
Pastoral nomadism was and is (where
it survives) a reasonable adaptation to
such a climate, because it permitted flocks
and herds to be driven to where the rains
were most abundant, and grazing good.
In the Sahel, where such systems had
long historic experience to sustain them,
it was possible to avoid both the hazards
of drought-induced failures of forage and
exposure to tsetse flies in the moister
woodlands to the south. Fulani and Tua¬
reg alike survived countless droughts.
But today, with partial stabilization of
the herds, with an extension of temporary .
cultivation into semi-arid environments, f
Ancient
splendours
under
the sand
Great monuments of some of the world's most famous
civilizations are now half-covered by the sand. These remains
attest to the extraordinary prosperity of many regions that
have since been turned into deserts. As countless cave
paintings prove, the Sahara once boasted towns built near
immense lakes where crocodiles and hippopotami sported.
The civilization of the Indus flourished in part of what is now
the Thur desert in Pakistan, while other great cultures
8

Photo © Michel Andrault. París
flW'fflUffl
«.
developed in those regions now invaded by the deserts of
Central Asia. In the Syrian desert, the Palmyra oasis (above)
was the seat of a prestigious kingdom dating back to the
3rd century A.D. In the arid mountains of Afghanistan, the
minaret of Jam (right) stands as a solitary memorial.
In the Sudan (below right) numerous remains recall the Meroe
kingdom some 2,000 years ago. Sand is destroying such
places as Al-Mukha (below), in the Arab Republic of Yemen.
__
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
9

Nothing but
an illusion...
The mirage is a typical desert
phenomenon: an inverted
image of far-off objects, it
looks like a stretch of water
situated between the object
and the on-looker. Mirages
appear over uniform surfaces
without vegetation that have
been heated by the sun. itf
LÏ
, and with increasing human population, the
system has lost this resilience. Overpas-
turing or overcultivation has strained the
vegetation and soil to the point where
prolonged drought has brought disaster.
In the Sahel itself, regional rainfall had
been declining since 1955 or 1960. The
drought of 1968-1973 (see Unesco Courier,
April 1975) was the culmination of a pro¬
longed, gradual deterioration. It raised
the spectre of permanent destruction of
productive land, of almost mortal damage
to the economies of several countries.
It is quite possible, moreover, that the
intensity of this prolonged episode was
increased by human misuse of the land.
This works in two ways. The first, and
most obvious, is that the destruction of
perennial vegetation, or removal of fine
materials and humus from soils, them¬
selves contribute to a harsher microclimate.
As drought increases, these effects are
brought about by the treading, browsing
and grazing of desperate animals, espe¬
cially near watering places, or by the
abandonment of arable land. Such pack¬
ed, denuded surfaces become hotter,
more reflective and less water-retentive.
Sudden showers may flow rapidly off
them. Windstorms will remove fine mate¬
rials. These are effects that will outlive
the drought itself, and will hinder the re-
establishment of fertility and productivity.
The second effect is more insidious, and
is not obvious to the local inhabitants. It
arises from the increased reflectivity of the
denuded surfaces, their "albedo", as the
climatologists say. It has been established
by infrared photography from satellites
that the high albedo of the Sahara, the
Arabian peninsula and much of the arid
Middle East causes this area of the atmo¬
sphere to be cooled even in mid-summer.
The fear is that the rise in albedo caused
by the destruction of vegetation in desert
margin areas such as the Sahel will cause
an increase in subsidence over these
regions with a still further intensification
of droughta positive feedback whereby
drought leads to intensified drought.
It is also possible that the widespread
loss of organic litter that accompanies
such events lessens the opportunity for
rain showers to fall from cloud systems
(which need "seeding" particles to bring
the rain down). It is hence conceivable
that the prolonged and severe character
of the Sahelian drought owed much to
the destruction of vegetation and soils by
the desperate efforts at survival made by
those involved in the calamity.
There is no easy way out of these
problems, and no simple, palatable advice
that a climatologist can offer. All the evi¬
dence points towards a recurrence of
severe and prolonged drought along most
desert margins at some date that we can¬
not now predict.
In Sahelian Africa such events have typi¬
cally occurred every two or three decades,
though not with enough regularity to
allow prediction. The decreasing phase of
rainfall often lasts a decade or more, so
that the culminating drought, when it
comes, attacks already enfeebled eco¬
systems and human societies.
Moreover, the 1970s have brought un¬
usually large extremes to many regions of
the world, for reasons at present undis¬
covered. Hence it is prudent to assume,
for strategic purposes, that in the next
few years droughts of unusual severity
may occur in the semi-arid world, and that
the desertification hazard is hence likely
to be high. Strategies for such hazards
should be articulated by the world com¬
munity; they will certainly be needed.
Control of land useessentially stabili¬
zation of a continuing, perennial vegetation
cover by careful control of stocking and
rainfed cultivation is the only direct mea¬
sure that can be advocated. The planned
green belts along the northern and south¬
ern flanks of the Sahara may achieve these
gains, even though they have little appar¬
ent effect on the large-scale climate (which
is governed by worldwide processes).
Drought cannot be avoided; but its effects
can be mitigated by good land manage¬
ment.
Rainfall enhancement experiments, now
planned or in progress in several parts of
the arid zone, should certainly be pressed
forward, but they are unlikely to produce
major changes of drought incidence.
Indeed their main effects may be to in¬
crease rainfall in already rainy years.
Large-scale flooding of desert basins and
irrigation of large areas are also likely to
produce only minor local effects on
climate.
There is some hope, finally, of a measure
of prediction of rainfall anomalies in these
areas. Recent research has demonstra¬
ted the existence of numerous teleconnec-
tions between arid zone rainfall and events
in distant places, notably sea temperature
anomalies. Some of these teleconnec-
tions have time-lags of two or three
months, which makes some foreshadowing
possible if one monitors the control areas
adequately (as is now possible with satel¬
lite technology). "
But for the moment the climatologist
must warn that droughts are recurrent,
prolonged and unavoidable aspects of
desert margin climates. Only rational,
wise use of the land and its resources can
avoid the calamity of desertification in the
wake of such drought. This may be poli¬
tically and economically a herculean
challenge, confronting countries that are
for the most part poor and ill-equipped to
accept it. Yet there is no real alternative;
and the challenge is really addressed to
the entire world community.
F. Kenneth Hare
10
