A VOICE FROM
THE THIRD WORLD
Towards
a 'new world order
of information'
by Ridha Najar
RIDHA NAJAR, Tunisian journalist and sociologist specializing in
the field of Information, is attached to the Institut de Presse et des
Sciences de l'Information (Press and Information Sciences Institute)
in Tunis. He has been technical adviser to the Director-General ot
the Tunisian Radio and Television Service and editor-in-chief of
Tunisia's television news.
INCONTESTABLY, 1976 was the
year in which the problems of
information and communication
became world-wide issues. A whole
series of conferences, symposia and
meetings on these subjects launched
a major debate and the issues were
fully aired at the 19th session of
Unesco's General Conference last
November in Nairobi, Kenya.
Today the countries of the Third
World are demanding a "new world
order of information". What does
this expression mean? What are
the immense stakes in this debate,
which poses questions that are at
one and the same time cultural, eco¬
nomic and political?
How can the countries of the Third
World take the first urgent steps to
improve communication between
themselves? How can they help to
limit the quantity of "one-way infor¬
mation" which for years has relegated
them to the role of consumerswithout
calling in question the very principle
of a free, balanced (and thereby fruit¬
ful) exchange of information between
nations?
How will it be possible progressi¬
vely to achieve the "balanced flow
of information" of which so much is f
21

ONE WAY ONLY...
Drawing from Graphis, Zurich © Shigeo Fukuda, Tokyo
Detail from a poster by the Japanese artist Shigeo Fukuda
heard today, as a means of achieving
better communication between peoples,
and hence promoting greater inter¬
national understanding and world
peace, which is so often jeopardized
by major historical and cultural mis¬
understandings?
The preamble to the resolution sub¬
mitted by Tunisia on behalf of the
non-aligned countries at the General
Conference in Nairobi points out that
Unesco has a contribution to make in
"liberating the developing countries
from the state of dependence result¬
ing from specific historical circum¬
stances which still characterizes
their communication and information
systems."
Just as people once referred to
"political and economic decoloniza¬
tion", they now speak of the "deco¬
lonization of information" which is
inseparable from the achievement of
a new universal humanism founded
on dialogue and mutual respect.
The developing countries continue
to "consume" world information as
it is conceived in the main by the
industrialized nations.
This information tends to maintain
the people of the Third World in a
state of alienation. It also keeps
the peoples of the Western countries
in a dangerous state of ignorance
regarding the realities of the Third
World countries, lulling them with the
complacent assumption that Western
industry, technology and culture, in
short, Western civilization as a whole,
are superior.
A serious matter, and one which
lends itself to all kinds of misunder¬
standings, is that in the name of a
certain concept of the "freedom" and
"free flow" of information, most of the
large Western news agencies cons¬
ciously or unconsciously disseminate
information which is fragmentary,
schematic and frequently distorted
concerning the complex realities of
the developing countries.
Conversely, the information which
they distribute in the Third World
countries is sometimes dangerously
loaded with the overtones of alien
cultures.
The Report of the Symposium of
Non-Aligned Countries on Communi¬
cation, held in Tunis in March 1976,
goes as far as considering that, for
these international agencies, infor¬
mation is "a commodity... in whose
processing and transmission inter¬
vene considerations which tend to
perpetuate a system of domination
in which the authentic interests of
the developing countries are consis¬
tently ignored or misinterpreted".
Is it surprising therefore that the
citizen of the Third World ends up
by accepting the vision of himself
presented by the mass media ?
The technological superiority of
the industrially developed countries
is constantly growing as a result of
modern progress, and their media
networks deluge the Third World
countries, which are far less well-
endowed with technical equipment
and trained personnel, with their
own brand of information.
There is no point in even men¬
tioning communication satellites.
Their "use by developing countries
is subject to the will of those who
possess the advanced technology,
and by it can decisively influence
the economic, political and social
reality of the developing countries" ( 1 ).
(1) Report of the Symposium of Non-
Aligned Countries on Communication, Tunis,
March 1976.
This, then, is the state of the world
as far as information is concerned.
In the 1970s it has forced the Third
World countries to make a harsh
appraisal of their position.
The newly-independent countries,
believing that they had defeated
direct colonialization, realized that
their development remained in jeo¬
pardy, that their demands for a new
economic order could not make them¬
selves heard, and that their cultural
identity could never be achieved
without a substantial change in the
world system of disseminating infor¬
mation.
What is the solution to this prob¬
lem ? How can better communi¬
cation between the countries of the
Third World be established? What
measures will help to achieve a more
balanced flow of information between
North and South, and vice versa?
In an attempt to find an answer
to these interrelated questions, let
us consider the action taken by the
non-aligned countries (see also article
page 18).
Meeting in Algiers, in September
1973, the Fourth Summit Conference
of Non-Aligned Countries recommen¬
ded that a joint plan of action should
be worked out in the field of commu¬
nications.
An international symposium concer¬
ned with ways and means of deve¬
loping the flow of information be¬
tween the non-aligned countries was
held in Tunis in March 1976. The
recommendations adopted at the
symposium lay in two main direc¬
tions:
the consolidation (or creation) of
telecommunication networks, ini¬
tially at the national and later at
the regional and continental levels;
22

the development of co-operation
and exchanges between the non-
aligned countries in all branches
of communication: news agencies,
the press, radio and television,
news films, the cinema, exhibitions,
festivals, tourism, research, the
training of personnel and so on.
Implementation of the first set of
recommendations would helpto bridge
the technological gap between the
industrialized countries and those of
the Third World.
The second group of directives
invites the non-aligned countries to
produce their own information and
circulate it amongst themselves in
order to counter-balance the essen¬
tially one-way flow of information
originating in the developed countries.
Far from wishing to supplant or
short-circuit the transnational news
agencieseven if this were possible-
intercommunication between the
Third World countries should seek
to fill the gaps which those agencies
leave (whether intentionally or other¬
wise), to compensate for their om¬
issions and above all to provide more
regular information gathered in the
countries which it concerns.
Nothing would appear more justi¬
fiable than the demand of peoples for
the fundamental right to voice their
own preoccupations, and to tell the
world about their life, their culture
and their efforts to achieve deve¬
lopment.
The most important point of all is
not merely that this intercommunica¬
tion should be established, but that
information should reach as wide a
public as possible.
This will be a long-term task, for it
will be necessary to stimulate fresh
pockets of interest in a public long
accustomed to "consuming" infor¬
mation originating in one part of the
world alone. National news agen¬
cies, cinema, press, and particularly
radio and television will have an
important role to play in this respect.
This multi-directional co-operation
calls for both adequate equipment
and trained personnel, and, together
with a general awareness of the
situation, a realization of the under¬
lying moral obligations.
Such an awareness now exists.
The problems of equipment and
personnel were indeed examined
at Nairobi by Unesco's General
Conference. What remains to be
achieved is agreement concerning an
international code of ethics in the field
of information. Here there will be
many difficulties, because points of
view still differ greatly, but there are,
nevertheless, certain grounds for
hope.
At Nairobi, the non-aligned coun¬
tries tabled a proposal which had
the merit of setting the debate
within a practical framework. This
proposal recommended that efforts
be made to create an improved ba¬
lance in the world flow of information,
with the establishment of a vast
programme of aid designed to assist
the developing countries in extending
their information systems.
The proposal was adopted unani¬
mously. It advocated in particular
measures to counteract disparities
in news transmission rates, and to
support regional groupings, news
agency pools and national and inter¬
national unions of journalists.
This programme of technical and
financial aid to the developing coun¬
tries, together with the international
research programme for communi¬
cation which has been recommended
by Unesco since 1970, should lead
to a reduction of the technological
gap between' the Third World and'
the industrialized countries.
If information is no longer to be
treated as a "commodity", and
become instead a "service" at the
disposal of all mankind, and if a new
world order in the field of information
is to be established, the Third World
countries must consolidate their
information media.
Here again, the problems should be
posed in the context of mutually
beneficial international co-operation,
rather than in a context of sterile
confrontation and pointless verbal
arguments.
Ridha Najar
23
