UNESCO
AND
LATIN
AMERICA'S
CULTURAL
HERITAGE
IN the past few years, Unesco has stepped up its activities
relating to the preservation and restoration of monuments
and other cultural treasures in Latin America, whose coun¬
tries are increasingly aware of the importance of their cultural
heritage as a factor in their cultural identity as well as its place
in their overall development.
In 1974, a regional programme was launched in six Andean
countries (Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Vene¬
zuela). Financed by the United Nations Development Pro¬
gramme (UNDP), it has been so successful that it has stimulat¬
ed a number of private initiatives as well. A wide variety of
activities has been initiated, in such fields as professional training,
the listing and preservation of monuments and other treasures,
and urban planning.
Since 1975, a training programme has been organized each
year at Cuzco (Peru), with courses on the preservation of archi¬
tectural monuments, archeological remains and other works of
art. Over a hundred students from the six countries in the region
have taken up scholarships to attend theoretical and practical
courses given by more than 40 international specialists.
Meanwhile, laboratory-workshops for the restoration of paint¬
ings and sculpture have been set up at La Paz (Peru) and Quito
(Ecuador), while the activities of existing laboratory-workshops
at Santiago de Chile, at Lima (Peru) and at Bogota (Colombia)
have been strengthened.
All the countries participating in this regional programme have
embarked on the urgent task of drawing up inventories of all'
their historic buildings and other art treasures, with the assistance I
of a large number of experts and consultants. . I
Restoration work on the church at
Checacupe, Peru, forms part of one
of the programmes for the
conservation of monuments and
other cultural treasures in Latin
America with which Unesco is
associated.
67

y Specialists in a wide range of fields have, been called upon to
deal with the problems of preserving sun-dried brick, stone,
paper, wood, pottery and metal, as well as the restoration of
colonial style buildings and questions related to museology and
the preservation and planning of historic towns.
Seminars and symposia have also been held with the parti¬
cipation of internationally-known experts on such themes as
"The Preservation of Historic Towns" (Quito, Ecuador), "Museo¬
logy" (Bogota, Colombia), and "The Listing of Monuments"
(Santiago de Chile).
A key target of the regional programme is to make the Latin
American cultural heritage more widely known and to encourage
the active participation of the people who live near the historical
monuments. To achieve this goal, exhibitions, lectures, sym¬
posia and round-table discussions have been organized, bro¬
chures and articles have been published, and radio and television
broadcasts have been produced. A notable example of these
activities is an exhibition entitled "5,000 Years of Peruvian Cloth",
presented at Lima in 1977.
Unesco is also participating in another major programme in
Latin America, the COPESCO plan, in which Peru and Unesco
are collaborating on the cultural and economic development of
the area between Cuzco and Lake Titicaca. The plan's objectives
are, firstly, to preserve monuments of the pre-Columbian and
colonial periods, particularly numerous in this area which was
once the centre of the Inca empire, and secondly, to foster the
growth of tourism. For the tourism attracted by these historic
monuments may help to promote the region's economic develop¬
ment and improve living standards, which are low.
In the preliminary stages of the plan, Unesco is putting its
experience in restoration techniques at Peru's disposal. The
execution of the work will be financed by the Peruvian govern¬
ment and the Inter-American Development Bank.
In accordance with the wishes of the Peruvian government,
Unesco will continue to provide technical assistance on indi¬
vidual restoration problems. Many specialists and consultants
are working with Peruvian technicians in such fields as archeology,
the restoration of architecture, painting and sculpture, as well as
museology and urban planning. A workshop-laboratory in Cuzco
is also serving as a centre for regional training courses given by
international experts.
In addition to these two major projects, Unesco is participating
in a number of other specialized activities related to the preser¬
vation of the cultural heritage of Latin American countries. With
Honduras, Unesco is collaborating on the preservation of the
Maya site at Copan and is assisting Guatemala in repairing the
damage caused by last year's earthquakes. Unesco is also
cooperating with Panama in drawing up an inventory of the
country's historic monuments, and with Brazil in organizing
training courses for specialists in the restoration of monuments
and in the preservation of historic towns and villages.
Finally, Unesco is working closely with Argentina and Uruguay
on the preservation and restoration of the ruins of Jesuit mis¬
sions; with Uruguay on the exploration and excavation of the
prehistoric site at Salto Grande; with Bolivia on the conservation
of archeological sites and the restoration of old Jesuit villages in
the east of the country; and with the Churubusco training centre
in Mexico.
