A citadel
in praise
of peace
THE Athenians began to build the
monuments that can be seen on the
Acropolis today shortly after they ,
made peace with Persia in 449 B.C.
Thirty years before, the Persian King,
Xerxes, had set out to conquer Greece.
Twice during the Persian campaign, the
Acropolis was captured and destroyed by
fire: in 480 by Xerxes himself, and in 497 by
his general Mardonius.
A year after the peace treaty was signed,
Pericles, the leader of the democratic party
and the most important figure in Athenian
politics after Themistocles, called on all the
Greeks to hold a conference at which they
could decide jointly on the reconstruction
of the shrines destroyed by the enemy.
This conference never took place, and
the Athenians began the work of recon¬
struction on their own in 447 B.C. In 445
a Thirty-Year Truce was declared between
Athens and Sparta and this favoured the
rapid progress of the enterprise.
The first task was to rebuild the temple
of Athena, the Parthenon. Work then
began on the Propylaea, but it was inter¬
rupted by the outbreak of the Peloponne-
sian War between Athens and Sparta in
431 B.C. Lastly, the Athenians tackled the
construction of the temple of Athena Nike
and the Erechtheum, which they built on a
site believed to have been occupied by the
palace of the mythical King Erechtheus.
As both an official centre of worship and
a citadel, as well as a place which evoked a
large number of precious traditions, the
Acropolis was of supreme importance to
the Athenians. It was the ancient city, the
immemorial seat of kings, demi-gods and
strange legendary creatures like the dual
figure of Erechtheus-Erichthonius, who
was both man and snake.
In the 6th century B.C., it had been the
seat of the "tyrant" Pisistratus and his
successors. The chorus of old men in
Aristophanes' comedy Lysistrata tells how
the people of Athens ousted the tyrants
with the help of the Spartan king Cleo-
ALEXIS DIAMANTOPOULOS, a specialist on ancient
and modern Greek drama, is a professor at the drama
school of the Greek National Theatre. The author of
an authoritative study on Aeschylus's Prometheus, he has
published many articles in the Journal of Hellenic Stu¬
dies as well as in Greek and French learned periodicals.
by Alexis Diamantopoulos
menés I, and then expelled Cleomenes
himself, who had set up a puppet govern¬
ment in their place.
In the Lysistrata, the people reminisce on
these events with great pride, for at the
time when the play appeared, in 411 B.C.,
democracy was in danger: the Athenians
had just suffered a disastrous defeat in
Sicily.
About a hundred years earlier, in 506
B.C., the young Athenian democracy had
erected its first trophy in a prominent place
beside the entrance to the Acropolis. The
trophy took the form of a bronze four-horse
chariot made from spoils abandoned on the
battlefield by Athens' northern neighbours,
the Boeotians, and by the Chalcidians, who
shared the aristocratic ideology of Sparta
24

THE GODDESS ATHENA was worshipped throughout the Greek world. Usually depicted
with helmet, spear and shield, she was also the personification of wisdom and patroness
of all arts and crafts. Head of Athena, above, is a detail from the Battle of the Giants, a
group of figures that once adorned the Old Temple of Athena on the Acropolis (c. 525 B.C.).
Only the foundations of the temple remain. Left, magnificent bronze statue of the goddess
with outstretched hand was found in 1959 at the Piraeus, the port of Athens.
and had invaded Athens in a vain attempt
to overthrow the new democracy.
It is significant that the inscription on
the base of the chariot does not give credit
for the victory to any specific military or
political leader, but simply to the "sons of
Athens". This is a rare example of a monu¬
ment to victory that mentions no names,
but only the anonymous soldiers who made
the triumph possible. It expresses the pride
which the people of Athens took in their
newborn democracy, and its site reflects
their profound love for the Acropolis, for
their "city" as it was called in all simplicity
by the chorus in the Lysistrata.
The Athenians had already revealed
their devotion to the sacred place in 480
B.C., as they prepared to meet the Persian
threat. As they waited for the enemy, they
disagreed about the correct interpretation
of the Delphic oracle, which had proph¬
esied that they would be saved by "wood¬
en walls". Herodotus tells how the old
guard elderly men who were still fit
enough for battle to make things difficult
for Xerxes dug themselves in behind the
wooden palisades of the Acropolis.
The other warriors followed Themisto-
cles, agreeing with the view of the majority
that the "wooden walls" referred to by the
oracle meant the strong navy which the
Athenians had mustered on Themistocles'
advice during the previous ten years.
But before embarking on the triremes
(galleys with three banks of oars) in which
they were to serve as hoplites or ordinary
foot-soldiers, the Athenian cavalrymen
rode to the Acropolis and hung up their
reins as an offering to the goddess Athena.
When the war was over, Themistocles,
the architect of victory, made it his first
priority to fortify the Acropolis. Even
today, massive blocks of stone from the
temples and shrines burned down by the
Persians can be seen in the upper part of
its northern wall. They served as a constant
reminder of the conquerors' desecrations.
There were many reasons why military
architecture should have been given top
priority. In 477 B.C., a powerful alliance
known as the Delian League was formed
under the leadership of Athens. Initially the
League was a purely defensive alliance, but
it soon embarked on a policy of aggression
and expansion which caused dissensions
and led to armed confrontation between
the allies.
There followed a six-year Egyptian
campaign, during which the Athenians
attempted at considerable cost to dislodge
the Persians and gain control over that
wealthy and fertile country. At about the
same time, they came to grips with Sparta
and her allies in a bid for hegemony over
the whole of mainland Greece.
As a result of these military activities, the
Athenians put all their efforts into fortifying
the city. The most important of their pro¬
jects was the construction of the Long
Walls, which transformed the area stretch
ing from the Acropolis in the west to the
port of Piraeus in the south and to Phaleron
in the north into one vast fortified triangle.
The fact that the Acropolis itself was
neglected for over three decades after the
great Greek victories and the Persian
retreat is an indication of Themistocles'
realism and efficiency in organizing and co¬
ordinating the economic, foreign and
military policy of Athens. He saw that the
best way to extend Athenian sovereignty
was to consolidate Athenian sea-power.
This neglect of the Acropolis also reveals
the extent of the ambitions harboured by
the young men in Pericles' radical party
who came to power in 462 B.C., after
Kimon, the leader of the aristocratic party,
had turned the Aegean into an Athenian
sea after his victory at the River Eurymedon
on the coast of Asia Minor in 468. These
ambitions went far beyond the expansion¬
ist dreams and plans of their political
predecessors, and they kept the city in a
state of war against both Persia and Sparta
for more than 10 years.
Athens finally made peace with Persia in
449 B.C., and with Sparta four years later.
At last the Athenians could devote them¬
selves to the reconstruction of the Acro¬
polis.
Like Pericles' famous funeral oration in
honour of the men who perished during
the first year of the Peloponnesian War,
but to an even greater degree, the Par¬
thenon was the result of a passionate
search for an act of faith. A similar search,
informed by the same passion, took place
during the same period in the Athenian
theatre.
The monuments on the Acropolis and
the great plays performed in the theatre
of Dionysus at the foot of the Rock have
often been presented as the artistic expres¬
sion of a people at the height of its glory,
demonstrating its pride in victory.
Yet it should be remembered that victory
preceded the sculptural and architectural
masterpieces on the Acropolis by more
than 30 years a whole generation. The
history of this hard-working, tenacious
generation and of their grim struggles
between the Persian Wars and the "Thirty-
Year Truce" with Sparta, reveals in much
clearer perspective the meaning of the
monuments built on the Acropolis during
the Golden Age. For these monuments
were, in fact, dedicated to the defeated as
well as to the victors.
They undoubtedly reflect the victory
over the Persians, which gave the Athen¬
ians the independence and power to res¬
tore on their city's sacred site monuments
which expressed more perfectly than be¬
fore their political freedom, their convic¬
tions and their aims.
But these monuments also reflect the
Athenians' sense of defeat in their first
headlong confrontation with historya
defeat that came after 50 years of military
preparations and struggles, first for the
survival of Athens and Greece as a whole,
and then for the extension and consoli¬
dation of their civilization.
These long and arduous struggles seem
to have filled the Athenians with amaze- k
ment at the infinite prospects opening upP
25

y before them in their new role as masters of
the Aegean Sea. But they had also expe¬
rienced doubt and disappointment. So
many projects had ended tragically, their
outcome being left to the mercy of Chance,
the new goddess of adventurers, rather
than to knowledge and experience.
One cannot help wondering what the
Athenian craftsmen, seeking as they did
nothing less than perfection, must have
thpught of the disastrous blunders commit¬
ted by the sorcerers' apprentices of the
expansionist policy.
For all those magnificent artists and for
the multitude of clear-sighted Athenian
men and women, the Parthenon represent¬
ed a kind of home-coming, a return to
Ithaca after a nightmarish Odyssey outside
the tranquil confines of traditional life. It
was a return to a reality they could manage
and control, using clean, hard materials
they could trust, unlike the bloodstained,
treacherous stuff of History.
For History had taught the Athenians ,
some cruel lessons. There had been bloo¬
dy, inglorious defeats, such as the disaster
at Drabescus in 465 B.C., when 10,000
men, women and children (an enormous
number, considering the population of
Athens at the time) were sent to Thrace to
found a colony and were virtually annihilat¬
ed by the indigenous population.
There had been disasters in Egypt,
where the Athenians fought for six conse¬
cutive years (460-454 B.C.). Disaster at
Tanagra in Boeotia, where the Athenians
were routed by the Spartans and Boeotians
in 458 B.C. and suffered the humiliation
of seeing their victors set up an arrogant
memorial, in the form of a gold shield made
from the Athenian spoils, on the newly-
built temple of Olympia.
Disaster struck again in 447 B.C. At
Koroneia in Boeotia, many Athenian volun¬
teers of them scions of noble fami¬
lies along with their general,
Tomides, and Cleinias, the father of Alci-
biades, in an ambitious attempt to extend
Athenian sovereignty to the fertile regions
on the mainland north of Athens.
Another spectacular failure had been the
deterioration of relations between the
Athenians and their allies in the islands and
coastal regions of the Aegean. Many of
these allies renounced their treaties with
Athens and fought to regain their indepen¬
dence. The toll in human lives was high
and opened a deep rift of hatred between
the allied cities.
When their great victories over the
Persian empire had opened the way to
mastery of the Aegean, the Athenians had
been faced with a difficult choice. Now
they were seized with doubts as to the
Tightness of the historical course they had
chosen.
Sculpture in marble is an austere art that
admits no mistakes. As in politics, a false
move cannot be erased. But the Parthenon
was built by craftsmen who had complete
mastery of their material and who could
match the finished work to the design they
had in mind with absolute precision. After
the harsh lessons of History, these 'men
must have felt a profound need for consis¬
tency and coherence.
The Parthenon was built in a spirit of
ruthless perfectionism according to a plan
that anticipated and forestalled any alte¬
rations that might prove necessary when it
emerged on the actual site, and was con¬
fronted with the surrounding landscape,
the horizon, the encircling mountains and
the bright sunlight.
The Parthenon reveals the sense of
poetry of the Athenian people, who found
artistic and intellectual inspiration in the
Attic countryside bathed in its unique
limpid light.
But it also shows how the ordeal result¬
ing from their society's radical change of
direction and from the disasters caused by
its expansionist dreams finally found
expression in a passion for artistic per¬
fection.
Thé monuments on tne Acropolis express
for all time that yearning for an end to the
kind of historical opportunism and expan¬
sionist aberrations which Euripides casti¬
gates in the Hippolytus, when Aphrodite
and Theseus wrathfully claim obedience
from obstinate and foolish men.
The harmonious relationship between
the Parthenon and its environment holds a
lesson that impresses itself on the mind
without rhetoric or exaggeration. It is
noteworthy that the symbol to which the
advocates of power politics attached most
importance, the gold and ivory statue of
the goddess Athena in full war attire, was
hidden away in the inner part of the temple.
In seeking and achieving this harmonious
relationship with the surrounding land¬
scape, the inspired artists of 5th-century
Athens were actually finding their way
back to their origins, back to the reality
which their own land offered them. The
Parthenon and the other monuments on
the Acropolis guided the Athenian back to
his familiar horizon, enclosed by the islands
of Aegina and Salamis, making him feel
that what he saw before him was good and
beautiful.
The Parthenon high on its rock and the
tragic and comic poets in the theatre of
Dionysus below each in their own way
celebrated peace. '
In 431 B.C., the year in which the Pelo-
ponnesian War broke out, Euripides prais¬
ed in his Medea the rare gifts and incompa¬
rable destiny of the Athenians and their
divine fortune in possessing such a land
beneath such a sky. There is no mention of
courage nor military valour, nor of great
conquests.
Euripides simply celebrates the blessed
land of Harmony and the nine Muses. This
is no facile phrase-making but a confession
of faith, the affirmation of a conscious
choice, a vote for peace:
The people of Athens, sons of
Erechtheus,
have enjoyed their prosperity
Since ancient times. Children of blessed
gods,
They grew from holy soil unscorched by
invasion.
Among the glories of knowledge their
souls are pastured;
They walk always with grace under the
sparkling sky.
There long ago, they say, was born
golden-haired Harmony,
Created by the nine virgin Muses of
Pieria.
They say that Aphrodite dips her cup
In the clear stream of the lovely Cephisus;
It is she who breathes over the land the
breath
Of gentle honey-laden winds; her flowing
locks
She crowns with a diadem of sweet-
scented roses.
And sends the Loves to be enthroned
beside Knowledge,
And with her to create excellence in
every art.
Then how will such a city,
Watered by sacred rivers,
How will Athens welcome
You, the child-killer
Whose presence is pollution?
Contemplate the blow struck at a child.
Weigh the blood you take upon you.
Medea, by your knees.
By every pledge or appeal we beseech
you,
Do not slaughter your children!
(translated by Philip Vellacott)
This choice is also apparent in the monu¬
ments of the Acropolis, in their conception,
in their relationship to the landscape, in
their every detail. It emphasizes the impor¬
tance of the traditional way of life. The
Panathenaic Procession on the frieze of the



Skilful horsemanship
was held in high esteem
by the Athenians. At
the city's Panathenaic
Games, held in honour
of Athena, jockeys
showed their prowess
in fiercely competitive
horseback and chariot
races. All the nobility
of horses is expressed in
this spirited head from a
marble statue in the
Acropolis Museum. It
was carved by a Greek
artist c. 490-480 B.C.
Parthenon is its most eloquent illustration.
Starting from the western side, the
procession moves along the north and
south sides to the eastern front of the
temple where the gods sit peacefully,
welcoming the Athenian citizens. No such
democratic representation can be found
elsewhere, at Olympia, for example.
Inside the temple stood Phidias' gold and
ivory statue of Athena, the formidable ally
of her people colossal in proportion to
the high ceiling, and therefore superhuman
in the eyes of men. Outside, the gods,
shown as rivals on the western pediment,
are transformed on the eastern pediment
and the frieze into peaceful subjects of the
primeval Mother Earth, restraining man
from the temptations of overweening pride
and violence.
Alexis Oiamantopoulos
I
