a*;
A WINNING BATTLE
AGAINST
DESTRUCTION
Desert science is turning
the steppes
of Central Asia green
by Agadjhan G. Babaev
and Nikolai S. Orlovsky
»
4% V
Wir.
'&Mw
THE desert and semi-desert regions of
the Soviet Union cover some 2 1/2
million square kilometres, mainly in
Central Asia and southern Kazakhstan.
This broad swathe of inhospitable land,
which measures 1,200 kilometres from
north to south and 2,500 kilometres from
east to west, is subject to a great variety
of natural conditions and is, in fact, a
source of considerable wealth.
Although the surface under irrigation
(some 7 million hectares) accounts for
only 3 per cent of all the cultivated land of
the U.S.S.R., and 61 per cent of its irri¬
gated land, it nevertheless produces the
Soviet Union's entire crop of cottonseed
oil, one-third of its natural fibres (including
all its cotton and hemp), 76 per cent of its
raw silk and more than 23 per cent of its
vegetable oil. A further 20 million hec¬
tares set aside for irrigation constitute an
impressive reserve for future food produc¬
tion.
In addition, the grazing lands of the
desert nourish the karakul sheep which
provide the country's entire output of
astrakhan, as well as flocks which pro¬
duce one-third of its mutton and 16 per
cent of its wool.
AGADJHAN GELDIEVITCH BABAEV is a Soviet
specialist in desert studies. A corresponding member
of the U. S. S. R. Academy of Sciences and President
of the Turkmen S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, he
directed the Turkmen Desert Institute from 1960 to
1975. An editor of the review "Desert Reclamation",
he is also the author of numerous works, including
one on the reclamation of oasis sands in Turkmenistan.
NIKOLAI SERGEIVITCH ORLOVSKY, Soviet clima¬
tologist and agrometeorologist, is Deputy Director of
the Desert Institute of the Turkmen S.S.R. Academy
of Sciences.
Photo © Yuri Trankvilitzki, Moscow
18

i¿*4
rV
iBi «*-.
In the arid and semi-arid zones of Central Asia, man has pitted himself against ihe desert for centuries. Today,
thanks to sand-stabilizing techniques, irrigation, soil reclamation and the creation of natural reserves, it is
possible to protect and even to extend farm and grazing land. These are now major crop-growing areas in the
U.S.S.R.. where cotton is especially important. Shown here sitting in front of a huge pile of cotton, these
farmers from a kolkhoz in Tadjikistan discuss plans for the next harvest.
19

And this is not all. The desert also
yields 34 per cent of the Soviet Union's
natural gas, 13 per cent of its coal, 50
per cent of its sodium sulphate and one-
third of its phosphates, together with
quantities of potassium and sodium chlo¬
ride, barium sulphate and other minerals.
The desert once served as natural graz¬
ing land. Until 50 or 60 years ago, live¬
stock raising in our country was based on
the nomadic way of life. According to the
season, the herdsmen led their animals
over huge areas in search of the best
pastures, counting on favourable years
and never doubting that the desert would
continue to yield food for their flocks, and
demand almost nothing in return.
Today, all that has changed. Settlement
has replaced nomadism, and the pastures
are used on a regular basis.
Land degraded as a result of over-stock¬
ing or deforestation is withdrawn from
service for a period of two or three years,
to permit plant improvement and the re-
establishment of vegetation.
The exploitation of grassland in desert
areas takes account of all the possible
social, economic and ecological conse¬
quences, and the creation of new pastures
makes use of the experience handed
down from generation to generation of
nomad herdsmen, especially as far as the
provision of water is concerned. The old
tradition of collecting rainwater in clay-
lined trenches has been refined by modern
engineering techniques, and reliable me¬
thods of freshening mineralized water are
being developed.
If the ancient desert bred herdsmen, it
also bred specialists in irrigated agriculture
in the vicinity of natural springs, where
oases created the most favourable condi¬
tions for human settlement. Tashkent,
Ferghans, Samarkand, Bukhara, Khorezm,
and other oases, are strung like huge
pearls along shallow rivers, and cover
immense areas.
During the past 30 or 40 years, irrigated
farming has undergone tremendous, care¬
fully-planned development, as may be seen
from the following two examples.
The Golodnaya step (literally, . "The
Barren Steppe") is an area of more than
one million hectares, situated on the
southern fringe of the Kyzylkum Desert.
Irrigation was begun as long ago as 1908,
but due to the limited natural permeabi¬
lity of the soil and the generally low level
of technology and agricultural know-how
at the time, the irrigated lands rapidly be¬
came salt-ridden. It took several decades
before the initial irrigation systems were
perfected and new systems introduced,
and before closed horizontal and vertical
drains offered protection against salting.
The Golodnaya project fully justified a
"comprehensive" approach to desert re¬
clamation, involving the creation of a
construction industry capable of produc¬
ing not only hydrotechnical installations
but also factories, housing and public
buildings.
Today, the steppe remains barren only
in name. Railways and highways, water-
and gas-pipelines and electric grids criss¬
cross the territory between scores of cot
ton farms, poultry stations, market gardens
and vineyards. Where their grandfathers
saw only a desert, today's children look
out on a rich and fertile land, the centre
of the country's most important cotton-
producing area, which annually yields as
much as 500,000 tons of raw cotton, toge¬
ther with a considerable amount of other
agricultural produce.
The Karakum Canal is the world's long¬
est man-made waterway. Already mea¬
suring a thousand kilometres from end to
end, it will be 1,400 kilometres long when
complete. Linking the Amu-Darya (the
ancient river Oxus), with the Caspian Sea,
the canal has a triple function.
Firstly, it is the key to the world's
largest desert irrigation project. Some
300,000 hectares on its banks already
produce almost half of the Turkmen
S.S.R.'s crop of high-quality cotton, and
its water will eventually irrigate more than
a million hectares. Secondly, the Kara¬
kum is a ship-carrying canal. And finally,
its waters contain a thriving population of
fish, which not only keep the canal
clear of weeds, but also delight Turkmen
gourmets!
Many other irrigation canals, driven into
the very heart of the desert and watering
what were hitherto sparsely vegetated and
arid grazing lands, have changed the face
of Central Asia.
Man himself is moving deeper into the
desert, attracted by its newly-discovered
industrial potential. Factories are spring¬
ing up in the vicinity of mineral deposits.
But man and industry alike require fresh
water. One of the U. S.S.R.'s first pipe¬
lines to carry water across the desert was
the Yaskhansky pipeline, serving Nebit-
Dag, Cheieken and other towns in west¬
ern Turkmenistan. The construction of a
complex network of pipelines on the
Mangyshlak Peninsula has made it possi¬
ble to build huge industrial centres in the
desert, including the copper works at
Dzhezkazgan (Kazakhstan), the oil ins¬
tallations at Nebit-Dag and Cheieken
(Turkmenistan) and the gold-mines at
Zeravshan (Uzbek S.S.R.), and to supply
the industrial chemists and electrical engi¬
neers of Navoi, in the same Republic, with
all the water they need.
Desalinated sea water is used to meet
industrial and human requirements in
20

Combatting aridity in Central Asia
In desert reclamation, top priority is given to stopping sand drifts and
finding water. To do this, special instruments are brought in to study
the formation of sand hills (at left and below). Such major undertakings
as the Karakum Canal (above) in Turkmenistan are today bringing
water to Soviet Central Asia. When it is completed, the canal will
run from Amu-Darya to the Caspian Sea, covering a distance of
1,400 kilometres.
desert areas which have no access to
natural fresh water.
Shevchenko is the only Soviet city^and
one of the few cities in the worldto be
entirely served in this way. Here, the
world's first nuclear-powered desalination
plant produces 120,000 cubic metres of
water every 24 hours, distributed econom¬
ically through three pipelines.
The first carries drinking water, the
second partially purified water for indus¬
trial and domestic use and for watering
the city's parks and gardens, and the
third, sea water for use by the municipal
authorities for street-cleaning and other
similar purposes. The 80,000 inhabitants
of Shevchenko are allotted as much water
as those of any major Soviet city, such as
Moscow, Leningrad or Kiev, and each
citizen enjoys almost 10 square metres of
green space, planted with trees.
Only 40 years ago, Nebit-Dag, rn the
Turkmen S.S.R., was little more than a
halt on the Central Asian railway. Not a
blade of grass, and not a drop of water
(its supply came in tanks from Krasno-
vodsk). Today, Nebit-Dag is one of the
largest and most modern cities of the
Republic, and the capital of the Turkmen
oil industry. Walking in its tree-lined
streets, the visitor forgets that a barren
plain lies all around the city, while its in¬
habitants rightly claim that they drink the
best-tasting water of any desert brought
from an underground lake at Yaskhansky,
120 kilometres further east.
Among other examples of the transfor¬
mation of the desert when water is piped
in, we may mention Bekdash, where
sulphate is extracted, and Khauzkhan, a
settlement created at the same time as a
huge reservoir, which was the first stage
in the creation of a modern paradox, the
"desert fishing industry".
the carefully planned and comprehen¬
sive approach, which mobilizes the latest
achievements of science and technology,
makes it possible to predict the processes
which lead to desertification, and to trans¬
form harsh desert conditions into a more
stable and favourable environment. Man
no longer flees the desert, but goes there
to live and workand not merely to work,
but also to relax and restore his health at
such well-known resorts as Bairam-Ali (for
its climate), Archman (for its waters) and
Molla-Kara (for its mud baths). In the
past 10 years, the population of the desert
regions of the U.S.S.R. has grown from
20.4 million to 40.4 million.
The modern battle with drifting sands
is waged on the basis of a careful study of
the mechanics of dune movement and
accumulation, of the ecology of sand-
binding vegetation and of the conditions
under which trees grow in the desert, etc.
During the past 25 years, 720,000 hectares
in the Karakum and Kyzylkum deserts
have been planted with trees and shrubs.
The shifting sands have been checked,
pastures have been improved and forest
belts have been created to protect crop
farming and animal husbandry.
The drifting of sand into oasis areas
creates great problems for the cotton
growers of Central Asia. In the Turkmen
S.S.R. alone, more than 500,000 hectares
21

i are threatened. But the latest experiments
at the Desert Institute of the Turkmen
Academy of Sciences have produced an
optimum technology for agriculture in
sandy areas, making it possible to pro¬
duce up to 900 quintals of green sorghum
(the locally-developed "Turkmen-I" varie¬
ty), and up to 600 quintals of maize per
hectare.
Hitherto unexploited land in the vicinity
of water supplies is being brought under
cultivation, thus liberating improved land
for more profitable crops, market gardens
and vineyards. At the same time, irriga¬
tion water is being used more sparingly,
costly sand-binding measures are no long¬
er necessary and there is no further danger
of salting.
Protective measures are an essential
part of the exploitation of the natural
resources of the desert. Eleven reserves,
covering a total area of 62,500 hectares,
have been created in the Central Asian
deserts for the preservation and study of
their ecosystems.
In the U.S.S.R., the protection of the
environment, including deserts, is in trie
hands of the State. Special nature con¬
servancy laws have been adopted by all
the republics of the Soviet Union.
Leopard-hunting is absolutely forbidden.
The hemione, a uniquely Central Asian
animal and the pride of the fauna of Turk¬
menistan, has been saved; more than a
thousand now live in the shelter of the
Badkhyz reserve, and several hundred
have been transferred to the island of
Barsakelms in the Aral Sea. The saiga
(a rare species of antelope) has been
brought back from the frontiers of extinc-'
tion, and its population now numbers two
million.
The many birds which winter in the
southern Caspian region have been pro¬
tected for a considerable time, and the
area of the Krasnovodsk bird sanctuary
has recently been extended, while the
Karakum Canal offers an additional win¬
tering-place. During particularly hard win¬
ters, the birds are fed from motorboats
and helicopters. Even venomous snakes
are now protected.
Conservation by no means implies let¬
ting the desert have all its own way. As
the scientists at the Repetek reserve have
shown, there are many occasions when
an over-zealous approach to conservation
can endanger, rather than safeguard, its
already meagre biological resources.
A careful approach, based on the infant
discipline of desert science, can transform
this harsh environment into one in which
man can live and work, and result in the
creation of well-watered fields and grazing-
lands, mining and manufacturing indus¬
tries, health centres, resorts and all the
facilities for tourism. As the 18th-century
Turkmen poet Seidi observed, "All land is
wretched, compared to this desert."
I Agadjhan G. Babaev and
Nikolai S. Orlovsky
Balanced development
Once considered useless for agriculture, this clay soil is now productive. When troughs are
dug (at top), enough rainwater is caught to irrigate the soil, and tall-stalked plants can
grow (lower photo). Nonetheless, only 20 per cent of such land should be set aside for
cultivation in Central Asia, according to the Soviet specialist Andrei G. Bannikov.
Vice-President of the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources, Mr. Bannikov believes that priority should be given to grazing land, which
protects the natural ecosystem. "If the norms for cattle-raising are observed, it is possible
to let domestic and wild ungulates graze simultaneously." This does, in fact, help wild
fauna to develop: "The irrigation of deserts, and particularly the Karakum Canal and
reservoir, bring a considerable increase in fauna, and especially water fowl. Today, there
are from 600,000 to 800,000 ducks, geese, and so forth, that winter on the water basins that
man has created in the desert."
22
