VICTORIA OCAMPO' S GIFT
On 15 January 1973, Mme Victoria
Ocampo and her sister Mme Angelica
Ocampo, of Argentina, donated to
Unesco a group of estates including
the spacious Villa Ocampo (right) at
San Isidro, Buenos Aires. In accor¬
dance with the wishes of its donor,
Victoria Ocampo, the villa will be used
"for promotion, research, experimen¬
tation and development of activities
related to culture, literature, art and
social communication, which are
aimed at improving the quality of
human life...." The villa is particularly
appropriate as a setting for "perma¬
nent studios or for programmes of
research, experimentation or produc¬
tion related to the cinema, television,
theatre, music and literature, for trans¬
lation or new forms of expression and
communication, as well as new types
and techniques of cultural and artistic
creation and art education."
by Jacques Rigaud
IT would be easy enough to see Victoria
Ocampo's life and work as the intel¬
lectual adventures of a rich heiress in
love with literature. But to do this would
not only be committing a grave injustice
towards a woman who has fought many
battles and taken many risks, it would also
ignore her remarkable achievement as a
pioneer in promoting the meeting of
cultures.
Victoria Ocampo was born at the end of
the last century, into a family whose his¬
tory is closely interwoven with that of
the Argentinian Republic itself. She en¬
joyed the happy childhood and cosmopoli¬
tan education of the privileged classes of
that time, and like many of her kind mignt
have been satisfied with the cushioned
and glossy existence of the rich. However,
her life was to take a different course.
JACQUES RIGAUD is Unesco's Assistant Director-
General for programme support and administration.
A precocious intellect, a generosity of
heart and mind which spurred her to ac¬
tion, indefatigable energy, insatiable curio¬
sity, courage begging to be put to the
test, an unrivalled gift for rallying her
friends and leading them into the frayall
these qualities destined Victoria Ocampo
to a life of creativity and commitment.
It all began in 1924 when she invited
Radindranath Tagore, who had prolonged
a stay in Argentina for health reasons, to
her family home at San Isidro, near
Buenos Aires. Through this encounter,
Victoria not only discovered the work of
the great Indian writer and the fascination
of Indian culture, she also discovered her
own vocation in life, which was to enter¬
tain, encourage, help and introduce to one
another writers, artists and creators of all
kinds. Ever since then Victoria Ocampo
has been fulfilling her mission at a pace
which seems to have made her forget to
grow old.
She works in the two houses with
which she has become identified; her stone
house at San Isidro and a spiritual dwell¬
ing of her own creation, the review Sur
("South").
In the first, she has been hostess to
some of the great names of this century:
José Ortega y Gasset, Igor Stravinsky,
Walter Gropius, Le Corbusier, Pierre Drieu
la Rochelle, Pablo Neruda, Jacques Mari-
tain, Ernest Ansermet, Albert Camus,
André Malraux, Saint-John Perse, Jules
Supervielle, Graham Greene, Roger
Caillois, Indira Gandhi, Alain Robbe-Grillet
and Michel Butor. There is no end to the
list of distinguished visitors whose pres¬
ence can still be felt in this opulent home
which has become a temple of culture.
As for Sur, which Victoria Ocampo has
headed since its creation in 1931, there is
probably no other review which can rival
it for boldness, discernment and eclecti¬
cism. During my visit to the Ocampo villa
in 1976 in the nostalgic mellowness of an
Argentinian autumn, the scent of dead
leaves mingling with that of late-blooming
flowers, Victoria proudly showed me the
complete collection of her review. I picked
up the first volume and, while leafing
through it, came across the signature of
Alejo Carpentier in the first issue. It took
considerable perspicacity to publish the
work of this prodigious novelist (see arti¬
cle page 8) 46 years ago.
When a complete analytical index and
anthology are made of Sur, it will be
obvious from the contributors (1), the sub¬
jects treated and the intellectual curiosity
and tolerance it has always shown that it
is an institution of international intellectual
cooperation.
A recent issue, which appeared at the
end of 1976, deals with translating, a vital
but neglected aspect of the inter-relation-
(1) They include Lorca, Joyce, Kazantzaki, Faulkner,
Sartre, Toynbee, Heidegger, Pirandello, Gabriela Mis¬
tral and Thomas Mann.
64

FOR WORLD CULTURE
Far left, Victoria Ocampo in 1947 with
Unesco's first Director-General, Julian
Huxley. Left, Mme Ocampo a few years
later with the French writer André
Malraux.
ship of cultures. The problems posed by
translating were treated in the rigorous,
challenging and imaginative fashion for
which Victoria Ocampo is famous.
Despite all this, Victoria Ocampo's life
has not been confined to running a house
and a literary review. She is a writer her¬
self, as well as a citizen whose commit¬
ment has on occasion landed her in prison.
For several years she was president of
Argentina's National Arts Fund. An inde¬
fatigable traveller, she always keeps her¬
self informed about the latest intellectual
developments.
She has far too strong a personality to
steer clear of controversy. People of her
calibre demand respect but they also tend
to provoke strong reactions. Yet it is
almost worth airing criticism of her simply
to see how easily it can be refuted.
Though she has sometimes been criti¬
cized for being too cosmopolitan and
though it is true that she has done a lot to
introduce art and literature from other
countries to Argentina, no one is more
deeply Argentinian than she.
As the French writer Etiemble, who is
by no means given to flattery, wrote in
1962: "She who for 30 years has spent the
better part of her fortune in order to print
and distribute the works of writers whom
she valued, whether they sold or not, and
whether they were Yankee, Argentinian
or European; she who for 30 years, and
contrary to all business sense, has been
giving the world the best Spanish-language
literary review how could anyone think
that she has not served her country?"
Her efforts to promote the international
reputation of Borges, Sàbato and many
other Argentinian writers are proof of her
deep-seated attachment to a land whose
cultural identity she has done so much to
uphold.
She has also been criticized for prefer¬
ring European culture. But Tagore, Nehru
and a number of Japanese writers have
acknowledged their indebtedness to her,
and Octavio Paz has said how much the
whole of Latin America owes her. The
ethnologist Alfred Métraux once remarked
that Victoria Ocampo "also considers her¬
self American in the geographical sense of
the term: she likes to discover themes and
elements which are common to the litera¬
ture of the New World and which set it
apart from that of Europe".
Can she be dismissed as a mere woman
of letters? No, for she has done much for
architects like Le Corbusier and musicians
like Ansermet and Stravinsky, and Sur has
shown continuing interest in the social
sciences.
And, lest one should be tempted to
think that it was easy for a member of the
upper classes like her to lead such a
brilliant life, the fact is that it was by no
means easy for Victoria Ocampo to pro¬
mote the emancipation of women in
Argentina during the 1930s not just in
words but in action, and later to risk not
only her personal fortune but also her
freedom because of her commitment. In
short, she paid for her privileges by con¬
tinually taking risks and by laying herself
open to misunderstanding and even insults.
Lastly, some might be tempted to say
that Victoria Ocampo's honours list is
now slightly out of date, and that the
world has moved on to other things. Even
here the would-be critic must accept that
Victoria Ocampo not only extended a
warm welcome to the nouveau roman,
but she also helped, and still helps, young
writers.
Always receptive to new ideas from
wherever they come, she is quite defin¬
itely not one of those who, like the French
19th-century politician and philosopher
Royer-Collard, admit sadly that "at my
age one no longer reads, one re-reads."
Victoria has always been enthusiastic
about new talent and ideas and quick to
tire of anything that smacks of the estab¬
lishment. Like Borges, Sàbato and Cor¬
tázar, she is consumed by a desire to
penetrate beneath the surface of things,
a refusal to be taken in by shadow-play.
To be questioned by her is a far from
restful process: she challenges, defies and
harries her interlocutor until she has dis¬
covered the truth and then, as Octavio
Paz has written, she can be seen "with
outstretched hand, ready to grasp another
hand".
Victoria Ocampo's ties with Unesco date Y
65

, back a long way. It would have been
surprising indeed if a pioneer in interna¬
tional intellectual cooperation such as she
had not shown interest in an institution
whose purpose is to provide a permanent
basis for just such cooperation. When
Julian Huxley visited Buenos Aires, and
talked to Victoria Ocampo about Unesco,
his words must have made a deep impres¬
sion, for years later she bequeathed her
two houses at San Isidro and Mar del
Plata to the Organization so that her work
there may be continued.
To this end, Unesco is making plans for
the future in close collaboration with the
donor. As Victoria Ocampo's life has
clearly shown, progress in the field of cul¬
ture often depends on the personal initia¬
tive of a smail number of people, on the
visionary daring of a few possessors of
creative talent, and also on the actions of
people like herself who have a gift for
. making things happen, creating needs,
forging connexions and inducing the tal¬
ented to exceed their own limits.
Nonetheless, once bold initiatives of
this sort have been taken, it is up to the
community to take over from the indivi¬
dual and guarantee continuity without
destroying any of the initial vitality.
The noble concept of the meeting of
cultures, which forms the cornerstone of
Unesco's mission, is perfectly embodied in
the person of Victoria Ocampo. By carry¬
ing on her work and lauding her example
which can be transposed to any
time or place Unesco will remember the
most precious element of a personal, and
to that extent ephemeral, life's adventure,
namely the fervour praised by the poet
Saint-John Perse:
"There are 'real' people who by their
very nature make us believe in them.
Victoria Ocampo can be said to have con¬
ducted her life's work like a great tree of
her native land; or better yetsince trees
are bound by their roots like the impe¬
rious Rio de la Plata which dominated her
childhood, adolescence and years of
mature womanhood, and whose pulsing
rhythm still resounds through her being.
This river is as true to its mighty course
as to its wedding with the sea and to its
distant alliance with far-out ocean currents
that sweep it towards other shores.
"Dear Victoria, great force of strength
and candour, inalienable and possessive
just* like your own Rio de la Plata, there
are many of us in Europe, America and
Asia who consider you one of the finest
exponents of the Argentinian spirit, which
expresses itself so proudly in you, a com¬
plex soul of many facets, both prodigal
and fatalist, passionate in its enthusiasms
yet regardless of the consequences in
moments of action and indifferent to
continuity."
This fine tribute calls, however, for one
comment: "indifferent to continuity"
should now read as "determined to con¬
tinue"a task Unesco has taken upon
itself.
Jacques Rigaud

