ONSLAUGHT
ON THE NILE
Shifting dunes threaten
Egypt's breadbasket
by Farouk El-Baz
FAROUK EL-BAZ taught geology at the universities
of Assiut (Egypt), Missouri (U.S.A.) and Heidelberg
(Fed. Rep. of Germany). Since 1973, he has been Re¬
search Director of the Centre for Earth and Planetary
Studies at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington,
D. C His work there entails analysis of the scientific
results of the Apollo flights and their application to
earth and planetary sciences. Among his numerous
geological publications, he is co-author of Nasa 's 'The
Moon as Viewed by Lunar Orbiter".
A composite view of
Egypt, made up of 60
photographs taken and
transmitted from a
"Landsat" in orbit 920
kilometres above Earth,
clearly shows the dark
band of fertile soil
bordering the Nile, as
well as the triangle of
the delta and the
Fayoum oasis. Two-
thirds of the photo shows
desert to the west of the
Nile. In the lower part
of the photo can be seen
broad parallel curves of
sand dunes.
WHEN we consider the dramatic
contrast between farmland and
desert in Egypt, we realize that
Egypt is truly "the gift of the Nile". This
mighty river meanders through the waste¬
land and brings life to a narrow strip of
land bordering its course.
If viewed from hundreds of miles above
the Earth, the Nile would look like a fragile
tree stem, barely supporting the branches
of the triangular-shaped delta. The Faiyum
Oasis, farmland reclaimed from the desert
by the ancient Egyptians, would look like
a solitary, heart-shaped leaf.
To portray the Nile and its farmland as
such a frail entity is particularly suitable
because of the imminent threat of shifting
sands from the Western (Libyan) Desert.
This great- expanse of dr/ wilderness
covers over 686,000 square kilometres or
more than two-thirds the area of Egypt.
It includes several oases enclosed in de¬
pressions.
The flat surface of this rocky desert is
crossed in many places by parallel belts of
sand dunes. The largest concentration of
these is known as the Great Sand Sea,
whose area of 140,000 square kilometres
is more than the combined total area of
Belgium, Denmark and the Netherlands.
Dune sand in the Western Desert is
migrating in a south-southeast direction,
with the prevailing winds from the north
and northwest. The migration is constant k
23

Advancing dunes that threaten the Valley of the Nile are clearly visible in the
upper right-hand part of this aerial view, taken to the northwest of Assiut, about
half-way between Cairo and Aswan. A few protective hedges made of palm
fronds can be seen on the edge of the dunes; they help to slow down the
encroaching sands but are not sufficient to stop them.
and relentless since the dunes can easily
overwhelm both natural and man-made
objects in their way. These dunes are
large enough to be easily detected on
space photographs. The last group of
photographs of Egypt were taken by the
American astronauts of the Apollo-Soyuz
mission.
In one colour photograph taken of the
area just west of the Nile Delta, I recogniz¬
ed three zones that did not correspond to
mapped geological formations. To study
these zones, I travelled to the Western
Desert in the company of five geologists
from Ain Shams University in Cairo. In
the field it was realized that the three
zones corresponded to arable soil com¬
posed of sand, calcium carbonate and
clay particles; a sheet of active sand with
sparse vegetation; and a rocky desert sur¬
face covered with pebbles. The youngest
sands are in the form' of southward-
migrating linear dunes.
These dunes are 5 to 40 kilometres in
length and a few kilometres wide. When
we visited the southern tips of the dunes,
we noticed that .the main sand mass
breaks up into crescent-shaped dunelets,
each attaining a height of 3 to 20 metres.
One can stand near the tip of one of
these dunes and watch it migrate. Grain
24
by grain and layer by layer, the dune shifts
in the direction of the prevailing wind.
The motion is steady and generates a soft
hissing sound.
The paved road from Cairo to the iron
mines of Baharia Oasis is in the path of
several of these dunes. One dune has
reached the road and has begun crossing
it, intermittently closing it to traffic. Pa¬
rallel to this road is a railroad used for
hauling iron ore from the mines to the
smelter at Helwan, near Cairo. At the
dune crossing, it is common to observe
labourers sweeping sand away as the train
inches its way forward.
In the Baharia Depression itself, there
are numerous villages. One of these, El-
Harra Oasis, is presently being inundated
by sand. The shifting dunes continue to
claim fertile land despite the efforts of
local farmers to block the way of advanc¬
ing sand. The sand grains keep moving
with the wind until they meet an obstacle
around which they accumulate. ' This
obstacle can be just a thin, scrawny bush.
With all this tangible evidence of dune
migration, we felt that aerial and space
photographs taken at different times should
record this phenomenon. Back in the
laboratory, we compared photographs
taken during the past three decades. The
photographs indicated that one of the
dunes had shifted 5.7 kilometres over a
period of 22 years. This is an average of
260 metres per year.
Continuing the investigation by air, I
noticed that further south and closer to
the Nile, there is an earlier generation of
sand dunes. These are no longer of the
linear type but form a complex network of
crescent-shaped dunes. Here the sands
are moving toward' the farmland, inunda¬
ting the western boundary of the fertile
Nile Valley.
Encroachment of sand on fertile land in
Egypt is a dangerous process. Less than
4 per cent of the area of Egypt is fertile
land, the rest is a desert wasteland. Egypt
cannot afford to lose any small part of this
fragile strip of land to the desert. On the
contrary, the irrigated area of land must
be constantly increased to supply food to
a population which is increasing by one
million each year.
Farther to the. southwest, the Apollo-
Soyuz astronauts photographed numer¬
ous dunes whose sands were derived
from the Great Sand Sea. In the Oweinat
Mountain region at the borders of Egypt,
Libya and Sudan, the dunes streak be¬
tween dark circular mountains. Dune
migration in this case can be a threat to
CONTINUED PAGE 33

ONSLAUGHT ON THE NILE (continued from page 24)
the Sudan. Sand from these dunes can
claim arable soil in the northwest part of
that country. The Sudan is considered by
many people to be North Africa's future
food supplier.
The dunes do not stop at the Sudan;
the American astronauts of the Apollo-
Soyuz mission observed linear streaks of
sand dunes all the way to Lake Chad. In
this region and even farther south all along
the Sahel belt, lack of rain, uncontrolled
grazing and shifting sands from the north
are all active in the desertification of fertile
lands.
It is clear that what happens in the
Western Desert of Egypt affects other
parts of the Sahara. To study this expanse
of land, all of its parts have to be taken
into consideration and dealt with as one
continuous geographic unit.
The colour of dune sand can be indic¬
ative of its age. As it is transported far¬
ther from its sources, and as it is subject¬
ed to oxidation by air and moisture, sand
becomes coated with a thin film of iron
oxides. Therefore, sand from the same
origin will appear redder when it is far¬
thest from the source. This property can
be used in mapping relative age zones of
desert sands.
Consequently, colour photographs taken
from Earth orbit can assist in the study of
desert landforms and the process of deser¬
tification. These photographs help in
documenting regional variations in the
colour of desert sands; providing evidence
of regional sand transport directions; and
aiding in the location of areas for detailed
ground investigations. The next oppor7
tunity to take these space photographs
will be provided by Nasa's next program¬
me, the Space Shuttle, which is due to
start test flights in July 1979.
! Farouk El-Baz
33
