RUBENS
Emissary ofpeace
in strife-torn Europe
by Frans Baudouin
Opposite page above:
Rubens executed this chalk
portrait of his son Nicolas
around 1625-1626. He made
many delightful sketches of
his children and sometimes
used them as models for his
paintings.
Photo © Erich Lessing-Magnum
Albertina, Vienna, Austria
Opposite page below:
Le Chapeau de Paille (The
Straw Hat) is one of Rubens'
most famous and attractive
portraits. It shows Susanna
Fourment, sister of Rubens'
second wife, wearing a
wide-brimmed hat which is
actually made of felt.
Photo © Erich Lessing-Magnum,
National Gallery, London
Right, Peace and War (or
Allegory on the Blessings
of Peace), painted in
London in 1630, when
Rubens was trying to
induce Charles I to make
peace with Spain. In the
background, Minerva,
goddess of wisdom, drives
away Mars, while beneath
her protection the joys of
peace are displayed. A faun
blissfully offers the
gorgeous fruits of the earth
to children and cupids,
while his companions (left)
are laden with gold and
treasures, symbols of
renewed prosperity.
AS a painter whose fame stretched
throughout Europe, Rubens ful¬
filled a mass of commissions
which would have exhausted a lesser
man. And yet, astonishingly enough, he
still found time to take part in the affairs
of State. His correspondence, as well as
other documents, provides ample evidence
of this.
The earliest surviving letter mentioning
public affairs is dated 30 September 1623,
but its contents support the view that he
had been concerned in secret State busi¬
ness long before then. However, it was
through a series of fortuitous events and
circumstances that he came to play an
active part in diplomacy.
At that time, the Netherlands were divi¬
ded into two parts. The largely Catholic
south (corresponding roughly to present-
day Belgium) belonged to the Spanish
crown; in the north was the Republic of
FRANS BAUDOUIN is curator of Antwerp's mu¬
seums of history and art, and secretary of the co¬
ordinating committee for Rubens Year (1977). He is
the author of P.P. Rubens: L' de Toute une Vie
(P.P. Rubens: the work of a lifetime), published by
Fonds Mercator S.A. (Antwerp) and Albin Michel
(Paris).
the United Provinces (the nucleus of
today's Netherlands) which had won its
independence from Spain and whose
representatives met at The Hague.
For many years Spain spared no efforts
to reconquer the United Provinces. How¬
ever, by 1609 the Republic was so well
defended under the determined leadership
of Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange,
that Spain agreed to sign a 12-year truce.
The governors of the Spanish Nether¬
lands at this time were the Archduke
Albert of Austria and his wife the Arch¬
duchess Isabella (her Spanish title was the
"Serene Infanta"), whose court was at
Brussels, the capital. When the truce
came to an end in 1621, Jan Brant, a
resident of The Hague and a nephew of
Rubens' first wife, tried to make contact
with the Archducal court.
A close friend of the Prince of Orange,
Jan Brant was among those who had
supported the truce and who were press¬
ing for an agreement with the Spanish
Netherlands. When the Prince seemed in
favour of making peace, Jan Brant was
eager to convey the news to the Arch- k
ducal court. y
23

PORTRAYING
THE MIGHTY
In 1625 Rubens painted this portrait
(top left) of the Infanta Isabella
Clara Eugenia, governor of the
Spanish Netherlands. She is
wearing the habit of a nun, which
she adopted after the death of her
husband, the Archduke Albert, in
1621. Judging from a portrait of her
in court dress which Rubens painted
about 1609, the Infanta had never
been beautiful: here her expression
is one of authority softened by
benevolence. For 25 years she was
a friend, patron and protector to
Rubens, who was deeply moved by
her death in 1633. Top right, the
first Duke of Buckingham, English
politician, flamboyant adventurer
and favourite of King Charles I.
During his diplomatic missions,
Rubens had close contacts with
Buckingham, who was assassinated
in 1628. Below, detail from The
Presentation of the Portrait of Marie
de Medici to Henry IV, one of
21 great paintings depicting the
life of Marie de Medici, the dowager
queen of France. The queen
commissioned this series from
Rubens in 1621 for her sumptuous
Paris residence, the Luxembourg
Palace. Considerable imagination
was needed to present the
quarrelsome queen as the
embodiment of all the virtues.
Rubens solved the problem by
clothing truth with allegory, £
showing the queen in glorious S.
scenes peopled with bevies of |
goddesses, sirens, angels and ä
cupids. In three years he completed s
the series, a masterpiece of |
Baroque art. Here a portrait of J
Marie is shown to her future i
husband Henry IV, who is attended s
by the god Mars. ^
At this point Rubens expressed his
' willingness to act as an intermediary. As
a painter, much-favoured by the Archduke
and the Infanta, he had access to the
Brussels court and could communicate
secret information to influential people
there without arousing suspicions. Rubens
gave an account of his talks with Jan
Brant to another of his relatives, Pierre
Peck (or Peckius), Chancellor of Brabant
and a trusted counsellor of the Infanta.
Rubens' first diplomatic letter was
addressed to Peckius. It deals with the
peace terms the artist had discussed at
Antwerp with Jan Brant, who is referred
to pseudonymously as "el Católico" (the
Catholic). Thus it was through two family
connexions that Rubens became involved
in State business as a negotiator.
From the surviving evidence, it is impos¬
sible. to piece together a detailed account
of the talks between Rubens and Jan
Brant. Because of the highly confidential
nature of the negotiations, many letters
relating to them were undoubtedly destroy¬
ed by the participants. At all events,
Peckius reported on them to the Infanta,
who subsequently passed on the infor¬
mation to her nephew, Philip IV of Spain.
On 11 October 1624, the Spanish king
expressed his agreement with Jan Brant's
proposal that the belligerents should meet
in a conference. Rubens' name is not
mentioned in the letter, but we can assume
that he was responsible for transmitting
the "Catolico's" proposal to the Brussels
court. In 1625, Rubens again refers to
these negotiations, which had probably
been interrupted in the meantime.
24

MEN, GODS
AND
SNARLING
TIGERS
These works illustrate two of the
many aspects of Rubens' art.
Above, expressive and realistic
studies of African heads. Below,
graceful group of nymphs and
gods in The Four Parts of the
World. As in so many of Rubens'
works the nudes are resplendent.
In foreground, a snarling tiger
suckles its young and children
play with a crocodile whose
gaping jaws and scaly hide make
a startling contrast with the
creamy skin of its human
companions.
In -1623, Rubens reported on his talks
with Jan Brant to Peckius. Soon, how¬
ever, he had an opportunity to brief the
Infanta herself about them.
On 30 August 1624, the French ambass¬
ador in Brussels noted that the Infanta
had granted several audiences to Rubens,
who was exploring the possibilities of a
truce. He also recorded that Rubens, as
well as making frequent journeys between
the Brussels court and the army camp of
General Ambrogio Spinola, a Genoese
marquis in the Infanta's service, was putt
ing it about that the Prince of Orange was
favourable towards a truce.
A letter Rubens wrote to the Infanta on
15 March 1625 provides further proof
that his standing was now sufficiently
high for. him to approach her directly on
official business.
The scope of Rubens' diplomatic activity,
which had hitherto aimed at establishing
peace between the two parts of the Nether¬
lands, now became European-wide. At the
beginning of 1627 he began to devote all
his energies to promoting a peace treaty
between Spain and England, then at war.
A chance encounter, two years before,
was of decisive importance in extending
Rubens' diplomatic activities to a wider
European stage. While in Paris in the
spring of 1625 to complete his series of
paintings on the life of Marie de Medici,
Rubens had made the acquaintance of
George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham,
and his agent, Balthazar Gerbier. Bucking¬
ham was an adventurer, a connoisseur, a
collector and a favourite of Charles I.
Gerbier, like Rubens, was a painter and L
diplomat. Y
25

Like many Flemish artists, Rubens loved painting animals, and
gave free rein to his taste for excitement, drama and physical
power in tumultuous hunting scenes depicting men and beasts
locked in life-and-death combat. As well as European animals,
he also portrayed lions, tigers, crocodiles and hippoes, some of
which he may have seen and sketched in menageries belonging
to rich noblemen. In The Boar Hunt (below) a boar attacked by
a swarm of hounds and huntsmen is the centre of a whirlpool
of action dominated by a horse's head poised dreamily above the
mêlée. Rubens had a particular fondness for horses, often
giving them expressions that are almost human. The great
French painter Eugène Delacroix (1798-1863) dubbed Rubens
"the Homer of painting" and made a careful study of his
THE THRILL
OF THE CHASE
Photo © Bulloz, Paris Marseilles Museum, France
techniques, especially his use of horses to define a painting's
"lines of force". Delacroix shows something of his debt to
Rubens in 77ie Death of Sardanapolus (detail right).
, In Paris Rubens painted the Duke's
portrait and thus had ample opportunity
to get to know this powerful figure. This
meeting in Paris undoubtedly explains
why Buckingham, when he subsequently
, wished to conclude a peace treaty between
England and Spain, called on Rubens to
act as an intermediary. He dispatched
Gerbier to the Netherlands to sound
Rubens out.
, Rubens played a key role in the ensuing
negotiations. He was summoned to
Madrid by Philip IV to give an account of
his contacts with Buckingham. He left
Antwerp in haste at the end of August
1628 and made the journey to Madrid in
the remarkably short time of two weeks.
Until then Philip IV, his powerful minister
Olivares, and his other Counsellors, had
been sceptical about the negotiations in
which Rubens was engaged. Now they
were impressed by the positive results of
the talks and by the soundness of Rubens'
reasoning.
Rubens' stay in Madrid lasted about
eight months, ending on 29 April 1629,
when he set out for London on a mission
entrusted to him by Philip IV. He called
at Brussels on the way to meet the Infanta,
and paid a brief visit to Antwerp to see his
two sons.
In London, Rubens encountered many
obstacles but finally succeeded in prepar¬
ing the ground for a peace treaty between
England and Spain. His acuteness , in
assessing men and situations, his powers
of persuasion, his skill and tact certainly
made a major contribution to the outcome,
as well as his reputation as a great painter,
for both Charles I and Philip IV of Spain
loved the arts and were delighted by the
presence of Rubens at their courts.
For Charles I he painted an Allegory on
the Blessings of Peace (National Gallery,
London) in which Minerva, goddess of
peace, drives away Mars, god of war.
This was clearly an allusion to the nego¬
tiations which Rubens had carried on with
Charles I and which led to the peace treaty
between Spain and England.
Rubens' mission to London was undoub¬
tedly the high point of his diplomatic
career. Madrid was highly satisfied with
his work in London. There was question
of entrusting him with other missions.
But the artist, who had spent so many
years travelling, now wished to live a
peaceful family life in Antwerp with his
young wife, Hélène Fourment, whom he
married on 6 December 1630. He wished
once more to devote himself entirely to
his art.
"For my part, I should like the whole
world to be at peace and that we should
in a century of gold arid not of iron,"
Rubens wrote. It is not only in his paint¬
ings that we can see the glimmering dawn
of a "century of gold."
Frans Baudouin
26
