f* A Ii I A An independent
news agency launched
by the
English-speaking
Caribbean countries
by Hugh N. J. Cholmondeley
THE English-speaking countries
and territories of the Carib¬
bean stretch through an arc
of the Caribbean Sea measuring more
than 6,000 kilometres from Belize in
the north to Guyana in the south.
Their common cultural background
and economic vulnerability have
long argued in favour of regional
integration.
The need for communication sys¬
tems and institutions to foster this
integration first found official recog¬
nition in a resolution of the annual
meeting of the Heads of Government
HUGH N. J. CHOLMONDELEY of Guyana
was for five years Project Manager of the
Caribbean regional communication project
described in this article. A former General
Manager of the Guyana Broadcasting System
(GBS), he is at present Communication Advi¬
ser to the Caribbean Community (Caricom).
of these countries in 1967. This
resolution asked Unesco to advise on
the "establishment of a regional news
agency and the regular exchange of
sound radio and television pro¬
grammes".
It was understood by the Heads of
Government meeting and implicit in
their request that the Governments
themselves would have to assume
responsibility for both these initiatives
and that should a news agency prove
feasible, it would therefore be owned
and operated by the Governments
concerned.
Press, radio and television organi¬
zations in the Caribbean are partly in
State ownership and partly in private
hands. In the latter case, the media
belong either to nationals of the
region or to foreign companies.
A Unesco study in 1968 revealed
that while the privately-owned media
10

English-speaking countries of the Caribbean are now participating in the Caribbean
News Agency (CANA), created with the support of Unesco in 1975. CANA has
substantially increased the news flow in and from the region, and its list of foreign
subscribers is steadily growing. Above, left, a teleprinter keyboard. Right, a street
scene in Bridgetown, capital of the Caribbean island of Barbados. CANA is
playing a decisive role in the development of the region by transmitting commodity
reports concerning exports or imports, up-to-the-minute information on markets and
prices, shipping opportunities, and other economic news.
were a major component of any viable
regional communication system, they
would not accept a news agency ser¬
vice controlled by Governments.
A stalemate ensued, but the inter¬
national news agency already estab¬
lished in the Caribbean recognized
the importance of the integration
issue and began to offer a modest
Caribbean service in addition to its
regular international service.
The Heads of Government conti¬
nued to show interest in this matter,
and in 1971 the United Nations Deve¬
lopment Programme (UNDP) agreed
to finance the execution by Unesco
of a regional communication project
in the Caribbean. The project in¬
cluded further study of the feasibility
of a regional news agency.
Working closely with the Common¬
wealth Regional Secretariat for the
Caribbean, the Caribbean Free Trade
Association (CARIFTA), and the
Caribbean Publishers and Broadcasters
Association (CPBA), the project team
was able to present a formula which
would develop a Caribbean News
Agency to be co-operatively owned
by the media, both private and
government-operated.
In July 1975, CANA (Caribbean
News Agency) came into being, work¬
ing on an interim basis with the
established international agency.
On 7 January 1976, CANA became
an independent news service owned
by 17 media institutions and govern¬
ed by an elected board of directors
drawn from both private and govern¬
ment-owned media.
In the course of its first year of
operation, CANA has not only estab¬
lished itself as a reliable and highly
professional agency, but has also
more than doubled its output of
regional Caribbean % news (from
12,000 to more than 24,000 words
per day). It also distributes the
international service of the former
agency.
Of the thirteen English-speaking
Caribbean countries (Antigua, Baha¬
mas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica,
Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Mont¬
serrat, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lu¬
cia, St. Vincent, and Trinidad and
Tobago), eleven are now linked by
CANA duplex teleprinter circuits.
Local correspondents everywhere
are ready to report on prices and
market conditions, and such a service
could soon become a major tool of
regional policy and planning.
Special business and commodity
services designed to provide daily
up-to-the minute information on price
fluctuations and on the availability of
commodities produced outside the
region, together with reports on ship¬
ping opportunities and other types
of information could also find clients
whose interests are of key importance
to the development of the region.
At the same time, the list of
foreign subscribers to CANA's General
News Service continues to grow.
Cuba, Surinam, the British Virgin
Islands, Martinique, the U.S.A., the
People's Republic of China and the
U.S.S.R. are already receiving this
service or are preparing to subscribe
to it.
We can thus say that CANA has
made a good start. The controversial
and protracted negotiations over a
four-year period which brought the
Agency into existence typify the
difficulties which the Regional Inte¬
gration Movement as a whole fre¬
quently faces in reconciling the
different points of view of member
countries. This leaves no room for
complacency, but recent develop¬
ments indicate that national Govern¬
ments in the Caribbean more fully
appreciate the vital role which com¬
munication can play in making good
past shortcomings, and as an agent
for change.
Hugh N. J. Cholmondeley
11
