Chernyshevsky
A pioneer of social reform
by Eduard Dnieprov
IN the history of every nation, there are
names which symbolize whole chapters
of social development, and which stand
out like beacons along the mainstream of
social and scientific progress. In mid-
nineteenth century Russia, one such name
is that of Nikolai Gavrilovich Cherny¬
shevsky, the 150th anniversary of whose
birth is celebrated this year.
At the age of twenty-seven, Cherny¬
shevsky was already a leading figure
among those seeking to liberate Russia
from the burden of oppression, and exercis¬
ed a strong influence on Russian culture
and social thought. Seven years later, he
was arrested, "removed from circulation"
as the police report put it, and deported to
Siberia, where he remained in exile for
more than twenty years.
Chernyshevsky was born on 24 June 1828
in the provincial city of Saratov, on the
Volga, where his father was a priest. The
local ecclesiastical seminary, which he
entered at the age of fourteen, could not
satisfy his quest for knowledge, and he
quickly outstripped not only his contempo¬
raries, but many of his teachers as well. The
seminary was his first contact with social,
and more particularly with educational re¬
alities, the shortcomings of which were to
become the earliest targets of his criticism.
After obtaining a degree in history and
philosophy at the University of Saint
Petersburg, he returned to Saratov to teach
Russian language and literature at the local
high school. It was here that he came to
understand that the distortions of the edu¬
cational system merely reflected the distor¬
ting conditions of life in Russia generally,
and that radical changes in the latter were a
prerequisite to any educational reform.
In the hope of finding broader scope for
the expression of his opinions, and a wider
battleground for the realization of his
ideals, he returned to Saint Petersburg. For
the next ten years, in scientific, journalistic
and revolutionary circles alike, and in the
simultaneous roles of philosopher, econo¬
mist, historian, writer, literary critic and art
theorist, Chernyshevsky threw all his
efforts into the struggle to transform
society.
EDUARD DNIEPROV, Sower historian, is a
member of the Research Institute of General
Pedagogy at the U. S. S. R. Academy of Pedago¬
gical Sciences. He is the author ofmany publica¬
tions on the history of pedagogy.
"Political authority, material well-being
and education", he wrote, "are inseparable
from each other. No one who lives in
poverty can develop his mental capacities;
no one whose intellectual capacities are
stunted can participate in the exercise of
power: no one who is deprived of political
power can free himself from oppression,
that is, from poverty and ignorance."
For Chernyshevsky, the root causes of
cultural backwardness in different peoples
and social groups were not to be found in
the peculiarities of their natural environ¬
ment or their heredity, but rather in the
unfavourable and oppressive, man-made
social, economic and political circum¬
stances of their lives. His analysis of the
factors which determine the formation and
development of the human personality
made a considerable impact on educational
theory not only in Russia, but throughout
the world.
Chernyshevsky did not deny that heredity
had a part in the creation of the personality,
but he believed that social factors played
the predominant role. Nor did he believe, as
did his predecessors, that these factors
were merely the product of environmental
conditions, or that these conditions were
somehow immutable. Man, he considered,
was not a passive creature of his sur¬
roundings, but an active agent, capable of
reconstructing his own environment. The
goal of education, which he conceived as a
major force for social transformation,
should be to produce human beings who
were indeed active in that way.
He was convinced that the humanities
and the natural sciences should form an
' integral part of general education and that
specialized and general education should
not be seen as alternatives. The content of
education was modified by scientific pro¬
gress, so that what had yesterday been a
matter for specialists alone might well
today become a subject of general educa¬
tion. Chemyshevsky's major contribution
to the development of pedagogical theory
lay in his insistence that a scientific
approach should be adopted to the selec¬
tion of the content of education.
Chernyshevsky considered teaching to be
one of the most noble and far-reaching of
human activities, the product of which, he
said, was "not something apart from man,
but man himself"; it was nothing less than
the construction of the future.
Eduard Dnieprov
30
