Tapping earth's
fiery core
mWBm
by Ralph Haenel
Ralph Haenel, chairman of the Federal Repub¬
lic of Germany's commission on geoihermal
energy, is also director of géothermie studies
and deputy director of the geophysical depart¬
ment at the Lower Saxony Soil Research Insti¬
tute (Hanover). A visiting professor at the Berlin
Technical University, he is a project leader with
the Research and Development Group attached
to the European Community's Commission in
Brussels.
GEOTHERMAL energy, in its broad¬
est sense, is the natural heat of the
earth. .The temperature of the
earth rises steadily with increasing depth,
and if just one per cent of the energy con¬
tained in the upper five kilometres of the
continental crust could be tapped, this
would satisfy our energy requirements for
the next 4,000 years.
Unfortunately, it is not yet possible to
draw heat directly from the subterranean
rock layers. So far all that can be used is
the heat transmitted to underground water
deposits by these rocks. Thus geothermal
energy is currently only available in the
form of natural hot water or natural steam.
In 1975, geothermal energy was
supplying electrical grids with 1,191 mega¬
watts, and producing the equivalent of
some 6,340 megawatts for non-electrical
uses, such as the heating of dwellings and
greenhouses an overall geothermal
energy total of some 7,500 megawatts or
the equivalent of the output of seven large
nuclear power stations. In the last decade
the amount of geothermal energy used has
doubled every five years. There is reason to
believe that 15,000 megawatts will be pro¬
duced in this way by 1980; perhaps even
more if the energy crisis leads to increased
exploitation of the earth's natural heat.
So far the use of geothermal energy in
the form of natural steam has been largely
limited to volcanic areas where the surface
shows clear indications of underground
steam, such as geysers, steam or sulphur-
laden vapour escaping through fissures, or
hot springs. Today exploration is being
extended beyond these original sites.
The primary use of geothermal steam is
for the generation of electricity. The steam
emerges either in pure form, as dry steam,
or as a mixture of steam and water known
as wet steam. The wet steam is piped into a
separator, in which the water and the
steam are separated. The steam is then led
into a turbine connected to an electrical
generator.
24

mmw
Geothermal hot water cannot be used
directly, since it often contains toxic or
dangerous chemicals. Instead, it is passed
into a heat-exchanger where it heats cold
water which is then used to warm a dwel¬
ling. Heat-exchangers -which can operate
with a relatively high percentage of un¬
desirable chemical content are already on
the market.
The use of geothermal energy derived
from hot water is still very localized, as dell-
very by pipeline to the user is not economi¬
cally viable over distances of more than five
kilometres. But when one considers that
about 40 per cent of all energy used in the
world goes to heat households and provide
them with warm water, this local aspect
takes on added significance. In fact, this is
one promising area for the replacement of
electrical current by geothermal energy.
Geothermal energy can thus only be
used on a large scale if the heat of the earth
can be transformed into electricity, and if
this current can be carried over long distan-
North Island, New Zealand, is
noted for its wide belt of
geothermal activity including
many hot springs, bubbling
mudpools and spouting
geysers. Left, steam surges
skywards at the
Whakarewarewa thermal
reserve at Rotorua, one of the
North Island's major tourist
attractions. Part of this large
geothermal basin is tapped for
steam to generate electricity
and heat homes.
ces and used for a wide range of purposes.
Up to now, however, only natural steam
from sites of comparatively recent volcanic
activity has proved suitable for this sort of
conversion. In most populated regions, it is
unlikely that natural steam suitable for the
production of electricity is available for tap¬
ping. This is. why other techniques of
drawing energy from the internal heat of
the earth on a large scale are now under
examination.
In the forefront of this discussion is the
Hot Dry Rock process which involves dril¬
ling down to high-temperature under¬
ground rock layers. Given a deep enough
bore-hole, temperatures of around 250°
centigrade can be reached. Since the tem¬
perature rises between 3° and 4°C with
every hundred metres of depth, this would
require drilling to a depth of seven kilo¬
metres. At this level, the rocks no longer
contain water: they are dry.
High-pressure water is pumped down
the bore-hole, causing the rock to crack,
producing a fissure stretching over several
square kilometres. A second hole is drilled
down to this fissure, as far away from the
first as possible. At this point, cold water
can be pumped down the first hole, to be
heated to between 200°C and 250°C in the
fissure, and then brought up to the surface
again by the second bore-hole. The reduc¬
tion in pressure during its ascent turns it
into steam, which can then be used to pro¬
duce electricity.
This technique was first tried out in Los
Alamos (New Mexico, USA). It was shown
conclusively that there were no problems
involved in making a fissure of the requisite
size; the difficulty lay in locating this nar¬
row and vertical fissure at great depth with
the second bore-hole. In addition, it has
not yet proved possible to regulate the
speed and quantity of water moving ,
through the fissure, and thus to control
energy production.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, the
possibility of extracting energy by means of
a single bore-hole is under investigation. In
the United Kingdom and Sweden studies
are being carried out on a Warm Dry Rock
technique, designed to tap the geothermal
energy of rocks at lower temperatures than
those called for ¡n the Hot Dry Rock pro¬
cess. In Iceland and the Federal Republic of
Germany attempts are being made to
bypass the creation of artificial fissures by
deep drilling down to natural fissures
already containing water, such as the main
fault deep beneath the Rhine basin in Ger¬
many.
Another recent proposal involves
breaking up large volumes of underground
rock by means of nuclear explosions. The
heat yield would be extremely high, but a
number of questions about this technique
have yet to be answered what would it
cost? What would be its effect on the envi¬
ronment? Would it cause earth tremors?
Successful exploitation of geothermal
energy will depend largely on reducing the
cost of drilling, but drilling costs rise expo¬
nentially with increases in depth. A bore- k
hole three kilometres deep costs in the t
25

Volcanic gases spurt from a mini-crater (left) near the mining
centre of Chuquicamata in northern Chile. Lava has solidified
around the vent to form a natural chimney. Above, view of
geothermal plant at Larderello (Italy) in a part of Tuscany rich in
thermal springs and subterranean steam containing boric acid.
Larderello takes its name from a Frenchman, the Vicomte de
Larderel. who exploited its boric acid deposits as long ago as
1818. Today this thermal belt, which extends over some 200 sq.
km., feeds a heavy water plant and several power stations.
y region of $1,450,000, while one reaching a
depth of six to seven kilometres costs some
$9,750,000.
Studies are now taking place in the Uni¬
ted States on a process whereby the rock
layer is neither pierced nor fractured, but
melted. The 1500°C temperature necessary
for this can be provided either electrically or
by means of a small nuclear device
attached to the end of the drilling probe.
An entirely new idea a spin-off from
the Hot Dry Rock concept is to investi¬
gate whether additional energy can be pro¬
duced as a result of heat released by chemi¬
cal reactions. The aim is to set up a chemi¬
cal reaction with the hot rock within the
artifical fissure. The first estimates suggest
that the heat gain resulting from the use of
chemical additives would be of the same
order as the original geothermal energy
present.
It may also prove possible to exploit tem¬
perature conditions in the regions of the
ocean ridges, where upwelling magma
from the depths of the earth are constantly
forming new sub-bcean crust. Hot water
under pressure is also to be found in newly
formed coastal basins such as the Gulf of
Mexico. But in both these cases the condi¬
tions for exploitation would be extremely
difficult and any energy obtained would
have to be carried over long distances to
reach the consumer.
Clearly, a new and massive source of
energy is becoming available, though the
technology to tap it effectively is now in its
early stages. Time will tell whether or not
the subterranean heat bank ¡s a dead end or
a major breakthrough.
Ralph Haenel

