A
PHOENIX
RISING
FROM
THE
ASHES
by Aleksandar Fiaker
THE Second World War inflicted incal¬
culable losses on Slav cultures.
Monuments of rare magnificence,
such as the National Museum in Belgrade
with its priceless manuscripts and early
printed books, crumbled under the impact
of enemy bombs. The Nazis systematically
plundered museums, carrying off their
archives. Whole cities, Leningrad, Kiev,
Minsk, Warsaw and many others, were vir¬
tually erased from the map.
All Slav intellectuals, including writers,
were subjected to ruthless persecution.
Here are just a few names from the long list
of victims of this terror : Vladislav Vancura,
a leading figure in the avant-garde of Czech
literature, executed in 1942; a whole group
of Croatian writers and critics, including
August Cesarec, shot in 1941; Ivan Goran
Kovacic, the Croatian poet and essayist,
short-story writer and translator of Shelley,
Keats and Rimbaud, savagely murdered in
1943; the Bulgarian poet Nikola Jonkov
Vapcarov, shot in Sofia in 1942, who,
before his death, addressed a moving and
lyrical appeal to his wife and to the entire
Bulgarian people.
Among those who fell in the ranks of the
Yugoslav National Liberation Army were
the Slovenian poets Karel Destovnik-Kajuh
and Miran Jare, the Croatian prose-writer
Hasan Kikic, from Bosnia, the Serbian lit¬
erary critic Milos Savkovic, the famous
Macedonian poet Koco Racin, and many
others.
Yugoslavia alone lost at least 75 of her
most talented writers, not to mention
countless promising young poets who
perished at the front or among the Parti¬
sans, while their Polish contemporaries
were dying in concentration camps or in
the flames of the Warsaw Rising and
young Russians of the same generation
were giving their lives in the struggle
against the aggressor.
The war left indelible scars on the cul-
ALEKSANDAR FLAKER, prominent Croatian-
Yugoslav scholar in Slavic and comparative lit¬
erature, is Vice-President of the International
Association for the Study and Dissemination of
Slav Cultures.
70

The Second World War left profound scars
on the Slav world. This image of
desolation, one of a series of Indian ink
drawings entitled "It must never happen
again", is by the Soviet artist Boris
Prorokov, who lost both legs during the
war. Many Slav writers and artists died in
the struggle against Nazi barbarity.
Detail of a fresco of the Virgin Mary in the
church of St. Nicholas, Novgorod. Used as
a target by occupying forces in the
Second World War, it evokes the fate of
many works of art destroyed during the
Nazi invasion.
71

tures of all the European countries. But this
time of wholesale destruction, cultural
annihilation and massacre on an unprece¬
dented scale was also a period in which
fresh literary and artistic values made their
appeal anee, in which the foundations of a
more fitting human existence were re¬
modelled, and in which new horizons
were opened for future relations between
individuals, peoples and States. Thus,
from the ashes of this hour of destruction
arose, phoenix-like, a new literature and a
new art, dedicated to the struggle towards
the light and against the black forces
of modern barbarism.
If, as the Soviet novelist Leonid Leonov
puts it, culture is "mankind's memory", it
is easy to understand why the red stain of
their martyrdom remains imprinted on the
cultures of peoples who endured such suf¬
fering during the 1940s, a dark age in Euro¬
pean and world history, and yet who,
among the ruins, laid the foundations of a
new life.
Echoes from that wartime period are still
heard in modern Polish literature, from the
tragic evocation of the Warsaw ghetto in
Andrzejewski's "Holy Week" to the latest
prose works by the realist writer Miron Bia-
loszewski. Similar themes run through the
new Polish cinema, from Kavalerowicz to
Wajda, and the new cinema of Yugoslavia,
represented by Veljko Bulajic.
The War is still a major subject in the
Soviet novel, and permeates the works of
Konstantin Simonov and Yuri Bondarev.
Oles Goncar in the Ukraine, and Vasyl
Bykau in Byelorussia draw on the war years
for inspiration; the Croatian writer Miroslav
Krleza has turned his attention again to the
same period; and the novels of the Monte¬
negrin writer Mihailo Lalic set wartime
events in a new light.
The oppression of man, his resistance to
constraints and terror of all kinds, and his
liberation from the fear and threat of war,
are themes which find reflection in the
many sculptures and monuments which
are familiar landmarks in countless Rus¬
sian, Ukrainian and Byelorussian towns
and villages. Similar monuments are to be
found at the scene of battles and suffering
which already seem a part of distant his¬
tory, but which are not to be forgotten, for
they were the battles and sufferings of
whole peoples, indeed, of all mankind.
Aleksandar Flaker

