THE MOTHER I The spiritual heir
of Sri Aurobindo
by Emmanuel Pouchpa Dass
Photos © Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry, India
Above, The Mother with her spiritual master, the great
Indian philosopher Sri Aurobindo. Right, as a young
woman during a visit to Algeria in the early years of this
century when she was starting to become aware of the
vocation that would take her to work with Sri Aurobindo
15 years later.
EMMANUEL POUCHPA DASS of India is
Director of Unesco's Division of Cultural
Studies.
THIS year, the centenary of the birth
of "the Mother" is being celebrated
in India. An outstanding and much
revered figure, she was the closest disciple
and direct spiritual heir to Sri Aurobindo,
the great Indian philosopher whose teach¬
ing has had a profound spiritual and moral
influence on modern India.
She was born Mirra Alfassa on 21
February 1878, in Paris, where her parents
had recently settled. Her father, Maurice,
who came from Adrianople in Turkey, was
a mathematician and banker. Her mother,
Mathilde Ismaloun, a native of Alexandria
in Egypt, was a strong-minded woman for
whom religion was nothing but superstition
and weakness and anything to do with ima¬
gination was a waste of time.
Mirra lived in Paris with her parents until
her marriage at the age of 19 and received a
rather strict and austere upbringing.
She enjoyed playing tennis (and con¬
tinued to do so until she was 80), but her
main loves were music, poetry and above
all painting. She practised the piano several
hours a day, yet still found time for painting
and poetry, to the dismay of her mother,
who had pinned great hopes on her daugh¬
ter and feared she would fritter away her
life. Ideas for poems would come to her in
her sleep, and she would get up in the
middle of the night to jot them down on
paper.
In 1897, when she was 19, she married
the painter Henri Morisset, and got to
know artists of the older generation such
as Claude Monet, Auguste Renoir, Edgar
Degas, Alfred Sisley and Paul Cézanne,
and the sculptor Auguste Rodin, as well as
younger painters like Paul Signac, Georges
Rouault, Maurice de Vlaminck, Georges
Braque, Henri Matisse and Pablo Picasso.
Mirra lived in the world of artists until
1908, when she and her husband sepa- >
rated. This was a period of great spiritual f
27

> intensity. Much later in life, she recalled a
visit to Fontainebleau:
"No one had ever told me about medita¬
tion, or how to meditate. I sat down under
the trees and felt a great sense of inner
calm and concentration ; I lost all sense of
the outside world and felt in harmony with
the trees: I was very happy."
Mirra's undoubted gifts enabled her to
discover unaided the wisdom of the ancient
philosophers. She possessed that quality
that Sri Aurobindo described in the fol¬
lowing terms: "Sense is fundamentally not
the action of the physical organs, but the
contact of consciousness with its objects."
By a curious coincidence, it was pre¬
cisely in 1904, at a time when Mirra, then
26, was beginning her systematic explora¬
tion of the various levels of consciousness,
that Sri Aurobindo began the serious study
of yoga. But it was not until 10 years later
that they actually met.
Through a process of experimentation.
Mirra soon discovered what the Vedic Ris¬
his (1) had found out thousands of years
before, secrets that Sri Aurobindo was
himself beginning to unravel through self-
mastery and a methodical exploration of
every level of consciousness. The Rishis
had discovered what they termed enigmati¬
cally, "a certain Fourth". This was a new
world that Sri Aurobindo called "the supra-
mental", a possible fourth state of Matter,
a future state where Matter does not die. A
different kind of Matter, perhaps, or a dif¬
ferent vision of the same Matter.
In the course of her spiritual experimen¬
tation, Mirra succeeded in analysing the
mechanisms of many religious, social and
political systems. It was almost as if she felt
the need to exhaust every possible alterna¬
tive. Later she would insist on the need to
escape from what she called "the prison of
age-old habits". But at that time she still
lacked any experience of speculative philo¬
sophy.
This she hoped to acquire when, in 1910,
she married Paul Richard, whom she had
met two years earlier. With her new hus¬
band she set off for India, a vast sub¬
continent as yet unknown to her.
On 19 March 1914, she walked up the
steps leading to the large white verandah of
the house in Pondicherry where Sri Auro¬
bindo and his first followers lived. He was
expecting her. Although they had never
met before, each of them felt a sense of
recognition.
"Though there may be thousands of
human beings plunged in deepest igno¬
rance". Mirra wrote next day, "the man we
saw yesterday is here on earth and his pre¬
sence alone is proof that the day will come
when darkness will be turned into light."
(1) Rishi: the term refers chiefly to the authors of the
hymns of the Rigveda (between 1500 and 800 B.C.),
which were thought to have been revealed by Brahma,
and which make up the most important of the sacred
Vedic texts.
Sri Aurobindo was born in Calcutta on
15 August 1872. His father, a surgeon,
gave him an English education. After
studying classics at Cambridge, Sri Auro-
b'ndo returned to India in 1893 and became
a teacher, first in Baroda, in western India,
then in Calcutta. At this time he
joined the revolutionary movement whose
purpose was to free India from British
domination. He became involved in a
secret organization that would be ready,
when the time was ripe, for an armed up¬
rising. Then in 1906, he began to preach
the nationalist cause with missionary fer¬
vour in the columns of the Calcutta daily
newspaper Bande Mataram.
Aurobindo's activities caused him to be
arrested and held in solitary confinement in
Alipur prison on a conspiracy charge. After
a long-drawn-out trial, he was finally
acquitted and released in May 1909. During
his spell in prison, he experienced a mysti¬
cal revelation of the divine omnipresence,
which made him decide to turn his back on
politics and retire to Pondicherry in south¬
ern India.
Aurobindo said at the time: "The advo¬
cates of action think that everything can be
put right by an ever renewed upsurge of
human intellect and energy. The present
state of the world, after a development of
the intellect and a stupendous output of
energy for which there is no parallel in his¬
tory, is signal proof of the emptiness of the
illusion under which they labour. Yoga
takes the stand that it is only by a change
of consciousness that the true basis of life
can be discovered; from within outward is
indeed the rule."
The first issue of the philosophical jour¬
nal Arya appeared on 15 April 1914. The
journal continued to appear until January
1921 and in its pages Sri Aurobindo was to
publish the greater part of his philosophical
work.
Meanwhile, Mirra was still reaching for
the key to transformation, a way of inven¬
ting new modes of consciousness and
perception in other words the path to the
súpramental. As her spiritual Odyssey pro¬
gressed. Mirra was gaining assurance as a
thinker. This can be seen in the vivid imag¬
ery and lively language she employed in her
Conversations and in her teaching at the
Ashram, the international community she
and Sri Aurobindo founded at Pondicherry.
She taught that our first step along the
road to self-perfection is to become con¬
scious of ourselves, of the various parts of
our being and of their respective activities,
in order to become aware of the origin of
the impulses we experience and of the
various reactions and urges that stir us to
action
28

Photo © Dominique Darr, Pans
The Mother taking an evening class at the
Ashram, the international spiritual
community at Pondicherry which she
founded with Sri Aurobindo. Above, a
gathering of disciples at the Ashram,
which today has some 1,800 members.
Photo Vidyavrata Visharad © Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry, India
View of Pondicherry showing (in foreground) the buildings
of the Ashram, where The Mother continued the work of
Sri Aurobindo after his death in 1950.
Right, a stamp issued
to commemorate the
centenary of the birth
of The Mother.
^21-278 «
«ft aTTfipit
SRI AUROBINDO
25 .
ASHRAM
This process, she said, "is a bit like
taking three or four different colours, put¬
ting them in water and mixing them to¬
gether. What you get is a greyish, indis¬
tinct and incomprehensible mixture. You
can't tell the red from the blue, or the
green, or the yellow. All these colours
mixed together come out as something of a
mess. So what you have to do first is sepa¬
rate the red, the blue, the yellow and the
green, and put each of them in its own
place."
"We are exposed to every conceivable
kind of influence good, bad, neutral,
dark, light it's all there, and in theory
each individual should act as a filter... In
the last resort, this is the reason for physi¬
cal existence.
"And it's a wonderful thing, people
don't realize what an infinite boon it is: the
universe is so arranged that there is a mass
of substances, ranging from the most
material to the highest form of
spiritualityall gathered together in what
we call an individual; yet still controlled by
a central will."
Thus it is only by subjecting all our inner
impulses to the strictest examination that
we can hope to create within ourselves an
unfailing power of discernment. At the
same time the external being must also
strive after perfection.
This process of inner discovery must also
be accompanied by mental development,
which the Mother defined in these terms:
"Mental development in its most complete
form involves the minutely detailed study
of all kinds of philosophies and ideas, get¬
ting inside systems of thought and fully
understanding them... Development, in the
sense of the realization that all ideas are
true, is followed by a realization that a
synthesis must be made... And that some¬
thing luminous and true lies beyond that
synthesis."
A group of followers had formed sponta¬
neously around Sri Aurobindo. But should
they first practise yoga and pursue their
own spiritual development and only then
turn their attention to other people?
Or should they immediately allow all those
with the same aspirations to join them, so
they could all march together towards the
same goal? Sri Aurobindo and Mirra chose
the second solution, for, as Aurobindo
said: "I am concerned with the earth, not
with worlds beyond for their own sake; it is
a terrestrial realization that I seek and not a
flight to distant summits."
From the founding of the Ashram on 24
November 1926, Sri Ai/robindo put the
Mother in charge and devoted himself to a
new enterprise. First of all, he sought the
transformation of consciousness, the tran
sition from mental man to spiritual man;
then physical transformation, the transition
from spiritual man to the gnostic being,
governed by the supramental.
Sri Aurobindo corresponded at length
with his followers but he appeared among
them only three times a year. The Mother,
however, saw them as often as possible:
she organized and took part in their various
activities, whether work or play, and
encouraged them to discover their inner
truth.
At one point in her life. Mirra noted that
she was putting such intense energy into
her inner activity that "sleep" became
impossible. "For more than a year, I jotted
everything down little things, a snatch of
conversation, an impressionand tried to
find a transition from one memory to an¬
other. At first, nothing much came out of
it, but after a time I was able, by starting
from the end, to trace all my "dreams"
back to the beginning of the night. It put
me in such a conscious, continuous state
that I ended up by not "sleeping" at all. My
reclining body was fast asleep, but my con¬
sciousness was not at all at rest."
The Ashram consisted at the start of only
a handful of disciples, but house after
house was gradually added, it grew larger,
and its inmates learned to be self-sufficient.
The community now numbers 1,800 people
CONTINUED PAGE 33
29

THE MOTHER' - SPIRITUAL HEIR OF SRI AUROBINDO
(Continued from page 29)
who wish to give their lives a spiritual
dimension. Its various activities, which are
organized by the members themselves,
range from weaving and spinning, to
farming, building, handicrafts and metal
work. A papermaking plant supplies the
needs of the community's printing presses
which publish works in thirteen languages.
Cultural activities include painting, sculp¬
ture, music and handicrafts.
The Ashram, then was, created just as
Sri Aurobindo wished, "with another
objective than that usually associated with
such institutions; not for the renunciation
of the world, but as a centre and a field of
practice for the evolution of another kind
and form of life, which would ultimately be
moved by a higher spiritual consciousness
and embody a greater life of the spirit."
Sri Aurobindo died in 1950, leaving the
Mother to carry on their common work
alone.
Two years later, the Sri Aurobindo Inter¬
national Centre of Education was founded:
it now provides education ranging from
kindergarten to university level based on
the so-called "free progress" method,
which was devised and defined by Sri
Aurobindo. Up until 1958, the Mother her¬
self took an active part in teaching there,
and gave pupils a grounding in French in
the course of her yoga lectures.
A tireless teacher, she continued to offer
guidance to the disciples, and to receive
visitors from all over the world. She used to
explain to her followers that whatever the
ideal they set themselves they would only
fully achieve it if they attained inner perfec¬
tion. She referred to what she called the
great "change of government", by which
she meant that mental government by the
intelligence should give way to spiritual
government by the consciousness a word
central to her and Aurobindo's thinking.
The Mother used to say that it was
impossible for any individual on earth as we
now know it, however great he might be,
to change the world single-handed, to
change creation as we know it, and to
achieve the superior truth of a new world.
She was convinced that only a group of
individuals (either in time, one after the
other, or in space, in the form of a commu¬
nity) could enable that truth to take shape
and to establish itself. Achievement obeys
all-embracing laws which reflect a certain
aspect of Eternity and the Infinite.
In 1968, at the age of 90, sensing that the
world was ready to experience and under¬
stand a new venture aimed at realizing the
unity of mankind, the Mother initiated
plans for a city in which men and women
would eventually be able to live according
to the ideals of Sri Aurobindo, and which
would be. called "Auroville" in his honour.
The Mother died on 17 November 1973, at
the age of 95.
E. Pouchpa Dass
33
