is not
Photo <£J Georges Tourdjman, Pans
22

by Burton L. White
IN 1965, the United States government
initiated a dramatic attack on educa¬
tional under-achievement by children
from low-income families. Each year since
then hundreds of millions of dollars have
been spent on research and service pro¬
grammes to help children prepare for entry
into the school system. From these unpre¬
cedented efforts has come an exciting new
conception of education which has focus-
sed attention on the importance of the edu¬
cation developments that take place during
the first three years of life, long before a
child enters primary school.
Recognition of the need for new approa¬
ches of this kind took some time to
emerge. Free education had been available
throughout the United States of America
since the beginning of the century, but not
until much later did it become clear that
this was not enough.
Experience showed that the achievement
levels of children entering the educational
system at around the age of six generally
gave a good indication of their likely school
achievement levels in subsequent years.
Children who appeared particularly well
developed at six were much more likely to
perform well throughout their school
careers than average or below average six-
year-olds. Furthermore, the gap between
these two groups tended to widen with the
relatively poorly developed six-year-olds
falling further and further behind.
For several decades, various types of
remedial education were introduced in an
attempt to help the less favoured children
make up the lost ground, but, in general,
BURTON L. WHITE of the USA is director of
the Harvard Pre-school Project, a long-term
research programme which he started 14 years
ago to study ways of helping children make the
best of their potential. He is the author of three
textbooks on early childhood development and
of a book for parents, The First Three Years of
Life, published by Prentice-Hall Inc., New Jer¬
sey, USA, in 1975.
schools found it very difficult to make any
significant improvement in the situation of
those children who at six seemed unprep¬
ared for school.
The prevailing view, rooted in age-old
ideas about human nature, was that this
state of affairs was inevitable. If a child did
not do well during his school years, it was
because he or she did not have the poten¬
tial for average or above-average academic
achievement. The child who did well was
destined to succeed because of hereditary
factors.
As research on human development
became more substantial from the 1940s
onwards, many investigators came to
question this entrenched idea.
It seemed that there was considerable
reason to believe that learning opportuni¬
ties during the first six years of life played a
significant role in determining how much
ability children had acquired by the time
they entered the school system. If this were
so, there was hope that children need not
enter the system "predestined", as it were,
to be poor performers.
More and more people came to believe
that it was possible to provide better prepa¬
ration for formal education. Spokesmen for
low-income families became increasingly
restive, and strong pressure was brought
to bear on the U.S. government to provide
special education programmes for pre¬
school children. The result was the massive
attack on the problem of school readiness
launched by the government in 1965.
The first major effort, known popularly
as Project Head Start, was designed to
help three- to-five-year-old children from
low-income families prepare for the formal
education system. With $600 million in
funds for the first year alone, and steadily
supported since then, Project Head Start
has encompassed a wide variety of pro¬
grammes across the country.
It soon became clear, however, that the
problem of readiness for formal education
was not an easy one to solve.
One of the first findings was that not all
children from low-income families were
inadequately prepared for formal educa¬
tion. On the contrary, some of them
showed outstanding academic abilities
when they entered school.
Nevertheless, It was found that a higher
percentage of the more slowly developing
children came from low-income than from
upper-income families. The vast majority of
the new pre-school programmes did not
seem to bring a dramatic improvement in
their rate of development. Their ability
levels after two years of special education
were not noticeably different from those of
similar children who had not been enrolled
in such programmes.
However, a handful of especially effec¬
tive programmes did produce improve¬
ments. Children who otherwise would not
have been ready for the first year of primary
school were helped, particularly as far as
their language and intellectual skills were
concerned. By the time they entered
school, they had reached levels of achieve¬
ment that were at least as good as the
national average.
This was an incredible achievement and
one that received wide acclaim. Unfortuna¬
tely, in from one to three years, all these
improvements were usually lost. By the
third year of primary school, the children
who had been helped by the few out¬
standing pre-school programmes no longer
showed any significant advantages over
comparable children who had not attended
experimental programmes.
This finding has been depressing for all
those interested in improving the educatio¬
nal achievements of young children. How¬
ever, many of those who have studied the
development of young children over a
period of several years have never been
convinced that special education beginning
at the age of three was the wisest way to
help children prepare for school.
A number of indications, including the
results of achievement tests at the age of
three, pointed to the fact that the problems
children reveal when they start school very
often develop considerably before their
third birthday.
Such evidence made it clear that pro¬
grammes like Head Start, which start after
the child is three years old, are not preven¬
tative but remedial. But since pre-school
educational programmes such as Head
Start are based on the belief that it is better
to prevent than to remedy, it became
obvious that the first three years of life
should be more closely examined.
As a result, attention has shifted from
the three-to-five-year age range to the first
three years of life, including infants and
toddlers.
Increased attention is also being paid to
different kinds of teacher. The teachers in
the Head Start programmes are professio¬
nals, and usually unrelated to the children.
The teachers of children under three are
usually the children's own parents, and
most often their mothers.
Research during the past decade on how k
children acquire abilities during the first f
23

three years of life has brought to light some
fascinating facts. First of all, there is a
strong suggestion that during the first six
or seven months of life babies are assured
of acquiring certain skills, and that this
holds good even though they may be
brought up in a wide variety of ways.
Basically, what children have to acquire
at this stage is the sense that they are
deeply loved and a small number of simple
skills such as learning how to see and hear
clearly and how to reach for nearby
objects. They must also preserve their
innate interest in exploring the world.
These skills seem to develop well in the
vast majority of cases even when the
parents have received no special training or
assistance.
The picture changes dramatically, how¬
ever, from the age of six or seven months
until the third birthday. During this period
there is nothing inevitable about children's
development. There is no certainty that
their language skills will develop as well as
they might, that their curiosity will be deep¬
ened and broadened to the fullest, that
their social development will be adequate,
or that the sub-structure of intelligence will
be solidly established. Given suitable learn¬
ing opportunities they will acquire new
skills and be able to handle increasingly
complex tasks; but the progress made will
depend to a surprising degree on the atti¬
tudes and child-rearing practices adopted
by the parents.
One major source of difficulty is that as
children enter the second half of their first
year they enter a relatively dangerous time
to be alive.
When babies begin to crawl, they are
accident-prone. They use their mouths to
explore the world and tend to swallow
things that can harm them. Their move¬
ments are not well co-ordinated. Homes
are not designed for such crawling chil¬
dren, and as a result infants tend to fall, cut
and bruise themselves. Consequently,
parents are inclined to restrict the explora¬
tory activities of young children. However,
this is not the most desirable way of
helping the infant and toddler make the
most of his developing talents.
Broadly speaking, it has become clear
that the child's first teachers his
parents are usually not well prepared for
the very important task of getting their
child off to a good educational start. Edu¬
cational policies in the United States make
no provision for preparing and assisting
parents to raise very young children.
Because of long-standing traditions, de¬
signed in part to protect the privacy of the
home, it has been assumed that as long as
parents love their children they will some¬
how do a good job of raising them.
However, recent research increasingly
indicates that if parents were given prepa¬
ration and assistance, both immediately
before the birth of their children and during
the pre-school years, children would get
more out of their early learning experien¬
ces, parents would experience much less
needless strain in raising young children,
and everyone would get considerably more
enjoyment out of the process.
Burton L. White

