More than a billion persons (half of them children) In rural areas of the
developing world have no ready access to clean water. In these vast
regions, women and children are obliged to spend hours of each day
walking far from their homes to the nearest source of water, weighed
down with back-breaking containers.
Photo Constantin Manos © Magnum, Pans



The impending
water famine
If nothing is done,
water resources in the world's
populated areas will be
nearly exhausted by the year 2015
by Valentin I. Korzun andAleksei A. Sokolov
THE total volume of water on Earth
has been estimated at the enormous
figure of 1.386 billion cubic kilo¬
metres. If spread evenly over the entire sur¬
face of the globe it would form a layer no
less than 3,700 metres deep!
Since 96.5 per cent (1.338 billion km3) of
all this water is ocean, it would perhaps be
more logical to call our planet "Ocean",
rather than "Earth"!
The process known as the "hydrological
cycle" endlessly evaporates water from the
surface of the oceans into the atmosphere,
precipitates it on to the land as rain and
snow, and then returns it to the oceans
again. This constant circulation restores
the qualities of water and makes it fit for
further use. What is more and this is
what distinguishes water from other natu¬
ral resources such as oil, gas and coal it
can be used time and time again, and yet
its total volume never diminishes.
There is no objective evidence of any
"leak" from the atmosphere into outer
space which could, sooner or later, reduce
the Earth's stock of water, and transform
our planet into an arid and lifeless desert.
But this reassuring news does not mean
that there is no "water problem". For cen¬
turies, men have squandered water and
strained its capacities for self-renewal and
self- purification. And though we do not go
along with the gloomy predictions of some
futurologists, we are convinced that the
water problem is one of the most critical i
social and economic issues of our time. I
VALENTIN IGNATIEVICH KORZUN is chairman of the U.S.S.R. National
Committee for Unesco's International Hydrological Programme and deputy head
of the U. S. S. R. 's bureau of hydrological and meteorological services. He is the
author of more than 30 studies on hydrology.
ALEKSEI ALEKSANDROVICH SOKOLOV is a member of the U.S.S.R.
National Committee for Unesco's international Hydrological Programme. The
head of the U. S. S. R. 's bureau of hydrological and meteorological services, he is :
the author of some 100 studies on world water problems.
5

, The crux of the problem is that in order
to live and work, people require water of a
certain quality, and above all fresh water.
Since the bulk of the Earth's water is con¬
centrated in the ocean, it must be desalted
before it can be used, and desalting, unfor¬
tunately, is still a very costly process.
In some cases of extreme necessity
desalting is economically viable, and will be
used more extensively in the future, but its
role in the world water balance should not
be overestimated.
During the International Hydrological
Decade, Soviet scientists prepared a detail¬
ed inventory which revealed that world
fresh-water reserves, including rivers,
lakes, groundwater, snow fields and ice¬
caps, totalled 35 million km3, or some 2.5
per cent of all the Earth's water.
But the readily available supply is even
smaller, because 70 per cent of these assets
(more than 24 million km3) are, quite liter¬
ally, frozen in the ice and snow of the
Arctic, the Antarctic and Greenland, and
are virtually inaccessible.
More than 10.5 million km3 of fresh water
lie underground. These reserves constitute
one of the main sources of supply for many
countries. -£ut exploitation of such "natu¬
ral reservoirs" is severely limited, firstly
because they are unevenly distributed
throughout the world, and secondly
because they can only be tapped when the
inflow of water filtering down from the sur¬
face (in the form of natural precipitation or
waste water from human use) matches or
exceeds the outflow.
In most countries, the principal source of
water for human consumption and use is
and will continue to be the surface water
contained in rivers and lakes. But these
stocks are far from limitless. The latest
figures show that rivers and lakes contain
no more than 95,000 km3, a mere 0.26 per
cent of the world's fresh water (0.007 per
cent of its total water reserves).
Most of the water found on the land
comes from moisture absorbed into the
atmosphere from the seas and oceans.
Deposited on the land in the form of preci¬
pitation, it replenishes lakes and rivers. The
ocean thus acts as a gigantic natural desalt¬
ing plant, guaranteeing the quantity and
quality of fresh water resources.
The most recent data indicate that total
annual precipitation on land amounts to
1 19,000 km3. But only some 45,000 km3 of
this are returned to the ocean by rivers, and
some 2,000 km3 via the glaciers of the Arc¬
tic and Antarctic. (The rest evaporates into
the atmosphere or infiltrates deep into the
earth.)
It is thus the river flow generated by this
annual precipitation that constitutes our
renewed water supplies. It might be com¬
pared to a return on invested capital, which
can be used without "tapping", the original
investment.
Thus, the real problem is not that the
Earth is short of water, but that its reple¬
nishment in /ires/7 water is limited. Some
countries and regions of the world are
today facing a shortage of fresh water that
is growing more acute because of popula¬
tion growth and the development of
industry and agriculture. The situation is
aggravated by the reckless and often rapa¬
cious attitude of those who take water for
granted as a free gift of Nature. This leads
to the impoverishment of supplies and to a
rapid deterioration in quality, which in turn
causes irreparable damage to animal and
plant life, upsetting the ecological balance
of the biosphere.
How much water does man need? No
branch of industry in the modern world can
develop without water. Ten cubic metres
öf water are needed to produce one tonne
of fuel oil and 5,600 m3 to manufacture a
tonne of synthetic fibre! A thermal power
station with a capacity of one million kilo¬
watts "drinks" between 1.2 and 1.6 billion
cubic metres of water every year.
But the main factor in increasing demand
is the population explosion. Since 1900,
the world's population has more than dou¬
bled, rising from 1,670 million to over 4
billion:

Friend
and foe
These scenes from
different parts of the
world show the diversity
of man's complex and
often dangerous
relationship with water.
Left, raising water by
leverage and muscle-
power from a well near
Lake Chad in Africa.
Right, in northern Alaska
an Eskimo has pierced a
hole in the ice in order
to fish in the frozen
waters of River Meade.
Below, In Kampuchea
(formerly Cambodia) a
farmer and his water
buffalo cross a flooded
river. In southeast Asia
each year thousands of
lives are lost in floods,
which also destroy
over 5 million hectares
of crops.
Demographers predict that by the year
2015 it will reach 7 or 8 billion.
However, the calculation of future water
needs must take into account not only
population growth, but also improved
living standards, which directly depend on
increased water consumption.
While the world population has more
than doubled since 1900, the total annual
consumption of water has increased seven¬
fold, from 400 km3 to 2,800 km3. Moreover,
during the same period per capita con¬
sumption approximately trebled, largely
because of the demands of an increasingly
urban population.
In 1900, average annual water consump¬
tion totalled 240 m3 per person. By the year
2015, according to our calculations, this
figure will have risen to 1,130 m3 per year.
There has been a virtually unbridled
increase in the amount of water used by
industry, from 30 km3 per year at the begin¬
ning of the century to 630 km3 per year in
1975 more than a twentyfold increase.
During the same period, the consumption
of water for agriculture rose sixfold, from
350 km3 to 2,100 km3 annually.
By the year 2015, according to our calcu¬
lations, industry will be using 2,750 km3 of
water per year; agriculture 4,700 km3 and
domestic consumption will have risen to
650 km3. By the same date, the world as a
whole will be consuming 8,500 km3 per
year.
This projected consumption figure repre¬
sents 19 per cent of the annual runoff
figure mentioned above (45,000 km3) which
constitutes the replenishment of our water
supplies.
At first sight, one might be tempted to
draw an optimistic conclusion: by 2015
demand will be less than one-fifth of fresh¬
water resources. In reality, however,
demand should not be compared with the
total runoff, but with that portion of the
flow which can actually be exploited.
Since river flow varies considerably from
year to year (and even during the course of
a single year), unless some form of control
is applied, we can only use that part of the
flow which remains constant, that is,
approximately 25 per cent. If more big
reservoirs are built, this figure could be
increased, at the outside, to 50 per cent.
Furthermore, annual river flow is ex¬
tremely unevenly distributed. The Earth is
roughly divided into two parts: one where
there is excess moisture but not enough
heat, and another where there is more than
enough heat but where moisture is in short
supply. The latter part includes 33 per cent
of the territory of Europe, 60 per cent of
Asia, almost the whole of Australia, most
of Africa, the western part of North Ame¬
rica and 30 per cent of South America.
If we consider the per capita supply of |
fresh water, we find that Europe (with I
7

, almost 20 per cent of the world's popula¬
tion and only 7 per cent of its fresh-water
resources) is in the worst position. Asia,
with 60 per cent of the world's population,
has barely 31 per cent of reserves.
In all the populated regions of our planet,
the annually renewable fresh-water resour¬
ces which could really be exploited amount
to some 12,500 km3. This is not much
more than the projected figure for con¬
sumption in the year 2015.
But the water problem is further compli¬
cated by the progressive deterioration in
the quality of fresh-water resources. The
amount of used water discharged through¬
out the world into sewers and reservoirs is
already enormousapproximately 700 km3
per year. By 2015, the annual discharge of
effluent, including runoff water from irriga¬
tion, will exceed 2,000 km3.
Even when purified by modern tech¬
niques, used water must be diluted in at
least ten times its original volume of pure
water to be fit for further use, though the
effluent from some- chemical -industries
may require as much as 100 or even 200
times the original volume. By the year
2015, some 20,000 km3 of pure water will
be required for this purpose, that is,
approximately twice the amount of the
available fresh-water resources of the
populated regions of our planet.
This leads inescapably to the conclusion
that by the year 2015, water resources will
be close to exhaustion in the populated
regions of the globe. In certain regions and
river basins, they will be exhausted by the
end of this century.
The only way to alleviate the water prob¬
lem and stave off the impending "water
famine", is to devise a comprehensive and
overall approach to the exploitation of
resources. With scientific planning, mea¬
sures can be developed and implemented
at the national, regional and global levels
alike to prevent the pollution and exhaus¬
tion of water supplies.
One way of replenishing resources in the
world's populated regions would be to use
water from less densely populated areas in
that part of the globe where there is an
abundance of moisture. Here lie some 50
per cent of the world's fresh water resour¬
ces, which up to now have been left out of
our calculations concerning the situation in
the year 2015.
The exploitation of these resources by
redistributing river flow to areas which lack
water will pose enormous engineering
problems. But, despite the complexity of
the task and the huge expenditure
involved, an approach of this type offers
one of the most realistic solutions to the
water problem in a number of countries.
The North American Water and Power
Alliance has proposed a gigantic project to
divert up to 196 km3 of water from the
Yukon, Fraser, Peace and Athabaska
rivers, and part of the Columbia River to
the dry plains of Canada and the United
States. (See article page 23.) In South
America, there are plans to divert the flow
of two of the world's greatest rivers, the
Amazon and the Plate.
In Africa, specialists are examining the
problem of transferring a considerable part
of the water of the Congo towards Lake
Chad, in order to irrigate neighbouring
parts of the Sahara. In the Soviet Union,
the question of diverting part of the Ob and
the northern rivers of European Russia
towards the south, to the arid regions east
of the Volga, to Central Asia and to
Kazakhstan, is under consideration. Stu¬
dies of a similar nature are being made in
Australia, Pakistan and other countries.
Some scientists have voiced fears that
interference with Nature on such an unpre¬
cedented scale may lead to unforeseen and
unpleasant consequences and even to
changes in the rotation of the Earth and in
the climate of our planet. Soviet studies
have shown that such fears are groundless.
The amount of water involved in these pro¬
jected transfers is only a very small propor¬
tion of the total amount of water circulating
in the hydrological cycle (approximately
12,900 km3).
Aware that this problem was becoming
acute in many countries, Unesco's General
Conference at its 13th session in 1964,
adopted a global programme of internation¬
al scientific co-operation the Internation¬
al Hydrological Decade. This piogramme
included more than 60 projects, involving
scientists from 108 countries, as well as a
number of governmental and non¬
governmental organizations.
The experience gained by participants in
the International Hydrological Decade has
been discussed at many scientific confe¬
rences, symposia and seminars, and pub¬
lished in international handbooks and other
documents. But although the achieve¬
ments of the International Hydrological
Decade were far from negligible, many
problems still remained to be solved, and
some of them have as yet barely been
touched upon.
Consequently, in 1975, immediately after
the conclusion of the International Hydro-
logical Decade, a new, far-reaching and
long-term programme of international col¬
laboration was launched under the aegis of


The world's
arid lands
Unesco has recently published a new map of the world distribution of arid regions, taking
into account the latest advances in knowledge of climates, soils and vegetation. Above,
simplified version of the map. It shows how vast areas of the continents are affected
by water shortages. Even "subhumid" regions experience water supply problems.
The great thirst
This graduated glass shows
average world per capita water
consumption (in millions of litres
per year) since 1900, as well as a
forecast up to the year 2015.
Industrial and agricultural needs
are Included. The population
explosion is accelerating growth
in demand for water. World
population, 1.6 billion at the turn
of the century. Is now more than
4 billion and Is expected to reach
nearly 7 billion by the year 2000.
Unesco and with the active participation of
many countries and international organiza¬
tions.
This programme, known as the Interna¬
tional Hydrological Programme (IHP), pro¬
vides for the exchange of experience con¬
cerning the collection, processing and
analysis of hydrological data; the develop¬
ment of physical and mathematical models
of natural and artificially induced hydrologi¬
cal phenomena; the improvement of
methods of calculation and data-feeding
for automated water management
systems; the use of the latest techniques
and equipment for the study of water
resources (satellites, remote-sensing,
etc.); and collaboration in the training of
scientific and technical personnel.
Scientists from all over the world are
today co-operating in Unesco's Internatio¬
nal Hydrological. Programme, with the
active participation of the World Meteoro¬
logical Organization (WMO), the Interna¬
tional Association of Hydrological Sciences
(IAHS), the Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion (FAO) and other international, govern¬
mental and non-governmental organiza¬
tions. This increasingly close international
collaboration is essential if the Earth's
water problem is to be solved.
Valentin I. Korzun
Aleksei A. Sokolov
