RETURN
TO THE
HOMELAND
The art of Oceania Is rich In masks designed for use at funerals or fertility rites. Made
from a variety of materials, usually including tapa, or bark-cloth, they are sometimes
elongated in shape and have richly decorated eyes, like this example from the Gulf of
Papua which now forms part of the collection of the Papua New Guinea Museum. It was
returned to Papua New Guinea in 1977 by the Australian Museum, Sydney, where it had
been since 1884.



Entire regions
have been deprived
of their
cultural past
by Georges Fradier
IMAGINE a country which has collec¬
tions of works of art of all kinds and
diverse origins. It makes careful provi¬
sions for storing these precious objects; it
exhibits them to an admiring public; it
makes them available for study by scholars.
But what if representatives of another
country should come along, point at a sta¬
tue, say, or some mosaics or a manuscript,
and declare: "Look here, these things don't
belong to you. They were removed from
our country. In all fairness, you ought to
return them to us"?
This situation has in fact occurred often
enough to arouse the concern of the Uni¬
ted Nations General Assembly, which since
1973 has been looking into the question of
"the restitution of works of art to countries
victims of expropriation", and of Unesco
which is now preparing to set up "an inter¬
governmental committee concerning the
restitution or return of cultural property to
countries having lost it as a result of colo¬
nial or foreign occupation." Last March, an
international group of experts meeting in
the capital of Senegal, Dakar, drafted the
committee's terms of reference.
In some cases cultural property is seized
by force of arms. Except for the nomadic
hordes of old, who chose to destroy what
they found, armies have on the whole had
GEORGES FRADIER, French novelist and
essayist, was for many years a member of
Unesco's staff, latterly as Acting Director of the
Division of Human Settlements and Socio-
Cultural Environment. Among his many pub¬
lished works are East and West, towards mutual
understanding (1959), Encounters and Celebra¬
tions, on the mutual appreciation of Eastern and
Western cultural values (1963) and About the
Quality of Life (1976) all published by Unesco.

This wickerwork mask with a tapa face, possibly a fertility-symbol, was
found in a Papuan village. A characteristic specimen of a highly
original art, it was returned to Papüa New Guinea on 20 August 1974 by the
National Museum of New Zealand at Wellington as part of an informal
arrangement with the Papua New Guinea Museum, Port Moresby.
at their head, or in their ranks, shrewd col¬
lectors on the look-out for objects to take
back for the adornment of palaces and,"
later on, museums.
The law of nations has been quite explicit
on this point for almost 2,000 years: if a
country that has enriched itself in this way
loses a war, the victors enforce restitution.
The 1815 Treaty of Vienna, and the
Treaties of Versailles, Saint-Germain and
Sèvres at the end of the First World War,
resulted in the return of thousands of
works of art from all over Europe to their
country of origin.
Those treaties even blithely ignored any
notion of prescription, the principle of law
whereby the right to something may be
acquired through its continued use or pos¬
session over a long period: in 1920 one
country was requested to return objects
and documents which it had removed in
the 18th century from a region then under
its domination. They included a triptych
painted by Peter Paul Rubens that one of
the country's kings had purchased in 1777.
Naturally, any power which imposes
such treaties ought to feel bound by the
same obligations if it too possesses works
once removed from another country.
Examples of such elementary courtesy
have, however, proved rare and, in this
context, historians are fond of quoting
their precursor, the Greek chronicler Poly-
bius, who wrote, more than 2,000 years
ago: "It is my hope that the conquerors of
the future will learn not to despoil the
towns they take, and will refrain from
turning other nations' misfortunes into
embellishments for their own country."
It is quite frequent, today, for one
country to approach another with a formal
request for the restitution of works taken
from it in unhappy circumstances at a spe¬
cific time and place. The other country will
listen politely and then regret that it is not
in a position to take any action.
One African country, for instance, is cur¬
rently attempting to recover one of four
ivory masks removed in 1897 by certain
members of a "punitive expedition". The
whereabouts of the masks, which are of
enormous symbolic and historical value, is
known; one of them is in a museum, and
the three others are in the possession of
private individuals. These include a woman
descendant of an officer who took part in
the raid. Doubtless she considers thft the
item forms part of her family possessions;
what the holders of the other two masks
feel about the matter is not known. The
fact remains, however, that the official
delegation of the requesting country,!
which was empowered to buy one of the
masks (for a very high price), returned
home empty-handed.
It would be a mistake, however, to sup¬
pose that military operations alone have
been responsible for the large-scale re- k
moval of cultural property which is now f

Wooden "ndop"
figurines depicting kings
played a major role In
the transmission of
authority among the
Kuba people of Zaire,
whose traditions of
kingship are centuries
old. The subject of each
statuette can be
identified by a symbolic
object attached to its
base. Example shown
here (height 55
centimetres) is a
representation of King
M'Bop, who ruled at the
turn of the century.
Photo © Royal Museum
of Central Africa,
Tervuren, Belgium
Thought to depict an Amazon, this
polychrome mosaic dating from the
5th century A.D. attests to the extent
of the Roman colonization of Asia
Minor. It was discovered at the
ancient city of Apamea In Syria and
belonged to the Newark Museum,
New Jersey (U.S.A.). Following a
request sent to the Museum on 25
June 1973 by the Syrian Department
of Antiquities and Museums, this
outstanding work returned to its
homeland on 6 April 1974.
causing concern to international organiza-
' tions like Unesco. Nearly all such transfers
have taken place in peacetime, and in the
most peaceful manner possible. A number
of renowned museums boast works which
came to them as a result of cold-blooded
plunder, carried out, under a cloak of
authority, either during a "foreign or colo¬
nial" occupation, or on occasions presen¬
ted by the occupation of a territory by a
third power; whatever the circumstances,
the essential common factor was the
defencelessness of those being plundered.
The most blatant example of such
dealings remains the case of the "Elgin
Marbles", sculptures from the Acropolis of
Athens which were hewn off the buildings,
dismantled and sent out of the country be¬
tween 1800 and 1803 by the British envoy
extraordinary in Constantinople, the
Seventh Earl of Elgin. How many visitors to
the British Museum realize, as they stand in
admiration before the frieze of the Parthe¬
non and a Caryatid from the Erechtheum,
that Lord Elgin's henchmen smashed
dozens of bas-reliefs as they took the tem¬
ples to pieces? Or that some of the met¬
opes, which might eventually have formed
part of the London, Paris or Copenhagen
collections, were shipwrecked and now lie
at the bottom of the sea, somewhere off
Cape Malea at the southern tip of the Pélo¬
ponnèse? Do they realize that all these
sculptures would now be standing on the
Acropolis, where their creator Phidias
intended them to stand, had it not been for
Lord Elgin's frantic efforts to "save" them,
with the dubious approval of the govern¬
ment in Constantinople?
This is but one typical case among hun¬
dreds. It would be absurd to level accusa¬
tions at one particular country rather than
another. Besides, at the time, nobody criti¬
cized Lord Elgin more vehemently than the
English poet Lord Byron. Most leading
museums of ethnography or ancient art
today possess important works obtained in
similar circumstances in Greece, Italy,
China, India, the Middle East, Africa or
Latin America. It is more instructive to exa¬
mine the clear conscience with which such
"rescue operations" were nearly always
carried out.
Around 1800 it was fashionable to bring
to Europe any work deemed beautiful; a
beautiful work of art was a reflection of
man's genius, and Europe assumed that it
held the monopoly of that attribute. Occa¬
sionally, a single European nation would go
it alone. When Napoleon's commissioners
walked off with statues, books, paintings
and gold objects from Flanders, Italy and
Spain, they seriously believed they were
striking a blow for Reason and Enlighten¬
ment.
Later on, other high-flown pretexts,
such as scientific progress, love of art, or
simply the needs of the collection, were
found for relieving weaker countries of
their heritage. Thus, most cultural property
removed from former colonies (or from
countries in a de facto situation of depen¬
dence because of political unrest or econo¬
mic stagnation) would seem to have been
legally acquired. Legislation protecting
such property and forbidding its export is
only recent, and has not yet been enforced
in all countries.
The problem is how to decide retrospec¬
tively whether acquisition was legal or not.
Travellers in search of exotic souvenirs or
experts carrying out research may well
have behaved with scrupulous honesty. A
local administrator, landowner, or village
chief would authorize them to take away
the fruits of their excavations, objects from
a sanctuary, or manuscripts from neglected
archives.
Many objects, ranging from the priceless
to the most utilitarian, were given away in
8

The Kuba people, who migrated in large numbers from the west
to central Zaire, have always felt a keen admiration for art and
beauty and hold the artist in high esteem. Of all the craftsmen at
the royal court, the sculptor held pride of place. Carved In minute
detail, this wooden hand (84 millimetres long) was a ritual object
which may have had a sacred meaning.
This pre-Columbian ceramic, produced sometime
between 800 and 1200 A.D., was discovered in a
tomb at Sitio Conte in Codé province, northern
Panama. The Peabody Museum at Harvard
University (U.S.A.) has returned it to Panama under
a ten-year renewable loan.
The Lega people of the Maniema
region of Zaire produce an art
whose simple, expressive style
appears to full effect in the
objects they create for the
Bwamé, a society of initiates. This
mask (137 millimetres high) is
made of ivory and probably
belonged to a high-ranking
initiate. Like the other two objects
from Zaire shown on these pages
it has been returned to its
homeland as part of an agreement
between the Royal Museum of
Central Africa at Tervuren
(Belgium) and the National
Museums of Zaire.
The Hungarian coronation
regalia have returned home
once more. The crown was
given to St. Stephen, the
first king of Hungary, in the
year 1001 by Pope Sylvester
II; the sceptre and the orb
date from the 12th and 14th
centuries respectively.
Several times lost and even
stolen during the centuries,
these precious objects were
stored at Fort Knox,
Kentucky, after the Second
World War. Following an
agreement between the
United States and
Hungarian Governments
the regalia were returned to
Budapest early in 1978.
accordance with the laws of hospitality.
Even more were simply bought or bartered
as the result of transactions which, how¬
ever odd they may seem today, probably
satisfied both parties. Later on, the use of
currency simplified matters, and dealers
began to flourish. What could be more
legal than such dealings when carried out
in good faith and in accordance with local
practice?
There is good reason today to look
askance at such practices and to take the
notion of good faith with a pinch of salt.
One may wonder, for instance, whether
the donors were always entitled to give.
Sometimes the degree of generosity was
unacceptably high, such as when a poten¬
tate gave away the property of "his" peo¬
ple, or when a priest kindly offered a visitor
the contents of "his" church.
It is equally legitimate to question the
validity of commercial transactions from
the time of the wandering pedlar down to
the tentacular business concerns of today.
Was the seller entitled to sell? Was he really
the owner, or at least a genuine representa¬
tive of the owner?
Works of art are stolen or disappear
every day. After a long and circuitous
route, they reappear in the shops of respec
table dealers, who then sell them to equally
respectable collectors. Sometimes it might
be more relevant to ask whether the seller
was really in a position to refuse to sell in
the first place, in other words whether or
not he was forced by social or economic
pressure to accept money for a piece of
property that he would have kept for him¬
self if he had had greater freedom of
action.
On the international art market paintings
pass from hand to hand, from strongroom
to museum, from continent to continent.
In general, this is the lot for which they
were intended and for a long time painters
have been putting their works up for sale
and dealers have been pushing their prices
upwards. On the art market there is a kind
of equality between buyer and seller.
This is not the case, however, when the
market handles items that were never
intended to be sold. Three-quarters of "lost"
cultural property consists of objects that
were carved, painted, modelled or woven
for religious and ceremonial purposes, or
else were purely utilitarian. The flow of
such property is almost always in one direc¬
tion only, from the poor to the rich coun¬
tries. A number of countries with out- 1



standing artistic gifts have been deprived in I

Photo © Oakland Museum, Oakland, California
These two Chancay funeral figures,
formerly in the possession of the Oakland
Museum, Oakland, California, were
handed back to the Consul-General of
Peru in San Francisco in March 1977. The
Chancay people inhabited the central
Peruvian area from around 1000 AD up to
the arrival of the Spanish conquistadores.
They were famed for their weaving which
was technically highly advanced.
This chalk figure, from New Ireland in the
Bismarck Archipelago (Pacific Ocean) is
one of a number of items returned in 1977
to the Papua New Guinea National
Museum by the Australian Museum,
Sydney. It was originally acquired by the
Australian Museum by purchase.
this way of their entire cultural heritage.
The richer their traditions, the more their
artefacts tend to flow abroad.
This explains why many countries are
now feeling frustration and resent¬
ment are demanding the restitution
of their works of art. One African head of
state was leafing through a book on his
country's art when he realized that of the
hundreds of important and characteristic
works shown in the illustrations every sin¬
gle one was outside the country. An¬
other "African leader wanted to create a
national art .museum. His representatives
approached museum curators from Europe
and America during a congress telling
them: "We have nothing of our own left.
Would each of you agree to let us have one
work, just one, from all those in your col¬
lections?"
So far, none of the museums involved
has felt able to accede to that request. The
national museum has opened, but its ex-
^^^1
^1
mw
C W^^ .- -
^m
^m t ^^M
^B^ J
i J9^H
10

Detail from a stele dating from the late
classical period (600-900 AD) of Mayan
culture. This stele, which stands 240 cm
high, was originally discovered at the
ancient ruins of Piedras Negras, in north¬
western Guatemala. The stele, which was
acquired by a United States Museum, was
returned to the Government of Guatemala
In 1970.
hibits are photographs and one or two
copies.
Yet such heartfelt appeals are being
increasingly heeded, and it now seems cer¬
tain that they will not remain completely
unanswered. Restitution is not being
requested on a scale too massive to be fea¬
sible. No country is claiming back more
than a portion of its lost cultural property,
even in cases where the losses have left
unpleasant memories. It is universally
accepted that the arts and sciences have
nothing to gain from being enclosed within
national boundaries and that, on the con¬
trary, admiration and love of a people's cul¬
ture can only increase when its works of art
are exhibited and studied abroad.
The experts brought together by
Unesco, all of them museologists, defined
a specific objective they felt should be
aimed for: the reconstitution, through bila¬
teral negotiations, of a country's dispersed
heritage. More precisely, they said, it is
advisable "to ensure the return to its
country of origin of cultural property which
is fundamentally important from the point
of view of its spiritual value and the cultural
heritage of the peoples concerned." No
one could refuse to subscribe to such a
reasonable objective.
It would seem, however, that manifesta¬
tions of justice and solidarity, the recogni¬
tion of cultural identities, or a spirit of
generosity are not enough alone to solve
this problem. There remain a number of
hurdles to be cleared; the most important
of these, according to the Unesco experts,
are "psychological difficulties" and legal
obstacles.
There are, they say, certain psychologi¬
cal difficulties which "are linked to the
incriminating aspects of the act of restitu¬
tion which implies that the possession of
the object was up till then illegitimate.
Many countries and private owners would
find it difficult to accept being placed as it
were in the dock when the objects in ques¬
tion were added to their collections by
means that were legal and legitimate at the
time, and when they could well, it seems,
invoke the principle of non-retroactivity."
More serious is the concern expressed by
institutions and private individuals about
the legal and physical protection, even the
conservation, of cultural property once it
has been returned to the country of origin.
The experts proclaimed what they called
"the primacy of the object"; and indeed it
would ill become a requesting country to
recover a given item unless it could
demonstrate that it could guarantee perfect
conservation.
In this sphere, however, there exist a
number of broad rules that could be fol¬
lowed anywhere in the world. But their
applicationa moral duty which no state
would wish to be seen to shirk may be
hindered by material difficulties and
administrative shortcomings, as happens in
areas where conservation methods are still
inadequate. In such cases, the following
solution was suggested by the experts:
countries "in possession" of the objects
could and should offer the technical aid
necessary for every aspect of conservation
to those countries which need it, and help
to train every echelon of the staff who will
be in charge of collections.
Their advice has already been put into
practice. For example, an agreement rea¬
ched in 1970 between the Royal Museum
of Central Africa, at Tervuren in Belgium,
and the National Museums of Zaire pro¬
vides for the collection of objects, the resti¬
tution of certain works, the services of Bel¬
gian experts and the training of Zairian
curators.
The legal obstacles to the return of cul¬
tural property arise in connexion with the
question of the legal status of the claimed
objects. When they form part of national
collections (which are in theory untransfer¬
able), they can be donated to another state
by government decision. This occurs only
rarely, and in a number of countries any
such decision would (again in theory) be
subject to prior parliamentary debate.
But even when this obstacle exists,
however formidable it may appear to be,
there are usually ways of getting round it.
Museums are perfectly free to arrange
loans and exchanges, and more particularly
to entrust works of art to foreign institu¬
tions on a long-term deposit basis. Such
deposits may be indefinitely renewable by
tacit agreement.
Objects that are in private hands, how¬
ever, seem difficult to recover. The right of
ownership is almost universally guaran¬
teed, and could be overridden only by
CONTINUED PAGE 33
H

RETURN TO THE HOMELAND
(Continued from page 1 1)
exceptional expropriation measures, which
are scarcely ever resorted to except when
the public interest is at stake. Few coun¬
tries would feel able to justify the identifica¬
tion of the public interest (a notion which
would have to be redefined) with interna¬
tional cultural values.
But there is always the possibility that
privately owned works whose return is
desired by their country of origin may sur¬
face on the art market. Several states have
the right of pre-emption at public auctions
held on their territory which gives them by
law a prior claim over the rights of the
highest bidder, who receives compensa¬
tion. A system of bilateral agreements
could be envisaged, whereby the right of
pre-emption could be exercised to the
advantage of a state which has requested
the return of an invaluable part of its heri¬
tage. But in all other cases, if compulsion is
ruled out, there is no choice but to rely on
the good will of the owners.
When it comes down to it, the restitu¬
tion, loan or deposit of property, and the
technical co-operation that can facilitate
such action, will always depend on the
good will of owners, whether private or
public. It may be claimed that it is inge¬
nuous to bank on such qualities as intelli¬
gence or a sense of fairness, which do not
usually govern human relationships. But
such pessimism has already been belied on
numerous occasions.
The collaboration between Belgium and
Zaire is by no means an isolated case. In
1974, the National Museum of New Zea-
. land despatched, at its own expense, to the
National Museum and Art Gallery of Papua
New Guinea, a collection of valuable
ethnographic items it had acquired the
year before.
In the last few years, the Stockholm
Museum of Ethnography has established
working relationships with universities and
museums in Kenya, Tanzania and Sri
Lanka, in order to improve research and
conservation techniques and pave the way
for any necessary restitutions.
On two occasions, in 1959 and in 1976,
Harvard University in the United States
returned to the Mexican authorities hun¬
dreds of gold and jade objects discovered
during excavations on the Yucatan penin¬
sula at the turn of the century. Other price¬
less pre-Columbian items, acquired over 50
years ago by U.S. citizens, were also
recently returned to the national museums
of Panama and Guatemala by Harvard and
Pennsylvania Universities.
Lastly, there was the recent case of a
Japanese businessman who decided that
his prize possession, the 1,000-year-old
sword of a Sumatran king, complete with a
scabbard studded with gold, diamonds,
rubies and sapphires, should be returned to
Indonesiawhich only goes to show that
some private collectors at least are aware
of the need for restitution.
It is a pity that the many instances of pro¬
perty being returned in this way are given
very little publicity, because once an exam¬
ple is given the idea may catch on, with the
most fruitful results. However, the initia¬
tives of this kind that are known to have
been taken are already sufficiently nu¬
merous to suggest that the appeal made by
the Director-General of Unesco, Mr.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, on 7 June 1978,
"for the return of an irreplaceable heritage
to those who created it" will be swiftly
heeded and will help to smooth out any
difficulties in negotiations which are still
only tentative. (See page 4).
His stirring appeal was addressed not
only to governments and public or private
institutions, but also to librarians, art gal¬
lery owners, journalists, critics, historians
and writers.
But it is to be hoped that the men and
women of today, and more particularly the
young people Mr. M'Bow had in mind
when he called on the help of educators,
are already aware that respect for works of
art should lead "wherever necessary to
^ their return to their homeland", and that
they understand "the affliction a nation can
suffer at the spoliation of the works it has
created." They may not themselves have
anything to return; but their support is
absolutely vital.
Georges Fradier

