Brunelleschi
The
Florentine
who launched
Renaissance
architecture
by Francesco Gurrieri
The genius of the 15th-century architect Filippo Brunelleschi left an
enduring imprint on the city of Florence. Left, the cathedral of Santa
Maria del Fiore, whose mighty cupola, one of the biggest in the world,
was designed by Brunelleschi. It dominates the rooftops in panoramic
view of the city (below), along with another of Brunelleschl's
masterpieces, the domed basilica of San Lorenzo (left of photo). Above,
San Lorenzo in close-up.
Photos © Robert Descharnes, Paris
WITH the coming of the Renais¬
sance in the early 15th century,
Italian art underwent a funda¬
mental change. The development of a
new humanist outlook created a cultural
climate which favoured the blending of
the arts and the sciences and in the city of
Florence liberated the creative genius of
exceptional men such as the painter
Masaccio, the sculptor Donatello and the
architect Filippo Brunelleschi.
Brunelleschi was born in Florence in
1377, 600 years ago, an anniversary which
Italy has just commemorated with justifi¬
able pride. The son of a prosperous notary
who occupied an important position in the
Florentine Republic, he trained initially as
a goldsmith and sculptor, being admitted
to the Goldsmiths' Guild at the age of 21.
Small in stature, he was a witty and highly
cultivated man. We know how effective
he could be in answering back his critics k
from one of his poems in which he lashes J
FRANCESCO GURRIERI, Italian architect, art
critic and historian of architecture, is assistant
superintendent of Monuments in Florence. A
specialist on Tuscan architecture, he lectures
on architectural restoration techniques at Flo¬
rence university and has collaborated with the
International Council of Monuments and Sites
(ICOMOS).
27

, lO'ut at a denigrator of his greatest master¬
piece, the dome of Florence cathedral.
At this period of Italian history, the
communes towns and cities ruled by
free, self-governing institutionswere
yielding one after the other to the power
of new overlords, the signorie. Florence,
however, a city of powerful businessmen
and merchants, succeeded in preserving
its constitution and its right to self-
government, as well as freedom of expres¬
sion for its humanists and scholars. Its
rulers were men of letters whose influence
stemmed less from their rank than from
the esteem in which they were held by the
people. This was the age of Florence's
great "humanist chancellors", men such
as Coluccio Salutati, Leonardo Bruni and
Possio Bracciolini, whose names have
passed into the history of Italian literature.
Brunelleschi's first biographer, the
mathematician Antonio Manetti, reports
that his subject was deeply interested in
science, and particularly in optics (then
closely related to medicine and physics).
Thanks to his studies in this field, he
formulated revolutionary principles of
perspective and applied these laws to a
new concept of architectural space.
Another biographer, Giorgio Vasari, refers
to Brunelleschi's close relations with
mathematicians and physicists.
In 1401, at the age of 24, Brunelleschi
entered the famous competition for the
bronze relief decoration of the second door
of the Baptistery in Florence. His trial
piece won the competition jointly with that
For the Ospedale degli Innocenti, Florence's Foundling Hospital named after
the Innocents of Herod's massacre, Brunelleschi created a façade with wide
semi-circular arches and slender columns. Drawing below shows the façade
as it looked in 1445. Lower photo shows a detail of the interior of the church
of Santo Spirito, which Brunelleschi designed in 1436.
I Î f 1 I
Photos Paolo Monti © Electra Editrice, Milan
The Pazzi Chapel (below), which Brunelleschi built for Florence's powerful
Pazzi family, is one of the architect's most remarkable creations. The
columns, porches and many other details of the design show how carefully
Brunelleschi had studied the ancient ruins in Rome. Many of the terracotta
roundels inside the chapel are by the great sculptor Luca delta Robbia.
iWWWVWWW^^s^ii^iÉ
11
r rz\

Detail of the wooden crucifix
carved by Brunelleschi for
the church of Santa Maria
Novella in Florence. The
crucifix (1 metre 70 cms.
high) is the only surviving
piece of monumental
sculpture in wood by
Brunelleschi.
In 1401, a competition was
held for the decoration of a
pair of bronze doors destined
for the Baptistery in
Florence, and sculptors were
invited to submit a trial piece
on the theme of "the
Sacrifice of Isaac".
Brunelleschi's entry (detail
below) won joint first prize
along with that of Lorenzo
Ghiberti, who later executed
the commission alone.
of Lorenzo Ghiberti. The two artists
were invited to share the commission, but
Brunelleschi refused to collaborate with
his rival and Ghiberti did the door. From
then on he turned increasingly to architec¬
ture, where far greater successes awaited
him.
In the early years of the 15th century,
Brunelleschi is thought to have visited
Rome to study the ancient monuments.
According to Vasari, he was accompanied
by his friend Donatello the sculptor, and
the two men spent so much time measur¬
ing the ruins of temples and palaces that
the Romans thought they were searching
for hidden treasure.
Brunelleschi's interest in the relics of
classical art reflected much more than a
mere concern with style. He was aiming to
create new modes of harmony and beauty,
as well as investigating building
techniques. The result was that he invent¬
ed an entirely new architectural language
which was far from being a slavish imita¬
tion of classical models. .
It was not until 1418, by which time he k
was 41, that Brunelleschi began to reveal f
29

, the full scope of his creative genius. In that
year he built a chapel (which has not sur¬
vived) for the church of San Jacopa
Soprarno in Florence. According to Manetti
he was trying to prove that the system of
vaulting by interlocking or "herringbone"
courses of masonry, which he had perfect¬
ed, could be used to construct a dome
without the use of a temporary wooden
supporting framework.
This ingenious new technique of alter¬
nating horizontal and vertical rows of
bricks in a herringbone pattern was to be a
characteristic feature of all Brunelleschi's
domes, both large and small. In his search
for perfection the architect closely super¬
vised the fitting together of the brickwork
and every other detail of the construction
work: each brick in the cathedral dome was
manufactured according to his precise
measurements and specifications.
In 1418, Brunelleschi also drew up a
project for the reconstruction of the an¬
cient Romanesque church of San Lorenzo.
Taking into account the ground-plan of
the ancient edifice, he devised a new
church with a nave and two side-aisles,
each flanked by small chapels. Even the
lateral views, from the nave towards each
chapel off the aisles, were conceived in
conformity with the rules of perspective.
Later in the same year, he began work
on the Old Sacristy of San Lorenzo,
intended to become the family chapel of
the Medicis. The building, a remarkable
example of purity of form, consists of a
cubic hall above which rises a circular
melon dome.
In the following year, 1419, Brunelleschi
began to produce projects for the Ospedale
degli Innocenti, Florence's foundling hos¬
pital, whose harmoniously proportioned
façade is still admired today. The Ospedale,
which would serve as a model for later
generations of hospital builders, marks the
birth of a new and authentically modern
type of building created along functional
lines by an architect who was also cons¬
cious of the imperatives and problems of
urban planning.
In August 1420, work began on the
dome of Santa Maria del Fiore, the cathe¬
dral of Florence, a mammoth undertaking
in which Brunelleschi was to be involved
throughout the second half of his life.
The dome, which rises over 80 metres
above ground level, is without parallel in
the history of architecture. Its construc¬
tion posed innumerable problems of design
and building technique, to which
Brunelleschi, as great an engineer as he
was an architect, devised some astonish¬
ing solutions.
The eight master-architects who had
preceded him in directing the work had
left the octagonal drum on which the dome
was to rest open to the sky. It stood there
like a vast crater, and no one knew how
to cover it. In 1417, the project was
thrown open to public competition, and
engineers and architects submitted a
number of designs incorporating a variety
of different approaches. Brunelleschi's
solution to the problem was novel and
attractive, but it alarmed the organizers of
the competition. He proposed to build the
dome without using the traditional wooden
supporting framework. The technique was
revolutionary but feasible.
When construction work began, it was
directed by Brunelleschi, Lorenzo Ghiberti
and Battista d'Antonio. By 1426, however,
Brunelleschi was virtually in complete
control. Among the many admirers of the
dome was the great architect and theore¬
tician Leon Battista Alberti (1404-1472),
who praised it as "a structure so great,
rising above the skies, large enough to
shelter all the people of Tuscany in its
shadow".
The dome, some 40 metres in diameter,
consists of an outer and an inner shell,
separated by a gap through which access is
given to the top. The thickness of the inner
shell is just over 2 metres and that of the
outer shell 0.75 metrest while the gap
between them is over 1 metre wide.
The red and green clay tiles which cover
the outer surface of the dome, together
with the white marble ribbing, create a
matchless interplay of colours against the
blue Florentine sky.
Brunelleschi's solution to the problem
of the dome expresses the humanist ideals
of the great architect and embodies a new
vision of the relationship between art and
mankind. The future development of
Florence was dominated by his monu¬
mental work, and through its association
with this new conception of art the city
became identified for all time with the rise
of humanism.
Many other designs have been attribut¬
ed to Brunelleschi, including work on the
Pitti Palace and fortifications in Pisa and
Vicopisano. The basilica of Santo Spirito,
planned in 1436 and begun in 1444, show
that his boldness in manipulating architec¬
tural forms in no way diminished as he
grew older.
The work of Filippo Brunelleschi marks
a turning point in the history of archi¬
tecture. In future plans would be drawn
accurately and methodically, and checked
against the laws of perspective. Buildings
would be carefully sited in their urban
surroundings.
Brunelleschi died in 1466. He is buried
in Florence cathedral, in the shadow of the
great dome which represents one of the
greatest triumphs of man's creative genius.
Francesco Gurrieri
