Education
for disarmament
'Freedom from fear is
a fundamental human right'
by Swadesh Rana
URGENCY, cynicism and helpless¬
ness characterize the current
debate on disarmament. Almost
everyone recognizes the urgency, very few
can help being cynical, and hardly anyone
knows how to transform the desirable into
the attainable.
Beginning with the Declaration of St.
Petersburg in 1868 (which prohibited the
use of explosive bullets), international con¬
cern about disarmament has undergone
two fundamental changes. On the one
hand there has been a shift in emphasis
away from general and complete disarma¬
ment towards arms control, and on the
other an increasing diversification of the
international machinery to negotiate disar¬
mament proposals. Both these develop¬
ments were inspired by the need to trans¬
form the desirable into the attainable; nei¬
ther has really promoted the objectives
visualized.
Enthusiasm for arms control was based
on the logic that limitation would lead to
reduction and ultimate elimination of arms.
As a corollary, those most heavily armed
were considered to be responsible for start¬
ing the process of control.
Since the League of Nations convened a
world' conference to discuss universal
disarmament, in February 1932, the inter¬
national community has adopted no less
that twenty-two major multilateral and as
many bilateral agreements to control the
arms race, in addition to thirty resolutions
of the United Nations, including the latest
SWADESH RANA of India has been engaged
in research at the Institute for Defence Studies
and Analyses, New Delhi, since 1971. A former
Visiting Fellow at the Institute for the Study of
War and Peace, Columbia University, New
York, and at the International Peace Research
Institute, Oslo, she has written widely on
international relations, disarmament and peace.
by the first-ever U.N. Special Session on
Disarmament, held earlier this year. Not
one of these measures has as yet deterred
the acquisition or encouraged the elimina¬
tion of a single weapon which a country
considered crucial for its legitimate national
security interests.
In all disarmament discussions, whether
between nation-states, as in the Eighteen-
Nation Disarmament Committee (now
some forty members strong and re-named
the Committee on Disarmament) or bet¬
ween individuals, at meetings such as the
Pugwash Conferences (1) and in institu¬
tions such as the Oslo International Peace
Research Institute, national security con¬
cerns have emerged as the single most
stubborn obstacle to disarmament. In¬
variably the frontiers of national security
concerns coincide with the geographical
borders of a nation-state. National leaders
view the inviolability of their frontiers with
the same uncompromising attitude as indi¬
viduals perceive their right to survival.
For most of the developing countries,
which by now constitute more than two-
thirds of the international community, the
sanctity of territorial borders as they emer¬
ged with statehood also involves the capa¬
bility to regulate within their frontiers such
events as insurgency and secessionist
threats. For some industrialized countries,
national frontiers extend beyond their geo¬
graphical limits and tie in with their assess¬
ment of regional and global interests in¬
cluding the protection of political values.
Each nation builds up its arsenal to suit
its resources. Very few developing coun¬
tries would envisage using a "Cruise" mis-
ID The Pugwash Conferences are meetings of scien¬
tists from different countries of the world to discuss
problems of disarmament and world security. Pugwash
Is the name of a village in Nova Scotia, Canada, where
the first of these conferences was held.
sible to curb an insurgency. Most industria¬
lized countries find it hard to stop experi¬
menting "just in case" a situation arises
which may require military activity beyond
their frontiers. The countries most anxious
to arm are those with clear-cut adversary
relationships based upon actual military
engagements.
Do nations arm because they feel threat¬
ened? Or do they feel threatened because
they are armed? Rarely, if ever, has the
issue been faced squarely by any interna¬
tional body concerned with disarmament.
At all forums where disarmament is discus¬
sed, the desirability of disarmament is
emphasized because military expenditure is
wasteful and risky, but few find it wise to
explore the possible alternatives to military
strength as a means of protecting national
security interests. A sad result of the proli¬
ferating disarmament exercises is thus an
almost universal attempt at skilful falsifica¬
tion of the motives behind the continuing
arms race.
In the publicity of an international forum,
few participants are willing openly to obs¬
truct consensus. But in the privacy of
national decision-making,, the military
analysts are guided by the political leader¬
ship, the politicians seek clarification from
the scientific community, and the scientists
provide technological grounds for political
reticence on disarmament.
A world armed to annihilate itself many
times over continues, in the meantime, to
spend more than 400 thousand million dol¬
lars a year on arms. The fact that a diver¬
sion of world military expenditure into
development projects would double the
combined Gross National Products of more
than half the developing world (southern
Asia, the Far East, Africa) does not deter
more than half of the world's physicists
and engineers from being engaged in mili¬
tary research and development.
12

1 tank
(U.S. $500,000)
Equipment for 520 classrooms
(30 pupils per primary school class)
1 jet fighter
(U.S. $20 million)
40,000 village pharmacies
1 destroyer
(U.S. $100 million)
Electrification for 13 cities
19 rural zones with a population of
9 million inhabitants
Physics and engineering constitute two
of the most exacting branches of the study
of science, which is in itself a demanding
educational discipline. Education, in its
broadest sense, reflects man's endeavour
to understand, control and, if possible,
mould the human environment to his
advantage.
But if the highest goal of education is to
improve the environment then why are
those most qualified to do so adding to its
hazards? The very instinct of survival which
equates military strength with security also
recognizes the insecurity of a world armed
to the hilt and continuing to arm itself. But
how is it that those concerned with human
welfare have never designated the freedom
from insecurity as a fundamental human
right?
Disarmament is desirable not only
because military effort is wasteful and risky
but also because it negates the very pur¬
pose of education. Disarmament is essen¬
tial because freedom from fear is a funda¬
mental human right.
These twin themes should become an
integral part of education because educa¬
tion provides the strongest single determi¬
nant of social awareness. Disarmament
education should involve re-educating
those who make knowledge a hazard to the
human environment and educating those
who have yet to learn.
Future action should take three main
directions. There should be a search for an
alternative to the present predominant
trend whereby military strength is equated
with security. Influence should be brought
to bear on decision makers who are in
clined to look no further than national fron¬
tiers when planning education. It should be
brought home to the largest possible num¬
ber of human beings that they are collect¬
ively as well as individually responsible for
the environment they choose to live in.
The search for alternatives would involve
encouraging research among specialists on
methods of conflict resolution, particularly
in areas with well identified adversary rela¬
tionships. Political parties could be used as
an effective mode of communication in an
attempt to reach the minds of the decision
makers. There cannot be a better way to
mould social awareness than to attach a
kind of Hippocratic oath to all educational
degrees and diplomas. Education is a way
of improving the environment, and it is up
to the educated to decide whether they
want to live in peace or die with fear.
Swadesh Rana
13
