Magic,
marriage
IM
merry-making
by
Aleksandr A. Gura,
Olga A. Ternovskaya,
and Nikita A. Tolstoy
iV~
"A
^
33 V
^
s
^1
A
FROM time immemorial, the life of the
Slavs has been bound up with agri¬
culture, and for this reason, ancient
rites and rituals connected with the seasons
of the farming year figure prominently in
their culture.
One such ceremony, commonly celebra¬
ted. until quite recently, was the dozhinka,
or harvest festival. This took varying forms
among the different Slav peoples, and may
thus serve as an indicator of their separate
yet similar development from a common
origin.
The rites which accompanied the end of
harvesting comprised a sequence of events,
carefully structured in space and time and
based on different combinations of three
distinct ceremonies, each centred on a spe¬
cific object. These objects, of which there
were a great number of variants, were
fashioned by the reapers out of ears of L
corn, straw, branches, flowers, thread and f
ribbon.
©
ALEKSANDR A. GURA, OLGA A. TER¬
NOVSKAYA and NIKITA I. TOLSTOY are
members of a research team attached to the
Institute of Slav and Balkan Studies of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. Directed by
Nikita Tolstoy, they are carrying out ethno¬
graphic and linguistic research into ancient Slav
cultures including marriage customs and
other popular traditions.
13

One of these objects, the dozhinochny
venok, or harvest garland, was a head-dress
woven from flowers, branches, ribbon and
other materials. The end of harvesting was
considered as a sort of marriage, and the
preparation of the garland was accompa¬
nied by rites reminiscent of the wedding
ceremony. The garland was worn by the
best and prettiest of the women reapers
who took the role of the bride in these
rituals whose magic, incantatory nature is
reflected in an old Byelorussian harvesting
song, with the refrain "The more you kiss
the mistress. Master, the more corn will
there be..."
Moreover, the other dramatis personae of
this rjtual adopted the names of the princi¬
pal participants at a wedding, so that the
terminology of the latter permeated the
harvest ceremony.
The ritual weaving of the garland was
common in the Ukraine, southern Byelorus¬
sia, Slovakia and Poland, but rare among
the Bulgarians and quite unknown in
Russia.
Another ceremonial object was the last
sheaf, or a, symbolic representation in the
form of a man of straw. This sheaf differed
from the harvest garland in that it was not
an adjunct of a leading human participant in
the ritual, but actually presided over the
events. For this reason, it was often given
anthropomorphic names such as baba
(granny), ded (grandpa), kumushka (the
merry wife) and nevesta (the bride). In
north-east Russia this sheaf was even con¬
sidered as the master (khozjain) of the
household ; and in Russia as a whole this
word is one of those most commonly used
to denote the guardian spirit of the family
home.
The ritual involved in the preparation of
the sheaf was widespread among the West
Slavs and the western group of the South
Slavs ; it existed also in northern and wes¬
tern Russia and was found in north-east
Byelorussia.
The most important ritual accompanying
the end of harvest-time among the Slavs
had as its focal point a patch of the crop
which was left uncut. The standing ears,
which the East and South Slavs called the
boroda (beard) were fashioned in a specific
manner plaited together, for example,
partly broken or knotted in some wayand
then served as the decor for various rites.
The womenfolk turned somersaults; the
young men wriggled under the bent stalks;
a girl danced in front of them; they were
sprinkled with vodka or water; little piles of
flax or stones, or of bread and salt were
placed beside them, and so on. After these
Seasonal
rites
Harvest-time in Poland,
left, was celebrated with
traditional ritual. Wearing
an elaborate crown of
wheat and escorted by
the village musicians and
the other villagers, the
prettiest of the village
maidens led the
procession to the village
church. After the priest
had blessed the crown,
the procession moved on
to the village hall. There
the mayor placed a cock
on top of the crown and
it began to peck at the
ears of corn. If the cock
crowed, this was taken as
a good omen signifying a
plentiful harvest. Finally,
the procession wound its
way to the house of the
local squire who
distributed gifts to those
considered to have
worked hardest during
the harvesting. The day
ended in feasting and
dancing. Right, in
Moravia, Czechoslovakia,
the arrival of spring is
marked by the making of
a "smartka", a figure
representing the death of
winter. In Bulgaria,
bottom left, this figure is
replaced by a villager
wearing an elaborate
mask.
14

rites, the South Slavs cut or pulled up the
boroda; the East Slavs left it standing in the
field.
Traditional Slav weddings were compli¬
cated affairs, in which ritual and mythologi¬
cal play-acting were interwoven with the
recital of poems and with singing, music
and dancing. The relatives, friends and
acquaintances of the bride and groom all
participated in these activities; everyone
had a role to play, and was simultaneously
an actor and a spectator. The list of
wedding-guests often included professio¬
nal match-makers Isvaty), lamenters who
could be relied upon to produce a few tears
at the right moment, a master of ceremo¬
nies, sorcerers and soothsayers to protect
the newly-weds from witchcraft, and a jes¬
ter to amuse the assembly with his jokes
and witticisms.
The first stage in the process of getting
married involved the arrival of the match¬
makers at the bride's house, where they
engaged in a conversation full of symbols
and ambiguities with her parents. They
were travelling merchants, they said, or
hunters of martens and foxes; they were
looking for a lost heifer; were there any
stray ducks or geese in the vicinity; or did
the family have a young ewe-lamb or a little
wheat for sale? On rare occasions, when
the married couple was to set up home in
the bride's, rather than the bridegroom's
household, the match-makers addressed
themselves to the bridegroom's family;
sometimes the bride went to offer "her
hand in marriage. All these ceremonial
negotiations ended with an official
betrothal; the engaged couple began to
prepare for the wedding and drew up the
list of guests.
Once betrothed, the status of the fiancée
changed; no longer a spinster, she was not
yet a married woman; her former social and
family ties and relationships had been
loosened, but new ones had not yet taken
their place. In popular belief, she was ex¬
posed during this transitional period to the
dangerous influence of witchcraft and the
evil eye, and for this reason she was ex¬
cused from all her normal domestic duties.
Sometimes, for fear of harm, she did not
even leave the house.
In the Russian north, this was the period
when the professional weepers entered the
scene, some of them rubbing their eyes
with onions for increased effect. Ritual
weeping and wailing continued until the
end of the wedding ceremony.
The state of betrothal was also reflected
in details of the clothing, head-dresses and
hair styles of the nevesta the future bride.
The eve of the wedding was a special
occasion among all the Slav peoples. In
Russia, this was the moment when the
bride took leave of all her girlhood friends.
Ritual bathing was practised by the Rus¬
sians and the South Slavs, while in Russia
and sometimes in Byelorussia, Poland and
Bulgaria, the bride ceremonially let down
her hair. The East and West Slavs decorated
a "wedding sapling"; in the western
Ukraine, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Ser¬
bia, the girls plaited garlands; the South
Slavs and Slovaks prepared a wedding ban¬
ner. In Russia (particularly the south), Bye¬
lorussia, the Ukraine and Bulgaria, the eve
of the great day was the time for baking the
wedding bread.
The baking of this svadebny khleb was a
well-established tradition among the Slavs.
The bread, decorated in a variety of diffe¬
rent ways, was offered to the wedding-
guests with many ritual gestures and
songs, in which it was compared to the sun
and the moon. The bride and groom bowed
low before the round loaf and kissed it;
their parents blessed them with it and it
was used in the "bread and salt" ceremony
which greeted them after they were pro¬
nounced man and wife, as a symbol of Slav"
hospitality; and the newly-weds were bom¬
barded with handfuls of grain, to wish them
happiness and wealth.
The procession from the bride's house to
the wedding, and to the bridegroom's
house after the ceremony, was considered
to be a dangerous moment. The East Slavs
frightened each other, for example, with
tales of whole wedding parties being trans¬
formed by witchcraft into wolves. For this
reason, the guests took particular care to |
protect themselves from sorcery. |
15

One
hundred
kisses
"Luboks", or humorous
engravings of scenes from daily
life, became very popular in
Russia towards the end of the
18th century. Left, a village
wedding feast is in full swing.
The figure in the centre, a
relative of the bride, calls on the
bride and groom to "sweeten
the vodka", whereupon the
newlyweds are obliged to kiss
each other one hundred times,
while the guests in chorus count
each kiss. The children perched
on the bunk over the stove
seem more interested in stuffing
themselves with handfuls of
nuts. Right, from
Czechoslovakia, an elaborate
wedding cake representing
Adam and Eve before the tree of
knowledge.
y The wedding festivities included an
important act: the changing of the bride's
hair-style and head-dress to match her new
status as a married woman.
The newly-weds were seen off by the
guests, usually from the groom's house, to
the bridal bedchamber. Oddly enough, the
wedding night was generally spent in
unheated quarters in a store-room, a barn,
or even a cow-shed I
The next day was devoted to fun and
games. Tricks were played on the young
couple; the match-makers were "pun¬
ished"; men dressed up as women and vice
versa; the party wandered through the vil¬
lage disguised as mummers or gypsies, and
so on. Sometimes, as in the Byelorussian
region of Polesie, for example, the guests
re-enacted a parody of the previous day's
ceremony, with actors playing the parts of
bride and groom.
The last act of the wedding included a
ritual visit by the newly-weds to the village
bath-house, a symbolic "testing" of the
bride, and visits by the in-laws to each
others' homes.
To this day, the arrival of summer is cele¬
brated in Byelorussian Polesie on 7 July,
which corresponds in the new calendar to
the old Slavonic festival of Midsummer Day
and the Feast of St. John the Baptist. Des¬
pite centuries of religious persecution, the
occasion remains full of colourful relics '
from pagan times.
On the eve of Ivan Kupala, as the occa¬
sion is called, huge bonfires of brushwood,
straw, etc. collected by the boys and girts
are lit at twilight on the river banks or on
the little hills of this wooded and marshy
region. The fires are usually grouped in
threes, and are sometime topped by straw
"guys" which are either consumed in the
flames, or thrown into the river to "drown".
The fires burn until midnight or until
dawn. When the flames have died down,
the merry-makers jump over the embers.
beat the ground with fire-brands and gen¬
erally amuse themselves. Just before first
light, they gather piles of grass, and tell
each other the legend of the mysterious
flower of the fern which brings good
fortune to anyone who chances to see it.
What looks like just plain mischief by the
country boys and girls (they block up the
chimneys of cottages so that smoke from
the stoves cannot escape, take gates from
their hinges and throw them on to other
people's vegetable patches, or pull buckets
and chains out of the wells and drag them
noisily through the village) is, in fact, the
survival of ancient rites which, like jumping
over the fire or beating the ground with bur¬
ning sticks, were connected with exorcism,
purification, fertility and so on. Now, how¬
ever, they are merely the signs of uninhibit¬
ed gaiety, in which the whole population
stays up all night to join in the fun.
On Midsummer Eve in Poland, along the
lower reaches of the Bug river, the unmar¬
ried girls push little wooden cups with
lighted candles and posies of flowers out
across the water. A girl whose cup sinks
will be married during the year; but if the
cup floats on, she will remain a spinster. In
the Ukraine and in Byelorussia, the girls
also throw garlands of flowers into the
water and tell their fortunes with them.
On Midsummer Eve in Slovakia, the girls
dig holes in the ground with their bare heels
and fill them with sugar or bread. At dawn,
they come back to see what has happened:
if the sugar and bread are still there, they
are destined to remain old maids; if they
have disappeared, a death in the family may
be expected. A girl who finds ants in the
hole she has dug will marry a good lad; but
if it contains a starling, she will have to con¬
tent herself with a widower.
According to ancient superstition, wit¬
ches were abroad on Midsummer Night,
and the Slovaks and the people of Polesie
took pains to protect themselves from all
manner of sorcery. To sting the witches
(who among other devilments were liable
to steal milk from their cows) and drive
them away, they put nettles on their
window-sills and strewed them across their
thresholds.
The Slovaks set great store by the magi¬
cal properties of grass gathered on Mid¬
summer Night, a time when, so they be¬
lieved, every blade of grass was silently cry¬
ing out "Cut me! Cut me!" Among the
Cribs and nativity plays are important |
features of the Christmas festivities. Over j
the years, in Poland, a traditional
spectacle known as "The Herods" has
developed around the nativity story and in
particular the journey of the Three Wise
Men. This spectacle, in which the
principal characters are Herod, Death and
the Devil, is now a colourful feature of
carnivals as well as of the Christmas and
New Year festivities.
16

Serbs, the holiday was known as Sveti
Jovan Bil'ober (St. John the Grass-cutter).
Similarly, the Bulgarians, on the day they
called En'ov den (John's Day), gathered
grass, and protected their cattle and fields
from the evil spirits which threatened their
milk and harvest, while the young girls told
fortunes to find out who their future hus¬
bands would be. This was the day on
which, according to the Bulgarians, En'o
"threw a sheepskin coat over his shoulders,
since snow was on the way..."
The Croats and the Slovenes also greet
Midsummer Day with bonfires, thus joining
in the celebration which links the Slavs
with the other peoples of Europe. In medi¬
eval France, the king himself applied the
torch to "le feu de la Saint-Jean", and Mid¬
summer Night bonfires flickered over Den¬
mark, Italy, Scotland and England as well,
although they were banned in London in
1539.
Where these ancient rituals are still prac¬
tised, the participants are almost always
unaware of their initial magical signifi¬
cance. But as they make merry in the sun¬
light or in the glow of a blazing fire, as they
welcome the flowers and the harvest, and
the rippling fields of summer grass, they are
looking hopefully towards the future. Simi¬
larly, the distant forbears of the Slavs rejoi¬
ced in all these things, feeling that they
were a part of Nature's forces, as children
of the forests, the water and the sun.
Olga Ternovskaya,
Aleksandr Gura
and Nikita Tolstoy
17
