
WHAT shall we see in civil aviation
after the turn of the century?
Thousand-tonne flying wings
carrying 1,000 or more passengers? Hyper¬
sonic transports with unlimited range?
Spacecraft, regularly winging their way to
and from Earth orbital missions?
Some of these craft will be operational
early in the 21st century; others may not
reach fruition before the year 2025; yet
others may never see service at all. But
they all exist today, either as concepts in
the minds of aircraft designers and engi¬
neers or at some stage of development. A
few are already with us as experimental
vehicles.
The problem with crystal-balling in the
aviation field, as in others, is that major
technological advances do not always
occur when the world is ready for them.
During the period between the conception
of an experimental aircraft and its success¬
ful demonstration, non-technical obstacles
may crop up to prevent the normal progres¬
sion from testing and evaluation to opera¬
tional use. The opposite may also happen:
prototypes at an advanced stage of deve¬
lopment may become obsolete because of
a major technological breakthrough.
The consensus today in the civil aviation
industry is that between now and the year
2000 there will be no major design changes
in the world's commercial aircraft. Both the
airframe manufacturers and the airlines


26
The shape
of things
to come
by Charles D. LaFond
CHARLES D. LAFOIMD has been editor-in-
chief of the ICAO Bulletin, the monthly technical
journal of the International Civil Aviation Organi¬
zation, since 1971. Previously, he was for 20
years an aerospace-magazine writer in the
United States.

Tomorrow's aircraft are already on
the drawing board and in some cases
models are being tested in wind or
hydraulic tunnels where various
flying conditions are simulated.
Special optical instruments are used
to record the movement of air or
water as they flow around the model,
sometimes producing surprising
visual effects. Turbulent flow round a
cylindrical fuselage (left) in hydraulic
test tunnel at Châtillon (France)
shows up as a haunting owl-eyed
mask. Below, model of a supersonic
commercial transport developed In
high-speed wind tunnels at a
research centre in Virginia (U.S.A.).
Multiple exposure photo shows
wings outsretched for take-off and
landing, folded halfway back for
medium speeds and almost flush with
fuselage during supersonic flight.
expect new aircraft during the next tew
decades to be derivatives of today's
designs. They will be shortened or"
stretched. They will have more or fewer
engines, and passenger craft will be modi¬
fied so that they can be more easily con¬
verted to carry freight. Engines will be
quieter and produce less pollutants. Range
may be extended, and take-off and landing
runs may be shortened. But for those of us
on the ground, the narrow-body transports
will look about the same as today's. So will
the large, wide-body aircraft, though they
may possibly be bigger.
The reasons for this are largely econo¬
mic. The cost of new aircraft continues to
escalate. The air transport industry is still
growing, but at a much slower rate than
anticipated. The cost of fuel is still moun¬
ting as available world supplies diminish.
In the longer term, however, the picture
may not be so bleak. In all the industrial¬
ized countries, intensive research has been
going on for years in key areas that would
permit radical changes in aircraft design.
Research into advanced materials alone
is already producing structures which com¬
bine enormously increased Strength with
significant reductions in weight. New
engine designs, backed up by sophisticated
research in acoustics, may prove so effec¬
tive in the not-too-distant future that the
next major step in reducing aircraft noise
will have to come from the airframe itself.
Fuel research is introducing an entirely
new factor into the equation. Synthetic
fossil fuels, liquid hydrogen and nuclear
power are all being studied today as poten¬
tial power alternatives. However, given
today's technology and the lack of interna¬
tional commitment, the practical use of
either liquid hydrogen or nuclear energy for
aircraft propulsion is a long way off.
Advanced wing configuration is another
area of research that is already paying off.
Some models, now in an advanced stage
of development, have been shown to com¬
bine enormous lift for heavy payloads with
short take-off and landing (STOL) capabili¬
ties. As a result, we may see vastly differ¬
ent wing structures coming into use in the i
next century, as well as the possibility of a |
Photo © USIS, Paris

New
silhouettes
in the air
There are two major
trends in aeronautical
research today. One Is
the result of a quest for'
higher speed; the other'
stems from a search for
greater economy.
Designs for future high¬
speed planes
incorporate wings that
are smaller and
increasingly tucked into
the fuselage. The
search for economy, on
the other hand,
produces wings that are
stretched, have less
sweep and are thicker.
The fuselage tends to
disappear. Drawings,
right, show these two
trends in aircraft design.
Increased
thickness
(giant cargo)
Increased
sweep,
slimmer fuselage
Today's
subsonic
Delta wing
(supersonic,
hypersonic)
Stretched thick fuselage
(hypersonic.
Space Shuttle)#-
Drawing J.M. Troillard © Science et Vie, Paris
28

transonic transport operating at slightly
over the speed of sound.
Let us look at some of the research now
in progress.
The use of composite materials for the
manufacture of aircraft structural parts is a
relatively recent field, although the devel¬
opment of bonded glass fibre began as far
back as 1940. This technology consists of
producing structures of virtually any shape
by stacking and moulding layers of diffe¬
rently oriented fibres contained in a plastic
base.
The so-called advanced reinforced com¬
posites which emerged in the mid-1960s
incorporate boron filaments whose
strength and high performance instantly
appealed to aeronautic engineers. Today
composites are replacing more and more
metal structures because of the weight and
cost savings and greater fuel economy that
can be achieved.
The really important thing about compo¬
sites is that the selection of fibre material
and the lamination of layers with fibres run¬
ning in different directions for each layer
permit an end product that fits specific
structural needs. For example, composites
can guarantee good bending strength for
one piece and keep costs down in another
which is only subjected to low stress. It
has been estimated that, compared with
metals, advanced composites can bring
energy savings of up to 33 per cent and
weight savings approaching 30 per cent.
A relatively new material has been pro¬
duced by what is called "whisker" techno¬
logy, in which nearly perfect crystalline
structures of carbon provide a specific
strength approximately 50 times that of
steel.
One major U.S. airframe manufacturer
estimates that up to 75 per cent of an air¬
craft could be made from composites, pri¬
marily graphite epoxy, and that the overall
cost would be 21 per cent less than that of
its metal counterpart. As the airframe
would be much lighter, fuel consumption
would be reduced by about 30 per cent.
With today's technology, such an aircraft
could be built by the 1980s or early 1990s,
and operational soon after.
What kind of fuel will be used in the early
2000s? Most experts believe that conven¬
tional kerosene jet fuel will be the basic civil
aviation source well into the next century.
As we approach the year 2000, however,
alternative fuels may have to be intro¬
duced.
Synthetic kerosene, obtained from coal
and shale, could be mixed directly with
petroleum-based fuels, giving an end-
product whose properties would be similar
to those of today's jet fuel. Coal and shale
supplies appear to be large, and such a fuel
would require few changes in storage and
ground handling and could readily be used
in conventional aircraft. However, some
specialists feel strongly that a major com¬
mitment should now be made to devel¬
oping the use of liquid methane or liquid
hydrogen as a fuel. In either case, a new
aircraft design would be required.
For the same weight of fuel, liquid
methane can provide 20 per cent more heat
than kerosene. Its density is about half and
its cost about the same as kerosene fuels.
But liquid methane only exists at very Ipw
temperatures ( 161 °C at atmospheric
pressure), like liquid hydrogen( °C),
and thus creates storage and handling pro¬
blems. Although its higher heating value
reduces the total fuel needed to carry a
load over a given distance,' the improve¬
ment is only modest. Because it is lighter,
bigger fuel tanks are required.
More interest has been shown in an air¬
craft fuelled by liquid hydrogen because of
its even higher heating value: 280 per cent
that of kerosene for the same weight of
fuel. The trouble is that its density is only
one-twelfth that of kerosene. Thus the
liquid hydrogen needed to produce the
same energy as kerosene fuel, while weigh¬
ing only 35 per cent as much, requires a
volume four times as great.
Obviously, then, an aircraft using liquid
hydrogen would require a larger, heavier
fuselage with greater aerodynamic drag
and consequently reduced efficiency. At
the same time it would have a lower gross k
weight at take-off, thus requiring lessf
i
Windmill
effect
Photo taken during experiment
in a hydraulic test tunnel shows
simulated airflow patterns
created by the rotor blades of a
helicopter.
Materials
under the
microscope
Research into advanced
materials which combine
increased strength with reduced
weight has led to the
development of new alloys.
Right, a nickel and niobium
carbonate alloy seen through a
microscope.

Fuel
of the future?
Liquid hydrogen is a possible fuel for
aircraft of the future. However, It
would require a new aircraft design
incorporating giant fuel tanks (right).
Space Shuttle
on piggyback
The U.S. Space Shuttle has already
made its first free flight after being
launched from a specially
adapted carrier (here shown taking
off). When fully operational it will
leave Earth powered by its twin
rockets, go into orbit, perform a
space mission and then return and
land like a glider. After refuelling it
will be ready for its next flight.
Swinging wings
One proposed design for tomorrow's
aircraft is the oblique-wing plane
which would fly at slightly over the
speed of sound. The wing, located
atop the fuselage. Is rotated as the
aircraft gathers speed. (In wind
tunnel testing it has already been
turned as much as 50°.) If maximum
speed is carefully controlled no sonic
boom is created.
30

y energy per kilometre than conventional air¬
craft. On a long flight the energy economy
would be significant. Nevertheless, cost is
a serious hurdle.
Another problem that cannot be taken
lightly is the storage and handling of liquid
hydrogen. One expert estimates that the
complex required at a major international
airport for the storage and handling of
liquid hydrogen for wide-body jets would
be 30 times the size of the gigantic U.S.
Apollo Space Programme installations near
New Orleans.
The proponents of liquid hydrogen,
however, stress a number of advantages of
this fuel. There would be a dramatic reduc¬
tion in the noxious exhaust fumes from
commercial transport aircraft. The major
exhaust product of liquid hydrogen is water
vapour, with minute amounts of oxides of
hydrogen. With careful design, they
assert, the latter could be reduced far
below that of equivalent kerosene-fuelled
jet engines.
Furthermore, hydrogen-fuelled superso¬
nic transport aircraft of the future would
generate a lighter supersonic boom, and
these second- or third-generation superso¬
nic transports will require 40 per cent less
energy than if synthetic jet fuel is used.
As we near the end of the century, new
aircraft, particularly those operating in the
subsonic and transonic ranges, may benefit
from current developments in wing aerody¬
namics and even from entirely new con¬
cepts in the use of wing structures.
Some of these changes may not even be
noticed by the casual observer. For exam¬
ple, by increasing wing thickness or redu¬
cing sweep, we may significantly reduce
the weight of. wings and greatly improve
aerodynamic efficiency. The result would
be lower fuel consumption or much smaller
engine sizes to carry the same payload over
a given distance. Another by-product
could be reduced noise on the approach to
airports.
Other, even more sophisticated changes
in wing design involve controlling the air¬
flow around the wings in order to reduce
turbulent flow and thereby reduce drag.
This could result in fuel savings of as much
as 50 per cent.
An even stranger-looking design is the
proposed oblique-wing aircraft, which
would fly at speeds slightly over that of
sound. A relatively long, narrow, straight
wing is located atop the fuselage, forming
a shape which turns out to be ideal for both
low-speed and high-speed flight. As the
aircraft picks up speed, the wing is rotated.
In wind-tunnel testing it has been turned as
much as 50°. The remarkable thing is that
at low supersonic speeds (up to Mach 1.5)
in the wind tunnel such asymmetrical
models have been found to be more stable
than models of conventional aircraft. Also,
if the maximum speed is carefully control¬
led, no sonic boom is created.
Because of new developments in shield¬
ing nuclear reactors and successful tests
which have shown that there would be no
release of radioactive material in the event
of a crash, we may see nuclear power
coming to the fore for aircraft propulsion.
The temperatures generated are suffi¬
cient to drive a turbofan engine suitable for
powering subsonic transports. However,
because of the concentrated weight of the
reactor and its shielding, very large aircraft
would be required, probably weighing in at
500 tonnes or more. A nuclear-powered
transport aircraft could provide a range
equal to some 10,000 continuous flight
hours without refuelling.
In the same weight range or larger is the
"flying wing" that many designers have
dreamed of for years. Some feel that the
flying wing, unencumbered as it is with the.
long body structure of conventional air-^
Pedalling
on air
On 23 August 1977 the first successful man-powered flight took place in California (U.S.A.). At the
controls of the flimsy-looking Gossamer Condor was a young hang-glider pilot and bicycle racer,
Bryan Allen, who triumphantly walked off with an $86,000 prize awarded by British industrialist Henry
Kremer. Competitors had been trying to win it for 18 years. Propelling the craft with a bicycle-pedal
mechanism, he flew the figure-eight course around two pylons 800 metres apart in seven minutes. *
The craft, designed by aeronautical engineer Paul MacCready, was made of piano wires, aluminium
tubing and see-through plastic. With a wingspan of 28 metres, it weighed only 32 kilos.
31

, craft, is the most efficient design obtain¬
able. Others believe it to be inherently
unstable.
The wing required for take-off and lan¬
ding would have to be deep enough to pro¬
vide lift, and would thus have enough room
for the payload- possibly 1,500 to 2,000
passengers and 300 tonnes of car¬
go could be distributed over the
entire span. A first-generation vehicle
could use conventional engines, while
second-generation flying wings might have
a fusion reactor. The later version would
have an unlimited range; its cruising speed
would be some 1,000 km. per hour.
Looking further ahead, we may even¬
tually see an even more revolutionary air¬
craft, capable of travelling at Mach 6 i.e.
six times the speed of sound. The fuel,
liquid hydrogen, would also be used to cool
the aircraft's skin, compensating for the
enormous heat generated at such a high
speed. Researchers look on the Mach 6
hypersonic transport as the logical succes¬
sor of the March 3-4 class supersonic trans¬
ports of the nearer future, which will pro¬
bably also be powered by liquid hydrogen.
Why Mach 6? The answer is that this
seems to be the upper speed limit that fits
the practical journey times for long-range
flights of from 8,000 to 10,000 km. Such a
hypersonic plane, carrying between 300
and 400 passengers and looking not much
different from today's Anglo-French delta-
wing Concorde, except in size, would make
the non-stop trip from Los Angeles to Paris
in less than three hours.
Although there seems little doubt in the
minds of many scientists today that such a
craft could be built some time early in the
21st century, there certainly is some doubt
as to its practicality. Nevertheless, experi¬
mental versions of ramjet engines neces¬
sary for powering the hypersonic transport
are already in research and development.
Much closer on the horizon, however, is
a vehicle that represents an equally radical
departure from the norm: the U.S. Space
Shuttle. It is the first offspring of the mar¬
riage between aerodynamics (it is a glider)
and space technology (it uses rocket con¬
trol when in space). This large aerospace
transport vehicle is now well ahead in deve¬
lopment.
The first re-usable space transport
system, the shuttle will leave Earth boosted
by immense twin solid propellant rockets,
go into orbit, manoeuvre in space as re¬
quired to perform its mission, then return
and land without powersomething like a
conventional jet transport aircraft, except
that the pilot will have to control it like a gli¬
der during a lengthy landing approach.
After refuelling, it should be ready for its
next flight and could be used for hundreds
of missions.
The first fully operational flight of the
Space Shuttle is expected in 1980,
and the life of the programme as pre¬
sently conceived could carry it up to the
turn of the century. And if these missions
are successful, one can expect that at
some point during the next 20 years a
follow-up programme for an even more
versatile Shuttle might evolve. For this is
just the beginning.
Charles D. LaFond
Landing
on laser beams
A new landing system using laser beams was perfected in late 1977 by Soviet
scientist Igor Berezhnol. Known as Glissada, the system reduces the pilot's
reliance on his instrument panel in conditions of poor visibility or at night. Five
powerful red beams (left), which présent no danger to vision, are visible 20 km.
away. Three of them indicate the edges and centre line of the runway; the other
two show the glide path. Schematic representations above show what the pilot
sees on his glide path as he comes in to land: 1.) plane is left of course; (2.) on
course; (3.) right of course. Shown below, plane touching down at night with the
aid of Glissada. The new system is already being patented in sixteen countries
including the U.S.A., the U.K., the Fed. Rep. of Germany and France.
32
