Hydrogen is the most abundant element in our galaxy. It
constitutes about 80 per cent of the volume of the sun and
on earth is present in vast quantities as part of the water
in oceans, ice packs, rivers, lakes and the atmosphere. It
is also the most abundant constituent of interstellar gas.
Photo shows part of the constellation Orion. Dark
projection at centre of the cloud of gas and dust is known
to astronomers as the horse-head nebula. Some scientists
believe that hydrogen is destined to become the all-
purpose fuel of the future.



The case
for hydrogen
energy
by T. Nejat Veziroglu
WORLD demand for energy is today
mainly met by fossil fuels, and
fossil fuels have some very use¬
ful properties. They possess concentrated
energy. They are relatively light for the
amount of energy contained in them. They
are easily transportable and storable. In
fact they can be stored for almost unlimited
lengths of time, without any change in
their properties. However, fossil fuels are
not renewable.
The new energy sources which are now
being considered do not possess all the
advantages of the fossil fuels, although
some of them, such as solar energy,
nuclear fusion energy, and ocean thermal
energy, are almost unlimited in amount.
Some are only intermittently available.
Solar energy, for example, is only available
during the daytime when the skies are
T. Nejat Veziroglu is Associate Dean for
Research of the School of Engineering and
Architecture at Miami University (U. S.A. ) where
he teaches advanced heat transfer, solar energy
and nuclear engineering. President of the Inter¬
national Association for Hydrogen Energy, he
was chairman of the First World Hydrogen
Energy Conference, in Miami Beach in 1976.
clear. Even then, the intensity of solar
radiation changes with time and with the
seasons. Hence solar energy needs to be
stored to meet demand when the sun is not
available.
Some of the new energy sources are
continuously available, but they are too far
away from the consumption centres. For
example, the best ocean-thermal energy
sites are in the equatorial regions. As for
nuclear power plants, more and more of
them are being erected away from the
cities or the consumption centres because
of the potential danger from radioactivity.
None of these new energy sources can
be used as fuel for transportation, with the
possible exception of nuclear energy.
Nuclear energy is being used to power
some ships, but as yet it has not proved
itself commercially. With the exception of
nuclear energy, none of these new sources
exists in transportable form.
The above-mentioned shortcomings of
the new energy sources point to the need
for an intermediary energy system to form
the link between the primary energy
sources and the energy consuming sectors.
In such an intermediary system, the inter¬
mediary energy form or carrier must be
transportable and storable, economical to
produce, renewable and pollution-free, if
possible.
It ought to be independent of the pri¬
mary energy sources used so that, even if
these are changed from time to time, the
intermediary energy system remains intact.
This would have the advantage that the
storage and transmission systems and con¬
version devices running on the interme¬
diary (synthetic) fuel would remain the
same, even though the primary energy
sources might have to be changed.
The above conditions are best met by
hydrogen. Hydrogen is plentiful in the form
of water in our oceans,- lakes and rivers. It
is the cheapest synthetic fuel to manufac¬
ture per unit of energy stored in it. It is
almost pollution-free, and is certainly the
least polluting of all the synthetic fuels
such as methane, methanol and ammonia.
For a given amount of energy, the
weight of hydrogen is about one-third that
of the fossil fuels. But it is bulkier. For a
given amount of energy, it occupies 3.4
times the volume occupied by petrol. Its
lightness, high flame speed and wide flam¬
mable limits when mixed with air (from 4 to
74 per cent) make hydrogen an excellent
fuel. Its high ignition temperature is a
safety factor. It is also non-poisonous.
32

Photo © IPS, Paris
Hydrogen ¡s a renewable or recyclable
fuel. After being produced from water, it
combines with oxygen to produce energy.
Its combustion product is water vapour
which eventually comes back to earth, in
the form of rain or moisture, to make up
the water used to produce it in the first
place.
Hydrogen can be produced in three
ways: (1) by the direct thermal method (if
water is heated to a high enough tempera¬
ture ¡t will spontaneously split into hydro¬
gen and oxygen); (2) by the thermo-
chemical method (chemical reactions are
induced which split the hydrogen from the
oxygen); (3) by electrolysis (a direct electric
current passing through the water releases
the hydrogen and the oxygen separately).
This ¡s how the proposed hydrogen
energy system would work. A nuclear
power station, situated for safety at a
remote location, a solar furnace, sited to
make the best possible use of solar radia¬
tion, or indeed any other new energy
source, would provide the power to sep¬
arate water Into its component elements
of hydrogen and oxygen.
The hydrogen would then be transported
(via pipelines or super tankers) to energy
consumption centres where it would be
used just as fossil fuels are being used
today. The oxygen produced in the plant
could be either released into the atmo¬
sphere, or be shipped or piped to industrial
and city centres for industrial use, for re¬
juvenating polluted rivers and lakes, and
for speeding up sewage treatment.
Hydrogen is a very efficient energy car¬
rier. For distances greater than 200 miles, it
is cheaper to transmit energy as hydrogen
through pipelines than as electricity via
overhead lines. In addition, the hydrogen
pipelines would need very little right-of-
way and take up no land area. Also, hydro¬
gen is storable while electricity is not.
In the hydrogen energy system, ¡t ¡s envi¬
sioned that hydrogen will be transmitted
from the production plants or the ports, by
means of underground pipelines to
industry, homes and buildings. There,
hydrogen can be directly used for industrial
processes needing heat, and for space
heating and cooking. For example, the
combustion of hydrogen produces steam,
which is used ¡n many industries such as
the paper and chemical industries.
Hydrogen can be used in the smelting of
iron, instead of coal, with untold environ¬
mental benefits. The electricity needs of
industry, buildings and homes, can be pro
duced by means of fuel cells. In the fuel
cells, hydrogen and oxygen combine, and
produce electricity. At present, the con¬
version efficiency is of the order of 60 to 70
per cent. It is expected that this figure can
be improved with further research.
Today hydrogen is from three to four
times more expensive than the fossil-based
fuels. However, studies indicate that as a
result of research and development work
now in progress, the cost of hydrogen will
be brought down while the cost of fossil-
based fuels will increase due to depletion. It
is probable that the cost of hydrogen will
be comparable to those of fossil fuels at the
beginning of the 21st century.
Many scientists and engineers agree that
the hydrogen energy system offers, both
economically and environmentally, the best
link between the new primary energy
sources and the user. It would be better
for the world to start converting to the
clean and , renewable hydrogen energy
system as soon as possible, thus protecting
the environment and enhancing the quality
of life. Once such an energy system is esta¬
blished, it will never be necessary to
change to another.
T. Nejat Veziroglu
33
