Oriental

The traditional music of Korea shares
much of the common musical background
of Chinese and Japanese music. Yet Korean
music has maintained a number of uniquely
Korean characteristics which give it a place
apart in East Asian culture. These include,
for example, the triple rhythms of Korean
music, as compared with the double
rhythms of Chinese and Japanese music,
and its system of notation (chongganbo).
Korean music, like Korean painting,
reveals two distinct currentsclassical or
court music with its slow elegance and con¬
trolled passion, and folk music with its
lively rhythm and emotional melodic
expression which is comparable to that of
an Indian raga. Court music includes a num¬
ber of different types of music each of
which was used on specific occasions or for
specific ceremonies, for example, banquet
music and ritual Confucian and ancestral
shrine music.
Following a tradition borrowed from
China, musical instruments are classified
according to the eight principal materials
from which they are made: wood, clay,
metal, stone, hide, gourds, silk and bam¬
boo. Instruments representative of each
category are shown on these pages. Wood
is represented twice because the instru
ments traditionally used to start and end a
performance are both made of wood.
(1) Wood: the Chuk is a kind of wooden
trough with a hammer inserted through the
cover; the Chuk is placed at one side of the
orchestra and the hammer strikes the bot¬
tom of the trough, three times to indicate
the start of a performance. (2) Clay: the
Hun is a rounded flute with a blow hole on
top and five finger holes; the pitch depends
upon the width of the flute and the manner
in which the clay is baked. (3) Metal: the
P'yonjong is a set of sixteen bronze bells
hung in two rows on a carved wooden
stand; the bells are identical in size and
shape but of varying thickness of bronze
and are struck with a hammer made of
horn. (4) Stone: the P'yon'gyong is a set of
sixteen jade stone chimes which are also
struck with a horn hammer; pitch varies
according to the thickness of the jade. (5)
Hide: the Changgo is an hour-glass-shaped
drum; the left hand skin is thick and is
struck with the palm of the hand; the thin¬
ner right hand skin is struck with a drum¬
stick. (6) Gourd: Saenghwang is a type of
mouth organ consisting of a small bowl fash¬
ioned from a gourd from which seventeen
slender bamboo pipes, one of which is
mute, of differing lengths protrude; at the
base of each pipe is a thin metal tongue
which vibrates when the performer blows
into the gourd. (7) Silk: the Komun-go is a
six-stringed zither with strings made of silk.
(8) Bamboo: the Hyang-piri is an oboe made
of bamboo with double reeds and eight fin¬
ger holes; it was introduced to Korea during
the fifth century. (9) Wood: the O is an ins¬
trument in the form of a tiger with twenty-
seven indentations along its back; at the
close of a performance the tiger is struck
three times on the head and then a split
bamboo stick is drawn across the indenta¬
tions on its back; the O is always placed at
the opposite side of the orchestra to the
Chuk. M
15
