These two spheres side by side evoke
steps in the conquest of space from the
Middle Ages to the present day. Copper
Arab astrolabe (right) dating from 1054
was still being used at the Jagiellonian
University (Poland) when Copernicus was
a student there in the late 15th century.
Opposite page: the historic link-up of a
Soviet Soyuz-19 and a U.S. Apollo
spacecraft on 17 July 1975 is depicted in
this mock-up on permanent display in
Moscow. (See Unesco Courier, Jan. 1978).



From Copernicus to Korolev
A 500-year journey
into space
by Bogdan Suchodolsky
A cosmonaut circles the Earth in a
spacecraft. At a given moment, he
steps out of his seemingly fragile
vessel and walks among the stars. Such
images come easily to the modern mind,
now that space travel has become a fact.
But before Man took his first "walk" in
space, another long and arduous journey
of discovery was necessary, during which
thinkers puzzled out the laws of the uni¬
verse and technologists created the means
whereby the age-old dream of space travel
could come true.
To conquer the force of gravity, Man had
first to understand the world around him
and to multiply his own strength. For cen¬
turies scientists in many countries grappled
with the problem, interweaving hopes and
aspirations, and philosophical and poetic
reveries, with mathematical calculations.
Poland set off on this road to understan-
BOGDAN SUCHODOLSKY, Polish philoso¬
pher and historian of science, is a member of the
Praesidium of the Polish Academy of Sciences.
He is the author of several works on trends
in philosophy and on educational matters. His
article incorporates material prepared by the
Polish scientist Prof. W. Voisé.
64

Photo I. Gavrilov © APN, moscow
ding during the Middle Ages and the
Renaissance. In the thirteenth century, the
philosopher Witelo developed a theory on
the nature of material reality, the principles
of mathematical reasoning, the analysis of
natural phenomena (especially human
physiology and psychology) and astro¬
nomy. His treatise on perspective, which is
the only part of his great work to have sur¬
vived, was transcribed many times during
the Middle Ages, and often reprinted
during the sixteenth century. Witelo's stu¬
dies on the properties of light, used by the
' German astronomer Johannes Kepler in his
own research at the turn of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, were a mixture
of metaphysical speculation and physical
science. What he called lumen divinum (or
"divine light") was, he believed, the
original form of existence of nature,
and of man as capable of perceiving it.
Another Pole, Nicolas Copernicus, took
a decisive step along the road to the stars.
His daring heliocentric theory set the Sun
at the centre of the universe and at the
source of life. This theory is sometimes
mistakenly reduced to the idea that the
Earth is spinning through the universe. But
if Copernicus "set the Earth in Motion", he
also and this was the most important
thing "stopped the Sun in its tracks." He
not only rejected the traditional belief that
the Earth was the centre of the universe,
but spoke out against the school of
thought according to which, and on the
basis of evidence produced by the senses,
it was the Sun, and not the Earth, that
moved.
Copernicus had many disciples, in his
own country as well as elsewhere. In his
well-equipped private observatory, Jan
Helvelius (1611-1687) carried out many
complicated astronomical . observations,
and his Selenography (1647), a description
of the Moon's surface, illustrated with
splendid maps, made him famous through¬
out Europe. This treatise broke new
ground, and combined the expression of
mankind's nostalgic affection for Earth's
silvery satellite with detailed descriptions
based on meticulous research.
While Helvelius was devoting his atten¬
tion to deciphering the Moon's secrets,
another man, the engineer Kazimezh
Semenovich, was examining the possibili¬
ties of actually getting there. His treatise on
ballistics (1650) was translated into many
languages, and astonishingly enough con¬
tains proposals for a multi-stage rocket.
Helvelius's astronomical calculations and
Semenovich's intuitive technical conject¬
ures were to be brought together in a single
field of research and aspiration.
One of the leading popularizers of Coper-
nicus's teaching was Bishop John Wilkins,
the author of Mathematical! Magick (1648)
and of a number of other works, and a
founding member of the Royal Society in
England. Drawing inspiration from the
Polish astronomer's ideas, Wilkins posed a
problem raised by the discovery of other
worlds: the problem of interplanetary
flight.
Although he wrote that a winged con¬
struction, of some kind appeared to offer
the best means of effecting such journeys,
he himself, on the basis of his study of Gali¬
leo's mechanics in particular, favoured the
solution of a "flying chariot".
Another self-confessed disciple off
65

Lomonosov (1711-1765), the great Russian
scientist and encyclopaedist, a member of
the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences
and the founder of Moscow University. His
research in chemistry and physics opened
the way to the corpuscular theory of mat¬
ter, while his philosophy, which was in
direct opposition both to the rationalism of
Descartes and the empiricism of Locke,
was an attempt to unseat the mechanistic
conception of the world.
Substantial progress was made in this
direction during the century that followed.
The "Copernicus of geometry", as the dis¬
tinguished Russian mathematician Nikolai
Lobachevsky (1792-1856) was called, was
one of the creators of non-Euclidian geo¬
metry. His system played an important role
in the development of modern science.
Not long after this began the career of
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky (1857-1935), the
Polish-born Russian scientist who was the
founder of modern astronautics. His work
entitled "The exploration of cosmic space
with the aid of jet-propelled engines",
published in 1903, set out for the first time
a theory of controlled flight under both gra¬
vitational and non-gravitational conditions,
and paved the way for the use of rockets
for interplanetary travel. In 1929, Tsiol¬
kovsky published a second, equally innova¬
tory work, "Cosmic rocket ships", which
laid the foundations for the first interplane¬
tary flights.
Tsiolkovsky's activity brought to a close
The great Polish astronomer Nicholas Copernicus (1473-1543) "set the
earth in motion" and "stopped the sun in its tracks" by disproving the
accepted theory, formulated in Antiquity by Ptolemy, that the earth
was the motionless centre of the universe. His theory of a heliocentric
system in which the earth was a moving planet laid the foundations for
later developments in astronomy. Above, Copernicus as depicted in a
17th-century engraving by Edme de Boulonois of Brussels.
Reaching
for the stars
Copernicus was the French poet Cyrano de
Bergerac (1619-1655) among whose works
was a science fiction novel, published pos¬
thumously, entitled "The States and Em¬
pires of the Sun". In this fantastic tale, the
narrator describes how, after a scientific
discussion with his friends, he returned
home disillusioned with reading dry-as-
dust learned treatises and determined to
find out for himself whether the Earth was
actually spinning through space, and whe¬
ther life existed in distant worlds. Inspired
by an original idea, he tied around himself a
number of flasks filled with dew, believing
that the dew would be transformed into
steam by the sun's rays, and would carry
him into the upper layers of the atmos¬
phere.
This section of the novel, like many
others, contains hypotheses whose fallacy
has long since been demonstrated; but this
in no way detracts from the work's signifi¬
cance. We should forgive Cyrano for his
errorsafter all, he lived in an age when
the theory of gravity was still in its
infancy and by acknowledging the exis¬
tence of innumerable other worlds, he
struck a blow against conservatism of
thought.
In the Slav countries, another step on
the road to the stars took place during the
eighteenth century. In western Europe
during this period progress in the natural
sciences was developing through the appli¬
cation of empirical and rationalistic
methods in certain specific fields. Among
the Slavs, however, these methods were
utilized not only for piecemeal research,
but also in an endeavour to create an inter¬
disciplinary synthesis, through which the
universe might be explained as a dynamic
entity. This was a complex vision of things,
the accuracy of which could only be par¬
tially established at the time and which"
consisted for the most part of bold hypo¬
theses which would only be verified in sub¬
sequent centuries.
Two outstanding personalities should be
mentioned at this point. The first was
Roudjer Boskovich (1711-1787), a Croatian
philosopher and scientist, whose work
reflected the theories of both Newton and
Leibniz and contained the seeds of future
theories of relativity and non-Euclidian geo¬
metry. Boskovich attempted to construct a
mathematical model of matter based on
dynamic rather than mechanistic concepts,
and prepared a draft outline of a philo¬
sophy of the universe which differed con¬
siderably from that which was generally
accepted at the time.
The second great figure was Mikhail
66

the long "pre-space" era and turned a new
page which would be inscribed with the
story of Man's final realization of his
ancient dreams. The real conquest of space
began in our century, as a result of further
advances in the natural sciences, in tech¬
nology and more especially in mathe¬
matics and astronautics.
A large group of Russian scientists wor¬
ked on these subjects during the early years
of the century. Nikolai Zhukovsky (1847-
1921), known as "the father of Russian
aviation", created in Moscow the first
European Institute of Aerodynamics, and
devoted much attention to the develop¬
ment of techniques of rocketry. The
younger generation of scientists, techni¬
cians and pilots followed in the steps of
their elders; S.P. Korolev (1906-1966) was
a particularly outstanding Soviet scientist,
whose work contributed to the creation of
the huge rockets used for launching the
first artificial satellites, the first flights
towards the Moon, Venus and Mars, and
the first journeys of the cosmonauts in
outer space.
The activities of Korolev, the construc¬
tion of the first sputniks, the first space
flight by Yuri Gagarin and Aleksei Leonov's
famous walk among the stars marked the
final stages of a journey that had lasted for
five centuries, and had led from an intuitive
and theoretical understanding of the struc¬
ture of the universe to the opening of its
very doors.
Bogdan Suchodolsky
Mankind has always dreamed of achieving mastery of space. Below left,
illustration from The States and Empires of the Sun (1662), a science fiction
novel by the French author Cyrano de Bergerac, a student of Copernican
astronomy. The gravity-defying hero is clad in a space suit equipped with
flasks containing dew which, he hopes, will be turned into steam by solar
heat and propel him to the upper atmosphere. The dream became reality in
1961 when Yuri Gagarin became the first man to travel in space. Medal
(below) was issued in the U.S.S.R. to commemorate his exploit.
"He was in himself our first
university," wrote Pushkin of
the Russian polymath Mikhail
Lomonosov (1711-1765). A poet
and linguistic reformer as well
as a scientist whose research
ranged from studies on metals
and gases to astronomy and
geology, in 1755 Lomonosov
helped to found Moscow
University, which is named
after him. Left, portrait of
Lomonosov by an unknown
artist.
"The Astral System of
Copernicus" is the theme of a
stained glass window designed
for Cracow's "House of
Physicians" by Stanislaw
Wyspianski (1869-1907), an
outstanding figure in modern
Polish art. Below, detail of the
cartoon design for this
composition, showing
Apollo, symbol of the sun.
Photo Stanislaw Lopatka © National Museum, Cracow
67
