Redrawing
the world's waterscapes
The next generation may see projects
so vast as to compete with Nature'
Canada, the U.S. and Mexico are associated in the North
American Water and Power Alliance (NAWAPA) which would
bring vast quantities of water across the continent from Alaska
to parts of Canada, the U.S. and northern Mexico.
Under a massive water redistribution system now being studied in the
U.S.S.R., north-flowing streams would be diverted to supply arid
regions in the south. Another plan under discussion for the distant
future would create a veritable inland sea in Siberia.
by Jerry Pournelle
JERRY POURNELLE, American science writer
and Journalist, Is the author of more than a
dozen books on scientific subjects.
WATER has always been civiliza¬
tion's most essential resource,
and that has not changed.
Modern industrial nations consume some
2,000 litres per person per day. Agriculture
needs incredible quantities of water4,500
tonnes to produce one tonne of rice, and
nearly 10,000 tonnes of water for each
tonne of cotton fibre harvested.
Drought and flood have been twin
scourges of civilization throughout. history,
and in ancient as well as modern times the
ability to manage water resources was one
of the most important functions of govern¬
ment. Today, in much of the world, floods
and drought are still. vital threats. Often,
too, both occur in the same country in the
same year.
In California, for example, there is
drought. Farmers and city dwellers alike
face severe rationing, with resulting eco¬
nomic losses running into billions of dollars.
And yet a few hundred kilometres to the
north the state of Oregon endures disas¬
trous floods.
Nature has provided man with vast
quantities of water, far more than would
be needed to industrialize the entire world,
but the water is not in places where it is
needed. Most of the water in the Soviet
Union flows northward into the frigid
tundra above the Arctic Circle and thence
to the Arctic Sea. Vast quantities of water
that might be useful in Canada, Mexico i
and the United States are in Alaska, where
23

they are useless. China is often trapped
by alternate years of drought and flood.
For millennia man had no choice but to
settle near a water source, although even
primitive civilizations made some attempt
to manage water resources. Today we
should not have to submit to flood and
drought. We can bring the water where
it is needed.
Already the California Water Project in
the western United States carries water
thousands of kilometres to supply such
cities as Los Angeles, and turns formerly
arid regions into some of the most
productive land in the world. The Soviet
Volga-Don canal system has brought
water into the Caspian Basin, thus
temporarily arresting the drying up of the
world's largest fresh-water sea.
Despite the large investments and
tremendous achievements in hydraulic
projects, there is a great deal more to be
done. The Caspian basin still receives too
little water, and more cannot be diverted
from the Don without severe damage to
the Azov sea. California still suffers from
periodic drought and much potentially
productive cropland in North America
cannot be planted.
A
J ^ LL this can change. The



MWêB. next generation may see
m m water projects so vast as
to dwarf those already built, indeed, so
vast as to compete with those of Nature.
Projects now seriously under study in both
the United States and the Soviet Union
would not only make deserts bloom and
bring industry to uninhabited areas, but
would actually change the climate of vast
regions of the Earth.
Although such projects as the North
American Water and Power Alliance.
(NAWAPA) which would bring nearly 200
billion cubic metres of water from Alaska
into Canada, the lower 48 United States
and Mexico, and the Soviet plans for
diverting north-flowing streams into the
more inhabitable southern regions involve
engineering on a scale much greater than
anything previously attempted, no one
seriously doubts their technical feasibility.
In both the United States and the Soviet
Union projects exist which, though small
compared to what is now proposed, are
large enough to demonstrate that truly
staggering quantities of water can be
transported over long distances. The
studies now under way in both nations are
devoting special attention to economic
feasibility and ecological effects. Can such
.vast projects be carried out with available
resources at costs that are not prohibitive?
And should they be done at all?
Most economic studies indicate1 that
although the initial investments for such
large hydraulic projects are enormous,
running into hundreds of billions of dollars,
the benefits are so great that they can be
considered as good investments.
There remain the environmental effects.
Until a few years ago, the environmental
effects of shifting enormous quantities of
water could not even be guessed at. There
were simply not enough data, and no good
theories. This situation is changing. The
U.S. Viking probe on Mars has transmitted
meteorological data about that planet's
weather and climate. Martian meteorology
is much simpler than that of Earth but the
principles are much the same. Mars is
becoming a laboratory for the study of
simplified weather systems. This makes
possible new theories on how weather
operates.
Meanwhile, satellite data make it possible
to obtain a unified picture of Earth's
weather and climate. Scientists can
observe the effects of slight warming of
the seas, shifts in the jet streams, and all
the other myriad factors that generate
weather.
Finally, a wide variety of studies, from
examination of tree rings to cores taken
from the ocean floor, have provided new
data on the climate of the past. From
this scientists are able to assemble a
picture of how the weather machine
operated under vastly different conditions,
such as in Ice Ages.
But even without these studies it is
clear that our present climate and weather
are not "natural" in the sense that they
have always been as they are. During
historical times there have been major
changes in climate. Greenland was once
inhabited, and Iceland thrived as recently
as 1200 A.D. There was plentiful rainfall
in areas that are now desert, and once-
dry regions bloom today.
Yet these changes, which can be found
in history books, are trivial compared with
the alterations Nature can make in the
Earth's weather patterns. At one time
much of North America and Europe was
covered with vast sheets of glacial ice.
The seas were hundreds of feet lower than
at present. Nothing man will or indeed
can do compares to the wild shifts in
climate this planet has already endured
not once, but dozens of times.
Then, too, hydraulic projects are not like
Nature's, for they can be controlled,
monitored, even reversed. When, through
changes in the Earth's orbit and tilt, Nature
begins to change the climate, it all happens
at random, uncontrolled and uncontrolla¬
ble. But pumping stations and dams are
very much under control; they can be
used not only to halt undesirable man-
made trends, but even to reverse Nature if
need be.
There will always be those who find the
whole prospect frightening, and their
arguments have merit. At bottom the
desirability of enormous hydraulic projects
becomes not so much a matter of opinion
as a matter of emotional bias. Certainly
projects such as NAWAPA and the Soviet
Pechora project or - the even more
ambitious Soviet plan to construct what
amounts to a new inland sea in the Yenisey
Basin can potentially wreak havoc on
weather and climate patterns. By the
same token, though, the ability to transfer
large amounts of water implies the ability
to control the effects of such a transfer.
Is control better than none at all?
Control implies the possibility of error; but
lack of control relies on luck. Those who
are frightened by the new hydrology
projects have, knowingly or subconsciously,
assumed that nature will continue to act
kindly, and that we will not need the
control over Nature implicit in the big
water projects.
The historical evidence runs counter to
that assumption. We in the 20th century
live in what may be the most favourable
climatic conditions that have ever prevailed.
Nearly all studies of long-term climate
changes indicate that we are due for a
change and that it will be for the worse.
The- warming trend that has prevailed
since the end of the "Little Ice Age",
which drove the Viking settlers out of
Greenland and greatly reduced the
habitability of Iceland, may well be coming
to an end.
During the American Revolutionary War,
cannon were carried across the ice in New
York harbour. There has not been such
a hard freeze in this century. Even the
"Great Freeze" of 1976 was mild compar:
ed to normal conditions in 1776. Now,
however, the trend seems to be moving
downward. The average number of days
in which crops may be grown in the
northern ' hemisphere has measurably
decreased since the turn of the century.
Hydrology may be able to reverse this
trend. For example, the Soviet Yenisey
Basin plan would provide climate stability
in much of Siberia. Parts of that inhospita¬
ble region would become enormously
productive farmlands.
THbHb would oe another
trend, though, and one
not clearly understood.
Warmer climates close to the Arctic might
affect the northern ice cap. The precise
effect is simply not predictable at this time.
There could be either an increase or a
decrease in the amount of snowfall in the
Arctic, and thus the icecap might either
grow or shrink.
Given this ambiguity, a natural reaction
is to say "Best leave things alone. Why
take chances? If the icecap grows it could
turn much present arable land into desert;
if it shrinks, the resulting rise in sea level
would drown coastal cities. The concept
is far too dangerous, and surely no one
seriously intends to do that!"'
And yet, without such projects, there is
no control at all.
24
CONTINUED PAGE 33

Redrawing the world's waterscapes (continued Nom page m
Many climatologists believe we are
already at the beginning of a new Ice Age,
and some seriously believe that the reason
why glaciers have not already begun
their march is that man-made heat has
been added to the atmosphere, not merely
directly by burning fossil fuels, but indirectly,
by adding more carbon dioxide to the
atmosphere (which causes the atmosphere
to retain more of the sun's heat).
Others believe that the smoke particles
man has added to the atmosphere have
reduced the amount of sunlight falling on
the Earth, and have contributed to cooling
the planet. There are even a few who
believe that these two factors have cancel¬
led each other outthe carbon dioxide
causing more heat to be retained, the
smoke particles reflecting more.
But in the midst of this debate comes
more disturbing news. There is now
considerable evidence that the sun does
not always emit the same amount of
heat and light. Studies of sunspots as
reported in historical records indicate long
periods of "quiet" with no sunspots at all,
which would affect the sun's output.
Thus we find that nature has a great
number of ways to alter our climate. It is
only recently that man's efforts have
become sufficiently great to have any real
effect.
And that is where the debate lies now:
should we build the means for transferring
vast quantities of water vast, but still
quite small compared to the amounts of
water locked in glacial ice that flowed
across the continents not too many
thousands of years ago or should we be
content to let nature dictate our climate?
Suppose we go ahead. The earliest
projects would probably be the NAWAPA
plan in North America, and the Soviet plan
to divert much of the Pechora into the
Volga basin.
The Soviet Pechora project would
provide water to irrigate 10 million hectares
of land, to generate 3 billion kilowatt-hours
of electricity, and to save the Caspian
Sea from drying, with consequent increas¬
ed salinity. It would also provide water
for the Azov Sea, restoring that basin to
its natural salinity.
The U.S. NAWAPA Project is even
more ambitious. Affecting three nations,
it would open up deserts for cultivation
and provide sufficient water to flush out
the Great Lakes, restoring the water purity
they once enjoyed before industrialization.
The climatic effects of both projects are
relatively easy to understand. In the
Soviet case, the increased surface areas
of the two major bodies of water, the
Caspian and the Azov Sea, would cause
increased evaporation, and subsequent
rainfall in the regions to their east. Those
regions are drained by the rivers affected
by the water project, so that an equilibrium
would soon be established. To the extent
that there would be climate changes, they
would tend to restore conditions prior to
man's industrialization of the region.
The NAWAPA project similarly tends to
restore lakes and land areas to the condi
tions prior to industry and farming of the
regions. Both the U.S. and Soviet projects
would also provide water for irrigating
lands that, because of extensive farming,
become dustbowls in dry years.
Beyond those benefits there is another
new knowledge. While to some it may be
criminal to experiment with weather and
climate, it cannot be said too often that
nature herself "experiments" and her
experiments are not at all controllable. We
have today enough technology to assess
the changes that we could bring about.
We can monitor the climatic effects of
NAWAPA and the Pechora Project, and
from them learn just what does happen to
weather when we move large quantities
of water.
And that would make possible even
larger projects. The Soviet studies of the
Yenisey Basin have not gone beyond the
early-planning stage, and wisely so. The
creation of an inland sea so close to the
Arctic would have drastic effects on
climate for not only Soviet Asia, but the
rest of the world. Without a better under¬
standing of those effects it would be
folly to invest in such a vast project...
But someday we may need it.
Neither the sun nor the earth remain
unchanged. Through the millennia climate
has varied; and we are due again for a
change, with all indications that it will be
a change for the worse.
Unless we do something about it. And
we can.
Jerry Pournelle
33
