Copyright The creator's
bread
and butter
by Henri de Saint-Blanquat
ARE authors an endangered species?
Will they be extinct, a hundred
years from now? These questions
are not entirely facetious. Judging from the
present state of affairs as far as the protec¬
tion of their livelihood is concerned, their
future is, to say the least, uncertain.
This statement may come as a surprise.
Never have so many books been printed;
never have there been so many authors,
whether of literary or other works. Yet the
explosion in modern means of communica¬
tion carries with it a threat to the author
and to the notion of "intellectual
property". Authors may well soon find
themselves the victims of technological
advance.
Not that authors were treated more
favourably in the past. In the early 18th
century, an author who sold a manuscript
to a bookseller surrendered all his rights as
far as his work was concerned; the book¬
seller could dispose of it as he wished. And
if the notion of literary property is of more
ancient origin (the Romans recogniz¬
ed it, just as they recognized the funda¬
mental principle of moral interest, which
allowed the author some say in the for¬
tunes of his work, even after he had sold it
to another person), this early "copyright"
was a matter of unwritten agreements and
traditional arrangements: it carried no
legal consequences.
It was not until the end of the 18th cen¬
tury that the first copyright laws made their
appearance, according official recognition
to the rights of authors to obtain equitable
payment for their work, and to retain some
measure of ownership of their literary pro¬
perty, even when it had been published.
This was a hard-won victory; in a great
many cases, authors were obliged to go to
court to obtain recognition of their rights.
In France, it was not until the Revolution
was well under way that their rights began
to be recognized in law. As far as writers
for the theatre were concerned, the drama¬
tist Beaumarchais put the matter in a nut-
HENRI DE SAINT-BLANQUAT, French scien¬
tific journalist, is the author of many articles on
anthropology, ethnology, sociology and
archaeology. His study on medieval and early
modern Europe, La Vie en Europe (Life in
Europe) was published by Hachette, Paris, in
1970.
shell when he remarked: "They are saying
in the theatre lobbies that it is ignoble for
writers, whose pretension it is to aspire to
fame, to plead for vulgar monetary reward.
Yet in truth, whatever the attractions of
fame, to enjoy it but for one year, nature
obliges us to dine three hundred and sixty-
five times."
But it was not enough for a country to
give legal recognition to literary and artistic
rights, for this only afforded the author
protection within the frontiers of his own
country. What the 18th century began, the
19th century had to continue, not only by
ensuring that authors' rights were recogniz¬
ed abroad, but also by ensuring that their
works enjoyed truly international protec¬
tion, so that a book by an Italian author, for
example, remained as much his property in
Iceland or Japan as in his native land.
This was easier said than done. Bilateral
treaties were a beginning, later to be fol¬
lowed by international unions and conven¬
tions. 1886 saw the adoption of the Berne
Convention for the Protection of Artistic
and Literary Works a European agree¬
ment and the first multilateral copyright
convention in history. Three years later, the
first in a series of pan-American conven¬
tions was adopted.
But that was not the end of the story.
Protection can always be improved. The
Berne Convention was revised and correc¬
ted in 1908, 1928 and 1967, while a series
of pan-American conventions were con¬
cluded between 1889 and 1946.
The fact that there were two different
sets of conventions posed a number of pro¬
blems that were partially resolved by the
adoption in 1952, under the aegis of
Unesco, of the Universal Copyright Con¬
vention. But this Convention, which in its
turn would be revised in 1971, did not
replace the earlier instruments. States
remained free to adhere to the Universal
Copyright Convention in its original or re¬
vised form, or to any of the non-universal
unions or conventions. This explains why
the Berne Convention could be revised for
the third time in 1967, fifteen years after the
Universal Convention was adopted.
At present, some States adhere only to
the Berne Convention; others (72 in all)
adhere to the Universal Convention; still
others adhere either to both or to none.
while the Soviet Union is a signatory of the
Universal Copyright Convention, in the ver¬
sion of 1952. All of which goes to show
that the protection of literary, artistic and
scientific works is a complex affair, and one
which may become even more complicated
as time goes on.
At this point, it might be asked, what
exactly is to be protected, and how? The
answer depends on the situation; and the
number of different situations is virtually
unlimited. Anglo-Saxon law, for example,
merely protects works that have been for¬
mally deposited, registered and legally
identified, whereas "continental" Euro¬
pean, law tends to protect the act of cre¬
ation itself. The existence of these two dis¬
tinct schools of legal thought explains why,
for so long, two series of international
agreements have existed side by side.
Furthermore, the Socialist countries
have their own ideas on the subject. In the
Western countries, notwithstanding cer¬
tain national differences, copyright law is
based on the notion of property and the
laws of a free market. In the Socialist coun¬
tries on the other hand, where the State
assumes the role of publisher, works of
authorship are sometimes considered as
property that can be exchanged (in which
case the author enjoys certain rights of
ownership); but they are above all con¬
sidered as cultural values .and as instru¬
ments to be placed at the service of
society, so that the author receives no
royalties when they are used for educa¬
tional purposes.
To complicate matters still further, there
is the case, only recently acknowledged, of
the developing countries, which must rely
on massive imports of intellectual works,
, and at the same time develop their own
output. Efforts to help them solve this pro¬
blem have led to the granting of certain
facilities as far as copyright is concerned,
which in effect limit the rights of authors of
works circulating in those countries.
The key word here is the word "limit". It
might be presumed that during the past
two centuries works of the mind have
come to enjoy greater and greater protec¬
tion, and that their authors' livelihood has
increased accordingly. Such is indeed the
case, and bodies like Unesco and the
World Intellectual Property Organization
(WiPO) are doing what they can to consoli-
28

It has been calculated that if Sophocles' play Oedipus Rex were presented on television today, the audience it could reach in a
single showing would be far bigger than the total number of spectators to have seen It In a theatre since it was written 25
centuries ago. Above, Oedipus in a 1967 film version of the play, directed by the Italian film-maker Pier Paolo Pasolini. A recent
Unesco-ILO survey on the condition of writers and artists in the modern world drew attention to "the small extent to which the
artist exercises control over the management of his own affairs, and the problem of obtaining remuneration commensurate with
the commercial use made of his work."
date this trend. Nevertheless, there are
limits to the progress that can be made,
and a number of disquieting signs indicate
that the situation is not evolving as fa¬
vourably as it might, at least as far as
authors are concerned.
One thing is certain: there will always be
limits of some kind. When is an author not
an author, and where do creation, imita¬
tion, plagiarism, execution and interpreta¬
tion begin and end? Precisely what should
copyright protect? There are no easy
replies to these questions, as may be seen
from a number of lawsuits heard in recent
years.
In 1975, for example, a French court was
called upon to rule whether or not the for¬
mula of a particular perfume was protected
by the laws of copyright. In the same
country, the unauthorized reproduction of
photographs has given rise to lengthy
debates and contradictory judgements.
French law, it is true, protects "photo¬
graphic works of an artistic or document¬
ary nature". But what is "artistic", and
what is "documentary"? That is where the
difficulty lies.
The attribution of royalties poses an¬
other problem. On orders from their supe¬
riors, two American soldiers designed and
erected a statue destined to serve as the
emblem of their garrison. When they retur¬
ned to civilian life, they claimed royalties on
their work of art. The courts decided other¬
wise, ruling that the Army had financed the
project, and discharged the executants
from any further obligations. "If copyright
is due," ruled the judges, "it is due exclusi¬
vely to the Government of the United
States of America."
Whether or not plagiarism has been
committed can also be the subject of end¬
less debate. It should be pointed out here
that copyright, as a general rule, protects
creations but not ideas, in other words, the
substance but not the inspiration. Follow¬
ing a competition for the design of a monu¬
ment to the liberator of Paris, General
Leclerc, to be erected on the outskirts of
the French capital, an unsuccessful compe
titor took the winner to court, claiming that
his project had been plagiarized. The
defendant claimed that he had merely
"borrowed" his rival's idea of a grandiose
and symbolic "Victory-V". The initial judge¬
ment in favour of the plaintiff was revers¬
ed on appeal: since the defendant had
merely adopted the plaintiff's idea, plagia¬
rism had not occurred.
These examples are more than anecdo¬
tic. They reveal not only that the exercise
of rights at any given time (our own time,
in the cases mentioned) is subject to limita¬
tion, but also that the limits are mobile and
subject to constant dispute.
The rights of individuals, of authors, are
one thing, but the right of access to literary
and other works of society as a whole and
the public at large must also be protected.
In addition, there are various "pressure
groups", whose primary concern is with
protection of their vested interests. To
keep all these different elements in equili¬
brium requires a veritable juggler's skill, i
The see-saw is never horizontal.
29

Copyright and
computer art
Electronic music, graphics and other
works created with the aid of a computer
today pose a highly sensitive copyright
problem. One major difficulty is where to
draw the line between human intervention
in the creative process and the point
where the computer might be considered
to "take over". Unesco is carrying out
studies on this and other related questions
as part of the international community's
effort to define the copyright status of
computer art. Right, computer graphic by
artists from the Fed. Rep. of Germany.
( Translators are another category of peo¬
ple with problems of a similar kind. It was
not until 1976, during the General Con¬
ference of Unesco at Nairobi, that an
international Recommendation was adopt¬
ed on the legal protection of translators
and translations. In its opening lines, the
text recalls that the principles of protection
are one thing, and their actual application
another. In principle, translators are pro¬
tected by the Universal Copyright Conven¬
tion, by certain provisions of the Berne
Convention and by a number of national
laws. In reality, the text prudently observes
"The practical application of the principles
and provisions is not always adequate."
This remark is followed by a series of sug¬
gestions for further action a modest step
forward after so many years of effort.
It would, in any case, be an error to
believe that steady and irresistible progress
is being made towards increased recog¬
nition of authors' rights. The example of
the developing countries mentioned above
shows, on the contrary, that it has been
necessary in their case to impose certain
limits on authors' rights with regard to
works translated in or imported into those
countries. The copyright conventions thus
provide for various facilities, reductions or
dispensations designed to enable the deve¬
loping countries to obtain more books and
to make more translations, as a matter of
extreme urgency.
These measures reflect a certain moral
concern or at least an enlightened self-
interest on the part of the major book-
producing countries. But the extension of
copyright protection is threatened by other
limitations, which are yet to be clearly de¬
fined and which are due to the manner in
which the techniques of communication
are evolving. If the recognition of copyright
poses few problems where radio and tele¬
vision programmes are concerned, the task
is far more difficult in the case of repro¬
ductions: tapes and cassettes for creative
works in sound, cables and video-cassettes
for visual images, and photocopies for
texts.
Here, too, one or two case-histories will
show the kind of difficulties that can arise.
At the beginning of 1974, a Paris court
handled a lawsuit involving a number of
publishing houses, including publishers of
scientific works in particular, and the
French National Centre for Scientific
Research (CNRS), on the subject of photo¬
copies.
Instead of purchasing several copies of a
given book, this research centre, like many
other laboratories and libraries, preferred to
buy single copies, and to make use of a
photocopying machine to reproduce the
pages which their scholars and students
required. Quite obviously, the more the
photocopier was used, the fewer copies of
the book were sold by the publishers and
the smaller the royalties received by the
author. In this case (similar ones have
occurred in the United States), judgement
was given against the CNRS, but in merely
symbolic terms; if it had gone further, the
court would have infringed the right of
public access to published works.
This ruling indicates that the trend is
towards compromise: laboratories and
libraries, whose requirements are uncon¬
tested, are assimilated to private indivi¬
duals, and their photocopying activities are
not considered as an offence. On the other
hand, the case showed that a limitation had
indeed been imposed on authors' rights.
Another recent case concerned radio
sets installed in hotel rooms. France's
Society of Authors, Composers and Music
Publishers (SACEM) took a Paris hotel to
court, claiming that rights were due on
behalf of its members in respect of pro¬
grammes broadcast on those sets.
SACEM's position Was clear: the hotel was
a public place, and thus subject to copy¬
right. The hotel management, supported
by the French Federation of Hoteliers,
claimed that its rooms were private, and
thus exempt from copyright law.
The court found in favour of the hotel,
basing its ruling on the fact that the man¬
agement did not select the programmes
broadcast. If, on the other hand, the man¬
ager had relayed programmes to clients'
rooms from a receiver situated somewhere
in the establishment, he would have been
found guilty, since the programmes would
then have been considered as public per¬
formances. This, incidentally, was the
judgement given in an Australian case,
where the organizer of a dance for mem¬
bers of a private club was found to have
given a public performance.
Many copyright problems have yet to
find solutions. "Pirate" recording is one of
them. Countless young people today lend
each other records, and re-record them on
to cassettes. There is nothing to prevent
them from doing this: as members of the
public, they are merely exercising their
right of access, with the help of the latest
techniques. Some countries have, how¬
ever, found solutions to the problem. In the
Federal Republic of Germany, for example,
the purchase price of a tape-recorder in¬
cludes a sum destined for the benefit of
performing artists.
The "rediffusion" of programmes of all
30

kinds is another issue that awaits solution.
Here, the situation is complicated by the
fact that a distinction is made according to
whether or not the body responsible for
retransmission is the originator of the pro¬
gramme concerned. No solutions have as
yet been found in this connexion, whether
with regard to radio, to cable or television
or to video-cassettes, although the matter
is being considered by a number of inter¬
governmental committees, under the aegis
of Unesco.
Cable television was the subject of a
meeting in July of this year, and video-
cassettes were considered in September.
While it is to be hoped that positive so¬
lutions will eventually be found, one thing
is already clear. The latest techniques of
communication permit ever-increasing
access to an ever-increasing number of
works of all kinds, and it is morally un¬
thinkable to obstruct this process.
The increasing use of satellites carries
the problem of copyright into space, and
into a new and extremely important dimen¬
sion. Three well-placed geostationary
satellites can in fact cover the whole sur¬
face of the Earth. This means that un¬
authorized countries or organizations,
which have not signed any of the interna¬
tional agreements, will be able to pick up
programmes transmitted to other destina¬
tions, and to become "wavelength pirates"
on a grand scale. Can this be avoided?
In 1974, Unesco and the World Intellec¬
tual Property Organization (WIPO) adopted
a Convention specifically devoted to this
question. Under the provisions of its Article
2, each Contracting State "undertakes to
take adequate measures to prevent the dis¬
tribution on or from its territory of any
programme-carrying signal by any distribu¬
tor for whom the signal... is not intended."
At present, four States have signed this
convention. It is true that the problem is an
enormous one, and goes beyond the mere
risk of piracy: certain transmission net¬
works are capable of monopolizing the
attention of the whole world.
Last in this series of problems of copy¬
right are those posed by computers. What
can be done, for example, with regard to
their programmes? How can they be given
legal protection? Are they covered by copy¬
right or by patent law? Should they be the
subject of special legislation? WIPO is
studying the question. But here again,
reproduction is a stumbling-block.
Computers, in fact, represent automatic
The protection of folklore
In its customary setting, folklore undergoes a natural growth which ensures its
authenticity, but when transplanted from its native soil and used for
commercial purposes it is laid open to the same risks as other works of the
creative imagination: plagiarism, amputation, misappropriation and unlawful
reproduction or use. Unesco, in collaboration with specialized bodies such as
the Berne Union, is engaged in the search for ways of protecting the world's
heritage of folklore by regulations enabling it to retain its authenticity. Below,
musicians of Kahemba (Zaire) playing the balafon, a kind of xylophone.
documentation carried to the heights of
perfection. And whether they store cata¬
logues, inventories, data, quotations, ab¬
stracts, analyses or automatic translations,
they are of direct concern to authors,
whose attempts to secure their rights are
likely to meet stubborn opposition on the
part of the computers' owners and pro¬
grammers, who will no doubt use all the
means at their disposal to avoid paying
royalties.
Today's technological revolution, as
Marie-Claude Dock, head of Unesco's
Copyright Division has pointed out, is full
of promise and at the same time fraught
with dangers. It recalls an earlier leap for¬
ward: the invention of the printing-press.
After Gutenberg, authors were for a long
time powerless in the face of printers and
publishers. They had to wait three full cen¬
turies before they were officially entitled to
draw real benefit from the extraordinary
opportunities that printing offered.
Their problems today are of a similar
kind. The explosion in communication,
which has virtually acquired the dimensions
of a chain-reaction, is not to be deplored;
science and culture will undoubtedly be its
beneficiaries. But there is as much risk as
promise in the situation. New economic
forces have made their appearance or are
waiting in the wings, and this cannot but
affect works of the mind. And since identi¬
cal phenomena lead to identical solutions,
unless care is taken the rights of authors
may well be swallowed up and lost in the
dark waters of economic interest.
And meanwhile, today as in the age of
Beaumarchais, authors must, if they are to
survive, sit down to dinner three hundred
and sixty-five times every year.
Henri do Saint-Blanquat
Record piracy
and plunder
The booty of "record pirates",
whose illegally reproduced
recordings rob record producers,
authors, composers and performers
of their financial rewards, is
reckoned to have reached $500
million in 1977. Cassettes are the
main target. A meeting of record
producers recently estimated that
70 per cent of the cassettes sold in
the U.K., 50 per cent of those sold
in Italy and 5 per cent of those sold
in France (mostly Arab music) had
been reproduced illegally.
31
