Workers can be choosers
In defence of free choice in working life
by Gósta Rehn
GOSTA REHN, head of the Swedish Institute
for Social Research, University of Stockholm,
was formerly Director for Manpower and Social
Affairs with the Organization for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (OECD) in Paris. A
slightly longer version of this article has also
appeared in ILO Information, Geneva (Vol. 14,
No. 1, 1978).
THERE are many dimensions of work¬
ing time: hours per day or week,
days per month and year, years of
work versus years of study and retirement.
Traditionally these aspects have all been
regulated separately and rigidly with little
allowance for the idea that different indivi¬
duals or groups might want to use their
time along different lines.
Individual requests for deviations from
the norms are subjected to scrutiny and
tutelage. Thus you must prove that you are
either a very gifted and stable person or
else definitely retarded and unstable in
order to get particular support from society
for studies and training. You must prove
that you are unable to work to get an early
pension. You must be strong and healthy
not only in order to be able to work but also
to overcome all legal, administrative and
socio-psychological hurdles, if you want to
continue working after normal retirement
age; even then you may be penalized by a
tax rate on your additional earned income
similar to that levied on the income of a mil¬
lionaire. And if you do not use holiday
rights before a certain date every year you
simply lose them.
The fact that social insurance funds or l
other arrangements now exist to provide f
23

income maintenance during all the periods
of non-work could, however, be the basis
for a greater freedom of choice. The
various sorts of income maintenance,
including the tax-based study financing
system, could be combined into one com¬
mon scheme of exchangeable drawing
rights. Assets accumulated on each indivi¬
dual's social security account, thus integra¬
ted, could be made available to him at any
time for purposes of his own choice.
I basic credit for studies
after compulsory school would be needed,
as a starting fund for everybody, but peo¬
ple should not lose their rights in this res¬
pect if they prefer working instead of going
to higher schools for some years of their
youth; this should instead create extra draw¬
ing rights for them once they want to use
the money. This feature would imply a rec¬
tification of some present inequities: that
persons who use big societal resources for
long studies get high pensions on the basis
of a low number of working years, while
the opposite holds for those who work and
pay pension fees all their lives from sixteen
to sixty-five.
With such generalized drawing rights it
would also be up to the individual when
and whether he opts for late retirement
with a high pension or the opposite; whe¬
ther he takes a "temporary retirement"
with full rights to return to work; whether
he accumulates holiday rights in order to
use them for studies, leisure, or an increa¬
sed pension; whether he interrupts his
work career for further education, or his
studies for work. The choice would be his,
and the authorities would have no reason
to scrutinize the "legitimacy" of his use of
his own fund.
Under such a system of drawing rights,
records of "debit" and "credit" should be
available to the individual at any time, just
as with a bank accountwith the impor¬
tant difference that the state is in a position
to guarantee its value against inflationary
erosions, thanks to the fact that the gen¬
eralized contributions would grow auto¬
matically with inflation as they already
do in most social insurance schemes. We
assume of course that the individual is not
permitted to exhaust his assets; he must
still have money left for a reasonable pen¬
sion without extra contributions from tax¬
payers to keep him from starving in his old
age.
It would also be possible to offer certain
advantages to persons who use their draw¬
ing rights in ways that are useful to society,
for instance those who time their periods of
further study or extended leave to coincide
with periods of low demand for their type
of labour, thus making savings on unem¬
ployment insurance. Training for higher
skills and qualifications could be encoura¬
ged and rewarded especially if it implied
switching from an unemployment area
toward shortage occupations.
This idea is not Utopian. Various forms of
flexible retirement do already exist. The
new fifth holiday week in Sweden is avail¬
able for accumulation so that the worker
can take nine weeks off every five years if
he so wishes. In Australia such "long ser¬
vice leave" is a tradition.
With growing levels of real income,
people will want continuing reduction in
working time. Different persons, however,
want this in different ways. To meet all
requests for shorter weekly hours, more
holidays, more schooling, and earlier retire¬
ment by across-the-board regulations is
not possible. People would not like the
ensuing limitation on income and the high
taxes and fees needed for financing the
necessary income maintenance. This over¬
all limitation should not hinder us in letting
the individual choose his own form of
working time reduction, to be financed out
of his own account for drawing rights in
the overall social insurance system.
In some respects such freedom may
create difficulties for the production pro¬
cess. But it can also be a help. Well organi¬
zed flextime systems have helped to reduce
irregular absenteeism and high labour turn¬
over. And a systematic co-ordination with
labour market policy, offering incentives to
people to use voluntarily their drawing
rights in a way that helps to maintain balan¬
ced full employment would also be advan¬
tageous to workers and employers alike
and make shorter working time economi¬
cally more feasible.
Human freedom and technical and eco¬
nomic efficiency may sometimes appear at
first sight to be incompatible. It is up to the
social and economic policy makers to work
out ways of eliminating any incompatibili¬
ties and of making these aspirations
mutually supporting.
Gösta Rehn

