Should we re-think
the pre-school
system? by Liliane Lurçat
ONE result of the generalization of
education during this century has
been an increase in scholastic
competition; access to many jobs depends
upon certificates and diplomas obtained at
school, and children who have had the
advantage of a few years of pre-schooling
find entry into primary school less difficult
than those with no pre-schooling behind
them.
Pre-schooling is seen, therefore, as an
important factor in scholastic success and
in view of the high incidence of scholastic
failure, particularly among working-class
children, it is easy to understand parental
anxieties and the desire, of some parents at
least, to get their children involved in the
educational process at an early age.
But pre-schooling has repercussions on
the educational system as well as on the
children: the primary school expects to
receive "pupils" and not children fresh
from the family circle; the child Is trans¬
formed by an earlier introduction to life in
society.
During the first months of life, children
are subject to the influence of their family.
The family environment passes on values
peculiar to each family as well as national,
regional and class characteristics. Religious
beliefs are also imparted by the family. Chil¬
dren absorb this family culture, adopting a
variety of habits, for example, of feeding,
expressing, amusing or occupying them¬
selves. They adopt certain attitudes when
faced with change; depending on the
nature of the family, they adjust with
varying degrees of ease or difficulty to
other environments. This does not mean
that the family standardizes reactions. Dif¬
ferences between individuals also play their
part, and each child of a family marks his
tastes and proclivities by adopting what
appeals to him in his environment.
The period between the ages of three
and six is a personality-forming phase typi¬
fied by great sensitivity to surroundings. It
is also the period of pre-schooling, the
LILIANE LURCAT, French specialist in child
psychology and educational psychology, is the
author of two books on pre-school education,
La Maternelle, Une Ecole Différente (published
by Editions du Cerf, Paris, 1976) and Une Ecole
Maternelle (Stock, Paris, 1976).
influence of which can have lasting effects
which may tally with family influences or
else run counter to them.
It has been pointed out that the essential
function of pre-schooling is to introduce
children to life in society. This "socializa¬
tion" has two aspects. On the one hand, it
clearly teaches them how to live collecti¬
vely, with children who are of about their
own age, and with adults who are not their
parents and who fulfil specific functions.
Children adjust to the group, and to the
rhythm and activities of school. They learn
to obey adults and to accept discipline.
The other less obvious aspect of this
socialization is that it has the effect of pro¬
ducing a certain uniformity in. children's
reactions. The most basic and widely
accepted moral notions are inculcated in
young children: they learn, for instance,
that they ought not take home or break
toys belonging to others, that they ought
not fight. And these prohibitions are not
just an abstract set of rules. It is the action
of the children themselves which is com¬
mended or criticized. The child gradually
learns how to distinguish between what is
thought to be positive and what is regarded
as negative in what he or other children do.
Moreover, the children in the group par¬
ticipate and react collectively along the
same lines as the adult, with the result that
approval or disapproval becomes a univer¬
sal reaction. When, for instance, a three-
year-old girl refuses to put away the felt
pens and the schoolmistress calls her "a
naughty girl", many of the children of the
same age in her class will repeat: "Yes,
she's naughty, she's not nice". They
adopt the adult's opinion. This standardi¬
zation of reactions has been called "ideolo¬
gical pattern-forming".
The socialization of children at school is
something that takes place throughout the
day and in the course of their various activi¬
ties. Thus it is not so much a particular
field of teaching as a lifestyle to which the
child gradually becomes accustomed.
Pre-school teaching does not usually fol¬
low a specific curriculum. As a general rule
children are not given marks. But they are
appraised according to their school work.
In France, for instance, school records are i
kept on each child, starting at pre-primary f'
A cardboard house is a
fine vantage point from
which to examine the
world around. The pre¬
school years are the
period In which the child
is introduced to society
and acquires manual
skills: a time to savour
the hilarity of the law of
gravity and to marvel at
the enchantment of the
tinkling of bells and the
clashing of cymbals.
18 .*

H
^MHHH
19

school; and they contain assessments of
conduct, character and scholastic success.
Pre-school teaching covers various cate¬
gories of activity. Activities involving self-
expression and creativity are aimed at
bringing out the child's personality. Other
forms of learning and preparation for lear¬
ning, the teaching of manual skills, develop
control of the body. It is accepted that one
of the vital needs of young children is the
opportunity to create and to express them¬
selves. This is encouraged by the extensive
use of play situations: classrooms are divi¬
ded up into different areas by partitioning.
There is a kitchen area, where family meals
are simulated; a bathroom area where dolls
are washed and dressed; and a grocery
area, where children can play at buying and
selling.
Other opportunities for self-expression
and creation are provided by drawing,
modelling, singing, dancing and making
things. Objects made by children are often
exhibited at end-of-term open days. Celeb¬
rations in general play an important role in
pre-school teaching; the children's birth¬
days are celebrated, as are festivals such as
Christmas, Shrove Tuesday, and Easter.
In some schools, creative and construc¬
tive activities provide an opportunity for
bringing together children of different
ages. But the children are usually grouped
according to age. In France, for example,
when nursery schools have nine classes,
the children are divided up into three
sections a lower section consisting of
children aged between three and four, a
middle section with four- and five-year-
Veryown village
"A house must have walls or we
would all be outside" (Christophe). "A
roof in case it rains" (David). "A floor
or we might trip over the holes in the
ground and moles might come in"
(Stephane). "A door so we can go In
and out" (Sandrine). "And windows
to look out of" (Mylène). "And so it
won't be all dark Inside" (Fabien).
The children of the Gambetta nursery
school, at Sèvres, near Paris, were
discussing the houses they were
going to build on a piece of land set
apart for them by the municipality.
The children built Veryown Village
and, in 1978, they published a booklet
describing how they set about It and
from which these drawings are taken.
olds, and an upper section with five- and
six-year-olds. There are often three classes
per section, again divided up according to
age. The three classes in each section may
reflect a more detailed breakdown into age
groupings of four months.
This grouping by age is justified by the
speed with which children develop at this
stage. It makes It possible to organize acti¬
vities more closely geared to the children's
ability level at any given time, particularly
with regard to the teaching of manual
skills, and preparation for learning. Take
for instance graphic activity aimed at pre¬
paring children to write: there exist pro¬
gressive exercises for the middle and upper
sections, while in the lower section chil¬
dren are usually encouraged to play with
felt pens, paint brushes and chalks. They
learn in this way to use instruments
without being given systematic instruction.
Moreover, manual skills can be developed
through a whole series of games involving
the nesting of boxes, fitting objects into
each other, collages, cut-outs, and the
stringing of beads, among many others.
Pupils in the upper section are often
given their first introduction to reading and
writing, while certain mathematical games
begin in the middle section. There is also
instruction in spatial location (such notions
as right, left, above, and below). This is
thought to facilitate the learning of reading
and mathematics.
Pre-school education is by no means in
its infancy in France the first nursery
schools were established in 1881 yet dis¬
cussion of its aims and content was for
long restricted to educational circles.
Nowadays an increasing number of people
are taking an interest in the function of
schooling and above all in the crisis now
affecting it in many industrialized coun¬
tries. Pre-school systems have not aroused
the same degree of curiosity, and educatio¬
nal sociologists have devoted much less
work to pre-schooling. But various factors
are now encouraging its analysis.
In the first place, there is the problem of
school failure, which is more widespread
among children from a working-class back¬
ground, and can be observed from the
moment primary education begins. The
theories that have been put forward to
explain school failure are of two types:
some find fault with the educational system
itself, which fails to provide the right condi¬
tions to enable everyone to acquire the
basic reading, writing and arithmetical
skills. Others blame the circumstances of
children from the poorest backgrounds,
invoking what they call the "socio-cultural
handicap" which results from being
brought up in an unstimulating family envi¬
ronment and which prevents children from
acquiring knowledge of a scholastic nature.
This implies that the reasons for failure
have nothing at all to do with the school.
Similar explanations ascribe the failure of
working-class children to a lack of Intelli¬
gence, supposedly proved by their poor
performance in intelligence tests.
Such thinking on the causes of school
failure has led to the devising of so-called
compensatory teaching systems (because
"If it's too narrow, we won't be able to move'
"If the door is shut we won't even be able to
eat and we shall have to make a hole in the
door where our mouths will come so we can
be fed through it".
"If there were three or four of
us inside we would be much too
squashed; just think what it
would be like with five!".
Drawings (£) Ecole Maternelle Gambetta. Sevres, France
20

they compensate for the "handicaps"
caused by the family environment). Experi¬
ments of this kind have been put into prac¬
tice on a considerable scale in the United
States (see page 23). Pre-primary school is
considered an ideal stage at which to com¬
pensate for such handicaps. French nur- .
sery schools have even been called
"schools for the equalization of opportuni¬
ties". Such compensation should be parti¬
cularly directed at language, since it is
thought that working-class children suffer
from a "linguistic handicap" which pre¬
vents them from understanding abstrac¬
tions.
But these theories are by no means uni¬
versally accepted. Many researchers ques¬
tion the whole notion of a socio-cultural
handicap. It is not only wrong but highly
dangerous, they claim, to blame families
for any failure their children may expe¬
rience at school, for it absolves the school
of any responsibility in the matter. But if
school is compulsory for all. It is Its duty to
pass on basic knowledge to all its pupils.
When, as sometimes happens, almost a
third of the children experience difficulties
during their primary education, some
attempt should be made to establish why
this is so and to discover what Is wrong
with the school. Research in the field has
shown that the transmission of knowledge
is not always egalitarian, and that in some
cases it would be accurate" to talk of selec¬
tive transmission in favour of middle-class
children. It has also been shown that
school can encourage self-disparaging atti¬
tudes among working-class children, in
other words that it can cause them to lose
their self-confidence as pupils.
To talk of a socio-cultural handicap with
reference to the poorest families is to
analyze in pathological terms a phenome¬
non which is essentially related to social
and more particularly educational condi¬
tions. To adopt such an approach is tanta¬
mount to denying the cultural identity of
the working class. Now one of the great
problems facing schools for all is how to
respect the cultural identity of those who
attend them. For if all are to enjoy the right
to acquire knowledge, particular individual
or social characteristics should be allowed
for rather than repudiated. Teachers must
also be trained; children are all too often
entrusted to people who have received no
proper pedagogical instruction.
It was long held that pre-primary school
was a neutral, sheltered environment, and
that the real problems began when children
started primary school. But on-the-spot
research has revealed the existence even in
the pre-primary school of selective trans¬
mission and the development of proneness
to failure among children from the poorest
homes.
Pre-schooling, as has already been men¬
tioned, is a vital period in the forming of a
child's personality. It Is only natural, then,
that self-disparaging attitudes can leave a
lasting mark on children who feel inferior to
their fellow pupils. Such attitudes are not
caused solely by the relationship with
adults; they also stem from teaching
methods and content. If reading and arith¬
metic are taught too early, there is a danger
that many children may be put off such
subjects. In France, there is a running con¬
troversy between advocates of their being
taught early, and those who feel it is better
to wait until primary school.
Various difficulties have been lumped
together under the heading "handicaps",
from motor and sensory difficulties, such
as difficulties of walking, seeing or hearing
which are quite clearly of a physiological
nature, to psychological difficulties whose
nature and origin are hard to analyze and
whose very existence is sometimes far from
easy to prove the child may simply be
reacting to school. In this case it is not a
question of a disorder specific to the indivi¬
dual but of a particular manifestation of a
lack of flexibility of the school.
Some French educationalists have
stressed the need to detect all such "handi¬
caps" before the age of four. Here again,
caution is called for; while there is every
advantage in detecting shortsightedness in
young children it is much riskier to start
examining them for signs of psychological
abnormality. There is, moreover, a change
in teachers' attitudes when one of their
tasks is to detect such disorders. The long-
term purpose of schooling could well
change, and considerable harm could
result for any child wrongly labelled as
handicapped in some way.
One really difficult problem in pre-
schooling is connected with the differences
that exist between individuals. Depending
"The roof must be higher, otherwise our heads
will be sticking up into the room above."
on the location of the school, there can be
a varying degree of social homogeneity In
the catchment area. But the teaching
problem is the same everywhere; all chil¬
dren have to be prepared for primary
school. In order to ensure that some chil¬
dren do not feel rejected, teachers have to
understand them and try to understand
themselves.
Labels, such as "unstable" or "trouble¬
some", should be avoided at the pre¬
school level because they tend to stick. On
the contrary, great attention should be paid
to all signs of evolution or change, which
teachers are in a position to detect as they
are in contact with their pupils for several
years. Teaching methods should be based
on an understanding knowledge of the chil¬
dren and guided by the very positive aim of
personality-forming.
Differences between children should be
recognized and tolerated. It must be reali¬
zed that they do exist, otherwise teachers
will reject some children without being
aware of their deeper reasons for doing so.
One of the first things a teacher has to
face are differences in his pupils' social
backgrounds. Then come differences in
their rate of development; some children
walk, speak and are toilet-trained before
others, though this has no bearing on their
subsequent development.
Another type of difference is in the way
they react to school. Some children are at
ease, and make full use of their ability to
adjust. They are liked by their teacher,
who is encouraged and reassured because
he thinks he can detect the immediate
effects of his teaching. Other pupils are
fearful, anxious, on the defensive, reserved
and shy. There are quiet children who do
not try to draw attention to themselves by
recounting the latest exploits of their fami¬
lies. In this world in miniature the teacher
distinguishes between the most quick¬
witted and the slowest, between those
who are well turned out and those whose
appearance is neglected, and between
those capable of keeping up with changes
of activity, and those who remain aloof,
participating only in short spells. But the
teacher must also understand each one of
them.
In the relationship that is gradually built
up with the children, a vital role is played by
the teacher's emotional reactions, such as
sympathy, antipathy, selective irritability,
favouritism, displays of affection, out¬
bursts of anger, and so on. This emotional
relationship is complemented by character
judgments, and an image of each child
gradually takes shape, blurred and change¬
able In some cases, clear-cut and lasting in
others. Teachers tend to prefer and feel
affection for children from their own social
and cultural backgrounds.
Recognizing the children's cultural iden¬
tity means recognizing that each one of
them is a repository of culture and there¬
fore also means respecting that which is
different and specific to them. This is why
there is an urgent need to defend the pre-
primary school, to re-think it and to re¬
organize it in relation to the children who
attend it in a word, to respect those who
have not yet learned distrust.
Liliane Lurçat
21
