Spiritual landscape
of traditional Korea
by Chang Byung-kil
THOUSANDS of years ago, according
to ancient legend which archaeolo¬
gical research and linguistic studies
seem to confirm, tribes inhabiting the Altai
Mountains started migrating eastwards
across Siberia and Manchuria. Some of
them, believed to be of Tungu origin,
travelled as far as the Korean peninsula.
They liked what they saw and from the
third millennium B.C. they moved into the
peninsula and settled there to become the
dominant ethnic group.
The primitive Korean, a hunter-fisher,
was much bewildered by the way in which
things around him behaved. He wondered
if those things too had spirits as he did.
His attempt to understand and come to
terms with his environment eventually evol¬
ved into a nature-belief that powerful spi¬
rits resided in the natural forces and ani¬
mate and inanimate objects surrounding
. him. Thus when the hunter had to kill an
animal for food, he performed a rite invo¬
king the approval of the totem spirit of the
victim he was going to hunt. And when the
farmers wished for a good harvest, they
held ceremonies which were intended to
propitiate the local gods of field and forest.
For personal as opposed to social needs,
the individual required an intermediary with
the spirit world who could avert or cure'
sickness and bad luck, and assure a propi¬
tious passage from this world to the next
when the time came. Such a priestlike indi¬
vidual, known as a shaman, would be cal¬
led upon to perform the requisite rituals.
The myth of national foundation embo¬
died in Korea's oldest religion, Taejong-
gyo, is comparable to those of other Altaic
peoples.
Taejong-gyo is about 4,000 years old,
and embodies the concept of a triune god:
creator, teacher, and temporal king, whose
name is Hanul. This god took human form
in the person of Tan'gun, the father,
teacher, and king of the Korean people,
CHANG BYUNG-KIL is professor of religion at
Seoul National University. His writings on the
history of Korean religions include an important
contribution to A Handbook of Korea, Seoul,
1978.
who descended from heaven onto the
highest peak in Korea, presumably Mt.
Paektu, in 2333 B.C. Until recent times
Korean calendars and dates were reckoned
from this year.
Tan'gun became the great teacher and
law-giver of the tribes he found living in the
Korean Peninsula, reigning over them for
ninety-three years until he reascended to
heaven.
The tribal communities gradually develo¬
ped into kingdoms. By the first century
B.C., there were three such kingdoms in
Korea, namely Koguryo, Paekche and Silla.
Religious rituals common to these tribal
states included a service directed at propi¬
tiating heaven.
The tribal rituals, conducted by the chief¬
tains, who were regarded as "messengers
of the Heavenly Emperor", were strongly
established among nobles and commoners
alike by the time of the Three Kingdoms
period, but with the introduction of foreign
religions, purity in the practice of Taejong-
gyo gradually declined. By the fifteenth
century, this cult as such had practically
disappeared.
It was during the Three Kingdoms era! 57
B.C. 668 A.D.) that more sophisticated
religions began to flow into Korea from
China. When Taoism, Confucianism and
Buddhism came to Korea, one after ano¬
ther, they were readily accepted and there
was no sense of conflict between them or
of opposition to rites relating to local
nature-spirits.
It is difficult to pinpoint the exact date
when Taoism, as philosophy and religion,
came to influence Korea. Mural paintings
found in Koguryo tumuli near Kangso,
Pyongan Province, show Taoist influence.
Records indicate that the teachings of Lao
Tzu and Chuang Tzu were brought to
Korea in the seventh century A.D., and
that there was some active effort to study
them. Even Buddhist temples were conver¬
ted to Taoist temples as Koguryo's power
began to weaken.
In Paekche too, there was a trend toward
believing in Taoist spirit beings. But the
strongest imprint of Taoist influence can be
discerned in the guiding principles of the
Hwarang elite corps of Silla, who were trai
ned in patience, simplicity, contentment,
and harmonyall part and parcel of Taoist
ethicsalong with the Confucian doctrine
of loyalty, filial piety, righteousness, and
faith, and the Buddhist teaching of com¬
passion.
Although Taoism failed to proliferate as
an independent cult, it nevertheless conti¬
nued to permeate all strata of the Korean
populace.
The most apparent trace of Taoist
influence among the Koreans is the search
for blessings and longevity, the strongest
of Taoist features. One may observe the
indelible Taoist mark in the two Chinese
characters, su (longevity) and pok (bles¬
sings, or bliss, or happiness), which are
used to decorate so many everyday articles
such as spoons and pillow cases. Should
one ask an elderly Korean what constitute
the ultimate blessings, he would most
unhesitatingly answer, "Longevity, happi¬
ness, health, wealth, and the begetting of
children".
At the time Buddhism entered Korea in
the fourth century A.D., the peninsula was
drawing toward the middle of the Three
Kingdoms period, and was about to be uni¬
fied as a single nation under the southern¬
most kingdom, Silla. For geographical rea¬
sons primarily. Silla was the last of the
three to be penetrated by the foreign reli¬
gion. Koguryo, the northern kingdom, was
visited by a Chinese monk named Sundo in
the year 372 A.D., and a dozen years later,
neighbouring Paekche played host to an
Indian missionary, Marnananta, who had
come by way of China.
Silla did not begin to receive Buddhist
influence until about half a century later,
and it was only in 528 A.D. that it became
legal to preach Buddhism openly there,
after the miraculous martyrdom of the
saintly Yi Cha-don.
Meanwhile, the new religion must have
, spread like wildfire in the two northern
kingdoms, apparently under royal patro¬
nage. Many temples and monasteries were
constructed, and hordes of believers con¬
verted. So rapidly and deeply rooted did
Buddhism become in Paekche and
Koguryo, in fact, that by the sixth century
priests, scriptures, and religious artisans
CONTINUED PAGE 9

These two granite bodhisattvas ("future Buddhas") discovered near Kyongju,
capital of the ancient Korean kingdom of Silla, were carved some 1300 years
ago. The serenity of Buddhism is inscribed In their kindly, smiling faces.

Deep in meditation, a sage
(above) gazes at flowing
water In a work by Kang Huí¬
an (1419-1465). Calligraphier,
poet and functionary as well
as a painter, Kang Hui-an
visited China where he was
influenced by the Ming
tradition of Confucian art.
The god of longevity, Susong
Noln (right) was one of the
Taoist figures often depicted
by Korean artists. In this ink
painting by the court artist
Kim Myong-guk (1623-1650),
the god's alert and vigorous
features are delineated in a
style characteristic of 17th-
century literati painting.
Colour page
Maitreya
in meditation
According to Buddhist teaching which
spread from India to Tibet, China, Korea
and Japan, bodhisattvas are individuals
destined to attain the Enlightenment of
the Buddha in this or another life. In
Mahayana (Great Vehicle) Buddhism they
postpone their own final entrance into
Nirvana in order to alleviate the sufferings
of others, whom they help by perfecting
in themselves the six virtues of
generosity, morality, patience, vigour,
concentration (in meditation), and
wisdom. Highly revered throughout the
Buddhist world, the bodhisattva Maitreya
is here depicted in a gilt bronze sculpture
dating from around 600 A.D., the period of
the Three Kingdoms In Korea. Features
such as the square jaw and bulging
cheeks suggest that it may have been
made in the south of the Korean
peninsula. The artist has succeeded in
conveying an impression of spontaneity
and grace in a figure which is deep in
meditation.
Photo © Yi, Paris, National Museum of Korea, Seoul


n
*y

and artifacts were being sent to Japan, for¬
ming the basis of the early Buddhist culture
there. Much of the prestige attached to the
new cult in Korea, and its eventual adop¬
tion as the state religion in all of the Three
Kingdoms may be traced to the Koreans'
high respect for Chinese learning.
By the time Silla unified the peninsula
under one government in 670 A.D. Bud¬
dhism had been established there too as
the State religion, though governmental
systems were already being run along Con¬
fucian lines, with no conflict between the
two.
Royal patronage during this brief Golden
Age of Unified Silla produced a magnifi¬
cent flowering of Buddhist arts and temple
architecture; and the rapid fragmentation
of the kingdom after less than 200 years did
not harm the position of the Buddhist
church either, since the succeeding Koryo
Colour page
Millennial home
of Holy Writ
Located In a remote spot on the beautiful
tree-covered slopes of Mount Kaya in the
southeast of the Korean peninsula, the
temple of Haein-sa is famed as the
repository of the set of thirteenth century
woodblocks used for printing the
Tripitaka, a sacred Buddhist scripture. The
81,240 blocks of the "Tripitaka Koreana"
are one of the most outstanding
monuments of Korean cultural history.
Founded in the year 802 by two monks,
Sunung and Ijong, the temple was built by
King Aeja of the Silla dynasty. The
monarch Is said to have been converted to
Buddhism and ruled his people from
Haein-sa, In whose grandiose setting
monks still carry on the tradition of
worship begun over a thousand years ago.
Photo © Korean Overseas Information Service, Seoul
dynasty which took power in 936 A.D. was
even more enthusiastic in its support of the
imported doctrine.
Out of many famous monks and theolo¬
gians of the Silla era, possibly the most
influential was Wonhyo, though he was
the only clerical leader of that day who did
not study in China. Wonhyo tried to unify
the various sectarian rivalries among Bud¬
dhists, and sought to make the religion
popular and applicable to the daily lives of
the people. He wrote many books, and
legend ascribes to him a brief love affair
with a royal princess the son of their
union being supposedly the scholar who
invented the system of writing Korean in
Chinese ideographs called idu.
During the Koryo dynasty, priests
became politicians and courtiers, some of
them corrupt or worldly in their interests.
When in the thirteenth century the Mon¬
gols invaded Korea, conquering and rava¬
ging the entire nation except for the Han
River estuary island of Kanghwa where the
king and the court took refuge, the Bud¬
dhists took their share in the blame for the
national disaster. From this era may be
dated a definite and rapid decline in Korean
Buddhism.
When Yi Song-gye staged a revolt and
had himself proclaimed king in 1392, his
policy was both anti-Mongol and anti-
Buddhist. All influence of the religion was
removed from the government. Vast
wealth and land holdings of temples were
seized and Confucianism became the State
religion.
Confucianism had, in fact, first become
established in Korea very much earlier.
Confucian texts had entered the peninsula
well before the beginning of the Christian
era and all the Three Kingdoms left records
that indicate the early existence of Confu¬
cian influence. In Koguryo, for example,
there was a central Confucian university
functioning by the fourth century A.D.,
arguing a long and deeply-rooted tradition
already in existence: while the province had
scattered private Confucian academies cal¬
led Kyongdang.
The neighbouring kingdom of Paekche
seems to have established similar institu¬
tions at about the same time: as usual, the
southernmost kingdom of Silla was a little
later in importing the foreign influence. But
when in the seventh century A.D., Silla
conquered and absorbed the others, her
interest in Confucianism and other aspects
of Chinese culture rapidly increased. Dele¬
gations of scholars were sent to China to
observe the workings of Confucian institu¬
tions at first hand, and to bring back volu¬
minous writings on the subject. Though
Buddhism was the state religion of Unified
Silla, Confucianism formed the philosophi¬
cal and structural backbone of the State.
In Korea, Confucianism was accepted so
eagerly and in so strict a form that the Chi¬
nese themselves regarded the Korean
adherents as more virtuous than them¬
selves, and referred to Korea as "the
country of eastern decorum," referring to
the punctiliousness with which the
Koreans observed all phases of the doctri¬
nal ritual.
The overthrow of the Koryo dynasty in
1392 marked the beginning of a Confucian
renaissance. In the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, under rulers who were generally
enlightened or themselves scholars, there
was indeed considerable progress in social
reform, modernization, and justice. It was
an era of inventions, culminating in the
development of an exact phonetic system
for transcribing the Korean language, cal¬
led Han'gul (see article page 13).
Confucianism produced a new crop of
philosophers starting in the seventeenth
century called the Sirhak or Practical Lear¬
ning School, whose concern was less aca¬
demic than utilitarian. Perhaps under the
influence of Western ideas filtering into
Korea indirectly via the Jesuit missionaries
then active in China, there arose a new
interest among the literati in such matters
as national productivity and defence, agri¬
culture, trade, and welfare of the general
populace.
Confucianism in Korea meant a system
of education, ceremony, and civil adminis¬
tration. With the passing of the monarchi¬
cal system in the early twentieth century,
only the first function remained important.
However, the deeply ingrained Confucian
mode of manners and social relations is still
a major factor in the way Koreans think and
act.
The tide of Christian mission activity
began to turn toward Korea as early as the
seventeenth century, when copies of
Catholic missionary Matteo Ricci's works in
Chinese were brought back from Peking by
the annual tributary mission sent there to
exchange gifts with the Chinese emperor.
In Korea, the missionaries, especially the
late-arriving Protestants, came as bearers
of modern knowledge in every field, filling a
vacuum which the isolated, indrawn
Korean nation desperately needed filled if it
were to attain that modernization which
might assure its continued independence.
The missionaries arranged for the advan¬
ced education abroad of many of Korea's
young potential leaders, and stood shoul¬
der to shoulder with patriotic resistance
to Japan's encroachments upon Korean
sovereignty.
The Tonghak movement, which arose in
the mid-nineteenth century in response to
many complex social factors, was in a
sense a reaction against Catholicism,
which was called "Western Learning,"
whereas Tonghak means "Eastern Lear¬
ning." It was also inspired by the political
decadence of the period, and the plight of
country people ground under the heels of
city aristocrats or idle rural gentry. In these
respects it was a reform movement, and
also included anti-foreign elements, in reali¬
zation that Korea was threatened by out¬
side domination as well as inner decay.
The founder of the Tonghak movement
Choe Che-u aimed at a religious system, in
his own words, "fusing into one the ethics
of Confucianism, the awakening to nature
taught in Buddhism, and Taoist cultivation
of energy."
Syncretism of this kind continued to be a
feature of almost all later religions, most of
which are Confucian in ethics, follow
Buddhist-type rites and adopt Taoist
methods in religious practice.
Chang Byung-kil

Photos © Kim Tae-byok, Seoul
ANCIENT KOREA AND WORLD HISTORY
Christian
year
Korean history World history
B.C.
2333 Tan'gun founds Ancient Chosun
753 Foundation of Rome
555 Buddha born
551 Great Wall of China
108 Chinese Colony of Lolang established
Kimhae pottery
THREE KINGDOMS (57 B.C-668 A.D.)
57 Silla
37 Koguryo
18 Paekche
A.D. Christ born
372 Buddhism introduced to Koguryo
476 West Roman Empire falls
527 Buddhism sanctioned in Silla kingdom
571 Mohammed born
589 Sui Dynasty unifies China
618 T'ang succeeds Sui in China
660 Paekche kingdom falls
668 Koguryo falls: end of Three Kingdoms
UNIFIED SILLA (670-935)
670 Silla Kingdom unifies Korea
751 Construction of Sokkuram Temple
800 Charlemagne crowned Emperor
907
KORYO DYNASTY (918-1392)
T'ang dynasty falls in China
918 Koryo kingdom founded
935 Silla falls
960 Sung dynasty founded in China
962 Holy Roman Empire founded
980 Avicenna born
1011 Work started on the Tripitaka Koreana
1096 First Crusade
1145 Annals of the Three Kingdoms published
1215 Magna Carta
1231 First Mongol invasion
1234 Metal type for printing used for the first time
1272 End of the Crusades
1274 First expedition to Japan
1275 Marco Polo visits China
1279 Sung Dynasty falls in China
1281 Second expedition to Japan
1368
YI DYNASTY (1392-1910)
Ming dynasty founded in China
1392 Koryo falls, Yi dynasty takes over
1396 Capital moved to Seoul
1443 Korean alphabet invented by King Sejong
(1419-1450)
1455 Gutenberg Bible
1492 Columbus reaches America
1498 Vasco de Gama discovers Cape
route to India
1592 Japanese invasion
The shaman's mask
In ancient Korea the shaman cast out
demons, cured disease and communicated
with the dead. Supernatural powers were
attributed to the masks worn during
shamanistic rituals. (1) Lacquered wood
mask for scaring off evil spirits was
discovered in a 5th-century royal tomb
near Kyongju. It originally had protruding
teeth and two pairs of globular eyes.
Survivals of old shamanistic beliefs still
find expression in colourful Korean folk
dances such as that based on the legend
of Ch'oyong, son of the dragon of the
east. Originating in the 9th century, the
legend was adopted by 13th-century
Buddhists who used it to illustrate the
principle of countering evil with good :
Ch'oyong had resisted the temptation to
kill his wife's lover. Photos 2 and 3 show
masks worn during the Ch'oyong dance.
(2) Mask of a functionary is draped with
leaves and equipped with "ears"
representing traces of a stag's antlers.
Like the symbolic "ears" which adorned '
the crowns of Silla kings, they recall the
antlers attached to the headgear of
Siberian shamans. (3) Mask worn by
another figure in the dance is capped with
a lotus flower, an unmistakable sign of
Buddhist influence.
10
