Women at work:
a European profile
by Evelyne Sullerot
EVELYNE SULLEROT, French sociologist, spe¬
cializes in the study of women's position in
society. She has prepared many studies for
international organizations on aspects of the
situation of women in working life and the ques¬
tion of equal pay for equal work. Among her
published works, which have been widely trans¬
lated, is Women, Society and Change (McGraw
Hill, New York, 1971). This article has been
adapted from a report prepared for the
United Nations on "Changes in the Roles of Men
and Women in Europe"
IN Western society, a person tends to
be "identified" above all by virtue of
his or her professional activities. The
question "Who are you?" has been re¬
placed by the question "What do you do?"
It is therefore inevitable that women
should feel a growing need for a social
identity which is not defined exclusively by
reference to the economic role of men.
Better trained and educated than in the
past, less tied to the home thanks to a
iighter burden of housework and less fre¬
quent child-bearing, they naturally wish to
use their gifts, knowledge and skills to
ensure their independence and play a fuller
and more influential part in human affairs.
The first impression to emerge from sta¬
tistics concerning women in employment is
that the working world has been conceived
and organized by men and for men.
Definitions of "working women" vary
from country to country: in one farmers'
wives, shopkeepers and unpaid workers in
family businesses are all included in this
category; in another they are not consider¬
ed a part of the labour force on the grounds
that it is impossible to assess the nature or
the regularity of their remuneration. In
Europe these different definitions account
for disparities in calculating "woman-
power" amounting to several millions of
persons. The differences can be particu-
18

Equal work... unequal pay
In some parts of the world women are still earning less than men doing the came jobs. A 50-country survey
carried out by the International Labour Organisation in 1976 covering six kinds of job (spinners and machinists
in the textile industry, bookbinders, laboratory assistants, grocery shop assistants and accounting machine
operators in banks) revealed, for example, that in twelve countries women machinists were paid between 0.7
per cent (Italy) and 40 per cent (Madagascar) per hour less than men. However, in Hong Kong (below) and
Hungary women machinists' average hourly earnings were actually from 6 to 8 per cent higher than those of
men. Women laboratory assistants (bottom photo) earned 7 per cent less per month than men In Peru and
around 20 per cent less in Norway and Venezuela, while women grocery shop assistants earned much less than
men in Canada (Montreal), Finland, Ireland (Dublin), Malaysia (Sarawak) and Mall. In certain countries,
including Cyprus, Morocco and Venezuela, the difference was over 30 per cent. The survey also showed that in
some countries the monthly earnings of women accounting machine operators were up to 20 per cent less than
those of men and that In Hong Kong the top monthly earnings for a woman in this job were 30 per cent less
than those of a man.

The textile industry is still, at times, more of a money-spinner
for men workers than for women. ILO figures show that, in
1976, the difference In hourly wage rates ranged from 5 per
cent (Algeria, Hong Kong, New Zealand) to 30 per cent
(Honduras, Mauritius, Venezuela). However, in the majority of
countries for which figures are available the rates for the two
sexes are the same and in Hungary, in 1976, women spinners
actually earned an average of 5 per cent more than men.
k larly startling in countries where agriculture
is important. Thus the statistics show that
in Turkey the proportion of women in the
total labour force is one of the highest in
Europe, while the figure for Greece is one
of the lowest. But is it really possible that in
one country the majority of women are
employed and in the other they are not?
There is a wide margin of error in assess¬
ing the work of women in each country,
but it grows even wider when there is an
attempt to make international compari¬
sons. Different countries use different age
limits for calculating the numbers of their
"active population." The percentage of
women working part-time is sometimes
ignored by the statisticians. This figure
varies considerably from country to
country: in Belgium part-time workers
constitute 8.2 per cent of the total female
working population as against 38.3 in the
United Kingdom.
A society only assesses accurately what
it deems to be important, and the vague¬
ness of the statistics concerning women's
employment is a sign that women's econo¬
mic role has long been considered to be
marginal.
In the mid-1970s the proportion of
women in the total labour force varied
widely in different parts of the world. It was
highest in the U.S.S.R. (49.3 per cent),
followed by eastern Asia (38.9 per cent).
North America (35 per cent) and Europe
(34.4 per cent). Between 1970 and 1975 the
proportion of women in the total labour
force dropped in Africa and eastern Asia,
for various reasons. In the U.SiS.R. the
figure went down from 51.6 per cent to
49.3 per cent because the demographic
equilibrium between the sexes, which had
been upset by the high rate of male mor¬
tality during the war, is gradually reestab¬
lishing itself. In Europe it rose slightly from
33.6 per cent to 34.4 per cent, and accord-,
ing to ILO projections it will register a fur¬
ther slight increase between now and the
end of the century.
. However, this overall figure conceals big
disparities between different European
countries : disparities in the level of
women's employment and disparities in
development. Austria and the people's
democracies of central and eastern Europe,
where women constitute over 40 per cent
of the total labour force (46 per cent in Cze¬
choslovakia) form one group of countries.
In all of them the proportion is on the
increase.
In three northern countries (Sweden,
Finland and Denmark), the proportion of
women in the work force has risen sharply
in recent years (by 6 per cent in Sweden in
four years) and now stands at around 41
per cent. But although this figure is high, it
includes a large percentage of part-time
workers (between 30 and 45 per cent). Nor¬
way is a case apart; the proportion of Nor¬
wegian women workers has been low for
many years and still only stood at 28 per
cent in 1970. Since then the figure has risen
spectacularly to 35.5 per cent.
In some countries of western Europe,
such as the United Kingdom, France, and
the Federal Republic of Germany, where
women constitute some 38 or 39 per cent
of the working population, women have
traditionally formed part of the labour force
and have played a major role in economic
activity for almost a century.
In southern Europe the situation is diffe¬
rent, although the figures are on the
increase. In Yugoslavia the proportion of
women in the labour force rose from 24 per
cent in the 1950s to 33.9 per cent in 1975.
The lowest figures in Europe were those for
Spain and Portugal (around 22 per cent),
although the number of women working
on the land in these countries has been
underestimated. In Spain the number of
women in jobs has risen in the last five
years. The case of Italy is particularly inte¬
resting; in the 1930s women constituted
some 38 per cent of the Italian labour force.
Post-war industrialization and agrarian
reform brought the percentage down to 26
per cent by 1974, but this is a gross
underestimate, particularly because of
the incidence of undeclared labour.
Within a single country, women's parti¬
cipation in economic life may vary widely
from region to region. The extent of their
economic role bears little relation to their
willingness to work: whatever the econo¬
mic activities of a given region, men get
priority in the queue for jobs. If there is no
industry, for example, it is the men who
work in the service sector. As a general
rule, the rate of female employment is
determined by a "filter" of male employ¬
ment.
The rate of female unemployment also
varies widely from region to region. In
western Europe as a whole the rate of
unemployment is proportionately higher
for women than for men. But there is also a
hidden form of unemployment, which
reveals itself, for example, when new jobs
are created in a region where hitherto there
have been few women workers. Discourag¬
ed in advance by the hopelessness of find¬
ing a job, many women do not even bother
to register as job-seekers.
20

Ever since the industrial revolution there
has been a distinction between "men's
jobs" and "women's jobs", Some occupa¬
tions have become "professional ghettos"
for women, with low status and salary.
This distinction fs often artificial, in the
sense that it is not based on biological dif¬
ferences between the sexes, and is becom¬
ing increasingly flagrant as technological
progress takes the backbreak out of work.
A comparison between the "feminized"
jobs in different countries also highlights
the artificiality of this distinction. In the
U.S.S.R., many women work in theprin-
ting industry, whereas in France and Bel¬
gium it is an all-male preserve. The fur and
tobacco industries are other examples of
the same phenomenon.
What unwritten laws lay down this distri¬
bution of functions between men and
women? By and large it can be said that
when a job is downgraded it becomes a
"woman's job" and vice versa.
Furthermore, women in minor jobs are
proportionately more numerous than men.
They climb the ladder of promotion more
rarely and more slowly. They have a "pre¬
ference" for jobs in the service sector,
which they often prefer to jobs in industry
even when the latter are better paid. They
outnumber men in industries such as the
garment and textile industries which are an
extension of their traditional functions.
Their output is higher than men's in preci¬
sion jobs. But although they work quickly,
their dexterity generally receives little
reward.
Contrary to an often-made assertion, it is
not women who do the most unpleasant
jobs. The toughest work (mining, deep-sea
fishing, foundrywork, etc.) as well as the
humblest and least attractive jobs (refuse
collection, sewer cleaning, etc.) are
everywhere done by men. Men are in a
much wider spectrum of occupations than
women, ranging from the most prestigious
to the least enviable.
Even at school boys have a much wider
variety of ideas and ambitions than girls
where jobs are concerned. Girls' choices
focus on two main activities: teaching and
nursing. This trend is universal and appears
in countries as different as the U.S.S.R.,
Italy and Sweden. Nor does co-educational
schooling seem to encourage wider
choices. Obviously, social conditioning
is all-important here, and even if we are
performing an act of faith rather than true
reasoning, we must do away with the
prohibitions and stereotypes. School
textbooks must be monitored to see that
they do not present stereotyped images of
men's and women's jobs.
Maternity has an important bearing on
the whole question of women's employ¬
ment and poses many role problems both
for the mother, the father and society at
large. Should mothers be encouraged to
stop working? Should child care facilities
be provided for them during working
hours? Should they be given the opportu¬
nity to go back to work later on?
Women everywhere are starting work
later than in the past because of the raising
of the school leaving age. The number of
women workers between the ages of 20
and 55 is on the increase throughout
Europe, but the statistical pattern varies
widely from one country to another. In the
eastern countries all women generally work
until retirement age, which is earlier than
that of men and is brought forward even
further if the woman has had several chil¬
dren. In the Soviet Union the pattern is
sharply outlined: 85 per cent of women
aged 20 are in employment; almost 90 per
cent of those between 30 and 50; after the
age of 55 the figure drops sharply to 26 per
cent, and then falls to 7 per cent after the
age of 60. Even if the Soviet definitions of
"activity" are very broad, this pattern
shows that a strong priority is given to the
economic role of women through their pro¬
fessional activities over their role as wives,
housekeepers and mothers.
The same pattern is found in the east
European countries, with certain variants.
However, sudden downturns in population
growth have caused some of these coun¬
tries (Hungary, Czechoslovakia, the Demo¬
cratic Republic of Germany and Poland) to
allow women to take about two years off
work after the birth of a child, in addition to
a long period of maternity leave. This inter¬
ruption in working life is unpaid in the case
of the first child, but starting with the
second the mother has the right to an
allowance. In Hungary in 1974, 229,000
women, or 10 per cent of the total number
of women in employment, had temporarily
stopped work after a birth. These figures
show that Hungary has come to give prio- i
rity to the role of the mother. I
"Man's work lasts till set of sun;
Woman's work is never done". In
this satirical 17th-century
engraving. Woman is depicted
festooned with household
utensils and condemned to a
life of drudgery. P?"*'M¿,
I Photo © Snark International, Pans (Private Collection)
21

In countries such as Spain, Luxem¬
bourg, Ireland and the Netherlands the
situation is quite different. There women
take jobs as soon as they leave school until
the age of 20 or 21. By the age of 25 only
between 20 and 30 per cent of women are
still at work, and the figure drops even fur¬
ther later on. The drop is so abrupt that it
can almost be taken to indicate the age of
marriage and the birth of the first child. The
roles of wife and mother have taken prece¬
dence over professional activities. There
is no large-scale return to work after
maternity.
The same phenomenon occurs in Bel¬
gium, Italy and Greece where the activity
peak is reached at age 21-22, but in these
countries the drop is much less abrupt and
less closely linked to marriage. In Belgium,
married women even represent a particu¬
larly high proportion of the total number of
working women: 60 per cent.
Fifteen years ago, the rates of working
women in the FederaJ Republic of Ger¬
many, France, the United Kingdom, Swe¬
den and Denmark peaked around the age
of 21 (70 per cent). The figures dropped at
the age of maternity and then began to rise
again after the age of 35, reaching a second
peak around age 50. This indicates that for
many women life was divided into three
phases: work, maternity, work. Since then
things have changed (except in the United
Kingdom). More women are working at the
age of maternity, and more and more
young mothers are continuing to work. In
the United Kingdom there is still a drop at
the age of maternity but more and more
women are returning to work later on: in
the U.K. the average age of women in
employment is relatively high.
I NE observation which is
rarely made is that women everywhere on
average live longer than men but finish
their professional lives sooner, whether or
not they have had children. Except for
women who work on the land, few carry
on beyond retirement age and many retire
even before. In the case of men the situa¬
tion is totally different. Does this mean that
women are less energetic? Do they feel that
they are less "defined" by their profession,
Are they less affected than men by the
trauma of retirement? Is their grandmother-
role more important than is often thought
and does it influence their decisions?
Research on these questions still remains
to be done.
It is known that farmers' wives are the
most "active" category of working
women, but the professional activities of
women vary according to the social and
professional status of their husbands. The
proportion of married women who do not
go out to work reflects a U-curve in relation
to the salary of their husbands. They are
proportionately numerous in families where
the husband earns little, less so when he
has a moderate salary. The figure rises
again in the case of women whose hus¬
bands have a high income. Far from ten¬
ding to promote equality in family incomes,
the wife's work sometimes accentuates the
disparities in income between families in
the lower and middle strata of society,
since it is more common for the woman to
make a significant contribution to the
family budget in households where the
husband already earns a decent salary.
The social and professional category of
the husband is often more important in
determining whether or not the wife works
than that of the wife. Furthermore, rela¬
tions between man and wife are often on a
more equal basis in the middle strata of
society while certain aspects of patriarchy
have persisted among the very poor and
the very rich.
Few data exist on the relationship bet¬
ween the number of children, their age and
the working lives of the mother. However,
such figures as we have all tell the same
story.
The birth of a third child often has a
strong influence on whether or not the
mother goes out to work. Between 80 and
90 per cent of mothers of children under fif¬
teen do not go out to work, even in coun¬
tries like France and Belgium which lead
Europe in their provision of day-care facili¬
ties for children between two and six years
old.
The value attached to a job is generally
indicated by its remuneration. In Europe it
was traditionally accepted that women
should be paid less than men, either as a
sanction of their natural "inferiority" or of
their presence in the world of paid work,
considered to be abnormal and detrimen¬
tal. Today the principle of unequal pay is no
longer accepted, but it has not totally
disappeared. However, although a good
deal of ink has flowed on this question, it is
still not widely understood by the public.
The only way to appreciate the question
of equality or inequality of pay for the same
job or an equivalent job is to make a com¬
parison between workers of both sexes
doing the same job, with the same qualifi¬
cations and the same amount of expe¬
rience, etc. Only then is it possible to
appreciate the disparity in virtue of sex.
The application of the principle of "equal
pay for equal work" is not easy, in spite of
all the legislative instruments surrounding
it: the ILO International Convention Con¬
cerning Equal Remuneration for Men and
Women Workers for Work of Equal Value
(1951); article 119 of the treaty setting up
the European Economic Community; the
fundamental laws incorporated in the
Constitutions of many countries; provi¬
sions in different countries for punishing
infringements of the principle and for
taking a case to court.
A list of such laws and decrees would be
a long one. However, many of these mea¬
sures have only been promulgated in the
last ten years, and the principle of "equal
pay for equal work" is most respected
where it has already been applied for a cer¬
tain time. It takes time to remove discrimi¬
natory provisions from collective agree¬
ments, to establish an efficient monitoring
system and to bring home to workers' and
employers' organizations a full awareness
of the issues involved.
Above all, it takes time to thwart
attempts to twist the law and undermine
the principle of equal pay for equal work by
changing professional definitions and clas¬
sifications. It takes even more time to per¬
suade women that they have rights of
redress when they are victims of prejudice,
even in a period when the employment
situation is giving rise to concern.
N the last few decades
there has been a movement towards grea¬
ter similarity between men's and women's
role. There has been widespread concern
about women's status and roles, and the
results of this concern have been and
should continue to be beneficial to women.
Yet whatever women's roles may be, and
even if in the less hidebound societies they
are recognized as being of considerable
importance, they still take second place to
those of men. Is this because women are
somehow incapable of exploiting their roles
in terms of power, at least off the beaten
track of private life where they are accusto¬
med to do so? They are often led to empha¬
size the negative, constricting and subordi¬
nate aspects of their roles rather than seek¬
ing to transform them into organized
power.
The most serious studies of women's
attitudes often show that women who go
out to work do not justify themselves by
defending their work but by criticizing
home life, while housewives point to the
alienation of women who go out to work
instead of speaking out for the powers of
the wife and mother in the home. This is a
classic attitude in groups which have been
treated as inferior: they tend to denigrate
themselves by matching themselves
against the performances and values of the
dominant group.
Women could certainly do better in wor¬
king out and establishing their roles both
those which they once monopolized but
are now beginning to share and those
which are now open to them and which
they are learning to perform. If they did so
they would achieve something more than
uncertain and unsystematic forms of pro¬
tection; they would achieve power in public
life.
A minority of women are thinking along
these lines, but only a small minority. Time
is going by, and the climate of opinion may
become less favourable. In any case, defi¬
ning female roles in terms of power may be
yet another instance of slavish obedience
to the male stereotype, which aspires to
conquest and the assertion of power.
There always remains the possibility, of
course, that men may adopt less aggres¬
sive and competitive patterns of behaviour.
If they do, modern society will really have
broken new ground.
Evelyne Sullerot
22
