Fusion power
Can we reproduce and harness on earth
the energy of the stars?
by Rende/ S. Pease
FUSION power has all the attractions
of fission power as a replacement
for fossil fuels, and also has a num¬
ber of potential environmental advantages.
The main problem, however, is that fusion
is still in the research stage and will not be
available until the beginning of the next
century.
Rendel S. Pease of the U.K. is director of Cul-
ham Laboratory, a major centre for controlled
nuclear fusion research. He is also chairman of
the International Atomic Energy Agency's Inter¬
national Fusion Research Council.
The research into and building of reactor
plants requires very high technology and
much capital investment. The International
Fusion Research Council estimates that the
cost of research and development will be
$15 billion. However, once (and if) achiev¬
ed, fusion should be very cheap to fuel.
Nuclear fusion is, in simple terms, the
fusing together of two atomic nuclei to
make one slightly heavier nucleus. When
this happens to the nuclei of light elements
(like hydrogen or lithium) large amounts of
energy are released. It is this process which
occurs in the stars and provides the limit¬
less flow of energy from the sun.
Nuclear fusion reactions occur abun¬
dantly only at high temperatures, such as
exist in the centres of stars. To produce
controlled nuclear fusion energy on earth,
the temperatures needed will depend on
the fuel, but even with the fuel we are
working on at the moment, which requires
the least high temperature, this must still
be about 100 million degrees centigrade.
The temperatures are so high that any¬
thing which comes into contact with the
reacting mixture (sometimes called plasma),
will melt. There are two methods, known
as magnetic and inertial confinement, for'
avoiding this. The latter, which is a rela¬
tively recent development (dating from
around 1970), involves storing the reactant
inside a miniature glass pellet, which is i
heated and compressed until the fusion I
13

7 w
Too hot to handle
at a hundred million degrees
Thermonuclear (fusion) reactions can occur only at temperatures
so fantastically high, around 100 million degrees centigrade, that
anything coming into contact with the reacting mixture (plasma)
would melt. The problem facing scientists, therefore, is how to
insulate the plasma from the walls of its container. One way of
achieving this is to hold the plasma in a magnetic field. In the
Soviet-designed, experimental "Tokamak 6" installation (above),
at the Kurchatov Institute of Atomic Energy, Moscow, the fusion
plasma is held in a doughnut-shaped container around which
coils are wound to create a strong magnetic field which stabilizes
the plasma. An electric current flowing through the plasma itself
heats the plasma and produces another magnetic field that holds
it away from the container wall.
<
©
o
£
k reaction occurs and there is a 'micro-
explosion" which is too small to,'damage
the surrounding reaction vessel but large
enough to give useful energy.
While results from inertial confinement
experiments are very promising, magnetic
confinement will probably provide the
quickest route to successful commercial
reactors. It is on this, especially the
tokamak-type confinement system, that
the bulk of research until now has been and
will continue to be concentrated.
The tokamak apparatus is shaped like a
very large American doughnut and the
plasma is held away from the walls by an
extremely strong magnetic field. The
plasma in the doughnut-shaped vessel is
heated by passing through it an electric
current of several hundred thousand am¬
peres. In experimental apparatus, tempera¬
tures of between 10 and 20 million degrees
centigrade are obtained routinely, and sus¬
tained for as long as the current, at present
up to one second.
Thermal insulation is provided by the
magnetic field, although in present appara¬
tus the effective insulation is still not good
enough for a reactor. The properties of
plasmas at 100 million degrees centigrade
are expected to be similar to those at 20
million degrees centigrade. There are thus
excellent prospects that when the larger
vessels and currents required for reactors
are used, the thermal insulation will be suf¬
ficient for nuclear energy production.
The exact relation of thermal insulation
to size and current is to be explored in the
next generation of experiments. These
experiments will also explore the raising of
temperatures towards the required 100 mil¬
lion degrees centigrade, which appears to
be a matter of improving existing tech¬
niques.
Only a very few fuels react fast enough
to be of any use to us. These are deuterium
(heavy hydrogen), lithium, which is conver¬
ted for use into tritium (an even heavier
form of hydrogen), helium 3, and boron.
The last two are involved in reactions
which are beyond our technical capabilities
today, and which we might never be able
to engineer.
In the reactor we are working towards at
present, the fuels are deuterium and tri¬
tium. Four-fifths of the energy released by
the reaction will be carried through to the
reactor wall by neutrons which are released
in the reaction. The neutrons enter a region
containing lithium and heat exchangers,
where they give up their energy and heat
the steam. The neutrons also react with the
lithium to manufacture tritium (which does
not occur naturally), which can then refuel
the reactor. The other one-fifth of the
energy remains in the plasma and keeps it
hot enough for the fusion reactions to con¬
tinue.
This reaction is the easiest to obtain and
also has excellent energy input to energy
gain ratios. Of all the fusion reactions it is
the only one which could occur sufficiently
abundantly in magnetic confinement.
14

The fuel reserves for deuterium-tritium
reactors are very considerable. Deuterium
constitutes 0.0033 per cent of sea water,
and the sea thus contains what is to all
intents and purposes an inexhaustible
supply of this fuel. Lithium is found in fairly
rich deposits of up to about one per cent
concentration in South Africa and North
America, and in salt lakes and mineral
waters. Using these deposits alone, which
amount to about 10 million tonnes, there is
enough lithium to release energy sufficient
for the next 200 to 500 years at the predic¬
ted rate of consumption, if no other forms
of energy are used.
Lithium is present on average in the
earth's accessible crust at around 0.002 per
cent concentration which equals around
100 million tonnes. If we were to tap only a
small fraction of this by exploiting lower
grade lithium deposits, we would have
enough for a very considerable
period. If, after achieving power stations
based on deuterium-tritium reactions, we
can proceed to design viable reactors
based on deuterium-deuterium reactions
(which is the next very large step), then
we have reserves for another 10 billion
years in the sea.
Not only is the fuel available in limitless
supply, but it is also extremely cheap and
easy to obtain, with a minimum of proces¬
sing. The extraction of deuterium from the
sea will result in very little land despoliation
and will in no way affect the sea.
Because the quantities of lithium re¬
quired are so small, mining operations
would be modest, less that those required
for the running of fission reactors and
vastly preferable to the strip mining neces¬
sary for coal-fired power stations.
The only chemical product of fusion is
helium, which is an inert gas. Thus there
are no reprocessing or dumping operations
of spent fuel or ash to worry about. But
there will be waste heat and some radio¬
activity, so that the siting of fusion reactors
would present much the same problem as
that of fission reactors.
Structural parts from the reactor will
occasionally need to be replaced. They will
have become radioactive and their disposal
will pose a problem. If the metals used are
carefully selected, these parts might have
activity which would last for about 100
years. Tritium is radioactive and will have
to be contained.
The reaction requires such special condi¬
tions that any imbalance in them will auto¬
matically stop the process very quickly.
Moreover, there will only be very small
amounts of fuel (up to about one gramme)
in the reactor zone. Consequently, the con¬
ditions for serious reaction runaway will be
absent.
The International Fusion Research Coun¬
cil (IFRC) has proposed the following time¬
table for research into fusion power. The
next six to eight years must be spent in
acquiring full understanding of the physics
of burning plasmas. After this we should
be able to demonstrate the net energy out¬
put from experimental reactors. This will
take between seven and ten years.
The next step would be the development
of efficient and cost-effective components
for demonstration reactors, which will be
ready in a minimum of 15 years if all the
necessary financial support is forthcoming,
followed by comparison of different reactor
systems.
Only then could the design and cons¬
truction of commercial reactors start. If all
goes well, the first of these may be ready
early in the next century. This programme
depends heavily on the degree of public
and financial support invested in it. We
have the necessary scientific skill and
enthusiasm to make rapid progress, but
progress depends on experiments which
require very expensive equipment. As sta¬
ted above, the IFRC estimate for costs up
to the demonstration reactor stage is $15
billion.
DOTH the time and the cost
of development can be
reduced by international
cooperation. Work on
magnetic confinement has
been completely open
since 1958, and this has
led to extensive and valu¬
able cooperation between the nations.
By 1960, for example, the Euratom coun¬
tries of Western Europe (1) started to work
together on a co-ordinated programme
which the U.K., Ireland, Denmark, Sweden
and most recently Switzerland have since
joined.
Co-operation with the Soviet Union has
been particularly fruitful in this field, and
critical measurements on the Soviet Toka¬
mak T-3 device by a team from the U.K.
which worked for up to a year in the
U.S.S.R.'s principal atomic energy insti¬
tute, proved to be a turning point in toka¬
mak research.
Another example of close international
collaboration in this field ¡s that between
the Soviet Union and the United States,
which has included such areas as the gen¬
eration of very high magnetic fields to pro¬
duce very dense and hot plasmas. The
most important recent example of interna¬
tional co-operation is the setting up of the
Joint European Torus (JET) project at Cul-
ham (U.K.) by the nine Euratom countries
and Sweden.
The purpose of the experiment is to heat
and confine matter to the temperatures,
densities and thermal insulation close to
those required in a controlled fusion reac¬
tor. Construction work on the project will
take about five years and will cost about
$200 million.
The United Nations plays an important
role in promoting international co¬
operation through its International Atomic
Energy Agency, which in 1970 set up the
International Fusion Research Council to
advise it on progress in and co-ordination
of world-wide fusion research.
Countries with substantial research pro¬
grammes report on their work and future
plans annually to the Council, where it is
subject to discussion and comment. This
process enables adjustments to be made to
improve the progress of research. The
Agency also operates small-scale specialist
services to aid the international pro¬
gramme.
The IFRC has published a number of
reports reviewing progress. In the most
recent of these, published this year, the
Council affirmed that the progress of
research is now such that the scientific
basis for building controlled nuclear fusion
devices with a net energy output from
deuterium-tritium reactions is no longer
seriously in doubt.
This conclusion needs to be proved, and
research has to be combined with engin¬
eering development to establish whether or
not technically and economically practical
fusion systems can be realized. The Coun¬
cil has also made detailed recommenda¬
tions aimed at achieving more concrete
International co-operation in the next
stages, and there are encouraging indica¬
tions that their hopes can be fulfilled.
Rendel S. Pease
(1) Euratom, the European Atomic Energy Com¬
munity, was set up in 1957 by Belgium, France,
Italy, Luxembourg, The Netherlands and the
Fed. Rep. of Germany in order to develop
atomic energy for peaceful purposes.
15
