Baby polecats scurry along after a little boy on an
experimental farm at Novosibirsk (U.S.S.R.), where
scientists are studying the behaviour patterns of a
variety of Siberian animals.



One man's luxury
is another
man's need
How education can sharpen
our awareness
of environmental issues
à
by Peter J. Fensham
PETER J. FENSHAM is professor of science
education at Monash University, Victoria (Aus¬
tralia). As a member of the Australian National
Commission for Unesco, he chaired an Austra¬
lian national seminar on environmental educa¬
tion in 1975. He led the Australian delegation at
the intergovernmental conference on environ¬
mental education organized by Unesco and the
U.N. Environment Programme (UNEP), and held
at Tbilisi (U. S. S. R. ) in October 1977.
HOW can education help us meet the
challenges of environmental prob¬
lems?". This was the question
facing the 330 participants and observers
who attended the world's first Intergovern¬
mental Conference on Environmental Edu¬
cation, held in Tbilisi, Georgia, (U.S.S.R.),
from 14 to 26 October, 1977.
This meeting was the culmination of the
first four-year phase of the international
programme for environmental education
launched by Unesco and the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
in response to a recommendation of the
U.N. Conference on the Human Environ¬
ment in Stockholm in 1972.
What emerged from the working ses¬
sions at Tbilisi were a number of insights
that go right to the heart of the problems
facing environmental education. These
might be summed up as follows. Environ¬
mental education must be seen, not as a
new "subject' to be taught in schools, but
as an added dimension to the educational
process. It should be a global, lifelong acti¬
vity involving society as a whole, a training
to distinguish "environmental luxuries"
from "environmental necessities", and an
aid to development.
As yet very little headway has been made
in many countries to reshape teaching pro¬
grammes so that this concept of environ¬
mental education becomes a real part of
formal learning.
Geography and biology seem to be the
subjects which have been most able to
incorporate environmental issues. And yet
in many ways, these subjects reflect the
symptoms of environmental problems
rather than their causes.
Environmental issues bring into play
social values, political organizations, eco¬
nomic policies and structures, technologi¬
cal control and development, and national
and international patterns of distributing
resources. All these are, in fact, more
naturally related to other subjects such as

literature, social studies, the physical scien¬
ces, and mathematics.
Much needs to be done to assist tea¬
chers in elementary and secondary educa¬
tion to present in simple form some of
these radical issues. For example, the way
in which resources are distributed and the
indicators (such as Gross National Product)
that we use to measure economic growth
are both fundamental to our perception of
environmental issues.
Yet these concepts are often taught only
in a formal, analytical way during the senior
years of secondary schooling. Teachers
might well be surprised how readily six- or
seven-year-olds can grasp these basic ideas
if they play a game in which they share out
differently, on successive days at school,
the same number of things like favourite
story books or coloured pencils.
Or, again, the younger children in a
family regularly have their desires overruled
by others.
Until now we have made very little use of
these real experiences to familiarize
youngsters with the processes of power,
control by groups, and decision-making in
society.
Environmental education must not only
involve all the disciplines normally taught in
schools, but must also force schools out of
their isolation from the community. Envi¬
ronmental education set wholly within the
confines of the classroom is a contradiction
in terms.
But this certainly does not mean that
field trips, camping, or museum visits auto¬
matically constitute environmental edu¬
cation. Unless these experiences "help
groups and individuals acquire the skills for
identifying and solving environmental
problems," they are not environmental
education as expressed in the Tbilisi recom¬
mendations.
Environmental education must be a life¬
long process. Not only should learning
continue beyond school; different age
groups should also learn together. The
roles of teacher, student, parent and citizen
become more flexible, as they join in a
learning situation that serves to en¬
hance awareness of their environment.
Learning by doing is one approach devel¬
oped in recent years. It may take the form
of a movement like "Make Cuba a
Garden", or a community or school effort
to eliminate litter in Singapore. Or it may
be a drive to reduce energy consumption in
home or factory.
There has been a tendency, particularly
in the industrially developed world, to
define the environment in terms of middle-
class values. There has been more empha¬
sis on the conservation and preservation of
aspects of the man-made and natural envi¬
ronments that are enjoyed by the middle
class than on the quality of life enjoyed by
the less privileged. As the preservation of,
certain of these resources clashes with the
provision of jobs, sustenance and shelter, |
there is likely to be a backlash against many I

aspects of today's environmental educa¬
tion programmes.
The concepts of "environmental luxu¬
ries" and "environmental necessities" may
prove useful since they provide criteria and
bases for choice. They may make it easier
to tackle such questions as the merits of a
building in New York whose energy con¬
sumption approaches that of a city the size
of Pittsburg. During a campaign for a new
national park, these concepts may also
help us see the viewpoint of workers who
would be obliged to leave the area, even
though they have no powerful lobby to
voice their claims for adequate compensa¬
tion and alternative job opportunities.
Again, it may turn out that the land
rights of the 800 or so aborigines living on
or near the uranium deposits in northern
Australia are the "environmental necessi¬
ties" in that situation, and that the econo¬
mic consequences of mining which may
shore up the "environmental luxuries"
other Australians enjoy are of lesser
merit. Similar problems for environmental
education crop up on the international
scene.
In the developing world there is a ten¬
dency to see environmental education and
education for development as one and the
same, and many environmental educators
in the industrially developed world would
also like this to be the case. However,
many of them fail to recognize the contra¬
dictions that exist between the conserva¬
tion of many things the developed world is
coming to appreciate as "quality of life,"
and the redistribution of the world's resour¬
ces in such a way that development also
takes "quality of life" into account.
Two examples come to mind. Environ¬
mental education in Japan developed ini¬
tially almost entirely in response to a com¬
pelling environmental issue rampant
The wood
and the trees
The problems posed by the conservation of
the environment and the exploitation of
natural resources are not always seen in the
same way. In the industrialized countries,
city-dwellers are taught at an early age
(above) to respect and care for trees and
greenery. Wood is often imported, even if
this sometimes leads to the deforestation of
tropical regions (right). The establishment
of a new international order means that
environmental problems, like those of
development, must be approached in a
spirit of solidarity, for there is still too much
injustice in the management of mankind's
common resources.
Straying off
the beaten track
The spread of cities, towns and villages
often disturbs the habits of animal life in
the natural environment. Left, a bear
beats a retreat from a village in the Ural
Mountains (U.S.S.R.). It is not unknown
for a bewildered animal to blunder its way
into a big city, like the moose (below) that
turned up one morning in a Moscow street.

fe
^(^
'
% M
Photo Georg Gerster, © Rapho, Paris
industrial pollution. Although they have by
no means solved this problem, the Japa¬
nese have made some progress. Some
processes that produce effluent are now
controlled by local and national legislation.
Others have bsen "stopped" altogether by
exporting the problem to other less devel¬
oped countries in Southeast Asia. For
example, a particularly dirty phase in the
processing of iron ore imported from Aus¬
tralia now takes place in the Philippines, en
route to Japan.
Again, Australia's strict re-afforestation
rules now make some local timber very
expensive. Accordingly, Australia now
imports large quantities of cheap timber
from Southeast Asian countries which,
because of their urgent need for trade with
the developed world, cannot afford to lose
this revenue by enforcing the same expen¬
sive environmental controls as Australia.
Unesco and UNEP have a vital role to
play in promoting international co¬
operation in the development of teaching
programmes and materials that bring an
awareness of such global interactions,
both to students in formal education and to
the general public. If left to individual
national efforts, these issues are always
likely to be underplayed because of nation¬
al constraints and the natural myopia that
shrouds the consequences of one's own
actions.
Formal education has been a delusion for
many people in most countries. It promises
to be the key to social development, but
instead it serves to select a small eiïte, and
as a result most people experience a sense
of failure. The environmental education
movement suggests that at each stage of
education the question should be asked: Is
the programme enabling the maximum
number of learners to extend their mastery
over their environment?
An excellent example of what can be
done is the alternative approach to elemen¬
tary education formulated by the APEID
programme in the Asian Region of Unesco,
and its pilot projects in various countries
have shown that such a goal is not impos¬
sible. If children at school in Nepal can, in
fact, learn how to choose the right fuel,
then their families will indeed have a new
sense of mastery, since many families in
that deforested land spend hours each day
seeking firewood.
There is a pointlessness about so much
schooling in the industrially developed
world that this approach is just as urgently
needed there as it is in countries like Nepal.
Perhaps the "back to the basics" move¬
ment in a number of countries is really a call
for educational programmes that have the
same relevance as true environmental
education.
It is clear that the Unesco-UNEP Pro¬
gramme has served as a catalyst for nation¬
al developments in environmental educa¬
tion. What for many countries in 1975 was
simply an idea has now become a much
more concrete movement through the
development of teaching materials for
schools, national plans and programmes,
expanded non-formal environmental edu¬
cation, and new legislation establishing
environmental education.
The réponse to the Tbilisi recommenda¬
tions will vary according to the political and
educational structures in each country.
Nevertheless, in many countries educatio¬
nal innovators now have a chance to get
their contributions to environmental educa¬
tion recognized and established.
Peter J. Fensham
