HUH, C5-d£H. £ÍKE W£UP£H Hjí3U
MbTCM ibO«i>RTHhffi ZSilOALHE
tîhMOïfifcHM MPMKHH H3hIK5
¿OrîTOl'o ^HfilJIM^CKOPHHOfo
iiscadfiHáro riv/trf ikmoijw . sors kotth
Byelorussia's first printed book
The work of the scholar and printer Gyorgi-Franciszek Skorina is a milestone in
the history of Byelorussia's language and culture. Born at Polotsk in 1490, he
obtained the degree of "bachelor of the seven liberal arts" at Cracow and then
set off on a journey across Europe, staying in German towns, at Prague
University and in Padua where he was made a doctor of medicine. During his
years of wandering and study he conceived the great plan of publishing a Bible
in his mother tongue, Byelorussian. "God sent me this language," he wrote, "1
vow it shall become a language of books." Patiently and obstinately he raised
money for his venture and recruited illustrators and engravers. Between 1517
and 1519 he translated and published 22 parts of the Bible, followed a few years
later by the Acts of the Apostles. Exquisitely printed and illustrated, the Skorina
Bible is widely considered to be one of the world's most beautiful books.
Above, engraving showing Samson fighting a lion. Below, an episode from
Exodus when the Lord commanded Moses to make a tabernacle: "And thou
shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold... And thou shalt make two cherubims of
gold, of beaten gold shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat."
Photos © Engravings ol Franciszek Skorina, Belarusi Publishers, Minsk



ARTS
AND
CRAFTS
OF
BYELO¬
RUSSIA
by Evgeni M. Sakhuta
68

"Put me in the mud and I shall become
a prince," says the grain of rye in an
old Byelorussian proverb. According to
tradition, the first seeds sown when
the winter snows have melted are
taken from the last sheaf harvested the
previous autumn. The straw from the
sheaf is laid out on the ground in the
form of a cross, "so that Christ won't
get his feet wet when he comes to
bless the earth". Below, the first-fruits
of the harvest are ceremonially knotted
around the farmer's waist.
Byelorussian artists create
outstandingly beautiful works of art
out of plaited straw. Left, detail of the
remarkable "Tsars' Gate" in an 18th-
century country church in the Pinsk
region. Although made of straw it
glows with all the majesty of gold leaf.
POPULAR decorative art holds a pro¬
minent and colourful place in Byelo¬
russian culture. It is a highly original
art, for although the objects made by Bye¬
lorussian craftsmen have much in common
with those produced by their neighbours in
Russia, the Ukraine, Lithuania and Poland,
they have also been profoundly marked by
the special circumstances of Byelorussia's
social, political and cultural development as
well as by the natural environment.
Only rarely has this art been created by
organized groups of professional artists
and craftsmen. For the most part it has
been produced in a domestic setting. As a
consequence it remained rooted in tradition
until the early years of this century.
Working in wood, the most widely used
material, Byelorussian craftsmen produced
highly expressive forms of decoration,,
especially in the large objects such as mor-^
EVGENI M. SAKHUTA is a Byelorussian art
historian on the staff of the Institute for the
Study of Art, Ethnography and Folklore at¬
tached to the Byelorussian S.S.R. Academy
of Sciences. He is the author of many pub¬
lished works on the popular arts of Byelorussia.
69

tars, canoes, beehives and tubs which they
hollowed out of tree trunks and boughs.
Smaller vessels were often embellished
with animal motifs, salt-cellars being car¬
ved in the form of ducks, and bucket hand¬
les being shaped to resemble the head of a
horse or bird, a rooster's tail'feathers or a
cock's-comb.
Geometric patterns were incised on
utensils used by women, such as distaffs
(in the Brest-Litovsk region) and tsurki
(sticks between 30 and 40 cm long to which
sheaves were attached) which are found in
central Polesie.
Pottery is one of the most ancient popu¬
lar crafts of Byelorussia, and a number of
old-established pottery-making centres are
situated near the cities of Pinsk, Vitebsk
and Minsk. Pots, basins, zbanki (pitchers)
sparishi (twin vases), sloiki (jars) and other
containers were all made out of clay. Some
pottery towns specialized in producing
black-glazed pottery which looked as if it
were made of cast iron. This is a curious
survival from prehistoric times, since Bye¬
lorussian pottery of this type has hardly
changed either in shape or decoration since
the Iron Age.
Other potters were renowned for their
skill in making earthenware in the form of
bears, lions and rams, also producing
highly distinctive figurines of cockerels,
ducklings, horsemen, ewes and dolls.
Along with wood-carving and pottery-
making, weaving was one of the most
widely practised crafts in Byelorussia,
where countrywomen had little choice but
to learn the art of the loom. Napkins,
towels and abrussy (table-cloths) were
woven in two or three colours arranged to
form checkwork, diamond-shaped, hexa¬
gonal and other patterns. The region
around Grodno specialized in rainbow-
striped drapery which is today found in
many parts of Poland. Geometrical pat¬
terns in white, black and red were the most
common features of dress design.
The plaiting of objects out of birch-bark,
willow wands, roots and straw is another
ancient Byelorussian craft. Articles fash¬
ioned out of straw are particularly distinc¬
tive, as well as large wickerwork household
utensils which derive their beauty from
their sculptural form and from the rhythmic
alternation of brown stripes of willow or
hazel on a background of golden straw.
But the aesthetic potential of straw, a
widely available material in Byelorussia, is
best seen in decorative objects, in toys and
in coffers decorated with raised wicker-
work ornamentation in the form of dia¬
monds. A masterpiece of Byelorussian
craftsmanship in straw is the eighteenth-
century "Tsar's Gate" in a little country
church at Vabulich-Lemeshevich in the
Pinsk region. Although made from the
humblest of materials it glows with all the
majesty of gold leaf.
The skills of Byelorussian village painters
found their widest expression in the de¬
corated coffers and chests which, from the
second half of the nineteenth century
onwards, were increasingly used in daily
life and figured prominently in the marriage
ceremony. Owing to the great demand for
such objects, it was inevitable that they
should eventually be produced in studios
by artists specializing in this form of
decoration.
Since popular art was primarily utilitarian
in character, it was bound to be affected by
social and economic changes. Thus many
domestic crafts declined in the second half
of the nineteenth century and some (such
as the hand-printing of textiles) died out
altogether.
The radical transformation of rural life
during the early Soviet period, and the
improved standards of living which the
workers began to enjoy, led to a temporary
depreciation of many traditional utilitarian
articles and reduced the people's reliance
on home-made utensils, furniture, clothing
and tools.
Concern for the preservation of popular
handicrafts and the quest for new ways
and means of promoting popular art led the
Soviet Government to adopt in 1919 a
decree "on assistance to domestic
industry". Exhibitions of works by crafts¬
men and artists were organized, the prob¬
lem was widely discussed in the press, and
regional museums began to assemble their
collections. Craft centres were open¬
ed to encourage the development and pre¬
servation of popular art.
In Byelorussia, and in the Soviet Union
as a vyhole, popular arts and crafts are
mainly produced by groups of craftsmen
and artists in craft centres. As a result of
their work, decorative objects of popular
art, especially those made of plaited straw,
are now becoming more widely familiar not
only in Byelorussia but also abroad.
There hqs been a revival of traditional
pottery-making, and weaving has taken on
a new lease of life. The traditional two- or
three-tone range of colours has been
extended, and modern weavers are pro¬
ducing complicated multi-coloured pat¬
terns based on plant motifs.
The majority of modern Byelorussian
wood-carvers today are creating small-
scale objects inspired by traditional themes
from history, folklore and everyday life, and
are trying to revive the manufacture of
traditional wooden utensils. Wood-carving
for purposes of architectural decoration
is enjoying widespread popularity.
Considerable attention is now being paid
to the revival, conservation and develop¬
ment of popular arts and crafts. Whereas in
the past national traditions and creative ori¬
ginality were handed down spontaneously
from generation to generation, often within
the same family, this task has now been
assumed by professional artists, art histo¬
rians and the staff of popular arts and
crafts centres. A museum of popular art
has recently been opened at Raubichi, near
Minsk, and a museum of ancient crafts and
domestic industries at Zaslavl. As well as
displaying the traditional heritage, these
institutions will help to train the Byelorus¬
sian craftsmen of tomorrow.
Evgenl M. Sakhuta

