Unesco and respect
for human rights
By a decision of its Executive Board on 3 March 1978, Unesco
has adopted new procedures for dealing with specific complaints
concerning alleged violations of human rights in its fields of
competence. (1)
According to these procedures, any person or groups of persons
may write to the Director-General of Unesco drawing his attention
to an individual case of violation of human rights or to a ques¬
tion of massive, systematic or flagrant violations which result
either from a policy contrary to human rights applied de jure or
de facto by a State or from an accumulation of individual cases
forming a consistent pattern. Acting in conformity with moral prin¬
ciples and within the limits of its specific competence, Unesco
must work in this field in a spirit of conciliation and mutual com¬
prehension, it being understood that the Organization cannot fulfil
the role of an international judicial body.
To be admissible, such complaints must fulfil ten different condi¬
tions and notably be compatible with the principles of the Organi¬
zation, the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Decla¬
ration of Human Rights.
The procedures laid down by decision of the Executive Board
provide that, on receipt of a communication, the Director-General
shall ascertain that its author has no objection to his communica¬
tion being transmitted to the government concerned and being
brought to the notice of the Executive Board's Committee on Con- .
ventions and Recommendations.
Once the author's consent has been obtained, the government
will be informed of the communication and will be invited to reply.
The Committee will examine the communication in private session
and will first try to bring about a friendly solution. Whatever the
results of its efforts, the Committee will submit to Unesco's Exe¬
cutive Board confidential reports on the communications it has
examined. The Executive Board will discuss these reports in pri¬
vate session, but may decide to do so in public meetings when
questions of massive, systematic or flagrant violations of human
rights are involved-for example, those perpetrated as a result of
policies of aggression, interference in the internal affairs of States,
occupation of foreign territory and implementation of a policy of
colonialism, genocide, apartheid, racialism, or national and social
oppression.
Such questions may also be considered by Unesco's General
Conference in public meetings.
(1) The rights falling within Unesco's spheres of competence are
essentially the following:
the right to education
the right to share in scientific advancement
the right to participate freely in cultural life
the right to information, including freedom of opinion and
expression
Unesco has Issued a
wall-poster
presenting the text
of the Universal
Declaration of
Human Rights (1948).
It features this
design by the Polish
artist Stanislaw
Zagorski.
Photo Unesco
11
