Hundredth
issue of
DIOGENES
WITH the publication of its 100th issue, the quarterly review
Diogenes celebrates its 25th anniversary. Published with
Unesco support by the International Council for Philosophy and
Humanistic Studies, it appears in three language editions
(English, French and Spanish). It also produces yearly
anthologies in Arabic, Hindi, Japanese and possibly Portuguese
in the near future. Its role is unique in contemporary culture.
The current issue, though not devoted to a single theme, is
nevertheless bigger than usual and its contents are extremely rich,
and varied. (The French edition is now available; the English
edition will be published early in the summer.)
Each article sheds new light on an unusual aspect of
contemporary life, ranging from the new "sign language", a
study of the signs, posters and billboards in modern cities, to
"articulturists", those who live from art without creating it; from
healing by radio as practised by certain Brazilian religious sects
to a study of the cultural level of illiterate peoples.
Arthur Koestler, Jean Starobinski and Jean Fourastié examine
the nature of imagination and discuss the relationship between
science and poetry. The sources and meaning of Pop Art are
also analyzed, while a mathematician looks into the conditions
which favour the birth of scientific hypotheses. Another article,
a study of America's "new economists", examines the latest of
those intellectual movements that sweep America before
reaching Europe and the rest of the world.
The aims of Diogenes have been defined on several occasions by
Its founder and editor-in-chief, Roger Caillois. First and
foremost, it is international in outlook and scope. Most literary,
artistic and scientific magazines and reviews, as well as those
originating in the universities, are linked to a specific culture.
Diogenes, as the organ of an international council and supported
by Unesco, knows no cultural boundaries. Obviously, it takes
Into account the decisive importance of cultural identity, but
since it does not originate from within a given culture. It
deliberately adopts an international and intercultural outlook.
It Is also interdisciplinary in approach. "Interdisclplinarity" has
come Into vogue in recent years, and the pages of Diogenes may
have had something to do with that. However, unlike many
publications, Diogenes is not content merely to present a
diversified, many-sided approach to problems. It also tries to
establish parallels between often remote fields and disciplines.
Such hitherto hidden affinities herald those "diagonal sciences"
with which the name of Roger Caillois is so closely linked.
Along with this, Diogenes has also helped to broaden the very
concept of human sciences. Though it is a cultural review, it
also covers such rapidly changing disciplines as those connected
with biology, physics and chemistry. The interests and curiosity
of Diogenes range from the study of poetry and art through
linguistics, anthropology, psychiatry and economics to the exact
sciences.
Diogenes is thus opposed to narrow specialization and an
excessive division of labour in the sciences. This does not mean,
however, that it questions the need for analysis or scholarship,
nor that it champions hastily-formulated synthesis. The
avowed aim of Diogenes is to forge much-needed links .
between the various branches of science today.
This already gives some indication of the public Diogenes wants
to reach. Steering between excessive detail and vague
generalization, it is designed for specialists who wish to keep up
with developments in disciplines other than their own. Useless
jargon and glib systematizing are equally banned, as the review
seeks to provide for its readers the fullest possible picture of the
way science is moving and the relationships between its various
branches.
Diogenes rejects both pedantry and simplistic explanations, and
in so doing meets a need felt in a broad range of scientific and
cultural circles. In the last 25 years it has earned a reputation
which can be measured not only by the fidelity of its readers but
by the number of scientific studies and university theses that
quote it.
Diogenes feels that it has remained faithful to its ambitions and
that in contemporary cultural life it is playing the role of a
pioneer, a catalyst and a vehicle for ideas. In this way It forms a
link between scientific innovation and the curiosity of a wide
public.
Jean d'Ormesson
of the Académie Française.
Secretary-general of the International
Council for Philosophy and Humanistic Studies
