Korean painting an original
contribution to Oriental art
by Ch'oe Sun-u
DOWN the ages, Korean painting has
been strongly influenced by Chi¬
nese painting, both because of the
geographical proximity of the two coun¬
tries and the long-standing cultural ties bet¬
ween them. Yet Korean artists were not
content with mere imitation. They created
a uniquely Korean art by harmonizing Chi¬
nese influences with their own native
genius.
Korean art goes back to the tomb murals
which were a prominent feature of the cul¬
ture of the ancient kingdom of Koguryo (37
B.C. to 668 A.D.). In its early days, the
kingdom was open to the influence of
north Asian civilization through its contacts
with a number of peripheral tribes, such as
the Huns. But the dominant influence was
that of the north Chinese culture developed
under the Han dynasty (206 B.C. to 220
A.D.) and the Six Dynasties (280 B.C. to
589 A.D.), and the murals of the ancient
Koguryo tombs, both in conception and in
style, drew their inspiration from Chinese
painting of this period.
This tradition had its counterpart in the
kingdom of Paekche (18 B.C. to 660 A.D.).
The murals in the stone tomb in Nungsan-
ni, Puyo, which depict in a refined and deli¬
cate style lotus flower designs, cloud pat¬
terns, and portraits of the Four Gods are an
excellent example of Paekche art. Another
excellent example is the tomb of King
Muryong which was discovered in Kongju
in 1971. The tomb contains delicate lotus
designs and colour representations of the
Red Phoenix and animal deities. A beautiful
landscape painting executed on a brick wall
in a ruined Paekche temple which dates
back to the first half of the seventh century
confirms the notable development of land¬
scape painting during the Paekche era.
The kingdom of Silla (57 B.C. to 668
A.D.) was by far the most conservative of
the three ancient kingdoms as far as paint¬
ing was concerned. Up to 1950 no trace of
Silla painting had been found, but excava¬
tions in recent years have turned up some
exciting findings, notably the birch bark
paintings discovered in Tomb 155 in
Kyongju in 1973. A form of oil painting, it
would seem that the contours were first
drawn rather freely on the surface of arti
cles made from white birch bark and that
the colours were then added.
The Samguk Sagi (Historical Records of
the Three Kingdoms) has an interesting
anecdote about a painter named Solgo
who was active from the middle of the sixth
century to the beginning of the seventh
century. "A painting of an old pine tree
which Solgo executed looked so real that
birds flew into the room to perch on its'
branches. After the passage of time the
colours in the painting began to fade and it
was retouched by an old priest. From then
on, the birds were no longer deceived."
So, even though no actual Silla paintings k
are extant, with the exception of those*
CH'OE SUN-U is director of the National
Museum of Korea, Seoul. He is one of the con¬
tributing authors of Korea, its Land, People and
Culture of all Ages, Seoul, 1963.
Landscape (ink and colour on silk) attributed to the 16th-century
scholar-painter Yi Kyong-yun. With a group of other artists Yi Kyong-
yun introduced into Korea the "Northern School" style of painting
inspired by Chinese art. The crane near the human figure symbolizes
immortality.
19

Photo © Han Sok-hong, Private Collection, Haenam
Self-portrait (ink and colour on paper) of Yun Tu-so, a 17th-century scholar-painter
of the Northern School. One of the few self-portraits to have survived from Yi
dynasty Korea, the face is realistically portrayed with every strand of the beard
being meticulously delineated.
, associated with tombs, one can see that,
by contemporary judgement at least, works
of outstanding artistic merit were being
produced.
There were two schools of painters
during the period of the Koryo dynasty (918
A.D. to 1392 A.D.), one comprising profes¬
sional painters and the other made up of
aristocrats, scholars and literati who re¬
garded painting as a hobby.
Yi Nyong was one of the representative
professional landscape painters of the
Koryo era. Two of his landscapes, one
depicting the Yesong River and the other
depicting the Chonsuwon Pavilion, won
great praise from Emperor Huitsung of
Sung China who was himself an accom¬
plished artist.
Outstanding among the literati painters
of the day were Chong Chi-sang, famous
for his landscapes and paintings of flowers,
Haeae and Hyeho, both Buddhist monks,
who gained renown for their Buddhist
paintings and their bamboo paintings in
Indian ink, and King Kongmin (1351-1374)
who excelled in landscape painting, paint¬
ings of flowers and birds, and portraits.
The division of the painting world into
two schools mentioned earlier was intensi¬
fied under the Yi dynasty (1392-1910). The
professional painters centered their activi¬
ties around the Tohwa-so (Office of Paint¬
ing), a government office which had been
set up in the Koryo era but was reorganized
under the Yi dynasty.
The leading professional landscape
painters during the early Yi dynasty were
An Kyon and Yi Sang-jwa, and the out¬
standing literati landscapist was Kang Huí¬
an. All three painted in the style of the old
Sung academy, showing the conservative
taste of the royal court and the nobility. A
factor in this trend towards conservatism
was the enormous collection of Sung and
Yuan paintings which Prince Anp'yong,
the fourth son of King Sejong, had in his
possession. Prince Anp'yong was a young
man of refined taste and artistic leanings.
Around the middle of the sixteenth cen¬
tury a group of painters, notably Kim Che,
Yi Pul-hae, and Yi Kyong-yun introduced
the Northern School style of painting to the
Korean art world. The Northern School
continued to exert its influence until the
end of the seventeenth century, numbering
among its adherents artists of the calibre of
Yi Chong (1578-1607) and Yun Tu-so
(1668-?)
The eighteenth century saw the emer¬
gence of a number of remarkable painters.
Among them was Chong Son, a landscape
artist, who introduced the Southern
School and thus boldly challenged the con¬
ventional Northern School style. Chong
Son was the first artist to successfully
adapt the Southern School style to paint¬
ings of Korean scenes and this innovation
may be attributed to the awakening of a
new national consciousness, which ultima¬
tely led to the emergence of the Sirhak
school of practical learning, a popular
literature written in Han'gul, and genre
painting based on themes taken from the
daily lives of the people.
Ch'oe Sun-u
20

Northern School painting was challenged by the "Southern School"
which contributed to Korean art a host of lively paintings of scenes
from everyday life. Kim Hong-do (born around 1745) was a noted
painter who boldly and wittily depicted the occupations and
recreations of people usually neglected by conventional painters.
Three scenes by Kim Hong-do : The Amorous Look (top right);
Village School (right). Typical Korean musical instruments are
featured in Musicians and a Dancer (above).
Photo © Han Sok-hong, National Museum of Korea, Seoul
21
