Mankind's
memory banks
Around the beginning of the 3rd
millennium of the pre-Christian era,
the Sumerians of southern
Mesopotamia invented cuneiform
writing as a means of recording
names, speech and actions. This
clay tablet, dating from around
2000 B.C., is inscribed with a text
concerning the income earned from
the sale of cattle by the ancient
Babylonian city of Isin. A gift from
the government of Iraq, it is today
exhibited at Unesco's H.Q. in Paris.



The story of archives
from the clay tablet
to the computer
by Jean Favier
LONG before they became the hunting-
ground of historians, archives were
the stuff of history itself.
From the very earliest times administra¬
tors have committed to public archives the
records of state business, just as indivi¬
duals have kept private records of their
own or their families' activities, noting
down today what might be of use to them
tomorrow.
The materials on which these documents
were recorded were as varied as their con¬
tent. Wax tablets and tablets of baked
clay, shells and potsherds, were all used at
one time or another. In this way material as
varied as the correspondence of ancient
kings of Asia Minor, surveys of the Roman
Empire, estate-books of the Roman Catho¬
lic Church, and William the Conqueror's
record of his estates, was preserved for
posterity by men who can hardly have been
aware that they were acting as the custo¬
dians of history.
But if these documents owed their exis¬
tence to matters of immediate concern,
and were in no way conceived with the
needs of future historians in mind, they
also had two other features in common.
In the first place they were relatively
durable. Constant reading could never
wear away a tablet or a marble plaque, nor
could it harm the fragile papyrus (although
the latter might suffer from rough handling
or excessive exposure to light). Secondly,
each of these documents, no matter how
many copies of it were made, was unique.
Although procedures for handling the»
documents were varied, a copy of the origi- 1
JEAN FAVIER, Director General of the French
National Archives, is a member of the Executive
Committee of the International Council on
Archives. He is a former professor of medieval
economic history at the Sorbonne, where he
also headed the Institute of History from 1971 to
1975. Among his many published works on
medieval history are volume 4 of Paris au 15"
Siècle ("Paris in the 15th century"). Hachette,
Paris 1975.
vAi1T¿

For centuries, archives have, been used to store and preserve historic documents and
books. Top, a reader consults the largest of the million volumes in the library at
Tambov (U.S.S.R.) Below, a fragment of a nation's memory is stored in this section of
the U.S. National Archives In Washington, D.C.
Photo © National Archives, Washington, D.C.
11

This ancient inscription
on clay is another
document in cuneiform
(wedge-shaped) writing.
Unearthed in the Arab
Emirate of Bahrein, it
was produced around
1800 B.C. Cuneiform
was used for writing a
number of languages in
the ancient Near East.
> nal was generally made in the interests of
administrative efficiency, while the author
also kept a copy as a record of the deci¬
sions and information it contained. Thus,
there grew up the "registers" and "rolls"
which, from the Middle Ages onwards,
came to constitute a wealth of information
revealing how' rulers conducted their
affairs.
A glance at the Rolls kept by the medi¬
eval kings of England, the papal registers
and the documents conserved in the Trésor
des Chartes in France is sufficient for us to
realize the debt which history owes to the
systematic compilation of official docu¬
ments of all kinds.
Together with society's need to conserve
documentary evidence came the need to
organize this material. It is, after all, to the
archives that people turn when they seek
precedents for their decisions and the basis
for actions and judgements whose rules are
not prescribed by law.
For this purpose, the archivists of Anti¬
quity initiated, and those of the Middle
Ages particularly from the 13th century
onwards^ expanded and extended the pro¬
cess of listing and drawing up inventories,
classifying their material alphabetically,
chronologically and topographically, so
that it could be consulted with greater
speed and efficiency.
These traditional archives had their
drawbacks, foremost among which was
their extreme vulnerability above all to
fire, the nightmare of all ancient towns and
cities. When historians think of all the
documents that have, over the centuries,
gone up in flames, they are reduced to spe¬
culation and surmise about their contents,
if not to tears of frustration.
Another scourge of archives has always
been "borrowing", to use a euphemism.
Outright theft is relatively uncommon, but
many precious documents have disappear¬
ed because their users neglected to return
them. If archives were less useful, their
contents would be much richer!
From the 17th century onwards, West¬
ern historians increasingly felt a need to
base their work on documentary evidence,
and archivists began to take into account
the historical interest of the documents
they handled, in addition to their legal con¬
tent and their value as precedents. Collec¬
tions of historical documents were made,
composed of copies as well as originals.
Wealthy collectors enriched their libraries
with such miscellaneous acquisitions,
which often included documents
"diverted" from their original homes.
Scholars ranged far and wide across
Europe in quest of unpublished texts,
making copies for themselves and their
friends. In many cases, these copies are all
the evidence we have of important records,
since the originals were subsequently des¬
troyed by fire or tossed into the dustbin
during an epidemic of manic "sorting".
This preoccupation with History turned
the archivist's world upside down: the ser¬
vant of administrators became the servant
of the historian. During the 19th century,
this even led to a reversal of priorities: a
scholar himself, the archivist often gave the
needs of the historian priority over the
immediate demands of the bureaucracy.
Thus the century that saw the develop¬
ment of the positivist approach to history
was also the century whose history is in
many ways the most difficult to write,
because it paid scant regard to future gen¬
erations of historians. Preoccupied as they
were with the past, people forgot that the
present too would one day be the past.
At the same time, however, the 19th
century also made a major contribution to
the writing of history, through the great
collections of inventories, exhaustive cata¬
logues of publications and documents that
were compiled in many countries.
While archives were acquiring a new
scientific and cultural dimension, the right
of public access to their contents, as part
of a universal heritage, found clearer and
more forceful expression.
As a result, the management of archives
was subjected to fresh constraints, from
which emerged the modern concept of the
archivist as a public servant whose duty is
to communicate, to assist research and to
advise. The development of research in
universities would pack the reading-rooms
with an enthusiastic yet disinterested
public, for whom the right to consult ar¬
chives was part of the right to discover
the truth.
With the coming of the 20th century,
archivists began to be faced with a massive
increase in the output of official docu¬
ments, primarily due to the expansion of
the state's activities in most countries of
the world.
Only a century ago, countless transac¬
tions were handled purely on a private basis
by the individuals concerned. Today, the
state has a finger in every pie from house¬
building to symphony concerts with its
permits and prohibitions, its regulations,
aid, and taxes. Public records today thus
reflect virtually all the activities of the com¬
munity. At the same time archivists are
now more concerned than in the past with
preserving additional sources of informa¬
tion in the form of private archives, whe¬
ther compiled by the man-in-the-street or
the statesman, the shopkeeper or the
multinational corporation.
Technological progress has also brought
upheaval to the archivist's world. The last
century has seen the replacement of the
quill pen by the ball-point, and of the inky-
fingered copyist by the electric typewriter,
the duplicator and the Xerox machine.
Once, original documents were the rule;
now they are the exception.
"Papers, papers, everywhere..." is the
result, swamping the archivist, who can no
longer cope single-handed with a flood of
12

Some archives are today a
tantalizing mystery. The
signs and symbols on the
seals produced between
2500 and 1500 B.C. by the
' ancient civilization of the
Indus, have defied all
attempts at decipherment.
This elephant seal was
discovered at the famous
site of Mohenjodaro
(Pakistan).
documents which may not be of immediate
or daily use, yet are not sufficiently unin¬
teresting to be destroyed. Highly speciali¬
zed new techniques must be used to
handle this mass of new material.
Whether the specialists concerned are
"archivists" or "documentalists", their
task is not merely to let the archives pile up
until there is time to attend to them, but to
"process" systematically documents which
are still useful for administrators and
already sought-after by research workers.
The sheer bulk of the material means
that closer attention must be paid than in
the past to sorting and selection. Some
weeding out is essential, but it must be
done with care. The solution is to use a
"sampling" procedure, thus avoiding the
total disappearance of documentary evi¬
dence concerning certain activities.
Thus, the archivist may keep archives
concerning one year in five, or one in 20.
He may take samples on a geographic
basis, taking care that the samples are suf¬
ficiently varied to reflect a whole range of
social and economic affairs. Or he may
take samples according to subject, so that
the historians of the future will be able to
Photo © Archives Nationales, Pans
The use of the stylus to
keep records on wax-
covered tablets was a
practice that persisted
from Antiquity into the
Middle Ages. Wax
tablets at left were used
by Jean Sarrazin,
Chamberlain of St.
Louis, king of France, in
the mid-13th century.
grasp the full complexity of events at any
given point in space and time.
The storage of vast quantities of archives
is also a costly process. Here, microfilm
may seem to be a solution not far short of
miraculous, when one compares the cost
of a metre of film with that of a metre of
shelving, and when one considers that
documents which would once have filled
whole buildings can now be stored in a few
small canisters.
And yet, when the cost of preparing
documents for microfilming is added to the
costs of the labour and the equipment
required, it turns out that it is twice as
expensive to microfilm a big collection of
archives for storage as it is to construct a
special building to house the full-sized
documents.
This may mean that the creation of ar¬
chives on microfilm will not become a
serious alternative until the end of this cen¬
tury. Another major drawback must also
be faced: in most countries microfilm,
which defies many forms of analysis and
expert examination, is not yet legally reco¬
gnized as documentary evidence.
Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that
microfilm offers the archivists of our cen¬
tury invaluable possibilities for storing .
material in limited space, and providing |
13

hAtt Jt fW ¿ft ó»4 «-Ä- Î, Sr v*-V. Uf ¿ , Ô* tuM
Among the treasures preserved in archives are
documents recording some of the great moments
of history. Left, a letter bearing the royal seal
written in January 1196 by Richard the Lion-Heart,
King of England and lord of much of France,
concerning a peace treaty with the French King
Philippe Auguste.
, access to documents whose originals are in
distant libraries.
This technological revolution brought
renewed awareness of a threat which archi¬
vists have, perhaps, tended to neglect
since the age when records were inscribed
on papyrus: the fragility of documents.
What will remain, a few centuries from
now, of our photographs which yellow
with time, of our photocopies, and of car¬
bon copies on flimsy paper? In 30 years
time, what will have become of our
recordings on tapes which deteriorate with
every playing and eventually become
demagnetized?
The widespread use of computers poses
an even more serious problem. Even if
ways are found of preserving from decay
the memories contained in today's data
banks, who can be sure that the machines
of the late 21st century will be able to use
them? What shall we do if the memories
are silent?
The methods used for storing archives
on paper may be inadequate when it comes
to preserving the records of the computer
age. A document committed to paper
bears traces of all the stages of its life; suc¬
cessive entries mark its pasage through dif¬
ferent hands. A register, an account book
or a file shows an unfolding pattern in the
work of a law court or the activity of a busi¬
ness, and enables us to follow the deve¬
lopment of a career and a life.
But as a computer absorbs new informa¬
tion, it cancels earlier entries as obsolete. If
no remedy is found, the historian who con¬
sults the memory of a computer may well
find the "final result", but not the full story
of the game.
The growth of scientific curiosity during
the past half-century has also modified the
nature of the demands made on archives.
The archivist of 1914 had a fair idea of the
requests that would be made in a few years
time: they would be the same as those
made a few years earlier. He would be
asked to produce "traditional" material for
political, institutional and local history, bio¬
graphies and genealogies.
Today, however, historians look to the
same archives, as well as records of other
kinds to which scant attention was paid in
the past, for a much broader range of infor¬
mation on economic and social history, the
history of collective attitudes and religious
beliefs. In the course of a single day, an
archivist may be asked to provide docu¬
mentation concerning the evolution of
prices, the development of technology,
matters of public health, and forms of reli¬
gious observance.
At a time when many historians are turn¬
ing their attention to the recent past, peo¬
ple are concerned with the right to privacy
in their own and their family affairs. For
archivists, this has created a problem
which was unknown to their predecessors
a century ago. How can they open their
most recent records to public scrutiny, so
that the history of our times may be scienti¬
fically studied and the workings of govern¬
ment may be clearly understood by the
governed, and at the same time protect the
individual and his private life from prying
eyes and pressures? The archivist's task is
indeed full of contradictions.
Domesday Book, compiled in 1086 on the orders of the King of England, William the Conqueror, is the first
official census of property owners in England. Its two volumes (760 pages and 900 pages) are the earliest
"public" archive preserved at the Public Record Office in London. Below left, part of a page of Domesday
describing in minute detail the land and possessions of Edward of Salisbury, an important landowner. Right, a
plough-team from an 11th-century calendar showing costume and implements at the time of Domesday Book,
which is considered by many scholars to be the greatest administrative achievement of the Middle Ages.
Üfm/7 jot- wtti 7 jwjwrr<£.<*. «r lb,. . nwUnt rOS
~tv(b- È- toi* H*»14*1* liut^TBti* i. I£ yyiHá¿UK, i>¿-
WfÁ- m- «^ lt* »wl"í r*¿fv- «íáy,7*.^^7DS(ut/
toJbwT- SiW-i^l^aWW 0(í<Á.l*.m*l>í<*-l*.
fcyr^.hJr'MpK.t. {.du» iam5-.1t -cupu-ap-
Photo © Public Record Office, London Photo © British Library, London

Photo © National Archives, Washington, D C.
Design (above) proposed by William Barton in 1782
for the Great Seal of the United States is now in
the National Archives, Washington, D.C. The
small design in the upper right-hand corner was
adopted as the reverse of the seal and also
appears on a dollar bill. The rest was rejected.
' :
r(t%
vjßaAfav makíÍy
,. %t\drj/,Yhi*.iaá)fal),#Í£IW^Íd^,j
û M/ratimnr « lajyr//sá- .
/hit.:, j¿ Cs¡Minuit «ràxrAi .kiàrit ¿bar ¿Mi Jàji exmnAt? m
!rt f*rê*rryrf.i.w*)pn¡M r/ipm m*pvwfjr*Hrlr¿lrr/í¿lrnlmM¿r /»m * *'/x j< s.w/m
H.Unlitfw. I ('.Î4i. IriXtt. Jtyrmi . ''ffyfiOiAaAt l%fíHm7fsl¿uj*foAiíinjf. moWlití
íKpmuíjáaifmwPulmm/ ir&tHliíJf
r, iumu .-ya»'» t^mÊitfÊÊMiWrtnmr:
. iatyxxikitiii! ft h. mpmr
¥i1/n_ ÎiW iJ/A'ïi . ¿w/*,;:
^¿u.^
Original document of the Lei Áurea, the Golden Law abolishing
slavery in Brazil, dated 13 May 1888. The first two articles read
as follows: "Article 1 Slavery in Brazil is herewith declared
illegal as from the date of this law.
Article 2All contrary provisions are hereby rescinded."
Human rights are one thing. The rights
people actually enjoy are another. The
break-up of great empires, which began as
long ago as the Middle Ages but which
acquired particular momentum in the past
two centuries, has obliged many peoples to
look outside their own countries for some
or all of the records of their history.
This has led to claims which are as com¬
prehensible as they are difficult to satisfy.
Photo © Photo Department, Archives Nationales, Paris
People often think of
archives as stacks of musty
papers stored in deserted
rooms. Today this image is
increasingly false. Archives
now contain a mass of
recent documents, which are
often recorded by modern
techniques such as microfilm
and are consulted by the
general public as well as
specialists. Left, microfilm
reference room at the
Archives Nationales, Paris.
The present distribution of archive material
does not necessarily reflect the territorial
changes which followed the fall of the
Ottoman or Austro-Hungarian Empires or
the end of colonial and military occupa¬
tions.
And although microfilm may offer a
scientifically acceptable solution, it is no
help in settling questions of principle.
Nor as we have seen is it an inexpensive
process. This is one of the problems which
are being examined today by Unesco, the
International Council on Archives and the
International Round Table on Archives.
The history of archives goes back 3,000
years. Throughout this period, they have
reflected human difficulties in every age.
Today, they are part of the national and
international policies of every country. A
thread of continuity runs through this
history the quest to improve the tools of
government and administration, pursued
by both medieval kings and the Heads of
State of developing countries today.
When modern states define the laws
which govern access to their own archives,
and negotiate with other states the right to
consult archives which are not in their own
keeping, they are turning a new page in the
history of human memory.
Jean Favier
15
