TOLSTOY
THE
STRUGGLE
TOWARDS
THE LIGHT
by Victor B. Shklovsky
T
time.
iHE greatness of a writer is not always
perceived at once. Familiarity, ab¬
sorption and assimilation all take
When Olenin, the young hero of
Tolstoy's early novel The Cossacks, first
sees the mountains of the Caucasus, after
his long journey across Russia from Mos¬
cow, their misty grandeur dawns upon him
slowly. His growing awareness is some¬
thing the reader shares:
"All 'he could make out was something
grey and white and fleecy: try as he would,
he could discover nothing beautiful about
these mountains of which he had read and
heard so much. Mountains and clouds
appeared alike to him, and he began to sus¬
pect that the special beauty of snowy
peaks, of which he had so often been told,
was as much a figment of the imagination
as the music of Bach, or love, in neither of
which did he believe and so he gave up
looking forward to the mountains. But
early next day, awakened in his post-chaise
by the freshness of the air, he glanced
casually to the right. The morning was
crystal clear. Suddenly he saw, at what
seemed to him at first glance to be about
VICTOR BORISOVICH SHKLOVSKY, Soviet
critic and historian of literature, is the author of
biographies of Tolstoy and Dostoevsky as well
as a number ofnovels including The Sentimental
Journey (1923).
24

Above, Tolstoy and his friend the Russian historical painter llya
Efimovich Repin (1844-1930), whose work he greatly admired. Repin
illustrated several books by Tolstoy and executed several portraits of
him during visits to Yasnaya Polyana. Repin's reputation rests on
powerful, dramatic compositions such as his famous painting The
Volga Boatmen (below), today in the Russian Museum, Leningrad.
This work has been seen as a symbolic depiction of the fettered
Russian people under the Tsarist regime, dragging their chains
behind them.
twenty paces away, gigantic pure white
masses with gentle curves and fantastical
airy summits minutely outlined against the
distant sky. When he realized the distance
between himself and them and the sky, and
the whole immensity of those mountains,
and their infinite beauty, he feared lest it
prove to be a mirage or a dream. He gave
himself a shake, but the mountains were
still there."
The birth of mountains is a primitive
affair. The earth's crust splits and heaves ;
deep fires thrust layers of rock into the cold
sky. The mountains drink deeply from the
surrounding clouds. Snow falls. The sun
shines. Torrents burst from the deep blue
shadows on their flanks. They are part of
the earth, the mountains part of the old
earth that man has always known. And yet
their presence comes as a surprise.
A great man is a simple man, but one
who has assumed the contradictions of his
age and come to terms with them, sharp¬
ening rather than blunting their edge.
Working on Dead Souls, in 1844, Gogol
wrote to his close friend, the critic Annen-
kov: "Outstanding people are not those
who see something that others do not see,
and who are surprised that they alone
should see it; the only people who can be
called outstanding are those who see
everything that everybody else sees, but
who put two and two together so that they
see what nobody else sees, and are no lon¬
ger surprised that others should be so
blind."
In great men, mankind sees a reflection
of itself, but in an uplifted and enlightened
state. A great man is a product of the
people's suffering.
In Russia, the events of 1905-1907 had
sounded the death knell of the old order.
The country's contradictions had become
acute. But the gathering storm of protest
still did not break.
And yet, slowly, the mountains were
emerging. In 1910, Tolstoy wrote: "With
the Revolution, our Russian people sud¬
denly awoke to the injustice of their situa¬
tion. It was the story of the emperor's new
clothes; the Revolution was the child who
cried 'the emperor has no clothes!' It op¬
ened the people's eyes to an intolerable
untruth, and after that, the people under¬
stood. Their eyes can never be closed
again."
The emperor had no clothes... And with
the unmasking of the Tsar came awareness
of other injustices in the ownership of
land, in the army, in the red-tape of official¬
dom, in the marriage bond, and in spurious
"science" which profited only the rich.
This new understanding came as a revela¬
tion, and laid the foundations of a new art.
In an article on Tolstoy, Lenin wrote: "Illu¬
minated by Tolstoy's genius, this period
which paved the way to revolution, in a
country still under the yoke of serfdom,
was to stand out as a new landmark in the
artistic development of all mankind."
With Tolstoy, too, human psychology
came to be seen in a new light. Where ear¬
lier writers had explained men's actions as
a product of their thoughts and their envi¬
ronment, he dug deep into the thinking
process itself, revealing the conditions and
contradictions of what Chernyshevsky
called "the dialectic of the spirit".
Tolstoy did not believe that the world lay
beyond the grasp of the mind. On the con¬
trary, and whether he was writing about
the present or the past, he took events
which at first glance seemed common¬
place, fed them through the prism of his
consciousness and experience, and re¬
vealed them in their true colours. The result
was a world cleansed of all ordinariness,
refreshed, beautiful and like Olenin's
Caucasus crystal clear.
The mountains are high, and the paths
into them are wearisome. Familiarity with
them takes time. The ancients believed that
they were the footstools of the gods, and
built temples on their topmost peaks.
In his old age, the contradictions Tolstoy
had laid bare sometimes frightened him; it
was then that he turned towards God for
shelter. But at times Tolstoy's thought
went beyond the bounds of his faith in
God, which, indeed, he had put in question
on many occasions.
On 2 September 1909, he wrote in his
diary: "During the night, towards morning,
there came over me a sort of coldness, like
nothing I have ever felt before a feeling of
doubt about everything, especially about ,
God, and about whether my understanding |
25

k of the sense of life is right. I could hardly
credit that I had had this experience, nor
could I recover the faith by which I was
living and had always lived."
On 18 December, he wrote: "Life in its
madness becomes increasingly incompre¬
hensible, and to express the sense one
gives to it is quite impossible."
Six days later, he wrote: "I saw in a
dream the negation of God, and the objec¬
tions that could be raised to my idea of
non-violence as a precondition of a better
life."
In Gorky's reminiscences of Tolstoy,
compiled from notes of their conversations
together, there is the following entry:
"I was struck by a strange saying in the
diary he gave me to read: 'God is my
desire'. When I returned it to him today, I
asked him what he meant."
'An unfinished thought', he said, screw¬
ing up his eyes as he looked at the page. 'I
must have wanted to say God is my
desire to grasp what he is... No, not that...'
He laughed, rolled up the notebook and
thrust it into the pocket of his smock. His
relations with God are indefinite, some¬
times they remind me of 'two bears in one
lair'."
In his refusal of what had gone before,
and in his struggle towards the absolute
light, in his rejection of the past, and his
search for a new path that the entire people
would understand, Tolstoy achieved great¬
ness, and emerged in his grandeur as a
snow-covered mountain range emerges
from the plain.
He placed the human soul within men's
grasp, and, drawing on ancient sources,
discovered a new truth, and a new beauty.
Leaving the home of his ancestors,
leaving his friends and family and turning
his back on their faith, he acquired a new
understanding of the world a world he
could not change, because to do so re¬
quired a new struggle.
He stood on the frontier of a new land,
which he had seen, but could not enter.
Tolstoy's departure from Yasnaya
Polyana was not the flight of an old man
into the cold dampness of an alien world. It
was the conscious decision of an artist to
transcend feelings of compassion for those
close to him, and to make a clean break
with all that had gone before.
Victor B. Shklovsky
The quotation from The Cossacks is from Rosemary
Edmonds' translation, published in 1960 as a Penguin
Classic. © Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth, U.K.
Photo © APN, Pans
In October 1900 Leo Tolstoy welcomed to Yasnaya Polyana the young writer Maxim Gorky
whose talent he admired and whose great literary future he foresaw. The visit left a
profound impression on Gorky. "I looked upon the old man," he wrote later, "and saw a
fantastic creative force. The immensity of his stature is quite unbelievable and the vigour
of his mind is stupendous. So remarkable is he that nothing like him would seem to exist
anywhere in the world." Gorky added that it was a gloomy autumn day and that as
Tolstoy led him to the riverside near to a clump of birches, the old man tenderly caressed
the trees with his hand.
26
