India's
mobile crèches
An imaginative experiment in child-care
by Meera Mahadevan
MEERA MAHADEVAN, founder and director
of the "Mobile Crèche" child care programme in
India, died in July 1977. This article, an edited
version of a study published in Unesco's educa¬
tional quarterly Prospects (Vol. VII, N° 4, 19771,
appears with the kind permission of Unicef's
journal Assignment Children.
INDIA is developing fast in every field.
The country is mobilizing all its re¬
sources to accelerate its transfor¬
mation from the bullock cart era to the
space age; yet millions of our children still
live in conditions of poverty.
The Mobile Crèche programme special¬
izes in caring for children from the poorest
sections of Indian society construction
labourers who travel from site to site, many
thousands of whom are women and
mothers, coal-scavengers, rag-pickers and
others like them are the parents of our
young charges.
The origins of the Mobile Crèche pro¬
gramme go back to 1969, when we opened
a crèche in a tent for children under three
left to fend for themselves while their
mothers worked on a construction site in
Delhi. In the next eight months, three
more centres for children under three were
opened. At that time we had neither trans¬
port facilities nor an office and the work of
setting up a skeleton programme, gath¬
ering meagre supplies and scouting around
for urgently needed help and finance was
all carried out from the homes of volunteers
or from central meeting points.
By the end of 1970, the number of
crèches had grown to five and funds had
been found for a small base office. In the
next six months, five more centres were
opened. The programme was gathering
momentum and by mid-1971 we were pro-
24

A mobile crèche set up on a New Delhi building site provides basic health and education
services for the young children of unskilled construction workers. Forever on the move
from one building site to another, and therefore the responsibility of no one local
authority, these young urban nomads were left to look after themselves as best they
could until the mobile crèche organization took a hand.
Photo © Abigail Heyman, Unicef
viding care for 1,000 children, dealing with
ten building contractors and negotiating
with a large number of officials who could
sanction funds, water supplies or sanita¬
tion for the work-sites.
Construction workers are not the only
ones compelled to leave their young ones
to look after themselves. Every poor wor¬
king mother has to leave the household and
the babies in the charge of the older chil¬
dren. It is not uncommon, for example, to
find a girl of six, herself in need of care,
bringing up her baby brothers and sisters.
The first lesson we learned was that a
child cannot be isolated either from its
family or from the community. We started
the programme with a crèche because that
was the first priority as we saw it. But the
moment we took in the babies, the older
children who had been looking after them
had nothing to do and they came along to
our centres as well. Their nomadic way of
life and the fact that they had been obliged
to look after their siblings meant that most
of them had never been to school.
So today we are Involved not only in
crèche and nursery services but also in
elementary education. Our centres have
three sections: a crèche, nursery classes,
and elementary classes for children be¬
tween the ages of six and twelve.
Furthermore, as we gained experience,
we felt a great need for contact with
parents and this led us to launch an adult
education programme. We realized that it
was impossible to cater only for this or that
age group, and took the whole community
as our target.
Our equipment is simple and familiar to
the mothers. For example we use impro¬
vised cradles of a type that is found
throughout rural India and costs next to
nothing. Other basic equipment for a
crèche includes mats, a table for chang¬
ing babies' clothes, and a cupboard for
medicines, plates and other utensils. A
stock of toys for a section of some 50 chil¬
dren costs no more than 10 rupees.
The accommodation allotted to us is
usually drab. It may be In a basement or on
the 18th floor of an unfinished skyscraper.
To mellow the harsh surroundings, the
staff decorate the crèche with the
children's colourful drawings. The babies'
cots and cradles have lovely mobiles
hanging on them.
The babies, who come to us from the
age of 3 or 4 weeks are generally malnour¬
ished. They receive a preliminary medical
examination and are prescribed a diet by
the visiting doctor. Most of them are given
vitamin drops, milk, and other high-protein
food according to need. Although the doc¬
tor visits a centre only once a week, the
supervisors and nutritionists keep a close
watch on the children's progress. Many
babies are given half an egg as a special
diet. Once they show signs of progress,
their mothers come forward to share the
cost of an egg.
We try to make our crèches a home from
home. Every effort is made to develop the
child physically as well as emotionally,
intellectually and socially. The crèches
resound with the traditional songs familiar
to children.
In our nursery sections there Is nothing
unfamiliar or alien to either the children or
their teachers and the educational methods
we use are carefully adapted to Indian
experience.
Nursery schools are often considered a
luxury in poor countries, mainly because
they are thought to need elaborate and
expensive facilities.
We have shown the fallacy of this belief
by making imaginative use of cheap, locally
available materials to provide equipment
for children aged between three and six. In
the nursery section the materials used are
cardboard, chart paper, glazed paper, kite
paper, wooden beads, scissors, black¬
board, stones, leaves, flowers, potters'
clay (to replace plasticine), rag dolls, old
saris, wooden blocks and other inexpensive
items.
Our most important achievement is to
have produced model nursery equipment
suitable for a country like India that has to
think of children in millions. With few
variations, the same equipment can be «
used throughout the country. |
25

Having found an answer to the problem
of children under six, we realized that It
was impossible not to cater for deprived
children aged between six and twelve.
In Delhi, primary education is free and
poor children are entitled to get free books
and uniform. Unfortunately, many of the
poorest members of our society, who are
completely illiterate, are not even aware of
these opportunities. In spite of the best
intentions, the government does not
always succeed in reaching the poorest
people in the country. This is where the
role of an agency like Mobile Crèches be¬
comes vital. When we take care of the
babies and the nursery-age children, we
prepare the older children in our elementary
sections to join the local elementary
school.
We had to educate our own staff. .We
need teachers who will attend to a child's
sores and bathe him before settling down
to teach. We also need teachers who will
convince the parents that they should send
their children to the school. Thus a worker
in a Mobile Crèche must be a social worker,
a teacher and a mother.
The training has to be very basic and
simple. A standard routine of bathing,
feeding and giving medicine to babies had
to be worked out and suitable equipment
provided. The role of the dustbin had to be
dramatized. Working in unhygienic sur¬
roundings without sanitation, we have an
enormous task to maintain standards of
cleanliness in our centres. We have to
improvise little places which babies can use
as toilets and then find methods of dis¬
posing of the waste in a hygienic way.
Higher secondary school girls form the
bulk of our staff, but over the past three or
four years we have also started recruiting
boys. They bring a different atmosphere
with them and children love to have a male
teacher around.
From the beginning, the Mobile Crèche
programme had wholehearted support
from the children on construction sites and
in the slums. Seeing their children so
happy with our staff, parents also accepted
us, although they were a little suspicious at
the beginning.
Each child is charged a nominal fee.
They all have to buy slates, notebooks,
pencils, erasers and other materials at sub¬
sidized rates.
When the idea of charging fees was
introduced, many mothers refused to pay
for nursery children on the grounds that
this age group did nothing but play and
sing. It was quite understandable, and we
decided to organize a mothers' meeting to
explain all our nursery school activities.
This meeting was a great success and we
now always hold this type of meeting when
a new centre is opened.
Mothers' meetings are a very common
feature of our activities today. In 1969 and
1970, when we were new in the field, we
tried to bring the mothers together but they
were always busy with their household
chores. Then we tried cooking demonstra
tions and these attracted a group of
mothers who began to meet regularly. We
provided them with education in nutrition
and taught other topics related to child
care, hygiene, weaning foods, and the diet
of pregnant and nursing mothers.
Today our main point of contact with the
parents is our Adult Education Programme,
which has helped us considerably in im¬
proving our services to children. Before
carrying out immunization or vaccination
programmes we hold parents' meetings at
which we explain, with the aid of films,
flash cards, etc., what we want to do and
why. In this way we retain the parents'
goodwill and they do not get the impres¬
sion that the programme is being high¬
handedly imposed on them.
In its Fifth Plan, the Government of India
has given priority to crèche programmes
and the Mobile Crèche programme now
receives a substantial grant from the Wel¬
fare Department. This has enabled us to
work at certain sites even when the buil¬
ding contractors have refused to contribute
financially. Our aim is to educate the com¬
munity by our work. We want the contrac¬
tors and the authorities concerned to be
convinced that there is no ulterior motive
and that our sole concern is the welfare of
the children.
Meera Mahadevan
Crèche and nursery school programmes
have been given high priority by the
Indian Government over recent years. At
this nursery school in Madras carefully
selected toys help stimulate the
imagination and develop manual dexterity.
26
