The anonymous
painters
of medieval
Catalonia
CATALONIA is a land steeped in an age-old civilization and hence in art. The Cata¬
lonian language and culture came into being around the same time as the other
great languages and cultures that grew out of the collapse of the Roman world:
French, Italian, Spanish, Provençal, Galician-Portuguese, Romanian and others.
Like them Catalan emerged around the year 1000 and gradually took shape in the later
Middle Ages down to the Renaissance and the great voyages of discovery in the 16th
century.
Catalonian culture reached a high level during these centuries, producing such great
figures as Raymond Lully in philosophy, Joannot Martorell in literature and Juan Luis
Vives in humanist thought.
But it was in art, and especially painting, that early Catalonian culture achieved its
finest splendours, as it would do again centuries later with its world-famous modern
architects and painters. (See article page 16).
With the exception of the mural paintings in the Pantheon of Kings which adorns the
basilica of San Isidoro in the city of Leon, most of the treasures of Spanish Romanesque
painting are concentrated in the churches and monasteries of Catalonia. These works,
many of them executed on wood panels, are examples of a humane, powerful, and
emotionally charged art that, until recent times, was known only to a few specialists.
Most of the artists who created these masterpieces were monks. Their names are
unknown, and they are identified by the names of the places where they worked. The
Master of Pedret, the Master of Tahull, the Master of Soriguerola, the Master of Osor-
mort and the Master of Espinelves were some of the most famous of these painters who
worked between the 11th and 13th centuries.
For hundreds of years the marvels of Catalonian Romanesque painting remained hid¬
den in small churches, convents and monasteries in the towns and villages of Catalonia.
It is only since the beginning of this century that specialists have been bringing them to
the attention of a wider public. Today most of these works are preserved in Catalonian
museums, notably Barcelona's Museum of Catalonian Art, which has an unrivalled col¬
lection of Romanesque painting.
Romanesque art in Catalonia and elsewhere in Spain bears traces of various out¬
side influences. The road that ran from Cordoba in the South to Toledo and Leon in the
North was the principal route along which Muslim art and culture spread from Cordoba,
until the fall of the caliphate early in the 11th century. There was, for example, an
important Mozarabic school of panel painting that left its mark on painting in the Chris¬
tian kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula.
Then, too, the pilgrims' road to St. James of Compostella crossed northern Spain
from east to west bringing artistic influences from elsewhere in Europe, starting with
that of the Benedictine abbey of Cluny in Burgundy which was the fountainhead of
Romanesque art.
The works of the anonymous painters of medieval Catalonia blazoned forth the great
themes of the Old, and even more often the New Testament, as well as the lives and
legends of the saints, in a style that is sometimes strikingly modern. On the following
pages we present a selection of these masterpieces. (See also back cover.)
Colour pages
Centre double page
Scenes from the life of St. Clement
are shown on this frontal from the
church dedicated to the Saint in
Tahull, a Pyrenean village in the
Spanish province of Lérida. The
painting, executed in the 12th century
by an anonymous painter known as
the Master of Tahull, is now in the
Art Museum of Catalonia, Barcelona.
Photo © Spanish Embassy, Paris
Opposite page
St. Margaret devoured by dragons: a
detail from a frontal in the ancient
monastery of St. Martin, in Sescorts
near Vich (Barcelona province). The
12th-century work is now preserved
in Vich Episcopal Museum.
Photo © Spanish Embassy, Pans
CONTINUED PAGE 23
18

&
OL * . '
I, » ,
o-
» If J
qV?
s\ t ¿ KA v íá \íV8? úDQ'LI



