A come-back
for King Coal
by Vladimir A. Kuzminov
COAL represents 87 per cent of all the
known fossil fuel reserves of our
planet, and this vast store contains
six times as much potential energy as the
world's known reserves of oil.
Scientists have estimated that these
positively identified coal deposits, together
with those that may confidently be presu¬
med to exist, amount to 8,400,000,000,000
tons corresponding to a store of potential
energy twenty-five times greater than that
of the world's oil supplies.
In the unlikely event of mankind turning
its back on all sources of energy except
coal, and allowing for the annual Increase
¡n world energy consumption (which
during recent years has amounted to
about three and a half per cent), and for
unavoidable wastage, there would still be
enough coal to meet requirements for at
least another hundred years. In other
words, despite the fact that for a century
and a half coal has been the principal
source of the world's energy, an enormous
amount remains to be exploited.
The period since the 1950s has seen a
decline in the rates of extraction and utiliza¬
tion, with the result that coal now provides
no more than 30 per cent of the world's
energy, while oil and natural gas have |
taken over Its dominant role. I
Vladimir A. Kuzminov is a Soviet physicist
who specializes in the study of heat and mass
transfer and in world energy problems. He is the
author of two studies and a number of articles
on these questions.
Coal, one of mankind's most precious resources, is sometimes called "buried
sunshine" because the sunlight falling on swamp forests long ago is stored in it.
Most coal began to be formed between 210 and 280 million years ago, during a
time that geologists call the Carboniferous Period, by the slow decomposition
and chemical conversion of immense masses of dead trees and plants. Coal
sometimes bears markings of the plants from which it was formed. On this piece
a part of a fern-like Alethoptera plant can be seen.
27

If all the world's known coal deposits
(as assessed in 1974) were piled up,
they would form a cube 21 kilometres
high more than twice as high as the
world's highest mountain. Small cube
(each side measuring 1.8 km) carved
out of upper right corner represents
total world energy consumption for
1975 expressed in terms of coal. Large
cube carved out at left (each side
measuring 13.5 km) shows the amount
of coal that would be needed to meet
all the world's estimated energy
requirements between now and the
year 2050.
Coal has fallen out of favour as a source
of energy, because, in comparison with
substances like oil and natural gas. Its
exploitation involves certain disadvan¬
tages. Coal-mining is a costly process, and
one which is not without risks as far as
human health and the environment are
concerned. Present methods of transport¬
ing coal from pit-head to power station are
labour-consuming and inefficient. Burning
coal emits harmful gases which are hard to
eliminate, as well as particles of gritty
matter, and leaves large quantities of slag.
^Furthermore, coal cannot be used, in its
natural state, as fuel for modern methods
of transport. All these factors obviously
inhibit any tendency to produce more coal
or to use it more extensively. -
On the other hand, some success has
already been achieved in overcoming cer¬
tain of these difficulties ; further research is
in progress, which should lead to a rehabili¬
tation of this age-old, well-tried source of
energy and of raw materials for the chemi¬
cal industry.
The large-scale mechanization and auto¬
mation of mining processes make extrac¬
tion a much less expensive business, and
reduce the health hazard to mine workers.
Underground gasification and hydraulic
methods of seam working make the future
prospects of the mining industry look much
brighter. Problems of transportation from
the mine to the furnace are being solved by
mixing the coal with oil or water and
pumping it through pipelines.
But the most important challenge
remains the improvement of the techno¬
logy of coal use. Radical improvements are
required if the heat-generating capacities of
coal and its potential as a source of energy
are to be increased without undesirable
consequences for human health and the
environment. Ways and means must be
found of ensuring that the replacement of
oil and natural gas by coal does not entail
substantial alterations to heat-generating
equipment.
Specialists believe that the extensive use
of coal in the future will depend on under¬
ground or surface gasification (i.e. its
transformation into methane), and on its
transformation into synthetic oil. Engineers
and scientists in many countries are cur¬
rently devoting considerable efforts to the
improvement of technologies for this pur¬
pose, which are not yet practical or econo¬
mical enough for widespread introduction.
It should be added that the production of
synthetic gas and oil from coal makes the
latter more competitive as a substitute for
natural gas and crude oil in the chemical
industry.
A large-scale return to the use of coal as
a source of energy thus depends on the
solution of a whole series of scientific and
technological problems; but in an age of
outstanding scientific and technological
advance and discovery, with every nation
striving to ensure that coming generations
will have reliable supplies of energy at their
disposal, these problems will all be solved
before many years have passed.
Indeed, solutions to some of them have
already been found and are being applied in
the mining and energy industries.
Soviet successes with underground gasi¬
fication and hydraulic coal extraction are
widely acclaimed while scientists and engi¬
neers in the United Kingdom, the U.S.S.R,
the United States, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, Poland, Czechoslovakia and many
other countries are making great efforts to
perfect the technology of surface gasifica¬
tion and the transformation of coal into
liquid fuel.
The increased production and utilization
of coal as a source of energy open up
favourable prospects not only for the
industrialized countries but also for those
of the developing world, particularly in the
Asian region, which has large reserves.
Coal can provide these countries with a
national supply of energy for social and
economic development, and above all for
their industrialization.
What role will coal play as a source of
energy in tomorrow's world? If it is difficult
to predict its future importance in specific
countries or regions, the analysis of the
potential which it offers in terms of energy
clearly reveals that tomorrow, and for a
long time to come, coal will continue to
serve the development of all mankind.
Vladimir A. Kuzminov
28
