It's
never
too
early
to learn
by Boris Nikitin
BORIS NIKITIN is a Soviet engineer who has
also written widely on questions relating to the
education of young children. He and his wife
Yelena are co-authors of a study based on their
experiences in bringing up their own family. This
article brings up to date his account of life with
the Nikitin family, published in the February 1971
issue of the Unesco Courier.
28

The seven children of librarian Yelena Niki¬
tin and her engineer husband Boris are all
two or three years ahead of other children
of their own age. Alyosha, the eldest, is
already, at the age of 17, working as a
senior technician in a research institute.
Anton, the second, has just graduated at
thirteen and a half from a secondary
school specializing in mathematics. The
other children are still at school, and are all
two or three years younger than their class¬
mates. How is it that they have developed
so early? Boris Nikitin explains:
WHEN our first child, Alyosha, was born
17 years ago, our primary concern-
like that of parents everywhere was
that he should grow up into a capable, good-
hearted and healthy adult. But how could we
make sure that he would turn out like this?
We read the biographies of talented indivi¬
duals of the past poets and writers like Pushkin
and Lermontov, musicians like Mozart, inven¬
tors like Edison and were struck by the early
age at which their creativity became apparent...
We began to collect facts, and to study the
history of education. One of the first things we
discovered was that in the 18th century, children
learned to read and write at the age of 14 or 15;
since then these skills have been taught at an
1 Soviet engineer Boris Nikitin
and his family are firm believers in
the precept that a sound mind
should go together with a sound
body. Physical exercise and
outdoor recreation are the order
of the day for the Nikitin children,
come rain, wind... or even snow...
2 ...with dad gamely joining In.
3 A family get-together on a
sunny day. Informal discussion is
an essential part of the upbringing
that has helped all the Nikitin
children to develop earlier than
their contemporaries.
4 The two eldest Nikitins put
their theoretical knowledge to the
test In the family workshop.
Photos 1 and 2 © APN, Moscow
Photos 3 and 4 N Samoylov
© "Soviet Woman", Moscow
29

increasingly early age. Two centuries later, we
1 ourselves started school at the age of eight,
whereas our children would do so at seven. We
discovered that in 58 countries schooling began
at the age of six, and at five in a number of
others, and that educational specialists in some
parts of the world were asking whether it should
not begin at the age of four. How, we asked
ourselves, could this trend be explained? What Is
the best age to start school?
While we were busy puzzling over this ques¬
tion, Alyosha was growing. One day, when he
was one and a half years old, someone gave him
a set of cubes with letters of the alphabet printed
on them. "The letters won't mean anything to
him yet," we said to ourselves, but we let him
play with the cubes all the same.
Three months or so later, we were more than
a little surprised to discover that Alyosha could
already recognize a dozen letters. By the time
he was two and a half, he knew all 29 letters of
the Russian alphabet. Two months later,
without any prompting, he read out his first
word. This was an eye-opener for us. If our
child could read at such an early age, how soon
could he acquire other skills?
At first, we relied entirely on intuition in deter¬
mining Alyosha's capacities and limitations. We
were very careful, when we played with him, not
to apply pressure or impose lessons. If he did
something successfully, we were pleased; if he
failed, we simply waited until he tried again.
At one-and-a-half or two-year intervals, other
little brothers or sisters arrived and we ourselves
gained experience and became bolder in our
approach. The family's stock of educational
toys and equipment for physical exercise stea¬
dily increased, and we even invented materials
and games ourselves.
In addition to the lettered cubes, we had a
board on the wall with letters made of bent wire
or cut out of linoleum, a blackboard, chalks,
pencils and paper, reading books and copy¬
books. When one of the little ones found a ring
one day he ran up to us, shouting delightedly,
"Look, Mummy, an '0'!".
We played trains with the letters, joining them
up to form "M - A - M - A", "P - A - P - A", "M -
0 L - K - 0" (milk) and other simple words. Our
second son, Anton, began to read at three years
and three months; the girls all began between
the ages of three and four.
Our general approach was based on the fact
that, to teach a child to speak, adults talk to it as
soon as it is born; in other words the child is
placed in conditions of oral communication long
before it begins to speak itself. Why not provide
the same conditions for the development of
other faculties? And this, as far as we were able,
was what we did: we tried to place our children
in an environment that would stimulate the
development of the greatest possible variety of
activities.
We didn't hesitate to introduce into the chil¬
dren's immediate surroundings a large number
of things from the world of grown-ups. As well
as the usual toys, dolls and children's books, we
provided a wide range of educational objects
and materials, such as maps and globes, mathe¬
matical tables and textbooks, and a whole series
of educational games invented by the family.
Games begin with very simple tasks, like
copying patterns, pictures or shapes, and lead to
more creative activities involving the invention
of new patterns, models and constructions.
These activities are quite informal. They are not
"lessons" in the sense that the adult teaches
and the child assimilates, but playful contests in
which the grown-ups are participants as well as
referees, and which often involve problems like
"how can we share 25 walnuts between nine
people?", or "how can we divide three apples
into 10 equal parts?".
We encourage the children to work the ans¬
wers out for themselves, and never hurry them,
however long they take. We believe that it is
better to wait patiently and to study their own
processes of reasoning; we don't even intervene
when they're on the wrong track; we leave them
to find that out for themselves too. What we are
looking for is originality, and the ability to argue
a case and defend a point of view.
We allow our children plenty of freedom in
choosing their occupations and working out
their own time-table, since we believe that this
gives them the opportunity to discover and
express their different interests.
We know that children are often more interes¬
ted in playing a game if adults, and especially
their parents, also join in enthusiastically.
Grown-ups should not remain on the side-lines,
as impartial observers or dutiful instructors, but
should participate wholeheartedly. And this is
what we do; we are just as excited as they are
when someone is successful, and just as disap- .
pointed when someone makes a mess of things.
Our children each have very different charac¬
ters and interests but they share the same curio¬
sity, attentiveness and ability to memorize. They
easily recall what they have read, think origi¬
nally, seek their own solutions and enjoy tasks
that sharpen their wits. Academician Nikolai
Amosov considers that they are not so much
"eggheads" as "problem-solvers". They like to
invent and act out situations, writing and perfor¬
ming playlets in which they are "in the Revolu¬
tion", "in prehistoric times", "at the zoo" or "at
the theatre"...
If the development of the child starts earlier,
at a more favourable period of his life, he will not
be overburdened with work later on at school
and consequently will not drop behind. All our
children get good marks at school, but the most
important thing is the excellent way in which
each one has developed his creative capacities.
Our main conclusion, after 15 years of practi¬
cal and theoretical enquiry in our own family, is
that all children can develop in this way and
can do even better if the necessary conditions
are provided at the right time.
Boris Nikitin

