An appeal by
Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General
of Unesco
ONE of the most noble incarnations of a people's
genius is its cultural heritage, built up over the
centuries by the work of its architects, sculptors,
painters, engravers, goldsmiths and all the creators of
forms, who have contrived to give tangible expression to
the many-sided beauty and uniqueness of that genius.
The vicissitudes of history have nevertheless robbed
many peoples of a priceless portion of this inheritance in
which their enduring identity finds its embodiment.
Architectural features, statues and friezes, monoliths,
mosaics, pottery, enamels, masks and objects of jade, ivory
and chased gold in fact everything which has been taken
away, from monuments to handicraftswere more than
decorations or ornamentation. They bore witness to a his¬
tory, the history of a culture and of a nation whose spirit
they perpetuated and renewed.
The peoples who were victims of this plunder, sometimes
for hundreds of years, have not only been despoiled of irre¬
placeable masterpieces but also robbed of a memory which
would doubtless have helped them to greater self-
knowledge and would certainly have enabled others to
understand them better.
Today, unbridled speculation, fanned by the prices pre¬
vailing in the art market, incites traffickers and plunderers to
exploit local ignorance and take advantage of any conni¬
vance they find. In Africa, Latin America, Asia, Oceania and
even in Europe, modern pirates with substantial resources,
using modern techniques to satisfy their greed, spoil and
rob archaeological sites almost before the scholars have
excavated them.
The men and women of these countries have the right to
recover these cultural assets which are part of their being.
They know, of course, that art is for the world and are
aware of the fact that this art, which tells the story of their
past and shows what they really are, does not speak to
them alone. They are happy that men and women else¬
where can study and admire the work of their ancestors.
They also realize that certain works of art have for too long
played too intimate a part in the history of the country to
which they were taken for the symbols linking them with
that country to be denied, and for the roots they have put
down to be severed.
These men and women who have been deprived of their
cultural heritage therefore ask for the return of at least the
art treasures which best represent their culture, which they
feel are the most vital and whose absence causes them the
greatest anguish.
This is a legitimate claim ; and Unesco, whose Constitu¬
tion makes it responsible for the preservation and protection
of the universal heritage of works of art and monuments of
historic or scientific interest, is actively encouraging all that
needs to be done to meet it.
The return of cultural assets to their countries of origin
nevertheless continues to pose particular problems which
cannot be solved simply by negotiated agreements and
spontaneous acts. It therefore seemed necessary to
approach these problems for their own sake, examining
both the principle underlying them and all their various
aspects.
This is why, on behalf of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization which has empowered
me to launch this appeal,
I solemnly call upon the governments of the
Organization's Member States to conclude bilateral agree¬
ments for the return of cultural property to the countries
from which it has been taken ; to promote long-term loans,
deposits, sales and donations between institutions con¬
cerned in order to encourage a fairer international exchange
of cultural property, and, if they have not already done so,
to ratify and rigorously enforce the Convention giving them
effective means to prevent illicit trading in artistic and
archaeological objects.
I call on all those working for the information
mediajournalists of press and radio, producers and
authors of television programmes and filmsto arouse
worldwide a mighty and intense movement of public
opinion so that respect for works of art leads,
wherever necessary, to their return to their homeland.
I call on cultural organizations and specialized associa¬
tions in all continents to help formulate and promote a

A PLEA FOR THE RETURN
OF AN IRREPLACEABLE
CULTURAL HERITAGE TO THOSE
WHO CREATED IT
stricter code of ethics with regard to the acquisition and
conservation of cultural property, and to contribute to the
gradual revision of codes of professional practice in this
connexion, on the lines of the initiative taken by the Interna¬
tional Council of Museums.
I call on universities, libraries, public and private art gal¬
leries and museums that possess the most important col¬
lections, to share generously the objects in their keeping
with the countries which created them and which some¬
times no longer possess a single example.
I also call on institutions possessing several similar
objects or records to part with at least one and return it to
its country of origin, so that the young will not grow up
without ever having the chance to see, at close quarters, a
work of art or a well-made item of handicraft fashioned by
their ancestors.
I call on the authors of art books and on art critics to pro¬
claim how much a work of art gains in beauty and truth for
the uninitiated and for the scholar, when viewed in the
natural and social setting in which it took shape.
I call on those responsible for preserving and restoring
works of art to facilitate, by their advice and actions, the
return of such works to the countries where they were
created and to seek with imagination and perseverance for
new ways of preserving and displaying them once they
have been returned to their homeland.
I call on historians and educators to help others to
understand the affliction a nation can suffer at the spolia¬
tion of the works it has created. The power of the fait
accompli is a survival of barbaric times and a source of
resentment and discord which prejudices the establishment
of lasting peace and harmony between nations.
Finally, I appeal with special intensity and hope to artists
themselves and to writers, poets and singers, asking them
to testify that nations also need to be alive on an imagina¬
tive level.
Two thousand years ago, the Greek historian Polybius
urged us to refrain from turning other nations' misfortunes
into embellishments for our own countries. Today when all
peoples are acknowledged to be equal in dignity, I am con¬
vinced that international solidarity can, on the contrary,
contribute practically to the general happiness of mankind.
The return of a work of art or record to the country which
created it enables a people to recover part of its memory
and identity, and proves that the long dialogue between
civilizations which shapes the history of the world is still
continuing in an atmosphere of mutual respect between
nations.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Thanks to an agreement between the Royal
Museum of Central Africa at Tervuren (Belgium) and
the National Museums of Zaire (see also pages 8
and 9), this ivory pectoral amulet (67 millimetres
high) has been returned to its country of origin.
Produced by an artist of the Hungana people, noted
ivory carvers who live In the valley of the river
Kwilu, It has the folded arms, the chin resting on
the hands and the knees bent close together that
are typical features of Hungana carved figures.
