Today's lost
generation
The unemployed young
in the Western industrialized
countries face the prospect
of frequent joblessness,
a long search for work,
and marginal employment'
by Peter Melvyn IF all the unemployed people in the
twenty-four industrialized countries
that make up the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) were to line up outside an employ¬
ment office in London, they would form a
queue long enough to reach all the way to
New York.
The queue would be a youthful one; of
the seventeen million people in it, seven
million, or forty per cent, would be under
the age of twenty-five. For although the
current world economic recession affects
all age groups* young people have been
particularly hard hit and over the past few
years the gap between the unemployment
PETER MELVYN is project manager in the Edu¬
cation and Labour Market Policies Branch of the
Employment and Development Department of
the International Labour Organisation (ILO),
Geneva. This article is based on a longer study
which appeared in the July-August 1977 issue of
the ILO periodical International Labour Review.
rates of adult and young workers has
widened disturbingly with young workers
accounting for thirty-six per cent of the
total increase in unemployment between
1973 and 1975. In 1976, over one third of all
the unemployed in the European
Communities were under twenty-five. In
Australia at the end of 1976, forty per cent
of the total registered unemployed were
under twenty-one, while in Canada in 1974
males aged from fourteen to twenty-four
accounted for close to half of the.
unemployed, double their proportion in the
work force. In the United States young
men between the ages of sixteen and
nineteen account for twenty per cent of all
the unemployed compared with an overall
unemployment rate of just under nine per
cent.
These figures do not, however, reveal
the whole picture. They include only those
young people in the unemployment count
who are actively looking for work and are
registered with the national employment
services. Many, particularly first-time job-

I
seekers under eighteen who are not
entitled to unemployment benefits and may
have applied for jobs or training places in
vain, see little purpose in registering. The
real unemployment figures may, therefore,
be considerably higher.
There is also evidence that growing
numbers of young people are now
remaining out of work for longer periods,
although these periods are still shorter than
those of adult workers.
Teenagers, first-time job-seekers and
those with the lowest educational
qualifications are the hardest hit. From the
statistics of the few countries that publish
data correlating unemployment with age,
sex and educational and training levels, it
appears that most youngsters who lose
their jobs have had no training or are semi¬
skilled. However, data for 1976 from the
Federal Republic of Germany show that a
third of all unemployed people under the
age of twenty had served an apprenticeship
or had been trained at a vocational school.
Clearly, training and skills are not in
themselves an infallible protection.
Unemployment among girls and young
women is also disproportionately high.
Demographic changes in a number of
countries are likely to make matters worse
before they get better. Between now and
the end of the 1980's the number of young
people reaching working age in the
countries of the European Economic
Community (EEC) will continue to rise
substantially. Not until 1985 will their
numbers go down and stabilize.
Why are young people so severely
affected? Clearly, the general decline in the
number of jobs due to the recession is
highly significant. But this holds good for
adult as well as young workers and the fear
is that certain long-standing structural
problems exist which may not disappear
with economic recovery. Well before the
recession the unemployment share of
young people was disproportionately high
in such countries . as Canada, France,
Ireland, Italy, the United Kingdom and the
United States. Even today in countries
such as Sweden and Norway where
unemployment is very low, the proportion
of young people out of work is two or three
times that of adults. All this points to a
structural trend towards growing
unemployment for the fifteen to twenty-
five age group.
One of the most often quoted reasons
for youth unemployment is the preference
of employers for adult workers. Particularly
in time of large-scale layoffs, employers
prefer to hire or keep experienced adult
workers. The , costs of employing young
people are greater in the short term than
the benefits to the firm. An employer tends
to fill job vacancies with older workers who
have job experience and skills, as well as
habits of reliability and punctuality, and in
this way keep his training costs down to
the minimum.
Research into the nature of employers'
recruitment policies under current
employment conditions is lacking in most
European countries. However, according t
to one such survey carried out in the United f

50 million jobless
in the world today
> Kingdom, "about half the employers
interviewed believe that the calibre of
young people has deteriorated over the
past five years in terms of their motivation
and basic education. Particular dis¬
appointment was voiced at the quality of
recruits to skilled manual jobs. So far this
attitude on the part of employers has not
markedly affected recruitment policies;
most employers continue to employ the
same proportion of young people."
There is also evidence that relative wage
costs may be a barrier to the employment
of young people. Each successive rise in
the minimum wage rate reduces employer
demand for inexperienced workers. In a
number of countries minimum wage
legislation now lays down lower minima for
the sixteen to twenty-one age group. In
Denmark, for example, where adult wages
are payable only from the age of eighteen,
unemployment is lower among the younger
age groups.
Paradoxically, young workers are often
disadvantaged by legislation originally
designed for their protection. In practically
all industrialized countries there are barriers
to the employment during school hours of
young people under sixteen. Yet the
emergence of work experience pro¬
grammes or of other schemes combin¬
ing study and work at secondary school
level raises the question of whether
legislation and practice should not take
these recent developments into account.
Thus it has been argued recently in the
United States that "enacted many years
ago to counteract a then widespread
exploitive practice, these laws operate
today to deny some forms of work
experience that would generally be
recognized as valuable... Surveys made by
the Department of Labor indicate that work
experience results in (or at least is
accompanied by) substantial reductions in
dropouts, truancy and tardiness, as well as
in significant improvements in school
grades. The findings appear sufficient to
recommend amendment of the federal or
state laws."
The same sources also point out that
employers are worried about the scope of
federal or state legislation concerning the
employment of persons under the age of
eighteen in "hazardous occupations" and
consequently are reluctant to hire anyone
under eighteen for fear of violating the law
in this respect.
In the discussion on the problems of
youth unemployment reference is often
made to the allegedly negative attitudes of
young people towards work, and par¬
ticularly towards jobs in industry. Yet it
remains to be demonstrated that their
attitudes are markedly different from those
of adult workers. The large body of
literature dealing with job satisfaction and
quality of work reflects society's growing
concern with the work situation. Is it
therefore surprising if the attitudes of older
people towards work influence the young?
Recent studies in France show con¬
siderable variations in attitudes among
young workers according to age, sex,
social origin, education, training and type
of job. Moreover it is not easy to
distinguish between the questioning of
work as a major social value and of the
circumstances under which it is done.
Difficulties during the transition from
school to work unemployment, unsatis-
itative supervision or a work organization
that imposes intolerable constraints and
deprives them of initiative and respon¬
sibility. They tend to refuse a type of
human relations at work that many adults
have come to accept.
It is often said that young people do not
want to go into industry but prefer jobs in
the service sector. It is true that many try to
avoid work on the assembly line and other
repetitive and monotonous jobs. But so do
many adults. Despite all the talk about the
high skill demands of modern technology
and the need for education and training to
prepare people for these demands, there
are still many jobs which require very little
skill, training, intelligence or judgement.
The deficiencies of the educational
system, especially at the secondary level,
are increasingly apportioned part at least of
the blame for the difficulties young people
are experiencing on the labour market. It is
frequently argued that schools do not fulfil
the function of bridging the gap between
the world of childhood and the world of
work. In many countries there is hardly any
communication between the educational
system and the labour market. With the
exception of those who go on to higher
education, young people move suddenly
from the protected, ivory-tower
environment of school into a harsh,
competitive, production-oriented work
situation where the performance and
behaviour expected of them are very
different from anything they have
previously known. During this transition
many of them undergo a good deal of
physical and psychological strain.
Yet concern about the problems young
people experience in making the transition
from school to work is nothing new. A
300 million persons
in the world
are underemployed
factory working conditions, low material
rewards, frustrated career and income
expectations, etc. certain to dampen
the outlook on work and are bound to give
rise to discontent, indifference or
despondency in young people. First
impressions may be lasting and thus cause
considerable social and personal harm.
Yet there are noticeable differences in
attitudes which are not necessarily
negative. For instance, whatever their
educational level, young people- become
increasingly reluctant to accept author-
report submitted to the United Kingdom
Government in 1959 drew attention to "the
abrupt transition from school to work" and
stated that "now that the school leaving
age is 15, a good many people have doubts
whether school conditions should not be
brought for everybody a little' nearer to
working conditions... There is a duty to
these older pupils, who are already half
independent in their activities and
behaviour, to assist them to fit into life as
it is generally lived by adults. Abundant
experiment will be necessary ; and,

Photo <© Marlborough Fine Arts, London
because this is a no man's land between
school and work, it is pretty certain that
some of the experiments which ought to be
tried will be difficult to carry out because
they will not easily be kept within the
bounds set by school regulations, trade
union rules, labour legislation and
insurance requirements..." However, it
was not until many years later that the
experiments recommended in the report
were started under the impulsion of
alarmingly high youth unemployment.
This criticism of the educational system
for being too academic mounted rapidly
during the mid-1970's and was accompa¬
nied by concern over an increasing lack of
basic literacy, numeracy and communi¬
cations skills.
What is being done to cut youth unem¬
ployment in the industrialized countries?
Most governments are adopting a multiple
approach involving innovations in edu¬
cation and training, employment subsidy
schemes and job creation programmes.
Spanish Horizon 1960,
a painting by the Spanish artist
Juan Genovés
Many governments are encouraging
sixteen-year-olds to stay on at school
rather than do nothing. This advice has
been heeded in Sweden where seventy-
two per cent stay on at school, and in the
Netherlands where many youngsters go in
for vocational subjects. Under a new
British scheme known as "link courses"
so far rather limited in application pu¬
pils in their last year of compulsory
schooling gain practical experience by
working in industry, commerce and the
public services. Before lending its support
to the scheme, however, the Trades Union
Congress insisted that work experience for
schoolchildren must among other things be
"an integral element in a properly planned
course of general education (and) comply
strictly with all the statutory restrictions
applying to the employment of children and
young persons".
In the Federal Republic of Germany a
year of basic vocational training is being
tried out in two Länder. Its purpose is to
prepare the pupil for entry into the world of
work, either entirely at school or in co¬
operation with an enterprise, by supple¬
menting general education with broad vo¬
cational subjects as a basis for subsequent
training. In Sweden much attention is
being paid to improving contacts between
school and working life, and in Canada,
Japan and the United States programmes
of alternate work and study have been in
existence for many years.
Since most governments consider train¬
ing to be one of the best ways of combat¬
ing youth unemployment, a number of
them have established programmes de¬
signed in particular to help young people
with poor educational records and little or
no work experience. These have generally
taken the form of subsidies to firms
providing training or of direct grants to
trainees.
In France a number of schemes have
been initiated including one which encou¬
rages employers to offer young people a
minimum of work experience through "em¬
ployment-training contracts" of from six to
twelve months' duration. The contracts
may be concluded by private or public in¬
dustrial, artisanal and commercial enter¬
prises. Employers' training costs are re¬
imbursed by the State through subsidies
of between thirty and one hundred per
cent of the minimum wage.
In the United Kingdom, in addition to a
number of short-term training programmes
and temporary work schemes, a work
experience programme has been launched
to provide school-leavers with six to twelve
months experience in factories, shops or
offices under close supervision. Simi¬
lar combined training and employment
schemes are in operation in the Nether¬
lands and in Australia.
Closely linked with these training
schemes are the employment subsidy
schemes adopted in a number of countries.
The Italian Government, for example, has
established a four-year regional employ¬
ment fund for Sardinia and is also offering
subsidies of 32,000 lire a month for each
worker aged between fifteen and twenty-
two hired at national minimum wage rates
for a combination of work and training.
France, the United Kingdom and Sweden
all have various forms of employment
subsidy schemes.
Another line of attack now widely adopt¬
ed is the institution of special job creation
programmes for groups experiencing spe¬
cial difficulty in finding jobs. The United
States and Canada were the leaders in this
field and the programmes usually serve
social rather than commercial ends.
The Canadian programme has been
based from the outset on involvement of
local groups and communities in the
creation of new jobs. The underlying aim is
to combat seasonal unemployment, a par¬
ticularly serious problem in a country that
experiences such hard winters. What is
unusual about the programme is that ideas
for projects can be submitted by anyone-
individuals, groups, municipalities or
corporations. The projects must be
designed for community betterment, not
for profit, and the jobs must be filled by
unemployed people. There is no age limit,
but about forty per cent of all participants |
have been under twenty-five years of age. |

In the 23 richest
countries in the world,
4 out of
every 10 unemployed
persons are under 25
Apart from being economically wasteful,
unemployment is felt as rejection and
discrimination and is therefore socially
damaging, especially to young people.
Most of the measures taken so far have
been of a short-term nature whereas the
problem itself is a long-term one which
calls for new and imaginative approaches
affecting the educational and training
system as well as the labour market. This
will require a determined joint effort on the
part of governments, educational and
employment authorities, employers, trade
unions, voluntary bodies and the public at
large.
Peter Melvyn
A job creation scheme modelled on the
Canadian programme but aimed exclu¬
sively at young people has been initiated in
the United Kingdom. As with the Canadian
scheme the goal is to provide short-term
jobs of social value, including community
tasks which would not otherwise be under¬
taken. Several other countries have taken
similar initiatives. In Denmark public works
programmes for young people have been
launched by the municipal authorities with
government funding. Since 1975 the Ne¬
therlands Government has been providing
temporary subsidies to public bodies and
non profit-making institutions for work
projects that are socially useful and do not
compete with normal economic activities.
The Netherlands is also experimenting with
an original scheme whereby two young
people share one job, one wage and one
full unemployment benefit.
If the various training and employment
creation measures mentioned above seem
in many cases to lack continuity and co¬
ordination, it should not be forgotten that
they were nearly always adopted under the
considerable pressure of a rapidly deterio¬
rating employment situation. That govern¬
ments are learning from experience is
shown by their continuing quest for new
and more comprehensive approaches, par¬
ticularly as regards long-term action to
meet educational and training needs and to
achieve better articulation between the
educational system and the labour market.
Most of these new moves are still in the
planning stage and are the subject of public
discussion and controversy.
Although it is hard to predict what the
future will bring, the unemployed young in
the Western industrialized countries face
the prospect of frequent joblessness, long
job search and marginal employment.
While youth unemployment is part of
general unemployment, the proportion of
young people out of work remains sub¬
stantially higher than that of other workers.
The reasons for this are partly cyclical but
also to a significant extent partly structural.
The high level of employment of the post¬
war years tended to conceal occupational
and technological change. Increasingly
jobs are lost through capital investment in
equipment; fewer new jobs are created and
these often demand skills that many young
people cannot offer. The recession has laid
bare the gap between the school and the
world of work.
8
