A challenge
for the
universities
Sketch for a poster for
the 7th Film Festival
on Human Rights,
held in Strasbourg
(France) in 1978.
by Thomas Buergenthal
MANKIND'S profound yearning
for human rights and human dig¬
nity is a reality of contemporary
international life of major significance. And
this hope for a more humane life and world
is not limited to a few nations or peoples; it
is universal in character.
The ever-increasing legal and political
influence of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights is evidence of this pheno¬
menon. Further proof is provided by the
growing number of human rights treaties
based on the Declaration and the inability
of governments to oppose the establish¬
ment of international institutions designed
to promote and protect human rights. Edu¬
cators who fail to recognize and act on the
pedagogic implications of these develop¬
ments neglect one of the principal moral
and political forces shaping the aspirations
and policies of our era.
If education is to provide the intellectual
basis for understanding and resolving
important contemporary societal problems,
education at all levels will have to deal with
and teach about human rights. Article 26 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
gives expression to this proposition when it
declares that "education shall be directed
to the full development of the human per¬
sonality and to the strengthening of res¬
pect for human rights and fundamental k
freedoms". f
THOMAS BUERGENTHAL is professor of
international law at the Scool ofLaw of the Uni¬
versity of Texas and chairman of the Human
Rights Committee of the U. S. National Commis¬
sion for Unesco. An editor of the American
Journal of International Law and of the Revue
des Droits de l'Homme:' Human Rights Journal
he has written widely on international law and
human rights subjects. He is the co-author of
International Protection of Human Rights
(1973), the basic U.S. university textbook on
this subject and International Human Rights and
International Education (1976), a source-book
for school teachers and administrators.
Drawing Luis Pascal, Portugal © International Institute of Human Rights, Strasbourg, France
25

, This injunction is forcefully reiterated in
the educational guidelines proclaimed in
Unesco's principal pronouncement on the
subject the 1974 Recommendation con¬
cerning Education for International Under¬
standing, Co-operation and Peace and
Education relating to Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms. The Recommend¬
ation makes learning and teaching about
human rights one of the basic components
of education for international under¬
standing.
In the universities, human rights subjects
can be taught within the framework of
many disciplines. This is certainly true of
medicine, history, philosophy, education,
sociology, political science, law, as well as
the physical and biological sciences. It is
also true of literature, the arts and econo¬
mics. The effect of technological advances
on the enjoyment of human rights, for
example, is a subject which scientists, en¬
gineers and architects need to address.
Faculties of medicine should explore the
human rights issues posed by the delivery
and cost of health care, genetic and drug
experiments, organ transplants, and the
employment of psychiatry and other bran¬
ches of medicine to further non-medical
objectives. (See article page 29).
Our knowledge of the forces and
causes that lead to torture, genocide, racial
and religious discrimination, poverty and
starvation has thus far proved inadequate
to prevent or eradicate these evils. Solu¬
tions to these problems need to be sought
by historians, sociologists, psychologists,
economists, political scientists and
lawyers. Philosophers and theologians and
the works of poets and artists can provide
valuable insights into the universal support
for certain basic human rights concepts;
this is a topic that social science research
has thus far largely neglected. Research
directed towards solving serious human
rights problems can be stimulated by
university-level teaching about human
rights.
F particular impor¬
tance, moreover, is the teaching of human
rights in education faculties and teacher-
training institutions. Unless future teachers
have an understanding of basic human
rights principles, problems and proposed
solutions, the primary and secondary
schools will not be able to do what the Uni¬
versal Declaration demands of them: to
contribute, through education, "to the
strengthening of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms". The many
large-scale violations of human rights that
continue to occur in all parts of the world
serve as a sad and constant reminder that
education to strengthen human rights and
fundamental freedoms is itself in need of
significant strengthening.
In the three decades that have elapsed
since the United Nations adopted the Uni¬
versal Declaration of Human Rights, the
international community has created a
normative and institutional framework
designed to implement the principles of
the Declaration. Today the international
human rights code comprises, in addition
to the U.N. Charter and the Declaration,
the two United Nations covenants on
human rights, which deal with civil and
political rights as well as with economic,
social and cultural rights; the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination; and the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide.
HESE documents are
supplemented by the Unesco Convention
Against Discrimination in Education, the
International Labour Organisation (ILO)
treaties relating to discrimination in
employment and related rights, the interna¬
tional agreements to safeguard the rights
of women, the conventions dealing with
refugees and stateless persons, as well as
the treaties outlawing all forms of slavery
and the slave trade. The more recent Con¬
vention on the Suppression and Punish¬
ment of the Crime ofApartheid should also
be included in this list. The same is true of
the various humanitarian law treaties, parti¬
cularly the four Geneva Conventions of
1949 relating to the protection of human
rights in times of war and armed conflict.
This international human rights code,
which requires governments to respect the
basic rights of all human beings under their
control, is in existence today only because
of the pressure of public opinion generated
by mankind's shared commitment to the
protection of human rights in all parts of
the world. But denials of human rights do
not end just because there are laws prohibi¬
ting them. Many governments continue to
commit serious violations of basic human
rights.
While international institutions cannot
stop all of these deprivations, they can pre¬
vent some. The covenant on civil and politi¬
cal rights and the racial convention each
establish special international supervisory
bodies to watch over compliance by
governments. Similar institutions have
been created by the ILO and Unesco. The
U.N. Commission of Human Rights has
now also developed procedures for the
investigation of large-scale denials of
human rights.
The most extensive experience with the
enforcement of human rights rules has
been accumulated thus far by some regio¬
nal institutions for the protection of human
rights, particularly those established within
the framework of the Council of Europe
and the Organization of American States.
The development of these norms and
institutions as well as the ways in which
they can prevent violations of human rights
are issues that need to be taught and stu¬
died in the universities of all nations. As a
subject of university study, "international
protection of human rights" has a great
intellectual appeal because it is a topic of
universal concern that cuts across major
ideological, political and cultural bound-'
aries. Its study can provide valuable insights
into the functioning of the international
system and the prospects for solving most
basic international as well as human pro¬
blems. That is why human rights education
is an ideal vehicle to infuse university insti¬
tutions with "an international dimension
and a global perspective" as urged by the
1974 Unesco Recommendation.
The specific subject matter of internatio¬
nal human rights courses will differ, to a
greater or lesser extent, from discipline to
discipline. An international law course dea¬
ling with this subject should emphasize the
transformation international law has under¬
gone and is undergoing in order to respond
to the human rights concerns of the inter¬
national community.
In such a course the students should
learn that prior to the Second World War
international law left States free, with some
minor exceptions, to treat their nationals as
they saw fit. One consequence of this doc¬
trine was that measures taken by a govern¬
ment against its own citizens, however bar¬
baric or oppressive, were deemed to fall
within that nation's domestic jurisdiction.
This meant that other governments lacked
a valid legal basis to complain formally
against such measures. Under pre-World
War II international law, the offending
governments thus enjoyed international
immunity to violate the rights of their own
people and were, on the whole, under no
obligation to account for this action to any
other country or international organization.
After exploring the disastrous conse¬
quences of the above-mentioned doctrine,
law students should study the effect of the
entry into force of the U.N. Charter, which
imposed human rights obligations on all
Member States. In this connexion, they
should also learn how the adoption of the
Universal Declaration, followed by other
international instruments, strengthened
these obligations.
Taken together, these documents have
internationalized the subject of human
rights by establishing international human
rights standards governing the manner in
which States may treat human beings,
whether their own nationals or not.
Governments engaging in large-scale viola¬
tions of the human rights proclaimed in
these instruments can today no longer
validly claim that these measures fall within
their domestic jurisdiction; other govern¬
ments and the international community as
a whole have a legitimate interest to insist
that these violations cease. Moreover,
various human rights treaties now in effect
outlaw specific violations of basic human
rights.
Law students should also learn about the
need for and development by the U.N., the
ILO and Unesco of institutions and proce- k
dures for dealing with violations of human f
26

A profusion of giant murals,
sponsored by community
organizations and groups and
painted by local amateurs as
well as professional artists, is
brightening the walls of New
York and turning the city's
streets into a vast open-air art
gallery. This huge, multi-ethnic
mural enlivens the once drab
intersection of Pitt Street and
Grand Street.
27

, rights. This will give them an opportunity
to assess the contribution made by the
U.N., the ILO and Unesco; it should also
enable them to explore the reasons why
these bodies have thus far not proved to be
very effective in putting an end to many
serious violations.
Students need also to be made aware
that there now exist a variety of non¬
governmental organizations engaged in the
promotion of human rights on the inter¬
national plane. Amnesty International
(London) is probably best known. But
there are others which do equally important
work. Among these are the International
Commission of Jurists (Geneva) and the
International League for Human Rights
(New York) as well as lesser known groups
sponsored by professional, religious and
labour organizations. A number of govern¬
ments have recently also established inter¬
national human rights departments in their
foreign ministries.
It is highly instructive, in this connexion,
to study the modus operandi of the inter¬
governmental and non-governmental Insti¬
tutions, and to examine the legal, political,
economic, social, and cultural obstacles
that they encounter. Such an inquiry
should lead, in turn, to a discussion of
other steps that might be taken to streng¬
then the institutional capacity of the inter¬
national community to deal with violations
of human rights.
But central to any meaningful teaching
of this subject is the "internationalization"
of human rights, which has brought with it
the "humanization" of international law.
Critical to the teaching of international
human rights is an understanding of the
legal and political significance of the fact
that- violations of fundamental human
rights, wherever they may occur, have
become a subject of legitimate concern to
the entire international community. Such
an approach allows an instructor to deal
with international human rights not only as
a legal abstraction, but as a subject having
legal, political, economic, social and cultu¬
ral implications for individual human beings
as well as for the entire human family.
Teaching about human rights and how
to assure that they are not violated can be
exciting and highly instructive for the stu¬
dent and the professor. It can also contri¬
bute to the wider observance of human
rights and, hopefully, to the eradication of
genocide, torture, discrimination and the
other deprivations that have caused untold
suffering to generation after generation.
University-level human rights education is
therefore a must in and for every country
that professes to believe in human dignity
and a better tomorrow for all mankind.
Thomas Buergenthal
Drawing by Jacques Gamelin (1738-1803) from Nouveau recueil d'ostèologie et myo/og/e dessiné d'après nature.
Photo © Snark International, Paris
28
