The employment crisis
in the Third World
1,060 million
new jobs needed
before the end
of the century
CHILD OF OUR TIMES. It has been estimated that migrant workers from the
Third World occupy some 12 million jobs in the industrialized countries with a
market economy and the oil-producing countries of the Middle East. About half
of them work in western Europe, where the main countries of immigration are
France and the Federal Republic of Germany. In Berlin (Fed. Rep. of Germany)
alone, migrant workers and their families number 3 million. Adjusting to life in a
new country poses difficult problems for the children. (Above, the son of a
migrant worker living in France) Unesco is actively promoting research to aid
migrant workers and their families to adapt to social conditions in the host
country, while at the same time preserving their cultural identity, and to help
them acquire knowledge and skills which will be useful if they decide to return
to their country of origin. Particular stress is laid on the need to provide
additional training for educators working in areas with a high proportion of
migrant workers.
F
employment and a reduction in
poverty and inequality are not auto¬
matic consequences of rapid natio¬
nal economic growth. This is the harsh les¬
son to be learnt from the experience of the
developing countries over the past three
decades.
During the 1960s, national income per
head of population grew exceptionally fast
by historical standards in most developing
countries. Indeed, throughout this period,
the rates of economic growth in the devel- ^
oping countries often exceeded those f
11

98.0
31.3 35.4 32.7
11.6
76.Í
7FFI
à
46.4
§ß
37.5
M
rf^
Algeria Botswana Ghana Ivory Coast Kenya Sudan Zambia India Korea Rep. of Kuwait Malaysia, W
Design © Fitnat, Paris. Based on a graph published in "The basic arithmetic of youth employment", ILO, Geneva
There is no single answer
to the employment problem
in developing countries,
where there are not only
high rates of
unemployment and
underemployment (working
short hours and wanting
more work) but too many
of those in jobs earn
incomes inadequate for
meeting even their basic
needs. In Asia alone an
estimated 180 million new
jobs must be created by the
end of this decade. Left,
these Indian students in the
examination room will soon
face another test the
search for a job
commensurate with their
qualifications and abilities.
achieved by the industrialized countries
when they were going through their
development phase.
Unfortunately, economic growth in the
developing countries has tended recently
to be concentrated in relatively limited,
capital-intensive sectors of the economy
rather than in the traditional rural sector or
the less organized urban sector which bet¬
ween them account for by far the greater
part of total employment. As a result, the
benefits of growth, and in particular
increased employment opportunities.
have mainly gone to a very small part of the
total population.
Several factors have contributed to this
uneven development. Production structure
and wealth distribution patterns in the
developing countries are often a legacy of
colonial or other alien regimes, and the
continued application of foreign patterns
has often led to the perpetuation of inap¬
propriate systems in such fields as educa¬
tion and health. Government policies have
frequently been ill-adapted to the circum¬
stances of an independent nation in which
the reduction of poverty ought to be the
major objective of economic policy.
Even since independence inappropriate
institutions and policies have continued to
lead to a poor allocation of investment
resources, the selection of economically
inefficient methods of production in rela¬
tion to resources available, the under-
utilization of labour, capital and land, and
an increasing concentration of income and
wealth. Very high and sustained rates of
population growth have aggravated these
problems. These interlocking factors have
12

98.0
75.5
$
41.1
V? 13.2 Y/ 15.5
27.9
95.8 98-°
Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Thailand Brazil Chile Costa Rica Guatemala Mexico Panama Peru Venezuela
Total modern sector vacancies as
a percentage or the age cohort.
Completing primary school and
higher as a percentage of the age
cohort. 1 The balance.
Higher qualificationsa ticket to nowhere?
The phenomenon of "educated unemployment" is not
confined to the industrialized countries. Only 10 to 15
years ago in many developing countries almost everyone
who completed 6 or 7 years of educationat a time when
only 10 to 15 per cent of the age group did socould be
fairly sure of a non-manual, modern-sector job.
Modern-sector jobs may be defined roughly as jobs which
(as distinct from traditional, self-employed, rural and
artisan occupations) provide security and a predictable,
regular, higher than average income, comfortable, modern
working conditions and social status.
Hardly anywhere can one now get such a job with less
than 9 or 10 years of education and a secondary
certificate. In parts of south Asia college graduates
compete unsuccessfully for routine clerical jobs with no
great prospects.
If there are too many certificated young job-seekers
chasing too few modern-sector jobs, and if the imbalance
is likely to grow rather than diminish, what are the
prospects for the future?
The diagram above is based on figures presented in The
Basic Arithmetic of Youth Employment, a publication of
the ILO World Employment Programme. Assuming a
rather conservative rate of growth of 2 per cent in
modern-sector employment opportunities, it portrays
graphically the likely employment situation in 1980 for
those whose education encourages them to aspire to jobs
in the modern sector. It underlines the seriousness of the
situation and the urgency of the task facing educational
planners in the developing countries.
For each of the countries shown on the diagram the first
column shows the total projected vacancies in the modern
sector in 1980 as a percentage of young people coming on
to the labour market; the second column shows the
percentage of these young people who will have
completed primary and higher education; the third column
shows the balance. Thus in the case of Algeria, for
example, out of 100 young people coming on to the labour
market in 1980, 46 will have completed at least primary
and/or higher education and will become available for jobs
in the modern sector of the labour market. However, of
these 46 only 7.5 will find a job in the modern sector, so
that 38.5 have no hope of finding a job in this sector.
combined to keep vast numbers of people
in abject poverty, deprived of any share of
the benefits of the increase in total output.
By the end of the 1960s it was clear that
in most developing countries following
conventional patterns, growth was not
leading to a reduction of poverty. On the
contrary, the numbers of the very poor
were rising, the degree of inequality was
only rarely diminishing and the employ¬
ment problem remained largely un¬
resolved.
Open unemployment in developing
countries can be measured fairly accura¬
tely. It frequently reflects, to a greater
extent than in the industrialized countries,
more the problem of young dependents
seeking employment than that of experien¬
ced workers losing their jobs. Despite very
high rates of open unemployment for some
areas and some age-groups, and much
higher rates in urban than in rural areas,
it is not generally a large fraction of the
total labour force. The unemployed in
many developing countries are dispro¬
portionately concentrated among young
people, first-time job-seekers, women and
the relatively better educated.
Other dimensions of the employment
problem in the developing countries are of
much greater importance. Seasonal unem¬
ployment is often extreme and under¬
employment (working short hours and
wanting more work) is widespread. But
the most widespread and critical phenom¬
enon is simply that work of various kinds
(especially self-employment) yields an
income inadequate for the working poor to
meet their basic needs.
13

In the developing world the number of new jobs which can be
created in the modern sector of the economy is extremely
limited. In many developing countries the maximum number of
new modern-sector jobs which can be expected even at the most
optimistic rates of growth would not provide for more than 20 or
30 per cent of the young people coming on to the labour market.
Photo Roland Michaud © Rapho, Pans
In countries without unemployment
compensation, those in the most desperate
need (particularly heads of households
with dependents) can spend little time
looking for the kind of work they prefer.
They must find something even if it yields
only a pittance. Thus heads of households
are more likely to be found among the ina¬
dequately employed or underemployed, for
example in precarious low-productivity
self-employment, than among the unem¬
ployed.
I HE crux of the employ¬
ment problem in the developing world thus
lies in the high proportion of the labour
force earning inadequate incomes. The
proportion of the labour force classified as
underemployed is approximately the same
as the proportion of the population classi¬
fied as "destitute". Thus, problems of
employment and poverty are inseparable
and the magnitude of the total poverty
problem is regularly understated.
The labour force of the developing coun¬
tries with market economies is now estim¬
ated to be around 700 million. About 5 per
cent of this labour force is openly unem¬
ployed and a further 36 per cent is under¬
employed, the proportion being lower in
urban and higher in rural areas. Of the total
of unemployed and underemployed, about
80 per cent are to be found in rural areas.
The growth of the labour force in the
developing countries with market econo¬
mies has accelerated in recent years and it
is likely that the acceleration will continue
for some time after the overall rate of popu¬
lation growth has finally begun to slow
down. United Nations estimates (which
assume quite substantial reductions in fer¬
tility rates) suggest that between 1975 and
the year 2000 the labour force of all the
developing countries (including China) will
rise by some 75 per cent.
In the developed countries the agricultu¬
ral labour force has long been decreasing
not only as a proportion of the total labour
force but also in absolute terms, whereas in
the developing countries it continues to
14

increase in absolute terms. This state of
affairs is likely to continue in the developing
countries as a whole until the beginning of
the second decade of the next century,
even if non-agricultural employment were
to expand much more rapidly. Thus agri¬
culture, in addition to absorbing a substan¬
tial backlog of underemployment, will have
to continue to provide employment for new
entrants to the labour force for a long time
to come if rural-urban migration is to be
slowed to a rate commensurate with the
creation of non-agricultural jobs.
That the incomes of so many of the
working poor are inadequate does not
mean that, like the unemployed, their
labour is totally unused. Some of them are
no doubt very fully occupied. However,
they are available for more productive and
better paid work when it becomes availa¬
ble. How can full use be made of these
labour resources so that the working poor
can meet their basic needs?
There are still many areas where factual
knowledge is far from complete. More
information is needed on the relation of
unemployment and underemployment to
poverty. What are the employment charac¬
teristics of the poor? Are they available for
rural works programmes? Would they
migrate to seek work or do they find secu¬
rity in their home villages? How many of
the poor are sick or old? Without such
knowledge it is impossible to tell what kind
of government programmes are needed to
reduce poverty.
From nearly every point of view, inade¬
quate employment in the traditional rural
and informal urban sectors is usually more
critical than open unemployment in the
developing countries. Creating the condi¬
tions where the former disappears will
make it very much easier to deal with the
latter. Measures aimed solely at reducing
open unemployment, on the other hand,
will worsen the basic problems of under¬
employment and poverty. Either additional
waves of seekers of jobs in the modern sec¬
tors will appear, or even more resources
will be used for the interests of the few and
thereby perpetuate the poverty of the
many.
This article and the box, right, are
based on studies which appeared in
the ILO report Employment and
Basic Needs, A One-World Problem.


