nPH» 1 1 « te
W. . ! . te ; J
J
;7yvOfWVYYaYrW^y^ *w^WV^Wf^Vh,yvyywrTfyWvwwwWWW*1^
":
1
I
iwvVWVVV/yvvvVVVm> yVVVVWVVVY^VV^VVVVVVW1/ v^YyVYVVYTVYtW' VWí V VVYVW YVVVWWlW"WiWfflV]
nrWWIWym'vVw^
i '
'
«ívvvvvvVyYWWVVYYW
i
"l'vifrl'ri*.
|wv/yvvfTyVïWtY^'v^^
i < ' . '
^<nww\vyvvtyvww\f^^ ' ivifUt¡ihWi'imi'vlW¡
... CÜ
KAZDY IZIEN OSWIE¡UMIA
PuCrilASIAt J370 OSÔB. ITÔRrCH IIC7SI MfYOMAtOMO PUAY2ll.NAKt.A0 W ILOiCI <64l CCCITCK C I OiYIADA ILÜÍO UNI TRWANIA OiOZU
. YíCH'OI.Al 4 MILIONV orriR
The caption to this poster by the Polish artist Jerzy Skapski reads: "Every day at Auschwitz brought death to
2,370 people, and this is the number of figures represented above. The concentration camp at Auschwitz was in
existence for 1,688 days and this is the exact number of copies of this poster printed. Altogether some four
million people died at the camp." In a letter to the Unesco Courier, Jerzy Skapski wrote: "When I had finished
painting this poster I was afraid to put my name on itwhat meaning have names in comparison with people's lives?"
22

The right
to be
informed
by Adam Lopatka
NEW human rights emerge as part of
a historical process rooted in deve¬
loping political, economic and cul¬
tural relations.
There are usually three distinct stages in
this process. Firstly, the idea of a new
human right is formulated and gives rise to
the conviction that it should be recognized.
Then, if this conviction becomes suffi¬
ciently strong and widespread, the right is
proclaimed by individual States, in docu¬
ments which apply to them alone, and is
later set forth in an international declara¬
tion. Both the documents and the declara¬
tion define the new right and affirm that ¡t
should be respected, but they do not make
It binding in national or international law.
Finally the new right is incorporated in
the constitutions of individual States as a
civil right, and an International convention
makes it binding under international law, at
least for those States which ratify the con¬
vention.
One example of this process is the right
to work and to social security. Born out of
men's aspirations towards equality, it won
recognition through the pressure of socia¬
list revolutions and was proclaimed in 1917.
Then, after long deliberation at the interna¬
tional level, it was incorporated in the Inter¬
national Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights of 1966.
A similar train of events probably led to
the acceptance of the right to freedom of
religion, which can be traced back as far as
the Treaties of Westphalia of 1648, which
brought to a close the Thirty Years' War
and founded a new European order. The
treaties Included articles on religion which
confirmed the halt to the , Counter-
ADAM LOPATKA, Polish jurist, is director of
the Institute of State and Law of the Polish A ca-
demy of Sciences, Warsaw. He was Director of
the Institute ofPolitical Sciences at Poznan Uni¬
versity from 1967 to 1974.
Reformation in Germany and saved Ger¬
man Protestantism from destruction by re¬
affirming the 1555 Peace of Augsburg
(except for those articles which compelled
citizens to adopt the religion of their
prince).
. . The existence of the right of everyone to
be informed about human rights was rec¬
ognized for the first time in a major inter¬
national document when it was in¬
cluded in the Final Act of the Conference
on Security and Co-operation in Europe.
This Act, signed in Helsinki on 1 July 1975,
lists ten principles governing the relations
among the States taking part in the Confe¬
rence. As its seventh principle, the Act lays
down the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including freedom
of thought, of conscience, of religion or
conviction. The Final Act declares that the
signatory States will in all cases respect
these rights and freedoms in their mutual
relations and will strive jointly, separately
and in co-operation with the United
Nations, to promote universal and effective
respect for these rights and liberties.
The Final Act then declares that the
States participating in the Conference
"confirm the right of the individual to know
and act upon his rights and duties in this
field".
The signatory States have thus pro¬
claimed the existence of this human right at
the international and regional level and
have assumed responsibility for making the
efforts necessary to ensure that it is gen¬
erally respected. They did not, however,
transform this right into a norm of interna¬
tional law, since the Final Act of the Con¬
ference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe does not constitute a multilateral
treaty from the point of view of inter¬
national law: it constitutes a 'multilateral
declaration including moral and political
obligations.
.To further reinforce the legal status of w
the right to be informed about human r
23

> rights as a distinct human right, it would be
necessary to proclaim it without delay by a
declaration of the necessary standing, such
as a resolution of the United Nations Gen¬
eral Assembly or of Unesco's General Con¬
ference. It would thus be universally pro¬
claimed as a new and distinct human right.
Such a proclamation by the United
Nations or Unesco on a universal level
might encourage Member States of these
organizations to add this right to the
human rights in their own constitutions
and to act in accordance with it. Later, the
right could be incorporated in an internatio¬
nal convention and thus become a norm of
international law, in other words, attain the
highest legal status.
However, the right to be informed about
human rights canand should be seen
from another standpoint. For does it not
constitute the application of a more general
right, the right of everyone to hold opinions
without interference?
This right is set forth in the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
which was approved by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on 16
December 1966 and came into force on 23
March 1976. As of 20 September 1978 it
had been ratified by 50 States. This right
constitutes a binding norm of international
law for all the contracting States.
The other States are bound to respect
this right and ensure its general and effec¬
tive recognition, in accordance with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
approved by the General Assembly on 10
December 1948. Article 19 of the Declara¬
tion lays down that everyone has the right
to freedom of opinion and expression. This
right, which Includes the freedom to hold
opinions without interference and to seek,
receive and impart information and ideas
through any media and regardless of fron¬
tiers, also implies the human right of
everyone to know his rights.
Article 19 of the Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights also spells out that the right,
to freedom of opinion and expression in¬
cludes the freedom of any person to seek,
receive and impart information and ideas of
all kinds, either orally, in writing or in print,
in the form of art, or through any other
media of his choice.
The same Article states that the exercise
of this right carries with it special duties
and responsibilities and may therefore be
subject to certain restrictions provided by
law with the aim of ensuring the respect of
the rights or reputations of other persons,
the protection of national security, public
order or of public health or morals. It would
appear that these restrictions need not, and
should not, apply to the particular aspect
of freedom of opinion constituted by the
right to be informed about human rights. In
fact, taking cognizance of these human
rights cannot endanger other people's
rights or reputation, not to mention natio¬
nal security, public order, health or morals.
The status of this right will be reinforced
as and when an increasing number of
States ratify the Covenant on Civil and Poli¬
tical Rights and as other States display
more respect for the right. In many coun¬
tries this right already has the force of law,
and is sometimes even enshrined in the
constitution. The constitutions of many
States guarantee their citizens the right to
freedom of expression and opinion which,
without doubt, includes the right of the
citizens to know about their human rights.
The constitutions of some countries, for
example that of the Federal Socialist Repu¬
blic of Yugoslavia, proclaim the right of the
citizen to be informed of events in the
country and in the world which are of con¬
cern to his life and work as well as ques¬
tions concerning community life. The
Yugoslav constitution imposes the obliga¬
tion on the press, radio, television and
other public means of information and
communication, to inform public opinion in
a truthful and objective manner and to
publish opinions and information from
organizations and citizens of concern to
public opinion.
There can be no doubt that this obliga¬
tion to inform the public also concerns the
human rights which Yugoslav citizens
enjoy.
HE individual undoubt¬
edly has the right to know all the human
rights contained in the constitution of his
country. He certainly has the right to know
all the human rights which concern him
because they figure in a convention his
country has ratified. He also has the right
to know the human rights proclaimed by
the General Assembly of the United
Nations and the highest organs of the U.N.
specialized agencies. This applies notably
to rights proclaimed as universal "human
rights" whether or not they are defined in
his State's legislation or Included In inter¬
national conventions binding on it. This
has particular importance when a govern¬
ment denies its citizens certain rights and
fundamental freedoms.
In my view, the right to be informed
about human rights is less imperative when
it concerns rights which are only beginning
to make their appearance in the social
conscience, such as the right to develop¬
ment and certain rights proclaimed in regio¬
nal agreements and which concern only the
region in question, such as the right to
diplomatic asylum in the American conti¬
nent.
In speaking thus of human rights, I refer
to civil and political rights as much as to
economic, social and cultural rights. Those
rights which have been called the "rights of
solidarity" could be applied in this domain
if the international community decides to
proclaim them as human rights. The right
to be informed on human rights certainly
includes not only individual rights but also
so-called collective rights such as the right
of each people to self-determination and to
dispose freely of its wealth or natural
resources without infringing any obliga¬
tions arising from international economic
co-operation. These rights are established
by the two United Nations Covenants on
human rights.
However, a fundamental question arises:
does the right of the individual to be in-
i formed about human rights only concern
his rights or does it also include his
duties or at least the most basic ones?
Examples of such duties include the duty of
obedience to the law, of service to the
community and the nation and the duty of
children to help their parents and vice-
versa.
The answer is that the right to be in¬
formed about human rights does include
basic civic duties. Although these are not
explicitly mentioned in the international
instruments and are thus not specifically
included in the right to be informed, the
constitutions of many States, including all
the socialist countries, re-affirm the funda¬
mental duties of the citizens as well as their
rights. These constitutions are based on
the principle that there is close inter¬
dependence between citizens' rights and
their duties, while the Final Act of the Con¬
ference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe clearly declares that the members
of the Conference confirm the human right,
to be informed of rights and duties.
The right to be informed of rights and
duties can be exercised in different ways. It
is, first of all, the duty of the State not to
prevent citizens from enjoying this right. In
reality, the application of this civic right
imposes concrete obligations on a State,
which must in its official gazette or journal
publish the texts of certain laws and inter¬
national treaties on human rights to which
it is a contracting party. It is also obliged to
agree to the publication of other texts con¬
taining information on human rights that it
has ratified or accepted.
The State should also accept that there
should be radio and television program¬
mes, books and scientific articles dealing
with human rights and citizens' rights. Fur¬
thermore, it should authorize the activities
of political parties and various social orga¬
nizations whose activities include inform-
ting the public about all or some of these
human rights. It is equally Important that
the State should allow the circulation on its
territory of information on human rights
published by universal international institu¬
tions such as the United Nations, Unesco,
or the International Labour Organisation
and by others, such as regional organiza¬
tions to which the State concerned
belongs.
Finally, it should be pointed out that
there are no special guarantees to ensure
the respect of the right to be informed
about human rights. This right enjoys the
same guarantees as all the other human
rights. The most that can be said is that it is
easier to observe than some others, thanks
to the advanced development of the mass
media in the modern world.
Adam Lopatka
24
