
by John Marrett
ACTS of unlawful interference today
pose a serious threat to civil avia¬
tion. Like other major forms of
transportation in the past, aviation has in
recent years become a target for criminal
acts. The media usually describe this new
form of crime as "hijacking" or "air
piracy", using terms which evoke similar
offences on land and on the high seas.
All states must deal inexorably with
crime, and to protect their national inte¬
rests must take steps to combat these acts
of unlawful interference.
The President of the Council of ICAO, Dr
Assad Kotaite, drew attention to this issue
on 15 September 1977 during his address
to the 22nd session of the ICAO Assembly:
"Unfortunately, acts of unlawful inter¬
ference with international civil aviation and
its facilities continue to have a serious
adverse effect on the safety, regularity and
efficiency of international air transport. It is
imperative that all states take measures to
safeguard international civil air transport.
"The number of parties to the three
ConventionsTokyo (1963), The Hague
(1970) and Montreal (1971) is steadily
increasing. Our aim at ICAO is to achieve
universal acceptance of these instruments
and their full application to prevent the
occurrence of any acts endangering the
safety of international civil aviation."
The international community has expres¬
sed its concern about this form of crime
through a number of resolutions of the
United Nations, the most recent of which
,was adopted on 3 November 1977, and
through resolutions adopted by other inter¬
national organizations.
The Aviation Security Programme spon¬
sored by ICAO was drawn up in response
to this concern. It may be divided into two
complementary parts, legal and technical.
Three conventions dealing with the legal
aspects of the problem have been adopted
so far.
The Tokyo Convention, adopted as early
as 1963, was the first concrete action by
JOHN MARRETT of Jamaica joined the Inter¬
national Civil Aviation Organization in 1970 to
prepare its Security Manual and is now the
Organization's Aviation Security Officer.


World
against
the international community to draw up
legislation on the unlawful seizure of air¬
craft. It deals with offences, committed on
board aircraft registered in a Contracting
State while that aircraft is in flight.- At pre¬
sent, 88 states are parties to the Tokyo
Convention.
The Convention of The Hague, signed
on 16 December 1970, defines the act of
unlawful seizure of an aircraft. It contains
detailed provisions on states' jurisdiction
over an offence, on taking offenders into
custody, and on questions of prosecution
and extradition. The Convention has so far
been ratified by 79 states.
A year later, in September 1971, another
conference convened at Montreal under
the auspices of ICAO adopted a Conven¬
tion for the "suppression of unlawful acts
against the safety of civil aviation." The
Montreal Convention defines a wide spec¬
trum of unlawful acts and is concerned,
: broadly speaking, with acts of sabotage.
The Contracting States have undertaken to
make these offences punishable by severe
penalties. So far, 75 states have become
parties to this Convention.
On the technical side, the primary goal of
the ICAO aviation security programme is
the prevention of unlawful acts, but it also
deals extensively with measures to be
taken if preventive action fails. To help
states implement their own security pro¬
grammes, ICAO convenes informal regio¬
nal seminars, and in 1971 published a
manual on aviation security. The manual,
which provides detailed procedures and
guidance, is kept up to date by regularly
issued amendments.
Some states that have requested more
detailed technical assistance have been
provided with the services of an itinerant
aviation security expert. Funds have been
provided for this by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).
Other aviation security programmes have
been developed by such international orga¬
nizations as the International Criminal
Police Organization (IPCO-lnterpol); the
Universal Postal Union (UPU); the Interna¬
tional Air Transport Association (IATA);
the Airport Association Co-ordinating
Council (AACC); and the International
Federation of Air Line Pilots' Associations
(IFALPA).
The travelling public may therefore be
assured that the resources of the entire
world community have been and still are
being mobilized to promote the safe,
orderly and efficient development and use
of civil aviation in the interests of all the
peoples of the world.
22

alert
hijacking
k ^ A decade
^^^^^ seizures: 483
k ^
of violence
J
^^^^ deaths: 1,137
i^^^^sabotage (threats): 18,411 j
injuries: 829
M persons detained: 31,84b ^j
^^^_îicts of sabotage: 145 ^
Record of almost ten years of violence (Jan. 1969 to Feb. 1978) to
passengers and crews of civil aircraft is shown here. The figures in this
diagram were compiled by the International Civil Aviation Organization
from news reports and other sources but they have no official status.
According to the same sources, such illegal acts affected no less than
41 airlines and 49 different countries in 1977 alone.
23
