Flying
for thrills
by Oleg K. Antonov
In photo below the famous Soviet
engineer Oleg Antonov shows
models of aircraft he designed to
his son Andrei. Right, Antonov's
biggest cargo plane, an 80-tonne
AN-22, on a runway at Medvezji,
site of the richest natural gas
deposits in the Soviet Far North.
Several types of Soviet aircraft
flying with internal and
international airlines bear the
markings "A N", indicating that
they were designed by Oleg
Konstantinovich Antonov, the
noted Soviet aeronautical
engineer. The designer and
constructor of aircraft ranging
from small Red Cross planes to a
big 80-tonne transport, Antonov is
a Member of the Ukrainian
Academy of Sciences, a Hero of
Soviet Labour, and a Lenin Prize¬
winner. Since 1946 he has been
head of a major U.S.S.R.
Aeronautical Research and
Development Bureau. In the
following text, an extract from
his memoirs Ten Times Over
("Desiat' raz snachala"), he looks
back to the year 1932 when he
was beginning his career as a
glider constructor.
Photo © APN, Moscow
Text © Copyright
Reproduction prohibited
I am sitting in the cockpit at the controls
of my glider, my beloved brain-child,
as it lurches forward, throbbing and
humming under the quivering tension of
the shock-cord a rubber-stranded rope
stretched out by the ground crew to launch
the aircraft. Everything has been thought
through, everything calculated. Every pin,
every bolt has been driven in place to func¬
tion properly; every rivet locked in the hole
made for it; every lever stamped, bent,
welded, and there you have it that re¬
markable and yet simple apparatus
the glider.
So simple, in fact, that in medieval Rus¬
sia and in ancient Greece and even earlier,
in ancient India, craftsmen and materials
could have been found to build a glider
capable of flying hundreds of kilometres
and soaring for hours aloft. But there was
just one little thing missing the know-
how.
It would take man two or three thousand
years to solve an apparently simple prob¬
lem: fitting together pieces of wood, fabric
and a few metal elements to fashion what
goes nowadays by the unassuming name
of glider.
For a glider pilot there is no such thing as
an engine. He accustoms himself to the
discipline of gliding from the very first jerk
on the shock-cord.
The glider pilot has a golden rule which
he must never forget: "keep up speed."
There is no engine, no propeller thrust, so
forget about stepping on the gas and pull¬
ing the stick back to gain height. Keep
going, forward and down; forward and
down. If you lose concentration you lose
speed and down you go. A good glider will
go into a half-spin, or even a spin, and if
there's enough altitude, you'll come out of
it. But if there's not, say just 50 or 100
metres, you'd better not dawdle.
The minute you have an inkling you're
losing gliding speed, your hand automati¬
cally eases the stick. If you're flying in an
open cockpit, you feel the speed with your
whole being. With your face, with your
eyebrows, with your ears, from the slope
angle of the glider, from the pressure on
the stick, from the singing of the struts,
from the hissing of the air stream, from the
vibration of the cabin. Forward and down,
forward and down...
...But today the instructor is taking me
up in an engine-powered plane to do some
aerobatics in order to improve my skills.
The motor idles. The instructor and I
climb into the cabin. No parachutes. In
1932 parachute jumping was just getting
started as a popular sport. You flew
without a parachute in gliders, in small
aircraft, too. Why bother with a para¬
chute? Safety belts were also frowned
upon.
24

Photo I. Sapojnikov © TASS, Moscow
We climb into the cockpit. A short run,
and we're airborne.
Emerald tufts of trees, pale yellow
specks of scorched grass, quadrangles and
rectangles of sunlit fields flash past the
green wings of our biplane.
I do some vertical turns. The cowling of
the plane swings along the horizon. I'm
pressed back in my seat. A bay looms up,
then a lilac chain of cliffs, the steppe,
mountains, sea, steppe, mountains,
seaeverything is spinning in a sparkling
iridescent whirlwind. The ailerons yaw,
increasing the pull on the stick. I am hold¬
ing it with both hands.
We come out of the turn...
The plane, as obedient as a good-
natured bumpkin, shifts into level flight.
Altitude: 800 metres.
"Well, how about a loop now!" shouts
the instructor. "Let's dive!"
I ease the stick away from me, the
plane's nose dips more, and still more,
we're accelerating... 120, 140, 160 km. an
hour.
"Pull the stick back."
I do. I'm pressed hard back against my
seat. The plane's nose rises, the horizon
tears by us, disappearing below.
"Stick full back!" the instructor yells.
As we climb, the speed slackens, and
there we are, flying wheels up, upside-
down. The noise of the engine subsides as
the instructor throttles back. We dive, we
come out of it... From behind, the horizon
below, bathed in the light of the sea, pas¬
ses us by.
My companion opens the throttle.
Great!
"Again!"
"I do another Nestérov loop." (*).
"Now for a wing-over!"
Once again we gather speed. I come out
on the horizon, stick full back, with my left
foot pushing the rudder bar to the limit. I'm
forced back against my seat as we bank to
the left. The plane, rolling over, is travelling
wheels up. But here the irrepressible condi¬
tioned reflex of the glider pilot takes over.
My hand, responding to an involuntary
impulse, shifts the stick into neutral. I feel
myself coming away from my seat, and...
At that instant, the only part of the plane
that I am conscious of, the only thing that
connects me with the plane, is the twine-
wrapped end of the control stick. And at
that very instant, the stick springs back
against me. I'm thrust against my seat.
The instructor has yanked back his stick,
changing the curved-line flight trajectory
that I had broken and restoring the centri¬
fugal force that retrieved us and kept us in
our seats.
And not a moment too soon. Had his
attention wandered for a fraction of a
second, our submissive little biplane would
have dumped us and left us floating
through space with no parachutes, just a
few hundred metres above a craggy slope,
alone with our thoughts about how useful
safety belts can be.
Oleg K. Antonov
(*) Piotr N. Nestérov, Russian engineer and aviator'
(1887-1914), significantly improved the manoeuvrability
of aircraft. One of the pioneers of aerobatics, he excu-
ted a loop in 1913 subsequently known as the "Nesté¬
rov loop"
25
