Paintings magic
and mundane
Folk art with a wealth
of significance for everyday life
the least appreciated. Korean scholars
regarded painting as a scholarly hobby and
tended to look down on the professional
painters attached to the Tohwa-so, or
Office of Art, who were recruited from the
Chungin, or artisan class.
Conventionally, Korean painting has
been grouped into two major
categories pure painting and "functional"
painting. Yet although there is now no
such thing as a really pure, academic form
of painting, any more than there exists an
exclusively "functional" painting, this clas¬
sification still often dominates the thinking
of artists, art historians, connoisseurs and
art dealers. The traditional Confucian scho¬
lar's scorn of popular paintings that were
colourful and contained folk motifs was at
the basis of this idea that unsigned "func¬
tional" paintings were a low form of art.
"Functional" in this context has a very
wide sense. Among "functional" paintings
were included, for example, those brought
out in accordance with old Korean custom
for specific seasonal festivals, such as New
Year's Day, the first day of spring, and the
fifth day of the fifth month. Old records as
well as those paintings that remain indicate
that most of these paintings included lon¬
gevity symbols, happiness symbols and
by Zo Za-Yong
THE rediscovery and re-evaluation
of a great wealth of long-forgotten
Korean folk paintings has been
one of the most exciting cultural events of
the past decade. These popular works of
art, often treasured family heirlooms, have
remained hidden away in private houses
and it was not until some ten years ago that
they started to be collected and systemati¬
cally studied.
These newly-discovered treasures have
come to be classified rather ambiguously as
"folk painting", but only if we examine the
historical position of the artist in ancient
Korean society does this classification
begin to make sense.
Painting in Korea has always been
closely associated with Confucian scholar¬
ship. A good Confucian had to excel in
three different skills: poetry, calligraphy
and painting. Poetry was the most impor¬
tant skill, while calligraphy was valued as
an art form. Of the three skills painting was
The twelve thousand needle-point peaks of the Diamond Mountains, a
vast massif running downwards from the north central part of the
Korean peninsula to the east coast and one of the three sacred
mountain ranges of Korea, have inspired a great variety of landscape
paintings and drawings. Left, a sketch in which the peaks seem as
though carved from a piece of crystal encircled with a Chinese
ideogram. Below, this painting of the mountains where they reach the
sea could almost be a view of a modern seaside town. Opposite page,
detail from an 18th-century screen over ten metres long. The serried
ranks of pinnacles seem like a ghostly congregation of monks and
priests engaged in some mysterious sacred rite.
40

r. ..
f Ï ' \ f '
i' :
;
. i
l \
: Y '.. V /> . \ Il J
ï
> 7 J
J''
I.
7^( .OJÍ
/'A ; ft
í/VÍ/ ' Y,>
V/í

, guardian ¡mages to ward off evil spirits and
in this sense fulfilled a "useful", even
"magical" function.
Thus the old Confucian-oriented Korean
scholars classified virtually everything out¬
side the elitist areas of calligraphy and lit¬
erati or Zen painting, created for the intel¬
lectual diversion of the scholar class, as
folk painting. Yet a great deal of this paint¬
ing was not folk painting at all in the sense
that this term is used elsewhere in the
world, i.e. meaning a simple form of paint¬
ing executed by amateurs and with no refe¬
rence to the rules of any school of art.
Korean folk painting therefore, develo¬
ped as an art of an entire nation, of all clas¬
ses, directly related to a particular life style;
and although in many cases we have no
idea whatever of the individual names of
these painters, we are at least aware of the
type of people in each group. They ranged
from wandering craftsmen to court paint¬
ers, all of whom participated in this popular
art.
The first group consisted of painters
known as "passing guests", wanderers
who travelled from one village to another
producing domestic paintings at individual
households. Of course most of them were
naive peasant craftsmen, but some skilled
artists were found among them, usually
those who had failed to become court
painters.
The second group was made up of
painter-monks. Talented monks who recei¬
ved severe training from a master usually
became professional painters and engaged
in producing various Buddhist ritual paint¬
ings for temples. Those who failed to sur¬
vive the severe regimen often turned to the
life of wandering painter-monks, travelling
from one temple to another and earning
their living by painting murals for temple
walls.
The third group consisted of the court
painters. As far as social position is concer¬
ned, a court painter was the highest rank
obtainable in Korea for an artist. It is often
thought that the works of these men were
only in the classical style, but they were
also hired to decorate palaces and to pro¬
vide ornamental designs.
Folk paintings were to be found in the
royal court, Buddhist temples, Shaman
shrines, Klsaeng drinking houses, altars
and private houses. Some themes were
reserved exclusively for the court while
others were used only in temples, shrines
and upon altars. The remainder were used
by ordinary folk to decorate their homes
and to enrich everyday life.
In a Korean home certain works of art
can be installed permanently while others
are brought out only during certain seasons
or on special occasions. A few themes are
suitable anywhere within the house, but
others are intended to be placed in one par¬
ticular location in order to produce felici¬
tous results. For example, the door paint¬
ing of a tiger to repel evil belongs to the
front entrance, while a painting or print of a
dog is intended for a storage room door.
Screens with representations of flowers
and birds or babies belong to bedroom
walls.
Korean folk painting is often classified in
terms of its relationship to the concepts of
Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism or Sha¬
manism. This classification is valid when
there is a clear religious identification:
paintings on the theme of Buddha's Life
are Buddhist painting, and of the Taoist
Immortals are Taoist painting; illustrations
of Confucian teaching are Confucian paint¬
ing and of the Mountain Spirit are Shaman
painting. However, at times these religious
motifs are so complexly interwoven that it
becomes impossible to determine to which
specific religion each belongs. The end
result of this is a general impression that in
Korea there is Taoist Buddhism, Buddhistic
Shamanism and Taoistic Shamanism, and
that the thought behind religious ritual
painting is actually the Shamanistic folk
content of each religion rather than its aca¬
demic aspect.
Analysis of Korean domestic paintings
manifesting various symbols reveals a com¬
mon denominator which interlocks these
religious ideas tightly together. This com¬
mon denominator is an inborn desire for
long and happy life and protection against
evil spirits. Thus these works of art are no
more than the Korean expression of a uni¬
versal aspiration. Though there are a cer¬
tain number of paintings which may be
grouped as ethnographic, such ethnic
themes do not characterize Korean folk
painting as much as the universal themes.
A striking characteristic of this painting
is the extent of stylization, which leads to
abstract art, expressing man's dreams,
imagination, symbolism, love, humour,
satire and sense of fantasy. There is no
attempt at realism and there is a filling in of
space in contrast with the aesthetics of
open space typical of classic Oriental
painting.
The second aspect is animism, which is
positively expressed in all kinds of animal,
rock and tree paintings and which is really a
reflection of Shamanistic animism. A third
style, usually referred to as naive style, is
developed by a combination of abstraction
and animism which portrays a genuine,
childlike world where a man's heart is more
important than his name.
The whole range of these paintings deals
with the life of the masses, often in a most
unconventional and unorthodox manner.
Dating back to ancient Korea, some of
these paintings are serious and others are
frivolous; some deal with imaginary things
and others with real objects; some have
religious overtones; some of them were
done by expert hands such as those of pro¬
fessional court painters and others by utter
amateurs.
Whatever the subjects and whoever the
artists, there is one thing common to them
all they are uniquely Korean and insepa¬
rably attached to the actual lives of the
people of the time.
Zo Za-Yong
42

The imposing majesty of the mountains of
Korea gave rise to popular belief in the
existence of a Spirit of the Mountain.
Among the various ways In which artists
depicted the Spirit the most frequent was
in the guise of an amiable old gentleman
with his arm resting affectionately on his
friend the White Tiger, as in this 18th-
century painting on hemp.
Photo © Zo Za-Yong, Emilie Museum, Seoul
Cascading waterfalls have long been a
favourite theme in oriental art. The words
of the Chinese philosopher Lao-tzu:
"Water is the weakest and most gentle of
things, yet it overcomes the strongest and
the most resistant", seem to be
epitomized in paintings below in which
the power of the dragon, the Spirit of
Water, contrasts with the outward
tranquillity of flowing mountain rivers.
Photos © Zo Za-Yong, Emilie Museum, Seoul
43
