by Dragoljub Najman
Amajor international conference on
technical co-operation among de¬
veloping countries, to be held later
this year, promises to initiate a new phase
in the history of development policies. It is
being organized by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and will
take place in Buenos Aires from 30 August
to 12 September.
Not that the idea of exchange of skills
and know-how between developing coun¬
tries is altogether new. For many years
experts from countries such as India or
Peru have participated in development pro¬
grammes elsewhere in the Third World,
and a number of Third World countries
have welcomed trainees from neighbouring
states. Experience has shown that such
exchanges are beneficial, and should be
promoted more systematically. It should
also be borne in mind that any change of
direction in the flow of technical assistance
will, necessarily have a bearing on the
establishment of the new international
economic order.
In recent years, recipient states, donor
states, and the secretariats of international
organizations have been increasingly criti¬
cal of the manner in which the technical
assistance necessary for their development
has been provided to the less privileged
countries.
For the most part, such assistance has
been provided by countries of the northern
hemisphere for those of the south and. has
taken the form of a package of grants,
scholarships, equipment and specialist
advice. The ingredients of the package
have been the same although the propor¬
tions may have varied. This package was
supposedly equally valid for a basically agri¬
cultural African country, for an already par¬
tially urbanized and industrialized country,
or for a country rich in mineral resources.
The first conclusion to emerge from the
current reappraisal of technical assistance
programmes is that the old procedures all
too often encouraged recipient states to
base their actions on concepts and approa¬
ches that were alien to their economic and
social situation and cultural traditions.
This led almost invariably to excessive
costs, both in financial terms and in terms
of effort. There would often be a difficult
period of adjustment, and sometimes the
"transplant" would be rejected and the
whole process would fail.
Consequently, strong efforts are now
being made to turn away from such pre-



Technical
co-operation
among developing
countries
Photos Patrick Waeles - Unesco
Television aids development
Photos on these pages show schoolchildren and trainee teachers taking part in an
educational television project organized by the Ivory Coast in collaboration with Unesco.
Right, student teachers learn TV production techniques; above, an audiovisual class; top
right, a practical exercise in modern maths. As part of a growing trend towards the
exchange of skills within the developing world, many developing countries have
expressed interest in this project as the possible foundation of a system of technical co¬
operation in educational television.
DRAGOLJUB NAJMAN, Unesco's Assistant
Director-General for Co-operation for Develop¬
ment and External Relations, is the author of
L'Enseignement Supérieur, Pour quoi faire ?
("What's the purpose of higher education ?")
published by Fayard, Paris, In 1974.
conceived models and to initiate and
encourage a form of development based
essentially on the natural, technical and
intellectual resources of the recipient coun¬
tries. This concept of development as an
"endogenous" process rooted in the histo¬
rical evolution of nations obviously pre¬
cludes any form of autarky. However,
everything imported from outside is
selected, reappraised and adapted to the
environment into which it has to fit.
Many developing countries and in
some cases developing regions as
well have a great deal in common as
regards their human resources, their clima¬
tic conditions and some aspects of their
social structure. This makes it easier for a
given country to adapt for its own use
ideas and methods which have proved suc
cessful in other parts of the world where
general conditions are comparable.
In addition to these technical factors,
whose importance is now recognized,
there are considerations of a more political
nature. These cannot be ignored, since
they reflect the evolution in the approach
of the United Nations system as a whole
resulting from the decisions of the 6th and
7th Extraordinary Sessions of the General
Assembly, which defined the role the
various states and organizations should
play in the establishment of a new inter¬
national economic order.
This new. order might be said to repre¬
sent a break from the existing type of
North-South economic relationship,
whieh, under conditions which still prevail.
30

almost automatically favours countries
which possess capital, the most advanced
technology and the most highly developed
economic infrastructure and is detrimental
to those whose resources chiefly consist of
raw materials and cheap labour.
Although the most widely known aspect
of this break with the past remains a re¬
adjustment of the terms of trade aimed at
eliminating inequalities, it is also a fact that
increased trade can and must contribute to
the profound transformation of world eco¬
nomies which the notion of a new inter¬
national economic order implies.
Economic development can then be seen
more clearly in its twin role as both a bene¬
ficiary and an instigator of change : a bene¬
ficiary through the increasingly rapid accu¬
mulation of capital in the poorer countries,
which will be made possible by the intro¬
duction of more balanced North-South
trade; and an instigator through an
increase in the complexity and diversity of
trade-flows stemming from the rapid deve¬
lopment of many national economies, each
to buy and to sell on every
market.
Technical co-operation among deve¬
loping countries is thus seen as a corollary
of economic co-operation among these
same countries, which it carries over into
the field of technical and intellectual rela¬
tions. For some years now, this type of co¬
operation has formed part of the action of
Unesco, which, in all the spheres of its
competence, has sought to increase the
number of training, research, and cultural
centres at the regional level, and to
organize them into multidisciplinary and
interdependent networks. Such activities
are destined to play an even more impor¬
tant role in Unesco's work in the future.
The reason for emphasizing the multipli¬
city of flows is to bring out an important
aspect of technical co-operation seen in
this new light. This aspect is a natural
corollary of the tasks incumbent upon the
industrialized countries as part of the
establishment of a new international eco¬
nomic order, and underlines their conti¬
nuing importance. The fact is that the
development of co-operation among deve¬
loping countries will in no way relieve the
industrialized countries of the responsibili¬
ties entrusted to them by the international
community and which result from their
technological and economic predomi¬
nance.
The new international economic order
marks a step towards righting the scales of
justice, but it will remain meaningless
unless the industrialized countries make it
their duty to contribute as much, indeed
more, than they have done in the past to
this effort to restore a global equilibrium. It
is difficult to envisage the establishment of
co-operative relationships between devel¬
oping countries whilst at the same time
these countries remain in a position of eco¬
nomic, technological and intellectual
dependence upon those of the industrially
developed world. The internal contradic¬
tions arising from such a situation would
inevitably lead to extreme tension between
countries at different stages of develop
ment.
The evolution that the Conference pro- f
31

k poses to encourage will, then, tend to
replace the North-South bipolarity, which
is still very much the rule, by a North-
South-East-West multipolarity, of which
only the first signs can as yet be seen.
This multipolarity, based on a streng¬
thening of the autonomy of the developing
countries, will entail the pooling of the
increased capacities for production, and
research which make that autonomy pos¬
sible, in order to enable such countries to
take a more active part in the activities of
the international community.
For such changes to become feasible,
the institutional and technical foundations
of autonomous progress in developing
countries will have to be strengthened, just
as the regional bodies, whether inter¬
governmental or not, which deal with
financing, training, research and exchan¬
ges will also have to be developed and sti¬
mulated. As for the industrially developed
countries, they too should participate
fully it is in their own interest to do so in
the pooling of financial and technical
resources, and in the strengthening of
infrastructures^ which form the basis for
progress in developing countries.
Since the process of development inhe¬
rent in the notion of technical co-operation
among developing countries is first and
foremost an autonomous process, there is
reason to hope that this approach will have
a salutary effect on all the effortswhich
have hitherto been vain to reduce inequa¬
lities between nations. Furthermore, the
results of the increasing number of experi¬
ments and initiatives being carried out in
Third World countries will be more widely
known and more immediately comparable
with, and applicable to, situations else¬
where.
Thus there is reason to hope that this
increase in the number of exchanges will
not only speed up the processes of
research and development, but increase
the momentum of industrialization and
boost the growth of trade.
But other activities such as education,
communication and culture which are
equally important aspects of human pro¬
gress, have much to gain from the intro¬
duction of multipolar exchanges in place of
those favoured by historical circumstances
or by an interdependence based on
inequality. Up to now the door has, so to
speak, been only ajar; now it must be flung
wide open.
A number of examples of Unesco activi¬
ties in recent years illustrate the wide range
of possibilities opened up by technical co¬
operation among developing countries.
One of the most common characteristics
of these activities has been support for
training and research institutions, national
or otherwise, which play a major role and
have been able, through the assistance of
Unesco, to undertake operations on a
regional scale.
Here are two examples of technical co¬
operation in the world of communication.
In August 1977 the Asia Pacific Institute for
Broadcasting Development opened in
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Through the co¬
operation of Unesco and of the United
Nations Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), this
national institution has been given the
resources to serve the entire region, which
it now provides with general or specialized
training courses in every area of radio and
television news, as well as furnishing tech¬
nical advice and a consultancy service.
In Nairobi, Kenya, a centre for the
exchange of radio and television program¬
mes was opened in 1977 by the Union of
African National Radio and Television
Organizations, with the help of Unesco. It
helps not only to promote co-operation
among African radio and television organi¬
zations, but to reduce Africa's present
dependence on imported programmes.
Another example, this time from the
sphere of science, is the network of institu¬
tions in South-East Asia for co-operation in
the basic sciences, which has been active
since 1974 and is co-ordinating a pro¬
gramme of research and training for the
optimal use of natural products in develop¬
ment.
HE programme includes two
pilot schemes, one involving
the chemistry and the other the microbio¬
logy of natural products. They both com¬
prise training courses and practical work.
One of the industrialized countries, Japan,
is making an effective contribution to the
running of the network.
In Latin America, the Latin-American
Centre of Ph'ysics, a Unesco-backed inter¬
governmental organization, is contributing
to the regional development of physics
research; and other networks, some of
which enjoy the support of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
are in the process of being set up.
Of particular interest is the Intergovern¬
mental Océanographie Commission's Pro¬
gramme of Co-operative Investigations of
the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions,
which since 1976 has been not only co¬
ordinating scientific research in states bor¬
dering on the Gulf of Mexico, but endea¬
vouring to solve, through co-operation
among all participants, the problems of the
circulation of information and data, of the
education and training of specialists, and
of the pooling of facilities. It should be
noted that the participating states (1) are at
very different stages of development.
Another particularly significant example
is to be found in the field of education.
Unesco, UNDP, and a group of industrially
developed countries have, for the last ten
years, been helping the Ivory Coast govern¬
ment to develop a major pilot project for
educational television. This project forms
part of a broad range of activities involving
co-operation between Unesco and the
Ivory Coast, including educational planning
(1) Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the United
States, France, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Mexico, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Panama, the
Dominican Republic, the United Kingdom, Surinam,
Trinidad and Tobago, the U.S.S.R., and Venezuela.
and the reform of junior secondary educa¬
tion, as well as educational television.
As many Member States showed inter¬
est in this project, the Ivory Coast govern¬
ment and Unesco decided to create the
conditions for a thorough and systematic
exchange of information about the situa¬
tion and evolution of educational television
in developing countries.
Preparations are already at an advanced
stage for an international seminar to be
held ,in December on technical co-
among developing countries, in
this field. It will provide people from the
developing world working in educational
television with an opportunity to exchange
ideas, to visit the Ivory Coast educational
television centre, and to lay the foun¬
dations of a system for the exchange of
information and experience.
Thus, whatever the levels of develop¬
ment of the countries concerned, there is
bound to be a transition from the notion of
technical assistance to the notion of techni¬
cal co-operation.
An increase in the number of co¬
operation centres, the consolidation of
their activities, a greater confidence felt by
each Third World country in its own élite
and in the élites of other countries with the
same experience all these factors should
enable these countries to carry greater
weight in the global volume of economic,
technical and intellectual exchanges.
What the Conference proposes to do is
work out a plan of action which will allow
the international community to reach
agreement on the kind of objectives to be
aimed at, on the tasks incumbent upon
states and organizations, on the various
phases of the undertaking, on the means to
be employed in order to set in motion or
accelerate the process destined to lend a
whole new dimension to international tech¬
nical co-operation.
The Conference will return to and dis¬
cuss in greater detail, at the level of the
whole United Nations family, arguments
which in some cases, like the notion of
endogenous development, already form
the basis of thinking in such essential docu¬
ments as Unesco's Medium-Term Plan;
and it is the hope of Unesco that the Con¬
ference will succeed in getting all United
Nations organizations to share its preoccu¬
pations. This of course implies that we
must be careful this time to avoid the pitfall
of "institutionalization", and never assume
that a problem has been solved just
because a new institution or body has seen
the light of day.
Moreover, the problem before us is one
not of sectoral development, but of a quali¬
tative change in our approach, in all the
areas of activity involving the United
Nations system.
It is up to each organization to draw the
necessary conclusions from the Con¬
ference, as regards both the content of its
programme and the way in which it pro¬
poses to implement it. This is a path that
Unesco, which can already point to several
instances of fruitful co-operation among
developing countries, will follow- with the
, greatest determination.
Drajoljub Najman
32
