The
doctors' dilemma
by Louis Cotte
EVERYONE in the modern world is
bound to feel in some way concern¬
ed with the issues raised by the
application of human rights to health and
medical care. There are two reasons for
this. On the one hand, rapid changes in
medical technology have brought the prob¬
lems of human rights in medicine sharply
into focus. On the other, people today are
better informed than they were and are
consequently more aware of what is at
stake.
People are inundated with information
about the possibilities and limitations of
medicine, whereas only a few decades ago
doctors worked in virtual secrecy and
patients had to make do with a trickle of
publications, aimed at the mass market and
often ill conceived.
The general rise in living standards has
imposed greater demands on medicine, but
one of its beneficial side-effects may have
been to encourage the public to take a hard
look at these demands. Questioning of this
kind was a rarity in the more passive and
resigned societies of yesterday.
This change in attitudes is all to the
good, reflecting as it does a more mature
approach to health problems. There is a
greater awareness of the considerable diffi¬
culties involved in applying modern medical
techniques to all their potential "con¬
sumers". There is a keener appreciation of
the responsibilities of the community and
the individual in a field of human activity of
fundamental importance to everyone. This
is a factor for progress on a par with the
scientific and technical breakthroughs
which have changed the face of medicine.
LOUIS COTTE is professor of the law relating to
medicine at the Faculty of Medicine of the Uni¬
versity of Besançon (France). He is also hono¬
rary dean of the university's Faculty ofMedicine
and Pharmacy and head of the neurological ser¬
vice at the regional hospital centre based in
Besançon.
One way of approaching human rights in
medicine is through the study of medical
law and ethics. These subjects are taught
in faculties of medicine, and thus the study
of human rights is not totally absent from
the training of doctors. This is one of the
conclusions to emerge from a world survey
on the teaching of human rights and pro¬
fessional ethics in faculties and schools of
medicine.
The survey was carried out in 1977-1978
under the auspices of the International Ins¬
titute of Human Rights and at Unesco's
request. A questionnaire was sent to 955
faculties or schools of medicine in 107
countries. By 31 May 1978, 145 of them
had sent in replies.
Analysis of the replies shows that the
overwhelming majority (126) of these insti¬
tutions provide instruction in medical
ethics, and that almost half of them (69)
provide human rights teaching. On the face
of it these figures are impressive. However,
it should be noted that replies have so far
only been received from a small number of
the institutions to which the questionnaire
was sent. Furthermore, human rights are
not taught as a separate subject but as part
of the instruction in a whole range of disci¬
plines. Only 61 institutions (42 per cent)
indicate the existence of courses specially
devoted to human rights and medical
ethics. This is a low figure.
The replies to another question also give
some cause for anxiety. The schools and
faculties were asked whether their staff
teaching human rights and medical ethics
were sufficient in number. Forty-nine
(more than one-third of those which sent in
replies) answered "no", while 25 did not
answer the question at all. Asked whether
teaching staff were sufficiently trained, 32
answered in the negative and 31 did not
reply at all.
All the same an effort is undoubtedly
being made. The subjects most widely
taught relate to the right to life (above all
abortion), the right to death (euthanasia)
and the doctor-patient relationship. As far
as the latter subject is concerned, there is
particular emphasis on informing the
patient as a necessary step towards gaining
his consent for treatment, on respect for
private life, on respect for medical secrecy
and on the responsibility of the doctor.
Almost three-quarters of the respon¬
dents (72 per cent) consider that human
rights teaching should be further devel¬
oped. The American continent is most in
favour of this (85 per cent) ; Europe the
least (52 per cent).
Which subjects should be given more
attention? Top of the list come the rights of
the dying, followed by those of the "ordi¬
nary" sick person, the right to be properly
informed (diagnosis, treatment, risks,
etc.), the right to participate in decision¬
making, the rights of the individual as an
experimental subject (for therapeutic or
other purposes) and the rights of the indivi¬
dual to free and equal access to medical
treatment.
By and large it seems that relatively slight
attention is being paid to the role and res¬
ponsibility of the doctor and medical staff
in exceptional situations such as those
giving rise to the practice of torture or
situations occurring in wartime.
So much for the institutions. But what of
the public? It would be interesting to know
how the sick themselves conceive of their
rights and how they judge the behaviour of
doctors. For it is valid to ask whether
human rights teaching as it exists today
(and perhaps even as the medical schools
would like it to be) is properly adapted to
"demand" to what the public today
expects of its doctors.
In France, for example, the situation
appears to be far from satisfactory. The
"Ordre des Médecins", a body which pro¬
motes medical ethics and has drawn up the
code of professional conduct, is inclined to
criticize the faculties of medicine for not
teaching this subject. At the same time,
professors of forensic medicine are reluc¬
tant to base their teaching on an official
code which is manifestly out-of-date and t
ill-adapted to the needs of modern society. Y
29

In spite of its references to illustrious
figures of the past such as Hippocrates,
France's official code of medical ethics
today appears to reflect the opinion of the
medical profession (or at least of most doc¬
tors) on matters which are of much greater
concern to the "users" of medicine than to
the doctors themselves. It is as if the law
had been written by the magistrates whose
job is to enforce it, rather than by represen¬
tatives of the citizens who must respect it!
The study of human rights should be
based on a reversal of this situation and
should emerge from a process of reflection
involving society as a whole. It should
result from a confrontation and a blending
of opinions of everyone concerned, medi¬
cal staff and patients alike. The starting
point for research should be an assessment
of the demands of a rapidly changing
society.
In other words, the teaching of human
rights in faculties of medicine should not be
a matter for doctors alone, nor, come to
that, for professional jurists and moralists.
As part of their education, trainee doctors
should be given the opportunity to meet
people who do not belong to the medical
profession. Only in this way will they find
out what it is like to be on the receiving end
of medical treatment and be encouraged to
be self-critical about the effects of their
actions on patients. These effects are not
all confined to the technical aspects of
treatment.
To be really valid, the study of human
rights in faculties of medicine should not
consist of the formal academic teaching of
. arid texts nor the examination of codes of
professional ethics. Even if such codes are
updated (assuming that such an entreprise
is worthwhile) they only constitute one
aspect of a many-sided subject.
It is vitally important that the doctors of
the future should learn to think, through¬
out their careers, about those human ques¬
tions whose importance and complexity is
bound to increase. These human aspects
of medicine will be increasingly decisive in
improving the quality of life, a task in which
health and medical care are the foundation
stones.
Louis Cotte

