Each year two million scientific articles written by
750,000 specialists appear in some 50 languages.
To help scientists keep up with this "information
explosion", Unesco and the International Council
on Scientific Unions decided 11 years ago to
launch a programme of international co-operation
in scientific information. Much progress has
already been made in some parts of the world
towards the ultimate goal of hooking up all the
world's regions in a single automatic scientific
information network.



Information
please...
Towards a world science
information network
by
Yuri I.
Litukhin
SCIENTISTS form an international
community whose common bond,
science itself, leads them to see
beyond national boundaries and sectarian
attitudes. When a scientist makes a dis¬
covery, he wants to tell, not just his fellow-
countrymen, but the world.
YURI IVANOVICH LITUKHIN, Soviet specia¬
list in computer science, is a staff member of
Unesco's division for the international develop¬
ment of social sciences. He is the author of
many studies on the application of information
systems to economic development.
Similarly, when he seeks information, he
wants to be provided with it as quickly as
possible, regardless of whether its source is
inside or outside his own country.
Today, no one scientist or engineer can
hope to keep up to date with the avalanche
of technical articles, books and abstracts
which threaten to engulf even the most
conscientious researcher.
At the beginning of the 19th century, a
solution to the increasing number of spe¬
cialized reviews was found in the form of
the abstract journal. But since then both
8

*""
abstract journals and periodicals have pro¬
liferated at an astounding rate so that each
year the scientist and technical expert must
confront some 50,000 scientific and techni¬
cal journals, publishing almost two million
articles written by some 750,000 authors in
as many as 50 languages.
This "information explosion" is both ex¬
citing and frustrating. On the one hand,
scientists are eager to share in the know¬
ledge and ideas of their colleagues. On the
other, they have neither the time nor the
resources to sift through a heap of publica
tions to unearth those items which fall
within their field of interest.
And when the scientist does gain access
to the material he wants, linguistic and
other barriers often prevent him from put¬
ting it to good use. The resultant wastage
and loss are staggering: for every thousand
new ideas in science, only three or four are
ever put to practical use.
To reduce these information gaps and
frustrations, an intergovernmental co¬
operative venture called UNISIST has been
set up under Unesco auspices. It is de
signed to stimulate the creation of national
and international information systems in
the social, natural and exact sciences. Its
beginnings go back to a January 1967
meeting between the International Council
on Scientific Unions (ICSU) and Unesco at
which it was decided to work towards a
world scientific information system.
Clearly, this goal is far from realization,
but much progress has been made towards
it. A preliminary step involved establishing
new relationships and better co-ordination
on a national and regional scale between
CONTINUED PAGE 37

Information
please...
Continued from page 9
the various information handling institu¬
tions such as libraries and documentation
centres. Internationally, the aim is to fur¬
ther develop transnational information
systems and ensure compatibility among
existing and prospective programmes,
especially those related to the storage and
retrieval of scientific information.
UNISIST Is also concerned with formu¬
lating national information policies, plann¬
ing information service networks, and pro¬
moting research on the acquisition, pro¬
cessing, and dissemination of data, as well
as setting international standards and gui¬
delines. In addition, it provides assistance
to countries in setting up information cen¬
tres, as well as in training and retraining
information specialists. The ultimate aim is
the progressive integration of national,
regional and international information ser¬
vices into a single world network.
, The most spectacular demand for a rapid
transfer of knowledge comes, of course,
from developing areas. Developing coun¬
tries, handicapped by a scarcity of accessi¬
ble information and expertise, can only
develop scientifically and technologically as
the result of enormous effort and sacrifice.
Moreover, a natural tendency to imitate
foreign models sometimes leads such
countries to turn their backs on more pro¬
ductive and original paths to economic
development.
Y endeavouring to make
scientific information
more easily available to
developing countries, Unesco hopes to
help them in technological and scientific
policy-making, as well as stimulating
industrial and economic growth. In other
words, there is an awareness of the close
connexion between a new world infor¬
mation network and a new international
economic order. Indeed, this is one
reason why Unesco has made assistance
to developing countries an important
feature of the UNISIST programme.
This assistance comprises field missions
by experts and consultants, practical
recommendations for improving national
information services, organization of semi¬
nars and refresher courses for local specia¬
lists, and provision of direct financial aid.
In 1977, help of this kind was extended to
Somalia, Senegal, Sudan, Morocco and
Ghana.
While assistance to developing countries
accounts for a significant part of UNISIST
programme activities, it is also imperative
to think in terms of larger regional units.
Consequently, in 1976 and 1977 Unesco
organized a number of regional meetings
in Delhi, for South and Central Asia; in
Tunis, for the Arab countries; in Bali, for
South- East Asia, to name but three to
draw up a blue-print for regional co¬
operation and to promote the access of
developing countries to world stocks of
scientific documentation, and to train
documentalists.
In Europe, the first regional conference
on the exchange of social science informa¬
tion took place under Unesco auspices in
Moscow in June 1977. This conference,
which brought together representatives of
information centres in Western Europe and
the Socialist countries, was jointly organi¬
zed by the European Centre for co¬
ordination of Social Science Research and
Documentation (Vienna) and the Institute
of Social Science Information of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. It consti¬
tutes a positive step towards implementing
decisions reached during the Helsinki con¬
ference and may serve as a model for Euro¬
pean co-operation in this field. A second
European conference is due to be held in
Poland in October, 1978.
Unesco initiatives at the regional level
complement international efforts to build a
flexible network based on the voluntary co¬
operation of a number of information ser¬
vices, such as the International Nuclear
Information System UNIS).
INIS exchanges information among its
49 Member States through a world infor¬
mation centre located in Vienna (Austria).
Each Member State, together with a num¬
ber of international organizations, issues
monthly data on scientific research. ' This
data is fed into a computer, micro-copies of
scientific abstracts are made, and the resul¬
ting information is forwarded to each natio¬
nal centre. In this way, each Member State
processes its own data using a standard
system and receives data on scientific
research in the other Member States.
Countries can thus make use of available
information in an economical way. Each
month, for example, Vienna forwards to
Mexico's National Institute for Nuclear
Energy information on the latest scientific
publications together with reports from
France, the U.S.S.R., the U.S.A., Italy,
Poland and other countries all of it con¬
densed, ready to use, and in one language.
Some of these information systems also
play an important part in the regional deve¬
lopment of UNISIST. A case in point is the
Moscow International Centre for Scientific
and Technical Information. It has been
given a key role by the Council for Mutual
Economic Assistance (CMEA) within the
scientific and technological information
system currently being organized by Bul¬
garia, Hungary, the German Democratic
Republic, Mongolia, Cuba, Poland, Roma¬
nia, the U.S.S.R. and Czechoslovakia.
HE Moscow Centre's
activities cover virtually
every field of natural
science and technology, from industry and
transport to energy and medicine. In the
case of research reports, periodicals and
translations from little-used languages, it
receives information from different coun¬
tries. As a research institute, it provides
advice on standardization, technical plann¬
ing and electronic data-processing equip¬
ment.
As a regional agency within the frame¬
work of the UNISIST programme, the Cen¬
tre is compiling a world register of scientific
periodicals, and is helping Mongolia and
Cuba to develop their national information
systems.
In Western Europe, the Euronet system
represents an ambitious attempt on the
part of the Common Market countries to
store and exchange scientific and technical
information. The need for an improved
system of information-exchange made
itself felt as early as 1967 and in December
1975 representatives of the post-offices of
the nine member countries signed a con¬
tract to set up such a system.
The Common Market's Committee for
Research, Science and Technology
(CREST) plans to make the network opera¬
tional as quickly as possible. It is tackling
three major areas: extending and rationali¬
zing information services; providing access
to computerized data bases by means of a
telecommunications network; and training
professional staff and system users. An
idea of the overall scope may be gauged by
the projected figure of 700 terminals, each
asking three or four questions a day, giving
an estimated total traffic of some half a mil¬
lion questions per year by 1980.
The exchange of information across
national boundaries is a desirable develop¬
ment, but it also brings new problems in its |
wake. Sometimes, relevant information is I
37

.scattered in a wide range of documentation
'in scores of languages. Then too, informa¬
tion is becoming obsolete at an accelera¬
ting rate. As a result, governments often
lack the up-to-date, complete information
needed to take pressing decisions.
To meet this new demand, Unesco is
working on a project called SPINES, an
international science and technology poli¬
cies information exchange system. Ini¬
tially, it is envisaged as a voluntary co¬
operative arrangement between eight to
ten countries (the United States, the U.K.,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany,
the German Democratic Republic, Poland,
Spain, the U.S.S.R. and possibly also India
and Japan) but its potential users range
from governments and national scientific
bodies to academic institutions, industry
and international organizations.
What kind of problems would SPINES
help to solve? For developing countries the
possibilities are endless. Imagine that a
developing African country has discovered
vast deposits of uranium within its terri¬
tory. How should it exploit this newfound
source of wealth? Export the crude ura¬
nium ore, export pre-processed ore, or
establish a uranium enrichment plant and
then export enriched uranium?
Depending on circumstances, any one of
these solutions may be correct. But what¬
ever the choice, the information obtained
through SPINES should afford a wide
range of experience on which to base an
informed decision.
The worldwide preoccupation with infor¬
mation systems reflects something more
than a sudden surge of interest in data pro¬
cessing; it represents a marked social and
economic trend.
Whether we like it or not, information
theory and its applications have already
begun to bring about far-reaching changes
in the lives of millions of people, and we
must prepare ourselves for the consequen¬
ces. The next two or three decades may
well see the completion of a fully automatic
science information network serving the
majority of the countries taking part in the
UNISIST programme.
Yuri I. Litukhin

