Celadon bowl with inlaid decoration of arabesque
designs and chrysanthemums (mid-12th century).
A sprig of foliage from the
plum-tree, symbol of youth
and purity, was placed in this
celadon maebyong vase,
known as the Thousand
Crane Vase because of its
incised decoration of
roundels depicting cranes
flying upwards amid clouds.
Produced in the 12th century,
it is one of the finest
specimens of incised ware
made under the Koryo
dynasty.
30

Immortal clay
The traditional pottery of Korea by Chong Yang-mo
White porcelain jar with grape design painted in copper
red beneath the glaze. (17th or 18th century).
The introduction of Buddhism in Korea led to the
practice of cremating the dead and burying their
ashes in funeral urns. Stoneware funeral urn above,
dating from the 8th or 9th century, is decorated with
stamped designs and covered with green glaze.
THE history of Korean pottery goes back to neolithic times
which saw the emergence of a form of pottery, fired at a
low temperature, and known as combware from the close,
toothcomb lines with which it was decorated. Then, around 100
B.C., followed Kimhae pottery which was fired at higher tempera¬
tures and from which the toothcomb designs gradually disap¬
peared. During the Bronze Age and at the beginning of the Iron
Age in Korea, black, red and grey pottery appeared.
Great progress was made during the period of the Three King¬
doms. Dark grey in colour, the pottery of this period, though much
finer and lighter than that of earlier days, was neverthless very
robust since it was fired at temperatures of up to 1,200 degrees
centigrade. Pottery from the kingdoms of Koguryo (37 B.C. -668
A.D.) and Paekche (18 B.C. -660 A.D.) is rare, but from the king¬
dom of Silla there remain many fine pieces which were the fore¬
runners of the famous celadons of Koryo. Most of them were reco¬
vered from tombs, some of which contained hundreds of pieces
including cups, vases with rounded bases, statuettes, models of
chariots and animals. Some pieces were decorated with geo¬
metric designs.
The techniques of celadon glazing and of white porcelain manu¬
facture had been brought into Korea from China during the Three
Kingdoms period and advanced techniques developed under the
T'ang dynasty in China reached the south-west corner of the
peninsula during the ninth and- early tenth centuries. Both the cela¬
dons and the white porcelains of the period up to the eleventh cen¬
tury reveal immense technical progress. Workshops and kilns were
under the control of the royal court and systematic experiments
were made with the techniques of the various Chinese schools of
pottery. As a result, Korean craftsmen were able to produce an
enormously varied range of pottery.
During the eleventh century Korean ¿pottery of the Koryo
dynasty was approaching perfection. Contemporary Chinese chro¬
nicles describe Korean glazing in particular as the most perfect of
the day. Gradually the ceramic art of Koryo was throwing off the
bonds of Chinese influence and acquiring an individuality of its
own. With its original shapes and ornamentation of great beauty
and its light, transparent glazes, Koryo pottery reached its apogee
in the middle of the twelfth century. New decorative techniques
were adopted mouldings, metal inlays and various other embel¬
lishments on ever finer clays. This brilliant phase was to continue
until the thirteenth century when decline and decadence set in
with the Mongol invasions, even though the latter brought with
them new techniques.
Under the Yi dynasty, Korean ceramic art experienced a new
resurgence, notably in white and blue porcelains for which grey
clay and kaolin were used. Kilns were supervised by the govern¬
ment of Kwanju, near Seoul, supplying the court and aris¬
tocracy while the regional kilns supplied the lesser nobility and
local administrations. The kilns were situated along an eighty-
kilometre stretch of the river Han and were fuelled by timber from
neighbouring forests, with disastrous consequences for the
environment of the region.
After the Japanese invasion towards the end of the sixteenth
century, Korean ceramic art fell on difficult times. Many Korean
potters were carried off to Japan where they gave a new impulsion
to Japanese ceramic art. In Korea, only white porcelain subsisted.
Later, its quality and style changed and flowers and plants became
part of the ornamentation. Korean pottery of this period, of great
simplicity, originality and beauty, was much appreciated by scho¬
lars and Korean white porcelain would continue to bring beauty
into the lives of many throughout the long, slow decline of the Yi
dynasty.
CHONG YANG-MO is chief curator at the National Museum of Korea,
Seoul. He is a specialist in ceramic art, a subject on which he has written
widely.
31
