How risky
is
genetic engineering?
by Dan Behrman
SO much is heard these days about
the possible dangerous conse¬
quences of biological research that
one tends to forget the real benefits that
can beand are being derived from it.
Some of these benefits were described
at a recent symposium on genetics and
ethics organized in Madrid by the Spanish
Higher Council for Scientific Research and
Unesco under its programme of science
in the contemporary world. Among the
34 participants from two dozen countries
was Professor J.R. Porter of the microbio¬
logy department of the University of Iowa
(USA). One of the microbe's firmest
advocates on the international scene, he
was particularly convincing at Madrid
when he described how it can contribute
to alleviating energy shortages.
"Should the price of oil go much
higher", he said, "ethyl alcohol production
by fermentation will become economically
feasible in many countries." This, of
course, is carried out in one of the oldest
production processes known to man, and
has been improved by the genetic selection
of yeasts to increase yields.
As a fuel, ethyl alcohol contains less
energy per litre than petrol but it works
beautifully as a supplement. Porter
reminded the symposium that Brazil is now
producing 800 million litres a year of
alcohol by fermenting cane sugar to reduce
its heavy dependence on oil imports.
It has been said that microbial processes
are so elegant and economic that they
make man's technology look like alchemy
in comparison. They certainly promise a
solution to that other and perhaps more
serious energy crisis created by the short¬
age of firewood for cooking purposes
among the poorest of the world's popu¬
lation.
DAN BEHRMAN, a Unesco science writer and
a frequent contributor to the Unesco Courier,
is the author of The New World of the Oceans
and Solar Energy, the Awakening Science, both
published by Little, Brown and Co., Boston,
U.S.A.
Microbial flora can produce methane-
known as biogas by fermenting manure,
plant residues or household wastes. So
far, little work in genetics has been done in
this field, but, said Porter, if biomass agri¬
culture and forestry were to become a
major source of energy, then certain select¬
ed microbes that attack cellulose and other
products would take on great importance.
Many years ago, Indian scientists began
to work on microbial digestion of cattle
dung both to produce methane for cook¬
ing and to keep the dung as fertilizer (it is
lost, of course, when it is burned for fuel
as at present). Such biogas plants are
now being promoted in India by the Kadhi
and Village Industries Commission in
Bombay. Thirty thousand units are already
in service and the target is 100,000.
These are community plants intended
to produce fertilizer as well as gas for
cooking and to run small engines. It is esti¬
mated that a small digester running on
manure from three to five cows will supply
a small family.
According to figures quoted by Porter,
Korea now has nearly as many plants as
India. But the leader by far is the People's
Republic of China where two million are
in operation.
When we hear of biogas, we tend to
think of the barefoot subsistence farmer
eking out a living. The symposium was all
the more impressed when Porter reported
on a mobile biogas plant developed in Colo¬
rado (USA) and mounted on a big semi¬
trailer so that it can be trundled around the
countryside for demonstration purposes.
This plant can take the daily manure pro¬
duction of 20 to 45 cattle and turn out
enough gas to heat one or two homes in
the chilly Colorado climate. Porter observ¬
ed that waste from a big feedlot operation
with 100,000 cattle could meet the needs of
a community of 5,000 people.
Microbes can also be used for quite
different purposes. Porter mentioned that
scientists are trying to extract uranium
from seawater. "Estimates are that the
oceans contain a few billion tons of ura¬
nium whereas land deposits are no more
than 1.0 to 2.9 million tons. Experiments
The characteristics of every living
organism depend on its genetic
material, whose key component is a
chemical substance called DNA
(desoxyribonucleic acid). Ribbon-like
strands of DNA, a highly complex
molecule, are here seen being released
from the head of a virus.
22

'.vy»:.
m
m
>:
iPV.
< X
,rft?v.

6ATTCAASTC«
CTAA^TTC^Cf
m p
The transmission of hereditary
characteristics is shown in
schematic representation (left).
The ladder-shaped double strand
that constitutes a DNA molecule
contains four substances
(represented here by four
letters). Each rung of the ladder
consists of a pair of the four
substances, which associate in a
specific way. When a DNA
molecule duplicates, it does so
by splitting lengthwise. In the
two new DNA "ladders", the
pairs form a different sequence,
with the help of an enzyme
depicted here as a little cartoon
figure with outstretched arms.
By manipulating this process,
scientists may one day learn
how to alter hereditary
characteristics.
Photo © Pr. Tavlitzki, Ciba-Geigy, Martin Boschet
are underway to" develop hybrid green
algae that will absorb and accumulate ura¬
nium from seawater. The marine algae
being developed by German scientists, for
example, will absorb uranium in concentra¬
tions several thousand times that of nor¬
mal seawater. Mesh vessels containing the
hybrid algae would be immersed in ocean
currents to harvest the uranium".
The symposium drew attention to certain
dangers in genetic research. Biologists
now know how to add a piece of DNA
(desoxyribonucleic acid, the gene's basic
component) from a given species to the
genes of another species, thus creating a
hybrid species. This technique was
recently used to insert into a bacterium the
insulin-producing gene of the rat. If it
proves possible to make this gene
functional, the implications could be
important. For example, insulin could be
produced by bacteria for the treatment of
diabetes.
Scientists were the first to fear that new
dangerous bacteria might be created. But,
with the passing years, the pendulum
seems to have swung in the opposite
direction. The feeling is that current DNA
experiments of the type described above
are less dangerous than much research on
pathogenic organisms now being perform¬
ed in medical laboratories with far fewer
precautions.
Nevertheless, great care must be taken
and scientists cannot afford to remain
above it all. Dr. Povl Riis from Denmark,
chairman of the European Science Founda¬
tion's committee on recombinant DNA
research, regarded the issue as a test case
in relations between science and society.
"If we do not fill the gap between scientists
and the mass of society," he said, "it will
Among these red corpuscles photographed under a microscope
are sickle shaped cells resulting from a mutation which may
cause sickle-cell anaemia, a potentially fatal disease.
be filled by wild fears and unrealistic hopes
which will lead to prohibitive legislation."
Too much "improvement" of genes may
not be a good thing.. Prof. Albert Jacquard
from the National Institute for Demographic
Studies in Paris, said: "The lesson of
population genetics is that at the level of
the gene it is impossible to say what is
good or bad." The gene that transmits
sickle cell anaemia can kill a child or, in
another form, help it resist malaria. Dia¬
betes is an illness, but it may also help an
individual to cope with less food in his or
her diet, perhaps a useful trait in the
future.
For the present, some serious social and
ethical issues have arisen as the result of
the findings of ecogenetics, which seeks
to determine how a person's genes
influence the way he responds to his
environment. Dr. H. Werner Goedde of
the University of Hamburg in the Federal
Republic of Germany, saw a genetic
explanation for the different ways that
individuals are affected by pesticides,
insecticides and herbicides as well as by



24

The form of mental deficiency known
as mongolism is due to a genetic
abnormality. This genetic "accident"
is visible in a mongoloid's hand: the
two lines running across the palm join
instead of remaining separate.
Above, milk droplets bouncing off a vibrating membrane. Many
people suffer from an inherited intolerance to lattose, the sugar in
milk. In the United States alone, this intolerance, due to to the lack
of the enzyme lactase, affects 90 per cent of Asian Americans, from
70 per cent to 90 per cent of American Indians and 75 per cent of blacks.
alcohol, cigarettes, drugs and industrial
pollution.
From one individual to another, the risk
of lung cancer in certain industries can go
up 33 times. Among heavy drinkers, some
end up with cirrhosis of the liver while
others do not. Significant differences in
response to alcohol are found between
Mongolian and Caucasian populations.
Similar variations are to be found in
reactions to pharmaceutical products,
which means, Goedde said, that care
should be taken in exporting them.
More examples were mentioned by. Dr.
Gilbert S. Omenn, assistant director for
human resources at the Office of Science
and Technology Policy in the Executive
Office of the President in Washington.
Inherited intolerance to lactose, the sugar
in milk, makes milk more a poison than a
food for 75 per cent of blacks in the United
States, 70 to 90 per cent of American
Indians, 90 per cent of Asians and 20 per
cent of Caucasians. "Given the symptoms
that may be induced," he has written, "it
is hardly surprising that many black children
'prefer Coke' or that Southwest Indians
have 'ungratefully' utilized powdered milk
to paint their adobes!"
Black and Mediterranean peoples are
often deficient in an enzyme known as
G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase)
which is essential to the integrity of red
blood cells. In its absence, an otherwise
healthy person may suffer acute anaemia
when treated with certain drugs (among
them sulfa derivatives and aspirin) or when
working in certain industries.
In some cases, individuals with this
deficiency are unable to eat fava beans.
Long before it was known to science,
Omenn remarked, the Pythagoreans were
said to have surrendered to their enemy
rather than flee through a field of fava
beans. And in Greek mythology, one sect
allowed women, but not men, to eat fava
beans. This is consistent with the way in
which the deficiency is transmitted from
one generation to the next.
One rare deficiency affects one in 2,500
Caucasians who will stop breathing for
hours if he receives suxamethonium, a
muscle relaxant frequently used during
surgery. Fortunately, a simple test exists
to screen such individuals.
Genetic screening, in fact, could protect
anyone suffering from these disorders but,
at the same time, it could bar them from
jobs or make it more difficult for them to
get insurance coverage. Is it right, Omenn
wondered, that they should be at a
disadvantage while others are not, simply
because their genetic predisposition to
other illnesses is not known?
Another question has been raised by a
proposal in the United States to introduce
iron supplements into bread to help a large
number of people suffering from mild iron
deficiency and anaemia. A smaller number
of people, however, are genetically suscep¬
tible to a disease brought on precisely by
too much iron. Such diseases tend to
increase as more and more new substances
are introduced into the environment,
inadvertently or not. Omenn is convinced
that cases now known represent only the
tip of the iceberg.
Genetic screening on a large scale is
now being undertaken in a number of
countries for a significant segment of the
population, the children yet to be born.
Prenatal examination can determine if the
child is suffering from mongolism, a risk
that increases with the age of its mother.
Other untreatable genetic diseases, but
not all, can be diagnosed in this manner.
Prospective parents can also receive
genetic counselling, particularly if they
already have an abnormal child and they
wish to know the risks they run in having
another.
Dr. Pertti Aula from the University of
Helsinki in Finland emphasized at the
symposium that even parents at risk have
a much higher chance than they might
think of having a healthy child. "In most
prenatal study projects, the number of
abnormal findings, which could lead to a
therapeutic abortion, has been about 5 per
cent. Thus in 19 out of 20 studies, the
results have been normal and the effect of
the study has been to relieve parents'
anxiety."
Aula insisted that individuals must be
given the freedom to choose whether or
not to undertake such prenatal diagnosis
and to decide themselves what steps to
take when the results are known.
The imperative need for such freedom
of choice was repeatedly stressed at the
symposium, whose participants agreed
that "the good of the species must yield
to the good of the individual". Professor
Jose Egoscue from the Autonomous
University of Barcelona in Spain expressed
the views of many when he said: "The
darkest hour of genetics is when it serves
political or economic interests."
Dan Behrman
25
