Nuclear energy
and
the environment
Are present safeguards adequate ?
by Essam El-Hinnawi
NUCLEAR energy has been used to
generate electricity on a commer¬
cial scale for about two decades,
and it is estimated that it will constitute
between 11 and 13 per cent of the world's
total electricity generating capacity by 1985
and 20 per cent by the year 2000.
Public concern about the development
of nuclear power has focussed chiefly on
the radioactivity released from the products
of nuclear fission.
However, every stage in the "nuclear
fuel cycle" '- has ' some impact on the
environment from the mining and milling
of uranium, through the manufacture of
fuel elements for reactors, the transport
and processing of irradiated : fuel, to the
management of the wastes produced at
each step in the cycle.
The environmental impact ot. uranium
mining may take several forms. On thé one
hand, land and water may be affected by
spoil, and by 'waste water, (from mine
drainage and in some cases from drilling).
On the other, there are certain occupation¬
al health hazards.
Essam El-Hinnawi of the Arab Republic of
Egypt is research professor of geochemistry and
mineralogy at the National Research Centre,
Cairo. The author of two books and many arti¬
cles on these subjects and on energy,, he was
awarded . Egypt's State Prize for Science and
Technology in 1967. He is chairman , of the
Energy Task Force of the United Nations Envi¬
ronment Programme (UNEP).
Uranium ore contains radium-266. As it
decays, this element gives off the radio¬
active gas radon, which is considered to be
a major cause of cancer among uranium
miners. Nevertheless, it should be noted
that the number of "environmental deaths"
among coal miners (from pneumoconiosis)
is much higher than among uranium
miners.
In the milling process, about 70 per cent
of the total radioactivity contained in the
uranium ore fed to the mills remains undis¬
solved in the form of tailings ground to a
sandlike consistency. Radioactive dust
from unprotected tailings piles may be
spread by wind erosion. Such piles may
also cause, water pollution if they are loc¬
ated too near river banks or if flood water
leaches radium from them and then perco¬
lates down to the groundwater.
- In the fuel fabrication process, the main
potential hazard arises from the toxicity of
the hydrogen fluoride and fluorine used in
the production of uranium hexafluoride.
However, safe methods of handling these
chemicals are now well established in the
fluorochemical industry.
As the' level of uranium enrichment
increases,' so too does the risk of the acci¬
dental agglomeration of sufficient quanti¬
ties of uranium-235 to set off a chain reac¬
tion. Although such accidents are unlikely
to occur,' great' care is needed to ensure
that they never do.
The production of uranium dioxide fuel
elements is now a well-established proce¬
dure which seems to be free of appreciable
hazards. Manufacture of mixed-oxide fuel
is, however, much more complicated.
Hazards arise from the toxicity of pluto¬
nium and from the fact that the "critical
mass" of plutonium dioxide the smallest
amount of material necessary to start a
chain fission reaction is only a few kilo¬
grammes.: However, normal operational
hazards of mixed-oxide fuel production are
not difficult to manage.
' During the normal operation of a nuclear
reactor, radioactive materials are produced
which are for the most part retained within
the fuel elements. Compared to the risks
from gaseous emissions produced by
fossil-fuel-operated plants, the risks from
discharges from nuclear power plants
during normal operation are negligible.
Thermal pollution, however, is consid¬
ered to be more pronounced with nuclear
plants than with fossil-fuel plants. The for¬
mer reject virtually all their excess heat to
the cooling water, while in the latter about
15 per cent of the heat is rejected up the
smoke stack along with combustion pro¬
ducts. In other words, a nuclear power
plant will discharge about 50 per cent more
waste heat to the receiving waters than a
fossil-fuel plant producing the same
amount of electricity.
Public concern about reactor operation
has concentrated on the possibility of an
, accident leading to the release of a consi¬
derable, amount of radioactivity into the
environment. Various types of accident are
possible during the operation of a nuclear
reactor, but many safety devices are incor¬
porated into reactor design, and there are
operating procedures that will automati¬
cally close the reactor down in the case of
any serious malfunction.
: In -addition,' most reactors are placed
inside a containment building,' the purpose
of which is to contain virtually all the
radioactivity that might be released in the
case of a serious accident. However, there
has been some criticism of the efficiency of
these safety measures * (particularly . the
emergency systems for cooling the reactor
core).
' Several studies have been made to deter¬
mine the probability of a major nuclear
reactor accident, using information on the
failure rate of reactors'1 various engineer1
ing components. The most recent of these
studies, generally known as the Rasmussen
report (1), estimates that the probability of |
an accident due to the melting of the fuel in I
(1) "The Reactor Safety Study", was sponsored by the
U.S. Atomic Energy Commission and carried out under
the direction of Prof. Norman C." Rasmussen' of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.-
11

the core of a light water reactor is some¬
where in the region of one in 20,000 per
jreactor per year, and that 99 out of 100
core-melting accidents would cause no
early fatalities. It is also predicted that
about one in 170 core-melting accidents
would cause more than 10 early fatalities,
and that only one core-melting accident
out of 500 would cause more than 100 early
fatalities.
The arguments over the adequacy of this
study are extensive and complex. Some
critics have questioned the validity of the
methods used, the estimation of the risks
of accidents, and the factor of human
error. Others have concentrated on the
inadequate consideration given by the
study to the risks of natural hazards (such
as hurricanes or earthquakes), deliberate
sabotage or war.
Because they produce more fissile mate¬
rial than they consume (see article page 8),
fast breeder reactors have attracted consi¬
derable criticism. The intense neutron
bombardment which occurs in a liquid-
metal fast breeder produces changes in the
size of the structural materials which sur¬
round it. This can result in the swelling of
metals used in the construction of the reac¬
tor core. These changes in the tolerance of
the core can affect the coolant flow, and
they might precipitate the overheating of
the core and the melting of the plutonium.
0NOTHER problem which
plagues breeder designers
is fuel handling. Breeders
have the advantage of
generating plutonium, but
retrieving the newly-
created radioactive subs¬
tance necessitates much
more frequent fuel handling than is neces¬
sary in today's reactors. Once the pluto¬
nium is lifted from its birthplace in the reac¬
tor core, it must be transported to a fuel
reprocessing plant so that it can be made
into new fuel elements.
Should an accident occur a major con¬
cern of those critical of the liquid metal fast
breeder reactor plutonium could leak out
of the cylinders during transit. Another fear
surrounding the movement of plutonium is
that some of the material may be diverted
for use by unauthorized parties. Only a
relatively small amount is needed to cons¬
truct a nuclear bomb.
The complete dismantling of a nuclear
power station after its write-off period
(usually fixed at between 20 and 30 years)
will be difficult and hazardous because of
radioactivity induced in the reactor struc¬
ture during its operating life. Bombardment
by neutrons of the materials used to build a
reactor produces a range of radioactive
nuclides. Some of these emit highly pene¬
trating gamma radiation and have a half-life
(the time required for a radioactive subs¬
tance, to lose half of its radioactivity) of
several years.
Experience gained in decommissioning
small power reactors gives some grounds
for optimism about the possibility of totally
disposing of full-size reactors after their
write-off. However, the environmental
consequences of this operation are far from
being sufficiently understood.
The spent fuel elements removed from
reactors during refuelling are the most
intensely radioactive material in the fuel
cycle. The main hazard here is the enor¬
mous amount of gamma radiation emitted
by the decay of radioactive fission pro¬
ducts. The spent elements are removed to
deep tanks of water known as cooling
ponds, and left there for some time. They
must be stored in the ponds in such a way
that the considerable amount of fissile
material present in them (uranium-235 and
plutonium) is prevented from forming a cri¬
tical configuration. After the short-lived fis¬
sion products have decayed to low levels of
activity which takes a few months the
fuel can be reprocessed.
At a fuel reprocessing plant the spent
fuel is chemically dissolved and the residual
fuel material recovered. During this pro¬
cess the major portion of the fission pro¬
ducts, in addition to induced radioactive
products present in the fuel cladding, is
converted into solid and liquid waste mate¬
rial. So far, fuel reprocessing plants have
been the major source of radioactive envi¬
ronmental contamination from the nuclear
industry.
Low-level liquid waste produced during
reprocessing is eventually discharged into
the environment. Improved methods of
storing or disposing of this waste must be
developed. Reprocessing plants also pro--
duce intermediate and low-level solid
wastes. Reprocessing the fuel used in one
year by a 1,000 megawatt light water
reactor would produce from 20 to 60 cubic
metres of such wastes. ,
Until now most waste of this kind has
been buried on land or placed in canisters
and dumped in the ocean. The Nuclear
Energy Agency of the Organization of Eco¬
nomic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) is currently supervising the dispo¬
sal of 7,000 tonnes per annum at a depth of
4,500 metres in the Atlantic Ocean. Other
methods of disposal include deep burial in
abandoned mines or in suitable geological
formations.
It is estimated that by 1990 there will be
20,000 cubic metres of high-activity wastes
arising from the reprocessing of spent fuel.
Such wastes contain over 99 per cent of
the fission products present in the fuel
together with smaller quantities of actini-
des. High-level wastes are at present stored
mainly in liquid form, and some consti¬
tuents will remain dangerously radioactive
for several hundreds of thousands of years.
There is at present no generally accepted
means whereby high-level waste can be
permanently isolated from the environment
and remain safe for very long periods.
Processes for the conversion of high-
level waste to a relatively inert solid have
been : developed. Permanent disposal of
high-level solid wastes in stable geological
formations is regarded as the most likely
solution, but has yet to be demonstrated as
feasible. It is not certain that such methods
and disposal sites will entirely prevent
radioactive releases following disturbances
caused by natural processes or human
activity.
Nuclear fusion is the fusing together
at very high temperatures of two
atomic nuclei. When this happens to
the nuclei of light elements like
hydrogen large amounts of energy
are released. This process provides
the limitless flow of energy from the
sun. Scientists are today
experimenting with lasers to achieve
the high temperatures required to
reproduce nuclear fusion on earth.
Photo shows cables of laser fusion
apparatus at Los Alamos, New
Mexico, U.S.A.
Marine disposal of high-level radioactive
wastes has been extensively restricted by
international and regional conventions
which are binding on many countries with
nuclear power industries. Disposal in
Antarctica is prohibited by treaty.
During the entire fuel cycle, including the
transport of nuclear material, strict vigi¬
lance and care must be exercised to ensure
that such material does not fall into unau¬
thorized hands. An enormous effort is
therefore required, both nationally and
internationally, to Drevent any diversion
of nuclear material or sabotage ofnuclear
installations.
The establishment and implementation
of a physical protection system at the
national level is the primary responsibility of
Governments. At the international level,
the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) has initiated and implemented a
nuclear safeguards system.
The system established under the Non-
Proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 has a
number of limitations and weaknesses: the
.failure of many states to become parties to
the Treaty; the inability of safeguards to
prevent the transfer of nuclear technology
from nuclear power production to the
acquisition of nuclear weapons compe¬
tence; the fact that many nuclear, facilities
are covered by no safeguards; the exis¬
tence of a number of loopholes regarding
the application of safeguard agreements to
peaceful nuclear explosions, to, materials
intended for non-explosive military uses,
and to the re-transfer of materials to a third
state; the absence, in practice, ' of safe¬
guards for source materials; the practical
problems of maintaining effective checks
on nuclear inventories; the ease with which
states can withdraw from the Non-
Proliferation Treaty and from most NPT
safeguards agreements; deficiencies1 in
accounting and warning procedures; the
absence of reliable sanctions to deter diver¬
sion of safeguarded material.
\ Nevertheless, the', Non-Proliferation
Treaty remains the most widely applied and
most effective international' nuclear safe¬
guards system.
Essam El-Hinnawi
12
