Photos © Miodrag Djordjevic, Saltykov-Shchedrin Public Library, Leningrad
The Morava school of painting marked the
golden age of Serbian art towards the close
of the Middle Ages. Frescoes, ¡cons and
miniatures all demonstrate how artists of the
Morava school succeeded in portraying vivid,
living personalities within the framework of
stylized forms. The four miniatures (across
both pages, above) by the master-painter
Radoslav come from a New Testament dating
from 1429, now in the Saltykov-Shchedrin
Public Library, Leningrad. The miniatures
depict the four evangelists listening to the
words of God as whispered to them by the
Spirit of Holy Wisdom. The symbols
attributed to each evangelist can be seen
in the top corner of each painting.
From left to right: St. Luke, with a bull; St.
Mark, with a lion; St. Matthew, with an
angel; and St. John, with an eagle.



The art
of the Morava School
Sensitivity and grace
in fifteenth-century Serbia
by Svetozar Radojcic
Left, detail from a 14th-century fresco known
as "The Saracens", from the Church of St.
Archangel, at Lesnovo, Macedonia,
Yugoslavia. The relationships between the
Saracens, the name by which the Muslims
were sometimes known in the West, and the
South Slavs were often turbulent.
Photo © Yugoslav Cultural Centre, Paris
A
NCIENT Serbian art began to flour¬
ish towards the end of the twelfth
century, but went into decline
SVETOZAR RADOJCIC is a noted Yugoslav
art historian who has carried out important
research into the art of medieval Serbia. He is
professor of the history of art at Be/grade
University.
after 1459, when Turkish invaders occupied
the fortress-town of Smederevo, the capi¬
tal of the Serbian Tsars. Nevertheless, this
national art survived, under the Ottoman
yoke, until the first decades of the eight¬
eenth century. When the Turks finally
retreated from the Danube basin, Serbian .
artists were ready to make their contribu-
41

tion to the late Baroque period of central
' and western Europe.
Against the background of the turbulent
history of the eastern Mediterranean
region, the Balkan peninsula and the
Danube basin, Serbian art, which had
formed an integral element of Byzantine
culture, followed its own path of deve¬
lopment.
When the great Serbian Empire crum¬
bled after the disastrous battle of the
Maritza, in 1371, and the extinction of the
Nemanja dynasty, the princely families of
the Lazareviói and the Brakovici struggled
to retain their hold in the narrow territory
that stretched from the belt of land bet¬
ween the Danube and the Sava in the north
to the two Moravas in the south (these two
tributaries, which flow northward from the
Macedonian border to meet in a single river
that joins the Danube east of Belgrade,
should not be confused with the Morava of
Czechoslovakia, from which the vast
region of Moravia takes its name).
It was here that the Serbian "despotate"
(a term borrowed from the Byzantine hi¬
erarchy of government, and in no sense
pejorative) had a short-lived existence bet¬
ween 1402 and 1459, as the last outpost of
free Christianity in the Islam-dominated
Balkans. In the struggle between the Chris¬
tians and the Ottomans, this little Serbia of
the south became the refuge of countless
emigrants from Byzantium, Mount Athos,
Macedonia, Bulgaria and Albania.
The roads leading to the despotate were
crowded with refugees: princes chased
from their principalities, bishops deprived
of their bishoprics, monks without monas¬
teries and seigneurs who had lost their fiefs
and castles. In their train followed a motley
retinue of writers, architects, painters,
musicians and singers the whole constel¬
lation of artists that surrounded the rich
and powerful figures of the day.
TEPHEN Lazarevió,
son of Prince Lazar
who fell in battle in
1389 at Kosovo- Polje,
where the Turks finally
established their supre¬
macy over the Serbs, was a typical repre¬
sentative of his age. Bearing the title of
"despot", conferred on him by the Byzan¬
tine Emperor, liegeman of the king of Hun¬
gary, vassal of the Sultan and commander-
in-chief of his own army, warrior and
patron of letters and himself a poet, he
attracted scores of writers to his court at
Belgrade. Sycophantic . contemp
oraries called him "the new Ptolemy". He
was the founder of the Resava school (so-
called after the monastery that stood close
to the river of that name). This was not
merely a school of copyists, as has some¬
times been slightingly suggested, but, as it
was referred to at the time, of
"translators".
Contemporaneous with the Resava
school, and created under the same aus¬
pices, was a still more significant school. It
has sometimes been said that art is the pro¬
duct of peaceful and happy times; the ,
Morava school, as it is called by historians
of Serbian art, which served as a nursery of
sensitivity and grace during a dark, doom-
laden period, provides ample evidence that
nothing could be further from the truth.
From the twelfth century onwards, the
quest for the aesthetic followed two paths
with artists seeking both outward and inner
beauty. These two contrasting and un¬
evenly balanced trends, the point and
counterpoint of which are most apparent in
architecture, reached their apogee during
the years of the despotate.
The churches of the Morava school,
whose inner volumes were perfectly plan¬
ned, and whose façades were covered with
sumptuous decoration, were suited both to
the routine of daily offices and to the occa¬
sional splendour of great ceremonies. Their
floor plan took the form of rectangles with
semi-circular ends, above which soared the
great conches of the apses and the crowns
of their domes. Their whole structure was
adapted to the requirements of a complex
liturgy involving numerous clergy, two
choirs, and the spectacular processions
depicted in contemporary frescoes. All the
different sections, passages and partitions
were functional and acoustically perfect.
The vocal music which completed the
beauty of these churches has only recently
been re-discovered. In fact it was not until
after the Second World War that Serbian
manuscripts dating from the turn of the
fourteenth-fifteenth centuries and contain¬
ing musical notations were deciphered and
their notes transcribed. Two of the proces¬
sions which appear frequently in ancient
paintings the "Grand entrance" and the
"Communion of the Apostles" can now
be accompanied not only by the words,
which were already known, but also by the
authentic musical background which gives
to the gestures of the depicted characters a
strange, unfathomable, almost unearthly
rhythm, a music which inspires in its list¬
eners the sentiment of unshaken and un-
shakeable belief.
The earliest frescoes, painted in the mid-
fourteenth century, portrayed the unusual
figures of the "chapel-masters" in their
richly decorated robes and strange, white,
three-cornered hats. Now we not only
know their names Stefan, Isaija and
Joakim but also the music they com¬
posed.
The beauty of these hallowed, music-
haunted places was enriched by a new
style of wall painting, in frescoes which
capture the same subtle and musical deli¬
cacy of tone and from which powerful and
severe brush-strokes are entirely absent.
The human portraits they contain are styl¬
ized, plastic, almost sculptural; like the
music, the figures seem unearthly.
From this point onwards, the painters of
the Morava school abandoned the tech¬
niques employed for earlier frescoes in
favour of the more subtle approach used
for painting on wood. Attitudes and move¬
ments are captured and, as it were, frozen
for all time; yet the gestures remain gentle
and harmonious. In the paintings of the
Serbian despotate, scenes from Christ's life
on earth are favourite themes: warrior-
saints, monks, bishops and preachers alike
are represented as "celestial men and ter¬
restrial angels", glowing with outward
beauty and inner perfection, inhabitants of
a universe whose only dimensions were
pictural, literary and musical.
This art is a faithful reflection of the
mysticism of Eastern Christianity. There is
something dramatic in the artistic expres¬
sion of the wonder provoked by revelation.
The sanctuary of the church, the "holy of
holies", is hidden behind a partition to
which icons are attached, the iconostasis
which, like the scenae irons of ancient
theatres, contains three doors draped with
rich fabrics. At certain specific moments in
the rituals, these curtains are raised. The
larger churches were decorated with rich
polychrome stone facings: broad ornamen-<
tal bands, arcades and large, rose-shaped
designs, and figures executed in low relief,
especially around the windows. There was
a great variety of decorative motifs: scroll¬
work, angels, mythical animals and enig¬
matic shapes, among which, at the Kalenió
monastery, for example, stood the centaur
Chiron, who taught music to the Greek
hero Achilles.
HE ancient dichotomy
of outer and inner
beauty is a recurrent
feature of works of the
Morava school, reveal¬
ed in its architecture, its frescoes, its
icons, its rich brocades, its jewellery and
above all its miniature paintings. Invariably
the ornamentation expressed an outer
beauty behind which transcendent, mys¬
terious, barely perceptible values lay con¬
cealed.
This grandiose vision of a perfect world,
evoked during an age of utmost peril, exer¬
cised a profound attraction on the survi¬
vors of Christian Byzantium; for the
mystics and intellectuals who, during the
fifteenth century, wandered between Italy
and the distant Russian steppes, it had the
value of a prophecy.
The merit of this fifteenth-century art,
which emerged from a Serbia whose fron¬
tiers had been so reduced, which was both
lordly and monastic and which was the
product of luxury and asceticism alike, was
that it reconciled the outer with the inner
beauty. European art was at a crossroads:
while the West turned its back on medieval
thought and art, the East continued to
cling to them tenaciously, adopting a scep¬
tical attitude both towards matter, nature
and the power of human reason, and
towards the spirituality of antiquity from
which, nevertheless, it derived its art an
art in which form alone resembled reality,
yet was itself a symbol and an allegory. The
figures of the writers embraced by the
Muses in the miniatures of the master
painter Radoslav are perhaps the finest
examples of this complex, traditionalist cul¬
ture, which found its most perfect expres¬
sion in the art of painting.
Svetozar Radojcic
42
