Turtle base of the now-missing centre
stone of the tomb of King Kim ln-mun at
Kyongju (7th century).
Photo © Korean Overseas Information Service, Seoul



Six good
turns
from
the turtle
by Zo Za-Yong
Prehistoric turtle design on a rock at Pan'gu-dae,
Ulsan, in the province of south Kyongsang.
Photo © KorPan Overseas Information Service, Seoul
Afew years ago a young Korean sailor named Kim Chong-nam
fell overboard late one night while his ship was in mid-
Pacific. For hours he struggled desperately to keep afloat
until he suddenly came up against a huge turtle. He grasped the
turtle's back, hauled himself on to it and lay there for thirteen
hours until he was rescued by a passing Swedish ship.
During the middle of a recent, long, hot summer, another giant
turtle emerged from the sea at Haeun-dae beach near the city of
Pusan and crawled to a nearby tavern. A crowd gathered to watch
it as it dug into the sand and laid its eggs. Interpreting this as a
good omen, the tavern keeper ran to the turtle as it was making its
way back to the water, hung her necklace around its neck and
gratefully sent it on its way back to sea.
The Korean press latched on to both of these "human interest"
stories with fascination, for the turtle is a reptile which commands
strong affection and respect among Koreans. It has always played
a major role in their folklore and traditions, while the wealth of
symbolic meanings associated with it have for centuries inspired
Korean sculptors and painters as well as the creators of folk art and
handicrafts.
The turtle plays six major roles in Korean folklore. First and fore¬
most it is the messenger of the water spirit, just as the tiger is the
messenger of the mountain spirit (1). Sitting astride a huge dra¬
gon, the white-bearded Water Spirit (or Dragon Spirit) lives
beneath the sea in the Dragon Palace and controls all affairs rela¬
ted to water, the sea, rivers, ponds, rain, storms and floods. The
industrious turtle is the only messenger capable of communicating
between the Dragon Palace and the earthly world.
Secondly, the turtle is a sacred animal of good omen, along with
the dragon, the oriental unicorn [Chi-lin) and the phoenix.
Thirdly, it is one of the ten longevity symbols known as the
Sipchang-Saeng, the others being the crane, the deer, the pine,
the bamboo, the fungus of immortality, rock, water, cloud and
sun. Of the three animals in this group the turtle is the only one
believed to live ten thousand years.
As the guardian of the north, the turtle is also one of the four
cardinal direction spirits, along with the blue dragon, the white
tiger and the red bird.
In its fifth role, that of carrier of the eight trigrams, the turtle is
one of the earliest holy animals in Oriental mythology. The trigrams
were magic writings which were supposed to have been carried by
an old turtle to the first man, Pok-Hi [Fu-hsi in Chinese) on the
bank of the Lo Sui River.
(1) These two earthly spirits, together with the various heavenly spirits such as the
Seven Stars, the South Pole Star, the Four Cardinal Stars, the Twelve Zodiac
symbols, the Sun and Moon, the Wind and Clouds, Rain and Thunder, constitute the
core of the Korean shamanistic tradition. Each of these spirits is associated by Korean
people with a sacred animal.
20 ZA-YONG is director of the Emilie Museum, Seoul. He is the author of
The Spirit of the Korean Tiger, 1972, The Life of Buddha, 7575, and
Korean Folk Painting, 1978.
38

Turtle-shaped celadon wine-flask
decorated with a peony pattern in white
against a dark green background (15th or
16th century).
Photo © Korean Overseas Information Service, Seoul
Finally, the turtle is connected with divination through its hex¬
agonal shell pattern which in ancient times was held to be of mys¬
terious origin. This pattern gave rise to complicated philosophical
interpretations, and a special fortune-telling technique was devised
whereby the shell was heated and the crack-lines thus caused were
analyzed.
Korean history is rich in stories illustrating the attributions of the
turtle. The rescue of the lucky sailor Kim Chong-nam itself has a
historic precedent. During the rule of the Paekche dynasty (18
B.C. -660 A.D.) a monk named Pangje was pushed from a boat by
bandits while he was transporting temple treasures. He was saved
by a mighty turtle that carried him to safety. The story of Chu¬
mong, the founder of the Koguryo dynasty, is a variation on the
same theme. While fleeing from a band of assassins, he came to a
river. At this critical moment the Dragon Spirit sent a multitude of
turtles to form a bridge across which Chumong made good his
escape.
According to one account, the six leaders of the six tribes of
Kaya, who formed a Kaya dynasty (42-562 A.D.), were born from
six huge eggs on "Turtle Mountain". The record states that the
people of Kaya gathered at the Holy Mountain and sang the song
that attracts turtles, and it is usually interpreted that the eggs were
laid by a turtle.
During the Silla dynasty the famous beauty Suro was carried
away by the Dragon Emperor. The story has it that a great crowd
assembled, singing the song of the sea, as a giant turtle brought
her back from the Dragon Palace.
A familiar figure in the visual arts, the turtle also appears in clas¬
sical literature, notably in a number of novels written under the Yi
dynasty, such as "The Story of the Hare and the Turtle" (Pyol-
chubu-ion), "The Voyage to the Dragon Palace" (Kumeo
Sin-hwal, and "The Story of Sim-Ch'ong".
Turtles appear comparatively rarely in classical Oriental painting
but although painting in general seems less important than other
forms of "turtle art", it is invaluable in helping to explain the
symbolic background, for each piece of turtle symbolism is expli¬
citly depicted. In Korean folk painting benevolent turtles are shown
carrying rabbits on their shoulders back to the Dragon Palace and
feature in paintings of Sa-Ryong, the four sacred animals of good
omen.
The sacred book-carrying turtle is often shown in the character
design paintings of the Yi dynasty, referring to the legend of the
turtle which bore the knowledge of the eight trigrams, while the
turtle as guardian of one of the four cardinal directions is found in
the tomb murals of the Koguryo dynasty. The latter symbolism
seems to have died out later as there is little trace of such painting
under the Yi dynasty, and the turtle came to appear most com¬
monly as one of the ten longevity symbols.
However, stone carving is the branch of Korean art in which
turtles are most prolific, especially in the form known as Kwi-Bu,
turtle-shaped stones which form the base of monuments and buil¬
dings. Over a hundred of these turtle stones, dating from the Uni¬
fied Silla period to the Yi dynasty, have survived at the graves of
kings and at Buddhist temples. The base stone is combined with a
dragon cap stone which completes the monument, and the turtle
in this art form may be either the turtle of good omen, the guardian
spirit or the symbol of longevity.
Some turtle stones (like the Sa-Ryong paintings) feature
strange, stylized turtles with dragon's heads. Their significance
can only be understood in reference to the iconography of other
sacred animals with a monster's head such as the chi-lin (unicorn),
the hai-tai, the lion, the white tiger and the dragon. Each of these
figures is portrayed as a real animal such as a deer, a lion, a tiger or
a snake, but is equipped with the monster-mask known as the"
Pyok-sa, whose purpose is to repel evil.
Although this type of turtle art originated in China under the Han
dynasty and was later introduced into Korea during the period of
the Three Kingdoms, many Orientalists claim that it was in Korea
that it attained maturity with the creation of masterpieces such as
those found in the Silla monument of King Muyol.
The influence of the turtle in Korean life and history extends
much further than art and folklore. In the 16th century Admiral Yi
Sun-sin designed a "turtle ship" which is often considered to be
the first ironclad battleship in the world. The turtle motif was
found on a variety of everyday tools and utensils; it adorned the
foundations of buildings, seals, stones in gardens, water tubs and
stone containers. Nearly a hundred magnificent "turtle bottles"
made for royal officials out of soapstone or bronze have survived
from the Yi dynasty, and together with gunpowder boxes, door
locks and fortune-tellers' magic boxes, bear witness to the cherish¬
ed place which this reptile came to hold in Korean life as a symbol
of longevity and good fortune and as a guardian against evil.
Zo Za-Yong
Photo © Zo Za-Yong, Emilie Museum, Seoul
The Taoist Immortal and the turtle, symbol of longevity, as
portrayed in an ink painting by an unknown 18th-century artist.
39
