Neptune's
power station
Ocean thermal energy conversion
offers an inexhaustible
and non-polluting energy source
by Richard Arlen Meyer
WHEN most people think of solar
energy they imagine heating
panels on roofs of houses and
other buildings. But actually the sun is
where all forms of energy (except nuclear)
originate. Oil and coal were processed by
nature over thousands of years under¬
ground, but they began by combining the
sun's energy with elements already present
in the earth. Solar energy is also the source
of the power of winds, waves and tides,
whose possibilities are now being Inves¬
tigated by researchers as sources of energy
which would not pollute the atmosphere as
do the fossil fuels, coal and oil.
Solar ocean energy, produced by the
process known as ocean thermal energy
conversion, makes practical use of the con¬
tinuous warmth of the seas, where the
sun's energy is conveniently stored 24
hours a day. Ocean thermal energy conver¬
sion takes advantage of the temperature
difference between the warm surface
waters of the ocean and the deep, colder
waters and taps the largest of the earth's ,
solar-thermal storage systems by using
heat exchangers that produce electrical
power.
The idea was first suggested by a French
physicist, Jacques d'Arsonval, in 1881. His
student, Georges Claude, another French¬
man, first demonstrated the concept on a
barge in the Mediterranean and later built a
plant in Cuba, in the late 1920s. These
experiments actually produced electricity,
but the cold-water intake pipes were des¬
troyed by a storm. Since, at that time, oil
Richard Arlen Meyer, U.S. zoologist and
oceanographer, is a specialist in the study of
solar ocean energy and its uses. He is editor and
publisher ot The OTEC Liaison, a monthly news¬
letter on ocean thermal energy conversion
published in Chicago.
was cheap and abundant, the power plant
was never rebuilt. Claude used seawater as
the working fluid in much the same way
that power plants today use steam to gen¬
erate electricity.
Today the United States has the largest
ocean thermal energy conversion pro¬
gramme, with government funding increas¬
ed from $700,000 in 1974 to an expected
$56 million in 1978, but other nations are
also active in the pursuit of solar ocean
energy. Japan has been working intensi¬
vely, since 1973, and a consortium of Euro¬
pean nations and firms is heavily involved
in research. At the largest conference ever
held on the subject, in Miami, Florida in
February of this year, 16 countries were
represented. The industrial countries were
there, officials from third world nations
seeking alternatives to oil, countries bord¬
ering on tropical seas, and even representa¬
tives from the oil-producing countries
themselves, since they know that their
major energy source is being rapidly
depleted.
Solar energy warms the surface water of
the oceans and other large bodies of water
to temperatures much higher than deeper
waters. This cold, deep water is brought up
to heat-exchangers where the temperature
difference is utilized and energy extracted.
Claude's system used warm seawater as
the medium (operating on only a 13°C
temperature difference) but modern scien¬
tists find that the use of other fluids, such
as ammonia, is more efficient. This was
first suggested, in fact, by d'Arsonval.
A prime advantage of ocean thermal
energy conversion is that power plants can
operate around-the-clock, and are non-
polluting. At present, such plants are plan¬
ned for areas surrounded by tropical
waters, but increased efficiency of the heat
exchangers promises a wider range of
potential locations.
The transference of energy from the seas
can be effected in several different ways,
the prime one being to send electrical
power to shore by undersea cable. While
this can be done economically up to 320
kilometres from shore, additional methods
of extracting energy are being studied. On-
site production of energy-intensive pro¬
ducts such as ammonia for fertilizer, as well
as other fuels and chemicals, and large
quantities of fresh water is also being con¬
sidered. Aluminium processing, which
uses great quantities of electricity, could be
enhanced by operating power plants near
the source of its basic raw material, bauxite
ore.
In addition to permanent anchoring of
the plants, either offshore or on coastlines
near ocean areas which have large tem¬
perature differentials, the concept of
"ocean grazing plants" is being developed.
These would be floating factories, that
would move to areas with the greatest tem¬
perature advantages, which change in the
oceans from time to time. Satellites are
already being used to map these locations,
and plot their movements.
By-products of ocean thermal energy
conversion plants make them still more
attractive. In addition to fresh water pro¬
duction, the largest potential apart from
electricity is the likelihood of creating pro¬
ductive fisheries in waters nearby.
The cold water pumped up from the
depths is heavy with nutrients, and re¬
searchers have found that sea life thrives
in such an environment. The Humboldt
Current, a natural cold-water upwelling off
the coast of Peru, produces a fishery that
supplies almost 20 per cent of all the
world's commercial fish. The marlculture,
or aquaculture, aspect of this new source
of energy is being enthusiastically observed
around the world.
While ocean thermal energy conversion
holds great promise as an energy source,
several problems remain. Marine organisms
cling to the surfaces of the heat exchan¬
gers, much as barnacles cling to boat bot¬
toms, but cleaning methods are being
developed to surmount this problem. The
22

In conventional electric power
plants coal, oil or nuclear fuels
generate heat which converts
water into steam. This steam
drives turbine generators which
produce electricity. In the ocean
thermal energy cycle no fuel is
burned and another liquid
medium, ammonia or propane,
is used instead of water.
Diagram below illustrates this
cycle. Ammonia is pumped
round a closed circuit. First it is
heated by the warm ocean
water (top of diagram) so that it
turns into vapour. The vapour
passes through a turbine where
it expands, driving a generator.
Emerging cooler and at a lower
pressure it flows to a cold-water
heat exchanger where it is
cooled further to become liquid
again and the cycle
recommences. Left, an artist's
impression of the surface
platform of an ocean energy
conversion plant. The cold water
pipe extends far below the
surface.
cold-water pipewhich may be as much as
20 metres across will pose transport and
assembly problems of an unprecedented
scale, and engineers are studying safe and
economical methods of solving them. Yet
the biggest questions today are not tech¬
nical, but political. Who would own and
operate the plants? Where can they op¬
erate without infringing on political boun¬
daries? How should they be regulated?
How should they be taxed? It is to be
hoped that this year's International Con¬
ference on the Law of the Sea will find ans¬
wers to some of these questions.
In 1978 ocean thermal research will leave
the laboratories, where efficiency of heat
exchangers, elimination of biofouling and
corrosion, and deployment of plants have
been studied for almost a decade. Late ¡n
1978 or early in 1979 the first mini plant will
be in the water, probably off Hawaii or
Puerto Rico, with a much larger plant
scheduled for 1980. Funding in the United
States and other nations has been increas¬
ing rapidly each year, although of all of the
solar energy options being pursued, solar
ocean energy has probably attracted the
least public attention.
Unlike conventional power plants which
produce pollution of some kind, solar
ocean energy is a clean source of power.
While extensive preliminary studies have
been made to determine the environmental
effects of such power plants, only minimal
objections have arisen. Sea life, while pro¬
tected from the intake openings by
screens, will actually be aided by the
nutrient-rich waters, brought from depths
where little life exists. Researchers have
estimated that, in the year 2000, if all the
power in the world came from solar ocean
energy the surface temperature of the
oceans would be lowered by less than one
degree, since the heat would be conti¬
nuously replaced by the sun.
The world's researchers are pursuing
ocean thermal energy development
because its potential as an inexhaustible,
clean, renewable energy source is tremen¬
dous. One estimate is that 180,000 million
megawatt-hours of power could be genera¬
ted annually from the Gulf Stream along
the "east coast of the United States alone.
This is about 75 times the amount of
power the United States will be using in
1980. Similar coastal areas suitable for solar
energy development could supply a subs¬
tantial share of the world's population with
electric power. With man's ingenuity and
persistence, it is expected that the oceans
will yield what has been stored there for
centuries: clean, inexhaustible energy from
the sun.
Richard Arlen Meyer
Liquid ammonia
"\
£=\ Warm
J^seawater
/29°C
Gaseous ammonia
Turbine
Q
Gaseous ammonia Pump
I
Liquid ammonia
J
Drawing ©RA. Meyer, OTEC
23
