Steering with a smile.
Shepherdess Irina Lapasova,
who lives in the Gorno-Altai
Autonomous Region of the
USSR, is determined that her
10 children will take the right
road in life. (The three
youngest were at the crèche
when photo was taken).
I /~*\ K-V"^ I I \ / /""^ K"^ ^r ^^. T'^ "t"^"^ I N the Soviet Union today 15 million
I ^*"H I I I I I \/ f~i I If J ^i I ^H I I ' I children are enrolled in a vast network
I \-A I I Illy V^ I I V-^ V_r* LV^I LV»/ of state nursery schools. On average,
/ about 50 per cent of children under seven
attend pre-school institutions, but In Mos¬
cow, Leningrad, Ashkhabad, Magnito¬
gorsk and a number of other industrial cen¬
tres, the figure is substantially higher
(about 80 per cent). In these centres, all
children whose parents wish them to
attend nursery schools are admitted
without restriction.
There are 213 training colleges for nur¬
sery school teachers; and highly qualified
staff (such as heads of nursery schools, v
specialists in teaching methods, and f



-a shared
responsibility
by Aleksandr V. Zaporozhets ALEKSANDR V. ZAPOROZHETS, Sower
psychologist, is a member of the USSR Aca¬
demy of Pedagogical Sciences and director of
the Academy's Institute of Pre-school Educa¬
tion. He is the author of more than a hundred
scientific studies on child psychology and pre¬
school teaching.
27

Photo © APN, Moscow
"It's very hard to make up later for what hasn't been
done in the first three years", wrote the Soviet
educationalist Anton S. Makarenko (1888-1939). A
fundamental tenet of Makarenko's theories on
education is that children's will-power is developed
not through indulging their every whim but through
teaching them self-control and balanced and positive
behaviour. Above, a budding ballerina at practice.
training college lecturers) are trained in 34
specialized faculties in pedagogical institu¬
tes. There are some 800,000 pre-school
teachers in the USSR today.
The family plays a highly important role
in the education of children in the USSR.
Soviet pre-school educational methods are
based on the principle of the unity of state
and family education.
Throughout the country, educational
ideas are publicized on a large scale by
"parents' universities", lectures, courses
and counselling, and also by the press,
radio and television. Many editions of
popular books on family education are
published.
The Soviet system of pre-school educa¬
tion is based on the idea that the develop¬
ment of the child does not occur sponta¬
neously, as a result of the emergence of
Innate aptitudes, but that the determining
factors are the social environment and edu¬
cation.
Education is particularly important in the
first years of life, when there is an intensive
development of various intellectual, artistic
and practical abilities, when the moral
qualities of the personality are formed, and
the character begins to take shape.
As the Soviet educationalist A.S. Maka¬
renko pointed out, the way in which chil¬
dren are educated during the pre-school
period has a decisive influence on their suc¬
cess or failure at school and to some extent
determines their subsequent achievements
in various fields of productive, scientific
and artistic activity, their position in society
and their happiness in personal life.
Although certain characteristics of a
new-born child's organic structure (and
especially of his nervous system) are inheri¬
ted, these are merely the starting-point for
his later psychological development and do
not predetermine either his character or his
future level of development. All normal
children have enormous psychological and
physiological potential; the problem lies in
creating the most favourable conditions for
realizing it.
Having recognized the importance of
inherited characteristics, we must, at the
same time, emphasize that they are merely
the conditions and not the determinants of
the child's psychological development.
None of the distinctive characteristics of
the human mind, such as logical thought,
creative imagination and volition as a regu¬
lator of action, can emerge simply as the
result of the maturing of organic charac¬
teristics. They can only develop in the right
social and educational conditions.
Psychologists have accumulated vast
amounts of data which support this thesis.
Studies on very young children hospitali¬
zed in isolation from adults, show that
psychological development is impossible if
the child is cut off from social life and edu¬
cation in the broadest sense.
However, merely to Indicate the decisive
Importance of social and educational fac¬
tors is not enough; it is essential to acquire
a clearer idea of the role of these factors in
psychological development.
Many West European and American
psychologists consider that the develop¬
ment of children and young animals fol¬
lows a similar process of adaptation.
except that children adapt to the conditions
of social life while animals adapt to biologi¬
cal conditions.
Such a concept is false because it takes
no account of the specific way in which the
human organism develops. It is true that
children, like young animals, go through a
process of adaptation and adjustment to
environmental conditions, but their
psychological development follows differ¬
ent lines and is not analogous to that of
animals.
It has been demonstrated that through¬
out childhood, the individual absorbs the
social experience accumulated by the pre¬
vious generation, acquires specific know¬
ledge and skills, and grasps certain aesthe¬
tic and moral standards. If no such social



experience is acquired, the child's psycho¬
logical development cannot take place.
It should be stressed that the acquisition
of social experience implies not only the
accumulation of individual concepts and
skills, but also the development of certain
personality traits. This is not a passive pro¬
cess and should not be regarded as a one¬
way influence exercised on the child's
consciousness by adults while thé child
remains inactive.
. The child's activity is of decisive impor¬
tance; without such activity nothing can be
achieved. Its nature changes as the child
develops. Certain forms of activity become
dominant at certain stages of development,
later becoming subsidiary and being re¬
placed by other, more complex forms of
behaviour.
Children of pre-school age mainly learn
through play and through such creative
pursuits as drawing, modelling and build¬
ing. Later on, school activities and socially
useful work become more important.
Research has shed light on the process
whereby new forms of mental activity
. develop while the child is actively acquiring
social experience. Initially such activities
take an outward, physical form of expres¬
sion and later, through the command of
language, are "generalized" and, as Piaget
puts it, "interiorized" as part of a process
of conceptualization, imagination and
thought.
The work of such Soviet specialists as
Leontyev, Galperin and Elkonin shows that
while this process always occurs, it takes
place more slowly and less effectively when
the child is left to its own devices. It hap¬
pens much earlier, and is more complete, if
the education provided is specially struct¬
ured and purposive.
These are some of the psychological
data which form the basis of Soviet pre¬
school educational theory. They provide
scientific justification for opposing the con¬
cepts of spontaneous development and
undirected education and for insisting on
the importance of the teacher's role, on the
need for the systematic teaching of pre¬
school children according to a definite
syllabus, and on the need for measures
specifically designed to form certain
aspects of the child's personality.
Aleksandr V. Zaporozhets
1

