UNESCO
Publisher to the world
In 32 years, 7,000 titles in 70 languages
by Edward Wegman
FOUR or five times a week, every week
of the year, a book is published by
Unesco or under its auspices some¬
where in the world. That makes a cascade
of more than seven thousand titles, pub¬
lished in some seventy languages, since the
founding of Unesco in 1946.
The subject matter is diverse, ranging
alphabetically from Art to Zoology or, in
accordance with the Universal Decimal
EDWARD WEGMAN is a formerjournalist and
radio commentator who entered book pub¬
lishing in 1960 In the United States. As a mem- .
ber of Unesco's staff he has been .connected
with the Organization's Book Development
Programme, International Book Year, The Inter¬
national Copyright information Centre and, at
present, the Unesco Press.
Classification system, from Official Publica¬
tions to Geography, Biography and His¬
tory. A bibliography issued by the Organi¬
zation in 1971 to mark twenty-five years of
publishing already employed some two
hundred different subject headings. It list¬
ed more than two thousand authors, start¬
ing with a specialist on Arab affairs named
Abdelbacky and ending with a jurist called
Zweigert; in between it cited many- of the
leading literary and political personalities of
our epoch, all of whom contributed their
writings to illustrate Unesco's goals.
More than a third of the books deal with
education; the next largest group of titles is
concerned with science, while the social
sciences, culture and communication each
represent about ten per cent of the output.
Not all these books and periodicals are
published by Unesco itself. Nearly half of
them are issued by agreement with private
publishers, non-governmental organiza¬
tions and even governments through their
National Commission for Unesco. Nor is
this by any means the totality of books and
periodicals relating to Unesco and its activi¬
ties; innumerable publications about
Unesco have been issued by other bodies,
both public and private. At the moment the
direct output by Unesco as a publisher is
approximately one hundred and fifty titles a
year as well as a dozen or so periodicals.
In the world of books, Unesco is a
publisher with a difference. Not many
publishers consistently distribute all their
publications in several languages in almost
one hundred and fifty countries throughout j
the world. In fact, you are reading these I
31

Unesco through
its publications
Organized within the framework of a series of "Unesco Book
Weeks" being held in major cities throughout the world, an
exhibition on the theme "Unesco Through its Publications" was
inaugurated at the Organization's Paris headquarters on 26
September 1978.
More than simply a display of books and periodicals, the exhibition
aimed to present a living picture of all Unesco's activities in the
publishing field, ranging from books produced by Unesco's
precursor, the International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation, in
which such famous personalities as Einstein, Thomas Mann, Paul
Valéry and Salvador de Madariaga collaborated, to Unesco's very
latest publications.
Photo shows Unesco's Director-General Mr Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
and, on his right, Mr Leonard Martin, President of the Executive
Board of Unesco, visiting the exhibition.
Photo Michel Claude, Unesco
t words in one of Unesco's most popular
' publications and in one of the nineteen lan¬
guages in which it is published. Few pub¬
lishers can claim so diverse a readership.
But if the Unesco Courier is a best-seller
as a periodical, with more than two and a
half million readers around the world, the
Organization has had a number of re¬
sounding successes with books as well.
Learning to Be, a pioneering study of
new directions in education, has been
translated and published in thirty-five
languages, and the Unesco Source Book
for Science Teaching has sold more than
one million copies in various languages and
editions and is still going strong.
Conceived as a do-it-yourself book for
high school science classes in war-torn
areas, the original Source Book explained
how to use a burnt-out light bulb as a test-
tube, and how to improvise laboratory
experiments. Its latest version has kept
pace with the growth of and changes in
science teaching. It describes experiments
in traditional physics and chemistry as well
as in biology and earth and space sciences.
Unesco's principal purpose as a pub¬
lisher is to make available material which it
alone can compile because of its unique
international resources and status. In addi¬
tion, Unesco is in a position to invest time,
effort and money in worthwhile projects
regardless of considerations of profitability.
One such enterprise is the Index Transla¬
tionum, a compilation of all the translations
published annually in all languages
throughout the world. Of inestimable inte¬
rest to librarians and publishers, the Index
has a limited circulation in proportion to the
costly international effort required to pro¬
duce it. Nevertheless, it has been going on
since 1948, carrying on the war-interrupted
enterprise initiated in 1932 by Unesco's pre¬
decessor of League of Nations days, the
Institute for International Intellectual Co¬
operation.
Another, perhaps even more impressive
international effort is now under way with
the General History of Africa. Experts from
all over Africa have joined with historians
from many other parts of the world to
undertake the mammoth task of putting
together for the first time a complete and
dispasàionate account of events in Africa
from the dawn of mankind to the present
day. Thanks to supplementary financial
support from Member States, the History
will appear not only in the vehicular lan¬
guages of the continent, English and
French, but also in at least one African lan¬
guage as well as in Arabic.
The idea of creating an international edi¬
torial committee for a single major project
had already been tested successfully with
the creation, a number of years ago, of a
Commission for a Scientific and Cultural
History ofMankind. The fruit of this project
was a six-volume study that has already
appeared in English, French, Greek, Serbo-
Croat, Slovene and Spanish.
Although many Unesco books and perio¬
dicals are aimed primarily at clearly defined
groups of specialists in the fields of educa¬
tion, science, culture and communication,
Unesco publications are becoming more
and more concerned with the broader areas
of interest of our time and are being direc¬
ted more particularly towards the educated
general public. This has involved the crea¬
tion of a number of new, interdisciplinary
series two of which, Insights and Ap¬
proaches, are just getting under way (see
inside back cover). Another series, World
Tribune, is at the planning stage.
Unesco also undertakes important activi¬
ties in the field of copyright aimed at pro¬
tecting the rights of the developing coun¬
tries and facilitating the transfer of copy¬
right. Unesco has sponsored a Copyright
Information Centre to promote the transfer
of rights to developing countries.
This interest in the exchange of know¬
ledge goes back to the very beginnings of
Unesco. One of the first international ins¬
truments approved by the Organization
was the Beirut Agreement, adopted by the
General Conference of 1948. With its sister
agreement, adopted in Florence in 1950,
the Beirut Agreement is intended to
remove obstacles to the free flow of books
and other material of an educational, scien¬
tific or cultural nature.
From this to copyright was but a step;
and from copyright to programmes for the
promotion of publishing in the developing
world was but one more. The effort to sti¬
mulate book production began with a
meeting of experts in Asia, in 1966, and
this was followed by similar meetings in
Africa, in 1968, in Latin America, in 1969,
and in the Arab States, in 1972. These
meetings assessed the difficulties each
region faced with respect to book
production and distribution and came up
with concrete suggestions on how to
solve some of the more urgent problems.
The climax to these efforts to mobilize
the book world was International Book
Year 1972, proposed by the U.S.S.R. and
voted unanimously by the Unesco Member
States. More than one hundred and thirty
countries drew up and executed national



32

programmes to promote the creation, pro¬
duction, distribution and reading of books.
Many of these programmes have con¬
tinued through the years since 1972.
One earlier result of the book develop¬
ment programme was the establishment by
the Japanese of a Book Development Cen¬
tre in Tokyo which, since 1967, has been
training personnel and devising new type¬
faces for Asian languages; Unesco has pro¬
vided assistance for the courses. Several
years ago, the Centre also established an
ad hoc mobile team of experts which has
visited various countries of the Asian
region offering intensive training in diffe¬
rent aspects of book production and distri¬
bution. This supplements the courses orga¬
nized by Unesco itself through its Regional
Cultural Centre in Karachi.
The Tokyo Centre, now known as the
Asian Culture Centre for Unesco, also
developed what has become known as the
Asian Co-publication Programme. The
basic idea was that the Centre would pre¬
pare a master edition of a children's book
which could then be translated by partici¬
pating countries into their national lan¬
guages using the same illustrations. Since
colour illustrations are the most expensive
part of a children's book this was an effec¬
tive way of cutting costs. The first editions
were all printed in Japan, with each partici¬
pating country sending its typeset trans¬
lation to the Centre.
The idea was refined in ensuing years
and the Centre now produces a master edi¬
tion in English which is supplied, free of
charge and accompanied by films of the
illustrations, to Asian countries wishing to
publish the work. The subject matter is
chosen by an international committee of
book experts from various countries of the
region. A Unesco representative also fre¬
quently participates. Four volumes entitled
Folk Tales from Asia have already been
published in at least fourteen Asian lan¬
guages, while two others on Asian
festivals have been issued.
This programme has been so successful
that a number of European publishers have
brought out translations of the publica¬
tions. And similar programmes are under
consideration to provide children's books
for Africa and Latin America. Through the
combined efforts of publishers in a region,
it will thus be possible for each country to
possess more and better children's litera¬
ture, which will at the same time promote
regional understanding.
Another long-term effort to promote
understanding of different cultures was
-started by Unesco in 1948 with its Litera¬
ture Translation Programme. Its purpose
was and is to promote wider knowledge of
works of literature in little-known lan¬
guages. Nearly 450 titles have been pub¬
lished; most of them have been transla¬
tions into English and French,, but some
translations from European languages into
less widely used tongues have also been
made. The books, from sixty different lan¬
guages, cover both classics and contempo¬
rary writing and Unesco is proud to have
included in its translation series
three authors who went on to win Nobel
Prizes for Literature: the Greek poet
Seferis, the Japanese novelist Kawabata
and the Spanish poet Aleixandre.
While the original impetus for the pro¬
gramme was the promotion of knowledge
of the literary heritage of different peoples,
it has also had the effect of improving the
quality of translation. Of what use would it
be to put into English or French a Persian
classic, say, if the work lost in the process
the literary excellence which had led in the
first instance to the decision to translate?
Unesco therefore seeks out the best trans¬
lators it can find and, as a further guaran¬
tee, submits their completed work to other
linguists to ensure that standards are being
maintained. All of this fits in, of course,
with Unesco's activities to improve the
status of translators generally, in¬
cluding the promotion of an international
declaration on that subject.
To be truly effective, Unesco needs to
convey its message in the language of each
country. That is why, in addition to spon¬
soring translations of world literature,
Unesco makes a special effort to promote
the translation of its own publications.
Some assistance may be necessary in
arranging for translation and publication. It
is here that the Member States' National
Commissions for Unesco often play a major
role. The Commissions take over the task
of finding translators and of seeking out
national publishers.
Unesco is exploring many other ways of
imparting knowledge: microfiches, art
slides, magnetic tapes, films, records, etc.
Together with books and periodicals, these
make it possible for more and more men,
women and children in every corner of the
earth to learn what international experts
have to say on problems that touch each
one of them.
Edward Wegman
33
