The flowering
of
Slav culture
Famed for the fanciful carvings of
warriors, fantastic beasts and masks
that cover its walls, the tiny cathedral
of St. George is the pride of the town
of Yuryev Polsky, 200 kilometres north¬
east of Moscow. Construction of the
cathedral, which was completed in
1234, is said to have been personally
supervised by Prince Svyatoslav
Vsevolodovich. Right, pointed mask
over the north portal is thought to be
the likeness of the Prince.
by Dmitri Markov
ALONG with the Latin and the Ger¬
manic peoples, the Slavs form one
of the major ethnic groups of Eu¬
rope. Slavonic languages echo from the
austere shores of the White Sea to the sun¬
bathed Adriatic coast, over the vast expan¬
ses that stretch from the Baltic to the Ural
mountains (Europe's frontier with Asia),
and further still, in Siberia and the Far East.
Jordanes, the sixth-century historian of
the Goths, tells us of the Antae (a group of
Eastern Slavs), who sacrificed oxen to their
Thunder God, Perun, who believed in
rusalki, or stream nymphs, and who wor¬
shipped rivers and woodlands.
Byzantine historians are unanimous in
recording the valour, integrity, hospitality
and, above all, the love of freedom of the
Slav tribes, to whom, in contrast with the
rest of Europe at the time, the institution of
slavery was virtually unknown.
This was a time when a page of history
was turning, when the Middle Ages were
replacing Antiquity and when the ancient
slave-owning societies were giving way to
new, feudal States. The Slavs played their
part in this process which affected the
whole of Europe. The kingdom of Great
Moravia, Kievan Russia and the Republic of
Dubrovnik, to name only three of the Slav
States, wielded considerable political
influence among their neighbours, not only
because of their economic and military
strength (in 911 A.D. Prince Oleg of Kiev
celebrated his victories by nailing his shield
to the gates of Constantinople), but also
because of their highly developed, diversi¬
fied and original culture.
The name of Great Moravia calls to mind
the unique achievement of two brothers
from Thessalonica, Cyril and Methodius.
The twenty-year adventure of the two
DMITRI MARKOV is a member of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and director of
its Institute of Slav and Balkan Studies in Mos¬
cow. He is president of the Unesco-sponsored
International Association for the Study and Dis¬
semination of Slav Cultures.
"Apostles of the Slavs" began in 863 A.D.,
when the Moravian prince Rostislav sent to
Constantinople for missionaries who could
instruct his people in the Christian faith, in
their own Slavonic tongue. An ancient
"Lives of the Saints" tells us that when he
was taking leave of the Byzantine Emperor,
Cyril declared: "Teaching without an
alphabet and without books is like writing
upon water", and before they set off on
their hazardous journey he and his brother
Methodius devised a Slavonic alphabet,
thus laying the foundations of Slavonic
literature.
The cultural and educational activities of
Cyril and Methodius had far-reaching
effects in Moravia, Pannonia and the other
West Slav countries. And although their
great undertaking met with implacable
opposition on the part of the Catholic
Church, which cruelly persecuted the mis¬
sionaries, their disciples quickly took up the
struggle in neighbouring Bulgaria. Access
to writing was an epoch-making event for
all the Slav peoples, and consequently for
the history of the culture of the world.
The age of Kievan Russia (whose heyday
was at the turn of the eleventh and twelfth
centuries) saw unprecedented advances in
city-building, craftsmanship and com¬
merce, intense international political acti¬
vity, and a corresponding flowering of the
arts. Our appreciation of mankind's cultural
accomplishments is in no way complete if
we neglect the inimitable creations of the
Kievan age in architecture, literature, paint¬
ing and the applied arts, which have given
such profound aesthetic delight to succes¬
sive generations of Slavs and non-Slavs
alike.
The perfect moulding and the succinct
yet picturesque language of the Slovo o
Polku Igoreve, a contemporary epic poem,
place it on the same artistic and spiritual
level as the Nibelungenlied and the Chan¬
son de Roland. This "Lay of Igor's Cam¬
paign" carries in its lines the whispering
sound of the feather-grass of the steppe
across which, in the year 1185, Prince Igor
of Novgorod-Seversky rode out against the
Polovtsians; its language echoes the clash
of swords and the gasps and groans of
horsemen locked in mortal conflict. Indeed,
the Slovo constitutes an invaluable and elo¬
quent account of distant days, and of the
feelings and thoughts of the people of
medieval Russia.
Mention of Dubrovnik calls up memories
of its outstanding role in the development
of European humanism. Over a period of
several centuries, despite constant warfare
and the re-shaping of frontiers, the city-
republic conserved its independence. It
rivalled mighty Venice in terms of both
commerce and culture, to such an extent
that a special item was placed on the
agenda of the Venetian Senate: "Every
Fridaya discussion on ways and means
of crushing Dubrovnikl" (See article page
43).
Dubrovnik was a centre of study for
famous mathematicians and poets, histo¬
rians and philosophers. Between the fif-_
teenth and seventeenth centuries, the
combined labour and talents of architects
and engineers, of anonymous stone¬
cutters and masons, produced an ensem¬
ble of rare harmony which, in its magnifi¬
cent and lavish natural setting, made it
seem to be an eighth Wonder of the World
and a fitting destination, as Bernard Shaw
suggested, for those who are looking for
heaven on earth.
The fortress of Dubrovnik and its
princely palace are visible symbols of the
independence of Dalmatian humanism,
which evolved in keeping with the historical
development of the country of the South
Slavs, in intimate contact with the wealth
of their national culture and in
accordance with their original life-style.
The Slav peoples contributed in a variety
of ways to the intellectual and spiritual life
of medieval Europe, and provided much of
the ideological background to the Euro¬
pean anti-feudal and anti-clerical move¬
ments which resulted in numerous popular i
uprisings. Thus, for example, the Bulgarian I


y sect of the Bogomils laid the foundations
of the dualistic teachings adopted by the
Cathars, the Albigenses and the Templars.
It is worth mentioning here that in French
dialects of the Middle Ages, the word
bogre (Bulgar) was synonymous with
"heretic".
Protest was inherent, too, in the ser¬
mons preached by the religious reformer,
Jan Hus, who was burnt at the stake in
141 5 on the orders of the reactionary Coun¬
cil of Constance. From his martyr's pyre
blazed up the purifying flame of the Refor¬
mation which spread throughout Europe.
The great Martin Luther humbly called him¬
self a Hussite, while the teachings of the
Bohemian preacher became a foundation-
stone of the revolutionary ideology of burg¬
hers and peasants alike.
During the Middle Ages, the Slav peo¬
ples were to taste the gall of foreign
oppression. Poland and Russia, for exam¬
ple, found themselves under constant pres¬
sure from their east European neighbours,
and this obviously affected their own cul¬
tural development. Nevertheless, when
medieval European culture was refreshed
The
Kremlin
down
the
ages
and renewed by the irresistible tide of the
Renaissance, the Slavs were able, to the
extent that their historical circumstances
permitted, to play an active role in the great
spiritual movement of humanism.
In the space of a few generations, the
great figures of the Renaissance elaborated
a new vision of the world and a new con¬
ception of man himself. Their ideas were
reflected in the artistic masterpieces and
forward-looking scientific achievements of
the age. And among the great Renaissance
men were numbered many Slavs.
Pride of place must be acorded to Nikolaj
Kopernik, the Polish astronomer Coperni¬
cus (1473-1543), who overturned the image
of the world that the Church had sanctified
for more than fifteen hundred years (see
Unesco Courier, April 1973). His revolu¬
tionary theory that the planets, in¬
cluding the earth, revolve around the sun,
enabled the Italian philosopher Giordano
Bruno (1548-1600) to extend the frontiers
of the universe still further, and postulate
the existence of countless solar systems
similar to our own.
There is considerable evidence of the
importance which Copernicus's contempo¬
raries attached to his work. As a young
man, Jan Amos Komensky, better known
to us as Comenius, while visiting Heidel¬
berg in 1614, came across a copy of Coper¬
nicus's treatise De Revolutionibus Coeles-
tium Orbium; without hesitation, he emp¬
tied his pockets to pay for the manu¬
script, and was consequently obliged to
make the long journey home to Moravia on
foot.
Komensky himself (1592-1670) was an-

other Slav scholar who made a unique con¬
tribution to the culture of the new age. He
devised a complete educational system,
and was one of the first to understand that
the transformation of society and its
advance along the path of historical pro¬
gress depended in great measure on the all-
round development of man.
Komensky stood at the watershed of
two great European cultural epochs, the
Renaissance and the Enlightenment. It was
the latter movement which, in its confirma¬
tion of the unlimited power of human rea¬
son, finally dethroned the scholasticism of
the Church as the ultimate authority as far
as the perception and explanation of the
world was concerned. Built on the founda- 1
tions of outstanding scientific achieve-'
Photo © APN, Pans
The Kremlin, or citadel, formed the defensive core of the great medieval cities of
Russia. Pskov, Novgorod, Smolensk and Rostov were all built round Kremlins, which
generally contained cathedrals, the palaces of princes and bishops, government offices
and an arsenal. The Moscow Kremlin, the most imposing of all, was originally a wooden
fortress erected in 1156, but it was enlarged and rebuilt many times. Photos (1) View of
Moscow in the 16th century from a book by the German traveller Adam Olearius. (2) The
first known plan of Moscow, published in 1556 in a book by the Austrian ambassador
Sigismund Gerberstein. (3) The Palace Square in the heart of the Moscow Kremlin in the
17th century. (4) 16th century engraving of the stonemasons of Moscow. The inscription
reads: "That summer [1367] the Grand Duke Dmitri built Moscow in stone, and from
that time Moscow was built only in stone." (5) The Kremlin in the 18th century, as seen
from the River Moskva. Copper engraving by the Russian artist Michael Makhaev.

> ments, the Enlightenment threw open the
doors to the further development of the
natural and human sciences.
The brightest star in the brilliant firma¬
ment of eighteenth-century Slav science
was undoubtedly Mikhail Lomonosov
(1711-1765), the great Russian scholar and
encyclopaedist, and a truly "universal
man". An urbane, yet poetic figure, Lomo¬
nosov combined the talents of physicist
and chemist, geologist and geographer,
historian and philologist. He was a versatile
and accomplished naturalist, and rightly
shared with the distinguished French
chemist Lavoisier the honour of discover¬
ing the law of conservation of matter
and energy.
The age of Enlightenment saw an affir¬
mation of the need to place scientific
knowledge at the disposal of the public as a
whole, and to create a non-clerical, secular
system of education, and it was not long
before this principle was put into practice.
The "Educational Commission" estab¬
lished in Poland in 1773 was the first
independent European "Ministry of Educa¬
tion".
The period between the mid-eighteenth
and mid-nineteenth centuries, rightly
known as "the age of national regenera¬
tion", was rich in consequence for the
development of Slav culture. In all spheres
of social life, the cultural element expanded
at an unprecedented rate. Literature, art
and science reflected a nation's greatness,
and served as its "visiting-card" as far as
other peoples and States were concerned.
The sudden flowering of Slav culture
was conditioned by (and inseparable from)
the national liberation movements of the
Slav peoples or, as in the case of Russia, by
the development of progressive social and
political ideas. Thus, the Russian poet of
freedom, Alexander Pushkin, echoed the
¡deals of the "Decembrist" revolutionaries
(1); the struggle of the Czechs for their
own National Theatre, which was conduc¬
ted under the slogan "By the people for the
people", was both a consequence and a
reflection of the upsurge of the national
movement; the Bulgarian writers Hristo
Botev and Ljuben Karavelov participated
directly in the armed struggle for the inde¬
pendence of their country.
Culture was a driving force in the politi¬
cal education of peoples, and in making
them aware of their identity as nations. In
March 1794, for example, the Poles reacted
to the first performance of Cracovians and
Mountaineers, a musical comedy by Woy-
zecfc Boguslavsky, the "father of the Polish
theatre", in much the same way as the
French Revolutionaries had reacted to
Beaumarchais' Le Manage de Figaro.
Each new decade of the nineteenth cen¬
tury saw an increased contribution by the
Slavs to the culture of Europe and of the
world. This was particularly evident in lit¬
erature, especially with the works of the
great Russian authors, Tolstoy, Dos-
toevsky and Turgenev, whose impact was
worldwide, while Poland was brilliantly
represented by Mickiewicz and Slovatsky,
and the Ukraine by Taras Shevchenko. At
the same time, outstanding Slav compo¬
sers like Glinka, Chopin, Tchaikovsky and
Smetana set new standards of excellence
in the music not only of their own coun¬
tries, but also of the world.
The theatre of the Slav countries under-
(1) The 'Decembrist rising' in Russia, so-called because
it occurred on 18 December 1825, was an ill-fated
palace revolution against the Tsarist autocracy.
went remarkable development, as may be
seen from a single example that of the
Moscow Arts Theatre, founded in 1898 by
the great actor-producers Konstantin Sta¬
nislavsky and Vladimir Nemirovich-
Danchenko.
In the twentieth century, the Great Oct¬
ober Socialist Revolution in Russia set in
motion a revolutionary process whose
impact on the development of modern cul¬
ture has been felt far beyond the borders of
the Slav countries. The vitality of the ideas
which provoked this development was put
to a severe test during the struggle of Slav
and non-Slav peoples alike against Fas¬
cism, a death-dealing movement which
also resulted in the mindless and pitiless
destruction of cultural monuments thou¬
sands of years old.
Today, Unesco's programme of cultural
studies is making cultural exchange even
more meaningful. A major component of
this programme is the study on Slav cul¬
tures, which reflects the increasing world¬
wide interest in the centuries-old cultures
of the Slavs, and in the economic and cul¬
tural achievements of the modern Slav
States.
Unesco has enlisted scholars and intel¬
lectuals and representatives of the mass
media and of educational institutions in
Europe, America and Asia in the implemen¬
tation of this project, a natural outcome of
which has been awareness of the need for
an international pooling and co-ordination
of efforts in the complex study of Slav cul¬
tures, and in the dissemination of know¬
ledge about the Slav peoples, the way they
live today and the contribution they have
made, and are making, to the civilization of
the world.
Dmitri Markov
The Slav cultural tradition, still very much alive today, now incorporates revolutionary
motifs. Known as "October Song", this porcelain dish is one of a series of decorative
objects produced by Maria Lebedeva in 1919-1920. The words of the "Internationale" are
reproduced on the inner rim.
8
Photo © Aurora Publishers. Leninarad
