Leo Tolstoy in the monastic simplicity of his
bedroom at Yasnaya Polyana. With him is
Dushan P. Makovitsky (right) the doctor who
tended Tolstoy and kept a record of his life and
sayings from 1904 until the great writer's death
in 1910. Dr. Makovitsky was the only person to
whom the 82-year-old Tolstoy divulged his
plans to leave his estate in search of a refuge
where he could live a simple life in closer
conformity with his convictions. When Tolstoy
left Yasnaya Polyana on the night of 10
November 1910, Makovitsky was with him. A
few days later Tolstoy's health broke down,
and he died at the tiny railway station at
Astapovo, attended until his final moments by
the faithful Makovitsky.



MY
YEARS
WITH
TOLSTOY
by Dushan Makovitsky
To mark the 150th anniversary of the birth
of Leo Tolstoy, the Unesco Courier presents
on the following pages specially selected
extracts from a hitherto unpublished diary
kept by Dushan Petrovich Makovitsky
(1866-1922), a Slovak physician who was
both Tolstoy's doctor and his close friend.
Throughout the last six years of Tolstoy's
life, Makovitsky lived at Yasnaya Polyana,
keeping a record of the great Russian
writer's comments on a wide variety of
subjects, including morality, religion,
philosophy, art, literature, history and
scienceand, more particularly, on the
most burning social and political issues of
the time.
The result was a voluminous diary
comprising more than 7,000 typed and
handwritten pages in the Russian and
Slovak languages, known today as The
Yasnaya Polyana Notebooks, although
Makovitsky himself called his record "With
Tolstoy, 1904-1910".
Makovitsky's diary owes its originality to
the manner in which it reflects what Lenin
called "the manifest contradictions" that
were so typical of Tolstoy's utterances and
thoughts. But the Notebooks are more than
14

just a day by day, at times even hour by
hour, chronicle of Tolstoy's life at Yasnaya
Polyana; they provide a memorable picture,
refracted through the prism of Tolstoy's
personality, of the period in which they
were written, of the critical years which
saw Russia's involvement in war with
Japan, the first Revolution of 1905, and the
reactionary backlash which followed its
repression.
The Yasnaya Polyana Notebooks are
invaluable source material for the study of
the life and work of one of the most
complex and spiritually fearless men of all
time, and of a writer who had a worldwide
influence on the development of modern
literature.
The first complete and annotated edition of
Makovitsky's diaries is at present being
prepared by Literaturnoe Nasledstvo
(Literary Heritage), at the A.M. Gorky
Institute of World Literature of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Sciences, with the
collaboration of the L.N. Tolstoy State
Museum in Moscow, the Charles University
in Prague and the Institute of Literary
Studies of the Slovak Academy of Sciences
in Bratislava.
Photo Hermitage Museum © Aurora Publishers, Leningrad
This impressive bust of Tolstoy, the 150th
anniversary of whose birth is being
celebrated this year, is by the Russian
sculptor Anna Golubkina (1864-1927) who had
attended Auguste Rodin's studio in Paris.
Today in the Hermitage Museum,- Leningrad,
the sculpture conveys all the creative force of
the author of Anna Karenina, Resurrection,
The Power of Darkness, The Kreutzer Sonata,
Father Sergius, The Death of Ivan lllyich and
above all of War and Peace, one of the
greatest literary masterpieces of all time.
15

MY YEARS WITH TOLSTOY
Tolstoy as a young man, at two key moments in his life as a
writer. Top, in 1856 at the age of 28. He had just returned to
St. Petersburg after serving as a volunteer in the Russian
army in the Caucasus and during the Crimean War. His
soldiering days left Tolstoy with a lifelong horror of war and
every form of violence, revealed in such early works as The
Cossacks and Sebastopol Stories which were based on his
experiences in battle. Above, Tolstoy at the age of 40 when
he was completing his masterpiece. War and Peace. This
vast novel, set against the background of the Napoleonic
Wars and above all the invasion of Russia in 1812, was
conceived and written between 1863 and 1869. With an array
of some 600 characters, it presents, through the story of a
group of families, Tolstoy's epic vision of Russian and
European life.
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited
1905
20 January
Tolstoy : "In the past, literature functioned like chamber
music, as something designed to please a small circle of idle
rich. Now that it is within the reach of the workers, it should
be based on what ordinary people want. But literature of that
kind does not yet exist."
4 February
Tolstoy : "I'm being serious, why not visit the Slav countries?
Italy, the Riviera that's all familiar stuff. But new places,
peoples that haven't changed they're what is interesting.
That's where I should go if I were you. I'm grateful to Dushan
Petrovich tMakovitsky] for everything, but especially for what
he teaches us about the Slavs. Apart from the "Slavophils"
( 1 ) who make a point of finding out about them, we Russians
don't know much about the Slavs; we ought to be asking
how many of them there are, what they are like, where they
live, and so on."
25 April
Tolstoy : "We've been trailing along behind the rest of
Europe. Why don't we move up to the front and show what
needs to be done?"
27 April
Tolstoy : "I was fortunate, in that I began to love and revere
our people at a very early age. Spiritually, the Russians are
growing up. They are moving ahead, although at a slow pace.
The people know a lot; it's up to us to learn from them."
8 May
Tolstoy : "It was Radishchev, Novikov and the Decembrists,
(2) and not Alexander II, who liberated the peasants. The
Decembrists sacrificed themselves.
"At the moment, the question of freeing the land is where the
peasant question was at the time of the Decembrists."
17 May
Tolstoy : "Goethe says that he thinks better than he speaks,
that he speaks better than he writes, and that he writes better
for himself than for the public. I think it's the opposite with
me: I write more clearly and more comprehensively, and take
greater account of every point of view, when I'm writing for
publication, than when I'm writing for myself or speaking."
22 May
Asked whether the [Russo-Japanese] war could have any
kind of cultural influence, Tolstoy replied: "Enormous, but
anticultural. It takes no time at all to assimilate European
culture look at the Japanese. The nations with European
culture are out of their minds, struggling for colonies in order
to sell their goods. Arming themselves all the time. First it's a
metre of armour plating on their ships, then a metre and a
half, two metres, two and a half. One lot mobilizes its men,
(1) From the mid-nineteenth century onwards, Russian political thought was
divided, basically, between two schools: the "Westernizers", who wished the
Russia of the future to be modelled on Western civilization, and the "Slavo¬
phils", for whom the only hope lay through the development of specifically Slav
traditions.
(2) Alexander Radishchev (1749-1802) and Nikolai Novikov (1744-1818) were the
first Russian writers to raise the question of the abolition of serfdom. The
"Decembrists" were the instigators of the unsuccessful rising of December
1825 against the autocratic rule of Tsar Nikolas I. Five of the ringleaders were
hanged and 120 others were deported to Siberia.
16

another calls up the women as well. All their thoughts and
energies are directed towards destruction. Isn't that mad¬
ness? Equality and brotherhood that's what true culture is
about."
27 May
Tolstoy : "It seems to me that the Russian people have lost
their moral sense. And yet I continue to venerate them. They
have their own religion, their own philosophy, their own art."
Vladimir Grigoryevich [Chertkov] (3): "What you have written
for the people is in a sense their property; but do they really
understand it?"
Tolstoy : "No, they only understand what I have borrowed
from themtheir tales and given back to them. What the
Russian intelligentsia is giving them is not what they need.
Dickens gave back to the English people the best of what the
people themselves possessed. In the West, the intelligentsia
laughs at the people, scorns the way they speak; in our
country it is the people who teach us how to speak, and who
reveal themselves through their speech. I come from the
people I like to believe that I really come from the
people and I try to write for them, in their own spirit."
1906
11 January
His voice choked with emotion, almost in tears, Tolstoy mut¬
tered: "How can I be a moral person when I am living off
others? The muzhiks [peasants] have taught me how to live.
Morality is possible only through physical labour and simple
living. When I learned that, it was my road to Damascus."
28 January -
Concerning the attachment of the lesser Slav peoples to their
national languages, and the enormous importance which they
accord to their mother tongue, Tolstoy said: "We Russians
are lucky, nobody else is oppressing us; we don't need to dis¬
cuss such matters. It's easy enough to talk about these things
when you're not under somebody else's yoke."
11 February
We were talking about music. Tolstoy said that music in¬
spired confidence and hope. It should be left on its own and
not be mixed up with drama and poetry. Music was the
highest form of art, the most mysterious and indefinable.
13 February
Tolstoy: "What a lot of barriers there are to prevent people
from leading reasonable lives! Racial distinctions, for in¬
stance, and governments, and religion."
28 March
Tolstoy: "At the moment, I'm making a thorough study of the
peasants. But what do the history books tell us? Almost
nothing that's of any use. I'm wading through the whole of
history, just to find a few scraps of the information I need.
Today we know at least that the people is made up of workers
on whose toil our food depends; in the old days, history
didn't even mention the people; it was all about tsars and
boyars [nobles] and fighting men and merchants.*'
1 May
"I have been thinking about the Duma (4)", Tolstoy told me,
"and wondering what it will all come to. More likely than not
the overthrow of the Romanovs and the declaration of the
Republic. A young worker from Tula was telling me a fort¬
night ago about a meeting in Zaseka forest. A state Duma is
not enough. What the people want is Socialism."
(3) Vladimir Chertkov (1854-1936) was one of Tolstoy's closest friends and the
publisher of his works.
(4) The elective national assembly created after the revolution of 1905.
"I reject the life of my class," wrote Leo Tolstoy in A
Confession, the account of his search for the purpose of
life. For many years his thinking was dominated by his
desire to share the life of the mass of the people, with
whom his sympathies lay. Photo above, taken in 1909,
shows Tolstoy with a group of local peasants who had come
to talk to him about their affairs and to seek his advice. He
held such gatherings almost every day of his life for he had
become, in his own words, "the advocate of a hundred
million peasants".
Tea-time outdoors for Tolstoy, his wife and seven of their
thirteen children on a day in 1892. A Count, Tolstoy
belonged to a noble family whose name has been traced
back to Ivan Tolstoy, a provincial governor during the reign
of Ivan the Terrible in the 16th century. It was at the Tolstoy
family estate, Yasnaya Polyana, just over 200 kilometres
south of Moscow, that the great writer produced most of
his works.
J\
17

MY YEARS WITH TOLSTOY
.
7 May
Tolstoy praised some of Schiller's work, and Goethe's shorter
poems and his Introduction to Faust. But he said that the
second part of Faust was nonsense, and that he didn't
understand a word of it, although he is as old as Goethe was
when he wrote it. In his own old age, he said, he appreciated
clarity and simplicity more and more and shied away from
mysticism.
18 May
Tolstoy: "The old order is on the way out, and with it, the
passivity and forbearance of the Russian people."
21 May
[A musical evening]... At about half-past-eleven, Tolstoy
took a glass of lemon water and went off to his room, smiling
at the singing and the dancing. Each time he heard a new
dance, he came out again to watch. Obviously delighted, he
joined in the singing. He once told me that if he had not been
a writer, he would have been a dancer.
13 August
Tolstoy told me about a talk he had this morning with a
couple of ragamuffin revolutionaries who were passing
through. "These young people «bave more to say than the
newspapers," he said. "It was useful to have a chat with
them. It's quite clear to me now that the government will have
to give in to all the revolutionaries' demands. A new Duma
should be convened without delay. Things can't get any
worse than they are at the moment. The people are in a state
of ferment, and the government is just trying to hold them in
check. A new government will soon emerge from amongst
the revolutionaries. The present government can survive
18

On the occasion of Tolstoy's eightieth birthday in 1908, the
Moscow Literacy Society decided to open a library for the
people of the village near to his estate. Tolstoy took a keen
interest In the project and supervised the choice of books.
On the day the library was opened the camera recorded
two informal glimpses of the great writer inold age. Left, he
is seen marching sturdily through the snow on his way to
the inaugural celebrations. Below, later in the day he stands
outside the newly-opened library surrounded by a group of
readers of all ages.
Photo A J. Saveliev © Tolstoy Museum, Moscow
Photo V.G. Chertkov © Tolstoy Museum, Moscow
(there's no knowing what the Revolution will lead to) only if it
purifies itself and cleanses itself from sin."
21 September
Tolstoy: "The Revolution has done a lot of good, as far as
education and the circulation of books are concerned."
17 October
Tolstoy: "Herzen (5) there's a writer who was hidden from
the Russians for a long time, but who has come to the sur¬
face. Herzen is an example of how a sincere, intelligent man
becomes a progressive. He went off to the West, thinking he
(5) Alexander Herzen (1812-1870) was a Russian writer, publicist and revolutio¬
nary who lived as a political exile in Western Europe from 1847 until his death,
witnessing the revolutionary events of 1848. His works were banned in Russia
before the Revolution of 1905-1907, but circulated clandestinely throughout the
country.
would find that things were ordered better there. But what he
saw during the revolutions disillusioned him with the Western
system, and he came to place all his love and hope in the Rus¬
sian people. Rightly or wrongly, that's where his hope lay. He
could serve as an example to Russian politicians, and save
them from making the same mistake of being attracted to
Western forms.
"People expect our own Revolution to give the same results
as the French one. But they should bear in mind that even if
that happened, nothing would come of it. What we must wait
for is a bigger, deeper upheaval in people's consciences, a
religious awakening. Perhaps all the horrible things that are
happening will bring people to their senses and make them
understand that they can't go on living this way; but the
Cadets'- (6) programmes won't do that. What is needed is
something completely new."
(6) The Constitutional Democrat Party.
19

MY YEARS WITH TOLSTOY
1907
19 January
Tolstoy: "To portray things in their entirety, the bad side of
things as well as the good, that's where the artist's task is dif¬
ficult and art is hard."
14 February
Tolstoy: "The only time to speak up in public is when your
words are better than silence."
27 February
Tolstoy: "A good woman is better than the best of men; but a
bad woman is worse than the worst."
4 March
Tolstoy: "The Japanese have outstripped the English and the
Americans; in the space of a few years, they have acquired all
the trappings of Western civilization. In some ways they have
gone even further. That just shows how very easy Western
civilization is to assimilate."
21 March
Tolstoy: "Dostoevsky was not as refined as Turgenev, he was
serious. He went through a lot, and spent a lot of time
thinking things over. And he knew how to resist playing to
the gallery."
9 April
Tolstoy said that when he heard people say that his work was
productive, he was pleased, although he ought not to be.
"Moses did not reach Canaan that's the way things
happen."
15 April
Tolstoy once said that every thought had its own trajectory,
rising to a point of brilliance and then growing pale. The time
for writing it down was when it reached the zenith. And that
is what he does. He keeps his notebook handy at all times in
his pocket during the day and on his bedside table at night.
He doesn't mind getting up as many as a half a dozen times
during the same night to light the candle and jot down the
ideas that come into his head.
25 April
Tolstoy: "A wise man in China was once asked whether there
was a single word that contained the possibility of human
happiness. 'Yes,' he replied, 'the word Shu, which means: do
not do to others what you would not want done to yourself."
26 April
This morning G. and S. played one of Mozart's sonatas with
some marvellous variations, then Schubert, and finally Beet¬
hoven's Kreutzer Sonata. They played well, calmly and with
simplicity. G. and S. weren't performing tonight; they didn't
get excited, but just played, and better than they do when
they are on stage. Tolstoy smiled with delight; once or twice
he clapped his hands. He liked the Mozart variations very
much, and best of all, the Beethoven. Afterwards, he de¬
clared that he had never heard the Kreutzer Sonata played
so well. The first part, he said, was pure Beethoven, grandi¬
ose and with a tragic, passionate tone. The second part was
melodious and simple, more in the manner of Mozart.
Later, he said that he knew and admired the artistic detail in
Homer and The Arabian Nights, and in certain Russian folk¬
tales.
28 April
Tolstoy asked for the scene from Victor Hugo's Les Miséra¬
bles where Jean Valjean meets the Bishop to be read to the
schoolchildren (7).
(7) Many years earlier, Tolstoy had opened a school for peasant children at Yas¬
naya Polyana.
"I can't do it," he said. "It moves me too much. The story
tugs at my heart-strings I can't read it."
17 May
Tolstoy: "Here I am, 80 years old, learning from schoolboys
how to write short sentences..."
22 May
Tolstoy: "I place Christ in the same class of men as [the Stoic
philosopher] Epictetus."
10 June
Tolstoy said that it was better to be old than young. He was
80 years old, he said, and only just beginning to live peace¬
fully, and things grew better every year. Youth was a time of
excitement, self-accusation, envy, passion. All that disap¬
peared with age.
Pointing to the candle on the table, he said: "It shines quite
naturally, without trying. It's the same with men, when they
improve themselves they unwittingly cast light all around
them. Things are so arranged that whatever a man does to
himself, he does to others."
When he was asked if it was true that night-time was really
the best time for writing poetry, he replied: "No, poetic acti¬
vity is the most intense activity of all."
24 June
We drank tea on the terrace, and talked about Dostoevsky.
Tolstoy recalled Taine's statement that Dostoevsky was the
world's most outstanding writer. He himself regretted that
Dostoevsky had worked so hurriedly, without correcting what
he wrote. In his novels, the first chapter was always the best
and contained everything. The rest was watery stuff.
S. said that wasn't true in every case. It wasn't true, for
example, as far as his best novel. The Brothers Karamazov,
was concerned.
Tolstoy retorted that The Brothers Karamazov was one of
Dostoevsky's poorest novels. His best novel was Crime and
Punishment, and its first chapter was the best. Tolstoy went
on to say that he blamed Dostoevsky for opening the door to
the "decadent" school of writers. Dostoevsky was a pas¬
sionate man who wrote about passionate subjects, but the
decadent writers who came after him were insincere.
25 June
Talking about the school, Tolstoy said that yesterday he had
introduced the children to some difficult bits of philosophy,
explaining to them, for example, that just as a leaf stripped
from a twig was torn from the whole tree, so an angry man
alienated himself not only from the person with whom he was
angry, but from everybody.
26 June
At ten o'clock this morning, the workers' children from the
schools across the river at Tula arrived with their teachers
from Kozlovka. There were 850 of them in allwe had been
expecting 350...
Tolstoy took the boys down to the Voronka river to bathe,
and joined with them in games and gymnastics and wrestling-
matches.
27 June
Tolstoy talked about "Grandpa" Islenyev. How frankly he
speaks about his relatives! The Tolstoys have absolutely no
family secrets, and hide nothing from their friends, or even
from their house servants. Instead of seeking to justify their
shortcomings and failures, they talk about them so objec¬
tively and in such a way that they might be discussing other
people.
20

1 él/-^A £?
II |
. T» i» . IBA
mw mM WF
mT VMm\\
P
Tolstoy was not only a great
writer for adults, but also a
noted educationist who loved
children. He was a captivating
teller of children's stories. Left,
he entertains two of his
grandchildren with his version
of an old popular fable. In 1859
he started a school at Yasnaya
Polyana where for some time
he taught his own children and
those of the local peasants. In
the 1870s he published two
spelling books and a Russian
reading course containing
fables and stories as well as
simple and attractively written
essays on physics and the
natural sciences.
Between 1889 and 1891, crop
failures caused widespread
food shortages and famine in
Russia. "The day before
yesterday," Tolstoy noted in a
letter, "I visited one village
where nine families owned
only a single cow; today I was
at another where everyone
lives on charity..." To alleviate
the widespread hardship
Tolstoy organized canteens,
donating large sums himself
and collecting contributions
from others. In two years he
collected over 140,000 roubles,
enough to feed 9,000 persons a
day. Left, Tolstoy and his
co-workers examine lists of
the needy.
Tolstoy's vigour was legendary
and even at the age of 80 he
would spend hours on end in
the saddle, riding through
fields and forest on Delir, his
favourite mount.
21

MY YEARS WITH TOLSTOY
Y.
27 August
At tea-time we talked about the two summer vacationers over
in Kozlovka-Zaseka, who are going about in their motor-cars
(the first in the district), and frightening the. horses.
Tolstoy: "The way civilization is moving at present material
but not moral progress is not at all promising. If human well-
being was the real issue, there wouldn't be any motor-cars.
Bringing up horses from foals, breaking them in, that gives a
lot of pleasure. But when there is moral progress our way of
life motor-cars, horses and the restwill change. What is
most important at the moment is that moral and material
progress should go hand in hand; when that happens, the
material conditions of everything will change. In what way?
Impossible to say."
2 September
Tolstoy talked about the letter he received yesterday from the
peasant Novikov, and how it revealed an awareness of the
growing needs of the people. The meeting today at
Chertkov's had shown him that there was the same aware¬
ness throughout the peasantry.
"How could it be otherwise?" he went on. "Ermilin, a peasant
here at Yasnaya Polyana, had four grown-up sons who were
all married to fine girls. The farm had five three-horse teams.
Then the sons divided everything up between them. Their
wives had children, and in their turn the children divided up
the farm. The fields got smaller and smaller, and they got rid
of all the hired hands except one. The old foundations of
family life fell apart, and there was nothing to put in their
place. Who would have thought, thirty years ago, that we
should be beaten in a war with Japan, and that a peasant like
Novikov would one day be writing a letter without a single
grammatical mistake, quoting Marx (relevantly, by the way,
and not just to show off his learning), and writing so power¬
fully?"
7 September
Tolstoy: "Too much polishing, and you spoil things. There's a
limit to the expressibility of ideas. You have a new thought,
an interesting one. Then, as you try to perfect it, it ceases to
be new and interesting, and loses the freshness with which it
first occurred to you. You're spoiling it."
12 September
Tolstoy said that the time for loving is the present; but people
are so busy looking ahead that they forget the present.
18 September
Tolstoy: "It's a bad thing to seek to impress. A true artist
writes what he considers necessary, and doesn't bother
wit.h the effect. But the temptation exists. The idea that it is
possible to influence people should be avoided like the
plague."
25 September
"What is the most important thing in art?" Tolstoy asked.
"Sincerity? Truth?" He provided his own answer: "The most
important thing in art is a sense of measure."
8 October
Tolstoy said that revolutionaries were obviously superior to
conservatives of all kinds and to people who thought that one
could go on living as in the past. The old order cannot con¬
tinue, he said, peoples grow up, just like individuals. It's im¬
possible to turn back the clock.
20 December
Tolstoy: "In my Cycle of Reading for children, I've put some¬
thing about love for animals. It's natural for children to love
animals on the one hand, and yet on the other hand to tor¬
ment them. It is very important to lead them in the direction
of love.
1908
5 January
H.A. is scandalized that Tolstoy should fail to appreciate
Dante.
Tolstoy: "Raphael, Beethoven, Shakespeare, Dante,
Goethe none of them come up to what I expect of art. But
personally and I'm ashamed to admit this I'm very fond of
them."
25 April
Tolstoy: "Any peasant you talk to will speak of the same
thing: the injustice in the present distribution of land. There's
a big change among the people, I feel it. There's a general
feeling of discontent."
17 May
Talking about the revolutionaries, Tolstoy said that they had a
certain arrogance: "My Party will put things right", they say.
But one thing was certain, evil made them sincerely
indignant.
5 June
All yesterday was spent in reading Vivekananda. Tolstoy said:
"There is one chapter, written with great talent, which justi¬
fies non-resistance to evil". Tolstoy also said that he was
reading a biography of Pushkin and some of his poems.
"What bad luck that two extraordinarily talented men, the like
of whom are pot born every century, Pushkin and Lermontov,
should both be killed in duels." Later, he said that he prefer¬
red Pushkin's prose writing.
29 June
Tolstoy: "If one thing still frightens me, it's the idea of being
born in a palace, rather than a slum. Life is a process of
liberation liberation of the essential spiritual principle that
exists in the jailbird as in everybody. And that's where we
should be directing our energies, not to speculation about the
spheres, or what will happen to our souls. Spiritual liberation
is what is most important; you'll find that the same thing is
said everywhere."
1 July
Tolstoy expressed no definite view on the matter, but he did
not dismiss the possibility that, one day, there would be a lan¬
guage common to all men. His words conveyed the feeling
that this would be a step towards understanding and peace
among nations.
1909
14 June
Tolstoy: "Freedom of conscience... A conscience that is not
free is as unthinkable as a flame that does not burn."
27 June
Tolstoy: "I read this phrase in Prugavin [a Russian
journalist] : 'When the storm of revolution blew across Rus¬
sia...'. Oh, yes, the storm has blown over, at least as far as
outward appearances are concerned. The old order has been
strengthened, and for a long time to come, just as it was after
the French Revolution. But what seems most important to me
is that the events have left their mark on a hundred million
Russians; they have aroused the people. I still get letters from
peasants, asking 'Is there anything to hope for?' They are
waiting and hoping for something."
8 August
Tolstoy: "It is strange how little the past or the future matter,
as one grows old. One lives for the present."
22

21 August
Tolstoy: "If I had created human beings, I would have
arranged things so that they were born old, and grew
steadily younger, The appealing characteristics of children are
simplicity, naivete and truthfulness; and the greatest of
these is truthfulness."
25 October
Tolstoy: "I'm interested in Bernard Shaw. He's very witty and
original, one of the best modern writers."
1910
14 January
Tolstoy: "I have been thinking of those writers I know of
three, Pushkin, Gogol and Dostoevsky for whom moral
questions were important. Pushkin died young but he
thought about them seriously. Lermontov also died young
and was concerned about moral problems."
22 April
Tolstoy said that he had decided to write for the cinemato¬
graph.
29 July
Tolstoy: "Nowhere is the failure of Christianity as it is taught
by the Churches more evident than in the behaviour of the
Europeans in their colonies."
26 August
Tolstoy: "There's nothing like Robinson Crusoe for teaching
children the work involved in making the things they use. It's
a very fine story."
23 September
Tolstoy went for a ride. What steep slopes he gallops up and
down, what dangerous places he goes through, across half-
rotten bridges and along the edge of precipices! He rides
straight through a thicket of young trees, bending to pass
under the low branches. His horse suddenly shies, but on he
goes, galloping and trotting! I'm not very heavy, I enjoy riding
and I have taken plenty of exercise in my time. I'm 43 years
old, and Tolstoy is 82, but I'm hard-pressed to put on such a
show as he does, and I can't keep up with him. My horse and
I nearly break our necks. What a horseman!
6 October
Tolstoy: "Nourishment, torment and instruction-
one gets from work."
-that's what
11 October
Madame Tolstoy told me that when Vanechka (8) died in
1895, Tolstoy slumped down on the sofa and said: "It's a
hopeless situation. You see, I thought that of all my children
he was the only one who could continue my work after me."
25 October
Tolstoy was talking about the huge quantities of books being
printed; he said that it had been calculated that if children
continued to be born at the present rate and if fewer of them
died, men would before long be standing shoulder to shoul¬
der on the earth. In the same way books would soon form a
pile reaching up to the sky if so many continued to be pub¬
lished. It was important, therefore, to select the best.
(8) Tolstoy's youngest son, who died of scarlet fever at the age of seven.
Text © Copyright "Literaturnoe Nasledstvo"
A.M. Gorky Institute of World Literature of
the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Moscow, U.S.S.R.
Tolstoy died on 20 November 1910. Top: the
peasants who had been his friends bear his coffin
to Yasnaya Polyana, followed by an immense
crowd. He was laid to rest in a simple grave on
the edge of a ravine beneath the trees of the
dense forest of Stary Zakaz (above). As children,
Tolstoy and his brothers had roamed the forest in
search of a legendary "green stick" on which the
secret of happiness and goodness was carved.
23
