by Paul-Emile Victor
Will
deserts
drink
icebergs?
IF the earth were the size of a large
orange, all its water, whether suspend¬
ed in the air, subterranean, or visible
in the form of oceans, seas, lakes and
rivers, would amount to no more than a
tiny droplet carefully deposited on its rind
with a pipette.
Almost the whole of the droplet (97 to
PAUL-EMILE VICTOR is a distinguished
explorer who has organized and led numerous
French expeditions to the Arctic and Antarctic
in the last 40 years. He was head of the inter¬
national glaciological expedition to Greenland
from 1967 to 1970, and since 1974 has been
president of the "Groupe Paul-Emile Victor" for
the protection of man and the environment.
His achievements as an explorer and scientist
have brought him international recognition,
including the award of the gold medal of the
Royal Geographical Society, London.
98 per cent) would be made up of salt
water from the world's oceans and seas.
The remaining 2 to 3 per cent would
consist of the fresh water that is vital for
human lifeso little that in comparison
with our orange it would look much
smaller than a pinhead.
Of these fresh-water resources, some 75
per cent is solid, in other words frozen.
Most of the rest is groundwater and soil
moisture, and less than 1 per cent is
actually available for human use in streams,
lakes, swamps and in the ground. It is
this minute quantity that we squander so
recklessly, pollute so unashamedly and
use up at an ever faster rate.
Every attempt, then, has to be made to
find further supplies of fresh water. There
are two viable methods of doing this, and
two only: the desalination of sea water,
and the tapping of the only existing
reserves of fresh water the ice of the
polar regions, formed by the accumulation
and compression of snowfall over many
thousands of years.
The desalination of sea water is expen¬
sive, whereas the production of fresh
water by the transportation of icebergs is
both economically competitive and feasible.
Icebergs are composed of fresh water
so pure that it often approaches the
characteristics of distilled water.
It has been estimated that the Antarctic
icecap loses more than 10,000 billion
cubic metres of ice every year in the form
of icebergs, which eventually melt and
disappear.
This figure is probably an underestima¬
tion: the most gigantic iceberg so far
recorded (and measured) was 350 kilo-
CONTINUED PAGE 21
17

Beneath
the Arctic ice
The remarkable underwater photos on this dolible page were taken during
recent Soviet "North Pole" expeditions, when explorers made some 1,500
dives in the Arctic Ocean. Much remains unknown, even today, about the
formation of pack ice, the behaviour of drifting sea-ice and its
characteristics above and below the water-line. Scientists from many
countries are today engaged on research in this field in order to improve
the safety of shipping and to promote the exploitation of natural resources
in polar waters. Photos were taken by V. Grichenko of the Leningrad
Institute of Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research, head of an Arctic
underwater exploration group. Above, a diver measures the intensity of
sunlight shining through a "ceiling" of drifting pack ice. Right, another
submarine explorer examines the cloudlike forms of submerged ice,
8 metres deep. Below, underwater mountaineering by diver at work
beneath an island of floating ice.

r

Floating
Antarctic island
Right, one of the largest Icebergs ever
recorded, photographed in January 1977
(after being tracked since 1967) from a
satellite 900 km. above the Earth. The ice
in such a gigantic berg (74 km. long, 40
km. wide and from 230 to 345 metres
thick) could provide enough fresh water to
meet California's needs for centuries.
,-t-|F
J . . . «-
IH i 5*
m-'K*
** - ^
. .. Mac
r - 1 w. ~ »*«
W ^^
1 :'*» * * '' '
1 m\. .1

Arctic peaks
Above, a U.S. cutter is dwarfed as it
passes between two peaks of a huge
Arctic berg. The peaks are joined
below the water, forming a single
block of ice. Arctic icebergs are
generally less regular in shape than
those of the southern hemisphere.
Salty ice floes
Unlike icebergs, which break off the
end of continental glaciers and are
composed of fresh water, ice floes
are sheets of frozen sea water a few
metres thick. Left, the Soviet
icebreaker Arktika which on 17
August 1977 became the first surface
ship to reach the North Pole.
( metres long, 90 kilometres wide, and
roughly 250 metres thick, in other words
the area of Belgium; it alone contained
8,000 billion cubic metres of ice.
But each year, the source of the icebergs
(the ice cap) recovers the same amount,
and possibly more, through accumulated
snowfall.
How much water would be provided by
an iceberg towed to one of the ports in
the "thirst belt"? Let's take the example
of Saudi Arabia, and an iceberg of a size
frequently encountered: 100 million tonnes,
1,200 to 1,500 metres long, 300 to 400
metres wide. Even though the iceberg
would lose about 20 per cent of its volume
during transport, the amount of water
which could be used would still be
enormous: 80 billion litres.
If the Red Sea port of Jidda, in Saudi
Arabia, were surrounded by a green belt
20 kilometres wide, the area could expect
a rainfall of some two metres per year, as
opposed to the present figure of only a
few centimetres. Within a few years,
Jidda would become the centre of a lush
oasis. But why go to the South Pole to
get icebergs? Why not the North Pole?
There are two reasons for this. First,
most Arctic icebergs are irregularly shaped
and dangerously unstable. Secondly,
Arctic bergs come from mountain glaciers
(from Greenland, for example) which
precludes their ever being large enough.
The "tabular" icebergs from Antarctica,
on the other hand, are often big and
regular in shape.
The snow that accumulates on the
Antarctic plateau turns gradually into ice,
then very slowly flows (or slides) ice is a
fluid towards the edge of the continent.
Sometimes it forms a fairly regular ice
shelf 250 to 300 metres thick, as in the
case of the triangular Ross Ice Shelf,
which is about the size of France. It is
"moored" by two of its sides to the coast
of Antarctica, while its front part, the
shelf, consists of a 50-metre-high cliff,
chunks of which break away to form
tabular bergs of variable sizes.
Another reason against using Arctic
icebergs is that the ocean currents which
move southwards from the Arctic are not
usually favourable, whereas currents
moving northwards from Antarctica tend
to be so. True, powerful tugs will be
needed to shift such gigantic masses of
ice, but without any currents to help them
their progress would be much slower and
more difficult.
The operation would be economically
viable: on delivery to Jidda, Antarctic
water would cost roughly 60 cents per
cubic metre, whereas the cost price of
desalinating sea water from the same area
is 80 cents per cubic metre.
But is such a project really feasible?
An international conference held in
October 1977 at the University of Iowa
(U.S.A.) concluded that the problems
posed were well within the reach of exist¬
ing technology, and that icebergs as a
source of water would cost between 30
and 50 per cent less than the production
of fresh water by desalination.
The idea of towing icebergs is not a
new one. The present renewal of interest
in the technique (as shown by international
meetings held in Paris and Iowa last year)
began in September 1975 when Prince
Muhammad al-Faisal of Saudi Arabia ask¬
ed my opinion on the feasibility of towing
an iceberg to his country. (1)
Our conversation triggered off a wholes
series of research studies, calculations, r
(1) Prince Muhammad al-Faisal is President of Iceberg
Transport International Ltd., one of the sponsors of the
Iowa Conference.
21

, and development projects under the super¬
vision of consultant engineer Georges
Mougin.
An international scientific commission
was appointed at the Iowa Conference to
organize the necessary theoretical and
practical research into the subject. It is
made up of ten internationally known
scientists, most of whom are glaciologists.
We need to know more about the
structure of icebergs (snow, névé, and
ice), their internal stresses, and their
crevasses, cracks and other weak points.
A "suitable" iceberg should be large
enough (100 million tonnes) to provide the
required amount of water by the time it
arrives at its destination. It should be
tabular, as regularly shaped as possible,
and, to make towing easier, much longer
than it is wide. The berg should also be
as homogeneous as possible in other
words, it should have the smoothest
possible surface, with no cracks or
crevasses.
Icebergs of this type, always supposing
that no internal or invisible cracks and
stresses are subsequently detected, are
produced in the Pacific sector, in the
Atlantic sector, and in the Indian sector.
Observations of iceberg drift around the
Antarctic continent carried out by the
French Polar Expeditions (in the course of
the 1971-1973 Berg-Eole Operation) show-
Icebergs could be transported by
tugs, but alternative methods
are also being studied, such as
using the difference in
temperature between sea water
and ice to drive a turbine (left).
Less than 2 per cent of the berg
would be lost as "fuel" during
a journey from the Antarctic to
the Pacific coast of the
United States.
Another concept of iceberg self-
propulsion. It involves the use
of electrically-powered
propellers or paddle-wheels
driven by engines mounted on
the berg or on escort ships.
To prevent excessive melting
caused by the sun and warm
tropical seas, it has been
proposed to cover bergs with a
protective wrap during transit.
Drawings by Saisi, Unesco
ed that bergs from ice shelves in these
sectors converge off the Amery Ice Shelf.
They then drift northwards and
disappear. They can be detected with
greater accuracy through analysis of
satellite photographs.
But the most important problem will be
to protect the icebergs against all types of
erosion, such as melting, evaporation,
mechanical erosion by waves, and friction
caused by movement through the sea.
It would, for instance, take eight to nine
months to cover 6,000 nautical miles at
optimum towing speed (about one knot or
roughly two kilometres per hour).
Various solutions to these problems
have been suggested. One of them involves
the protection of the sides by strips
(similar to those of a Venetian blind) made
of a reflective material.
The submerged portion of the sides
would be protected by a similar curtain (or
skirt) made of insulating material, while
the insulation itself would be provided by
a pool of cold fresh water between the
skirt and the sides of the iceberg. The
underneath of the berg would also be
protected by a kind of wrap held against
the bottom by inflatable floats.
Protection against mechanical erosion
could be provided by a belt made of various
materials.
The manufacture and assembling of
such units in Antarctic waters will involve
various problems that are not yet solved.
The actual towing operation should, in
theory, cause no problems at all, as the
largest modern tugs have a tractive force
of 125 tonnes. The tractive force needed
to shift an iceberg of 100 million tonnes is
in the region of 600 to 700 tonnes, so five
or six large tugs could do the job.
Once the iceberg arrived at its destina¬
tion it might have to remain several tens
of kilometres offshore, depending on the
shallowness of the continental shelf.
Melting water would then have to be
pumped by pipeline to the coast. But a
water storage and supply network would
first have to be constructed on land, for in
most of the countries that urgently need
fresh water no such network exists.
Paradoxically enough, the heat of the
sun will not be enough to produce water
in sufficient quantities. The melting
process will have to be speeded up, either
by spraying melt-water over the pool
which will form on top of the berg (to
absorb heat from the atmosphere), or by
a heat transfer with the sea, or again by
the use of external sources of heat.
Throughout this operation, the outer
protective covering of the iceberg would
of course remain in position.
The production of fresh water by the
transportation of icebergs is undoubtedly
one of the most original and exciting
ventures of our time.
It is also one of the most useful: the
most urgent problem soon to face man¬
kind will be how to obtain fresh water. For
a man can survive for 40 to 50 days without
food, but he can die after only four days
without water.
Paul-Emile Victor
22
