Are we heating up
our planet?
A new global programme
to examine man's impact on the climate
by William W. Kellogg
IT is generally recognized that "the cli¬
mate", which can be loosely defined as
the kind of weather we have learned to
expect next year, is actually never exactly
the same from one year to the next, or from
one decade to the next. There is a very
human tendency to count on favourable
weather for growing crops, for planning
vacations, for choosing where to build
houses, and so forth, and we are delighted
when the weather is better than usual and
dismayed when it is worse. Yet the facts
are quite clear: the climate fluctuates from
year to year and it changes over periods of
decades.
There are plenty of sobering examples of
such fluctuations in the climate that are still
fresh in our memory. Western Europe and
the eastern United States have experienced
some cold winters that strained fuel sup¬
plies and temporarily closed factories; the
Sahelian region of North Africa is still re¬
covering from a severe drought that lasted
from about 1969 to 1974; the western part
of the Soviet Union suffered a cold, dry
winter and a hot, dry summer in 1972 that
resulted in a severe reduction in its grain
crop. Yet these and other anomalous con¬
ditions were not unprecedented! They had
occurred before, and similarly unusual
weather will occur again in various parts of
the world.
These recent events serve as reminders
of the fact that the climate of our planet is
the result of an ever-changing and delicate
WILLIAM W. KELLOGG is a senior scientist at
the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR) at Boulder, Colorado, and a former
director of its Laboratory for Atmospheric
Science. Atpresent on leave from the NCAR, he
is working with the World Meteorological Orga¬
nization as adviser to the Secretary-General on
the World Climate Programme. He has written
widely on the dynamics of the upper atmos¬
phere, applications of meteorological satellites,
atmospheric chemistry and air pollution and the
influence of mankind on the climate of the earth.
L'Avenir des Statues, by René Magntte
© Edward James Foundation, United Kingdom
balance, a balance determined by the
actions of the sun, the atmosphere, the
oceans, the land, the ice and snow of the
polar regions, and all living things
including mankind. We can contemplate
conditions in the not too distant past (some
15,000 to 20,000 years ago) when North
America and Western Europe were largely
covered by great masses of ice and marvel
that the climatic balance is as stable as it
has been over the last several centuries.
There are a number of reasons why we
can no longer be complacent about our
restless climate, as we have tended to be in
the past.
First of all, living as we do on a planet
with limited resources and fully expecting a
continued increase in the human popula¬
tion and average standard of living, we do
not have the food and other reserves that
existed in the past. Thus, a large climate-
induced failure of crops or of fisheries in
one part of the world is felt worldwide.
Secondly, as we plan new developments
of highways, irrigation systems, industry,
energy generating plants, and large-scale
agricultural production in both the indus¬
trialized and the developing countries it is
increasingly important to take the expected
fluctuations and changes of climate into
account.
Thirdly, we have learned enough about
the global system that determines our
climate to realize that natural changes of
climate can occur on all time scales, and
furthermore that the activities of mankind
can have a very appreciable influence on
climate in the foreseeable future.
Finally, new tools have been acquired for
advancing our knowledge of the climate
system and the impacts of climate on
society, including powerful techniques for
observing the earth from space, and for
collecting and analysing climate-related
data with computers. These technological
advances have been accompanied by
equally impressive advances in theoretical
understanding of the climate system itself
and, to a lesser extent, the response of
social structures to climate variations and
change.
These considerations of a global or uni¬
versal nature all suggest that the problems
connected with climate must be attacked
on a worldwide, international scale. For
that purpose, the United Nations and its
various agencies, with the World Meteoro¬
logical Organization taking the lead, to¬
gether with the International Council
of Scientific Unions, are now working
together to institute a World Climate
Programme.
Such a programme must go beyond the
realm of conventional climatology, since
the study of the climate system includes
virtually all branches of the earth sciences
and ecology as well; furthermore, a major
thrust of such a programme must be to.
understand the impacts of climate on*

Climatic changes can have an important impact on human societies. The
"Little Ice Age" (1500-1700), for example, eliminated the vineyards of
England and turned the English into a nation of beer-drinkers. It also saw
a dramatic advance of the Alpine glaciers. The 20th century has been
marked by a worldwide warming and a retreat of the Alpine glaciers. The
engraving, at top of page, of the Argentière glacier, in France, was made
in about 1860; the lower photo, taken in 1968, shows the extent of the
glacier's retreat over a period of a little more than a century. Today,
about threequarters of the world's freshwater is stored in ice caps and
glaciers. If all existing ice were to melt, it would cause a rise in world sea
level of some ninety metres.

Two views of Antarctica taken from the weather satellite
Nimbus-5 show vast changes in the ice cap during the polar
summer. The picture on the left was taken on 15 December 1972,
the one on the right on 30 January 1973. Both have a standard
atlas overlay (black line) showing the outline of the land surface
of the continent. White or light grey areas are open water. Black
spots are gaps in the data received from the spacecraft.
chuman activities and institutions, and to
assist decision-makers in planning and co¬
ordinating climate-sensitive activities so
that these are less vulnerable to climate
change and variations.
As a preliminary step the first World
Climate Conference, an interdisciplinary
conference of experts on climate and man¬
kind, is being organized by the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO) with
the co-operation of Unesco and other inte¬
rested United Nations bodies, the Interna¬
tional Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU)
and the International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis (NASA). This Confer¬
ence is being held in Geneva from 12 to 23
February 1979.
The purpose of the Conference is to
review what we know about the system
that determines climate, and then to
explore the many impacts of climate varia¬
bility and change on such human activities
as agriculture, water resources, provision
of energy, forestry and fisheries, and finally
to trace these impacts back to their effects
on the basic social and economic struc¬
tures of society.
The conclusions of the Conference will
be taken into consideration when the
WMO Congress meets in May 1979 to con¬
sider the adoption of the World Climate
Programme. The draft of the Programme
has been in preparation for several years
and during 1978 a number of meetings of
experts were convened to work out the
plans in some detail. As at present envi¬
saged the Programme will consist of four
sections or sub-programmes each dealing
with an important aspect of the subject:
climate data, climate application, climate
impact studies and climate research.
Conventional climate data includes data
describing the record of the changing wea¬
ther, such as temperature, rainfall or snow¬
fall, wind, pressure, humidity and cloudi¬
ness plus data related to climate such as
solar radiation, sea surface temperature
and extent of sea ice.
Meteorological data come from more
than 9,000 "synoptic" surface weather
observing stations, about 4,000 of which
report regularly eight times daily as stations
of the global synoptic network; and about
900 of these network stations also make
upper air observations once or twice daily.
In addition to the land-based stations some
7,000 merchant ships make surface obser¬
vations, and about 1,500 commercial air¬
craft reports are made daily. The data in the
network are exchanged in a matter of hours
by the Global Telecommunications
Systems organized by WMO's World Wea¬
ther Watch Programme. Such data are fur¬
ther processed and archived at a number of
Regional Meteorological Centres and the
three World Data Centres for Meteorology
(in Washington, Moscow and Melbourne).
The immediate purpose of all these
observations is to make weather forecasts,
and usually not enough attention has been
paid to the data needed by agriculturalists,
hydrologists, and other users of climatoló¬
gica! data, and to the needs of scientists
studying such matters as ocean circula¬
tions or the conditions in polar regions.
Some of these non-synoptic data are cur¬
rently gathered by networks outside of the
direct responsibility of the meteorological
services.
Other kinds of climate-related data that
are needed for research on past climates
include, for example, tree ring records, dis¬
tributions of various kinds of pollens in lake
sediments and the histories of glaciers.
The purpose of this part of the World Cli¬
mate Programme, therefore, is to deter¬
mine where the data exist and to make
them more widely available when needed.
The range of data needed for various cli¬
mate applications and research is very
great indeed. The developed countries
have in general made some use of climate
data in planning and managing major pro¬
jects such as water resource develop¬
ments, new electric generating plants,
highways and urban expansion and the sta¬
tistical techniques for this purpose are fairly
well established. This part of the World Cli¬
mate Programme will be especially concer¬
ned with helping the developing countries
to apply knowledge of climate at a time
when many of them are contemplating
expansions of their industrial and agricultu¬
ral bases.
In many of the developing countries

climate is a critical factor which must be
taken carefully into consideration in any
planning they do. There are a number of
ways in which an international organization
such as the WMO can assist developing
nations to apply the knowledge of climate
in their planning and management of agri¬
cultural, industrial and social develop¬
ments. Some countries have fairly advan¬
ced national climate applications program¬
mes and the WMO can arrange for a trans¬
fer of the techniques they employ to other
countries that wish to make use of them. It
can also advise on the installation of data
processing facilities and arrange for the
training of technicians.
Climate variability and climate change
can have a profound impact on society and
different socio-economic structures may be
affected very differently, for example, by a
drought or a severe cold spell or a flood.
Some structures are clearly more vulnera¬
ble than others to the vagaries of climate,
though the reasons for this large range of
sensitivity are far from clear. To understand
and then predict the response of a social
and economic system to a certain change
or fluctuation in climate is the purpose of
this part of the World Climate Programme.
While listed fourth among the sub-
programmes of the World Climate Pro¬
gramme, climate research, by which we
seek to improve our knowledge of the
global system that determines climate
everywhere, could well be considered the
key component.
This part of the Programme will empha¬
size the development of various kinds of
theoretical and empirical models of the cli- ^
mate system. As these models continue to f
Fossils of even the
minutest sea creatures
can provide clues as to
sea temperatures of the
distant past. The
Neogloboquadrina
pachyderma, no bigger
than the head of a pin
despite its impressive
name, forms a shell which
spirals in one direction
(drawing 1) in water below
7° Centigrade and in the
opposite direction (drawing
2) in warmer conditions.
Water temperatures above
10° Centigrade are
indicated by the presence
of another sea creature
(drawing 3), the
Globorotalia menardii.
5 m a. X :z] o m
Period Climate Date
Subatlantic
Cold
and
wet
500 AD
Subboreal
Warm
and
dry
* 500 BC
Atlantic
Warm
and
moist
v'\. Boreal
Dry and
warmer
Preboreal Sub-Arctic
»9000 BC
End of Ice
Age
Arctic,
Sub-Arctic
Above, pollen record showing climatic conditions in eastern Denmark from 9000 BC to 500
AD. Fossil pollen found in peat and clay deposits show how the vegetation cover has
evolved throughout the past. Fossil pollen provide an excellent indicator of climatic
variations since they are virtually identical to pollen of living plant life and can be traced
back over millions of years.
Right, cross-section of a hardwood tree
showing annual ring growth. In temperate
regions most trees grow an additional
layer of wood every year, and when a tree
is cut down these layers are seen as
concentric rings. Not only do these rings
indicate the age of the tree, their width
also provides precious information on the
climatic conditions of the past. Narrow
rings may, for example, indicate a period
of low rainfall or drought. Wider rings
point to favourable climatic conditions for
the species of tree in question.

INCOMING SOLAR
RADIATION
An important function of our atmosphere is to filter radiation
coming towards the earth from the sun. The atmospheric shield
admits most of the short-wave radiation to the earth, but, like a
greenhouse, traps some of the radiation from the earth that
would otherwise escape to space (see diagram above). This has
the effect of slowing down the dissipation of energy from the
earth, thus stabilizing the temperature range at the earth's
surface. Today, however, man is burning such large quantities of
fossil fuels such as coal, petroleum and natural gas that he is
adding huge extra amounts of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.
Carbon dioxide absorbs radiation from the earth and prevents it
from escaping to space, so, in effect, man is "making the glass
of the greenhouse thicker". Right, graph shows the average
surface temperature in the northern hemisphere since 1860. The
lower dashed line shows what the average temperature would
have been if man had added no extra carbon dioxide to the
"natural" atmosphere. The dotted line right shows the dramatic
rise in average world temperature we can expect if present
trends continue.
i r
Approximate range of
undisturbed climate
in past few centuries
I improve they will simulate the behaviour of
the real system more and more closely.
Through them it will be possible to learn
how well climate variability (on a seasonal
or yearly time-scale) can be predicted.
Even more important, however, is the
fact that these models will enable us to
judge more accurately the critical question
of how sensitive the climate system is to
tha large-scale changes induced by the
activities of mankind. Although for a long
time to come we may not be able to make
good predictions of the natural variations
of climate from year to year, we can
already simulate the behaviour of the cli¬
mate system well enough to be convinced
that our human activities can produce a
climate change on a global scale if we
continue on our present course.
Of all the major world problems that can
be foreseen in the decades ahead, the pros¬
pect of mankind's warming the earth looms
as one of the most pressing and unprece¬
dented. The addition of carbon dioxide to
the atmosphere by the extensive burning of
fossil fuel (coal, petroleum, natural gas) is
the largest single influence and may pro
duce a significant global warming by the
end of this century. The warming is due to
the fact that carbon dioxide is a long-
lasting and stable' atmospheric trace gas
and it absorbs infra-red radiation from the
surface that would otherwise escape to
space a process sometimes called "the
greenhouse effect". We may also add
more of this gas as we cut down the tropi¬
cal forests of the world, since the decay of
wood also produces carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide remains in the atmos¬
phere for a very long time, the main sink for
it in the long run being the oceans. In fact,
it is estimated by oceanographers that it
would take between 1,000 and 1,500 years
for the oceans to absorb one half of the
carbon dioxide we have already added to
the atmosphere. For all practical purposes,
the steady increase in the concentration of
this trace gas that has already occurred
(about fifteen per cent since the beginning
of the century) and will probably continue
until the concentration has doubled in the
middle of the next century is irreversible.
This prediction of a global warming is
still based on some rather uncertain premi
ses, not the least of which is the prediction
of mankind's own future behaviour where
energy production is concerned. Much has
been written about this subject and it is fair
to say that there is now a growing consen¬
sus in the scientific community that carbon
dioxide will indeed continue to increase if
mankind continues on its present course. A
current "best guess" is that by the end of
this century the earth will on average be
warmer than at any time in the past 1,000
years or more, and with the temperature
still rising.
What is not so clear are the implications
of this climate change to mankind. Cer¬
tainly the large scale patterns of the atmos¬
pheric and oceanic circulations would
change, and this would cause regional
changes of both temperature and precipita¬
tion that are larger than the average. Some
places would be drier than now, some wet¬
ter; and while the average surface tempera¬
ture would rise, some regions might even
experience a coolingfor a while, at least.
The polar regions are expected to warm
more than the tropics, and this would
cause changes in the extent of polar snow
8

and ice and, eventually, some changes in
the volumes of the great ice sheets of
Greenland and Antarctica, with a corres¬
ponding change in sea level though gla-
ciologists generally believe these last re¬
adjustments will be very slow on the
time-scale of human affairs.
Of more fundamental importance to peo¬
ple everywhere are the readjustments that
will have to be made as temperature, rain¬
fall, snowfall, and wind patterns gradually
change. During this period of continual
readjustment of the climate system there
may also be larger year to year fluctuations.
Some regions and the people there, depen¬
ding on what they do for a living, will
become better off as a result of the shifts of
climate, while others will be hurt. In any
case the readjustments of agricultural prac¬
tices and patterns of living will in some
cases be drastic, and it seems to be an eco¬
nomic verity that all large-scale readjust¬
ments are expensive for the community as
a whole.
If we think of the future course of climate
change and the response of mankind to it
as a kind of scenario, then we are already
well into the First Act of the play. What will
happen in the subsequent drama as it
unfolds and becomes history is still a mat¬
ter for speculation. Will mankind try to go
about its "business as usual", or will some¬
thing be done to reduce the burning of fos¬
sil fuels and the deforestation of the tro¬
pics? Will we be wise enough, in any case,
to foresee the future course of the climate
change and plan the responses of nations
in the light of this knowledge?
No one can say just what will happen, of
course, but the World Climate Conference
and the World Climate Programme seem to
be vital first moves in the right direction.
William W. Kellogg
The effects of man's activities on the climate are
particularly evident in the Sahel, the belt of semi-
arid land stretching across Africa from Mauritania
and Senegal in the west to Chad and the borders
of the Sudan, which for centuries has been the
traditional grazing land of nomadic herdsmen. Top
right, over-grazing and deforestation have turned
thousands of square kilometres of former
pastureland into desert. Right, prehistoric rock
painting at Tassili-n-Ajjer, Algeria, central Sahara.
The large rings are thought to represent the
herdsmen's huts.
