Cultivated by the ancient Egyptians of the Nile Delta region, the papyrus reed was an
important and versatile raw material. Its fibres were used not only to produce an early
form of paper, but also in the manufacture of sails, cloth, mats, rope and sandals.
Bundles of papyrus stems formed the supports of mud and wattle dwellings or protected
the corners of mud-brick buildings. When construction in stone began, builders imitated
the appearance of the papyrus bundles and palm-tree trunks and branches used In
primitive buildings, as in these columns of the temple of Isis at Philae (above)) These
plant motifs were also found in many objects in everyday use, such as this princely mirror
handle in the shape of a papyrus umbel embellished with gold and turquoise (left).



Inventors and technologists
of pharaonic Egypt
by Rashid el-Nadoury with the collaboration of Jean Vercoutter
RASHID EL-NADOURY, of Egypt, is professor
of ancient history and vice-dean of the Faculty
of Arts of the University of Alexandria. A
specialist in prehistoric and protohistoric com¬
munities of the Nile valley and north Africa, he is
the author ofmanypublished works including an
Ancient History of the Maghreb.
JEAN VERCOUTTER, of France, is director of
the French Institute of Oriental Archaeology
(Cairo) and a specialist in the ancient history and
archaeology of the Nile valley.
PHARAONIC civilization was remar¬
kable for the continuity of its deve¬
lopment. To succeeding civiliza¬
tions of Africa in particular, it bequeathed a
legacy whose importance should not be
underestimated. It inherited from Neolithic
times techniques which were transmitted
and enriched in the pre-dynastic period
. (3500 to 3000 BC) and were subsequently
preserved when the historical period was in
full flower.
In the crafts, the ancient Egyptians' con¬
tribution can be traced in stone, but also in
wood, glass, and many other materials.
As early as 3500 BC, the Egyptians, the
heirs to the Neolithic period in the Nile
valley, used the flint deposits there,
especially those at Thebes, to carve in¬
struments of incomparable quality, of
which the Gebel-el-Arak Knife is one exam¬
ple among hundreds.
This craftsmanship is also found in the
carving of stone vases. Here, too, the
technique of the Neolithic period carried on
through the pre-dynastic period and the
Old Kingdom and continued to the end of
ancient Egyptian history. The Egyptian
stone-carver used every kind of stone, even
the hardest varieties, working with basalt,
breccia, diorite, granite, porphyry as readily
as with the softer calcareous alabasters,
schists, serpentines and soapstones.
47

, From Egypt, stone-carving techniques
later passed to the Mediterranean world.
The carvers of Cretan vases must surely
have learned their skills, if not in Egypt
itself, at least in a milieu that was
thoroughly steeped in Egyptian culture like
the Syro-Palestinian Corridor. Even the
shapes of the vases of the ancient Minoan
period betray their Egyptian origins.
The dexterity of the cutters of hard
stones passed to the sculptors. This can be
quality of the goods produced by Egyptian
weavers. Here we have a graphic example
of one of the ways in which the Egyptian
legacy was handed down.
Egypt contributed, if not the invention,
at least the distribution of glass-making
techniques to world civilization. While it is
true that Mesopotamia and the civilizations
of the Indus were likewise familiar at a very
early time with glazing, the technique
which is the basis of glass making, there is
moulded in coloured glass, were set in
wood or stone to make inscriptions. The
techniques of the Pharaonic glass makers
were handed down to craftsmen of the
Hellenistic period who invented blown
glass.
Alexandria then became the main centre
for the manufacture of glassware, export¬
ing its products as far as China. Aurelius
levied a tax on Egyptian glassware im¬
ported into Rome. The Meroitic empire
later imported some glassware from Alex-
The common unit of
measure in Egypt was the
cubit, a measure based on
the length of the forearm
from the elbow to the tip of
the middle finger. The
standard rule of Egyptian
craftsmen was made of
wood and had a bevelled
edge; It measured a "short
cubit", standardized at
450 mm. The "royal cubit"
had a length of 525 mm.
Photo © Louvre Museum, Paris
Painter's palette of hard
glazed paste, carved in the
form of a human hand
holding a shell, still contains
traces of red paint of the
type used by Egyptian
craftsmen to indicate
alignments and levels during
construction of a building or
for making a preliminary
layout of wall decorations.
Photo © The Metropolitan Museum of Art,
New York. Taken from Grandes Villes de
l'Egypte Antique, by Geneviève See,
Editions Serg, Paris
seen in the great Egyptian hard stone
sculptures, from the diorite Chefren of
Cairo to the large black basalt sarcophagi
of the Apis bulls. The skill then passed to
the sculptors of the Ptolemaic period and
later found expression in the statuary of the
Roman empire.
The cultivation of flax rapidly led to great
ability in hand-spinning and linen making.
The latter was known from the start of the
Neolithic period and its beginning coincid¬
ed with the emergence of civilization in the
Nile valley. The women spun the linen, do¬
ing so with great skill since they frequently
handled two spindles simultaneously.
For the Pharaohs, woven fabrics con¬
stituted a commodity particularly ap¬
preciated abroad. The finest cloth of all,
byssus, was woven in the temples and was
especially renowned. The Ptolemies super¬
vised the weaving shops and controlled the
quality of the manufacture, and their cen¬
tral administration, doubtless following the
pattern set by the earlier Pharaohs,
organized sales abroad which brought the
king huge revenues because of the superior
no evidence to suggest that they spread it
abroad.
It is certain that the Egyptians
demonstrated their aptitude in the art of
glass making in a relatively short time. The
presence of glass beads seems to be at¬
tested in the pre-dynastic period, although
it is not certain that they were deliberately
made by the craftsman.
Glass, as such, was known in the fifth
dynasty (c. 2500 BC) and began to spread
from the time of the New Kingdom (c.
1600). It was then used not only for beads
but also for vases in the form of fishes.
They were usually polychromatic and
always opaque.
Transparent glass made its appearance
under Tutankhamen (c. 1300 BC). Starting
about 700 BC, Egyptian polychromatic
glass vases, in the form called alabaster,
spread throughout the Mediterranean area.
They were copied by the Phoenicians, who
developed their manufacture into an in¬
dustry.
In the later period, hieroglyphic signs.
andria but, above all, adopted its manufac¬
turing techniques and spread them to the
upper Nile valley.
One of the most important industries
was that of the production of papyrus in¬
vented by the ancient Egyptians. No plant
played a more significant role in Egypt than
papyrus. Its fibres were used for boat mak¬
ing and for caulking, for the wicks of oil
lamps, for mats, baskets, ropes and
hawsers.
The hawsers which served to moor the
pontoon bridge that Xerxes tried to lay
across the Hellespont were made in Egypt
out of papyrus fibres. When tied together
in bundles, papyrus stems served as pillars
in early architecture until classical ar¬
chitects took them as a model for their sim¬
ple or clustered columns whose capitals
were shaped like closed or open flowers.
But, above all, papyrus was used to make
"papyrus", from which the word "paper"
is derived.
Papyrus was made by placing crosswise
48

One of the largest and best
preserved temples in Egypt, the
temple of Edfu (right) was built
on the west bank of the Nile in
Upper Egypt during the period
of the Ptolemaic dynasty.
Construction of the temple,
which was dedicated to Horus,
began in 237 BC. Even at this
comparatively late date the
papyrus motif still predominates
at the base and on the capitals
of the columns lining the great
courtyard. .
Photo © Henri Stierlin, Switzerland
successive layers of fine strips taken from
the stem of the plant which, after pressing
and drying, formed a large sheet.
Twenty sheets of papyrus joined
together while they were still moist formed
a scroll three to six metres in length.
Several scrolls could be joined together and
reach a length of thirty or forty metres.
It was scrolls of this kind that constituted
Egyptian books. They were held in the left
hand and unrolled as the reading proceed¬
ed. The volumen of classical antiquity is a
direct heir of this scroll.
Of all the writing materials employed in
antiquity, papyrus was certainly the most
practical. It was supple and light. Its sole
drawback was its fragility. Over a long
period it stood up poorly to humidity, and it
burnt very easily. It has been estimated that
to maintain the inventory of a small Egyp¬
tian temple, ten metres of papyrus were re¬
quired each month.
Provincial notaries, during the Ptolemaic
dynasty, used from six to thirteen scrolls or
from twenty-five to fifty-seven metres each
day.
Every large estate and royal palace and
all the temples maintained registers, inven¬
tories and libraries, which indicates that
hundreds of kilometres of papyrus must
have existed at that time whereas only a
few hundred metres have been
rediscovered.
The papyrus used in Egypt from the time
of the first dynasty (c. 3000 BC) until the
end of the Pharaonic period was later
adopted by the Greeks, the Romans, the
Copts, the Byzantines, the Aramaeans and
the Arabs.
A large part of Greek and Latin literature
has come down to us on papyrus. Papyrus
was, unquestionably, one of the major
legacies bequeathed to civilization by
Pharaonic Egypt.
The Egyptian expertise in wood working
is brilliantly manifested in their ship¬
building. The necessities of daily life in the
Nile valley, where the river is the only con
venient thoroughfare, made expert
boatmen of the Egyptians from the earliest
times.
In 1952, two great pits dug into the rock
and covered with huge limestone slabs
were discovered along the southern side of
the Great Pyramid. In the pits, partially
disassembled, but complete with oars,
cabins, and rudders, were discovered the
very boats used by the Pharaoh Cheops.
One of these boats has been removed from
the pit and restored. The other one is still
waiting to be taken out of its tomb.
Cheops' boat, now in a special museum,
has been rebuilt. When found it consisted
of 1,224 pieces of wood which had been
partially disassembled and stacked in thir¬
teen successive layers in the pit. The boat
measures 43.4 metres long, 5.9 metres
wide, and has a capacity of about forty
tons. The side planks are between thirteen
and fourteen centimetres thick. Cheops'
boat has no keel, and is flat bottomed and
narrow. The most remarkable fact is that it k
was built without any nails: the pieces of f
49

As long ago as 2500 BC, Egyptian physicians were famous for their ability to diagnose and
treat hundreds of diseases and to perform many kinds of operations. They could, for
example, reduce and set fractures using strips of linen soaked in resin or asphalt (photo
above left) and understood the nature and causes of hernia, from which the bearded
harvester (top photo) clearly suffered. Above right, detail from a bas-relief at the Temple
of Kom Ombo in Upper Egypt is thought by scholars to represent surgical instruments
used sometime during the Ptolemaic dynasty (323-30 BC).
¡^ wood are held together solely by the use of
tenon and mortise joints.
Beginning with the fifth dynasty, and
probably even before, the Egyptians knew
how to adapt their ships for ocean-going
voyages. The boats of Sahure show that
for use at sea the height of the prow and
the poop were greatly reduced.
In Cheops' boat, these were raised high
above the waterline. This made the ship
difficult to manage in the waves of the
Mediterranean or the Red Sea. In addition,
Egyptian naval engineers lent great solidity
to the whole structure by equipping the
ship with a torsion-cable passing over the
bridge and tying the stern firmly to the
bow. This cable also acted as à keel, ensur-
. ing the rigidity of the entire structure and
reducing the danger of its breaking in the
middle.
50
With these modifications, the Egyptian
ship was capable of plying the furthest
maritime routes opened up by the
Pharaohs, whether on the Mediterranean in
the direction of Palestine, Syria, Cyprus
and Crete, or on the Red Sea towards the
distant country of Punt.
The Pharaonic contribution to science
and applied mathematics has left a valuable
legacy.
It was, undoubtedly, the knowledge they
acquired from mummification that enabled
the Egyptians to develop surgical tech¬
niques at a very early period in their history.
We have quite a good knowledge of Egyp¬
tian surgery, in fact, thanks to the Smith
Papyrus, a copy of an original which was
composed under the Old Kingdom, bet¬
ween 2600 and 2400 BC. This papyrus is
virtually a treatise on bone surgery and ex
ternal pathology. Forty-eight cases are ex¬
amined systematically.
Several of the treatments indicated in the
Smith Papyrus are still used today. Egyp¬
tian surgeons knew how to stitch up
wounds and to set a fracture using wooden
or pasteboard splints. And there were
times when the surgeon simply advised
that nature should be allowed to take its
own course.
Of the cases studied by the Smith
Papyrus, the majority concerned superficial
lacerations of the skull or face. Others con¬
cerned lesions of the bones or joints such
as contusions of the cervical or spina!
vertebrae, dislocations, perforations of the
skull or sternum, and sundry fractures af¬
fecting the nose, jaw, collar-bone,
humerus, ribs, skull and vertebrae.
Examination of mummies has revealed
traces of surgery, such as the jaw dating
from the Old Kingdom which has two holes
bored to drain an abscess, or the skull frac¬
tured by a blow from an axe or sword and
successfully reset. There is also evidence of
dental work such as fillings done with a
mineral cement, and one mummy had a
kind of bridge of gold wire joining two
shaky teeth.
By its methodical approach, the Smith
Papyrus bears testimony to the skill of the
surgeons of ancient Egypt, skill which it
would be fair to assume was handed on
gradually, in Africa as well as in Asia and to
classical antiquity, by the doctors who
were always attached to Egyptian expedi¬
tions to foreign lands.
Moreover, it is known that foreign
sovereigns, like the Asian prince of
Bakhtan, Bactria, or Cambyses himself,
brought in Egyptian doctors, that Hip¬
pocrates "had access to the library of the
Imhotep temple at Memphis" and that
other Greek physicians later followed his
example.
Medical knowledge can be considered as
one of the most important early scientific
contributions of the ancient Egyptians to
the history of man. Documents show in
detail the titles of Egyptian physicians and
their different fields of specialization. In
fact the civilizations of the ancient Near
East and the classical world recognized the
ability and reputation of the ancient Egyp¬
tians in medicine and pharmacology.
Among the ailments identified and com¬
petently described and treated by Egyptian
doctors were gastric disorders, stomach
swelling, skin cancer, coryza, laryngitis,
angina pectoris, diabetes, constipation,
haemorrhoids, bronchitis, retention and in¬
continence of urine, Bilharzia and
ophthalmia.
The Egyptian doctor treated his patient
using suppositories, ointments, syrups, po¬
tions, oils, massages, enemas, purges,
poultices, and even inhalants whose use
the Egyptians taught to the Greeks. The
Egyptian pharmacopoeia contained a large
variety of medicinal herbs, the names of
which, unfortunately, elude translation.
Egyptian medicinal techniques and
medicines enjoyed great prestige in antiqui¬
ty, as we know from Herodotus.
The Greek writers Herodotus and Strabo
concur in the view that geometry was in-

vented by the Egyptians. The need to
calculate the area of the land eroded or ad¬
ded each year by the flooding of the Nile
apparently led them to its discovery.
Egyptian geometry, like mathematics,
was empirical. In ancient treatises, the task
was first and foremost to provide the scribe
with a formula that would enable him to
find rapidly the area of a field, the volume
of grain in a silo or the number of bricks re¬
quired for a building project. The scribe
never applied abstract reasoning to the
solution of a particular problem but just
provided the practical means in the shape
of figures.
Nonetheless, the Egyptians knew
perfectly well how to calculate the area of a
triangle or a circle, the volume of a
cylinder, of a pyramid or a truncated
pyramid, and probably that of a
hemisphere. Their greatest success was
the calculation of the area of a circle. They
proceeded by reducing the diameter by
one-ninth and squaring the result which
was equivalent to assigning a value of
3.1605 to TZ , which is much more precise
Few traces remain of the ordinary houses of the ancient Egyptians, yet
archaeological excavations, plans, documents and archives that have survived
bear witness to the skills of ancient Egyptian architects and town-planners.
(1) Plan of the remains of the city of Kahun, built during the reign of Sesostris
II (1897-1878 BC) in the present-day region of al-Fayyum, reveals the existence
of five types of houses designed for the different social categories notables,
scribes, office-workers, artisans and workmen. The houses of the notables were
located on the northern edge of the city while the humbler dwellings formed the
workmen's quarter to the west. The house marked "Acropolis" on the plan was
probably used by Sesostris himself. Despite their size they had seventy or more
rooms and antechambers the notables' houses were built In the same style as
the smaller (two to nine rooms) dwellings (see [2] detail to right of plan). (3) This
"soul house", a pottery model placed in a tomb as a symbolic dwelling for the
soul, was found in an 18th dynasty (1567-1320) tomb and represents a country
house. Unlike the average town house it has windows on all sides and a roof
terrace accessible by means of an interior staircase. Photo (4) Cross-sectional
painting from an 18th dynasty tomb of an elegant Theban town house. The
principal rooms have a higher ceiling than the others and receive light and
ventilation from small windows placed just below ceiling height. An additional
refinement is the air space between the ceiling and the upper floor. The ground
floor seems to house the domestic services whilst on the roof terraces are to be
seen the customary grain storage silos.
CONTINUED PAGE 54
51

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 51
than the value 3 given to 71 by other an¬
cient peoples.
The Egyptian contribution to astronomy
must be deduced from practical applica¬
tions made on the basis of observations.
This contribution is however far from in¬
significant.
The Egyptian calendar year was divided
into three seasons of four months, each
having thirty days; to these 360 days, five
were added at the end of the year. The
365-day calendar year, the most accurate
known in antiquity, is at the origin of our
own calendar year inasmuch as it served as
the basis of the Julian reform (47 BC) and
of the Gregorian reform of 1582. Side by
side with this civil calendar, the Egyptians
also used a religious, lunar calendar and
were able to predict the moon's phases
with adequate accuracy.
Ever since the Napoleonic expedition to
Egypt, Europeans have been struck by the
accuracy of the alignment of structures
built at the time of the Pharaohs, particular¬
ly the pyramids, the four façades of which
face the four cardinal points. The Great
Pyramids deviate from true North by less
than one degree. Such accuracy could
have been achieved only by astronomical
observation.
The ancient Egyptians applied their
mathematical knowledge to the extraction,
transportation and positioning of the huge
blocks of stone used in their architectural
projects. Their tradition of using mud-
bricks and various kinds of stone went back
to very early times. They first used heavy
granite during the beginning of the third
millennium before our era. It was used for
the flooring of tombs belonging to the first
dynasty at Abydos. During the second
dynasty they used limestone in construc¬
ting the walls of tombs.
A new phase began during the third
dynasty. This was a vital development in
the history of Egyptian architecture, for if
was the construction of the first complete
building in stone. This is the step pyramid
at Saqqarah, which forms a part of the
huge funerary complex of King Zoser.
Imhotep, who was probably the vizier of
King Zoser (c. 2580 BC), was the architect
who built the ensemble containing the step
pyramid where hewn stone was used for
the first time. The blocks were small and
looked very much like a limestone imitation
of the sun-dried brick used earlier in
funerary architecture. Similarly, the imbed¬
ded columns and the ceiling joists were
stone copies of the bundles of plants and
beams used in earlier construction. Thus,
there is every indication that Egyptian ar¬
chitecture was amongst the first to use
hewn stone in coursed work.
Until the Roman conquest, civil architec¬
ture continued to use sun-dried bricks even
in the building of royal palaces. The out¬
buildings of Ramses in Thebes and the
great Nubian fortresses provide a very
good idea of the versatility of this material.
It could be used with the utmost refine¬
ment, as can be seen from the Palace of
Amenhotep IV at Tell el-Amarna with its
pavements and ceilings decorated with
paintings.
Another contribution in the field of ar
chitecture was the creation of the column.
This was at first attached to the wall but
later became free-standing.
In developing this architectural skill the
ancient Egyptian was much influenced by
the local environment. For example, in ar¬
riving at the idea of a column, he was in¬
spired by his observation of wild plants
such as reeds and papyrus.
He cut the capitals of the columns into
the shape of lotus flowers, papyrus and
other plants, and this was another architec¬
tural innovation. The lotus papyrus palm
and fluted columns of ancient Egypt were
adopted in the architecture of other
cultures.
The technical knowledge acquired by the
Egyptians in construction and irrigation as
the result of digging canals and building
dikes or dams manifested itself in other
fields allied to architecture.
By 2550 BC, they had sufficient skill to
build a dam of hewn stone in a wadi near
Cairo. Somewhat later, their engineers cut
navigable channels in the rocks of the First
Cataract at Aswan. By all evidence,
towards 1740 BC, they seem to have suc¬
ceeded in erecting a barrage on the Nile
itself at Semna, in Nubia, to facilitate
navigation to the south. And finally, during
the same period, they built a ramp parallel
to the Second Cataract, over which they
slid their boats on the fluid mud of the Nile.
The ramp extended over several
kilometres, a predecessor of the Greek
Diolkos of the Isthmus of Corinth, and en¬
sured that the rapids of the Second
Cataract never hindered navigation.
Cultural ties linking Egypt with the
African interior existed during the earliest
stages of prehistory as well as in historical
times. Egyptian civilization under the
Pharaohs permeated the neighbouring
African cultures.
Comparative studies prove the existence
of common cultural elements between
black Africa and Egypt, such as the rela¬
tionship between royalty and natural
forces. This is clear from archaeological fin¬
dings in the former territory of the land of
Kush: royal pyramids were built in El-
Kurru, Nuri, Gebel Barkal and Meroe. They
bear witness to the significance of Egyptian
influence in Africa.
Unfortunately, our ignorance of the
Meroitic language, and of the extent of the
Meroitic empire, prevents us from judging
the impact it had on the cultures of ancient
Africa as a whole to the east, west and
south of the Meroitic empire.
Rashid El-Nadoury
with the collaboration of Jean Vercoutter
The ancient Egyptians developed the carving of hard stone to
a fine art as witness the detailed perfection of this
mythological scene incised on the lid of a priest's
sarcophagus found at Saqqarah, near ancient Memphis, and
dating probably from the 30th dynasty (380-343 BC). The
arched body of the sky goddess Nut forms the vault of the
sky. Within the inner circle can be seen the prostrate body of
Shu, the god of light and air and supporter of the sky.
Bordering this inner circle are the banners of the forty nomas
or provinces of Egypt. Within the larger circle, on either side,
stand the goddesses of East and West. Between their
extended arms, on which sail the ships of day and night,
passes the winged disc of the sun which is swallowed each
night by the goddess Nut to be reborn each morning.
