Medicine's
green
revolution'
by Jean-Marie Pelt
ALL over the world, a revival of interest in medicinal plants is
making itself keenly felt. Anxiety concerning the excesses
of industrial civilizations and the threats which they pose
to physical and mental health is leading more and more men and
women to seek herbal remedies for their suffering and illness, in a
movement of reconciliation with nature.
At the dawn of history, when the first glimmerings of knowledge
began to pierce the darkness of men's ignorance, both the
therapeutic and the toxic properties of plants were subjects of
In a factory at Kottakal, 'India,
medicines are prepared
according to the precepts of
Ayurveda, the classical system
of Indian medical science.
Traditional Ayurvedic remedies
use herbs carefully selected on
the basis of a highly elaborate
theory which takes into
account the taste of the plants
and their heat-giving
properties. Ayurveda, which
literally means the Science of
Life, was once widely
practised in Asia and is today
enjoying a revival. Faithful to
Indian traditions. Ayurvedic
healers look at the mind and
body as a whole before
prescribing the appropriate
remedy for a disease.
8

equal interest. Sorcerers, "medicine men" and witch doctors were
as familiar with poisons as with cures, and this knowledge gave
them an aura of supernatural authority.
In its turn, modern medical science has been enriched by the in¬
vestigation of plants that were known to primitive societies. Thus
the poisonous seed of a West African climbing plant, the calabar
bean, once used in trial by ordeal, today yields the drug known as
eserine, which contracts the pupil of the eye.
Another modern drug, the powerful heart stimulant ouabain, is
obtained from the Strophantus plant of tropical Africa and Asia,
used to poison arrows for hunting and war. Curare, another arrow-
tip poison, used by the Indians of Amazonia, is applied in modern
surgeryand abdominal surgery in particular to produce
muscular relaxation.
But how were these plants persuaded to part with their secrets ?
Doubtless as the result of a lengthy process of trial and error, dur¬
ing which manwhose very existence was intimately bound up
with natural processes and whose survival depended on endless
stratagems had to learn to recognize and distinguish between
plants which were useful and plants which might do him harm,
plants which might be used as food and plants which might cure
his illnesses, and plants which were capable of killing him.
JEAN-MARIE PELT, of France, is professor of plant biology and the
science of drugs at the University of Metz. Chairman of the Administrative
Council of the European Institute of Ecology, Metz, he has undertaken a
number of research and teaching missions in Africa and Asia. He has
published several works, both scientific and of general interest, including:
Evolution et Sexualité des Plantes (Evolution and sexuality ofplants), 1970,
Drogues et Plantes Magiques (Magic drugs and plants), 1971, and
l'Homme Re-naturé (Man's links with nature renewed), 1977.
At a later stage in history, this accumulated knowledge found
expression in a number of theories which may give rise to smiles
today, the most widespread of which was certainly the so-called
"doctrine of signatures".
According to this doctrine, every medicinal plant Indicates by a
sign its healing properties. "Everything that Nature creates",
wrote the Swiss physician Paracelsus in the sixteenth century, "is
shaped in the image of the virtue she intends to conceal therein".
Thus, plants which secrete the milky substance known as latex will
serve to prepare medicines that stimulate lactation. If this latex is
yellowish in colour, as in the case of the celandine, the plant is
considered helpful in the treatment of jaundice.
Fleshy plants put flesh on human bones. The shape of the
walnut is a sign of its usefulness as a medicine for brain diseases,
while that of the bean predestines it as a treatment for kidney com¬
plaints. This "therapy by analogies", developed by Arab physi¬
cians and the medieval alchemists, was in direct opposition to the
theories of Hippocrates and of Galen, whose famous aphorism
Contraria contrariis curantur lay at the foundations of a "therapy
by opposites".
Beliefs of this kind, which are found among the traditional
healers of Africa, the physicians of China and the empiricists of
South America alike, would appear to reflect a characteristic, "pre-
scientific" stage in the development of knowledge.
At first sight, the doctrine of signatures may provoke amuse¬
ment. It is difficult to believe that the leaves of the lungwort are a
remedy for chest diseases, just because their vein structure
resembles that of the air-cells in the lung ; that saxifrage (from the
Latin saxum, a stone, and frángete, to break) splits gallstones as
effectively as the rocks in whose crevices it grows ; or that bamboo
stems help to strengthen the spine because their knotty excrescen- v
ces resemble vertebrae. Y

> On the other hand, the uncontested virtues of such present-day
drugs as colchicine and aspirin seem to confirm this doctrine,
which in reality constitutes a means of committing to memory, by
means of "signs" and in civilizations which do not keep written
records, the remedies which medical experience has shown to be
efficient.
If the corm of the Colchicum or meadow saffron is shaped like a
gout-swollen toe, the extract which it yields, colchicine, is in fact
the only effective treatment for this painful affliction. And as for
aspirin, its story is worth telling as an example of the evolving rela¬
tionship between traditional plant medicine and modern phar¬
macology.
The origins of this drug are to be found in the bark of the willow,
a tree of the genus Salix, which usually grows in watery places and
is only truly happy when its feet are wet. According to the doctrine
of signatures, this indicates that the willow does not catch cold,
and that it should thus be capable of curing feverish chills,
rheumatic pains and similar conditions. And since it is the bark of
the willow that keeps it well wrapped up and warm, it is here that
one may expect to find the active property in question.
In the eighteenth century, willow-bark was found to be com¬
parable in its bitterness to the bark of a tree found in Peru, the cin¬
chona, an extract from which, quinine, was known to be the
supreme remedy for the feverish disease malaria. Thus a decoction
from willow-bark came to be used for the treatment of fevers. In
1829 the Frenchman Leroux succeeded in extracting from willow-
bark a substance which he called salicine (from the Latin name of
the tree).
Not long afterwards, a Swiss pharmacist named Pagenstecher
distilled the flowers of meadowsweet, a plant of the genus
Spiraea, which also likes to have its feet in the water, and obtained
a substance very similar to salicine, methyl salicylate. And now the
story moves to Germany where, a few years later, yet another
similar substance, salicylic acid, was produced artificially for the
first time; this in turn yielded a derivative, acetylsalicylic acid,
which (with its echo of Salix, the original willow) is none other
than the official name for aspirin, our common remedy for aches
A variety of blackberry is depicted on this page from the sixth-
century Codex Aniciae Julianae, the oldest surviving herbal, or
illustrated manual of medicinal plants. The Codex is a version of
a famous herbal by the Greek physician and pharmacologist
Pedanius Dioscorides (1st century AD) who described with
remarkable accuracy the therapeutic properties of many plants
used in medical practice until modern times.
and pains, where the syllable "spir" reminds us of its other vegeta¬
ble ancestor, the meadowsweet Spiraea.
Similar processes have given birth to a great many modern
medicines, the origins of which are to be found in plants known to
man since time immemorial. Ephedrine, for example, which is used
in the treatment of asthma, is derived from the Ephedra herb,
employed in Chinese medicine for at least 5000 years. Sovereign
pain-killers like henbane, mandragora, opium and asafetida are
listed in the earliest pharmacopoeias of Babylon and Sumer.
In fact, the capacity to relieve pain was probably the first great
triumph of medicine, and came long before the ability to heal.
Sedatives were used in Ancient Egypt, and a medical treatise
drawn up in Thebes in about 1600 BC contains an inventory of
seven hundred plants, including purgatives like senna and the
castor oil plant, and plants such as those of the genus Scilla, used
in the treatment of heart conditions.
It was Greek medicine, under the influence of such physicians as
Hippocrates and Dioscorides, that established the therapeutic
value of herbal remedies, as distinct from their significance in ritual
and magic. But sorcery and occult science made a powerful
comeback after the fall of the Roman Empire, while knowledge of
medicinal plants took refuge in monasteries and convents, and
medical learning flourished in the work of Arab scholars.
We now know that certain pathological states described by
medieval authors, like the inflamed skin condition called "St. An- .
thony's fire", can be induced by a minute fungus that attacks grain
and grasses, and that collective poisoning can occur, accom¬
panied by the hallucinations in which medieval man detected
satanic influences at work, when large numbers of people eat
bread made from contaminated flour. But it was not until the eigh¬
teenth century that ergot, the fungus in question, was identified.
Curiously, ergot serves today to produce a large number of
medicines used in the treatment of high blood pressure and other
circulatory ailments.
The discovery of America by European explorers and the open¬
ing of the sea route to India added new plants and spices to the an¬
cient pharmacopoeias, and thus led to the enrichment of the vast i
inventory of herbs used in modern medicine. f
10

w
unste lift.
i â*3al~~
i £M~
Î&Ê3MA
>2Ï
Photo © University Museum, Philadelphia
Documentary milestones in the story of man's long quest for
mastery of the art of healing: (1) Illustration from the Arab
physician Ahmad al-Ghafiq's classic study on the cultivation and
use of medicinal plants (Cordoba, 12th century). Shown here, a
stylized representation of the myrtle plant, widely cultivated In
northern Africa and the Iberian peninsula. (3) Over 4,000 years
old, this tablet unearthed In the ruins of the Sumerian city of
Nippur has been proclaimed the world's oldest treatise on
medicine. Inscribed on it are recipes for plant medicines,
although their uses are not specified. (4) Fragment of the oldest
known Egyptian medical manual, the Ebers papyrus. Dating back
to the second millennium of the pre-Christian era, it was
acquired by the German Egyptologist Georg Ebers in 1873. (2)
Birch-bark, as well as the tree's leaves and sap possess blood-
cleansing, antiseptic, diuretic, stimulant and sweat-inducing
properties. In the 12th century birch flowers were extolled by St.
Hildegard as aiding the formation of scar tissue.
11

"God has imprinted on
plants, herbs and flowers
hieroglyphics which are in
some wise the very
signature of their virtues",
wrote the 17th-century
English botanist Robert
Turner. According to this
"theory of signatures",
which held sway for
centuries, medicinal plants
possess some feature such
as the shape of their roots,
leaves or flowers which
relates them to the ailment
they can heal. According to
one variant of the theory
(right) propounded by the
Italian scientist
Giambattista della Porta
(1538 - 1615) a scorpion bite
can be countered by
heliotrope, cumin and
scorpiorus, plants whose
appearance has marked
affinities with that of the
deadly creature (pictured at
bottom of document).
All Rights Reserved
The nineteenth century marks a watershed in the manner in
which medicinal plants are used, and the transition from use of the
plants themselves or preparations ma.de from them for therapeutic
purposes, to use of the active molecules they contain. This is, in
fact, the period when the productivist ideologies of young in¬
dustrial societies begin to overthrow the traditional image of
nature, which is no longer regarded as anything but a vast source
of readily available raw materials. The resources are there to be ex¬
ploited, and modern man indeed exploits them, sometimes to an
excessive extent.
Where the plant world was once composed of individual "per¬
sonalities", it is now considered merely as a mine, whose sole pur¬
pose is to yield the substances it contains. In many cases, it must
be said, this new approach has its advantages: no one would
dream of sweetening their coffee with a lump of beetroot, when it
is much more convenient to extract the sugar from the beetroot
first!
When this process is carried further, and chemists succeed in
reproducing artificially a specific active substance, there is no fur¬
ther need for the plant from which it was originally obtained. And
the next stage, when one synthetic product is transformed into a
series of derivatives, which are tested first on animals and then ad¬
ded to the steadily lengthening list of "chemical" medicines, can
be carried so far that the fact that once upon a time there was a
plant which produced the same effects is all but forgotten. Who
today remembers that the amphetamines, prescribed as a
stimulant in cases of depression, are merely synthetic "descen¬
dants" of a natural extract of the Ephedra?
The shelves of modern pharmacies are stocked in this way with
artificial products, many of which originated in the active consti¬
tuents of medicinal plants. To an ever-increasing extent, man is
producing artificial molecules, which have no counterpart in the
natural world, and using them to concoct potions of his own
making.
Produced in greater and greater quantities and designed to serve
a huge variety of purposes, these synthetic compounds tend to
result in what we may call "medicinal pollution", with the grave at
tendant problem posed by the daily consumption, on a constantly
growing scale, of vast amounts of medicines by people who are
not really ill. Tonics, tranquillizers, all kinds of psychotropic treat¬
ment, contraceptive pills and so on, these are the "convenience
medicines", absorbed in huge quantities by masses of basically
healthy individuals in the belief that they will feel better as a result.
"In the belief" only, for there are no means of telling whether, in
the long run, the effect will be beneficial.
However, more and more people are asking themselves what
will happen if uncontrolled industrial development, based on the
production and consumption of ever-increasing quantities of new
commodities, is permitted to continue.
There is a powerful public demand for research into "softer",
less aggressive therapeutic techniques, which will subject the
human system to less strain, accompanied by a steep worldwide
increase in the production and consumption of medicinal plants.
But before breaking with the excesses of our chemistry-based
civilization, and inventing or re-inventing new therapies designed
to place man on better terms with his environment, it would be
wise to clarify, once and for all, the relationship between inductive
science and the empiricism of the ancient physicians and healers, a
relationship which resembles that of a couple in which the partners
are somewhat weary of living together, but at the same time in¬
capable of living alone ! A speedy reconciliation is called for. Here
lies the interest of the research carried out by the World Health
Organization, which is encouraging all its Member States to draw
up a completely fresh inventory of their therapeutic resources, in
which medicinal plants continue to occupy a prominent place.
There can be no doubt that such a research programme will lead
to the discovery of new medicines and the development of new at¬
titudes to the treatment of illness. It is hardly necessary to recall
that their wisdom and keen sense of observation frequently led our
ancestors on different continents to use the same natural
medicines for the treatment of the same afflictions. Thus, the con¬
tinents with tropical climates each produced popular remedies for
the same disease, leprosy, based on extracts from the same family
of plants, the Flacourtaceae. In other words, healers working
12

thousands of kilometres apart, unaware of each other's existence,
discovered the same medicines, based on very similar plants which
modern botany groups in the same family. Both the Incas and the
Chinese, for example, considered that the water lily had sedative
and anaphrodisiac properties I
Such convergences, when they occur, draw attention to the
usefulness of drugs discovered at different times by different
civilizations. Today a number of countries are devoting con¬
siderable resources to the reappraisal and scientific investigation of
their therapeutic traditions. Identical efforts in this connexion in
every continent would not only enrich the cultural heritage of each
people, society and civilization, but also place additional resources
at the disposal of modern medicine.
Progress of this kind, however, presupposes an entirely new ap¬
proach to medicinal plants. After decades of analytical research
aimed at the extraction of specific active substances, the accent
should now be placed on utilization of the entire plant. In this
respect, some of the radically new concepts of ecology may be of
help^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
To the ecologist, a givien effect is never the product of a single
cause, but rather the oufcbme of interplay between a number of
simultaneously occurm^ phenomena. In a complex system,
therefore, the whole is more than the sum of its components; and
understanding of the former depends on more than familiarity with
the latter. The '%©rking" of. nature's machine is not the sum of the
actions carried 9 Hoeously and in juxtaposition by all its
parts, but the consequence of the many interactions between
them. Expressed more simply, it is as if, once a certain threshold
of complexity has been passed, matter and life acquire new
properties.
In application to medicinal plants, whose composition is in¬
variably complex, this theory confirms a posteriori the traditional
theories according to which a plant in its entirety has properties
which differ from those of its constituent parts. The overall proper¬
ties of ergot, opium or digitalis, which are clearly different from the
properties of the individual substances which they contain, are ex¬
amples most frequently cited in support of such notions, but they
are not particularly convincing, since a minimum of Cartesian logic
is enough to show that the properties of a mixture constitute an
algebraic summation of the properties of its ingredients.
Our experiments with the artichoke would appear to yield more
significant results in this connexion. According to the doctrine of
signatures, this bitter-tasting plant ought to assist the functioning
of the liver, and this is in fact the case. The property involved was
initially attributed to a single substance, and then it was discovered
that a number of other substances are also partially responsible.
When, however, these were tested separately on mice, it rapidly
became clear that the majority of them isolation were totally
inactive. On the other hand, the administration in equal doses of
mixtures of these substances revealed that the greater the number
of ingredients involved, the more pronounced was their activity. In
other words, this was a spectacular demonstration of how new
CONTINUED PAGE 16
An intriguing feature of this 16th-century sculpture of St.
George and the Dragon, which stands in the palace of
Prague (Czechoslovakia) is that the clash takes place in a
field of stylized artichokes (detail below right). Experiments
seem to show that the bitter leaves of the artichoke, a plant
of Mediterranean origin, assist the functioning of the liver,
as suggested by the "doctrine of signatures".
Photo Jaroslav Jerabek © Narodni Gallery, Prague
1
13

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 13
active properties can emerge through the addition of substances
which, in isolation, are ineffective.
Similar phenomena doubtless occur in the case of other plants,
such as hawthorn and valerian, although the exact nature of their
active components has not yet been accurately determined. Just
as the "common weal" is something different from the sum of all
the individual interests concerned, so the properties of a given
drug are different from the sum of the properties of all its consti¬
tuent substances. This means that an entirely new approach to the
study of medicinal plants is required, as well as development of
specific pharmacology so that the full range of their nature and
action may be more readily understood.
In this way, for example, observations of the floor of a pine
forest by Professor Masquelier of Bordeaux University, led him to
discover an important medicine used in the treatment of cir¬
culatory disorders. Noting that grass is virtually non-existent on
the floor of such forests, Masquelier wondered whether the cause
of its absence might not be found in a substance contained in the
dead pine-needles, which inhibited the germination of the grass
seeds. Tests made with a decoction of dead needles revealed that
such inhibition did in fact occur, and powerfully so (see photo
story pages 14 and 15).
Professor Masquelier succeeded in extracting the substance
responsible, which was found to exercise a profoundly disturbing
influence on the hormonal processes governing the division and
elongation of vegetal cells. It was also found that this substance in¬
hibited the growth of malignant cell cultures of human origin.
When attempts were made to reproduce it synthetically,
however, it was found that only the polymers possessed such a
property (polymers are substances composed of very large
molecules that are multiples of simpler chemical units called
monomers). However, when reduced to dimers (a dimer is a com¬
pound former by the union of two molecules), these substances
were found to strengthen the resistance of the capillary blood
vessels and thus to fortify the cardiovascular system. Observation
of woodland undergrowth, coupled with the quest for new
therapeutic compounds thus led to the discovery of a new treat¬
ment for circulatory diseases, based on an extract of pine-needles.
This shows how scientific research must sometimes follow
curiously original and tortuous paths in order to arrive at positive
results.
Of a simpler nature are the tests which are systematically carried
out on plants in order to determine their activity. Every year, such
tests are applied in industrial and university laboratories to
thousands of species used by purveyors of herbal remedies in all
corners of the world.
Of more than ten thousand species investigated in this manner,
in the quest for a cure for cancer, only 10 per cent have revealed
only to a minor extent such properties. Some fifty of
these have been examined in greater detail, and it may be hoped
that some at least may one day form the basis of a useful therapy.
Another fruitful line of research consists in the investigation of
genera, species and subspecies of plants which are rich in active
substances. Reasoning by analogy suggests that if a certain
substance is found in the members of one species, it is likely to be
present in the members of a closely similar species.
Despite appearances, there is order in nature's affairs, and the
chemistry of botanical species is by no means a haphazard pro¬
cess. There is a "family spirit" among plants, and each family is
specialized in its own type of chemical reactions, just as each pro¬
duces its own type of flower.
At all events, and irrespective of the chosen path of research,
the study of medicinal plants is enjoying a new lease of life
throughout the world, and there are encouraging signs in the keen
interest now shown by the developing countries in their own tradi¬
tional pharmacopoeias. With the encouragement of the World
Health Organization, they are endeavouring to meet public health
requirements from their own resources, drawing on all that is
richest in the age-old medical traditions of their own civilizations
and thus reducing to a minimum the import of costly foreign
drugs, whose superiority is not always evident. Today, as ¡ri the
past, the world of medicinal plants remains a vast one, offering its
horizons to research and medical progress.
Jean-Marie Pert
