Children
in the never,
never land
of exile
WHENEVER men and women are
forced to go into exile, violence
is inflicted not only on them but
on their families and especially on their chil¬
dren, who are caught up in a situation that
is beyond their grasp» The plight of these
"indirect" victims of political repression
has all too often been overlooked.
When children see their parents put
under arrest or when they visit their parents
in prison, they are the witnesses and some¬
times even the victims of ill-treatment by
the police. When their parents go into
hiding, they are subjected to sudden
upheavals and are torn away from their
schools and their friends. They may have to
endure separation from one or both
parents for a considerable time. If they
manage to go into exile, they have to leave
behind them their customs, their language
and those they love, and then face the
demands abruptly placed on them by their
adopted country.
Three other factors aggravate the effects
of these bitter experiences. In the first
place the children are either fed with con¬
fused or insufficient information about the
events which led to their predicament. This
may be a deliberate attempt to stop such
data from getting out or it may stem from
the difficulty of formulating the kind of
explanations that children can grasp.
Secondly, exile represents a break in conti¬
nuity and prevents the family from making
any definite plans for the future. Thirdly,' it
imposes a constant strain on the parents,
leading to quarrels and separations which
add to the children's feelings of insecurity,
deprivation and helplessness.
In general, it seems that while the chil¬
dren do not experience any major problems
as far as their intellectual development or
their learning processes are concerned,
their imagination suffers: they tend to imi¬
tate rather than create.
By giving substance to fantasies bound
up with the repression of desires, expe¬
rience of political repression and exile may
inhibit, sometimes to a marked degree, the
children's ability to give expression to their
fantasies and to engage in creative think¬
ing. The likely outcome of this is that their
imaginative work will deteriorate in quality
and that the range of their imagination will
diminish.
This deterioration is also reflected in their
powers of oral expression. Their vocabu¬
lary becomes impoverished and deficient in
all those figurative turns of phrase, compa¬
rions and adjectives that enrich linguistic
expression. This happens whatever lan¬
guage the children speak in the host
country.
No disturbances were observed in the
children's perception of situations nor in
their capacity to express these perceptions.
However, many children tended to make
lists of concrete items of information but
could only establish partial relationships
between them and were reluctant to sug¬
gest possible explanations for such rela¬
tionships.
In various tests performed to assess gra¬
phic representation, oral expression and
play, the children displayed a marked
tendency to simplify and were extremely
wary of using their imagination.
Two possible explanations for this emer¬
ged from interviews with the parents, who
confirmed that their children also showed
signs of an impoverished imagination in
their everyday lives. The first was that the
children were cut off from communication
and the kind of information which might
enable them to draw a clear-cut distinction
between fantasy and reality; the second
was that speech, even the utterance of
their own name, might have been dange¬
rous for them at some particular time when
they were in hiding. The parents stressed
the role that imagination played in their
own political activities and underlined the
difficulty of reconciling their own creative
activity with the realities of their situation
as exiles; as for the children, their urgent
need to adapt to life in exile was stifling
their creativity.
The children made an enormous effort to
adapt to school and to their new environ-
This text presents the conclusions of a major
study by a group of psychologists on fifty chil¬
dren ofpolitical exiles living in Europe. The study
was carried out under the auspices of a Paris-
based welfare organization, the Comité Inter¬
mouvements auprès des Evacués.

The child of a political exile unconsciously sees his father as a man
rejected by his country and reduced in status by the stigma of punishment.
These drawings by the five-year-old child of a Latin American family living
in exile in France show the mother as the most substantial figure of the
family with the father a diminished background figure.
ment and did not come up against any
major obstacles. However, their desire to
imitate was so strong that they adapted in a
submissive, accepting fashion, playing very
little part in what went on around them and
rarely taking the initiative. The parents felt
that this stemmed from a conflict between
the children's need to adjust to their envi¬
ronment and their desire to remain faith¬
ful to their country, political creed and
language.
When the children played, told stories or
drew pictures, they tended to simplify and
to steer clear of difficulties. They stuck to
straightforward description, conventional
forms and expressions, and gave an
impression of isolation. Such characteris¬
tics were closely linked to the profound gap
which had opened up between "here" and
"there", between "now" and "then", bet¬
ween pleasure and duty, play and reality.
The parents were familiar with these
aspects of their children's behaviour and
put forward several explanations for them:
the absence of dialogue between adults
and children; the stereotyped language of
political ideology; reliance on grand¬
parents; the tug-of-war between the need
to adjust to a new set of circumstances
and loyalty to their background; and a
whole series of factors stemming from the
contradiction between the social origin of
militant activity and its orientation.
The parents needed help because they
were living in hiding, and this led them to
rely either on their families or on relief orga¬
nizations. Persecution and dependence of
this kind encouraged a regressive pattern
of behaviour which compromised the chil¬
dren's image of their parents.
Repressive measures against a specific
group creates a climate of violence which
affects the whole community. People were
thus inclined to treat the persecuted as
social outcastsand this rejection in itself
stigmatized them as guilty. Children derive
their values from other people, and these
youngsters were at a loss to understand
how those who had been rejected by
everyone else could possibly be "good".
In exile, however, activism may be more
highly thought of, either through demons¬
trations of solidarity with the exiled militant
or because the host country confers on him
or her an aura of prestige. The child's
impressions of his "double life" become
even more sharply divided between the
claims of the past and the present, home¬
land and adopted country, reality and
myth, and give rise to a welter of imagery
and ambivalent ideas.
In most cases, the parents' ideological
outlook did not coincide with the interests
of the class to which they belonged, still
less with those of the grandparents, who
often looked after the children when the
parents were in hiding. The children may
accordingly be expected to inherit the same
contradictions and ambivalences as their
parents experienced in relation to their own
fathers and mothers.
The father figure, reduced to the status
of a child by the stigma of punishment,
may no longer prove capable of represen¬
ting authority, and the child may look
elsewhere for another person or an institu¬
tion to fill the gap. Institutions, however,
are unable to bestow the affection with
which the family tempers the severity of its
authority and leaves room for the individual
to exercise his freedom.
Children of exiles receive a barrage of
information and value-judgements which
are often incoherent and contradictory.
When they try to work out for themselves
clear, comprehensive and objective rules of
conduct and honesty, they have a hard
time reconciling the treatment meted out to
their parents with the general climate of
opinion and their own appreciation of
events.
Tests on the children showed that their
image of the fathers tended to diminish,
both physically and in terms of his autho¬
rity and of his fitness to perform his role.
Given the facts of life in exile, this diminu¬
tion of the father's authority rarely seems
to be motivated by aggression. On the con¬
trary it appears to be a way of preserving
the father as a real person and of keeping
him close at hand, alive and well. The
parents confirmed the existence of this atti¬
tude, which avoids direct conflict but
causes the members of the family to be¬
come isolated from each other.
The children's drawings showed signs of
isolation and inability to communicate;
they brought out the failings of every mem¬
ber of the family, especially the father who
was shown as a shadow of his real self.
The figure representing the mother was
more substantial and often taller than that
of the father.
Success was the most important thing in
life for these children, although the yard¬
stick of achievement power, money or
dominancewas not clearly defined. At
the same time there was a tendency to
downgrade the idea of conflict and to avoid
all opportunities for acts of heroism. Sub¬
mission was extolled and rationalized as the
most intelligent way of solving conflicts,
which were regarded as evil by nature.
The children had a certain regard for
argument as a form of combat, but the out¬
come or conclusion was always glossed
over, so that the issue of whether or not
reason was actually effective was left
unsettled. The ideas behind the reasoning
were based on such liberal premises as the
defence of human rights, strikes for higher
wages, the defence of the environment,
and were always postulated in relation to
the host country.
33
