The holy places
of upper Nepal
by Corneille Jest
'O
lN the summit of the sacred moun¬
tain a precious jewel like a crystal
stupa;
On the east side the dwelling of the Three
Precious Protectors;
On the south side the palace of the divinity
Tara;
On the west side the pa/aces of the divinity
Dor/e Pamo and the Dakini fairies;
On the north side the pa/ace of the divinity
Dorjechang...'
The "sacred mountain" of this Nepalese
poem is Mount Dhaulagiri, one of the
highest of the great Himalayan peaks; with
Everest, Annapurna and Kanjiroba it forms a
towering backdrop to the kingdom of Nepal.
Just three decades ago, Nepal wasw
known only to a handful of fortunate out- P
For the people of northern Nepal's high
valleys, every moment in life is imbued
with sacred significance. Monks officiate at
birth, marriage and death, and also give
their blessing to a host of everyday
activities such as building houses and
marking out the boundaries of fields. The
lama ("master") is a spiritual guide who
attends to the welfare of the community.
His many duties include the performance of
protection rites for people and their
possessions and casting out the souls of
the dead to protect them from capture by
demons. Protection rituals also accompany
the treatment prescribed by the lama-
doctor, right, whose battery of cures
ranges from herbal remedies to cupping
(drawing blood from the body by forming a
partial vacuum over a certain spot).
CORNEILLE JEST, of France, is director of a
mu/tidiscip/inary research programme of the Cen¬
tre National de la Recherche Scientifique in the
Himalayas. A Unesco consultant for the cultural
heritage in Nepal, he has published numerous ar¬
ticles on the Himalayan region. Lavishly illustrated
with his own photographs, his book Tarap, une
Vallée dans l'Himalaya was published in 1974 by
Editions du Seuil, Paris.

, siders, but over recent years it has gradually
become more open to the world. The trickle
of mountain climbers, occasional travellers
from the West and visitors anxious to learn
about its culture, has become a flood of
tourists seeking the exotic and escape from
their own environment.
Perched high up in "the roof of the
world", Nepal stretches some eight hundred
kilometres from east to west. From north to
south, stepped hills descend to the Ganges
plain below; rivers and mountains divide the
landscape into a vast chequer-board of
natural regions of immense diversity.
Situated as it is in the heart of the
Himalayan range, Nepal has assimilated and
preserved cultural influences both Indian
and central Asian in origin. With their com¬
parative isolation making exchange difficult,
the peoples of the upper valleys have, until
recently, maintained their way of life, their
religion and their architecture unaffected by
outside influences. And whereas the
peoples of the middle valleys look towards
Kathmandu and the south and speak or
understand Nepalese and follow the Hindu
religion, those who live in the high valleys of
the north and in the foothills of the
Himalayas are of Tibetan or Tibeto-Burmese
culture and language and most of them are
Buddhists.
The upper valleys dominate the passes
between Tibet and Nepal. With their high
altitude, harsh climate and the very low rain¬
fall to the north of the upper range, they can
support only marginal agriculture, including
the cultivation of barley, buckwheat and,
more recently, potatoes. The breeding of
the yak and its hybrids, of sheep and goats,
provides an additional source of food and
raw material for weaving. These meagre far¬
ming and breeding resources are sup¬
plemented by exchanging local grain for salt
from the salt lakes of the Tibetan plateau.
In the spring, when the crops have been
sown, the herds are sent up to spend the
summer in the higher mountain pastures;
summer is also the time for the exchange of
grain and salt. In autumn, after the harvest,
some of the inhabitants go down to the mid¬
dle valleys to market their products such as
textiles and medicinal plants.
Religious life hinges round Buddhism, the
pattern of which was first developed in Tibet
in the 8th century. Time is reckoned accor¬
ding to the lunar calendar. The New Year
falls in mid-February and this is when the
ritual of the expulsion of evil takes place. In
midsummer there are ceremonies to ensure
the abundance of crops and the fertility of
livestock. Places of worship are numerous
and include village temples and private
chapels as well as monasteries in which
gather men or women who have vowed to
live a life of meditation.
It should be noted that Buddhism has
adopted a highly structured form in these
regions. The priests or lamas fulfil a decisive
role as spiritual guides without whose
assistance man would be deprived of any
hope of salvation. The monks provide the
laity with access to liturgical or magical for¬
mulae and constitute a powerful hierarchical
organization which finds collective expres¬
sion in complex rituals and rigid formalism.
The monk may belong to a contemplative
order and live in seclusion from the outside
world, or may devote himself to imparting
his knowledge to the members of the com¬
munity as an educator, teacher, painter of
religious pictures, doctor or astrologer. The
10
monastic system, which a few centuries ago
had great significance in northern Nepal,
has experienced a renaissance in more re¬
cent times, particularly under the influence
of the lamas who came from Bhutan
towards the end of the 19th century.
The early beliefs of Upper Nepal were cen¬
tred on the divinities of the mountains and.
are preserved in the oral tradition in the form
of tales and narratives still known to
everyone. The whole mountain area belongs
to an extremely ancient sacred geography
which has been assimilated by Buddhism
and, to a lesser degree, by Hinduism. The
legend of Padmasambhava, the saintly pro¬
pagator of Buddhism in the region of the
Himalayas in the 8th century, refers mainly
to the transformation of the old divinities of
the mountains and lakes into defenders of
the new faith.
The traveller who journeys up from the
south, through dense forests of oak and fir,
or from the north across a countryside of
blossoming mountain plants, suddenly
comes upon the sanctuary of Muktinath,
perched high above the Kali Gandaki valley.
Here on the arid slopes men have settled,
setting out terraced fields and building reser¬
voirs to conserve and control the irrigation
water on which their survival depends.
Whether because of the powerful massifs of
Nilgiri and Dhaulagiri that tower above it, or
the presence of natural gas that bursts into
flame on contact with the air, Muktinath, in
its unique setting, has become a focal point
for the religions of the Himalayas.
Around a pagoda-temple, water from a
sacred spring spouts forth in a hundred and
eight jets in which pilgrims take purifying
baths. Here too stands a statue in gilt bronze
which is worshipped by some as Vishnu and
by others as Buddha Lokeswar. An ar¬
chaeologist attempting to identify the
statue, but who hesitated to do so because
the hands were hidden behind gilt or¬
naments, was told that the smile of wisdom
on the face was the best guide. Set in the
midst of a treeless landscape, the sanctuary
itself is surrounded by poplars, said to be the
staffs of the eighty-four yogi, "The Perfect
Ones", who have passed on the occult doc¬
trines revered by both the Hindus and the
Buddhists.
Lower down, where the natural gases
burn, is the small "temple of the miraculous
fire". Sala mabar Dolamebar. Here, where
"earth, stone and water burn", the pilgrims
come to make their offerings and to collect
holy water. Near this spot stands the Gompa
sarwa, "the new temple", built in 1938 by
the chief of the village of Dzar; it is
remarkable for its size (the main building
measures. 14 x 23 metres) and the delicacy
of its sculptures and its decorated wooden
panelling. And to the north-east stands the
Marma Lhakhang, "the temple of the
lamps", which contains a large statue of
Padmasambhava.
Just below the pilgrimage site stand "the
six villages", each of which is situated on a
hill. The largest of these villages is called
Dzong, "the fort", or Rab gyal tse, "the
Peak of Supreme Victory". The mud walls
which mark out the site of an old fortified
palace give an idea of the size of the original
complex of buildings; a temple and a few
monastery buildings still stand nearby. In¬
side, one can appreciate all the splendour of
a vast assembly hall (9 x 12.5 metres) with
its wooden panelling and six finely sculpted
pillars. The altar is crowned by a statue of
CONTINUED PAGE 14
Colour photo
The remoteness of the high
Himalayan valleys of Nepal has
fostered the survival of many
ancient traditions among people
who feel a deep sense of
communion with the barren,
windswept landscape around
them. These rocks beside a
pilgrims' way in the Khumbu
region have been engraved with
prayers by the faithful. Such
sacred rocks hark back to very
ancient pre-Buddhist beliefs in
mountain spirits.

-.:-
¡tè&- í>
^fc
t¿X1S
MP»''*"
i
LJDK'fljP £p
:
» "
*
/"* -
j
"
^Wl» t."
^L>*r * - *
.

* V
:WrK,
^
1

Colour page left
Religious traditions in the Oolpo region of
upper Nepal are strongly influenced by the
form of Buddhism known as Bon, which
absorbed religious teachings from India and
combined them with pre-Buddhist beliefs
akin to shamanism. In this part of the
Himalayas special rites are sometimes
performed to banish evil spirits. Kindly
divinities are invoked and appear in the
form of masks worn by the monks, who
perform sacred dances. Top photo shows a
participant at an exorcism ceremony
wearing the blue mask of the mythical bird
Garuda. In Nepal Buddhism and Hinduism
are practised side by side and their
- traditions have intermingled. Below,
gilt bronze statue in a pagoda-temple at
Muktinath, a focal point of Himalayan
religions. It is revered by Hindus as the God
Vishnu and by Buddhists as the Buddha
Lokeswar. Another sanctuary at Muktinath
honours Padmasambhava (the
"Lotus-Born"), the Indian mystic who in
the eighth century introduced to the
Himalayas the form of Buddhism known as
Tantrism (so named after its holy
scriptures, the Tantra). To his followers
Padmasambhava is a great Tantric God
rather than a historical figure.
Right, a chorten or tomb-sanctuary high in
the Ta rap valley, northern Nepal. In
addition to the major conservation
programme now being carried out by the
Nepalese Government and Unesco in the
Kathmandu valley, Nepal's department of
archaeology Is taking steps to safeguard
and preserve the monuments of northern
Nepal. A team of Unesco specialists is
helping to draw up an inventory of the
most important monuments and sites.
13

The chequer-board, right, is
being used for a game which
is something more than a
game. It is divided into one
hundred and four squares, each
of which represents a phase
of existence in a "sphere of
rebirth". At the centre of
each square is one of six
letters. A, S, R, G, D or Y,
which also figure on the
sides of a dice. The letter
which comes up when the
dice is thrown determines
the thrower's"'region of
rebirth". A player who
throws the letter A five
times, for example, is reborn
in the Paradise of
Padmasambhava. What is for
some of the players merely a
source of diversion is for the
monks one way of
approaching the verities of
Buddhism.
High in the Himalayas, tea is
prepared according to a
special recipe. After being
left to boil for a long time, it
is poured into a churn and
mixed with yak butter and
salt. This highly nutritious
emulsion is consumed in
large quantities.
n
"7
1
Wi
1/1 1
1 ' H\ P -J
w'A ^^W w^\
*mI lu I 1
^*¿Lg
m^Jr^mf V
^1¿- Mk
MHH *
\\f*
14
, Sakyamuni (the Buddha) and the murals
depict the Medicine Buddhas.
The sanctuary of Muktinath comes to life
at the end of August, when some of the
faithful celebrate the "midsummer festival";
others pay tribute to Vishnu at the full moon
of Bhado (August-September). The pilgrims
make their way to Muktinath, in family
groups or by entire villages, wearing the
clothes of the plains, simple loincloths with
cotton turbans knotted on their heads, or
clad in wide cloaks lined with brocade and
bright with jewels.
The followers of Vishnu or Siva take a
ritual bath; the Buddhists make offerings to
the sacred fire and walk round the site one
hundred and eight times, following a precise
itinerary. Then follow the festivities, games
of skill, archery and horse races in honour of
the divinities of the earth and mountains.
The whole mountain becomes a huge sanc¬
tuary. Then the pilgrims wend their way
back to a nearby oasis or to the distant plain
of Terai, confident that their meritorious
acts will ensure a good harvest, long life
and, most important of all, a better re-birth.
For the inhabitants of the upper valleys of
Nepal nature is in communion with the
divine, and this rapid survey of the holy
places, the traditional way of life and the
ceremonies through which they give expres¬
sion to their profoundly religious tempera¬
ment, brings us to examine the question of
how best to protect and if possible maintain
the vitality of a culture now confronted with
Western technology and ways of thought.
The cultural future of northern Nepal will
be affected by two important factors the
introduction of modern materials that have
only recently become available for the
maintenance and restoration of buildings,
and the impact of a rapidly developing
tourist trade on traditional life.
The architecture of northern Nepal was
designed to withstand rigorous climatic con¬
ditions; unlike those in the Kathmandu
valley, the buildings are very simple on the
outside, all the splendour and decorative
CONTINUED PAGE 19

Flat roofs of houses in this Himalayan
village built on a mountain slope provide
the villagers with a terraced walk between
each dwelling, a meeting-place, and a spot
for drying grain and piling up firewood.
Prayer banners can be seen flying from the
masts. As they flutter in the chilly air,
these "horses of the wind" bear messages
to the sky gods and invoke their protection.
To bring good fortune to the house they
are building, these two men are tracing a
Ungarn, the generative emblem of Shiva,
the god of creation, on a stone which will
form part of the'fireplace.
15

16

Lines of pilgrims wend their way towards
Buddha-ri, a sacred mountain in the Dolpo.
They will walk around the peak, and on
reaching a cairn and a prayer-mast at the
Orolma col will prostrate themselves before
attaching new prayer flags to the mast. The
cult of the mountains, still a living tradition
high in the Himalayas, is associated with
very ancient beliefs absorbed by Buddhism
and (to a lesser extent) Hinduism.
During the midsummer festival (July-
August), the young people of the Dolpo
region are given the task of whitewashing
and decorating the holy buildings known as
chorten (a Tibetan word meaning
"receptacle of offerings"). The chorten ¡s a
form of stupa, the characteristic Buddhist
structure. The faithful walk around these
sanctuaries intoning mantras (sacred
formulae for communion with the gods).
Below, a row of chorten in
the grandiose setting of the
Tarap valley.
Photos © Corneille Jest, Paris
17

At the midsummer festival, held each year
to ensure that livestock will prosper and
crops will be abundant, the inhabitants of
the isolated valleys of the Dolpo region
gather to attend religious ceremonies held
in monasteries, chapels and, as in photo,
the village temple.
This man from the Tarap valley is wearing
the mask of the drekar, or white devil. If he
appears during the period before the New
Year in which the monks go into retreat,
custom has it that he must be given some
butter, some tsampa (grilled barley-meal)
and a measure of salt. Accepting these
gifts, he replies:
"White is my right cheek
Like that of the king of India,
My left cheek is black
Like that of the king of China,
Sun and moon upon my brow
Like the master Padmasambhava,
Oh my nose a cowrie shell
In the manner of "tse tse" the goat."
18

Clad in brightly coloured robes, the demons
dance during a ritual exorcism ceremony
performed to protect the Tarap valley from
evil spirits (see also colour photo page 11).
Divinities invoked in the course of rituals
form the backdrop of this temple altar in
the Dolpo region. The figurines in the
copper bowl in the foreground represent
the spirits of the mountains. The form of
Buddhism practised in this region of the
Himalayas is a synthesis of Mahayana and
Tantric Buddhism, which involves the
invocation of innumerable divinities;
representations of these divinities have to
conform to strict rules.
k skill being reserved for the interior. It should
not be forgotten that buildings are tangible
representations of the Spiritual Embodiment
of the Buddha. Construction follows strict
rules; the outline is more or less square, the
form depends upon the size and therefore
on the supporting structure, and the type of
building depends upon the number of pillars
used. The most commonly encountered
temple is of the "four pillars and eight
beams" type.
Great care is taken over the choice of site.
Whenever possible the façade faces east,
"the great white way leading to the rising
sun"; the area to the south is bordered by a
river "identical to the turquoise dragon"; to
the west the temple is set against "a moun¬
tain like a red bird"; and, finally to the north,
a mountain "in the shape of a turtle"
encloses the sacred area.
In the past, dwellings were grouped
together for defensive purposes and
situated so as to get maximum sunlight,
leaving free the spaces most suitable for ir¬
rigated crops. But it is becoming increasing¬
ly difficult and expensive, in a market
economy, to build in the traditional style us¬
ing local materials and qualified craftsmen.
Unfortunately, attempts to use cheap, resis¬
tant materials have not met with success
and have been detrimental both to tradition
and to the environment.
With their practical approach and active,
enterprising nature, the men of the upper
valleys tend to make use of new materials
such as corrugated iron, cement, nails and
glass without anticipating their possible
drawbacks. These newly introduced
materials are used without taking traditional
forms into consideration, with the result that
new constructions and existing buildings are
ill-matched. But with wood expensive and
difficult to come by and skilled labour in¬
creasingly scarce, and as problems of finan¬
cing and efficiency that were unknown to
the old way of life arise, the development of
a new style becomes inevitable.
With the appeal of the high mountains
and the growth of interest among
Westerners in Asian culture, Himalayan
tourism is bound to develop. The exploits of
those who have scaled Everest, the ex¬
periences of young people who have made
the pilgrimage to Kathmandu, and the grow¬
ing interest in Tibetan forms of Buddhism
are all having the effect of attracting tourists
to Nepal.
Doubtless the side effects, both good and
bad, of mass tourism will soon become evi¬
dent. There has already been a significant
revival of craft industry; the villagers carve
ritual formulae in wood or stone, or paint
thangkas, the traditional medium for the ex¬
pression of religious feeling, for tourists
eager to buy. But it is still too early to assess
the effects of the contact between the in¬
habitants and the tourists who are ill-
prepared to appreciate an austere way of life
in which poor resources and a harsh climate v
are the predominant factors. Nevertheless, f
19

Afghanistan
, this contact will undoubtedly be made easier
by the respect evoked by a courageous peo¬
ple with a kindly attitude towards foreigners.
The conservation activities undertaken so
far by the Nepalese Government and
Unesco, with the support of private institu¬
tions of various countries, have been mainly
concerned with Kathmandu and the sur¬
rounding valley. These activities supplement
the work being carried out by the Depart¬
ment of Archaeology, under the direction of
R. J. Thapa, for the maintenance of
monuments in the northern part of the
country.
The view that it is important for the
Nepalese to take on the task of preserving
their cultural heritage is shared by many
lamas and village representatives. 'But a
great deal remains to be done to ensure the
survival and conservation of the country's
traditions and cultural wealth.
Corneille Jest
Beneath the drum on which he beats out
the solemn rhythm of his prayers, a
Buddhist monk (above) copies out sacred
texts. In the upper valleys of the Dolpo
region Buddhist scriptures consist of three
types of worksthe Vinaya, or books
dealing with religious discipline, the Sutra,
writings which extol the power and virtue
of the Buddhas and hold them up as an
example to men, and the Tantra, texts
which expound the religious rituals and
practices necessary to the achievement of
Buddhahood.
In the calm solitude of his roof-top retreat,
a lama reads and meditates on a sacred
text. During the 18th century an edition of
the Buddhist scriptures was printed by a
wood-cut process, still used today.
