THE ARMS RACE
New
technologies
for overkill
THE most important and spectacular
aspect of the arms race in the 1960s
was the development and the full-
scale deployment of intercontinental
ballistic missiles (ICBMs), of submarine-
launched missiles (SLBMs), and of the
associated satellite surveillance and com¬
munication systems.
By the end of that decade there was
widespread concern that a new arms-race
spiral might result from the development of
anti-ballistic missile systems (ABMs) and
measures taken to counter them. These in¬
volved increasing the number of launchers
and, with the development of multiple and
independently targetable re-entry vehicles
(MIRVs), increasing the number of
warheads per launcher with a view to
neutralizing the ABM systems by sat¬
urating them.
The first strategic arms limitation treaty
(SALT I) between the United States and
the Soviet Union which was signed in May
1972, set ceilings on the number of ABM
sites and ICBM and SLBM launchers and
succeeded in halting the deployment of
ABM systems. Since 1972 the number of
. launchers has been increasing and is ap¬
proaching the agreed ceilings. In 1976, in
round figures, 2,500 ICBMs and 1,400
SLBMs were held by these two Powers
together.
The SALT agreement has had positive
effects but it is important not to lose sight
of its serious inadequacies with regard to
the limitation of strategic arms. Thus in re¬
cent years the arms race in strategic
nuclear weapons has increasingly taken a
qualitative direction. Vigorous research and
development programmes on improved
ABM systems have been maintained.
The SALT agreement as a whole has had
no discernible impact on the extent of
MIRV deployment. As a result, the number
of ICBM and SLBM deliverable nuclear
warheads has been rising by about 1,000
every year.
Moreover, a major post-MIRV innova¬
tion is already at an advanced stage of
development. This is a maneuvrable re¬
entry vehicle (MARV) which can change
direction in the terminal stages of its trajec¬
tory. This could not only make defence
against ballistic missile attack more dif-
10
ficult, but also, if combined with
developments now taking place in terminal
guidance systems, could provide MARVed
missiles with pinpoint accuracy of a few
tens of metres instead of the current ac¬
curacy of somewhat less than one
kilometre. This means that the silos now
protecting land-based ICBMs can be
destroyed with near certainty with a single
warhead at the first attempt.
As a result it becomes possible to con¬
sider using "strategic" nuclear weapons in
new ways. In addition to being a means of
massive reprisals against centres of popula¬
tion and industry to serve as a basic deter¬
rent, it becomes possible to think of using
ballistic missiles in "counter-force" roles to
gain military advantage at the outset of a
war by striking at the weapons and military
installations of the opponent, or to use
them to conduct supposedly "limited"
nuclear war. The adoption of doctrines of
this kind could greatly enhance the pro¬
bability of nuclear war.
No less significant are the implications of
the deployment of long-range cruise
missiles. These weapons, now under
development, are best described as small,
highly manoeuvrable, low-flying pilotless
aircraft. They can be equipped with a
nuclear as well as a conventional warhead.
Current models have ranges of several
thousand kilometres and accurate
guidance systems, which readjust the tra¬
jectory at intervals by comparing. terrain
features with a map. Accuracy is therefore
independent of range. It will be impossible
to determine from its geometry alone
whether a cruise missile carries a nuclear or
a conventional warhead and, within wide
limits, what its range is. Moreover, it is a
small and easily concealed vehicle. Future
agreements on strategic weapons may thus
become very difficult to negotiate because
they will be difficult to verify.
The cost of the cruise missile will be at
least an order of magnitude less than that
of ICBMs, so that in the years to come it
will be well within the financial means of
the smaller nuclear powers and of many
other countries as well. For some time the
exorbitant cost of the latest types of
nuclear weapon carriers (ICBMs and
SLBMs) has helped maintain the two main
military Powers in a class by themselves. In
the foreseeable future the importance of
this factor may greatly diminish.
Developments in the technology of
nuclear weapons themselves are equally
ominous, particularly the development of
small, low-yield nuclear weapons and
enhanced radiation weapons and of tactical
concepts for their use in battle. Delivered
with higher accuracy and causing less col¬
lateral damage per warhead, their use on
the battlefield may seem more acceptable,
so that the step from non-nuclear to
nuclear war may be more readily taken.
Once they are used on the battlefield,
escalation towards full-scale nuclear war
becomes a dangerous possibility.
The aggregate effect of these
developments cannot be understood in
terms of the gradual improvements in per¬
formance which have been so common
since the 1960s that they are hardly news
any more. The importance of the changes
now underway in the field of nuclear ar¬
maments and their carriers is not that their

Photo Henri Bureau © Gamma, Paris
performance in missions traditionally
assigned to them is improving year by year,
but that essentially new types of missions
are becoming possible. New technologies
open the way for new doctrines. These in
turn give an appearance of rationality to the
deployment of weaponry embodying these
technologies. At the same time they in¬
crease the dangers of war and alter the
terms of the disarmament equation,
rendering it more complex and more
intractable.
The proliferation of nuclear technologies
continues at an accelerating pace. France
and China acquired nuclear weapon
capability in the 1960s, and, in 1974, India,
which is not a party to the Non-
Proliferation Treaty [an agreement of 1 July
1968, signed by the U.K., the U.S.A., the
U.S.S.R. and a number of other States,
under which the three major signatories
agreed not to assist non-nuclear weapon
States in obtaining or producing nuclear
explosives], conducted a nuclear explosion
experiment underground. It was officially
termed a peaceful nuclear explosion experi
ment, but it demonstrated how readily and
cheaply a small nuclear weapon capability
could be derived from a major civilian
nuclear programme. In other cases nuclear
weapon capability could have been ac¬
quired without being demonstrated in a
nuclear explosion.
Civilian nuclear programmes, and with
them the technical expertise and the fissile
material required for military programmes
have spread all over the world during the
1970s. In 1975, nineteen countries had
nuclear power plants in operation and
another ten countries will have them by
1980. Experimental reactors are now in
operation in well over 50 countries. As far
as most industrialized and several develop¬
ing countries are concerned, there are no
longer serious technological or economic
barriers against initiating a nuclear
weapons programme. The only barriers to
proliferation are now political obligations
assumed under the Non-Proliferation Trea¬
ty, the good sense of governments and the
example to be set in the coming years by
the nuclear weapons Powers in agreeing to
reduce their own nuclear arsenals.
It is, of course, the continuation of the
nuclear arms race, not merely the spread of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which en¬
dangers peace. Stocks of nuclear weapons
and the continuation of the nuclear arms
race are factors which encourage nuclear
weapons proliferation. The danger of the
proliferation of nuclear weapons can be
removed by outlawing and halting the pro¬
duction of such weapons and by destroy¬
ing existing stocks.
The resolutions of the United Nations
General Assembly have repeatedly em¬
phasized that the Non-Proliferation Treaty
should become universal. It is consequent¬
ly important that the system of control en¬
visaged in article III of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty be adopted and that the parties to
the Treaty conclude the safeguards
agreements with the International Atomic
Energy Agency envisaged in article III of
the Treaty. »
Developments in the military use of I
11

space have been overshadowed in the
public mind by civilian space exploits. Yet
they have been of decisive importance. In
the Indo-China war satellites were used for
communication, for weather forecasting
prior to bombing raids and for navigation
for naval bombardment, but only now are
the full potentialities of these means
materializing.
Satellite technology is having a decisive
impact and conferring substantial
superiority on the major military Powers in
at least three fields target identification,
navigation and damage assessment in con¬
nexion with counter-force strategies in
nuclear warfare; surveillance, target iden¬
tification and navigation in "conventional
warfare"; and world-wide intelligence and
surveillance of the military programmes of
other countries and of wars in which the
major Powers are not directly involved.
The consequences of this latter capabili¬
ty could be both positive and negative
verification of agreements on arms limita¬
tions or disengagement, on the one hand,
and area policing and assistance in aggres¬
sion, on the other.
To cite an American example, because
these are the best known, the NAVSTAR
programme provides an indication of what
is becoming possible in just one field.
NAVSTAR is a 24-satellite system which
can provide three-dimensional positioning
throughout the world to within about ten
metres. Among its many possible uses is
the guidance of both nuclear and non-
nuclear forces in so-called "strategic" roles
and on the battlefield. It is to be established
over the period 1977-1984 at a cost in the
$3,000 million range. Not only will it allow
perfectly accurate guidance of ballistic
missiles against fixed targets, an essential
component of the counter-force strategy
already mentioned, it is also likely to
enhance greatly the effectiveness of sea,
ground and air forces in conventional war¬
fare and local wars.
Nevertheless, some progress has been
made and the installation of nuclear
weapons or any other kinds of weapons of
mass destruction in space is prohibited
under the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration
and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and other Celestial Bodies.
Throughout the 1960s conventional
weapons systems underwent continual and
rapid refinement in terms of size, speed,
propulsion, fire power, accuracy and so
forth. Unit costs for major weapons
systems typically doubled in real terms dur¬
ing this period. For aircraft they doubled
about twice as fast.
^Sophisticated weaponry, including
supersonic aircraft, became commonplace
in the armouries of industrialized as well as
less developed countries. And these
developments have continued unabated. In
addition, technological advances in several
areas have been combined to produce new
types of conventional weapons with poten¬
tially far-reaching military and political im¬
plications.
New precision-guided munitions
(PGMs), remotely-piloted vehicles (RPVs)
and other devices have been developed to
carry a conventional warhead to its target
with very great accuracy or, in the case of
RPVs, for reconnaissance and similar
missions.
This group of weapons uses the latest
developments in such fields as laser
technology, microelectronics, electro¬
magnetic sensors in the radar, infrared and
optical ranges, and wide-band data links
for a variety of remote or automatic
guidance and/or homing devices.
A first generation of PGMs made their
appearance in the Indo-China war. In the
Middle East in 1973, the enormous poten¬
tial of such weapons against tanks and air¬
craft was demonstrated. Both the type of
technology involved and their cost make
PGMs accessible to many countries and,
indeed, many already have them in their
inventories.
Such precision munitions are expected
to have battlefield implications as far-
reaching as anything that has happened
since the Second World War. The design
and mission assignment of the classical
weapons carriers, aircraft, ships and tanks,
and even the preponderant place they have
Since you set out for the south-east.
Who knows in what land you are
fighting now?
The fate of men who go away to war
Is no heavier than meadow-grass or
herbs.
Ghosts of dead men-at-arms, deep
sound of the great wind.
Warriors' masks, cold glimmering of
moons.
Soldiers and fighting men, laid out
now in silence.
Who will colour your features, or call
back your departed souls?
War leaves its traces, yet nature
remains unchanged.
The heart of the passer-by bleeds
with the pity of it all...
Man's destiny is to grow old on
battlefields:
Ban Siéu's hair was powdered with
hoar-frost before he returned.
Dang Tran Con and Phan Huy Ich
(18th century)
Song of the Soldier's Wife
ft
THE FIGHT OF THE
MONEYBAGS, a print by
Pieter Brueghel the Elder
(1525-1569?). Dating from
1564, the work Is now in
the British Museum,
London.
had hitherto in contemporary armouries
may be radically changed.
The new weapons, together with
developments in such areas as night vision
devices, battlefield surveillance and com¬
munications, are likely to accelerate the
pace of modern warfare and to place a still
higher premium on standing military
forces.
Last but not least, with dramatic im¬
provements in accuracy the yield of the ex¬
plosive charge becomes a less important
parameter in performance. There have
been suggestions, for example, that some
of the missions now assigned to "tactical"
nuclear weapons could be performed by
precision-delivered weapons with a con¬
ventional warhead. In principle this could
12

mean that the military planners would be
more willing to dispense with the use of
nuclear weapons in a limited conflict, but in
practice it could equally well have the ef¬
fect of blurring the distinction between the
use of nuclear and non-nuclear weapons,
thus enhancing the risk of any armed con¬
flict developing into nuclear war.
A range of new weapons and munitions
based on blast, fragmentation and incen¬
diary effects has been developed, and was
used, notably during the Indo-China war,
for saturation bombing over large areas.
Such carpet-bombing techniques approach
nuclear weapons as regards the blind, in¬
discriminate destruction they cause, the
long-term ecological effects to which they
give rise, and the high proportion of
wounded and maimed among casualties.
Other weapons of massive and in¬
discriminate destruction have not lagged
behind. The effectiveness of incendiary
weapons has been considerably increased,
and the development of binary nerve gases
and their munitions (which are relatively in¬
nocuous to handle as the nerve gas is only
assembled in flight) could seriously weaken
the remaining technical and operational
constraints on the development of
chemical weapons.
Significant developments have also
taken place in many other fields such as
radar technology, anti-submarine warfare
techniques, low-altitude intercepter aircraft
and laser-guided cannon.
13

Photo Alain Nogues © Sygma, Paris
Drawing shows four methods of delivering a nuclear warhead. Along
with other terms used to describe the apparatus of nuclear warfare
they are explained in this selective glossary.
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) system: A system to counter strategic ballistic-
missiles or their elements in flight trajectory.
Ballistic missile: Any missile which does not rely upon aerodynamic surface
to produce lift and consequently follows a ballistic trajectory when thrust is
terminated.
Cruise Missile: a small, highly-manoeuvrable, low-flying, pilotless aircraft
equipped with accurate guidance systems which periodically readjust the
trajectory.
Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM): A land-based, rocket-propelled
vehicle capable of delivering a warhead to intercontinental ranges (ranges In
excess of about 3,000 nautical miles).
Kiloton: A measure of the yield of a nuclear weapon equivalent to 1,000 tons
of TNT (trinitrotoluene). The bomb detonated at Hiroshima in World War II
had an approximate yield of 14 kilotons.
Manoeuvrable Re-entry Vehicle (MARV): A ballistic missile re-entry vehicle
equipped with its own navigation and control systems capable of adjusting its
trajectory during re-entry into the atmosphere.
Re-entry Vehicle (RV): That portion of a ballistic missile designed to carry a
nuclear warhead and to re-enter the Earth's atmosphere in the terminal portion
of the missile trajectory.
Multiple Independently Targetable Re-entry Vehicle (MIRV): Two or
more re-entry vehicles carried by a single missile and capable of being in¬
dependently targeted.
Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missile (SLBM): A ballistic missile carried
in, and launched from, a submarine.
Strategic nuclear weapons: Long-range weapons carried on either ICBMs
or SLBMs or long-range bombers.
Tactical nuclear weapons: Short-range weapons carried on smaller missiles.
Warhead: That part of a missile, projectile, or torpedo that contains the ex¬
plosive intended to inflict damage.
Source SIPRI
*"£>' 'i i "i
CRUISE MISSILE A
ICBM/MIRV ICBM/MARV
14
