The
sting
in the
fairy
tale
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
Photo © R. Canessa, Toulon
IF, as has been said, more children have
been lulled to sleep by the gentle balm
of fairies' smiles than have been kept
quiveringly awake by the grimly staring
eyes of ogres, then perhaps it is time to
examine more closely the instructions for
use, the side effects and the contra¬
indications of this balm, this drug which,
since it was first imported two centuries
ago, has been the bed-time tranquillizer of
Latin America.
Fairy tales probably reached Latin Ame¬
rica towards the end of the eighteenth
century at the same time as such "contra¬
band" cultural shipments as the works of
the Encyclopédistes, the ideas of the
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian poet and
writer, has published several volumes of poetry, inclu¬
ding an anthology. Informe Personal Sobre La Situa¬
ción (Personal Report on the Situation, Madrid, 19731.
His play about the Spanish conquest of the Inca empire,
published in English as The Sun Trampled Beneath the
Horses' Hooves (The Massachusetts Review, Winter-
Spring 19741 has also been translated into French, Swe¬
dish and Polish and performed in several countries of
Europe and Latin America. He has taken- part in
Unesco's programme of studies on Latin America cul¬
tures, and is now a member of the editorial staff of the
Unesco Courier.
French Revolution and the Declaration of
the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. They
arrived so opportunely as a means of
shoring up the colonial regime whose
downfall this other literature was intended
to help bring about that it might well be
asked whether they were not deliberately
despatched with this aim by the Spanish
Crown.
Unlike Asia, the Latin America of that
time had no established literary tradition
(and tales for children should be conside¬
red as part of general literature) and, unlike
Africa, was not endowed with a particularly
strong oral tradition. The legends, myths
and traditions of the native Indians which
still survive in the countryside, though with
great difficulty since the Indian took ven¬
geance on his conquerors with the weapon
of silence are not, properly speaking,
tales for children. Passing, it must be sup¬
posed, from the wealthy Creole's library to
his children's nursery, thence via the wet-
nurse or the cook to other households,
fairy tales finally filtered down through the
country schoolteacher to reach the minds
and imagination of village children.
Charles Perrault's Tales of Past Time, by
Mother Goose not only marked the begin¬
ning of fairy-tale literature, but was the
example of it most widely distributed in
Latin America. Written in 1697, at the
height of French territorial expansion under
Louis XIV, when the author, a high functio¬
nary and former protégé of Colbert, was
sixty-nine years old, the Tales were signed
by his ten-year-old son Perrault d'Arman-
cour, dedicated to a princess and intended
for use at the court of Versailles.
Already the serpent can be discerned
coiled within the egg! Literature written by
an adult and imbued with the ideology of a
courtier, was presented as being the work
of a child, that is, for children and intended
for the edification and amusement of prin¬
cesses; its purpose is evident, the exalta¬
tion of the divine right of kings and the
inculcation of devotion to the institutions
this right represented and on which it
reposed.
Adults propagated and imposed these
tales on their children at their most vulnera¬
ble age, preferring them to others and erec¬
ting their own experience into an educatio-
13

nal standard and making education a bas¬
tion of the sovereignty of the grown-up.
Believing that these tales were edifying
they became veritable colonizers of the
infant mind.
It would be not only stupid but cruel to
demand of these stories an implacable real¬
ism, thus denying men and, even worse,
children the right to dream. The child's per¬
ception of reality is more limited than that
of an adult, yet this does not mean that a
vast area of the child's mind is no more
than a desert; on the contrary, it is an area
peopled with images infinitely richer than
those that could be implanted there by the
impoverished imagination of an adult.
Because he lacks any basis for compari¬
son and judgement, the child tends to con¬
fuse the literary content of tales with
reality. Thus by imposing on the child an
imaginary reality which not only replaces
"real" reality but also his own fantasies,
the adult obliges him to identify himself
with characters and a context completely
outside his experience and which will be of
little use to him when the time comes for
him to face up to the problems of daily life.
"At one time or another", says Bruno
Bettelheim, "every child dreams of being a
prince or a princess." Yet what child of the
tropical plains or plateaux of Latin America
would ever have dreamed of such a thing if
these images had not been imposed upon
him, images made much more concrete by
Gustave Doré's at times gruesome engra¬
vings and Walt Disney's cloying cartoons
and made superficially more real by the
stage versions of these tales in which
schoolchildren are obliged to take part?
Given the authors and the immediate
audience for whom they were writing, the
kings and queens, princes and princesses
who figure in these tales were inevitably
generous and charitable, beloved of their
subjects and respected by their peers. They
had neither armies nor police forces (at
most a few kind-hearted gamekeepers) and
they never declared war. Only rarely were
their subjects sent to prison or to the exe¬
cutioner's block, and then only through the
spiteful machinations of a wicked step¬
mother. The queens and princesses,
moreover, were all remarkable for their
beauty. The young Latin American was not
slow in recognizing that, in comparison
14
with the realities of his life, all this was
nothing more than a huge adult lie.
In European fairy tales, which draw on
Scandinavian, German and Slav traditions,
the characters are naturally white-skinned,
blue-eyed and fair-haired (with the sole
exception of Snow White whose hair was
"as black as ebony"). Yet in Latin Ameri¬
can society, where economic discrimina¬
tion almost always goes hand in hand with
discrimination of a racial nature, the tacit
identification of this type of beauty with
goodness may have undesirable repercus¬
sions. Young indigenous and mixed-race
Latin Americans who, quite naturally,
reject this discrimination may tend to deve¬
lop a sense of inferiority, especially since at
school and in daily life they are already set
apart by the more or less white children
whose servants they often are.
In the Grimm brothers' version of Cinde¬
rella this identification is quite deliberate:
"this woman (the stepmother) had brought
with her two daughters who though beau¬
tiful and fair of complexion, were neverthe¬
less evil and black-hearted." In establishing
the exceptional nature of this case, the
"nevertheless" betrays the ideological con¬
tent of the sentence. If we were to turn the
phrase round and say that "the daughters,
though ugly and black-skinned were never¬
theless good and pure in heart", the racist
implication, however involuntary it may be,
would become brutally apparent. It is easy
to see why, for Latin American children.
"...what child of the tropical plains or plateaux of Latin America would
ever have dreamed of being a prince or princess if these images had not
been imposed on him...?" Photomontage shows European illustrations
in a Latin-American edition of the seventeenth-century French author
Charles Perrault's Fairy Tales.
¿SSari^y*
f *^fT H '* tF'/Sê
^Mtih
W i i Al ^%
¿^^Êm
^*
wä
*** Sk
t
vi
*^1
!^ ^*v
BSE
i ,
*1 _ « 1» - .

the most comforting, or at any rate the
least cruel, of these stories is Hans Ander¬
sen's Ugly Duckling.
Obedience to authority and for the
child authority means other people is
acceptance of one's fate; and one's fate is
the will of others. Male characters such as
Tom Thumb or Puss-in- Boots, although
submissive, are able to elude injustice or to
turn to their own benefit the absurd capri¬
ces of those in positions of power. But in
fairy taleswhich represent society in
miniature girls must obey and wait for
their obedience to be rewarded; thus their
feelings of impotence are reinforced. Cin¬
derella, submitting to the taunts of her
step-sisters, and Snow White, obliged to
live in hiding, are fine examples of patient
resignation, a virtue encouraged by the
establishment in a rebellious continent.
In fairy tales there are rewards and, more
in keeping with real life, punishments.
Bluebeard punishes his three wives' diso¬
bedience by taking their lives, although in
some versions the youngest manages to
save her skin. Little Red Riding Hood was
swallowed up by the wolf despite the fact
that, in Perrault's version, she had been
guilty of no disobedience (nor, indeed, had
her grandmother). It was not until some
hundred years later that, mercifully, Ger¬
man peasant women and wet-nurses
invented the timely arrival of the huntsmen
and her recovery from the wolf's belly, an
invention which was incorporated in the
version recounted by the brothers Grimm.
It was then that she learnt that she should
not disobey her mother and stray from the
path when walking through the forest.
A vital element in this literature, this
ideology, is the solution of problems not by
human endeavour but by providential
means which constitute, moreover, the
reward for submission. A king's son trans¬
forms Cinderella's life, other princes do the
same for Snow White and Sleeping
Beauty, and a dragon and a soldier arrive in
the nick of time to save Bluebeard's third
wife. Two centuries later the situation is
brought up to date. At closing-time, a
humble washer-up in a bar sings at her
work and a film director seated in a corner
"discovers" her and makes her a film star.
Unfortunately there are very few Marilyn
Monroes; millions of young Latin American
match-sellers, goose-girls and Cinderellas
are destined only to become adult Cinderel¬
las. They have no fairy god-mother with a
. magic wand to free them from their toil and
change their rags into silken robes and their
sandals into glass slippers. They have no
prince to come to their rescue, not even a
more prosaic modern equivalent the son
of a President, of an industrial magnate or
of a banker. For most women the dream of
Cinderella becomes the harsh reality of
Snow White; if she wants a roof over her
head she can stay and be provided for so
long as she' is prepared to "make the beds,
cook, wash, sew, spin and keep everything
clean and tidy" for the dwarfs.
More than a century after the brothers
Grimm publicly acknowledged their debt to
the German peasant woman who had
recounted to them several times, with no
variations, the stories that were to become
Grimms' Fairy Tales, psychoanalysts have
observed how adamantly young children
demand to be told the same story over and
over again with nothing left out, altered or
toned down. It would seem that this repeti¬
tion gives children a feeling of security, of
certainty that there will always be a happy
ending; if each detail remains the same
Photo
H.W. Silvester
© Rapho,
Paris
Illustrations
© Editorial
Porrúa, S.A.,
Mexico City
throughout the narrative, there is no
reason to suppose that the ending will
change.
Think, for example of some unhappy
child from a large family (and in Latin Ame¬
rica a large family is almost invariably a
poor one) as he listens to the story of Tom
Thumb. Tom Thumb's parents "were so
poor that their seven sons [aged between
ten and seven] were a great burden to them
since none of them could earn a living...
They decided to get rid of them by aban¬
doning them in the depths of the forest".
Perhaps the fact that he and his brothers
and sisters have been earning at least a part
of their keep since the age of seven will
reassure the little Latin American boy, but,
paradoxically, his certainty that the ogre
will never eat them all up, that they are not
15

y going to get lost and will find their way
home is due to the fact that, in the story,
the birds always eat up the breadcrumbs
that Tom Thumb dropped behind him so as
to be able to find his way home again.
This tendency of the child and the
adult to identify with the characters in a
story and the absence of any incentive to
imagine different outcomes to similar situa¬
tions is what, according to the experts,
gives these tales their therapeutic value.
Because they provide solutions that are as
clear-cut and unambiguous as the child's
unconscious is said to be, the child can
use them to help him to solve various
psychological problems of insecurity and
fear; to master the oedipal impulse or to
reconcile the notion of pleasure with the
understanding of reality. This may indeed
be true, but this is not what we are con¬
cerned with here.
Nor is there any intention of belittling the
literary value of fairy tales or of denying
their virtually worldwide genealogical
Mark Twain and Selma Lagerlöf. But the
argument that fairy tales "cannot be harm¬
ful since they are a part of all the traditions
of the world" is fallacious. They do not
belong to all traditions, not all traditions are
necessarily good for children, and not
everything is good simply because it is tra¬
ditional. Are we not today trying to correct
a whole host of misconceptions about
many aspects of human beings and the
world precisely so as not to pass them on
to our own children only for them to make
the same mistake with their children?
When children who have learnt to read
have access to books, their dreams are fil¬
led with the adventures of Sinbad and
Aladdin, and later of Sandokan, Gulliver
and Robinson Crusoe. Those who cannot
read stick to comics and films about Buf¬
falo Bill, the Indian-fighter, or Tarzan, the
tracker-down of negros. Today, television
has bought heroes such as Superman and
Batman (no words strong enough can be
found to describe the system of values they
"...The young Latin
American was not slow in
recognizing that, in
comparison with the
realities of his life, all this
was nothing more than a
huge adult lie."
roots. Tom Thumb antecedents can be
found in Homer and Rabelais and in Etrus¬
can and Scandinavian legends; Puss in
Boots was foreshadowed in Saint Basil the
Great's Hexameron, in Gianfresco Strapa-
rola's Pleasant Nights, Tales for the Diver¬
sion of Ladies and Gentlemen and in the
Thousand and One Nights; Sleeping
Beauty was referred to by Herodotus; ver¬
sions of Bluebeard exist in French, Ger¬
man, Swedish, Gaelic, Greek, Finnish and
Catalan. Latin American students come
across them in the course of their general
education just as they get to know the
great names of a literature which is not
addressed to adolescents alone, such as
Hans Christian Andersen, Lewis Carroll,
represent) to even the remotest villages.
Here and there, a few grandmothers and
mothers still intone "Once upon a time...";
the younger, more educated mothers seem
to have given up this habit altogether, feel¬
ing that the symbolism of these tales no
longer corresponds to reality, or doubting
their pedagogical and therapeutic value.
The tale is ended.
Aware of the difficulty of creating a tradi¬
tion, writers in Latin America set out first to
decolonize children's literature. The Brazil¬
ian writer Monteiro Lobato probably holds
pride of place among these innovators.
Many others have devoted themselves to
the compilation of indigenous stories, tales

based on the Indian cosmogony or of Afri¬
can origin. But they seem to have had little
success with children, perhaps because
they are given scant attention in the school
or in the home, perhaps because the chil¬
dren are conditioned to expect a certain
style and content, or perhaps simply
because they have not yet acquired the sta¬
tus of a tradition.
Some Latin American writers have
published, with the best of intentions, new
stories and fables; unfortunately, many of
them seem to consider the child reader to
be mentally retarded if not a complete idiot.
Adopting a quasi-colonialist attitude, con¬
temptuous rather than paternalistic, they
offer the child cheap falsehoods wrapped
up in insipid, pretty-pretty baby-talk. This
is childish literature, not literature for chil¬
dren. Once they have seen on television
men landing on the moon, or the incredible
life of the under-water world, or a cowboy
destroying an entire army singlehanded, it
is easy to imagine what children must think
of those who persist in telling the story of
how Mr. Toad married Miss Frog.
Among those who avoid these pitfalls is
the Argentine poet and puppeteer Javier
Villafañe who roams the hamlets and villa¬
ges of Latin America asking children to
recount to him their own stories and expe¬
riences. These he brings to life again by
presenting them on the stage of his travel¬
ling puppet theatre. The children have the
feeling that they have created something
and, in fact, this is true.
Not long ago I was a member of a jury
judging a competition in Ecuador for sto¬
ries for children written by children aged
from nine to twelve. Almost eighty per cent
of the entries were immediately eliminated
as being no more than pale repetitions of
fairy tales or cowboy films. Was not this a
symptom of cultural colonization? But,
worse still, in those cases where the chil¬
dren had produced original stories, adults
had ruined them with their "corrections".
Was not this another way of silencing the
children?
In every country, children's painting is
encouraged as being one of the most spon¬
taneous and unaffected expressions of the
universe of the child. But children are very
seldom encouraged to express themselves
in words and their right to speak out is
hardly ever recognized. (Thirty years ago,
the Uruguayan writer Jesualdo published a
volume of children's poems which included
lines that any poet would have been proud
to have written).
Imagination is always more ferociously
repressed when it is expressed in the form
of language. We are not disturbed when
the child expresses his vision of the world
in bright colours and touchingly hesitant
lines; what bothers us is his opinion of our
conception of his reality. It makes us smile
when we see a vertical line topped by a cir¬
cle and with two horizontal and two ob¬
lique lines coming from it. After all, that is
what a man is like whatever his stamp or
breed; it is a drawing, a game. But our fear
of words reveals our fear of the truth. We
are afraid to hear the cry "the Emperor has
no clothes", since, as far as children are
concerned, the Emperor is each one of us.
Jorge Enrique Adoum
16
