PAPUA NEW GUINEA



The cultural roots
of a new nation
by John Kolia
MMS
kEVEN hundred separate lan¬
guages"; "small-scale socie¬
ties"; "diversity of cultures";
how often one has heard or read these
stock phrases applied to that part of
Melanesia encompassed within the borders
of Papua New Guinea.
But such statements and the language
classifications they reflect are based on
data worked out in Europe many years ago.
One of the interesting results of modern
research, in fact, has been the increasing
importance attached to similarities rather
than differences of vocabulary, religion,
ways of maintaining law and order, ar¬
chitecture, artistic expression and customs
in Papua New Guinea, where in the past
there was extensive communication bet¬
ween the valleys, and between the moun¬
tains and the coast.
This is not to deny the existence of a
fascinating range of differences within
those broad similarities, so that the glory of
Papua New Guinea's culture could be sum¬
med up by the words diversity within unity.
The people practised animism, the
world's oldest religion. It was an organized
religion, if only at the local level. In fact it
was organized in a similar way throughout
the country, being based on the needs of
the group and the interpretation of the re¬
quirements of the spirits which, it was
believed, animated the behaviour and
structure of flora, fauna and rock with pur¬
pose, mystery and even caprice.
This religion is still being practised today,
but in adapted forms, for like all products
of the human mind it has had to adapt itself
to ever-changing circumstances. Perhaps
only in the Mortlock Islands of the North
Solomons province have the people
resisted the incursions of the Victorian
brand of Christianity. "We are Christians
now and have given up all our bad old
ways," many villagers will proudly but sad-
Painting of an ancestor or
clan spirit, right, is from a
cult-house at Ulupu In the
northern Maprik district
of Papua New Guinea.
Such portraits, painted
with earth pigments and
soot on sheaths of palm-
leaves sewn together,
were used to decorate the
cult-houses during
initiation ceremonies.
Whole galleries of similar
faces, arranged in rows
and combined with other
motifs, embellished the
gables of the cult-houses.
Remarkable mask on
opposite page is made of
ingeniously arranged
multicoloured feathers.
Photo H. Weber © Ethnological
Museum, Basle. Switzerland
JOHN ALEXANDER KOLIA, of Papua New
Guinea, is acting director of the Institute of
Papua New Guinea Studies and a specialist in
the country's oral history. The photos accompa¬
nying this article were provided by the author.
ly tell you, but fortunately the falsity of this
claim and the fancifulness of such attempts
to denigrate old customs are easily expos¬
ed. People have always philosophized and
attempted to relate the natural to the
supernatural, and the people of Papua New
Guinea today can still adapt to their own
pragmatic purposes theories which have
been introduced into their islands, just as
they have throughout their long history.
As in all well-integrated societies,
philosophy, religious or otherwise,
permeated such hard-to-compartmentalize
aspects of life as social control, artistic ex
pression, the economy, or, to use the con¬
venient Western gloss, customs. What an
intertwining .of customs must have been
evident to an ethnographer such as F.E.
Williams, when he first studied the culture
of the Orokolo people of the Gulf Province!
To superficial observers, of course, certain
ceremonies and seemingly bizarre
costumes appeared malevolent or quaint or
even comical; and these village dramas did
sometimes give rise to laughter.
Nevertheless, each part of the whole
related to other parts, as in the languages
used in ceremonies and in everyday life. I
12

Photo Mas« Museum. Slav*, the Netherlands
13

Thus words of similar origin are used to
describe a fish, an insect which it in some
way resembles, a species of vegetable, and
the behaviour of a certain kind of village
character. Such linguistic intra-reflection
may be found in a descriptive word, a
belief, a song or a decoration
Oral evidence provides further support
for the thesis of the homogeneity of
Melanesian customs. The history of -the
New Guinea ¡siands has yet to be written,
and since no one today, presumably,
would pretend that a short century of col¬
onial rule was anything but a recent foot¬
note at the end of fifty thousand years, it is
not surprising that researchers from such
institutions as the University of Papua New
Guinea, the Institute of Papua New Guinea
Studies and the National Museum are
working on the collection of oral evidence.
Much remains to be done, of course, but
the material collected so far has already
brought to light a complex pattern of
movements, battles and trade-routes. Just
as linguistic data eventually lead to the
drawing up of tentative maps and migra¬
tion patterns, the. collection of oral
evidence is now beginning to indicate the
broad lines of past developments. It has
been discovered, for instance, that the
Melanesians were capable not only of
fighting for their rights but of negotiating
peace treaties and coexisting in spite of
language barriers. A well-known example
of such coexistence is that of the Austrone-
sian Motu and the non-Austronesian Koita
at what was later to become Port Moresby.
This also serves to illustrate how history
might be distorted. We know about the
people near Port Moresby because mis¬
sionaries learnt Motu and wrote down as
much as they could understand of old
stories. But the same process of coex¬
istence was going on everywhere, for ex¬
ample between the Kiwai of Tureture on
the Western Province coast, and the non-
Kiwai of Kunini who lived inland of them.
In this case both languages were non-
Austronesian but from different language
families.
Although the Austronesian migrations
must have set up waves among the non-
Austronesian peoples (just as the later non-
Austronesians had done among the earlier
arrivals and the aboriginal peoples over
very long periods), any attempt to describe
Melanesian history as a vast battle between
the Austronesians and the non-
Austronesians would be an extreme over¬
simplification. There was hostility and co¬
existence between villages, between
dialect groups, between language families,
between highland and plain, and between-
¡slander and mainlander.
And there was also a borrowing of ideas,
designs, music and, of course, language,
so that new derivations emerged and what
A Kiwai woman in mourning. Photo was
taken in 1910 at Tirio village. Fly River,
Western Province of New Guinea.
Photo G. Landtman
© National Museum of Finland, Helsinki
The haus tambaran, or cult-house, photographed in the early 1900s at
Malinge village. East Sepik, Papua New Guinea. It was in the haus
tambaran that the menfolk performed the ceremonies of initiation into
the traditional spirit cult.
Photo Rosicke © 1977 The National Cultural Council,
Papua New Guinea
Young men wearing conical
kovave masks get ready for a
race on the beach at Orokolo,
Gulf Province. The masks,
representing the spirits of the
clan, were given to young men
after initiation. For the whole
of the next month they spent
each day at the beach,
receiving gifts of pigs which
they killed with their bows and
arrows. At the end of this
period, the masks were taken
away and burned.
Photo F.E. Williams © Office of Information,
Konedobu, Papua New Guinea
14

Tolai dancers of eastern New Britain,
photographed in 1890 wearing traditional dress
and masks.
Photo © Linden Museum, Stuttgart, Fed. Rep. of Germany
the earliest foreign observers saw were the
end results themselves only tem¬
porary a whole series of events and
exchanges.
Today we can see the remnants of this
process. Undoubtedly Western imports,
material and otherwise, have made deep in¬
roads into traditional culture. In some
places the culture, or the visible expres¬
sions of it, have been greatly depleted,
while in others destruction and disruption
have been much less. In some cases, such
as Gogodala in the Western Province, there
has been a revival of culture.
Should we therefore all strive to
"preserve culture"? Obviously this would
be impossible and the "bottling" of past
ideals has often been derided. The glories
of the past can, however, be preserved
when found in the form of artefacts, as in
Papua New Guinea's National Museum.
Music can be preserved on tape, and dance
patterns and decorations on film. All these
things are being done under the auspices
of the National Cultural Council.
However, there is more to culture than
preservation. People can be encouraged to
be proud of their past as well as their
future. At the National Arts School the em¬
phasis is very much on the continuing
development of culture today. Modern in¬
fluences are bound to make themselves
felt, as they always have in the past. But
today the influences come from all over the
world. This is not a bad thing. What can be
done, however, is to help develop the k
natural expression of indigenous artists, Y
te* i m

and we should not be surprised if they
¡choose to reproduce patterns similar to
those of the past or to develop their own
patterns. Performances by the National
Theatre Company and at the Highlands
Raun Raun Theatre alternatively use or
blend the traditional and the original.
Similarly, such films as Tighten the Drums,
about self-decoration among the Engas,
and The Red Bowman, about the Ida sago
fertility ceremony of the inland West Sepik
province, present a record of customary
behaviour today. Tomorrow things may be
different. It is to be hoped that they will be
just as interesting and beautiful, and not
just a mish-mash of plastic, consumer
goods.
The skills people developed to fulfil their
functions in traditional society must have
been impressive. Those who see the
hastily-erected fibro buildings of Moresby
suburbia may well be tempted to indulge in
nostalgia and regret the craftsmanship and
architectural grace of some buildings such
as the ceremonial house known as the haus
tambaran. In many places individuals were
specialists. Many men might assist in mak¬
ing a canoe or in dragging a tree from the
forest, but an expert hand was needed to
transform the utilitarian object into
something which had a graphic reference
to the rest of life, or perhaps the after-life.
During the colonial era, some of these ar¬
tists were employed as "unskilled" labour
in the modern sector of the economy.
Those still practising can be encouraged to
fulfil their true roles today, although if they
choose to produce inferior art for the
Bristling masks
and sacred flutes
Top left, bukumo mask under construction at Kurwok village, northern New Guinea. It
was built on a wooden frame which fitted on the wearer's head and was held steady by
handles extending downwards parallel to his arms. Canes tipped with hornbill and eagle
feathers were stuck into the frame to form the huge bristling semi-circle. Initiation mask,
top right, was photographed at Angriman village. East Sepik district, in the early years of
the century. It probably represents the monster which, during initiation, was believed to
gobble up the candidates before spitting them out again as fully-fledged men. Above, two
flute-players, possibly at Kanganamam village, also in East Sepik district. During the
initiation ceremonies the sounds of the flute represent the spirits' voices. Traditionally
regarded as sacred, flutes like these were kept in the haus tambaran, concealed from the
eyes of non-initiates such as women and children.
16

tourist trade, their choice can scarcely be
interfered with. Even out of this some new
and interesting form may emerge.
The psychological basis of the extensive
use of the mask has often intrigued the
speculative. The photo on page 16 (top
right) shows a most dramatic use of a mask
which is something more than a mask.
Does it conjure up fearful images or even
protests against "male chauvinism", a
popular accusation against traditional life?
Those who have lived in villages for any
length of time may have a different impres¬
sion. Women work hard, usually everybody
works hard; often village labour requires
co-operation of the sexes.
In some areas, women play highly impor¬
tant, even dominant roles, and descent
through the male line is by no means the
rule. In village life (but not always in the
towns) there are devices to protect the
rights and dignity of women. Women are
even capable of fighting alongside the
men; but the fact remains that the aged
and the women and children often depend¬
ed for the defence of their lives on the ac¬
tive males.
But these are just a few of the thousand
facets of Melanesian man's successful
handling of his environment, his use of
resources and his explanation of the world
around him and remote from him. This ex¬
planation was suitable for the "small-scale
society" in which he then lived, long before
the arrival of foreigners on his shores, but it
was not of course, primitive. "Primitive"
means something quite different, and
"small-scale" is also misleading. The ex¬
pressions of his philosophic outlook which
we outsiders are delightedly discovering
show that this outlook was a "large-scale"
one, for it penetrated to the heart of the
objects around him, into the earth itself
and to the distant horizons of the visible
universe.
John Kolia
