THE ARMS RACE
Human want
the spin-off
from military waste
20

n
WITH its economic costs and social
and political effects, the arms
race constitutes a serious obsta¬
cle to the establishment of a new interna¬
tional economic order. Exacerbated by the
population explosion, the food crisis and
the devastations of natural disasters and
war, the problems of eradicating poverty
and of improving standards "of health,
nutrition, education and housing have
become acute in many parts of the world.
No less important are the problems of in¬
dustrialization and growth in developing
countries, of combating the deterioration
of the environment, of halting the degrada¬
tion of cities,of developing new sources of
energy and raw materials while preserving
presently available sources. All of these
make claims on investment, research and
other resources, in direct competition with
military claims.
Meanwhile, the. massive diversion of
resources to military ends continues
unabated. The global waste of financial
resources, manpower, raw materials,
technical skills and research and develop¬
ment capability goes on year after year.
Every year military activities throughout the
world absorb a volume of resources
equivalent to about two-thirds of the ag¬
gregate gross national product of those
countries which together comprise the
poorer half of the world's population.
It is in the field- of scientific and
technological capability that the diversion
of resources to military ends is most
massive. It is estimated that at the present
time some 25 per cent of the world's scien¬
tific manpower is engaged in military-
related pursuits. It has been estimated that
of total cumulative research and develop¬
ment spending since the Second World
War some 40 per cent has been directed at
achieving military ends. By far the largest
part is spent on the development of equip¬
ment which has no conceivable civilian
use. Medical and biological research,
research related to the protection of the en¬
vironment or to the specific needs of
developing countries have consumed few
'
"
resources compared with military research.
The potential benefits over the years
from the redeployment of research and
development resources which effective
disarmament would permit are in¬
calculable. In the developing countries
enormous needs, unexplored in almost
every respect, are waiting to be dealt with
in the systematic, large-scale and purpose-
oriented fashion which has so far been the
almost exclusive prerogative of military
research.
In many other fields there is the same
urgent need for increased scientific and
technological resources. The effective ex¬
ploitation of the food and mineral
resources of the oceans, the development
of new sources of energy, the monitoring
of environmental health hazards,
meteorological research and forecasting,
natural disasters warning and natural
resource surveys are only a few examples
of areas where skills and facilities of the
types now wasted in military pursuits could
easily be used.
It is evident that in all these fields the
civilian spin-offs from military research, if
not in all cases negligible, have been trifling
in comparison with the resources with
which they were bought and with the
results that could have been achieved if the
efforts had been aimed directly at civilian
applications.
Manpower is another resource on which
the arms race makes heavy and wasteful
demands. The armed forces around the
world total approximately 22 million peo¬
ple. In the United States, for every three
persons in the armed forces another four
are engaged in military-related employ¬
ment. It is estimated that for the world as a
whole, 60 million people are engaged in
military-related occupations, uniformed or
civilian, public or private. Military and
military-related activities everywhere ab¬
sorb a proportion of the most qualified
categories of persons which is much higher
than the share of the military budget in the .
gross national product might lead one to f
expect.
Death from hunger
in the missile age,
Africa 1973.
Photo © Parimage, Paris
21

k Protection of the environment is an im¬
portant part of the resource problem and
the work of repairing the environmental
damage of the past and preventing or
minimizing further degradation is
hampered in many ways by military
activities.
Peacetime military activities, defence in¬
dustries, military installations, manruvres
and the like may be assumed to cause en¬
vironmental damage on top of that produc¬
ed by civilian activities, roughly in propor¬
tion to the share of military expenditure in
gross national product, but the supreme
mode of environmental destruction,
deliberate or merely incidental, is, of
course, war.
Military technology has acquired or
perfected means, including saturation
bombing, incendiaries, chemical and, of
course, nuclear explosives, of a nature to
cause extensive and in some cases persis¬
tent environmental damage. In South Viet
Nam more than 100 kilograms of dioxin,
the chemical of which 2.5 kilograms were
accidently released around the Italian town
of Seveso in 1976, were inadvertently
disseminated as an impurity in one of the
widely used chemical defoliants. Concen¬
trations in some areas reached 5 per cent of
the level which has rendered areas around
Seveso uninhabitable. This and a range of
other environmental and ecological conse¬
quences of the Indo-China war are such
that it is estimated that the recovery period,
at best, will have to be measured in
decades.
The world's armed forces are also major
consumers of a wide range of non¬
renewable resources, including both
energy and raw-material reserves. It is
clear that the consumption of raw materials
for military purposes is even more concen¬
trated in the main military powers than is
resource consumption generally. For such
metals as aluminium, copper, lead and
zinc, military demand in the United States
is 11 to 14 per cent of total demand. For
several other metals it approaches 10 per
cent. For titanium it exceeds 40 per cent.
Extrapolating from United States
figures, world military consumption of li¬
quid hydrocarbons (excluding petroleum
products used in the production of
weapons and equipment) has been
estimated to be about 700 to 750 million
barrels annually. This is twice the annual
consumption for the whole of Africa and
corresponds to approximately 3.5 per cent
of world consumption. For jet fuel on the
other hand, military consumption (in
peacetime) is reportedly one third of total
consumption for the United States. Even
though information is mostly lacking it is
evident that the military contribution to the
depletion of natural resources is substantial
in many cases.
The consequences of the arms race in
terms of natural resources may be il¬
lustrated by the situation as regards nuclear
fuel. The latest survey of uranium
resources, production and demand show
that, while there is a great expansion of
prospecting and development resulting in
major new discoveries, there will never¬
theless be formidable problems in ensuring
that there is enough uranium at com¬
petitive prices to meet demands for the
next twenty-five years. The report
estimates that during that period it will be
necessary to invest about $20,000 million in
exploration and a similar sum in mining and
milling.
The amount of fissile material in military
arsenals is not known, but if disarmament
released 2,000 tons it would be enough to
provide the initial and replacement fuel
over their useful life for an installed capaci¬
ty of about 100,000 electrical megawatts of
thermal reactors. For comparison with
these figures, current estimates of the total
installed capacity of nuclear power plants
are 200,000 electrical megawatts in 1980
and 700,000 to 800,000 in 1990.
In addition, complete nuclear disarma-
Now that current stocks of "strategic" nuclear weapons are sufficient to destroy the
world many times over (their combined explosive power is estimated to be well over a
million times that of the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima on 5 August 1945), attention has
turned to the "improvement" of "tactical" nuclear weapons. The latest project is the
enhanced-radiation neutron bomb with a "low yield" of about one kiloton (equivalent of
1,000 tons of TNT). This bomb is more destructive to life than to property. Diagram above
shows zones of destruction for a one-kiloton neutron bomb detonated 200 metres above
the target area. Zone 1: total annihilation and disruption of the site. Zone 2: All human
beings would be incapacitated within five minutes and would die within four to six days.
Zone 3: Fifty per cent of all people caught in the open would die, after much suffering,
within a period of several days to several weeks.
22

Diagram right shows
devastating environmental
effects of the detonation, of
a one kiloton neutron bomb.
In an area of 490 hectares
around the point of
detonation fifty per cent of
mammals and birds would
die. Closer to the centre of
detonation, the bomb would
also be lethal to many other
forms of life: within 350
hectares, to many trees and
higher plants; within 330
hectares, to many
amphibians and reptiles;
within 100 hectares, to many
insects; within 40 hectares,
to many microorganisms
such as bacteria, fungi, etc.
tprm*
\
vi*
ft
Although the use of chemical
weapons has been
condemned by a number of
international agreements, the
production and stockpiling of
such weapons have
continued. An alarming
development in recent years
has been the emergence of a
new generation of lethal
chemical warfare agents, the
binary nerve gases, which
are relativity innocuous to
handle and could thus
seriously weaken the
technical restraints on the
development of chemical
weapons.
490 ha 350 ha
Source SIPRI. Graphics Philippe Gentil studio © Unesco Courier
ment would release more than 20,000
nuclear scientists and engineers, now
working on military applications of nuclear
energy, some of whom could assist in the
peaceful nuclear programmes of developed
and of developing countries.
With world military expenditure remain¬
ing relatively stable in real terms since 1968
and world output continuing to grow, even
if only very slowly by the middle of the
1970s, there has been, of course, a
favourable trend in the ratio of military to
various non-military areas of expenditure.
Public expenditure oneducation, for exam¬
ple, overtook military expenditure in 1973.
But this is a world average and there are
very large differences between countries.
In the world as a whole there are almost as
many soldiers as there are teachers.
As with education, public expenditures
on health services have expanded rapidly in
recent years. Nevertheless, public health
expenditure (to which privately-financed
medical care should be added to complete
the picture) only amounts to about 60 per
cent of military expenditure on a world
basis. Again differences between coun¬
tries are very large. Even greater im¬
balances exist in the critical field of
research funding. The resources devoted
to medical research world-wide are only
one fifth of those devoted to military
research and development.
330 ha 100 ha 40 ha
In all cases the resources consumed in
the military sector are very large compared
with the social expenditures of govern¬
ments, even in such important fields as
education and health, indicating the unfor¬
tunate priorities that govern the allocation
of public funds throughout the world.
Yet if these priorities could be changed,
even a small proportion of the resources
now wasted on military pursuits could go a
long way towards alleviating some of these
problems, as a few examples will clearly
show.
The most alarming situation of all is in
the area of nutrition. Five hundred million
people throughout the world are severely
malnourished and millions more subsist on
diets that are far below minimal needs. The
physical and mental development of a large
proportion of young children in developing
countries is blocked because of diet defi¬
ciencies, and this entails incalculable con¬
sequences for the next generation.
In recent years famine has struck entire
regions of the world and on a per capita
basis food production in the developing
countries as a whole has been declining.
Yet the poorest countries, those with per
capita incomes below. $200, generally
countries whose military expenditures are
modest in relation to their gross national
product, nevertheless spend (on average)
about as much on military activities as they
spend on agricultural investment.
To complement national programmes,
there is a desperate need for international
assistance to finance increased food pro¬
duction and the establishment of emergen¬
cy reserves. At the World Food Con¬
ference, in 1974, it was estimated that
development assistance to agriculture
needed to be stepped up to five to six thou¬
sand million dollars annually for the re¬
mainder of this decade.
While fund-commitments for this pur¬
pose have risen substantially since then,
they are still two to three thousand million
dollars below the target. To close this gap,
funds equivalent to one per cent of the
military budgets of industrialized countries
would be sufficient.
The vast benefits which could result
from even trifling cuts in military expen¬
ditures and the reallocation of the funds
thus saved, are particularly obvious in the
field of health. The World Health Organiza¬
tion (WHO) spent around $83 million over
10 years to eradicate smallpox in the world.
That amount would not even buy a single i
modern strategic bomber. f
23

Open-air classroom scene in
Lagos (Nigeria). It has been
reckoned that the numbers of
the world's armed forces,
supported by millions of
civilians in military-related
jobs, are today twice as large
as those of all the world's
teachers, doctors and nurses.
Photo Unesco/Almasy-Vauthey
k The WHO programme to eradicate
malaria, estimated at a cost of some $450
million, is dragging on owing to lack of
funds. Yet its total cost over the years is
only half of what is spent every day for
military purposes, and only a third of what
will be spent, strictly for procurement, for
each of the new "Trident" nuclear missile
submarines.
According to 1975 statistics, more than
one thousand million people in 66 develop¬
ing countries live in areas where malaria is
endemic, adding its effects to the other
privations of poverty, inadequate nutrition,
insanitary water supply, poor housing, and
multiple infections, causing high
prevalence of disease and high mortality,
especially in the young, and undermining
the capacity of the people in these com¬
munities to improve their lives materially
and socially.
The eradication of some of the major
communicable diseases would cost trifling
amounts compared to the cost of the arms
race. Moreover, the potential benefits of a
transfer of resources from the military to
the health sector reach far beyond the im¬
mediate humanitarian aspect. The im¬
plementation of such eradication program¬
mes would by itself release important
resources in the medical sector for new
tasks, and by improving the general stan¬
dard of health in affected areas, would
enhance the ability of people to improve
their social and economic conditions in
other respects.
Unless he is deaf, no one who lives
where millions of human creatures
are subjected to sub-human
conditions and reduced to virtual
slavery can fail to hear the clamour of
the oppressed. And the clamour of
the oppressed is the voice of God.
Unless he is quite without heart, no
one who has at last come to
recognize the injustice that results
from the unequal distribution of
wealth can fail to be aware of the
protest be it silent or violent of the
poor. And the protest of the poor is
the voice of God.
Dom Helder Cámara (1909-
God's Voice Today, from
The Desert is Fertile
)
24
