
From Empedocles to Newton: a constellation of
The work of the Greek philosopher Empedocles (490-430 BC) is a
milestone in the history of Western thought because, not relying on
the intervention of divine or supernatural forces, he imagined a
universe consisting of four basic substances fire, air, earth and
water combined in various proportions.
Like the ancient Babylonian astronomers whose observations
had come down to them, the Greeks of Antiquity believed that the
earth was the centre of the universe. This idea was central to the
work of the great astronomer Hipparchus, who around 150 BC
discovered the processional movement of the equinoxes. This
means that each year the so-called "equinoctial point" at which the
sun crosses the equator shifts slightly westward. The ideas of
Hipparchus were taken up and developed by Ptolemy (c.90-168 AD)
one of the greatest astronomers and geographers of Antiquity,
whose system of cosmology was to dominate Western thought for
over a thousand years.
His work is preserved in a compendium known as the Almagest,
a composite Greek-Arab term meaning "the greatest". In it
Ptolemy constructed an elaborate model of the heavens composed
of large circles, called deferents, and small circles, called epicycles.
Each planet rode on the circumference of an epicycle, the centre of
which revolved on the deferent. From the Hellenistic Age until the
Middle Ages, this system of epicycles and deferents remained,
with some modifications, "the last word in astronomy". The earth
was immovable, fixed by God in the centre of the universe beneath
the concave dome of the stars.
Then in the 15th century, the Polish doctor, jurist and astronomer
Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543) set out to perfect the Ptolemaic
system. However, as his studies progressed, he became
increasingly dissatisfied with Ptolemaic astronomy, and his
calculations were to lead him to a radically different picture of the
universe. Ptolemaic astronomy left certain phenomena
26

cosmologists
unexplained. Why, for example, did certain planets seem to stop
and move backwards and forwards in a loop ? Copernicus
audaciously wondered whether such movements of the planets
might not be explained in terms of the movement of the earth. "All
the visible movements of the sun and the planets", he wrote, "are
not thus in themselves but only as seen from the earth".
Copernicus' great treatise on the movements of the earth and the
other planets was not published until 1543, the year of its author's
death. It attracted immediate criticism and was soon put on the
Church's Index of prohibited books. It was many years before the
"Copernican revolution" became fully accepted.
The English physicist and mathematician Isaac Newton (1642-
1727) was one of the greatest figures in the scientific revolution of
the 17th century. In mathematics he was the discoverer of the
infinitesimal calculus, and in mechanics his three laws of motion.
the basic principles of modern physics, led to the formulation of the
law of universal gravitation. He erected a model of the universe
which, in the words of the scientific historian J. Bronowski,
"ticked on without a hitch for about two hundred years"; until, just
after 1900, "time and light began to go awry" and Einstein asked
himself "What would the world look like if I rode on a beam of
light ?"
Photo 1. Empedocles examining the Universe, by the 15th-
century Italian painter Luca Signorelli
Photo © Alinari, Florence
Photo 2. Sun, moon and planets turning around the earth in the
Ptolemaic system. Engraving by Cellarius (1661)
Taken from Harmonía macrocosmica by Andreas Cellarius, Amsterdam, 1961.
Photo 3. The Copernican system. A new astronomical vision of
the universe
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.
Photo 4. Contemporary cartoon satirising Newton's theory of
gravitation
. Photo John Freeman Group © British Museum, London.
27
