Bulgaria's folk remedies
stand the test of time
by Vessel in Petkov
Abasie characteristic of popular
medicine is that the information
it givesabout medicinal plants
and other healing substances, about
hygiene habits, principles and practices
which tend either to preserve good health
or to cure illness has always been handed
down by word of mouth from generation to
generation. Only a very small part of this in¬
formation was ever written down.
VESSELIN PETKOV, of Bulgaria, is a member
of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, director
of its Institute ofPhysiology andprofessor of ex¬
perimental and clinical medicine at the Universi¬
ty of Sofia. The author of some three hundred
scientific publications, including several
monographs on medicinal plants, he serves as a
consultant to the World Health Organization.
Folklore is a rich source of information
about the realm of popular medicine. Since
folklore is an art of the people, it often em¬
bodies subjects relating to popular
medicine, subjects which are widespread in
customs, legends, folktales, folksongs,
sayings and proverbs.
Certain elements of phytotherapy, or
plant therapy, reflected in Bulgarian
folklore seem at first sight to be the expres¬
sion of a certain superstition, or an attempt
to conceal man's inability, because of his
ignorance, to explain natural phenomena.
Folktales and folksongs tell us that the
miraculous power of such and such a sim¬
ple can be relied upon only if it is plucked i
"at dead of night", at dawn, as the first I
39

cock crows, or else in a place that is
"secret, shady and damp". Other simples
must be picked at a specified time of year,
for instance at the Feast of Enio, the an¬
niversary of Krastu or the birthday of the
Holy Virgin, or they must be gathered in
certain clearly defined areas.
Nowadays, we are in possession of an
abundance of scientific data which prove
that the sun, the temperature, the quality
of the soil, the time of day, and the stage of
development of the plant all have an impor¬
tant effect upon the plant's metabolism
and, more specifically, on the biosynthesis
(or natural formation) of active biological
components and on the changes in the
plant's cycle which take place as these
components are distributed to different
parts of the plant the roots, leaves,
flowers, or fruit.
In the early morning, the leaves of
stramohy or thorn-apple are much richer in
alkaloids than in the evening. Certain other
active substances react in the opposite
way. For instance foxglove or digitalis
leaves lack glycosides at night, because
glycosides decompose at night. Thus
leaves gathered in the afternoon have a far
higher glucose content than those
gathered in the morning. In general, plants
growing in shady areas contain far more
alkaloids.
Biochemical studies of the various stages
of a plant's development demand that the
exact timing of gathering any plant be
specified, so that the greatest quantity of
the active substances can be extracted.
These timings coincide in most cases with
the requirements specified in folklore.
In some areas of Bulgaria, the snowdrop
is completely lacking in its active
therapeutic alkaloid, known as galantine;
in some areas, camomile plants do not con¬
tain the substances which are the source of
camomile's healing properties. In some
places, wild rose-hips are very rich in
Vitamin C, while in other places this
vitamin is almost totally absent. In general,
the directions given in popular medicine,
though they may appear to spring from
superstitious mysticism, are in fact found¬
ed on wide popular experience, which has
been accumulated and passed on from
generation to generation.
The use of herbs as preventive and heal¬
ing agents in the treatment of a variety of
ailments in Bulgaria has its roots.far back in
the history of Bulgarian popular medicine.
In his nine-volume "History of Plants", the
Greek philosopher Theophrastus tells us
that Thrace was a region extremely rich in
healing herbs. And Dioscorides, a Roman
military doctor although Greek by birth,
describes in his work "On Medical
Matters", written in Greek, a great many
plants which were used by the Thracians in
medicine. Dioscorides' indications were
widely used by Avicenna and by Galen as
well as by almost all doctors in medieval
times. Thus early Thracian experience in
medicinal plants became part of the body
of European medicine.
The Slavs too were happy to combine
magic with the use of healing methods
originating from plants. They used fewer
herbal plants than other peoples and far
more leaves and fruits of forest trees elm.
pine, fir, juniper, willow, ash, sycamore
lime, hawthorn, cornel, and so on. The
Slavs also used poppy and hemp as
anaesthetics.
Information about the use of medicinal
plants in the first Bulgarian State, which
. was founded in the 7th century, has also
come down to us. The glossary, given as
an annex to John the Exarch's "Hex-
ameron" (now preserved in the British
Museum), describes pleurisy and a treat¬
ment for it consisting of the leaves and
fruits of willow, poplar and hellebore, the
first two of which both contain salicylates.
John of Rila (early 11th century to mid-
12th century), later canonized by the
Bulgarian church, was a famous healer
known for his ability to treat all sorts of
illnesses with medicinal plants.
recognized throughout the world as a
Bulgarian contribution to European
medicine, was also apparently practised by
the ancient Bulgarian healers. Long before
Ivan Raev, they had been using extracts of
belladonna for chronic sufferers from
locomotive troubles (quite probably various
types of Parkinson's Disease) in quantities
which provoked a temporary dementia in
the patients followed by a complete cure.
Today, after a long period during which
it was fashionable to attribute absolute
power to the efficacy of synthetic
medicine, to the point of excluding all the
possibilities of natural products, en¬
thusiasm for medicines of herbal origin is
increasing. Scientific institutes and phar¬
maceutical companies from all countries
are studying plants as potential sources of
new therapeutic products.
'In poison
there is physic'
Because of their often deadly effects,
poisonous plants and animals played an
important role in the life of early man.
Surrounded with an aura of mystery and
superstition, poisons were used in rituals
and ordeals, arrows were tipped with
poison extracts and venomous snakes
often figured in religious beliefs and
ceremonies. As medicine gradually
became dissociated from magic and
religion, poisons and their antidotes
were studied more intensively and
recorded In medical manuals. Among
ancient records that have survived are
two works in verse by the 2nd-century
BC Greek poet and physician Nicander
of Colophon: the Theriaca, on the nature
of venomous animals and the wounds
they inflict, and the Alexipharmaca, on
poisons and their antidotes. Right, 12th-
century Byzantine illustrations of the
Theriaca which retain the flavour of the
ancient Greek originals. But poisons can
heal as well as harm. Today curare
arrow poisons are used as muscle
relaxants and anaesthetics and the
poison of the cobra has pain-killing
properties.
. ...
.a
Vassily the Healer, a leader of the
Bogomil movement, who was burned as a
heretic in Constantinople in 1114, was also
a healer of great renown. The Bogomil
talent for healing is well portrayed by the
fact that the chroniclers describe them as
preachers travelling from village to village,
with two bags slung across their shoulders,
one containing bread, the other medicinal
herbs.
A more recen i example is that of the
Bulgarian method of treatment for Parkin¬
son's Disease. The inventor of this
therapeutic method, which was based on
an infusion in wine of the roots of belladon¬
na (Deadly Nightshade), was the healer
Ivan Raev. From 1928 to 1933, his method
was tested in a number of clinics, mainly in
Italy, but also in Germany and other
Western European countries, and became
known as the best method at the time for
the treatment of Parkinson's Disease.
It is interesting to note that this method.
It is now recognized that biogenesis,
which operates in plants by the assimilation
of simple molecules into infinitely com¬
plicated plant systems, has possibilities far
beyond those of any modern chemical fac¬
tory. The plant world provides an inex¬
haustible fund of medicines. The active
biological substances originating from
plants are capable of further chemical
transformations, and are excellent models
for new synthetic programmes. The fairly
recent discovery of a drug as effective as
Reserpine, which is of vegetable origin, as
well as the fact that certain alkaloids con¬
tained in plants have been found to be ef¬
fective remedies against cancer, have
together provoked a complete reversal of
attitude on the part of many experts
towards the importance of herbal
treatments in modern medicine. Scientists
and medical men alike have given up their
former disdain, which was the required at¬
titude in respectable scientific circles,
towards the therapeutic properties of
40

medicinal plants. A new era has begun, an
era of revolutionary discoveries in the plant
world which have greatly benefited
medicine, a new blossoming of "green
medicine".
This revived interest in the healing
powers of medicinal plants has given birth
to the question of which directions should
be taken to obtain the greatest success in
the experimental work now being under¬
taken. For it is unlikely that we shall ever
succeed in studying in depth every one of
the 500,000 different vegetable species
growing on our planet, even if the entire
human race were to join forces on the pro¬
ject. It therefore seemed logical to adopt
the policy of concentrating research on
plants traditionally used in popular
medicine, and therefore tried and tested by
many centuries of common experience.
other plants or simples which were used in
Bulgarian popular medicine, has proved
that forty of them have the effect of
decreasing blood pressure, ten can arrest
intestinal spasms, and approximately fifty
have a germicidal action more powerful
than that of the strongest chemical
medicines. The studies have also confirm¬
ed the healing properties of certain plants
described by popular medicine, which are
used against worms and disorders of the
bile system, and as tranquillizers.
But at the same time, certain medicinal
plants have not produced the effects which
popular medicine attributes to them, and
others have even proved dangerous. This is
why it is the doctor's duty to oppose the in¬
discriminate use of remedies and methods
advocated by popular medicine. Each
remedy must be subjected to a detailed ex-
alien to it. This explains the fact that plant
therapy is less harmful and causes fewer
side-effects than modern chemical drugs.
The use of medicinal plants In treatment
works on the organism by means of a com¬
pound of active or apparently inactive
biological substances. A great many of
these "apparently inactive" substances,
known in the past as "ballast substances",
retard or accelerate the reabsorption by the
tissues of the active substances, and also
their evacuation in the urine or the bile.
Their action also causes useful changes
in the effects of the main active biological
components in the medicinal plants. In re¬
cent years it has been discovered that a
great many medicinal plants contain,
alongside their primary active substance, a
series of other biological components.
Photos © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
A few examples will serve to illustrate the
wide horizons which this approach makes
possible.
Garlic is widely used by the Bulgarian
people as a remedy for a great many
diseases. Judging from popular descrip¬
tions of these diseases, one can infer that
they consist of infectious disorders of the
digestive and respiratory tracts, worms,
hypertension and arteriosclerosis. Modern
studies by Bulgarian specialists have prov¬
ed that garlic contains substances with a
very strong antimicrobial action and is in¬
deed an effective remedy against worms
and that it retards the development of
arteriosclerosis. Garlic is also an excellent
preventive against chronic lead poisoning,
and can also be a cure when the condition
has already developed. Another interesting
fact, and one which could have economic
importance, is the stimulating effect which
garlic can have on the growth of animals.
The study of a few hundred herbs and
amination, and no treatment should be ap¬
plied without a medical prescription.
It is not a question of choosing between
medicinal plants and chemical substances
isolated from natural products. Any direct
opposition of these two groups would be
misplaced, as they are not mutually ex¬
clusive but, on the contrary, if cleverly used
by the doctor, can be complementary.
At the present stage of development of
pharmacotherapy, it is quite out of the
question to try to substitute herbal
remedies for the efficient medicines we
have in our possession to fight against
most diseases. But we must recognize that
in a not inconsiderable number of cases,
plant therapy provides undeniable advan¬
tages as against modern drugs. Taking into
account the fact that the active biological
substances found in plants are the product
of the metabolism of a living organism, the
human body is able to assimilate a great
many of them more naturally than it can
assimilate synthetic medicines which are
some of which react on the biosynthesis of
proteins, stimulating the synthesis of
antibodies and reinforcing the system's
immunities.
This also explains why the effects of
numerous medicinal plants like belladonna,
garlic, tea, coffee, St. John's wort and
others are very different from the
therapeutic effects of chemical products
extracted from the plants such as atropine,
hypericin, polysulphides and caffeine.
There is every reason to suppose that
medicinal plants and the active biological
substances which are extracted from them,
will gain in importance every year. A very
powerful factor in this area would be a
multidisciplinary approach to the scientific
study of medicinal plants, and the number
of scientists using this approach is increas¬
ing every day. The successes already
achieved by plant chemistry have a decisive
part to play in widening the use of
medicinal plants in modern medicine.
Vesselin Petkov
41
