
China:
a new medicine
born of tradition
by Wei Wen



Anew, highly effective antimalarial
drug has been successfully extrac¬
ted in China from a medicinal herb.
This is a breakthrough comparable to the
development of chloroquine, which is ac¬
cepted throughout the world as the most
effective treatment for malaria.
The new drug, Ching Hao Su, is a
substance obtained from wormwood, a
plant which, according to ancient Chinese
medical records, was used in the treatment
of malaria more than 1,000 years ago.
Research began at the Institute of
Chinese Materia Medica, which is attached
to the Academy of Traditional Chinese
Medicine. Members of the Institute's staff
succeeded in extracting Ching Hao Su in
1972. Later dozens of other scientific
organizations joined in the work. Clinical
tests and experiments in chemical phar¬
macology, preparation and production pro¬
cesses were studied and herbal resources
were surveyed. The clinical effectiveness
and chemical structure of the drug were
ascertained. Its crystalline chemical struc¬
ture is entirely different from those of the
antimalarial drugs now being used
throughout the world, and in this respect
Ching Hao Su is entirely new.
WEN, of the People's Republic of China, is
a specialist in medical information who writes for
the New China Agency, Peking.
The new drug can be administered orally
or by intramuscular injection. Reliable
though it is, it has one shortcoming : it is
unable to prevent short-term relapses. Ef¬
forts are now being made to remedy this
defect.
Traditional medicine is part of China's
cultural heritage. As early as the Warring
States period (475-221 BC) herbal medicine
began to develop as an independent
branch of Chinese medical science. As time
went by, more and more medicinal herbs
were discovered and experience in using
them against disease grew richer.
China's health services are making great
efforts to develop and popularize both the
traditional and the western schools of
medicine, with the aim of creating a new
integrated medical science based on a syn¬
thesis of the two schools. To date, more
than 5,000 varieties of medicinal herbs have
been catalogued in China, as against some
2,000 before liberation. Many therapeutic
herbs and treatments have been collected
from the Chinese people, some more effec¬
tive than certain western drugs.
In this field, China is focussing on herbs
for the prevention and treatment of com¬
mon and recurrent diseases. One example
is chronic bronchitis, which affects from 3
to 5 per cent of the population in some
parts of northern China. Since 1971 the
government has sent 290,000 medical
workers to the countryside, factories and
mines to study the prevention and treat-
25

China's herbal
drugstores
Traditional Chinese medicine, known
throughout the world primarily for its
acupuncture, has used plants and herbs
since very ancient times. Today, in
conjunction with Western medical
techniques, the use of medicinal plants is
helping China to spend less on synthetic
drugs and its people to achieve better
health. Far right, boxes brimming with
herbs in a chemist's shop give a glimpse
of the variety of Chinese herbal reme¬
dies. Top right, medicinal herbs being
dried by growers and "barefoot doctors"
at Huangshan (Ankwei province). Bot¬
tom, right, at a Peking pharmacy, staff
prepare herbal prescriptions while the
customer waits.
Photo © WHO, Geneva
ment of this disease. Along with the village
"barefoot doctors", these medical workers
have investigated the impact of the disease
and collected some 100 effective drugs, in¬
cluding a plant named Muching which with
nine others is being introduced all over the
country. Dozens of compounds have been
produced.
Clinical reports made in the past few
years show that Muching (vitex negundo
var. cannabifolia) has been highly effective
in treating 60 per cent of the 2,000 chronic
bronchitis patients tested. Laboratory tests
show that this herbal medicine is effective
for clearing up phlegm. It stimulates the
body responses, promotes the functions of
the cortex of the adrenal glands, and acts
as an antihistamine (used to relieve the
symptoms of hay fever and other allergies)
or as a sedative.
The work done on Muching shows how
western techniques may be integrated into
traditional Chinese medicine. The use of
Muching dates back many centuries, but
ancient pharmacological works recorded
that only the fruit and the roots of the herb
were effective in treating chronic bron¬
chitis. No previous sources have been
found to indicate that the leaves are useful.
However, modern chemical analysis shows
that the medicinal quality of the fruit is due
to the volatile oil content of its calyx, the
outer circle of leaflike scales at the base of
the flower, and that the leaves contain four
to six times more volatile oil than the fruit.
This important discovery has opened wide
possibilities for the extraction of oil from
Muching. The case of Muching
demonstrates that there is much to be
learned from the experience of traditional
Chinese medicine and, on the other hand,
that traditional medicine must be made
more effective by applying modern scien¬
tific methods.
The Chinese herb medicine salvia mi/tior-
rhiza is now being used to treat diseases of
the coronary artery, another common ill¬
ness. This medicine was known in ancient
times for its efficacy in activating the cir¬
culation of the blood. The herb has been
made into injectable solutions for the treat¬
ment of angina pectoris and has proved ef
fective in 87 per cent of cases. Electrocar¬
diograms showed some improvement in 53
per cent of the patients thus treated.
Laboratory tests reveal that in patients
given injections of salvia miltiorrhiza there
is a noticeable increase in the volume of
blood circulated. Tests also show that
treatment with this drug causes a drop in
blood viscosity. It also hastens the flow of
red cells, in some cases bringing this flow
back to normal. These results show that
the medicine promotes blood circulation
and dissolves clots of red intercellular
bodies.
A large number of effective herbal
remedies have been found for treating
burns, hypertension and even cancer. They
are abundant and inexpensive, but they
work slowly. Since 1958 a hospital affiliated
to the Shansi Medical College has suc¬
cessfully treated more than 800 cases of
extra-uterine pregnancy with herbal
medicine. In 90 per cent of them no surgery
was used. Pharmacological studies showed
that the various decoctions of medicinal
herbs used checked bleeding, improved cir-
26

Above, 19th-century miniature depicting
the great Chinese botanist Han Kang (2nd
century AD). "The nobles decked out in
their finery sought him out in vain", reads
the inscription. "He walked alone, happy
in the mountain of clouds". Indifferent to
worldly distractions Han Kang devoted his
life to the search for new plants..
Photo E. Reber-Lleras © WHO, Geneva
culation and hastened the disappearance of
blood clots.
Chinese specialists are also carrying out
research into the selection of safer, more
effective and more convenient contracep¬
tives both for men and women from among
herbal prescriptions (see article page 33).
In China, where many farm production
brigades grow medicinal herbs on their
own plots, a wide-ranging study of
medicinal herbs is under way as part of the
development of rural medical and health
services. This includes a further survey of
plant resources, the domestication of wild
herbs and the improvement of drug
preparations. One achievement resulting
from research carried out in the past dozen
years by the Institute of Medicine of the
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
other bodies, is the successful cultivation
of the rare and widely needed plant
gastrodia e/ata, used for 2,000 years for
treating dizziness, headaches and infantile
coma.
Wei Wen
Right, a tree of the
Cephalotaxus hainanensis
Li species and its seeds
(inset). From the bark of
this species, indigenous to
Hainan Island in southern
China, scientists have
isolated substances which
inhibit the formation of
tumours and have yielded
promising results In the
treatment of certain kinds
of leukaemia.
27

Himalayan
herbalists
and healers
Partly owing to its wide variety of natural conditions, Nepal Is
exceptionally rich in medicinal plants and herbs and can boast
one of the world's oldest traditions of herbal medicine. (In the
Rgveda, a collection of over 1,000 sacred hymns written between
4500 and 1600 BC, it is recorded that Himalayan plants were used
for healing.) Some parts of this country in the heart of the
Himalayas are a mere 50 metres above sea level, others rise to
over 8,000 metres, while the range of climatic conditions
(tropical, subtropical, temperate, Alpine) also contributes to the
profusion of different types of vegetation. The Nepalese
Government plays an active role in promoting the production,
processing and export of medicinal plants. More than 500
species grow in Nepal today, sales to other countries accounting
for 3 per cent of the country's export earnings. (1) Immediately
after being harvested, the roots of Picrorhiza Scrophulariaeflora,
used as a sedative and in the treatment of chronic bronchitis, are
laid out to dry. (2) 4,500 metres up in the Himalayas, a Picrorhiza
gatherer prepares his cargo before embarking on the journey to
the valleys of southern Nepal. (3) Vendors arrive at Kathmandu
market bearing loads of Acyranthes Áspera, a purgative and
diuretic plant. (4) Press for crushing mustard seeds which yield
an oil possessing curative properties. (5) A healer selling
medicinal plants at Kathmandu.
28
