Polish educator, doctor and author, Janusz Korczak (1878-
1942) introduced many revolutionary innovations in the field
of child care and teaching and eventually died at the
Treblinka concentration camp with the orphaned children to
whom he had devoted the greater part of his life. Korczak
taught that every child had the right to be respected as an
individual and as a child. Left, at a holiday camp for poor
children from Warsaw, in 1907, Korczak listens intently to a
child reading, while all those around him seem concerned
only with what the photographer is doing.



Janusz
Korczak
The doctor who lived
and died for children
by Stanislaw Tomkiewicz
and Béatrice Maffioli
AN educator whose ideas broke new
ground, a pioneer of child psychi¬
atry and a prolific writer, Janusz
Korczak was a passionate and lifelong
defender, not of childhood as an abstrac¬
tion but of individual children who suffered
oppression, hardship and neglect.
Korczak and his work have been famous
for many years in Poland, Israel, the Soviet
Union and Germany but they are still not
widely known in other parts of the world.
This year Unesco is celebrating the hun¬
dredth anniversary of his birth (see Unesco
Courier, April 1979 page 34) and publishing
a selection of his works in French as part of
its literature translations programme.
STANISLAW TOMKIEWICZ, head of the
department of psychopathology at the Universi¬
ty of Paris VIII (Vincennes), is director of
research at the National Institute of Health and
Medical Research, Paris, and scientific director'
of the Institute's unit for research on the mental
health of young children and disturbed
adolescents. A paediatrician andpsychiatrist, he
was born in Warsaw, and after surviving the
Warsaw ghetto rising against the Nazis he was
deported to the concentration camp of Belsen.
He has lived in France since 1945.
BEATRICE MAFFIOLI, French specialist in the
history of fascism, works at the National In¬
stitute of Health and Medical Research, Paris,
and is an active member of the French "Friends
of Doctor Janusz Korczak Association". She
has also worked in Africa as a sociologist and
educational consultant.
Korczak (whose real name was Henryk
Goldszmit) was born in Warsaw, then oc¬
cupied by Tsarist Russia. His family belong¬
ed to the so-called "assimilated" stratum of
the Jewish community. The Goldszmits
were patriots imbued with Polish language
and culture; they did not practise their
religion assiduously but neither did they
deny their Judaism. They subscribed to the
liberal reformist ideas of the intelligentsia of
their time, and dreamed of the in¬
dependence of Poland and of a society
from which poverty would be banished.
The grandson of a doctor and the son of
a famous barrister, Henryk enjoyed a happy
childhood. Then, when he was seventeen
years old, his father died after a long period
of confinement in a psychiatric institution.
The nature of his illness is not fully
understood. Korczak had to provide for his
mother and sister and learned for himself
what it was like to be poor.
Korczak's personality was profoundly
marked by his experience of being both a
Jew and a Pole, by his transition from
wealth to poverty, and by his fear of
hereditary madness.
Paying his way by giving private lessons,
he passed his baccalauréat and then began
to study medicine. In these years he made
friends with young people in the poorest
districts of Warsaw. In 1900 he helped to
organize the first holiday camps for Polish
working-class children, a revolutionary idea
at that time. After specializing in
paediatrics in hospitals in Berlin and Paris,
he soon won a reputation as a paediatri¬
cian, treating the children of wealthy
families. However, he devoted more and
more time to hospital work, to his writing,
to educational problems and to the welfare
of needy children.
In 1905, recently qualified-, he took part
in the Russo-Japanese War as a doctor with
the Russian army where he encountered
the first soldiers' soviets. In gatherings held
to discuss the liberation of the working
man he took the floor and pleaded for the
liberation of the child without which, he
said, the liberation of humanity would be
an absurdity.
In 1910 he spent some time as a teacher
in children's holiday camps. Out of this ex¬
perience came two short novels, Joski,
Moski i Srule and Joski, Jaski i Franki,
which were read by children and adults
alike. In them Korczak describes with sen¬
sitivity and humour the behaviour of poor
children on holiday and their impressions
when they discovered the countryside and
community life for the first time, in an at¬
mosphere where hierarchy and repression
were non-existent.
Soon after the publication of these
works Korczak took the step which was to
determine the course of the rest of his life.
He helped to plan a new building for a War¬
saw children's orphanage, and when it
opened was appointed its director, physi- V
cian and head teacher. From this time until f
35

>his tragic death in 1942 his life would be
devoted to this children's home, except for
a four-year absence during the First World
War. After 1920 he only left the orphanage ,
for short periods of travel, including visits
to Palestine in 1934 and 1936.
His fear of hereditary madness prevented
Korczak from marrying and having a family
of his own. His only children were those of
others.
From 1922 to 19o6 he also worked as a
teacher and physician at an orphanage for
Catholic children. He lectured at Warsaw
University and between 1934 and 1938
broadcast each week on Polish radio under
the pseudonym of "the old doctor". First
of all he presented a programme in which
he told stories for children; later he gave
advice to parents and spoke in defence of
children's rights. The texts of these popular
talks were later published in a book entitled
Droll Teaching. Even at this time Korczak
had high hopes of the possibilities of audio¬
visual methods in popular education and
ranks as a pioneer in this field.
The rise of Nazism in Germany brought a
threat to the Jews of Poland. Korczak's ter¬
rible sufferings on account of this brought
him closer to Judaism and even to a certain
mysticism.
Korczak broadcast again on Polish radio
in September 1939, raising the people's
morale during the heroic defence of War¬
saw against the Nazi attack which left parts
of the city in ruins. From the very beginn¬
ing of the occupation Korczak refused to
wear the yellow star which the Jews were
obliged to display, and although he was
subjected to physical violence and sentenc¬
ed to a term of imprisonment on this ac¬
count, his resolution did not weaken.
In October 1940 the orphanage was forc¬
ed to move into the newly-created Warsaw
ghetto. Death took a terrible toll, especially
of the children, scores of whom died in the
streets every day. But wretched and starv¬
ing though they were, Korczak's orphans
lived in an island of relative peace and
security. Right until the end, Korczak's
force of personality and unremitting efforts
ensured that their minimum needs of food,
hygiene and above all affection were met.
In 1942, two weeks before they were
sent to their death, Korczak had the
children perform Rabindranath Tagore's
play The Post, the story of a sick child who
dies dreaming of running through the
fields, in the hope of familiarizing them
with the idea of death. He received several
offers of safety if he would consent to leave
the ghetto, his orphanage and his children.
But he refused to countenance such a
possibility. On 5 August 1942 he was with
the 200 orphans when they began their last
journey to the gas chambers of the
Treblinka death camp.
Korczak's was a rich and complex per¬
sonality. First and foremost he was an
author who wrote whenever he had a spare
moment in his crowded life of teaching and
caring for children. He was still writing only
a few days before his death. His novels,
scientific articles and studies, short stories,
pamphlets and plays reached a vast public
of children, parents, doctors and
educators.
His children's books were widely read
and loved during his lifetime and are still as
relevant as ever. If some passages have
worn less well than others, his harrowing
descriptions of needy Jewish and Catholic
working-class children in Poland under the
Tsarist occupation and between the wars
find an echo in the experience of certain
children of migrant workers today and are
as powerful and as topical as when they
were written. Some parts of his work are
unbearably moving; others are rich in
humour. Korczak had an unfailing gift for
capturing children's imagination, an in¬
stinctive understanding of their desires and
fears.
A year after the appearance of his two
short novels about life in a children's holi¬
day camp, he published Fame, his first
novel written specifically for children. In it
he evokes the dream of omnipotence, the
desire for fame and the impossibility of
fulfilling this desire in childhood.
true, in defiance of common sense and pro¬
bability.
In spite of their humour, these books are
profoundly sombre. They show how
dreams of grandeur, if they remain mere
fantasies, are always thwarted when they
come up against the realities of life.
But Korczak's last story for children,
written in 1938, reveals how such dreams
can be fulfilled. Entitled A Stubborn Boy, it
is a fictional biography of Louis Pasteur.
The creation of the famous "Little
Review", the first weekly journal entirely
written by children and adolescents, had an
important place in Korczak's literary ac¬
tivities. With its 2,000 correspondents aged
from six to eighteen, the magazine voiced
all the preoccupations of Poland's
schoolchildren. It brought out the true im¬
portance of seemingly trivial events in
children's lives, their injustices and
In King Mathias I, a novel which has
been translated into twenty-two
languages, this dream comes true, as Korc¬
zak portrays the greatness and ultimate
downfall of a boy king who sets out to
establish a world of justice and peace for
children and adults alike. The work satirizes
the high and mighty, gives a comic ex¬
planation of the machinery of power and
shows a topsy turvy world in which
children are workers and adults attend
school.
Little Jack Goes Bankrupt (1924)
presents the dream of grandeur in a dif¬
ferent form: a little boy enters the business
world, not to make a fortune but to replace
the profit motive with a co-operative
system.
In Jo/o the Magician (1934) a child
comes to realize that he has supernatural
powers when some of his wishes come
pleasures, joys and sorrows, focussing on
all those things that adults tend to dismiss
as trifles because, unlike Korczak, they
have forgotten how important they are to
children.
"I should like my children's newspaper to
be printed on cigarette paper", Korczak
once said, "just like the literature pro¬
hibited under Tsarist Russia and in Poland
between the wars. I should like this
newspaper to say things that adults will not
know about because they will be afraid to
read it."
The "Little Review", still a revolutionary
idea even today, ceased publication when
the Nazis invaded Poland in 1939.
Korczak left no academic treatises, no
turgid textbooks, no abstract theories. He
was not intellectually incapable of writing
for a restricted academic audience, but he >
did not wish to do so. The destiny of each f
36

Korczak's work with children
began while he was still a young
medical student and in 1900 he
helped organize the first holiday
camps for poor children in
Poland. In 1913 he opened the
orphanage for Jewish children at
92, Krochmalna Street, Warsaw,
to which he was to devote his
life. In 1922 he became, in
addition, co-director and medical
superintendent of Nas Dom (Our
Home), an orphanage for Catholic
children. Photos, top right,
children of the Nas Dom
orphanage in Warsaw and,
bottom right, at a holiday camp at
Bielany. Centre right, children
from the Jewish orphanage at
their last holiday camp, at
Goclawek, In 1940. In October
1940 the Jewish orphanage was
transferred to the newly
constructed Warsaw ghetto. Left,
Janusz Korczak in 1938. At a time
when the rising tide of Nazism
had already swamped Austria,
Korczak wears the troubled look
of a man anxious about what the
future holds for his beloved
children.
' ' :- ^
"Ï
Üä
'm*?*
^ ,
t y
*c i
i, ir- '
* T-
.
W^jfi
r^¿ ^
±jj**'**
ùt '*& ¿^?
'* Hi
ÎB^'
M IllPikP
wrWM
1 ^^^^^Ht f^BBKf V^k
>^ M£
.- ' 'i
1
5
*> * ^Ä - fttk
37

L individual child took precedence over
'generalizations which might turn out to be
arbitrary or unfounded.
How to Love a Child, writen in a field
hospital during the First World War, shows
how Korczak transmuted experience and
theory into poetry. His works often consist
of aphorisms, thoughts and anecdotes
seemingly jotted down at random. A close
reading, however, reveals that they have a
structure and that behind the apparent
discursiveness is a coherent system based
on protection, love and respect for
children. Children were the subject of vir¬
tually all his writing and the mainspring of
his life.
Korczak's literary, social and scientific
publications for adult readers are not easy
to classify because they eschew pedantry
and jargon for humour and tenderness.
Among the most important of these works
are:
Ghetto Diary, the reflections of a man
without illusions on a world collapsing into
cruelty and horror;
The Child's Right to Respect is a
veritable proclamation of the Rights of the
Child, a denunciation of the love that stifles
and a defence of the love that encourages
independence. In this work Korczak also
denounces the oppression of children and
suggests ways of ending it;
How to Love a Child is a compendium of
Korczak's ideas on education. Although
the first part dealing with infancy is now
somewhat outmoded, the sections on
«ll^HTTWIIlTi»'.-.
boarding education and on schools in
general contain ideas which are still regard¬
ed as advanced today.
Janusz Korczak never completely aban¬
doned medicine. He practised as a
paediatrician, specializing in the study of
relationships in the family and at school. He
may be considered as a forerunner of the
modern "antipsychiatrists" although, like
almost all physicians at the beginning of
the century he was a positivist, a materialist
and a firm believer in scientific method. He
was a defender of theories of heredity and
even of eugenics, and yet he was also con¬
vinced of the perfectibility of the child
through love and education.
Knowing where beliefs in eugenics and
hereditary theories of behaviour led in Nazi
Germany, we may feel that this paradox is
a tragic contradiction in. Korczak's thought.
But it must be remembered that he lived in
the pre-Nazi era when such notions were
the dogmas of Western medicine and
psychology. It was only when Hitler took
these theories to their ultimate conclusions
that scientists came to understand the im¬
portance of the biological, affective,
cultural, political and social environment in
the child's development.
But Korczak's place in the history of
human thought is as an educator rather
than a writer or a physician.
In the Warsaw orphanage he was able to
apply his educational ideas. There, instead
of the traditional structure of discipline bas¬
ed on the power of the adult and the obe-
SAMORZQD w SZKOLE.
EH
%
Jsr
Maly PAIY TRZEGLAD
f'liMO DZfEr.1 I KtMZfEZY
htitipetr to FFBtt« rano