by Michel A. Attisso
MICHEL A. ATTISSO, of Togo, is director and
pharmacist of the University Hospital Cen¬
tre and professor at the Faculty of Pharmacy,
Montpellier University, France, where earlier he
had been a student. Before returning to Mont¬
pellier he taught for twelve years at the Faculty
of Medicine and Pharmacy of Dakar University,
Senegal. He is a consultant to the World Health
Organization and was formerly vice-chairman of
the International Narcotics Control Board of the
United Nations Economic and Social Council.
Right, mountain herbs and plants are
identified, cleaned and cut before being
sent to a drug processing factory at
Kanzikode, India. In collaboration with
the Indian Council of Medical Research,
the World Health Organization (WHO) has
initiated a four-year scientific study on the
therapeutic qualities of Ayurveda, the
traditional Indian healing system based on
homeopathy and naturopathy. In April
1979, as part of its programme on
traditional medicine, WHO held a meeting
in Rome on research and training in
traditional systems of medicine in
developing countries with particular
reference to medicinal plants and herbs
The meeting called for the creation of a
task force for the organization of
traditional medicine programmes in
Africa, including the establishment of
training facilities for young African
scientists, botanical gardens for medicinal
plants, and provisions for testing
traditional therapies.
Photo A. Kochar © WHO, Geneva

Medicinal plants
make a comeback
PHYTOTHERAPY, the treatment of
illnesses by pharmaceutical prepa¬
rations based on vegetable drugs,
was the mainstay of the therapeutic arsenal
until the mid-nineteenth century. This prac¬
tice gradually gave way to the use of
medicines produced fror; pure molecules
of the active ingredients of medicinal plants
which had a more specific or precise phar¬
macological activity. Thus medicinal plants
to some extent faded away into oblivion
and were replaced by treatments using
wholly or partly synthesized chemical
substances.
In recent years, there have been un¬
mistakable signs that phytotherapy is mak¬
ing a come-back. Statistics from the Inter¬
national Centre: of Commerce show that
medicinal plants have lost none of their im¬
portance despite the constantly increasing
use of chemotherapy, the treatment of
disease by chemical substances. The pro¬
portions of medicinal plants used in the
preparation of pharmaceutical products in
the world today is about one-third that of
synthetic chemical substances.
The global value of imports of raw
materials of plant origin destined for the
pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries
soared from $52.9 million in 1967 to $71.2
million in 1971, with an annual progression
of some 7 per cent since then.
The annual quantities of some of the
drugs consumed world-wide since 1974 in
the form of pharmaceutical preparations
are as follows: 3,000 tonnes of aloes;
10,000 tonnes of fresh artichoke leaves;
5,000 tonnes of quinquina bark; 1,000 ton¬
nes of belladonna, henbane and datura
leaves ; 5,000 tonnes of senna pods ; 1 ,000
tonnes of digitalis leaves.
In addition, it has been estimated that in
1974 the industrialized countries consumed
in the form of infusions : 150 tonnes of lime
blossom; 250 tonnes of mint; 100 tonnes
of camomile; 200 tonnes of vervain; 30
tonnes of orange blossom; 30 tonnes of
Chinese anise; and 45 tonnes of eucalyp¬
tus.
These figures alone should be enough to
show that there is a renewed interest in
medicinal plants, inspired neither by
charlatanry nor by any modish desire to
return to nature. To understand the
underlying reasons for this phenomenon
we must look elsewhere.
An understanding of the distinction, ig¬
nored by many people, between medicinal
plants and vegetable drugs, may help to ex¬
plain why medicinal plants are today enjoy- k
ing a new lease of life. f

, A medicinal plant is one which contains
in one or several of its organs substances
that can be used directly for medicinal pur¬
poses or in chemical and pharmaceutical
semi-synthesis, while the term vegetable
drug refers to that part of the medicinal
plant used directly in the preparation of
medicines.
As raw materials, medicinal plants are
vital as a source of pure molecules which,
. though not medicines themselves, can be
used for the partial synthesis of phar¬
macologically active derivatives. This is
notably the case of various kinds of aloes,
agaves and dioscorea which contain
steroids that can be used in the partial syn¬
thesis of cortico-steroids (hormones
secreted by the outer region of the adrenal
glands) and their derivatives, of progesta¬
tional substances and oral contraceptives.
Through their active ingredients,
medicinal plants also constitute ideal
models for pharmaceutical research.
Substitutions and artificial mutations of
natural molecules have enabled new kinds
of medicines and more specific phar¬
maceutical products to be obtained. Ex¬
amples include the synthetic local pain¬
killers which have been derived from the
cocaine molecule, medicines used in the
treatment of high blood pressure, and
derivatives of the alkaloids found in the
roots of the Rauwolfia plant.
Finally, when medicinal plants have been
picked and checked for quality, parts of
them or their secretions can be used as
vegetable drugs in phytotherapeutic
preparations. In this form they are, either
prescribed in addition to specific
chemotherapy or as major medication for
certain ailments, especially psychosomatic
complaints, various cardio-vascular
diseases (including high blood pressure
and certain kinds of heart disease where
there are no organic lesions), digestive
troubles, disorders of the liver and gall¬
bladder, and as antiseptics for internal and
external use. "Aromatherapy", for exam¬
ple, (treatment using preparations with a
base of essential oils of medicinal plants)
has made great strides in the last five years.
It is likely that these trends will continue
to grow in the next few years. The scien¬
tific study of medicinal plants in developing
countries will provide new molecules that
will directly enrich the present range of
medicines or provide a basis for further
chemical and pharmacological research.
Michel A. Attisso

