The will
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
SINCE 1945 the disaster of a third world war has been
avoided; but at what price has this been achieved?
For how many days have the guns been silent
throughout the world? Although the field of conflict has
shifted towards the poor countries, children, whose lives
are no less precious than anyone else's are still dying as a
result of war.
Yet the nations, that in this twentieth century alone have
sacrificed more than 100 million human beings on the altars
of war, continue, as if caught up in the gears of a runaway
machine, to dissipate a vast proportion of their genius, of
their energy, of their resources, on the manufacture of
lethal weapons, ever more sophisticated and devastating.
To these nations, the question of disarmament represents
an unavoidable challenge.
If we take up this challenge, not only will mankind be
delivered from the menace of a hecatomb without prece¬
dent but it will also acquire the means to win the struggle
against poverty, sickness, ignorance and the other afflic¬
tions which beset so many peoples.
If only a proportion of the material and human resources
devoted to preparation for war were assigned to the cause
of development, it would suffice to change the face of the
earth, lessen the widening gulf between rich and poor coun¬
tries, and reduce the areas of poverty which continue to ex¬
ist in many industrialized countries. A great number of
essential activities, in the fields of nutrition, health, literacy,
the development of education, the training of scientific and
technological personnel, the establishment of research cen¬
tres, cultural development, and the safeguarding of the en¬
vironment, are curbed or even blocked, solely for lack of
material resources. This in turn aggravates inequalities, and
brings about new situations of tension.
And so in addition to the development of nuclear
weapons we have the armaments race in so-called conven-

for peace
tional weapons, which extends to the smallest and poorest
States. Thriving on injustice, and representing a further
manifestation of selfishness in the world today, this race, in
turn, brings into being terrifying world-wide interests linked
to arms industries, multiplies the risk of a world conflagra¬
tion, and provides fuel for the flames of conflict.
The arms race is not only fraught with the most terrible
danger to human life; it also determines investment choices
and sets a premium on economic structures which, having
become essential to the life of nations, subsequently make
it all the more difficult to carry out the conversion of the
arms industry to non-military activities.
The countries whose high level of development enables
them to influence the crippling economic and social process
of the arms build-up have a special responsibility towards
the international community and to the small and medium
States which at present can do no more than submit to
decisions which have been taken elsewhere, even though
they involve their future.
For Unesco, the essential task is the creation of a growing
movement of world public opinion which is conducive to
disarmament and peaceful co-operation. One of our essen¬
tial objectives should be to work towards the inclusion of
education on disarmament in courses, not only at school
and university, but wherever knowledge or skills are ac¬
quired.
What has to be done, above all, is to ensure that the
burden implied by any war and the enormous benefits of
peace are better understood so that public opinion can
, throw its full weight into the balance and can support
governments in the movement towards disarmament.
We have to persuade and convince and appeal to reason
and common sense, but we also have to call on people's
generosity and a clearly realized sense of solidarity that
stands to benefit one and all. It is a long drawn-out, difficult
and at times unrewarding combat, for guns have to be
silenced by ideas, but it is a combat on which all the world's
hopes are staked.
X
>iN
%r
Photo Boubat © Top, Paris
