The property of the last Sultan of Kilwa, this colourful fez is
typical of Swahili culture, drawing on African influences for
its bead embroidery and on Arab sources for the fez design.
A maritime city-state built on the island of Kilwa Kisiwani,
off the coast of present-day Tanzania, Kilwa was a
flourishing trade centre from the 12th to the 15th century.



The
shaping
of Swahili
civilization
****** *- ^- éï9>^âi\â\r^9W^m
by Victor V. Matveiev
IN the history of the islands and coast of
East Africa the period from the twelfth
to the fifteenth century stands out as
that of the formation of what may best be
termed the Swahili ethnic community.
Around the twelfth century the Swahili
people did not form a homogeneous com¬
munity either ethnically or socially.
Ethnically, a nucleus of Bantu-speaking
peoples was joined by people from the
closer parts of the hinterland and emigrants
from the countries of the northern shore of
VICTOR V. MATVEIEV, of the USSR, is direc¬
tor of research at the Ethnographic Institute of
the USSR Academy of Sciences. He is a
specialist in African history and ethnology and is
the author of a number of works including Arab
Sources for the History of sub-Saharan Africa
and Records of Early Arab Authors on Bantu
Peoples.
the Arabian Sea and the Indian Ocean,
comprising Arabs, Persians and Indians.
Social disparity was a fact too, since in
addition to the main body of ordinary, free
members of the community, there existed a
distinct and isolated rich élite which en¬
joyed the influence stemming from tradi¬
tional functions. Alongside this élite the
community included individuals who were
also rich but did not wield traditional power
and influence. Their wealth derived from
trading. The commoners formed the ma¬
jority and the main body of the Swahili
people.
The common Swahili people lived in huts
which they made from sticks and clay and
thatched with palm leaves or grass. These
huts were grouped to form villages and
towns. However, Arab sources tell us of
the more advanced culture of the towns of
the East African islands and coast which
was related to the development of maritime
trade.
These towns probably consisted for the
most part of huts, but they also had stone
buildings and were the dwelling places of
the wealthy and noble members of Swahili
society. The important point was that the
towns were trading centres where local
wares were assembled and ships from
overseas put in. They were at the same
time centres of Islam on the coast.
Archaeological work carried out at Kilwa
Kisiwani, a small island off the eastern
coast, provides a picture of fairly developed
trading. Finds have included a large quanti¬
ty of cowrie shells, which were used as
money, imported pottery of the yellow
sgraffito type with a cream shading and
also with dark green glazing, and
66

glassware. A small quantity of glass, cor¬
naline and quartz beads and steatite vases
from Madagascar have also been found.
The main export item here was gold. In the
mid-twelfth century Kilwa started to import
Chinese Sung porcelain together with a
small amount of celadon.
In the early thirteenth century the
"Shirazi" dynasty ruled at Kilwa and it
seems that Mafia Island came under its
sway. In the mid-thirteenth century Kilwa
fought the Shanga people, who were most
probably the inhabitants of the island of
Sanje ya Kati. The likely cause of the strug¬
gle was rivalry to control local trade. As
related in the Chronicle of Kilwa, Kilwa
ultimately prevailed. This victory probably
underlay the subsequent rapid develop¬
ment of Swahili trade and the Swahili
civilization, which can be reckoned to
begin in the early fourteenth century and
coincided with the advent at Kilwa of a new
dynasty associated with the name of Abu-'l-
Mawahib.
In the fourteenth century the volume of
trade was, it seems, at its height. Our main
source in Arabic for that period is Ibn Bat¬
tuta, who visited East Africa. He describes
Mogadishu as a major trading centre and
relates that it was customary for each mer¬
chant who arrived to choose from among
the citizens a confidential agent to manage
his affairs.
Mogadishu exported "maqdashi" (i.e. of
Mogadishu) cloth. Mogadishu's trade links
were distinct from those of the other towns
farther south. Thus maqdashi cloth was ex¬
ported to Egypt, while other cloth was im¬
ported from Egypt and from Jerusalem.
We know of the huge quantity of cloth ar¬
riving at Mombasa and Kilwa for onward
dispatch to Sofala in the fifteenth century.
The part played by cloth in the early
period is clear, for instance, from the ac¬
count in the Chronicle of Kilwa of the pur¬
chase of Kilwa Island. When Hussein Ben
Ali, an Arab, expressed the desire to pur¬
chase Kilwa Kisiwani, the local African
chief replied that he would sell the island
for a length of cloth sufficient to encircle it.
Hussein Ben AN had the cloth made and
took possession of Kilwa.
The main export items were ivory and
gold. In addition to these were slaves (the
slave raids being referred to by Ibn
Battuta), rhinoceros horn, ambergris,
pearls, shells and, in the northern part of
the coast, leopard skins.
There were undoubtedly links between
the coast and the inland gold-bearing
regions near Lake Nyasa, from which the
gold was brought to Kilwa. The gold-
bearing regions near the Zambezi in the
heart of the continent and on the territory
of what is now Zambia were probably the
first with which trade links were establish¬
ed. This is attested by finds of cowrie
shells, which were exchanged for gold and
ivory. In the Engaruka area of present-day
Kenya, excavation of a trading settlement
yielded the same type of cowrie shells and
beads (of the fifteenth and sixteenth cen¬
turies) as in excavations at Kilwa and other
coastal towns.
In this trade it was cowrie shells more
than any other article which provided a
medium of exhange. They are found in all
excavations and, as indicated, not only on
the coast but also in the interior of the con¬
tinent. The same purpose seems to have
been served by beads and, at a later date,
by china. Where commercial activity was
the most intense a new type of medium of
exchange was introduced in the form of
coins of copper and silver. The minting
centres seem to have been Kilwa and
Mogadishu.
Coins are found in the major trading cen¬
tres such as Kilwa Kisiwani, Kisiwani
Mafia, Kwa on Juani Island, and the
islands of Zanzibar and Pemba. It may also
be supposed that coins had a greater ex¬
change value than cowries, and their in¬
troduction is a likely indication of the large
scale of business done. This is borne out by
the fact that the main article of trade at
Kilwa was gold, with its very high intrinsic
value. At that time the abundance of gold
and its rôle in commerce as an article of
trade obviously precluded its use as a
medium of exchange.
Trade underlay the social and cultural
development of Swahili society. The con¬
tacts that are a natural part of trading
familiarized it with the cultural
achievements of other peoples, in par¬
ticular the Arabs, Persians and Indians.
Despite the vast quantity of goods of
Chinese origin found in the course of ex¬
cavations, the Chinese did not take a direct
part in trading with Africa until the early fif¬
teenth century.
A consequence of the development of
trade was the appearance of an influential
group in Swahili society competing for
power with the old aristocracy. The rise of
this new influential group and its
endeavour to consolidate its position called
for a new ideology. This was provided by
Islam which had become known through
contacts with the Arabs and Persians.
The penetration of Islam seems to have
begun at the end of the seventh or eighth
century. In the tenth century Al Masudi
reports the presence of Muslims on Kan-
balu Island speaking an African language.
That is the period to which the spread of
Islam on the East African islands is usually
attributed. In the thirteenth century Islam
spread to the coast itself. This East African
Islam should evidently not be put on a par
with that of the Arab countries, for in¬
stance. In all probability, what was impor¬
tant at the beginning was simply to be con¬
sidered as being Muslim, and the new
religion coexisted with traditional cults.
In the course of time the influence of
Islam grew and went deeper, and the
number of adherents increased. An out¬
ward indication of this kind of change is the
rise in the number of mosques. The start of
this extension process should probably be
dated back to no later than the last decades
of the twelfth century, and its full develop¬
ment must have coincided with the four¬
teenth and fifteenth centuries.
The adoption and spread of Islam under
conditions of intense commercial activity
was accompanied by much borrowing from
Arabic, particularly with regard to trade,
religion and law. Judging by the reference
in Ibn Battuta's work to the cadis of
Mogadishu and Kilwa, Swahili society
assimilated some elements of the Muslim
legal system (but probably not the entire
system). The demands of trade and
religion, with the need to keep accounts, to
observe a number of Muslim religious
ceremonies, and to fix the rights and
privileges of the various sections of Swahili
society, also led to Swahili being put into a
written form based on Arabic script.
A consequence of the development and
spread of Islam among the Swahili was not
only the construction of mosques but also
the development of building in stone. Its
beginnings date back to the twelfth century
in Gedi, Zanzibar and Kilwa. This initial
period had its own building methods,
which consisted simply in laying coral
blocks on red clay. The only edifice from
that period to have survived to this day is
the Great Mosque of Kilwa but it was
rebuilt a number of times and is now a
completely new building.
In the fourteenth century the main
trading centre of Kilwa underwent a period
of growth and prosperity in architecture as
well as in commerce, and building methods
developed further. Use was simply made of
undressed stone of more or less uniform
size, which was placed in mortar. New con¬
struction elements included spherical and
pointed cupolas, semicylindrical vaults,
stone columns and various ornaments. But
it seems that those elements were then on¬
ly to be found at Kilwa. Elsewhere flat roofs
continued to be the rule.
In the course of the fourteenth century
many stone houses were built in Kilwa and
it became a large town. This construction
activity undoubtedly denotes the growing
wealth of the town. In the first half of the
fifteenth century this activity continued at
Kilwa and was accompanied by further im¬
provement in building methods. The mor¬
tar was poured into casings and completed
with rubble. Even cupolas were built in this
way. Monolithic columns were replaced by
columns of stone and mortar. The basic
type of house remained the same but
houses of two or three floors made their
appearance.
A characteristic detail of building at that
time was the custom of adorning vaults
and cupolas with glazed vessels of Chinese
and Persian porcelain set into the body of
the construction. The house with a
mosque within the bounds of Makutani is a
monument of that period at Kilwa. In the
reign of Sultan Sulaiman ibn Muhammed
al-Malik al-Adil (1412-1442), the Great
Mosque of Kilwa was reconstructed in its
present form, and it is a very fine example
of East African Swahili architecture.
According to Portuguese sources, the
streets of the districts of Kilwa comprising
mud-wall houses were narrow and covered
over with protruding palm leaves forming
the roofs of the houses. The buildings in
the town had wooden doors and, probably,
other details in wood richly adorned with
carving. Work of this kind has come to
light in various parts of the coast, par¬
ticularly Bagamoyo and Zanzibar.
The Portuguese were impressed by the
towns, by the wealth of the inhabitants and
by the elegance of their rich gold-adorned
silk and cotton clothes. The women wore i
chains and bangles of gold and silver on I
67

The Great
Mosque
of Kilwa
"Faith and righteousness are their foremost
qualities", declared the Arab historian Ibn
Battuta in a description of the people of Kilwa
written in 1331. For not only was Kilwa an
important trading centre, it was also a centre of
Islamic Influence. Construction of the Great
Mosque of Kilwa was begun in the 12th century
and as the city's prosperity grew the Mosque
was rebuilt several times. During the reign of
Sultan Sulaiman ibn Muhammed al-Malik al Adil
(1412-1442) the Great Mosque was reconstructed
in its present form (aerial photo above) and with
its cupolas, columns and vaults (right) it remains
a fine example of East African Swahili
architecture. Kilwa imported large quantities of
Persian and Chinese pottery, including Sung
porcelain and celadon and, later, Ming blue and
white porcelain. A curious practice among
builders of the time was to inset porcelain bowls
as a ceiling decoration. Above, a fallen portion
of a vault in the House of the Mosque showing
inset bowls.
68

their arms and legs, and earrings set with
precious stones.
The furniture consisted of carpets and
mats, and sometimes stools and luxurious
beds inlaid with ivory, mother-of-pearl,
silver and gold. The rich made everyday
use of imported pottery from Iran, Iraq and
China, as well as from Egypt and Syria.
East African Swahili towns, like Kilwa,
were often administrative centres and the
capitals of small States ruled over by the
local Muslim dynasties. But above all they
were trading centres. Indeed, it seems clear
that the East African Swahili civilization
was the fruit of commercial development.
It was trade that prompted the growth and
progress of a civilization. But it can also be
said to have underlain its weakness, for it
. was not tied in with development of the
productive forces of the region.
From the occupations of the population
it can be seen that the Swahili people as a
whole did not endeavour to develop its pro¬
ductive forces beyond the level which pro
bably obtained in traditional Swahili society
before the advent of trading on a substan¬
tial scale.
This is also evident from the fact that few
iron tools or other metal instruments have
come to light in excavations. Almost all the
goods got or produced by the Swahili were
intended not for local consumption but for
sale and export. This was also true of hunt¬
ing and the mining of such commodities as
gold and iron.
At the same time, trade alone was an in¬
sufficient basis and stimulant for a civiliza¬
tion. The loss of former trade routes and
the disruption of commercial relations
threatened to bring trade to a standstill,
with the inevitable consequence of a rapid
depletion of wealth and of the civilization's
vital force. This, as we now know, was
what the future held in store for the East
African towns.
Various circumstances are considered to
have contributed to the decline of the
Swahili civilization. There was the Zimba
invasion, and it also seems that decreased
rainfall and the consequent upsetting of
the water balance hindered the further
development of the coastal towns.
It is possible that all these factors did ac¬
tually sap the Swahili civilization. The chief
cause, however, was the disruption of
maritime trade by the Portuguese. Being
well fitted out, equipped with artillery and
built for the very purpose of naval warfare,
the Portuguese ships were an invincible
force. Their constant presence in the
region under the command of Ruy Lorenso
Ravasco, the seizure of twenty vessels
laden with goods, the defeat of Zanzibar's
large fleet of light craft, and the plundering
and destruction of the coastal towns, par¬
ticularly Kilwa, were all blows from which
East African maritime trade never
recovered, and beneath them medieval
Swahili civilization perished.
Victor V. Matveiev
The imposing ruins of Great
Zimbabwe, former capital of
two great southern African
states the Monomatapa
Empire (12th to late 15th
century) and the Changamire
Empire (late 15th to early 19th
century) are situated near
Fort Victoria in present-day
Zimbabwe-Rhodesia. The
construction of Zimbabwe's
hilltop stronghold, and the
Great Enclosure on the plain
below must have required an
effort comparable to that
involved in the building of the
Egyptian pyramids. The conical
tower, right, 9 metres in
height, lies within the massive
walls of the Great Enclosure
which was erected in the 13th
and 14th centuries. The wealth
of Zimbabwe was based on
the region's gold and copper
mines and the recent discovery
in the ruins of a coin bearing
the effigy of Sultan Al-Hasan
Bin Sulaiman (1320-1333) of
Kilwa seems to confirm that
Zimbabwe was regularly
visited by Arab traders from
the east coast.
Photo Picou © A.A.A. Photo, Paris
69
