The candle
of learning
The tragedy of
neglected
scientific talent
in the
developing world
by Abdus Salam
I would like to make a few general remarks
regarding the history of science in civili¬
zation and the way in which the history
of science has gone through various cycles.
I would like to illustrate this with a story: 750
years ago, an impoverished Scotsman left
his native glens to travel south to Toledo in
Spain. His name was Michael. His quest
was to live and work at the Arab universities
of Toledo and Cordoba, where the greatest
of Jewish scholars, Moses Bin Maimoun,
had taught a generation before.
The Toledo school, representing as it did
the finest synthesis of Arabic, Greek, Latin
and Hebrew scholarship, was one of the
most memorable of international essays in
scientific collaboration. To Toledo and Cor¬
doba came scholars, not only from the rich
countries of the East, like Syria, Egypt, Iran
and Afghanistan, but also from the im¬
poverished countries of the West, like
Scotland.
Then as now, there were obstacles to this
international scientific concourse, not least
the intellectual and economic disparity bet¬
ween different parts of the world. Men like
Michael the Scot and his contemporary
Alfred the Englishman were exceptions.
They did not then represent any flourishing
school of research in their own countries.
With the best will in the world, their
teachers at Toledo doubted the wisdom and
value of training them for advanced scien¬
tific research. At least one of his teachers
advised young Michael to go back to clip¬
ping sheep and weaving woollen cloth.
In respect of the cycle of scientific
disparities, I can be perhaps a little more
quantitative. George Sarton in his
monumental five-volume history of science
chose to divide his story of scientific
achievement into various ages, each age
lasting half a century. With each half-
century he associated one central figure.
The years 450 to 400 BC, for example, Sar¬
ton calls the age of Plato. This is followed by
the half-century of Aristotle; then of Euclid;
then of Archimedes, and so on. But then the
cycle changes. The period from 600 to
650 AD is the Chinese half-century of Hsuan
Tsang; from 650 to 700 is the half-century of
l-Ching. The 350 years from 750 to 1100 are,
in an unbroken succession, the ages of
Jabir, Khwarizmi, Razi, Masudi, Wafa,
Biruni, Omar Khayyam and so onArabs,
16
Pakistani physicist Abdus Salam, founder and director of the Unesco
sponsored International Centre for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, and pro¬
fessor of theoretical physics at the Imperial College of Science and
Technology, London, has been awarded the 1979 Nobel prize for physics.
The prize, which he shares with two American physicists, Sheldon
Glashow and Steven Weinberg of Harvard University, was awarded for
work in electromagnetic interaction between elementary particles. In the
words of the citation, the three physicists' theoretical work constitutes
"an enormous step" in the search for an underlying physical principle of
the universe. One of the goals of modern physics has been the elaboration
of a "unified field theory" (a task to which Einstein devoted the latter part
of his life) that would demonstrate that the four basic physical
forces electromagnetism, gravitation, the strong atomic interaction and
the weak atomic interaction were in reality different aspects of a single
basic force. The theory elaborated by the three Nobel laureates, since con¬
firmed experimentally, shows that two of these forces, electromagnetism
and the weak atomic interaction, are indeed the same phenomenon.
Shortly after the announcement of the award. Professor Salam, who has
had a long and fruitful association with Unesco, was invited to the
Organization's headquarters in Paris to receive the congratulations of the
Unesco Executive Board. The article below consists of large extracts from
his address to the Executive Board.
Turks, Afghans and Persians, men belong¬
ing to the culture of Islam.
After 1 100 Western names appear: Gerard
of Cremona, Jacob Anatoli, Roger Bacon
and so on. But the honours are still shared
with the names of Moses Bin Maimoun
(Maimonides), of Ibn-Rushd (Averroës), of
Tusi and Ibn-Nafis. After 1350, however, the
developing world ceased to make such an
important contribution, apart from some oc¬
casional flashes of scientific genius, such as
the Observatory of Ulugh Beg, the grandson
of Timurlane, in Samarkand, or the work of
Maharajah Jai Singh of Jaipur, who in 1720
corrected the errors of the western tables of
eclipses of the sun and the moon by as
much as six minutes of arc. As it was. Jai
Singh's techniques were surpassed soon
after with the development of the telescope
in Europe. As a contemporary chronicler
wrote, "With him on the funeral pyre ex¬
pired all science in the East."
And this brings us to the present century
when the cycle of Michael of Scotland turns
full circle and we in the developing world
begin to borrow from the West. I would like
to quote here from Alkindi: "It is fitting for
us not to be ashamed to acknowledge truth
and to assimilate it from whatever source it
comes to us, even if it is brought to us by
foreign peoples. For him who seeks the
truth, there is nothing of higher value than
truth itself, it never cheapens or abases
him".
The question which I am really leading up
to is, are we in the developing world today
firmly on the road to a renaissance in the
sciences, just as the West was in the twelfth
century at the time of Michael the Scot?
For this renaissance to happen, there are
two prerequisites: one, the availability of
places like Toledo where international con¬
course can take place, where one can light a
candle from a candle; secondly, there has to
be an interest in developing societies to give
the topmost priority to the acquisition of
knowledge, just as, for example, the
Japanese did after the Meiji revolution by
enshrining the acquiring of knowledge in
their constitution.
Regretfully, if I may speak the truth and if
I look at the world of developing countries
as it is today, I see that neither of these re¬
quirements is being met. The opportunities
for international concourse are fast shrink¬
ing, with greater and greater restrictions on
acceptance of overseas scholars from
developing countries. It is becoming in¬
creasingly clear that soon the developing
world will need internationally-run, United

Nations-run, Unesco-run, institutions,
universities of science, not just for research
as at the United Nations University in Tokyo,
but for high-level teaching of traditional
technology and science, both pure and ap¬
plied. The second prerequisite which I men¬
tioned, a passionate desire on the part of the
developing countries for scientific know¬
ledge and the removal of all barriers to its
acquisition, is unfortunately non-existent.
Some of you may recall that on 9 May this
year, Unesco held a meeting to mark
Einstein's birthday. I told then how Einstein
might have been lost to physics, but for a
series of accidents such was the measure
of the financial, economic and other frustra¬
tions which he faced, even in a country like
Switzerland. Unfortunately, the same thing
applies to an even greater extent where the
developing countries are concerned.
Perhaps I may be allowed to illustrate this
with a few words about my own case.
The fact that I became and remained a
research physicist was due to a series of ac¬
cidents. First the Second World War: as
soon as I showed some competence in
science, my well-wishers, my parents, all
around me, destined me for a career in the
prestigious Indian Civil Service. As chance
would have it, the Civil Service examination
was suspended for the duration of the War.
But for this and but for the grace of God, I
would today have been a civil servant in
Pakistan.
The second accident and this is
something which I am sure many others have
experienced in their own lives and which is
by no means unique to mewas the acci¬
dent of how I got to Cambridge. The then
Prime Minister of my State, the Punjab, col¬
lected some funds to present to the British
Government for the purchase of armaments.
The war ended and the funds were left
unutilized. The Prime Minister decided to in¬
stitute Smallholding Peasants' Scholarships
for Study Abroad. A number of scholarships
were offered; I was fortunate enough to get
one and sail the same year, 1946, and to go
to Cambridge to read physics and
mathematics. Several other scholarships
were awarded. Unfortunately the scholars
were promised admissions for the subse¬
quent year. In the meantime, the sub¬
continent was partitioned and with partition
the scholarships disappeared. The entire ex¬
ercise of the then Prime Minister succeeded
in one thing only in getting me to St.
John's College, Cambridge, where Pro¬
fessor Dirac, to whom Unesco recently
awarded an Einstein Medal, was teaching.
So you can understand why I feel so
grateful to Allah for having given me this op¬
portunity in such a mysterious way that I
was able to conduct research at a time when
there was no visible means of doing so.
The third accident, and I will conclude
with this, happened to me after I returned to
Pakistan from Cambridge to teach and to try
to found a school of research in physics at
Lahore. Unfortunately, I soon discovered
that there was a very big conflict between
whether I should remain a research physicist
or whether I should leave my country. With
anguish in my heart, I made myself an exile.
It was this anguish which led me to propose
the creation of an International Centre for
Theoretical Physics, but this time with the
sponsorship of the Government of Pakistan
and of the governments of all other friendly
developing countries. The idea was to
award what we call associateships of the
Centre, so that a deserving young man
might spend his period of vacation in an in¬
vigorating environment in close touch with
his peers in research something which
commonly happens in a developed coun¬
try charge his batteries with new
ideas, still spending the remaining nine
months of his academic year back at home
working in his own university.
Unesco supported the idea, although it
was in fact first suggested at the Board of
the International Atomic Energy Agency,
from the very first day. With Unesco's very
active help, and with the most generous
assistance from the Government of Italy, the
Centre was created in 1964 by the IAEA in
Trieste, with Unesco joining as a full partner
in 1970.
Over the 15 years that the Centre has ex¬
isted, it has, in response to a continuing de¬
mand from the developing countries and
from Unesco, steadily shifted its emphasis
from fundamental and basic physics
towards subjects which are on the interface
of pure and applied science subjects like
physics of materials, physics of energy,
physics of fusion, physics of reactors,
physics of solar and other conventional
sources, geophysics, physics of oceans,
physics of deserts, systems analysis in ad¬
dition to the more basic subjects like high
energy physics (my own subject), quantum
gravity, cosmology, atomic and nuclear
physics, and applicable mathematics. This
shift from the pure to the applied was not
because we thought we were doing too
much pure. It was simply the fact that there
just was not and still is not any other institu¬
tion which could take over the more applied
aspects of the subject at all.
Over the fifteen years that I have been
running the Centre, I have felt more and
more strangled, if I may so express myself,
and never more so than now. I used to pride
myself on spending half a day every day in
research, and half a day in administration.
Progressively over the last five years, this
has become impossible. This is not because
the task of administration has become
greater; it is simply because the uncertainty
of the Centre's standing in the ecology of in¬
ternational institutes means that its ex¬
istence is something which one has to fight
for all the time, and this is not good for a
director who would like to combine both
research and administration.
Briefly, one-half of the Centre's budget
comes from the Italian Government and the
other half from the IAEA and Unesco.
Unesco defined its mandate 25 years ago as
a catalyst of institutions: but that is no
longer enough. We get 1,500 physicists
every year, coming to us for periods ranging
from four weeks to a year. We have a very
considerable experience of actually knowing
what the pulse of science in 120 countries is.
The realities of the situation now demand a
revision of earlier thinking. A mere catalyst
role is, I fear, no longer enough: it is
necessary to think in terms of setting up
more stable institutions. It will be pointed
out that this cannot be done without new
funds, and that is undoubtedly true. But I
would humbly appeal to Unesco and there
is no other body in the world to which one
can goto consider such a revision of what
was decided 25 years ago and envisage, the
creation for developing countries of institu¬
tions with the requisite stability, both on the
applied side as well as on the fundamental
side which must not be ignored.
In science, as in other spheres, this world
of ours is divided into rich countries and
poor countries. The richer half the in¬
dustrial north, the centrally managed coun¬
tries an income of 5 trillion dollars,
spends 2 per cent of this income, some 100
billion dollars, on non-military science and
research. The remaining half the poorer
southwith one-fifth of this income, i.e. 1
trillion dollars, spends only two billion
dollars rather than the 20 billion it should be
spending on the basis of the norm establish¬
ed by the richer countries. At the Vienna
Conference six weeks ago, the poorer na¬
tions called for international funds to in¬
crease the 2 billions to 4. We got promises
of one-seventh of this. Unesco's program¬
mes will be the sufferers, and with them un¬
fortunately the International Centre for
Theoretical Physics.
I would like to conclude with three ap¬
peals. The first and most important is to the
delegates from the developing countries,
and I am one of them. I would like to make a
personal appeal. Science and technology
are your responsibility. Your men of science
are precious assets. Prize them; give them
opportunities to participate in the scientific
and technological development of your
countries. Do not leave them out. The goal
of increasing the 2 billions to 20 billions is
ultimately your responsibility.
But having said this, I would also wish to
appeal to the international community, both
to governments and to scientists. A world
so divided where science and technology are
concerned cannot endure. What is one to
think when one sees that an international
centre for theoretical physics has a budget
of 1.5 million dollars to spend on 100
developing countries, while the great
organization CERN (the European Organiza¬
tion for Nuclear Research), at Geneva,
which is a joint organization of European na¬
tions, has a budget of one-third of a billion
dollars? That is the scale on which scientific
research has to be conducted in order to be
effective.
And then, finally, I would like to make an
appeal to my brethren, those from the
Islamic countries. I have spoken of Islamic
science. I spoke of it advisedly. To some of
you, Allah has given a bounty, an income of
the order of 60 billion dollars. On the interna¬
tional norms these countries should be
spending one billion dollars annually on
science and technology. Your forbears were
the torch-bearers of scientific research in the
eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh centuries.
It was your forbears who started the
academies of sciences in Baghdad and in
Cairo. Be generous once again. Spend the
billion dollars on international science, even
if others do not. Create a talent fund. It is
talent which makes the difference in the
end. Let this talent fund be available, not
only to Islamic countries, not only to Arab
countries, but to all developing countries.
My humble personal contribution to this
fund will be the $60,000 which the Swedish
Academy will so generously award me on 10
December.
17
