Profile of Papua
New Guinea today
THE mainland of Papua New Guinea
lies about 160 kilometres north of
the eastern half of Australia. It
comprises the eastern portion of the island
of New Guinea; the remainder of the island
is the Indonesian province of West Irian.
Although 85 per cent of Papua New
Guinea's land area is on the mainland, the
country also encompasses about 600
islands. In all, the country extends some
2,000 kilometres from east to west and
about 1,300 kilometres from north to
south. Its total land area is 463,000 square
kilometres slightly less than that of
Thailand but substantially more than that
of New Zealand or the Philippines.
The topography of Papua New Guinea is
rugged. Much of the land area of both the
mainland and the islands is characterized
by steep mountains, some peaking at more
than 5,000 metres.
Because of these formidable geographic
barriers, Papua New Guinea is culturally
and economically fragmented. The aircraft
was introduced much earlier and has
penetrated much farther than the
automobile or truck. Papua New Guinea is
said to have more airstrips per capita than
any other country in the world. The early
growth of air transport was associated with
gold mining activities, and it is used for
much of Papua New Guinea's internal ship¬
ping and most of its domestic passenger
traffic.
Roads are in the early stages of develop¬
ment, and the difficult climate and terrain
of Papua New Guinea make their construc¬
tion and maintenance expensive.
There is some inter-island coastal shipp¬
ing and this is a mode of transport with
considerable potential. Ocean shipping is
more important in overseas cargo traffic
than in coastal shipping, but most external
passenger traffic is carried by airlines.
In contrast with its transport facilities,
Papua New Guinea's communications
system is quite modern. The telecom¬
munications network has been significantly
improved in recent years; the posts and
telegraphs organization, a government-
owned enterprise, has built a trunk
telephone system that compares
favourably with those in many developed
countries. The principal means of mass
communication in Papua New Guinea is
radio broadcasting, which is also a govern¬
ment activity.
Papua New Guinea is rich in natural
resources. The many regions with good
soils and a variety of climatic conditions at
different elevations allow a wide spectrum
of agricultural possibilities. Subsistence
agriculture occupies 90 per cent of the
cultivated land and engages from 60 to 70
per cent of the population. Forest cover is
extensive and of considerable commercial
potential, but access to many forest areas
is difficult and expensive. A combination of
heavy rainfall and extensive mountain
ranges provides one of the world's richest
hydroelectric potentials.
Mineral resources are also good. Gold
was once the country's primary export, but
with the opening of the large opencast
mine on Bougainville in 1972, copper has
assumed first place among exports, now
accounting for roughly half of the
country's total exports and 20 to 30 per
cent of its gross domestic product. Gas
Youngsters in a Papua New
Guinea primary school
eagerly join in a question-
and-answer session during a
lesson aimed at developing
their language skills. English
is the main language of
instruction in Papua New
Guinea's school system, but
efforts are also being made
to transcribe, preserve and
promote the use of
vernacular languages.
Achievements in this field
were recognized at a
ceremony held on 10
September 1979 at Unesco's
Paris HQ, when the first
annual International Reading
Association Literacy Award
was presented to the Papua
New Guinea Branch of the
Summer Institute of
Linguistics, for its
educational work in local
languages.
drilling has resulted in encouraging, but not
yet commercially exploitable finds.
The 2.8 million people of Papua New
Guinea comprise a variety of distinct ethnic
groups, predominantly Melanesian. The
isolating effect of mountains, forests, large
rivers, and the sea has preserved unique
cultural and linguistic differences among
the various ethnic groups. Some 700 local
languages have been identified. The size of
these language groups ranges from 200 to
300 persons to the largest groups of about
100,000. There are, however, three
languages that are quite widely
spoken Pidgin, English, and Motu.
The social systems of the various groups
are also different. Patrilineal, matrilineal,
and ambilineal descent systems occur. The
social obligations among kinship groups
are complex. Members of the group have
an obligation to assist and support others
who might be in need and this has created
a kind of local social security system that
makes members reluctant to leave the pro¬
tection of the group environment. Indeed,
this clan group support has survived the
process of urbanization and serves as a
basis of settlement in towns. It establishes
claims and obligations among members
originating from the same clan group, and
mitigates the problems of urban im¬
migrants. Land ownership is also a com¬
munity right, with use granted to in¬
dividuals or families by agreement among
the owning group. About 97 per cent of the
land in Papua New Guinea is held by local
populations under these traditional tenure
systems.
The present population of Papua New
Guinea is nearly the same as that of New
Zealand but only about one-fifteenth that
Photo © J. Häuser, Basel, Switzerland
of the Philippines or Thailand. Thus, the
country has substantial physical size and a
population that is still relatively small.
About 40 per cent of the total population is
concentrated in the highlands in the central
mainland, a region that remained sheltered
from modern influences longer than many
others in the country. Only in the Eastern
Highlands is any population pressure yet
felt. Papua New Guinea's indigenous
population is increasing at an annual rate of
2.8 per cent, and it is expected to reach
about 3.5 million by the mid-1980s.
Because of this rapid growth, the age
structure of the population is quite young;
in 1971, 46 per cent of the population was
less than 15 years old.
Until quite recently, urban settlements
were restricted to the coastal areas and few
towns have more than 10,000 inhabitants.
The largest is the capital. Port Moresby,
with 76,000 residents, followed by the port .
town of Lae, with 38,000. This pattern is
now being changed rapidly by high rates of
rural-urban migration.
Papua New Guinea's school system was
pioneered by missionaries as early as 1872,
but the role of education did not begin to
expand rapidly until about 1960. In that
20

One of the world's newest nations, Papua New Guinea today
houses its national collections in one of the world's most modern
museums. Above, aerial view of some of the new buildings of
the National Museum and Art Gallery, opened in 1977 at Port
Moresby. Sloping roof covers the exhibition area; circular
buildings at right, typical of the round houses found in the New
Guinea highlands, form part of an outdoor entertainment area.
Although the Museum has over 20,000 items in its
anthropological collections, some parts of the country are poorly
represented; when the Museum was established many areas had
already been stripped of their traditional cultural objects by
collecting expeditions, and even in recent years there have
unfortunately been cases of looting and smuggling of works of
art from Papua New Guinea. The new museum facilities
effectively counter any argument against the return of artefacts
to Papua New Guinea on the grounds of failure to protect locally
the country's heritage or of lack of adequate conditions or staff.
Agreements on the return of works from several Australian
museums and from the National Museum of New Zealand have
already been implemented (see Unesco Courier, July 1978).
year 95,000 students were enrolled in
school, 92,000 of them in primary schools;
80 per cent of all primary students were in
mission schools.
By 1975, 69 per cent of the boys and 44
per cent of the girls in the 7-to-l2-year age
group were enrolled in primary school.
Secondary education is also developing. In
1975 there were about 30,000 secondary
students in 88 high schools, and another
10,500 students were in technical, voca¬
tional, or teacher training. Still, about 85
per cent of all enrolments were in primary
schools.
Papua New Guinea now has two univer¬
sities. The University of Papua New Guinea
in Port Moresby has some 1,000 full-time
and 500 part-time students, and the Univer¬
sity of Technology at Lae has around 1,000
students. These are exclusively boarding
institutions.
Health care in Papua New Guinea has
been well developed during the past
quarter century. A rural health care system
through village aid posts has been set up,
and today there are some 1,600 such
posts more than one for every eight
villages. Hospital cases are referred to one
of twenty-one district or base hospitals.
Training facilities are available locally for
aid post personnel and, since 1970, for
medical officers in the Faculty of Medicine
of the University of Papua New Guinea.
The process of modernization has made
giant strides in Papua New Guinea during
the past two or three generations, par¬
ticularly since World War II. Against Papua
New Guinea's complex historical and
geographical background and in the con¬
text of only recently (1975) acquired in¬
dependence, it is remarkable how rapidly
this process is taking effect.
i
This article presents information
contained in a World Bank report:
Papua New Guinea, Its Econo¬
mic Situation and Prospects
for Development. pub¬
lished by the World Bank in 1978.
A student audience in a
lecture hall of the
University of Papua New
Guinea. One of the
country's two
universities, it has some
1,000 full-time and 500
part-time students and is
situated at the national
capital. Port Moresby.
Photo © Parimage, Paris
21
