Deaf children live In a
world of silence but they
can "listen" to their
parents with their eyes.
Recent discoveries about
early childhood, stressing
the importance of the
gestures and facial
expressions which
accompany speech, are
being increasingly used
by parents and teachers
to help handicapped
children to acquire
communications skills.
The deaf child is trained
to follow the adult's line
of vision before lip-
reading his or her
comments.


The road
to self-expression
Awakening the latent language skills
of handicapped children
by Anne McKenna
ANNE McKENNA of Ireland is editor of The
International Journal of Early Childhood and lec¬
turer in the psychology department of University
College, Dublin.
L
ET us eavesdrop for a few moments
while a normal child talks to his
mother after he has just come out of
school. He rushes through the door and
runs to tell her what he has done since he
last saw her, in school and on the way
home with his playmates. His conversation
carries the outside world into the home,
and as his mother listens sympathetically
the various strands of his lifeschool,
home and friends come together for him
and interweave to make a new pattern and
a new world that he himself has fashioned.
y
Such fortunate children who have been
brought up in happy homes and who pos¬
sess all their senses unimpaired have
taught us so much about the meaning of
the world for a child. In giving us these
insights, they have given us the opportu¬
nity to acquire a new perspective on the
rights of handicapped children on their
long voyage to adulthood.
We now know that children learn many
of the highly complex processes of com¬
munication in a very short time early in life,
long before they reach school age. During
a recent study of a pre-school programme
in a socially disadvantaged area of the United
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

Kingdom, parents were asked whether
the programme had helped their relation¬
ship with their children. About half of them
said that this relationship had improved
and most often they attributed this to the
child's increased verbal facility.
The children had learned new words
which had made it easier for their parents
to communicate with them; the pre-school
experience had apparently provided topics
for conversation. It may seem surprising
that parents and children living under the
same roof should need to be provided with
conversational themes, but the fact is that
there are many situations in which lan¬
guage is superfluous.
Eating and sleeping can be supervised by
the parent with a great deal of efficiency
and even affection, but with very few
words. To wrap up a child carefully against
the cold you do not need to talk about his
red jumper or blue jumper or to differen¬
tiate a woollen from a synthetic coat ; and
you can tuck him into bed at night without
talking about the sun, the moon and the
stars.
The language used on occasions like
these may often be a one-sided set of terse
instructions from parent to child, with an
almost total lack of dialogue. To engage in
dialogue with the child about the names of
things, to perceive, compare and classify
their qualities, to create imaginary and
hypothetical situations, to relate events in
time and space, to discuss the happenings
of a familiar story, and to talk about how
one feelsall of these activities and many
others which form the basis of a good pre¬
school programme, might also become
topics of conversation to try out with
mother as well as with teacher. In giving
the child conversational pieces to take
home, just as we would let him take home
his drawings, we are also giving the parent,
perhaps for the first time, an opportunity to
try out alternative topics of conversation.
But with the child who is handicapped in
language development by deafness, deve-
20
Above, four cards illustrating and explaining gestures from the sign-
language of the deaf. They form part of a set used in the Swedish TV
"Hands Up" programmes described in photo caption on opposite page.
Clockwise from top left, cards show gestures for: "thanktyou"; "please"
"meeting"; and "happy". More than 300,000 sets were sold at shops
throughout Sweden.

lopmental delays or low:level linguistic sti¬
mulation in the home, we must go back to
the beginnings of language. Early depriva¬
tion through any form of handicap, either
social or physical, can have far-reaching
effects and can result in irreversible
damage. On the positive side, early enrich¬
ment programmes can be highly effective if
they are appropriate to the child's age and
level of development.
What are the essential elements of a lan¬
guage programme for children who have
not yet acquired language? To answer this
question we need to know what the normal
child has to learn before he can begin to
speak. Before language is possible, we
must "learn to mean" as one linguist has
put it to make sense of the world and of
the people in itand what other people are
trying to do for us and ro us. This is the
journey that we embark on from the first
breath of life, and children have travelled
far along this road before speech begins,
indeed before speech can begin.
One of the first things we know to be
essential is the setting up between infant
and adult of a common ground, with the
adult looking at the same thing as the
infant and then commenting on it. This
immersion in the same subject, which the
American psychologist Jerome Bruner has
called "joint attention", is a precious com¬
modity for the language enrichment pro¬
gramme. It is in such conditions that we
see the precursor of language and it is to be
noted that the adult joins in the child's
attention rather than expecting the child to
join in his.
A mother does not say: "Pay attention,
this ¡s a hat", but when the child involunta¬
rily attends and looks with interest at his
daddy's head, so does mother, accom¬
panying this with words like "Oh! look at
daddy's lovely hat". Meaning for the child
is the total content of the event, the words,
the pointing finger, the smile on mother's
face and the question in her eyes. The
younger the child, the more handicapped
the child, the more important is this con¬
text where everything that is happening
around him is a clue to be snatched up if he
is to make sense of the world.
And if the speaker's face expresses
impatience at having to repeat the message j
for, say, a deaf child, this is what the situa- 1
"HANDS UPI" a highly imaginative series of Swedish TV programmes,
has encouraged thousands of children with unimpaired hearing to learn
the sign-language of the deaf. The programmes were intended not only
to break the "sound barrier" of communication with deaf youngsters but
to initiate other children into a fun language they could use for swapping
secrets, communicating in noisy surroundings or from a distance. An
episode of an adventure serial starring two deaf children and two
children with normal hearing was screened each week. Every instalment
contained a key sentence in sign language that the "Hearing" children
and viewers had to interpret. Viewers had an opportunity to familiarize
themselves with the gestures used in the broadcasts by a training
programme preceding each instalment and by a set of explanatory cards
(see opposite page). Top photo page 20: the children, with producer
Gunnel Linde, learn signs connected with one of the secret sentences.
Top photo this page: the boy with normal hearing is telling the deaf boy
what has happened to a key they are looking for. It has been dropped
into a pool and the deaf diver (middle photo) has been told by sign
language where to find it. Left, he breaks surface, key in hand.
21

No words neededl This
expressive gesture
clearly means Ugh!
Disgusting!
, tion "means" to the child. You may be
mouthing "Take off your coat", but the
frustration or irritation in your eyes is the
chief message the child is receiving. So too
much of the tone of your voice when
speaking to a blind child, like the press¬
ure of your touch, can underline or cancel
out a spoken message.
No sooner has the child acquired the abi¬
lity to speak a three- or four-word sentence
to get attention, to procure his wants, to
comment on a surprising change, in short
to steer him through all the practical inter¬
changes necessary for living, no sooner has
he acquired this basic minimum than he
shows a joy in experimenting with ¡t. Lan¬
guage becomes something to be played
with, an object to be investigated. And in
the normal course of events the child is the
initiator, pushing the adult into dialogue.
A recent study has revealed just how
active and initiating children can be. When
the spontaneous speech of four-year-old
children in their own homes was recorded,
in circumstances in which neither the
mother nor the child knew when they were
being recorded, it was found that the child
initiated speech to the mother twice as
often as she initiated speech to him.
This finding has caused all of us to think
again about whether we teach language to
a child or whether we set up a situation
which allows the child to teach himself,
and if we do, to ask what sort of situation
this should be.
Once the to and fro of real dialogue has
been established, it provides the frame for
the child to try out new speech interaction
patterns. Here is a sample from an actual
dialogue in which a three-year-old child is
showing active forward planning, which is
revealed when the adult does not say the
"lines" he has mentally written for her.
- (Child) Shall I read this?
(Mother) Yes please.
(Child) O.K. (pretending to read) There
are no monkeys.
(Mother) Aren't there?
(Child) No. Say why aren't there.
(Mother) Why aren't there?
(Child) Because there is only Jane and
Peter.
The question "Aren't there" asks only
for a "Yes" or "No" answer whereas a
question containing the word why asks for
a detailed reply, which in this instance the
child had already prepared and intended to
deliver. This is just one of many examples
from our tape recordings of a child, not
merely initiating speech but also structu¬
ring the form of the dialogue, a dialogue in
which the child is the leader and the adult
thejollower.
What are the implications of this for chil¬
dren who are going through the critical
early years in situations which are less than
¡deal? What kind of language enrichment
programme should we have for the deaf,
the socially and culturally disadvantaged,
the mentally handicapped child? We have
to recognize the great value and producti¬
vity oí those desultory and, to the adult
mind, apparently aimless exchanges which
go on between an apprentice speaker, a
child, and a skilled practitioner, an adult.
Furthermore, we should recognize that
such exchanges will not take place until the
child is sufficiently emotionally secure to
disengage from the practical world of real
life, to play and experiment with language
in his own way and at his own pace.
Are there situations in which the burden
of providing for the family is so overwhel¬
ming that the providers become sources of
anxiety for the child, to be avoided rather
than sought out for little chats? In those
cultures where the child becomes an eco¬
nomic unit of his family before he has mas¬
tered the language learning process, he will
no doubt precociously acquire the scaffol¬
ding of language, but will there be time and
interest his own and that of his
parents to draw out the richness of lan¬
guage that he possesses? The child needs a
listenera listener with plenty of time: one
who appreciates that language itself ¡s a
great adventure for the human spirit and
not just a tool to make children more con¬
forming, more hard-working or even less
talkative.
In this, the International Year of the
Child, we should be facing the fact that
each child is unique and be asking oursel¬
ves how we can compensate for the handi¬
caps from which many children suffer. For
example, many children living in high-rise
flats or overcrowded slums spend a great
deal of their day playing in groups with
other children on their balconies or in their
yards. When their home background offers
a low level of language stimulation, their
needs are surely for more frequent contact
with a responsive adult, an experience
which a child from a more privileged social
background might have in abundance
whilst missing out on the experience of
playing with children of his own age.
For the deaf child we have to examine
our current programmes to ensure that
they are bombarding the child from the ear¬
liest moment with symbolsspoken or
manualwhich he can experiment with
and manipulate. However we must not
make the error of assuming that language
is something "out there" to be poured into
a child so that it finishes up inside him.
Rather the task is to give the child sufficient
appropriate stimulation to trigger off his
own latent language-forming skills.
And for the mentally handicapped child
might not the task for our educators be to
appreciate that a child's utterance, no mat¬
ter how poorly expressed, is his own crea¬
tion, his own unique assembly, to be foste¬
red and cherished rather than to be correct¬
ed in accordance with adult standards?
And for the blind child who is not lacking in
linguistic competence, how can we ensure
that the words he uses are not mere empty
concepts, pseudo-words which lack the
sighted child's richness of meaning?
Such are the questions we should pose
in this International Year of the Child if we
are to ensure that all our children have the
best opportunities to develop fully.
Anno McKenna
