SS»*
al
©I
r
SECONDS
For over two decades the conclusion of a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty has been
impeded by the difficulty of reaching agreement on effective methods of ensuring
compliance with such a ban. Verification would involve a variety of methods of
monitoring including satellite surveillance, on-site inspections and seismic detection and
identification of underground nuclear explosions. Above, seismograms obtained at the
Hagfors obervatory, Sweden, from, top, an underground explosion and, bottom, a
shallow earthquake. Although in this case the seismograms show clear differences
between the explosion and the earthquake, for complex technical reasons the distinction
is not always so clear-cut. Nevertheless, many experts now believe that, following
technical improvements in seismographic instruments over recent years, it would be
possible to establish an effective monitoring system consisting of a global network of
seismological stations, access to photographic satellite data and an international data
collection and evaluation centre. The United Nations is at present undertaking an
experimental exercise aimed at testing and evaluating various elements of such a
proposed global monitoring system.



Can the arms
race be halted?
WARFARE has been a permanent
feature of the period since the
Second World War. Weapons
have been in use on a significant scale vir¬
tually without interruption, more often
than not in several places simultaneously.
Casualties have been accumulating and
since the Second World War have totalled
many millions. To an overwhelming degree
these conflicts have taken place outside the
major industrialized regions of the world,
although in many instances some major
Powers have been directly involved and,
virtually without exception, the means of
warfare have been provided by these
Powers.
These, plus the ever-present possibility
of a nuclear conflagration, have been the
strictly military consequences of the arms
race.
But there are other important interna¬
tional consequences. First, there are the
economic effects. By diverting vastl
resources away from production and)
31

CAN THE ARMS RACE BE HALTED?
, growth, and by contributing to inflation
and the economic crisis which have af¬
fected many countries, the arms race
directly and indirectly impedes the full
development of international exchanges.
In addition, the flow of trade and aid is
distorted, in some cases very markedly, by
interference from political and strategic
considerations,resulting in the misalloca-
tion of resources on a global scale. The
arms race thereby contributes to maintain¬
ing and widening the gap between and
within developed and developing countries
and impedes co-operation between States,
socio-economic progress generally and the
promotion of a new international economic
order.
Second, there is the impact of the arms
race on international political conditions.
In an environment characterized by high
military preparedness on all sides, conflicts,
even minor ones, tend to be exacerbated
and security considerations become salient
in the policies of countries.
This is an environment conducive to the
creation of spheres of influence, in which
local conflicts tend to become linked to
regional or global confrontations and in
which social and political developments are
likely to be resisted if they seem to call ex¬
isting alignments into question. The fric¬
tions arising from this rigidity at a time
when the relative economic, political and
military weight of countries is changing
more rapidly than ever are themselves
possible sources of conflict.
Finally, there is the destructive effect of
the arms race on the social fabric. The
fears engendered by having to live with
stockpiles of nuclear weapons sufficient to
destroy humanity altogether, kept in a state
of constant readiness and subject to
human or technical fault, have contributed
to disaffection and disillusion, particularly
among the young. There can be no doubt
that the continuing arms race and the
growth of violence in the world adds to the
disaffection of many people, to their sense
of futility and powerlessness, and turns
them away from socially constructive ends.
Thus the arms race not only entails
military conflict, heavy economic sacrifices
and political division at the international
level, it also threatens and perverts
democratic processes, and weakens those
processes of social evolution which provide
the only real hope for the future of
mankind.
There has been no lack of attempts to
deal with the dangers of the arms race,
even though successes have been relatively
modest so far. In the 1960s and continuing
into the 1970s, these efforts were
characterized by two main features; one
was the priority given to partial measures
aimed at preventing the arms race from
moving into certain new directions and the
other was the emphasis on détente, the
assumption being that relieving suspicion
and fear would not only diminish the risk of
war, but would also remove one of the
main factors fuelling the arms race.
The past decade and a half has produced
a considerable number of agreements on
arms limitation, including:
the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons
Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space
and Under Water;
the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and
Use of Outer Space, including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies;
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons;
the Treaty on the Prohibition of the
Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and
other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the
Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor and in the
Subsoil Thereof;
the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling
of Bacteriological (biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction;
the Convention on the Prohibition of
Military or any Other Hostile Use of En¬
vironmental Modification Techniques;
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America;
the Soviet-American agreements on the
limitation of strategic arms (SALT);
the Treaty between the United States of
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on the Limitation of
Underground Nuclear Weapons Tests.
It has also produced agreements bet¬
ween the United States and the USSR and
between France and the USSR on the
prevention of nuclear war. Although these
treaties and conventions have contributed
to some extent to a new climate of
understanding, they have not proved equal
to the task of slowing down the arms race
or of significantly affecting the actual basis
of armaments.
Partial and collateral measures can play a
role in the cessation and subsequent rever¬
sal of the arms race, but it is becoming in¬
creasingly clear that they must be conceiv¬
ed as part of a broader programme, inscrib¬
ed in a whole set of measures aimed at
substantial disarmament in areas of
weaponry of central military significance.
If the partial measures are specially
designed just as measures to regulate an
ongoing competition in armaments, the
danger exists that they simply shift this
competition in other directions.
In the mid-1960s and the early 1970s, the
partial measures achieved contributed to a
climate of optimism, served to establish
useful channels of communication, and
demonstrated that agreements were possi¬
ble, within limits at least. These measures
thus undoubtedly contributed to pro¬
moting détente.
It is obvious that détente has had an im¬
portant effect in relaxing the international
climate, thereby diminishing the risk that
conflicts on the periphery of the arms race
or lesser conflicts involving the major
Powers will escalate into nuclear war. By
relieving the cold-war atmosphere between
and within the main military alliances and
helping to relax the rigid bipolarity of
former years, détente has also helped to
promote exchanges of all kinds. Indeed,
such exchanges are not only a result of
détente, they are part of the process of
détente itself, and continued relaxations of
set patterns of relations between the main
alliances, within them and within countries
individually, as recognized in the Helsinki
Declaration on Security and Co-operation
in Europe, are both aspects of, and pre¬
conditions for continuing détente.
By building international relations on a
sounder basis, détente has improved the
conditions for beneficial intercourse bet¬
ween States, for the development of
economic ties, and for increased scientific,
technological and cultural exchanges.
These are major, even . decisive
achievements, of the last decade or so,
which must be vigorously pursued and
strengthened.
While the overriding importance of
détente deserves constant emphasis, so do
the failures of this period. The fact that
political détente has not been accompanied
by corresponding measures of disarma¬
ment and military disengagement is its cen¬
tral weakness and a major cause of con¬
cern. Détente is being continuously assail¬
ed and undermined by the momentum of
technological developments in armaments.
It is essential that détente should not be
merely a process involving the main pro¬
tagonists, a process limited geographically
to certain areas and limited in substance by
an immense rivalry in the military field. For
a continuous build-up in armaments is
clearly incompatible with serious attempts
to eliminate the threat of war and to
strengthen beyond a very limited point the
confidence among States which must be
the foundation of genuine détente. If the
arms race is not reversed détente remains
without a real basis, always in danger of
sliding back into tension, suspicion, isola¬
tion and confrontation.
After more than a decade of attempts to
curb the arms race it can be seen that these
efforts have been inadequate. In every im¬
portant respect the arms race is continuing
apace, while much talent and energy has
been spent on what are now seen to be
issues of more marginal importance.
On several occasions it has been seen
how the public, when adequately inform¬
ed, can exercise a moderating influence on
developments in the field of armaments,
and fostering a genuine and widespread
public concern about the dangers of the
arms race may be one of the most impor¬
tant ways of giving a new momentum to ef¬
forts towards disarmament. This need for
an active and well-informed public opinion
capable of opposing all incitement to war
and of channelling its concern in construc¬
tive directions is of vital importance, for
where questions of armament and disarma¬
ment are concerned the very survival of
humanity is at stake.
32
