*
.*s K
Photo © Ken Heyman, New York
The population question is one which
concerns the whole world, but the
nature of the problem varies widely
from country to country and from
continent to continent. Different
aspects of the problem call for
different solutions. Today, synthetic
steroids derived from extracts from
plants make it possible to increase or
inhibit human fertility and thus to
influence birth rates in either
direction. These steroids are
obtainable cheaply and in abundance
from sapogenins, substances
originating from plants of the
Dioscorea family.



Mexican plants
and human fertility
by Pierre Crabbé
PIERRE CRABBE, of Belgium, is chairman of
the Department of Chemistry of the University
of Missouri, Columbia, U.S.A. The author of a
number of scientific books and papers, he has
served as a consultant to Unesco's new pro¬
gramme on the chemistry of natural products.
Alittle under forty years ago, chemists
discovered in plants from the
Mexican jungle a raw material
which created a revolution in the phar¬
maceutical industry. These plants, which
belong to the Dioscorea family, contain
products whose chemical structure is
closely related to that of certain organic
chemical compounds known as steroids.
Steroids are a group of naturally occur¬
ring substances and their derivatives that
are of great importance in biology, i
medicine and chemistry. They occur I
33

naturally in the human body and include
the main categories of sex hormones (an¬
drogens, cestrogens and progestogens)
which control the human reproductive
system, and adrenocortical hormones.
These adrenocortical hormones or cor-
ticoids keep the individual alive from day to
day by regulating his metabolism, that is,
the chemical process in living cells by
which raw material is assimilated and
energy is released to the body. For in¬
stance, corticoids regulate mineral
metabolism by keeping sodium, potassium
and water in adequate balance. Corticoids
also promote the metabolism of car¬
bohydrates, fatsand proteins. Additional¬
ly, the corticoids somehow help to protect
the individual from the effects of stress and
shock.
Synthetic steroids prepared from ex¬
tracts from a wide range of vegetable
sources are today used in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis, allergies, inflam¬
matory diseases, sterility and various heart
conditions, and form the basis of modern
oral contraceptives.
But when, during the 1930s, the proper¬
ties and nature of steroid hormones were
becoming better known; the sources of
steroids were rare. They were obtained ex¬
clusively from animal sources such as the
adrenal glands of livestock.
It was at this point that the American
chemist Russell Marker appeared on the
scene. In 1935 Marker embarked on
research into steroids at Pennsylvania
State college. He became actively engaged
in the search for a cheap and abundant
source of steroids and concentrated his at¬
tention on certain substances of botanical
origin called sapogenins. By 1940 he had
developed an efficient process for the con¬
version of various sapogenins, including
diosgenin, into progesterone.
Interested in exploring sapogenins of
new types and hoping to discover a prac¬
tical source of diosgenin. Marker launched
a series of extensive botanical collection
trips in the south of the United States and
in Mexico. He worked in collaboration with
seventeen American and Mexican
botanists. Over four hundred species in the
amount of forty thousand kilograms of
plants were collected. About half of the
plant species yielded interesting
substances and a total of twelve new
sapogenins were discovered.
In the early 1940s, Marker transferred his
activities to Mexico. He found an abundant
source of diosgenin in a species of
Dioscorea, known in Mexico under the
name of cabeza de negro (Dioscorea
macrostachya), a vine growing wild in the
jungles of the States of Veracruz and
Chiapas.
On subsequent trips. Marker collected
different specimens of Dioscorea, mainly in
the state of Veracruz. During one of his ex¬
peditions, near Tierra Blanca, he found
Dioscorea composita, called barbasco by
the natives, and which contains nearly five
times as much diosgenin as cabeza de
negro. However, for many years barbasco
could not be exploited commercially, since
there was no road allowing an easy access
to this part of the Mexican jungle. Accor
ding to a saying in Mexico, local Indians
utilized these roots for fishing, as their
saponins are poisonous to fish.
With the help of Mexican collaborators.
Marker produced additional quantities of
progesterone, enough to have a sizable im¬
pact on the world market. This was the
birth of the steroid hormone industry using
plant products as starting materials.'
After developing methods for producing
progesterone from diosgenin, attention
was focused on more difficult undertak¬
ings, such as the production of
testosterone. Barbasco, found to be a bet¬
ter botanical source, richer in diosgenin
than the cabeza de negro, became the
favourite plant for extraction. Since that
time, related Dioscorea species have also
been found in Central and South America,
as well as in China, India and South Africa.
Today although more than eighty million
women are using oral contraceptives,
those in current use are still fairly costly and
women have to be educated in their use.
What is now urgently needed is a cheaper
contraceptive pill with a long-term effect.
Research is continuing and the World
Health Organization (WHO) is conducting a
research programme at ten centres
throughout the world where more than two
hundred new steroid compounds with
potential long-term contraceptive proper¬
ties are being synthesized.
Recently, scientists from the People's
Republic of China have reported significant
anti-fertility effects associated with two
substances, anordrin and dinordrin,
prepared with steroids derived from the
sisal plants Agave sisalana and Agave
americana. These agents, whose anti-
fertility properties have been confirmed by
Chemicals
from crops
In Latin America experiments
are being made in the
cultivation (photo right) of
plants of the Dioscorea
family. These plants yield a
substance called diosgenin, a
form of sapogenin, which
can be converted into the
steroid hormone
progesterone. Progesterone
is used to inhibit ovulation,
and therefore conception, in
women. Diosgenin is
obtainable in large quantities
from the roots of the
barbasco (Dioscorea
composita), a plant (lower
photo) found in the forests of
the State of Veracruz,
Mexico.
*tà
.
v.«3$
Further research carried out in the early
1950s by Carl Djerassi in Mexico (he is now
professor of chemistry at Stanford Univer¬
sity) and an Australian chemist, Arthur
Birch, at Oxford set the stage for Gregory
Pincus to propose an important practical
application for some of these new steroids,
to develop what has come to be known as
"the Pill" and to begin the initial clinical
tests. But the value of these developments
was not limited to the inhibition of the
reproductive process. Pincus concluded
one of his reports as follows : "If we are on
the brink of finding numerous methods for
the inhibition or disruption of various
stages in reproductive processes, it means
that we are also armed with means for the
repair of natural defects. Fertility and sterili¬
ty are two sides of the same coin."
scientists in Sweden and the United
States, constitute a new family of con¬
traceptives with the great advantage of
having to be taken orally only once or twice
instead of the twenty times per month
necessary with the ordinary pill.
Another recent publication from scien¬
tists from the People's Republic of China
has reported that gossypol is being tested
as an orally administered male contracep¬
tive. Gossypol, which is isolated from cot¬
tonseed oil and is not a steroid, begins to
take effect about four to five weeks after
daily oral doses are administered. Gossypol
is a leading candidate for a male contracep¬
tive and could very well be the first
molecule of another interesting chapter of
scientific discoveries.
Pierre Crabbé
34
