Meiji Japan:
a case study
in industrialization
During the reign of
the Emperor
Mutsuhito (1867-1912),
who adopted as his
title Meiji
("enlightened rule"),
Japan embarked on a
far-reaching
programme of
Western-style
industrialization. A
major feature of the
plan was the
development of a
modern transport
system. This
engraving, dating
from around 1875, is
an advertisement for
the Tokyo-Yokohama
railway. Destinations,
timetable and first,
second and third-
class fares are shown
in top left corner.
by Keichi Oshima
and Keichi Furuya
KEICHI OSHIMA, professor of
reactor chemistry and applied
radiation chemistry at the
University of Tokyo's depart¬
ment of engineering, is a
specialist in the problems of
technology transfer and
technological policy. He was
from 1974 to 1976 director for
science, technology and industry
with the OECD (Organization for
Economic Co-operation and
Development).
KEICHI FURUYA is a professor
at the Science University of
Tokyo specializing in inorganic
analytical chemistry. His other
major interests include
technological history, especially
the history of the Japanese
chemical industry, and the prob¬
lems of technology and develop¬
ment.
Photo Louis Frédéric © Rapho, Parrs
THE year 1867, when the emperor
Mutsuhito acceded to the throne,
was a turning point in Japanese
history. Mutsuhito took the name Meiji,
which means "enlightened rule", and in the
little over a century that has elapsed since
the beginning of the Meiji era Japan has
been transformed from an isolated feudal
State into one of the great industrial powers
of the world.
What special factors lay behind this
achievement and what conclusions, if any.
can the countries of the Third. World draw
from this first successful experience of the
introduction of European-style industrializa¬
tion into a totally different economic, social
and cultural environment ?
First of all, the industrialization of Japan
has to be seen within the broader context of
political, social and economic development
and reform. The beginning of the Meiji era
saw the initiation of a political revolution
aimed at changing the whole structure of
political power as well as a strong cultural
and social reform which opened up the
country to the influence of the outside
world, in particular of Europe and the United
States.
Before that period, Japan had been vir¬
tually isolated from the outside world for
three hundred years. The visit, in 1853, of
Commodore Perry of the United States with
his four battleships, to demand the
establishment of diplomatic relations and
the opening up of the country, had been a\
tremendous shock to Japan. The Japanese!
31

This Japanese engraving of the
Meiji period shows, not without
irony, some of the conflicts that
could arise between modern,
foreign ways and products, and
those of traditional Japan: umbrella
(called a "bat" in the engraving and
perhaps also in popular parlance)
versus parasol. Western garments
versus the Japanese haori.
Inscriptions on lamps and lanterns
make similar allusions to Japanese
and Western food and systems of
transport. "Westernization" (or
opening up) and "Tradition" (in the
sense of resistance to change) are
words emblazoned on the banner
attached to the telegraph pole
brandished by the man with the
head of an ox.
were deeply impressed by the strength of
' these black ships, made of iron, driven by
steam, capable of crossing the Pacific
Ocean and, above all, equipped with over¬
whelmingly powerful guns. This was power
to which the old feudal régime had no
answer.
As the country was opened up to outside
influences the Japanese became aware of
the huge gap between the might of the
Western countries and their own lack of
modern technology and industry. There was
general anxiety throughout the country that
Japan could be taken over by strong
overseas powers.
A famous businessman and educator of
that time, Yukichi Fukuzawa, described this
feeling when he declared: "A country which
aims at the advancement of its civilization
has to decide the basic principles of its ac¬
tion by looking at European civilization as its
goal. And all the advantages and disadvan¬
tages have to be judged by this yardstick".
The surprise and shock which they ex¬
perienced at the start of Meiji provided
powerful motivation for the Japanese to
adapt and accept Western technology as
essential for building up a new civilization.
The important thing to be stressed,
however, is that not only among leading
politicians and businessmen but also among
the general public, there existed a strong
consensus on a national objective: Japan
had to introduce and adapt Western civiliza¬
tion, especially science and technology, in
order to become a civilized, by which was
meant a strong, country. The general public
understood the situation and this was due to
a very important factor the high educa¬
tional standard at that time in Japan. In
1868, the percentage of school attendance
was already the highest in the world,
reaching 43 per cent for men and 10 per cent
for women.
But great admiration for and attraction to
Western civilization was counter-balanced
by deep anxiety about the political
dominance of the West. This led the
Government to adopt a very careful attitude
in introducing Western civilization. There
was eagerness to introduce Western
knowledge and talent but also prudence in
adapting them to Japanese needs so as to
establish a truly indigenous self-reliant
capability.
The Government endeavoured to control
foreign capital investment even at a time
when there was a scarcity of capital in the
domestic market. The employment of
foreigners was also restricted mainly to
technical training and education and all
foreign workers had to be registered.
On the other hand, foreigners were paid
very high salaries, even though they were
not allowed to take part in general manage¬
ment. It is reported that thirty-five foreigners
employed by the Government were offered
higher salaries than ministers. More than 10
per cent of the Government's total budget
was at one time spent on foreign employees'
salaries.
There was thus very keen willingness to
introduce Western technology by welcom¬
ing the best foreign talents. But, on the
other hand, there was a strong effort to
adapt this technology to the Japanese
autonomous system as quickly as possible
so as to achieve self-reliance. One fact to be
noted is that almost all the Japanese
students who studied abroad came back to
Japan and there was practically no brain
drain. They engaged not only in education
or became Government employees but
also entered business and created new
enterprises.
With the amendment of the unequal trade
agreement early in this century, co¬
operation with foreign capital began.
However, even at that time the purpose of
joint ventures was more to acquire
technology rather than capital itself. The ex¬
ecutive manager of a large Japanese enter¬
prise stated: "It is not difficult to raise
capital in Japan. However, what I consider
to. be important is technology rather than
capital". Even after World War II this at¬
titude persisted in Japanese business
circles.
Another essential factor was the en¬
trepreneurial skill which created the driving
force for industrialization in the Meiji era.
Japanese entrepreneurs linked their private
activities with the national objectives of
developing the national economy and
military power. These entrepreneurs had
much in common with the innovators who
played such an important role in the in¬
dustrial revolution in the United Kingdom.
They were hard workers, with tough
physical and intellectual personalities, broad
interests and flexible ideas and a strong
belief in technology, and they made full use
of the talents of young people. They also
had something in common in their approach
to new enterprises: a strong competitive
spirit against imported goods, a desire to
serve the national interest by import
substitution and a very strong spirit of
emulation with fellow businessmen.
The close government-industry relation¬
ship, especially the dynamic policy of the
Government in support of the businessman
was another major factor. The slogan of the
Government was industrialization and at the
beginning of the Meiji era several measures
were taken, such as development of a
modern transportation system, formulation
of a direct export policy, the promotion of
trading companies, the establishment of in¬
dustry with modern production facilities,
and the holding of exhibitions and meetings
in various parts of the country at which
university professors were on hand to offer
technological guidance. In most cases the
foreign engineers employed by the Govern¬
ment were assigned to model factories and
Government factories to give technological
training and assistance.
While Government factories were mainly
in basic heavy industry closely related to
military purposes, such as iron and steel and
explosives, the private sector was mainly in¬
volved in light industry, manufacturing such
items as matches, toothbrushes, shoes,
glassware, umbrellas, soap, and buttons.
Such industries already existed to some ex¬
tent before the Meiji period and by introduc¬
ing new technologies they developed suc¬
cessfully and became the economic base
which supported capital intensive industries
in the later development of Japanese in¬
dustrial growth. They represent a typical
case of industrial application of what is to¬
day termed appropriate technology, being
labour intensive and closely combining
modern with traditional technology.
There are many examples of traditional
enterprises combining with imported
technology to produce some unique
32

Japan's first Girls' Normal School
was inaugurated in Tokyo on 29
November 1875. Marking the
importance of the event, as part of
Japan's modernization plan, the
Empress herself attended the
opening ceremony. In this
engraving, based on a painting by
the artist Gengetsu Yazawa, she is
seen about to enter the school.
Powerful electronic microscope designed
and developed by a Japanese company in
collaboration with the University of Osaka
In little over a century Japan has
been transformed from an isolated
feudal State to a leading world
industrial and commercial power.
The post-1867 social reforms and
the adaptation of Western science
opened up an era which still holds
untold prospects for young
Japanese today. Here, babysitting
father in the waiting room of a
modern Tokyo department store.
Photo © Rudolf Dietrich. 4th World Photo Exhibition, Stern, Hamburg, Fed. Rep. of Germany
Japanese products. In the very early stages
of the introduction of foreign technology
these enterprises tried to seek areas of the
domestic market not catered for by foreign
products. For example, the celluloid in¬
dustry produced artificial coral for Japanese
women's hair-pins and the rayon textile in¬
dustry produced decorative braid for
Japanese haori coats. Thus the domestic
market in traditional areas was used effec
tively to start the rudimentary stage of the
industry, leading to independence and com¬
petitiveness in the later stages. Throughout
this development, the Government offered
effective technical, financial and institutional
assistance to the industry.
Thus the successful industrialization of
Japan from the Meiji era onwards was based
on a wide consensus on national goals.
careful adaptation of technology leading to
self-reliance, entrepreneurial skill, and close
relations between government and industry.
Any relevance the Japanese experience may
have for developing countries today will,
however, be a matter of judgement for each
individual country based on its own specific
political and social situation.
33
