The urgent need to boost food production in the face of rising
demographic pressure is throwing into relief, perhaps more than
any other issue, the interdependence of the world community
and the necessity for international partnership. But today, as
countries tackle the problem through the adoption of appropriate
modern technology, figures show the persistent inequalities of
this partnership, in a world of haves and have-nots. Between 1961
and 1975, in the developing countries, consumption of fertilizer
tripled and the number of tractors per unit of land doubled, yet
the industrialized countries still consume five times as much
fertilizer per hectare of cultivated land and have ten times as
many tractors per thousand hectares of arable land. Furthermore,
the developing countries are still dependent on imports for more
than fifty per cent of the fertilizer they use.


Bitter harvest
Half the world's population
concerned in the drama
of agrarian reform
This article is based on extracts from a report of the United Nations Food and Agricul¬
ture Organization entitled Review and Analysis of Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development in the Developing Countries since the mid 1960s. This report was
drawn up as a preparatory reference document for the World Conference on Agrarian
Reform and Rural Development, held in Rome from 12 to 20 July 1979.
NEARLY half of all people on Earth live in the villages and
countryside of the developing world. Most are classed in
international statistics as "poor" and no less than
800 million as "destitute". Despite development efforts, the
number of these poor and destitute increases each year. Today
there is new cause for concern. The momentum of development is
slowing. Rates of growth in production and per capita incomes
have fallen, especially in the poorest countries, and several coun¬
tries are also facing acute environmental problems. If the goal of
development is growth with equity nationally and interna¬
tionally it can be seen clearly that the struggle is not being
won, and that the main burden of present trends falls on the rural
poor.
Developing countries have been engaged in an historic effort to
23

, build their national economies and escape the conditions of under¬
development and dependency which in many cases they inherited.
Largely owing to the apparent success of external models, they
have given the highest priorities to industrialization and other
urban-orientated concerns. It is now commonly understood that
within these development priorities the rural sector of national
economies has often been neglected.
The rural areas of the developing world continue to be marked
by a dualism between those who have been able to benefit from
new technological opportunities and the much larger number who
have not. On the one hand, this has led to a small and dynamic
modern sectorwith land, better education and greater access to
public serviceswhich has advanced very rapidly. On the other,
the great majority of rural people, lacking these advantages,
vegetate in traditional patterns of poverty. This appears to be true
in all regions. Landlessness is increasing very rapidly, leading to
uncontrolled migration to cities and the emergence of a rural
proletariat.
Issues of trade are of paramount importance. During the seven¬
ties the terms of trade of most developing countries which are not
exporters of petroleum have appreciably worsened. Continuing
tariff and non-tariff barriers against processed commodities of
developing countries, and consequently lack of access to markets,
have impeded the growth of agro-industries. Meanwhile the
burden of servicing debts has mounted, and official foreign
assistance remains far below target levels set by the donor coun¬
tries themselves.
Foreign private investment, while it has generally supported
host-country export goals, has been almost exclusively directed to
monoculture techniques, often highly mechanized, which tie rural
development to foreign capital, technology and markets without
regard for domestic food supply or levels of employment. In most
cases, dependence on this type of agriculture, whether foreign
owned or linked to foreign marketing networks, has added to the
problems of landlessness and reduced the possibility of
distributing resources more equitably.
The rural population of the less developed regions, which was
estimated at 2,060 million in 1975, is expected to rise to 2,890
million by the end of the century despite urban migration. A rise in
the agricultural labour force of more than 100 million is foreseen
with a subsequent decline in the land/man ratio in all regions. In
many areas it would fall to a level of less than one hectare per
member of the agricultural labour force. This would mean not only
a huge growth in the number of uneconomic, subsistence level
smallholdings, but also a dramatic increase in the number of peo¬
ple who are landless or who cannot be absorbed in agriculture.
Aside from the human problem of how these future millions will
live and work, projections of food needs also point to a dangerous
rise in dependency which is directly contrary to the goals of
developing countries. Current production and demand trends in¬
dicate that the cereal deficit of the developing world, which stood
at 16 million tons in 1970, will rise to over 90 million tons by 1985.
Degradation and depletion of natural resources in rural areas is
another significant factor. The ecological equilibrium appears to be
less stable in the tropics than in the temperate zone. The drive for
increased production has often caused the dislocation of well-
adapted, traditional agricultural systems and their sometimes
overhasty replacement by systems and technologies that are com¬
patible with neither ecological nor socio-economic conditions.
In the tropics, the removal of forest cover, especially on slopes,
has frequently led to serious soil erosion, downstream flooding
and siltation of rivers. In drier regions, similar results have followed
from an increase of livestock numbers and consequent overgrazing
which has stripped the soil of its vegetative cover. Deserts have
spread rapidly and with human consequences which became
sharply apparent with the tragic drought in the Sahelian zone of
Africa in the early seventies. Peasants who are deprived of access
to fertile soil, which is monopolized by large landowners or by
In many developing countries rural underdevelopment and
poverty have led to uncontrolled migration to the cities. The
extent of this poverty is devastating. In 1972, the International
Labour Organization estimated that 1,250 million people, more
than a quarter of the population of the world, were very poor.
24

that 700 million of these were destitute, and that 42 per cent of
the population in the developing countries of Asia, 39 per cent in
Africa and 27 per cent in Latin America were living in absolute
poverty; of these, the overwhelming majority lived in rural areas.
Photo B. Wolff, United Nations
foreign companies, have no other resource but the cultivation of
marginal zones, contributing to erosion, deforestation and soil
exhaustion.
Much precious water is wasted through inefficient irrigation
systems, and it is estimated that almost half the existing irrigation
facilities in developing countries require improvement. Saliniza-
tion, alkalinization and waterlogging, all associated with poor
drainage, have reduced the productivity of millions of hectares of
irrigated land and large areas have had to be abandoned.
Disturbingly, in the most seriously affected countries, which are
mainly in Asia and Africa, the annual rate of growth of agricultural
production fell from 2.5 per cent in 1961-1970 to 1.9 per cent in
1970-1977. Meanwhile their population increased at a faster rate so
that per capita agricultural production has been lower in the seven¬
ties than in the sixties.
Among the main agricultural commodities, the most rapid in¬
creases in production have been for products that are mostly for
export, rather than for food crops grown principally by small
farmers. Examples of the former include soybeans (especially in
Argentina and Brazil), palm oil in Malaysia and tea in Kenya. The
production of staple foods, like rice, maize, millet and sorghum,
starchy roots and especially pulses, has risen only slowly. Notable
exceptions, however, are wheat production in India (which in¬
creased by 3.8 per cent a year from 1970 to 1977) and rice produc¬
tion in Pakistan (3.9 per cent a year).
Major programmes of development in the Far East since the mid-
sixties have concentrated upon new technology to increase crop
yields, known as the "Green Revolution" or the "Seed Fertilizer
Revolution", and involving the use of new high-yielding varieties.
But for many reasons the Green Revolution has brought only
limited benefit to the mass of small farmers, tenants and landless
labourers. For example, it is not at present applicable to many of
the crops like starchy roots and pulses which are important
sources of food for the poorer groups. The small farmers are usual¬
ly unable to increase their irrigation facilities to take full advantage
of the potential of new technology.
The Green Revolution can, in fact, increase the gap between the
rich and the poor. Even in parts of Africa, where land tenure
customs had afforded some protection against such
developments, changes in this customary tenure system in favour
of individual interests in land led to fundamental changes in the
traditional economic homogeneity and enabled privileged in¬
dividuals to accumulate wealth and influence.
Gross inequality of the distribution of rights to land remains a
fundamental problem in most developing countries. These trends
are most marked in the poorest countries of the world: Between
1960 and 1970, in Bangladesh, the proportion of farmers holding
less than one hectare increased from 52 to 66 per cent; and in India
from 40 to 51 per cent. In Latin America, the growth in the number
of small holdings and the consequent increase in poverty resulted
in migration from rural areas to urban slums. In Iraq, farmers with
less than 5 hectares formed 51 per cent of the total. In the African
countries of Ghana, Liberia and Malawi, farmers with less than one
hectare accounted for 38 per cent, 52 per cent and 39 per cent
respectively.
In most Latin American countries, where the bulk of land is held
within large estates, attempts to help the rural poor through tenan¬
cy legislation has had little impact. Imposing size limits on large
estates has proved to be more effective and several countries have
adopted this policy, some with considerable direct participation by
peasant organizations.
Despite the achievements of agrarian reform in some countries,
as late as 1973, 85 million people, constituting 70 per cent of the
farm population in Latin America, lived at the subsistence level.
The big landowners, 2 per cent of the farming population, earned
an average per capita income of US $ 2,560. In 1973 they controll¬
ed a total of 47 per cent of the agricultural land, while the mass of
the poor held only 2.5 per cent. I
25

y Most countries of the Near East have very special
characteristics, in particular aridity, customary laws conducive to
fragmentation, and nomadism, all of which influence the course of
distributive reform:
The reform movement for more equitable distribution of land
started with land reform programmes enacted in Egypt in 1952,
Iraq and Syria in 1958, and Iran in 1962, to expropriate the very
large estates, break the economic and political power of the large
landowners and improve the control of the poorer classes over
land.
In several countries redistribution of land rights was followed by
the adoption of group production arrangements, such as farm cor¬
porations in Iran, crop consolidation and co-operatives in Egypt,
agricultural co-operatives on land owned or controlled by the
Government in Sudan, and production co-operatives and State
farms in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen.
In the majority of countries in the region attempts were made to
improve the conditions in the rural areas through large-scale irriga¬
tion schemes, with varying results. Egypt, using the waters of the
High Dam, reclaimed 380,000 hectares by the end of 1976, of
which about 100,000 hectares were distributed to landless families
in planned settlement schemes at an average cost of US $ 7,000
per family.
Afghanistan, the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, Jor¬
dan, Libya and Egypt (among other countries) have developed set¬
tlement schemes for nomads. The People's Democratic Republic
of Yemen has recently implemented an integrated development
project raising the living standards of Bedouins, of which the main
objectives are to drill boreholes, to improve pasture, animal
breeding and veterinary services, and to initiate and develop social,
economic and administrative organization.
Algeria's experience merits special attention. Initially, foreign-
owned estates were consolidated and organized into self-
contained units (unités d'autogestion) averaging nearly 1,000 hec¬
tares. The programme involved basic modifications in the cropping
pattern in an attempt to limit the effects of foreign markets (e.g.
wine) on production.
Absentee land ownership was virtually abolished, ceilings were
placed on the size of landholdings, surplus land was distributed in
leaseholds, and beneficiaries were required to become members of
multi-purpose co-operatives.
Recently, a number of countries have promoted programmes to
restructure their rural areas, particularly Madagascar and Ethiopia.
The latter, with a high degree of concentration of landownership
and widespread share tenancy, had no significant reform until
1975, when new measures set low ceilings on landholdings. Pea¬
sant associations, which excluded landowners occupying more
than two hectares, played an important part in the redistribution of
expropriated land. Former serf tenures were abolished and many
landless people gained rights to land and water.
In many African countries, although there has been a shift in
programmes toward food crops since 1965, commodity develop¬
ment programmes continue to concentrate on export crops (e.g.
cotton in Mali, groundnuts in Senegal and Gambia, tobacco and
cotton in Tanzania and tea in Kenya). Some of these programmes
have ha'd notable successes and have benefited large numbers of
smallholders and helped to increase productivity.
A brief review of the development programmes in African coun¬
tries suggests that concentration of limited resources and trained
personnel on export crops does not always lead to an equitable
distribution of available resources which will also ensure adequate
food supplies for the poor.
However, studies of several African countries show that small
farmers have indeed proved to be an effective means of diffusing
innovations and economic development in countries where there is
a favourable environment and the right incentives.
In Asia there have been some striking successes. Where there
were strong peasant organizations and determined governments
(as in Kerala, India), many small tenants received ownership rights.
Some legislation of the early seventies (e.g. Philippines) eliminated
share tenancy, converting the sharecroppers into leaseholders,
and subsequently declaring all leaseholders to be outright owners.
The Philippines carried out experiments with new production ar¬
rangements designed to bring agrarian reform beneficiaries
together gradually for co-operative cultivation in which five to ten
neighbouring farms were merged into one production unit, and
provided with assistance in planning and finance by State
agencies.
The experience of the Republic of Korea may be useful to other
countries in Asia. This country has one of the world's lowest
land/man ratios and the average size of holdings after land reform
was only 0.9 hectare. Before reform the land was concentrated in a
few hands and mostly rented out in small units. The land reform of
1953 gave ownership to the former tenants and established a ceil¬
ing of 3 hectares per holding. Thus the rural community today is
composed of small peasant owners. Rice yield increased from 3.3
tons per hectare in 1952-1956 to 4.6 tons per hectare in 1970. There
was no increase in absolute poverty and gains from growth were
adequately spread.
In the People's Republic of China, all the available land is collec¬
tively owned by the commune; so rent has disappeared as a source
of income, inequality and power. The complex problem of landless
labour and uneconomic holdings faced by other countries after
redistribution of rights in land do not arise.
As land and other means of production are collectively owned,
the basic unit of cultivation is the work or production team of 25 to
30 families, whose area of operation varies from one commune to
another, but in most cases does not exceed 25 to 30 hec¬
tares enough to provide for economies of scale in the
Chinese context, and yet not so large as to alienate the peasant
from participatory processes.
The commune devotes 14 to 24 per cent of the gross revenue of
its agricultural production to capital investments within
agriculture, forestry, fisheries and agro-processing, and a social
fund supports welfare and culture activities. Labour is
remunerated on the basis of individual work points. The fact that
every member of a commune has a stake in returns from on-farm
and off-farm works is an incentive for construction works for such
purposes and has facilitated mobilization of collective labour for ir¬
rigation and land improvement. Farm land improvement construc¬
tion projects completed by the communes and brigades over the
years have greatly helped the struggle against drought, waterlogg¬
ing and other natural disasters.
Before the Cuban revolution more than half of all land was held
by large local and foreign landowners, and a significant proportion
was under, foreign sugarcane plantations. There were wide varia¬
tions jn value of the expropriated properties, but the greatest prob¬
lem was whether or not to redistribute them to the landless
workers. The Government, after a brief experiment with co¬
operatives, chose to run the large estates as State farms and by
1965 some 70 per cent of the agricultural land was on State farms
with the workers receiving fixed wages. Within the private sector
the small farmers have organized themselves into a national
association and have also formed service co-operatives. They still
own the land individually, but irrigation works, agricultural
machinery, storage arid drying sheds are owned collectively, sup¬
ported by credit obtained as a group.
Everywhere, the redistribution of private holdings has been the
most difficult reform to implement, calling for hard political deci¬
sions and popular support. In many cases, redistribution of private
lands has required constitutional amendments, legislation inspired
by social justice to close legal loopholes, and effective administra¬
tion and novel financial and technical measures to implement the
reform laws. In most developing countries, constitutional barriers
not in line with the current aspirations of the people remain and
26

Left, aerial view shows
geometric patterns produced
by date-palm cultivation
along the shores of the
Euphrates in southern Iraq.
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
will have to be removed before any large-scale reforms can be car¬
ried out.
Even where there were no constitutional obstacles, a serious
problem in implementing land reforms since the mid-1960s has
been ambiguity in the intent and language of the legislation.
In Latin America, for example, the main grounds for expropria¬
tion of large estates were inefficient production and failure to fulfil
the so-called "social function" of property. The latter concept was
never clearly defined in the legislation, nor were criteria for assess¬
ment established. In practice, large estates were regarded as fulfill¬
ing their social function if they were reasonably productive and
free of labour unrest. Thus laws passed during the sixties to set
ceilings on holdings often provided incentives for introducing new
technology which increased production and also reduced the resi¬
dent labour force on large estates in order to qualify for legal ex¬
emption from expropriation. Landowners continued to exercise
considerable political influence, and laws based on the notion of
social function offered ample leeway for legal manoeuvring. As a
result, very little land was affected and that which was ex
propriated was of marginal quality and required heavy public
investment.
In a number of cases attempts to redistribute land and water
rights have been impeded by lack of funds to pay for expropriated
land and to cover the costs of administration. Whereas some
governments have overcome the financial difficulties by con¬
fiscating land and other assets, others have devised systems of
compensation by State bonds or the repayment of costs by the
recipients of expropriated land.
The agrarian systems of the world reflect an immense variety of
considerations land availability and quality, water resources and
constraints of climate, population size and distribution, oppor¬
tunities for non-farm employment, stages of development in other
sectors, political and social value systems, customs and tradition,
and many more. Certainly no single model for agrarian structure is
applicable.
Despite these diversities, however, there are also a number of
points in common. Despite the variety of given agricultural condi¬
tions such as climate and soil, it would appear that most problems
are subject to amelioration or solution by social decisions and
actions.
27
