The royal tombs of Macedón
A surprising archaeological find that may be
the tomb of Philip, father of Alexander the Great
by Manolis Andronicos
VERGINA, a small village located twelve kilometres south¬
east of Veroia, Macedonia, (northern Greece), is the site
of one of the most spectacular archaeological discoveries
in recent years.
Close by lies another larger village, Palatitsia, whose name, "the
small palaces", derives from the Hellenistic ruins located in the
vicinity. These remains were first spotted in 1855 by the French ar¬
chaeologist Léon Heuzey. He began excavations at the site which
were continued in 1938 by K.A. Rhomaios of the University of
Thessaldniki and completed between 1958 and 1975 by G.
Bakalakis of the University of Jhessaloniki and the author. Two
Macedonian tombs were discovered in this area and it seemed like¬
ly that similar burials might also be located nearby.
My long personal acquaintance with Vergina. began in 1937
when I took part in excavations carried out by my teacher
Rhomaios with whom I worked until 1940. In 1949 I entered the
Greek Archaeological Service and by good fortune I was given a
position in Veroia which included responsibility for Vergina.
I first explored the Megali Toumba, or Great Tumulus, whose
height dominated an extensive cemetery of other smaller tumuli, or
mounds. My initial attempt proved fruitless, yet I was convinced
that the Megali Toumba, which has a diameter of approximately
110 metres and an elevation of 12.5 metres, was indeed con¬
structed in Hellenistic times and covered a large Macedonian
tomb.
In the following years, I investigated the surrounding tumulus
cemetery which dated mostly from the Early Iron Age (1000-700
BC) although it was used until the end of the Hellenistic Period.
The excavated tombs belonged to its first period (1000-700 BC)
and they were rich in pottery, bronze, jewelry and iron weapons.
After this excavation I tried again in 1962 and 1963 to resolve the
secret of the Great Tumulus. After reaching a depth of 1 1 .5 metres
without coming across any finds, I became convinced that the ac¬
tual tomb was to be found below the fill of the tumulus in virgin
soil. Several fragmented grave stelae, including a painted one of
fine workmanship, were discovered ¡n the fill. The latest of these
stelae dated from the beginning of the third century BC.
Only in 1976, after an interruption to excavate the palace with
my colleague George Bakalakis, did I return to resume my efforts. I
knew that it would take more than one season to reach the depth
of 12.5 metres and begin the actual search for the tomb.
I was lucky, however, from another point of view; the 1976 finds
and the destruction observed in the cemetery lent support to the
identification of Vergina with the ancient city of Aegae, the
reputed burial place of the Macedonian kings, proposed by the
British scholar Nicholas Hammond of Bristol University. The re¬
mains unearthed in the filling of the Great Tumulus could be
associated with the looting of the royal tombs the Galatian
mercenaries left at Aegae in 274/3 BC as garrisons by Pyrrhus, the
king of Epirus, who invaded Macedonia, defeated Antigonus
Gonatas, the king of Macedón, and captured many towns.
If this hypothesis was correct, a logical conclusion would be that
the Great Tumulus was built by Antigonus Gonatas (320-239 BC),
who regained Aegae the next year, in order to cover the looted
tombs and protect his own royal tomb from similar vandalism in
the future.
With high hopes I began excavating in 30 August 1977 with my
assistants Stella Drougou and Chrysoula Paliadeli. After working
thirty-five days and removing 18,000 cubic metres of earth, we
reached the natural ground level in the centre of the tumulus. Five
trial trenches were dug 2.5 to 3 metres deeper so that we reached a
total depth of fifteen metres from the top of the tumulus.
The result was a great disappointment: there was no sign of
construction or human activity. But during the final days of the
1977 season, while preparing an access ramp for work to be carried
out in 1978, I noticed an older, smaller tumulus hidden under the
south-east perimeter of the Great Tumulus. Digging into this bar¬
row we came upon an odd piece of wall which was coated with
lime on the top and on one of its sides.
A few days later another piece of masonry appeared near a i
massive well-constructed wall. The next day, between these two |
CONTINUED PAGE 25
MANOLIS ANDRONICOS, professor of classical archaeology at the
University of Thessaloniki, is the author of many studies on Greek
archaeology and history. Among his works translated into English are: The
Acropolis, Delphi and Olympia, all three published by Caratzas Bros., New
Rochelle, U.S.A., 1975. He also contributed to Greek Museums, Barrie
and Jenkins, London 1976.
18

A mere two centimetres in height, these astonishingly powerful ivory
miniatures, above, may well be the most authentic known portraits of
Philip of Macedón (right) and his queen Olympias, the father and
mother of Alexander the Great. Along with the portrait reproduced on
our cover, they were discovered lying in the dust of ages on the floor of
the main chamber (No. 3 in drawing page 20) of a Macedonian tomb
uncovered by Professor Manolis Andronicos at Vergina, northern
Greece, in November 1977. Their presence, coupled with that of certain
other intriguing objects, lends weight to the Professor's hypothesis that
the tomb is that of King Philip II of Macedón (382-336 BC). The
sculptor perhaps the great Leochares himself has captured the king's
imperious mien, made even more sinister by his injured eye. The
resemblance between the portrait of the woman, above left, and the
features of Alexander the Great (see page 27) are strikingthe same
mouth, the same way of carrying the head, the same piercing look.
Surely this is Olympias, Alexander's mother, later cast aside by Philip.
Left, bearded Silenus, the constant companion of Dionysius the god
of wine, adorns a silver pitcher found in the main chamber of the
tomb. Far left, a silver vase from the same tomb bears the face of
Heracles from whom, legend has it, Alexander was descended.
According to the Greek author Plutarch, thirty-eight generations
separated Heracles from Alexander.
19

Revealed to the light of day after 2,000
years of interment, this vast fresco (5.5
by 1.2 metres) spanned the full width
of the facade of the great tomb at
Vergina (No. 2 in drawing). An
unsurpassed example of 4th-century
BC art, the painting depicts a hunt for
lion and wild boar. Hunters on
horseback and on foot pursue their
prey across a winter landscape, the
season being indicated by a number of
leafless trees.
Photo © Spyros Tsavdaroglou, Athens
Left, this cutaway drawing of the great
tomb gives a clear idea of the layout of
the first unplundered royal Macedonian
tomb ever found. It indicates the exact
positions of some of Professor
Andronicos' major finds in what was,
perhaps, the last resting-place of Philip
of Macedón, father of Alexander the
Great: (1) the main entrance to the
tomb; (2) the hunting-scene fresco; (3)
the main chamber; (4) the first
sarcophagus and gold casket holding
bones that may have been those of
Philip of Macedón (photo page 21);
(5) shield cover and various bronze
vases; (6) connecting door; (7) opening
to antechamber made by the
archaeologists; (8) antechamber;
(9) second sarcophagus and smaller
funerary casket; (10) golden quiver and
a pair of greaves, or leg-shields, of
unequal length (photo page 21).
Colour page
The rich treasure trove of objects
discovered in what Professor Manolis
Andronicos believes to be the tomb of
Philip of Macedón provides a number
of indications that support his theory.
Bottom photo, this magnificent gold
quiver, with a decoration in relief
depicting the sack of Troy, found in
the antechamber (No. 10 in drawing)
beside the connecting door to the main
chamber, must surely have belonged
to a king. Beside it lay a pair of gilded
bronze greaves, or leg-shields. The left
one is 3.5 centimetres shorter than the
righta significant detail when it is
recalled that PhiliD was lame. Top
photo, found inside the marble
sarcophagus in the main chamber (No.
4 in drawing),' this solid gold larnax, or
funerary casket, weighing nearly 11
kilograms, contained burned bones
that may have been those of Philip
himself. The cover is embossed with
the Macedonian sunburst emblem.
Photos © Spyros Tsavdaroglu, Athens


walls, we uncovered the roof of a rectangular tomb which had
been opened in the past and had seemingly been plundered. We
had found three structures next to one another. Two of them were
underground, the third had been built on the surface.
The structure on the surface had been totally destroyed and only
its foundations were preserved. Yet a number of marble pieces had
been carefully placed next to the foundations; they b»longed to
the superstructure of the building and displayed extremely fine
workmanship. The Galatian destruction of 274/3 BC no longer
seemed an abstract speculation but was confirmed by our
findings.
The interior of the "small" tomb measured 3.5 by 2.09 by 3
metres. It had obviously been violently plundered and little remain¬
ed of its contents. The contents had no doubt been valuable, pro¬
bably consisting of gold, silver and bronze jewelry and utensils.
It was obvious that the tomb must have been unusually lux¬
urious because the upper parts of three of the walls were
decorated with frescoes of excellent quality. On the long north wall
there was. a magnificent painting of "The Abduction of
Persephone by Pluto". This is the first fourth-century BC fresco to
be found in Greece. The confidence and the ease of the painter's
hand, the inspiration of the design and the subtleties of the colour
scale, the power of the expression and the mastery of perspective
indicate that this is the work of a great master.
I consider that this fresco may well have been painted by
Nicomachos, the well-known Greek painter of the mid-fourth cen¬
tury BC, who had portrayed this rare theme and was famous not
only for the perfection of his work but also for the rapidity with
which he executed it. The frescoes on the other two walls depict
female figures, excellently delineated but less elaborately coloured.
When we began clearing the neighbouring wall we came upon a
pile of sherds, ashes and burnt bones of small animals. The sherds
belonged to pots which had been made around 340-330 BC, cer¬
tainly before 320 BC. The masonry of the wall led to a similar con¬
clusion, and this was particularly interesting. As we dug, the
peculiar façade of the tomb began to appear; it was topped by a
cornice with splendidly painted palmettes.
Underneath we expected to see triglyphs and metopes of the
Doric style; instead we encountered a flat surface which seemed
painted. The figure of a standing youth with a spear soon ap¬
peared; close by were a roebuck and a horseman. The entire pain¬
ting, 5.5 metres long and 1.2 metres high, was a unique composi¬
tion from a period of Greek painting whose beauty had only been
guessed at from later Roman copies and imitations, like those in
Pompeii, Herculaneum and Boscoreale.
The main subject was a boar and a lion hunt (no. 2 in drawing
page 20). Three horsemen and seven men on foot, with spears,
dogs and beasts, make their way across a winter landscape which
is indicated by two leafless trees. The rendering of the figures, the
unexpected perspective, the mastery of composition and the quali¬
ty and alternations of the colour reveal the hand of a great painter.
I think that this fresco could be the work of the painter who made
the original depiction of the battle of Issos, on which the famous
mosaic in Naples is based. This unique work by "The Painter of
Vergina" gives us the first opportunity to appreciate the
achievements of Greek painting in one of its highest periods; and it
constituted the first major discovery of the excavation.
Further excavations revealed the entablature of the building, the
metopes and the triglyphs as well as the epistyle and the capitals of
the columns and antacapitals. They were all well preserved with
their original colours intact. Naturally our attention turned to the
middle of the façade where one would expect to find the door.
Realizing that it was impossible to complete the cleaning of the
entrance during this season, we decided to remove the earth from
the top part of the door so that we could see inside and eventually
enter the tomb. This plan was based on the assumption that the
tomb had been plundered and that as a result the door was broken
and had fallen into the tomb. When we reached the lintel,
however, we experienced a great and very pleasant surprise: the
door was intact, a good indication that the tomb had not been
looted (no. 1 in drawing page 20). I had never expected such luck.
Here at Vergina was one of the largest Macedonian tombs, the
oldest to my knowledge, with a unique painting on its front, and it
had not been plundered it was the only intact Macedonian tomb
yet discovered! From that moment, the excitement on the excava- w
.tion grew even more intense. t
25

The exquisite beauty of
Greek 4th-century wall-
painting had only been
guessed at, from
descriptions in ancient
Greek literature and from
Roman copies such as
those found at Pompeii,
before the discovery of the
Vergina tombs. Left,
detail from the dramatic
fresco depicting Pluto
abducting Persephone that
embellished the northern
inside wall of the plundered
small tomb.
Photo © Spyros Tsavdaroglou, Athens
The problem was now how to enter the tomb. It would be ¡m-
possible to open the door; this could be done only from the inside
and after the entrance to the floor had been cleared. Behind the
façade we had so far uncovered only a small portion of the roof.
We knew that the tomb was vaulted, like all known Macedonian
tombs, and so there was only one way to enter: by uncovering the
vault and removing the keystone, as the ancient grave robbers had
done.
When the earth, which at that point was six metres deep, was
removed, another unexpected situation arose. In the rear part of
the roof there was a mudbrick structure which had collapsed under
the weight of the earth fill. In this rubble we found two iron
swords, the point of a sarissa (a long pike used by Macedonian
soldiers) and many fragments of iron harnesses, all of which show¬
ed signs of burning. They had probably been placed in the funerary
pyre and then on top of the tomb, bringing to mind the famous
Homeric scene of Patroklos' burial where Achilles burned four
horses along with his dead friend.
On 8 November 1977 we finally removed the keystone of the
vault. With the help of a flashlight I looked through the opening in¬
to the chamber, 4.46 metres square. Across the room was a mar¬
ble door leading into the antechamber (nos. 6 and 8 in drawing
page 20). The coating of the walls, where one might have ex¬
pected painted decoration, was very poor, as if it had been hurried¬
ly applied. Yet in the chamber there were two groups of objects;
bronze vessels and weapons in one corner, silver vessels in the
other. On the floor there was a pile of decomposed materials in¬
terspersed with sheets of gold. Directly below the opening I could
discern a rectangular marble slab which covered a marble sar¬
cophagus (no. 4 in drawing page 20). The spectacle was
fascinating. We were supplied with a ladder and descended into
the chamber which was at a depth of 5.3 metres.
It is impossible to mention everything that was found. The
group of bronze vessels and weapons included two tripods, three
large vessels and some small ones, as well as many iron points of
spears and javelins and two greaves, or leg armour. A remarkable
find in one of the vessels was a sponge which was still soft and
elastic. The group of silver objects included many silver vessels of
high quality. Both their shape and decoration displayed excellent
craftsmanship and unique sensitivity. Nearly all had handles en¬
ding in small heads representing such figures as Herakles, Silenus
and Pan. These small heads constitute a real treasure for the study
of the Greek art of working metal in relief.
There were some other unique pieces. The bronze group was
dominated by a large round object resembling a shield (no. 5 in
drawing page 20). When we moved it, however, we realized that it
could not have been a shield because it had neither a handle nor
any other fitting characteristic of a shield. Neither could it have
been a vessel such as a cauldron. Behind the object lay a pile of
gold and silver bands, a round ivory plaque and the fragments of
two small ivory statuettes.
Careful examination convinced me that all these pieces belong¬
ed to a shield, which originally had a wood and leather frame with
ivory and gold decorations, and handles "adorned with beautiful
relief figures in gilded silver. Such a precious shield was un¬
doubtedly not used in battle and was probably ceremonial. It
would have needed protection; and the bronze object could thus
be its cover.
Next to the shield we found the iron helmet of the deceased,
with the crest typical of the Macedonian helmet and a figure of
Athena in relief on the front. This is the first Macedonian helmet
ever discovered. Some distance away we found a cuirass made of
26

iron sheets covered with leather and cloth. It was adorned with
three golden bands, six gold lions' heads and a rectangular gold
plaque with the figure of Athena in relief; on a fringe at the bottom
were more than fifty gold strips. A sword lay between the cuirass
and the helmet. Its sheath, made of wood with semicircular ivory
end-trimmings, was bound with a series of golden bands and was
decorated with gold palmettes.
The outstanding craftsmanship displayed by this wonderfully
decorated armour testified that the deceased could not have been
a commoner. Moreover, there was another unique find; a ring-
shaped gold and silver object with its ends inserted into a small
cylinder. It was decorated all over with lozenges and, on the small
end-piece, there was a relief design depicting the knot of a ribbon
and the ends of a band. In all probability this is a diadem, or head¬
band. It is similar to those seen in the portraits of such Hellenistic
rulers as Attalos III of Pergamon, Antiochos III of Syria and An¬
tigonus Gonatas of Macedón. Even Alexander the Great was
depicted with such a diadem, for example, in the portraits at
Rossie Priory in England and in the Boston Museum of Fine Arts.
This interpretation then leads us to the inevitable conclusion that
a king had been buried in the tomb. All our finds dated from bet¬
ween 350 BC and 325 BC. From 359 to 336 BC, however, there
was only one king in Macedón, Philip II, remembered not only as
the father of Alexander the Great but also for consolidating the
Macedonian kingdom and establishing its hegemony over Greece
in 338 BC. Alexander, who succeeded Philip in 336 BC and reigned
until 323 BC, died and was buried outside Macedón. Thus, we are
forced to the startling conclusion that if the deceased had been a
king, he was Philip!
Photo © Courtesy Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
If. the standard burial practices had been followed, the cremated
bones of the deceased ought to have been contained in an urn
placed in the marble sarcophagus. We expected to find a richly
decorated amphora, perhaps gilded. When we removed the cover
of the sarcophagus, however, we made an unprecedented find; a
gold larnax, or casket. Not counting the feet on which it stood, it
measured approximately forty centimetres in length, 33.5 cen¬
timetres in width, and 17 centimetres in height. With the bones it
contained, it weighed 10.8 kilograms. It was decorated with
palmettes, rosettes, vines and, on the cover, with a star.
Inside were the cremated bones, in a remarkable state of
cleanliness and, on top of them, a gold wreath with acorns and oak
leaves. Some of the bones and the bottom of the larnax were col¬
oured with a bluish-purple tint. Specialists later confirmed that this
came from the purple cloth with which the bones had once been
wrapped, reminiscent of Homer's descriptions of the funerals of
Patroklos, Hector and Achilles, the great heroes of the Trojan War.
We thought that this find must surely be the climax of a
remarkable excavation. Yet even more surprises were in store,
unexpected finds which further supported the tomb's association
with Philip. On the floor in front of the marble sarcophagus we
found remains of what may have been a wooden bed or piece of
furniture decorated with gold and ivory figurines. The ivory heads,
hands and legs lying on the floor, were left where they were, to be
removed later by specialists.
One day, however, as I was studying the interior of the tomb, I
decided to pick up one of the pieces. To my great surprise, I
discovered that it was an excellent portrait of Philip, showing him
as a mature man, somewhat tired, his injured eye subtly depicted,
yet clearly reflecting his strong personality.
I lifted a second head, and this time I could scarcely believe my
eyes. I looked again carefully. Surely I could not be mistaken! It
was the best portrait I had ever seen of Alexander the Great, depic¬
ting him with his neck stretched and turned, his vivid eyes looking
upward, his gaze intense, precisely as he is described by Plutarch
CONTINUED PAGE 30
Face of a conqueror
"Mine is the earth; thou, O Zeus, content
thyself with Olympus." The arrogant
boldness these words imply emerges
clearly from the portraits of Alexander
that have come down to us, such as this
bronze statue, left, in the style of the 4th-
century-BC Greek.sculptor Lysippus. Now
in the Louvre Museum, Paris, it originally
depicted Alexander holding a lance.
Although, according to Plutarch,
Alexander ordained that only Lysippus
should portray him, several more or less
idealized portraits of the great conqueror
by other artists exist. Far left, preserved in
.the Acropolis Museum, Athens, this head
of Alexander with its leonine shock of
hair, sensual mouth and intelligent intense
expression is the work of another great
Greek sculptor, Leochares. Centre left,
with head inclined and eyes turned
heavenwards, this statue from the
Hellenistic period, now in the Museum of
Fine Arts, Boston, reproduces the
characteristics traditionally ascribed to
Alexander in literature. Just visible is part
of the royal diadem often seen in portraits
of sovereigns of the Hellenistic period and
strikingly similar to the diadem, above
left, found in the main chamber of the
great tomb at Vergina. Wrought in gold
and silver, it bears a diamond-shaped
pattern completed by a knotted ribbon
motif in relief. Yet none of these portraits
conveys the same sense of stark realism
that exudes from the portrait, thought to
be of Alexander, discovered at Vergina
and reproduced on our cover.
27

M
m
Photo © Roger Viollet, Paris. Hellenic Institute of Byzantine Studies, Venice
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
The Alexander legend
The fame of Alexander spread throughout both the eastern and the
western world, reaching incredible proportions after his death. As well
as being the incarnation of the supreme victor, the conqueror of Greece
and of Asia became a quasi-mythical hero, endowed with all the virtues
and capable of all kinds of miraculous exploits. Illustrations and
legendary accounts of his feats abounded. A life of Alexander written in
the second century AD by a Greek author, the so-called "pseudo-
Callisthenes", was translated into Latin during the fourth century ;
during the eleventh and twelfth centuries it was taken up again by a
number of French poets, some of whom, to honour Alexander, wrote in
a verse form with lines containing six iambic feet which became known
as Alexandrines. He is also immortalized as one of the four kings in a
pack of cards. Many and varied were his legendary exploits. Photos : (1)
Space-traveller. Under the astonished gaze of his soldiers, Alexander
explores the heavens in a special cage borne up by two "hideous and
grotesque" griffins. (2) Explorer of the ocean depths. In this miniature
from a 14th-century French romance, La Vraie Ystoire dou bon Roi
Alexandre (The True History of the Good King Alexander), the intrepid
hero descends in a glass barrel to the strange world of the ocean bed,
with its curious whales, fish and mermen. The conqueror of the world
was the pupil of Aristotle and was viewed also as the conqueror of the
world of knowledge. (3) The model son. Pictured here in a medieval
Byzantine manuscript, Alexander leads his mother Olympias into the
presence of his father king Philip II of Macedón in the hopes of
effecting a reconciliation between the estranged couple. This must be
considered one of his rare failures ; indeed, historians are generally
agreed that Olympias later engineered Philip's assassination. (4)
Prophet. An illustration from a 15th century French manuscript shows
Alexander telling the tree of the sun and the tree of the moon of his
forthcoming death.
Bibliothèque Royale Albert I, Brussels
28

Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
Death of a hero. This fine 10th-century Persian miniature, from Ferdousi's famous Shah-Nama
(Book of Kings) evokes the tragic character of Jhe "Great Iskandar's" death. His body rests
on an elaborate bier, in the customary style of the Emperors of China. In the foreground, the
mourners wring their hands in grief. Olympias, in the centre, half lies across his bier, the
epitome of maternal distress, while from behind the bier the great Aristotle looks for the last
time at his former pupil.
29

The ancient Indian province of
Gandhara marked the most
easterly point reached by
Alexander's conquering armies.
During the 2nd century BC,
Gandhara came under the
domination of Indo-Greek rulers
and the distinctive Greco-
Buddhist art style that
developed there was a unique
amalgam of Hellenistic, Roman,
Syrian and Persian influences.
This Apollo-like head of Buddha
is a detail from the Boddhisattva
of Shabhaz-garhi, now in the
Guimet Museum, Paris.
i (see front cover). Nearby, a third portrait resembled that of Alex¬
ander, but it was that of a woman. I decided later that it
represented Olympias, Alexander's mother.
Further away were two more portraits, one of a male and the
other of a female, both with vigorous features which, however, I
could not identify. I remembered how, after the Battle of
Chaeronea in 338 BC, which had established Macedon's
hegemony over all Greece, Philip had commissioned statues of his
family from the great sculptor Leochares. The statues, to be
dedicated at Olympia, represented Philip, his parents, Alexander,
who had fought alongside Philip at Chaeronea, and Olympias.
It is very probable that at the same time the king commissioned
various pieces of furniture decorated with figures of his family. If
this were so, these small portraits may have been executed by
Leochares himself or in his workshop. Their exceptional quality in¬
dicates that they were made by a great master. There can be little
doubt that these are the best and most authoritative portraits not
only of Philip but of Alexander as well. The archaeological
evidence discovered so far therefore leads to the hypothesis that
the tomb belonged to King Philip. I emphasize the fact that this is
not a conclusion, but a hypothesis, which must be further confirm¬
ed by epigraphical evidence.
The tomb, like all large Macedonian tombs, consisted of a
chamber and an antechamber, divided by a two-leafed marble
door. Opening this sealed portal would not be an easy task. In¬
stead of forcing the heavy door, therefore, a block was removed
from the partition wall to enable us to enter the antechamber (no. 7
in drawing page 20). We had hoped that the walls or the vault of
the antechamber would be decorated with frescoes but we did not
expect to find more objects. Once again we were taken by sur¬
prise.
First of all, the wall plaster was of high quality, white on the
lower and Pompeian red on the upper part, but there were no
frescoes. The presence of a second marble sarcophagus, slightly
larger and more elongated than that in the main chamber, was
totally unexpected. On its cover, a pile of decomposed organic
matter looked as if it might have been the remains of flowers or
ears of wheat. Microscopic examination proved, however, that
this material actually consisted of feathers of large birds. Such
feathers were also found on the floor mixed with a large quantity of
other organic matter, presumably the remains of clothing and
wooden furniture.
High up on the walls were nails from which fabrics had probably
been hung. Fine gold sheets, broken glass and ivory scattered over
a large area of the floor indicated that the furniture had been gilded
and elaborately decorated. A gold wreath of myrtle leaves and
flowers lay on the floor next to the sarcophagus.
Many alabastra were found in the space between the door jambs .
and the marble door. Yet the most impressive discovery was a gold
quiver or gorytus, similar to those found in the royal tombs of the
Scythians in Southern Russia (see Unesco Courier, December
1976).
30

It was decorated in relief with scenes that probably depict the
sack of Troy. Behind this gold plaque We found arrows; part of
their wooden shafts had been preserved in fairly good condition. A
fourth pair of greaves lay beside the quiver (no. 10 in drawing page
20). In this case the greaves were gilded. The left one was 3.5 cen¬
timetres shorter than the right, a fact which reminded us that Philip
was lame.
The final surprise came from the sarcophagus in the
antechamber. When we removed the heavy cover, we found
another golden larnax, sightly smaller and with simpler decoration
than that of the main chamber, yet with the same characteristic
star on its lid (no. 9 in drawing page 20). The cremated bones in¬
side the casket had been wrapped in a purple cloth interwoven
with gold thread; its border was decorated with a wave pattern, its
centre with vine leaves, flowers and branches. Beside the bones, a
very elegant diadem of golden flowers and twigs had been placed,
or rather pushed. In all probability this diadem had belonged to a
woman.
The quantity of finds, their opulence and, most of all, their quali¬
ty supported the view that we were in a royal tomb. Since the en¬
tire chamber belonged to Philip II, who could have been buried in
the antechamber? It might be supposed, for instance, that the
deceased was a woman, as the elegant diadem and myrtle wreath
suggest, and therefore that she might be Philip's last wife,
Cleopatra, who was either executed or forced to commit suicide.
This interpretation, however, raises problems, the most important
of which is the absence of female jewelry in the antechamber. We
would prefer to wait until more research has been done before put¬
ting forward any conclusions.
Such were the results of excavations carried out in 1977.
When we continued our excavations in the summer of 1978 we
made another important find. On 5 August we found the façade of
another Macedonian tomb, a small distance to the north of the
Great Tomb, which we opened on the 22nd of the same month.
The new tomb (tomb III) is smaller but architecturally similar to
the great one. It consists of a chamber and an antechamber, and
on its façade is a similar frieze. However, the mural painting on the
façade, unlike that of the Great Tomb, has been totally destroyed
because it was executed on some kind of organic material,
possibly a wooden panel, and not on the stucco of the wall.
Inside the chamber one of the two leaves of the inner marble
door was found lying broken on the ground. Instead of a sar¬
cophagus there was a "table" with a cavity in its upper part, into
which had been put a silver hydria, or pitcher, containing the burn¬
ed bones of the dead. On its shoulder was a golden wreath of
leaves and acorns. Almost the entire floor was covered with the re¬
mains of organic substances similar to those which had already
been discovered (a wooden bed, pieces of leather, ivories etc.). In
one corner there were many silver vases of high quality; in another,
two big vessels of silvered bronze. Near them was a tall silvered
iron lamp-stand. The clay lamp had fallen on the ground. At the
other side there was a pair of greaves, two wreaths of gilded
bronze and some other objects. A few pieces of the ivory decora¬
tion of the wooden bed could still be seen.
On the floor of the antechamber we found the remains of a
leather garment adorned with gold. At the other side of the
antechamber among other organic remains were strigils, in¬
struments used for scraping the skin after exercise or at the bath,
and the lower part of a gilded spear. Finally, the walls of the
antechamber are covered with a continuous narrow frieze depic¬
ting a chariot race. Although the painting cannot be compared
with those of the two other tombs, since its character is only
decorative, it is nevertheless of very good quality and quite well
preserved.
From the fragments of the ivory relief decoration of the bed,
technicians have so far restored an exquisite group scene depicting
Pan and a dionysiac couple, possibly Dionysos and Ariadne or
some other couple in a "thiasos", or procession of worshippers.
The occupant of the tomb must have been very young, but I am
certain that he also belonged to the royal family. My first impres¬
sion is that the new tomb is earlier than the great one, but I cannot
be fully certain until I have studied the objects fully.
After this new discovery, I think that it is possible that we are in
the area of the royal necropolis and that it is highly probable that a
new tomb will be found as the excavation continues. Certainly
there is an increasing awareness of the importance of the
discovery. The objects that have been found so far offer extremely
precious material for the study of the art of the 4th century BC,
especially for the study of the painting of this period which has
hitherto been almost unknown.
Manolis Andronicos
./
;L
Krxmr: > ;>> a
fwC./.
û " . <
. * < 	 « - *	 j_-
Darius III Codommanus, king of the
Persians from 335 to 330 BC, died at
Hecatompylos (present-day Damghan
some 200 kilometres east of Teheran),
stabbed to death by Bessus, the satrap
of Bactria. Alexander, in hot pursuit of
the Persian king, arrived on the scene
shortly afterwards and ordered that he
should be buried at Persepolis with full
royal honours, married his daughter
Stateira and proclaimed himself Darius'
successor. In this exquisite Persian
miniature from the 15th-century Shah-
Mama (Book of Kings), Alexander is
seen supporting the dead king's body.
31
