I * ' t i '
' !!.'** Jíi^VwWr*---
-
- -
.1
J . .
i -".-1
* 1
j-r._i
i3 -i
" l . - -
i # * -
ífj m
31
3| ;
*-i ?.i J
Photo Dick Hanley Parimage. Paris
Above, the scintillating skyline of
Manhattan by night. In July 1977 the lights
went out in Manhattan and the rest of New
York when a day-long power station failure
cut off electricity supplies, bringing the
city's activities to a halt and causing losses
totalling $5 billion. The breakdown
illustrated the vulnerability of a certain kind
of economic development characterized by
a high degree of concentration and
technological specialization. The
components of such concentrated systems
are so mutually dependent that when one
of them fails the whole systerri is
paralyzed. Attempts to solve the problem
by further injections of technology are not
fully satisfactory because in a sense the
very rarity of technical breakdowns means
that people are less fitted to cope with
their consequences when they occur. This
undesirable by-product of technological
progress is leading to dissatisfaction with
technology in some quarters. At the same
time, attention is increasingly being
focussed on the reliability-potential of
smaller-scale, more autonomous
undertakings.

Diminishing
returns
A provocative
view of
the limitations
of modern
technology
by Orio Giarini
IF we look back over the history of the last
ten centuries or so, it becomes apparent
that economic growth is a phenomenon
as old as mankind. The Stone Age, the
Bronze Age, the Iron Age, the Space and
Electronic Age, each describes a stage of
development in human civilization. The divi¬
sion between one stage and the next is often
marked by a technological advance, but
technological progress is inseparable from
the men who conceived it, who used and
spread it. Systems of production and
distribution are determined by the society in
which they evolve; society is the prime fac¬
tor in production, indeed, it is our way of
putting our signature on economic facts.
Man's history is essentially the history of his
production, in every field of activity. Ob¬
vious though this may seem, it tends to be
forgotten, particularly since Keynesian
economic theory laid emphasis on the "de¬
mand" factor and preached that economic
development depended essentially upon
stimulation of consumption.
Nevertheless, both in its magnitude and in
its causes, the phenomenon of economic
growth such as the western world has ex¬
perienced since the end of the Second
World War is unprecedented in the whole
history of mankind.
If, in 1945, an economist had dared to
predict that national income in the in¬
dustrialized countries would increase as it
has, he would certainly have been thought a
madman. All previous economic history
would have tended to suggest to a man of
good sense that such a prediction was im¬
possible of fulfilment.
And yet, during the following twenty
years, economic and political life became
organized around the new reality of a high
growth rate. In the debate over the growth
rate (should we be content with 6 per cent a
year, or should we attempt to catch up with
Japan's rate which in some years nudges 20
per cent?) we have begun to think of this in¬
creasing growth as an eternal truth. It has
become part of our way of life, a constant in
our economic and political analyses. We
have even been told that if the growth rate is
only 2 or 3 per cent, then we are in a state of
crisis, quite forgetting that the average
growth rate during the first Industrial
Revolution is believed never to have been
higher than that. Born of real economic and
social factors, increased growth has since
entered the psychology of the industrial
world as an article of faith, an unavoidable
reality. Accelerated growth has become, im¬
plicitly, an ideology, especially since it has
come to be regarded as the principal, if not
the only means of achieving a social consen¬
sus. Little by little, the means has become
the end, a categorical imperative.
The driving force behind this growth has
been the widespread use of a technology
which, for the first time in history, was
based on the development of scientific
knowledge bequeathed to us by the 19th
century. The Industrial Revolution was bas¬
ed on new methods of production, coupled
with an increase in the population due itself
to the development of technology in health,
hygiene and agriculture. But it was the
unheralded marriage between technology
and scientific knowledge which was the key
to the new growth. Knowledge of the nature
of a polymer forms the basis of the produc¬
tion of man-made textile fibres and of
plastics. At the time of the first Industrial
Revolution, when the steam engine was in¬
vented, the properties of water were not
precisely known. But we owe nuclear
energy to a profound knowledge of the
structure of the atom. The engineer has
become the secular arm of the scientist.
How can we predict the practical con¬
sequence of this marriage which took place
almost before anyone, even the married
couple themselves, was aware of what was
happening?
Economists, accustomed to scrutinizing
the relationship between investment figures
and alterations in the population structure
and in demand, were unable to assess the
economic significance of the discovery of
the structure of the ethylene molecule and
of polymerization at the time these
discoveries were made.
The reality of economic growth, this
growth which began at the start of the cen¬
tury but which really took off between 1965
and 1973, has been such that it cannot be
explained by the analytical methods at our
disposal. From this state of affairs to an im¬
plicitly ideological explanation was a short
step, easily taken.
Towards the end of the 1960s, more at¬
tention began to be paid to the correlation
between investment in research and
economic growth. It was a dizzying mo¬
ment. The technological gaps between
Europe and the United States, between the
developing countries and "the others" were
discovered. The fact that, as a general rule,
investment in basic research only shows
results after about ten years was forgotten.
Even in applied technology it always takes a
fair number of years before appreciable
economic results are obtained. To say that
research would produce results more and
more rapidly (and who has not seen graphs
purporting to prove this?) was to confuse
the time needed to become aware of the
uses of a technology already in existence
with the time necessary for the development
of a new technology. The time needed for
the former has shortened, but the time
needed for the latter has, more often than
not, tended to become longer. Physicists to¬
day confirm that no discovery of fundamen¬
tal research is likely to be usefully applied in
under twenty years. Hence the difficulty of
conceiving and putting on paper a feasible
and effective "policy for science and
technology".
Furthermore, in the case of those famous
twins R and D (Research and Development),
the correlation between investment and
economic growth was considered irrever¬
sible and directly proportional.
It is curious to note that, at the very mo¬
ment that the gospel of growth through in¬
vestment in technology was being most
fervently preached, America's leading in¬
dustries and aeronautics
undergoing a pronounced recession.
The statistics even showed that it was above
all the export of products requiring a low
level of technology that was having the
most beneficial effect on the American
balance of payments. A few years later the
file on the "technology gap" was being
passed feverishly from one expert to
another, but no one was able to explain
away an increasing series of contradictions.
The fact is that, by its very success,
technology has produced its own limita¬
tions. In this context reference is often made
to the problem of environmental pollution or |
to be more precise, of the lengthening of the I
21

The price of the potato is in the packaging.
Research and development of preservation
and processing techniques and the
organization of a sales and distribution
network are factors which help to explain
why the potato chip should be so much
more expensive than its earthy raw
material. In some countries today, the
lion's share of the price the customer pays
for a product covers distribution costs of
various kinds; manufacturing costs may
constitute less than 20 per cent of this
retail price.
y time needed for the re-cycling of many new
products. The production sequence, from
extraction of the raw material to the utiliza¬
tion of the final product, comprises a series
of transformations each of which produces
its own wastes. The wastes themselves are
sometimes transformed into by-products
and again some wastes remain.
This is an important question, but it ac¬
counts for only a part of the present situa¬
tion. The most important problem is that
technology has so much reduced produc¬
tion costs in comparison with distribution
and storage costs that the industrial sector
today has become virtually a second tertiary
sector. In more and more cases the cost of a
finished product as it comes off the machine
represents as little as 10 or 20 per cent of the
price paid at the end of the distribution net¬
work. The rest is made up of costs of
storage, distribution, maintenance, sales,
and financing. A technological improvement
which reduces production costs by 10 per
cent, but which indirectly causes an increase
of the same percentage in storage and
distribution costs, is an "improvement"
which increases the economic cost in real
terms five or ten times. Once we have reach¬
ed this point technology is no longer a
motive force in the production of wealth but
has become a source of "diseconomies"
leaving no margin for growth in real terms.
In other words, an additional advance in
technology no longer provides a propor¬
tional increase in economic growth and
material well-being.
At all events, it is obvious that margins are
not infinitely wide and there is reason to
believe that many sectors of industry have
already reached the limit of these margins.
The race to produce the biggest or the
fastest aeroplane, the largest ethylene or
ammoniac plant, so much a feature of the
industrial scene ten years ago, is now vir¬
tually a thing of the past. Today the practical
men of industry are talking in terms of the
diminishing returns of technology, but this
phenomenon has not yet been recognized
by the general run of economists. The myth
suits them better. Meanwhile, economic
growth has become an item on the balance
sheet rather than something that really oc¬
curs, with "stagflation" (economic stagna¬
tion accompanied by inflation) providing the
link between the two.
Experience gained during the economic
crisis of 1929 led experts to deduce an
economic law which stated that large-scale
unemployment and inflation could not occur
simultaneously. If there was unemployment,
therefore, the economy could be revived to
the point where full employment was attain¬
ed simply by stimulating demand. This
would only be possible, however, in a situa¬
tion in which production was elastic, that is,
where there was nothing to constrain a rapid
change in the level of production. But there
is an essential difference between the situa-
y
.« ^^ «& Qi^&r$
The situations shown in these two
drawings illustrate at a simple, everyday
level how technology can have both
positive and negative effects. When a
gardener plants flowers near a bee-keeper's
hives (above), the yield of honey is
improved, while smoke from the factory
chimney (below) has a detrimental effect
on the service provided by the nearby
laundry. Attempts to measure the costs
and benefits of technology are increasingly
taking into account its impact on the
environment and the quality of life.
22

Below, irradiated fuel in a plant at La
Hague (France) specializing in the
treatment of radioactive waste from
nuclear power stations. By radically
changing the structure of materials,
modern technology often creates products
which when discarded take much longer to
be "recycled" into nature than natural
substances such as wood. Nuclear energy
poses the problems of recycling waste in
their most acute form, since atomic waste
may remain radioactive for centuries.
Photo Gilbert Uzan © Gamma, Pans
tion before the Second World War and the
situation today. During the 1930s,
technology was in a phase in which it of¬
fered increasing returns, whereas today,
overall, it has reached a stage where it offers
only diminishing returns. Furthermore,
modern technology entails increasing costs
imputable to the need for pollution control
and correction and to the growing
vulnerability of economic systems. These
costs appear in the accounts as "value add¬
ed" to the national income and thus as an
increase in wealth, whereas in fact they are
"value deducted" and represent a reduction
of wealth.
We are therefore faced with a situation in
which the limits to growth are to be found
within the production mechanism itself and
in the very logic of technology application.
There is also the problem of the increasing
vulnerability of complex economic systems
and the question of intrinsic value. What
purpose does it serve? is a question which
comes up more and more often. A fibre that
can withstand a temperature of 500 degrees
may find a small, specialized market, but it is
unlikely to arouse much enthusiasm in the
general textile industry, even in the most
highly developed country. And in a society
that is not capable of inventing or re¬
inventing a process for its own purposes
(and therefore of maintaining and making
use of it) a modern process or technology is
not necessarily going to increase well-being
or wealth.
The limitations of technology, therefore,
entail limits to a certain conception of
growth. They peel off the many layers of
superstition that have built up about science
and about its ideological interpretation. In¬
deed, it can frequently be observed that the
very same science that has fought so many
bitter battles against superstition over the
last two or three centuries has itself
become, in some subtle way, the refuge of
unreason. Though they themselves would
not see it in this way, scientists have often
played the role in society that an American
economist of the beginning of this century,
Thorstein Veblen, identified with that of the
magician. Scientists are only credible to the
general public when they use an incom¬
prehensible language (proof that, unlike the
ordinary mortal, they can communicate with
the gods) and when they cause things to
happen that are beyond the ordinary man's
ken (further proof of their magic powers).
Today, whether he likes it or not, the
scientist finds himself at the crossroads, try¬
ing to escape from the myths and supersti¬
tions of our time. But whereas in the time of
Galileo superstition was against him, the
modern Galileo's problem is that he is often
seen by the politicians, the economists and
the public at large as an incarnation of the
figure of the magician. Psychologically we
look upon him as we used to look upon the
magician of old. This is very important for,
although the army, the police and money
have always played an important role in the
history of civilizations, these civilizations
have been made or marred not because one
was richer than another, but because one
was more successful ,in controlling men's
minds and spirit. The role of science today
would be less contested if we had been able
to see where this assimilation of the scientist
to the magician would lead us. Scientists
themselves cannot be blamed for this
assimilation which probably satisfies a cer¬
tain taste for the irrational in all of us. I
23

k This is why there is an urgent need for us
to understand that in our modern age
superstition too has been modernized so
successfully, indeed, that it can attack its
enemies from within, imitating their words
and gestures.
If science today is under attack, it is
because men see in her an inexhaustible
source of miracles. How many economic
miracles and technological miracles has our
era experienced modern miracles born of
the marriage between science and
technology that was consummated during
the last century.
But in this present time of the "growth
crisis", the question of divorce is in the air,
divorce between economic growth and
economic welfare in the widest sense of the
term. This would become blindingly evident
if a new form of economic accounting were
to be developed which would put costs and
profits in their proper place. In the
framework of present economic thinking,
too many activities are assessed on the
credit side when in reality they should be.
placed on the debit side.
Take for example the man who commutes
to work; the farther he lives from his work,
the more it costs him in transport and time.
But the national revenue is increased as a
result of having to set up the system of
transport he uses. The individual pays and
this represents for him a reduction in
economic welfare, but the Gross National
Product is increased, and we are told that
this benefits growth. That is the divorce.
Growth too often feeds on the costs it
creates itself.
It is, of course, impossible to avoid the
whole range of such costs, but if we could
detach ourselves from the myth of growth,
which today is given absolute priority, we
could find a new equilibrium. Without
sacrificing everything to the popular Utopian
ideas of the primitive life, we could try to
find better economic welfare by daring to
ask again the question that Adam Smith first
asked: "What is the wealth of nations and
how is it created?". The answers that the in¬
dustrial societies have so far given to this
question are becoming less and less
satisfactory. There are almost certainly
several new directions open to us which
would produce values and riches on a
worldwide scale.
To achieve this we must first, in the
jargon of the electronics technician, get rid
of the background noises produced by all
kinds of superstitions, especially those that
disguise themselves in modern dress and,
using the trickery of scientific and
technological "miracles", assume the man¬
tle of the true religion and prevent us from
seeing clearly the paths to the future.
We are today witnessing a process of
world industrialization. If this process is not
progressing evenly enough to satisfy those
who want to see a more equitable distribu¬
tion of the riches of the world, it never¬
theless shows some parallels with the
spread of the industrial revolution to con¬
tinental Europe during the last century. In
the political field the resemblances are strik¬
ing. Today, as then, we are seeing the
irresistible thrust of independence
movements in regions affected by the in¬
dustrialization process. This corresponds to
an extension of the European ideological
model which was born of the industrial
revolution (in both its liberal and its marxist
versions). It is nevertheless to be hoped that
it will be possible for this model to evolve in
the Third World without ' reproducing at
each stage the set-backs that occurred in
Europe. It is even possible to conjecture that
the equilibrium of our planet very probably
depends more on a growth of awareness
and a flowering of the different cultures of
which it is composed than on a standardiza¬
tion of the cultural environment.
ORIO GIARINI, Italian economist, is a member
of the Club of Rome and a former director of the
industrial economy and services division of the
Battelle Institute, Geneva. Among his published
works are The Diminishing Returns of
Technology, written in collaboration with Henri
Loubergé and published by the Pergamon Press,
Oxford, U.K., in 1978, and L'Europe et l'Espace
(Europe and Space), published Lausanne, 1968.
He is currently preparing a report for the Club of
Rome entitled "Dialogue on Health and We/fare".
The adoption of more efficient production
techniques sometimes leads to results
which are diametrically opposed to those
desired. In the case of renewable natural
resources, technological progress may lead
to overexploitation and ultimately to a drop
in production. Modern techniques have
enabled fish to be located and captured so
efficiently that fish stocks have declined
and there has been a drop in the world fish
catch in the last ten years. Whale fishing
has been so intensive that certain species
were hunted to the point of extinction. The
International Whaling Commission,
established in 1946 to protect whales from
overexploitation, has prohibited the hunting
of some whale species and fixes annual
catch quotas for non-prohibited species.
Photo shows a group of fin-whales tied to
the stern of a factory ship in the Antarctic
before processing.
24
