\
Photo Maximilien Bruggmann © La Spirale, Lausanne, Switzerland
Horses and (possibly) antelopes
disport themselves in this prehistoric
painting on stone at Jabbaren, Tassili
N'Ajjer (Algeria). On the next eight
pages we present a selection of
masterpieces incised or painted on
living rock by African artists in
prehistoric times. Most of our
illustrations are details from the
mysterious frescoes, discovered at
hundreds of sites in the Sahara since
the last century, which afford vivid
but tantalizing glimpses of a society
and its natural environment many
thousands of years before climatic
changes made the region largely
uninhabitable.



Old masters
of the New Stone Age
Rock paintings that present
a dazzling pageant of African prehistory
by Joseph Ki-Zerbo
AFRICAN prehistoric art is found
mainly in the high plateaus and
uplands of the continent. The
mountain ranges, and the depressions,
river basins and forest lowlands of the
equatorial zone are far less rich in this
respect. In the areas where the largest
number of finds occur, sites are mainly
located in cliffs on the edges of the
uplands.
The two most important areas are the
Sahara and southern Africa. In the zone
bounded on the north by the Atlas Moun¬
tains, on the east by the Red Sea, on the
south by the tropical forest and on the west
by the Atlantic, hundreds of sites have
been found, containing tens or perhaps
hundreds of thousands of carvings and
paintings.
Examples are found to the south of Oran
and in the Tassili N'Ajjer area in Algeria; in
southern Morocco; in the Fezzan (Libya) ;
in Air and Ténéré (Niger) ; in Tibesti
(Chad) ; in Nubia; in the highlands of
Ethiopia; in the Dhar Tichit (Mauritania)
and at Mocamedes (Angola).
The other main area is in the tapering
part of southern Africa bounded by the In¬
dian Ocean and the Atlantic which includes
Lesotho, Botswana, Malawi, Ngwane,
Namibia and the Republic of South Africa,
with particularly significant finds in the
Orange Free State, the Vaal River area and
the Transvaal.
As to why there should have been this
flowering in the deserts and steppes, one
reason is that at the period in question they
were nothing of the kind. When they
became so, this in itself, plus the dryness
of the air, helped to preserve them and turn
them into natural museums. In the Sahara,
for instance, objects have been found that
had lain undisturbed for thousands of l
years. As to why it should have occurred I
27

OLD MASTERS OF THE NEW STONE AGE
on the edges of the upland valleys, the
reason is that these were the best habitats,
most easily defensible and within reach of
water and game.
If we are to fit prehistoric art finds into an
intelligible time-scale, our first approach
must be geological and ecological since the
environment, for peoples without our
technological adjuncts, was more of a con¬
straint than it is today and both provided
and imposed the general framework of ex¬
istence.
Although some authors consider that its
origins go back to the Mesolithic, African
rock art dates essentially from the
Neolithic. It has become customary to call
the major periods of rock art by the name
of an animal which thus provides a
typological reference point. Four major
series are thus named after the Bubalus,
the Ox, the Horse and the Camel.
The bubalus (Bubalus antiquus) was a
kind of enormous buffalo which, according
to the palaeontologists, dates from the
beginning of the Quaternary. It is depicted
from the beginning of rock art (around 7000
BC) to about 4000 BC. This period is also
characterized by elephants and
rhinoceroses. The ox is either Bos ibericus
(or brachyceros) with short, stout horns, or
Bos africanus, with a magnificent lyre-
shaped pair of horns. It appears around
4000 BC.
The horse (Equus cabal/us) sometimes
pulling a chariot, makes its appearance
about 1500 BC. The "flying gallop" gait,
whilst not realistic, is naturalistic on the
western track from Morocco to the Sudan,
whereas on the eastern "road" from the
Fezzan it is highly stylized. By now we are
well into the period of history when the hip¬
popotamus disappears from rock pain¬
tings, no doubt denoting the end of peren¬
nial water. The camel brings up the rear of
this historical caravan. Introduced into
Egypt by the Persian conquest about 500
BC, it is common towards the beginning of
the Christian era.
In general, where both exist, carvings are
earlier than paintings. Carving was done in
the softer sandstone rocks, and in granite
and quartzite as well, by means of a
sharpened stone struck with a Neolithic
hammerstone, specimens of which have
been found near the carvings.
With only this minimal equipment, the
precision of the technique is brilliant. The
elephant at Bardai (Chad) is delineated with
a single light line. It is hardly more than a
sketch, but it brings out the essentials. The
elephants at In Galjeien (Mathendous) and
In Habeter II, on the other hand, are deeply
carved with a heavy, lifelike line, and so is
the rhinoceros at Ganoa (Tibesti). The
groove is either V-shaped, or shaped like a
U and taken down to a depth of about a
centimetre. The notches were made either
with a stone axe or a piece of very hard
wood, damp sand possibly being used as
an abrasive.
Making these carvings must sometimes
have called for distinct athletic ability. At
Oued Djerat, for instance, there is an
28
elephant 4.5 metres high, and the beginn¬
ings of a rhinoceros 8 metres long.
In central and southern Africa, carvings
with broadly incised outlines are thought to
be associated with religious purposes,
whilst delicately grooved carvings possibly
denote an initiatory or instructional aim.
Delicate effects are achieved by hollowing
and highly polishing some internal surfaces
to represent the shades of animals' coats or
their loads. This technique foreshadows
the bas-reliefs of Pharaonic Egypt. Indeed,
trte figure is sometimes produced by carv¬
ing it entirely in intaglio, like a cameo.
The natural rock is used very appositely.
For instance, a giraffe is carved on an
oblong block whose shape it exactly fits
(West Transvaal). Similarly in the Leeufon-
tein area, a rhinoceros is carved on a rock
with a rough surface and angular ridges
that precisely reproduce the animal's
carapace.
Rock paintings should not be considered
in isolation from carvings. Outline carvings
on certain walls suggest that the artists first
carved and then painted. Here again, ar¬
tistic work sometimes called for feats of
athletic prowess.
At Oued Djerat there is a Horse period
painting 9 metres long on a steeply sloping
ceiling, and at some of the Tassili sites,
such as Tissoukai, paintings begin more
than 4 metres from the ground, as though
it was wished to avoid the lower levels
within people's reach. This necessitated
the use of crude ladders or even scaf¬
folding. The paintings are either in
monochrome or polychrome.
Traces of workshops have been found.
At l-n-ltinen, for instance, little flat grind¬
stones have been dug up along with tiny
grinders to reduce the rock to powder and
also little pans of paint.
The relatively extensive range of colours
is based on certain basic tones such as red
and brown, obtained from iron oxide
ochres, white obtained from kaolin, animal
droppings, latex or zinc oxide, and black
extracted from charcoal, ground calcined
bones, or from smoke and burnt fat. There
are also yellows, greens, violets, and other
colours.
The ingredients were ground to a fine
powder with a pestle and mortar, mixed
together, and then made up with a liquid,
perhaps milk, the casein in which is an ex¬
cellent binder, dripping, or else white of
egg, honey or cooked bone-marrow. This
explains the brightness of the tints after all
these thousands of years.
The colours were applied with the
fingers, with feathers, with straw or chew¬
ed wood spatulas, or with brushes made of
animal hairs fixed to sticks with tendons.
They were also sprayed on by squirting the
liquid from the mouth. It was this last pro¬
cess that was responsible for the outlines
of hands still to be seen on rock faces and
which are a kind of authenticating
signature on these masterpieces.
Sometimes corrections are made without k
erasing the original lines: giving oxen withf
Some of the oldest works of African rock
art show the tropical animals that
flourished during a period of humid
climate when the Sahara was a region of
lakes and rivers bordered by luxuriant
vegetation, rich in game and fish, grassy
valleys and wooded mountain slopes.
Modern scholars have named the most
ancient style of this art after the Bubalus
antiquus (a type of buffalo with massive
horns, now long extinct) although other
animals such as elephants and
rhinoceroses (see next double page) are
also found depicted in the semi-
naturalistic Bubalus style. The horns of
this specimen (1) engraved in the rock at
Oued Mathendous (Libya) measure 72 cm
from tip to tip. Incised between them is
an ostrich. (2) The giraffe, an animal found
in its natural state only in Africa, is so
frequently depicted that specialists believe
that it must have proliferated in the
Sahara in Neolithic times. The creator of
->

this masterwork at Enneri Blaka (Niger)
made sure that the markings of each
animal's coat, realistically rendered by
intricate patterns of tiny dots hammered
into the rock, were subtly different from
those of the rest. (3) Graceful portrait of a
horse, also at Enneri Blaka. Paintings of
horses, antelopes and mouflons (wild
sheep) are thought to belong to a later
stage than the Bubalus style. The mouflon
with powerful horns (5) at Ti N'Zoumaitak
(Algeria) is surrounded by curious forms
including a jellyfish-like creature (right)
and a strange animal with a human nose
(left). (4) By the time this tranquil pastoral
scene at Sefar (Algeria) was painted,
prehistoric man had learned to dominate
and control livestock in a Sahara of
villages and encampments. (Note the
dwelling at right of painting.)
Photos Maximilien Bruggmann ' La Spirale, Lausanne,
Switzerland
a3»jfc£
29

, four horns, men with three arms, and so
forth.
The term "petroglyph" has been coined
for rock pictures. More than any other in
fact, this kind of art is a sign language, i.e.
a bridge between reality and idea. It is a set
of graphic symbols and to read it one needs
a key. When it comes to explaining it pro¬
perly, the main drawback is our ignorance
of the society that produced it. That is why
it is important not to make over-hasty inter¬
pretations by omitting the descriptive stage
in which the sign language itself is sub¬
jected to formal analysis.
Providing African rock paintings with
captions such as "Justices of the Peace",
"The White Lady", "Man pulling teeth",
"Josephine sold by her sister", "Martians"
and suchlike, distorts them from the
outset, since it superimposes an interpreta¬
tion of a single observer from another
civilization with quite different symbols and
codes. African prehistoric art must be inter¬
preted by reference to indigenous values
and it is only when the local environment of
time, space and culture fails to provide an
answer to a problem that we are entitled to
look elsewhere for the solution.
To what extent can African prehistoric
art be regarded as the illustrated edition of
the first African history book?
In the first place, it constitutes a
documentary film about the physical en¬
vironment of the first societies to live on
our continent. H. Lhote has found hip¬
popotamus bones at a site at Adrar Bous,
radiocarbon dated to about 3100 BC, which
confirms the historical accuracy of (for in¬
stance) the group of hippopotamuses
depicted at Assadjen Ouan Mellen. Now
this animal is an ecological indicator since it
required perennial water in order to exist.
The elephant which eats enormous quan¬
tities of vegetation daily is another indicator
and the Sahara of the prehistoric paintings
must have been a great expanse of
parkland with Mediterranean vegetation,
traces of which have survived to this day.
This environment gradually gave way to a
Sudanic Sahel biotope. In the Horse and
Chariot period, some representations of
trees are found, such as palm-trees, no
doubt indicating oases.
In southern Africa the northern or
Rhodesian style is full of drawings of trees
some of which are identifiable. Shelters in
areas that are now desert are peopled with
a teeming, varied fauna, like some latter-
day Noah's Ark or a petrified zoo. There are
carvings of fish, tremendous shaggy wild
animals like the extinct buffalo, with its
enormous horns up to 3 metres across,
felines like the cheetah and the aardwolf,
guenons and baboons (at Tin Tazarift),
ostriches, owls and so on. On all sides
there are hunting scenes, reminders of the
perennial duel between man and beast.
This profusion of hunting scenes from
the Nile to the Atlantic is vivid illustration of
the existence of a whole hunting civiliza¬
tion. Even large animals like the elephant
did not escape, as witness the great hun¬
ting scenes at Upper Mertoutek. Traps are
nearly everywhere associated with the
symbols of hunters in a very original
cultural pattern, which existed over almost
the whole of Africa for tens of thousands
"This kind of art is a sign language, a set
of graphic symbols", writes Prof. Joseph
Ki-Zerbo, "and to read it we need a key".
Photos on these pages illustrate some of
the conundrums facing specialists as they
try to interpret these beautiful but baffling
images and explain the interplay of styles,
techniques and influences which may
connect them. Photo 1, sweeping curves
convey the intensity of movement in this
silhouette of a woman with a bowl (Sefar,
Algeria). With photo 7, showing
silhouetted dancers from a prehistoric site
at the Tsisbab Ravine (South Africa) it
draws attention to the seeming kinship
between specimens of Saharan rock art
and that of southern Africa whose artists
also worked within a figurative tradition.
In the present state of knowledge it is
impossible to say whether influences were
transmitted between the two regions or
whether these artistic traditions evolved
independently. (8) One of the most
celebrated frescoes in southern Africa
(also at the Tsisbab Ravine) depicts a so-
called "White Lady" accompanied by
figures painted yellow, brown or black. It
is thought that the white colouring may
indicate ritual make-up. Portraits of a
rhinoceros (2, 3 and 4) bring out three
distinctive techniques of representing the
same animal. In (2) the essential outlines
of the rhino's body are traced with a
thick, heavy stroke that contrasts sharply
with the fine incision delineating the
animal shown in photo 4 (at Oued Djerat,
Tassili N'Ajjer, Algerian Sahara). Photo 3
shows a painted rhino at Oumet el Ham
(Mauritania). Such paintings, in which the
pigment is applied to the rough rock with
great artistry, seem to be later than
engravings. In spite of differences in
technique, each image shows a real
knowledge of the animal and a flair for
precise observation. Two puzzling images
that have so far defied all attempts at
explanation are the two-headed cow
(Sefar) in photo 5 and the even more
intriguing representation of a cow with
two hindquarters and no head (Oued
Mathendous) in photo 6.
30
Photos Maximilian Bruggmann © La Spirale, Lausanne,>Switzerland

of years until very late in the historical
period.
These pictures also show the gradual
transition from trapping animals or taking
them into captivity, to feeding them and
then to domesticating them. There is a man
armed with a bow holding an animal on a
leash, whilst at Tissoukai moufflon are be¬
ing hunted with hounds. The lifelike saluki
at Sefar was obviously the friend of desert
man then as now. There are also sheep and
goats. Even boats are depicted, including
one at Tin Tazarift shaped rather like the
papyrus boats of the lakes and rivers of
Chad and Nubia.
There are paintings at l-n-ltinen showing
men bending down using angled tools,
.which are reminiscent of the harvest
scenes with sickles of Pharaonic bas-
reliefs. At Battle Cave, San girls are
depicted setting off food-gathering, their
digging-sticks over their shoulders. The
sheer profusion of artifacts depicted on
rocks or found loose over enormous areas
of Africa, especially those that are now
desert, gives an interesting idea of the
population density in those areas.
African prehistoric art has also much to
tell us about the clothing of the people of
those days. As often happens in early
civilizations, we find that the men were
more decoratively dressed than the
women, until the Ox period, when the
situation seems to have been reversed.
The home is often depicted schematical¬
ly by hemispheres representing huts, in
which furniture and also family scenes can
be seen. Buxom women are seen sitting in
front of the huts with their children, calves
are carefully tethered in a row to a rope,
whilst men are busy milking the cows.
The vast fresco at the Iheren shelter, one
of the high points of prehistoric painting,
shows finely caparisoned oxen, ridden by
women in rich attire, passing by with
waterskins hanging from their flanks.
Some animals lower their heads to the
water-hole, whilst a huge herd moves for¬
ward in stately fashion. Women in their
finery lounge outside their homes, and men
. with feathers in their hair have stopped,
seemingly to greet them.
We do not know the meaning of the
two-headed oxen or the oxen with two her¬
maphrodite bodies and but a single head to
be seen at Oued Djerat nor of the
magnificently carved helixes associated
with many animals, as with the Bubalus at
Oued Djerat. Some scholars consider that
the helix symbolizes the continuity of life.
As for the umbilical link to be seen between
two people, as for instance one starting at
the intersection of a woman's thighs and
ending at the navel of a bowman out hun¬
ting, it seems as though it stands for a
magical flux going from the mother (who is
praying, with upraised hands) to her son,
who is in a dangerous situation. Again, in
southern Africa (Botswana), a rain-making
animal is shown being led across the coun¬
try on a rope held by a procession of expec¬
tant people. Sun motifs form part of the
same religious background.
Some pictures nevertheless,, are still
obscure, and they will only ever be explain- k
ed by reference to a genuinely African Y

OLD MASTERS OF THE NEW STONE AGE
, cultural and religious context. This is what
happened with regard to a scene at Tin
Tazarift, previously entitled "conven¬
tionalized oxen". Because their legs seem¬
ed to be reduced to stumps, it had been
supposed that they were lying down, but
A. Hampaté Ba realized that in fact they
had been led into the water as part of the
lotori ceremony to celebrate the ox's
aquatic origin.
The tendency to explain all the features
of African culture by the theory of outside
influence must be rejected. This does not,
however, mean denying any outside in¬
fluence, but simply involves defining it
carefully. Franco-Cantabrian rock art,
which goes back about 40,000 years, is
Palaeolithic and hence earlier than African
prehistoric art. (Saharan Neolithic, on the
other hand, is earlier than European
Neolithic). There was thus a strong tempta¬
tion to argue that the inspiration of artists
on the African continent came from the
north, and there was even talk of a
Eurafrican art with its focal point in
Europe in fact, a sort of Hamitic theory in
the field of African prehistoric art (see arti¬
cle page 24).
Now there is no truth in this at all. Quite
apart from the fact that there is a difference
of 15,000. years between the development
of the two schools of art, it is accepted that
the art of eastern Spain (which would have
had to be the connecting link for any in¬
fluence there was) has nothing in common
with the art of southern Oran, the Tassili
and the Fezzan. The real flowering of
prehistoric art came from the Atlas, and its
focal points are nothing if not African.
People have also wondered whether it
was not from the east (i.e. from the Nile
Valley) that this type of art radiated out to
the interior of the continent. Now it is ob¬
vious that the art of the Egyptian Nile
flourished much later than that of Saharan
and Sudanic Africa. The Saharan represen¬
tations of oxen with discs between horns
are much earlier than those of the cow god¬
dess Hathor. The magnificent ram with a
sphere at Bou Alem is much earlier than the
ram of Amon, which only appears in Egypt
under the XVIIIth Dynasty. The superb
Egyptian-type boats depicted in the Sahara
(e.g. at Tin Tazarift) are no doubt simply
Saharan type boats.
Of course Egypt had a tremendous in¬
fluence on the interior of Africa, though no
doubt it was limited, but what is even more
certain is that the prehistoric civilization of
the Sahara is earlier in time. It is also true
that no obstacle except distance separated
the peoples of the Ahaggar, the Tassili and
the Fezzan from the Nile Valley, which was
for a long time (until the drying-up of the
Sahara) a rather unpleasant swampy area.
It was only from the so-called "historic"
period onwards that Egyptian civilization
achieved that splendour as a result of
which everything is now attributed to it.
But where art and technology are con¬
cerned, the focal points were originally in
the Sahara, in what is now the modern
state of the Sudan, in East Africa and in the
Middle East. Moreover, the Sahara of
prehistory is itself much more indebted to
the centres of the south-east than to the
Middle East.
Some authors hold that the Bubalus
period of rock art is to be attributed to ill-
defined "Mediterranean" people, white or
half-caste according to different authors.
The so-called "round head" period is at¬
tributed to "negroids" whom some con¬
sider to have interbred with peoples from
the Middle East and who supposedly con¬
stitute the Sudanic Neolithic tradition. The
Ox period was supposedly the work of the
ancestors of the Fulani. Lastly, it is claim¬
ed, the influence of the so-called Guiñean
tradition, further south, can be seen as far
away as in the buildings of the Tichit cliffs
(Mauritania).
The whole edifice of this reasoning, it
must be said, remains highly precarious
and gives great weight to population
movements from outside Africa. People
can refer to "the distinct African influence"
in a Sahara rock picture. But above all, this
reconstruction tends to equate concepts as
Using skilful stylization and turning to their advantage the rough
texture of the rock, artists of the Neolithic Sahara could achieve
subtle and expressive effects when portraying the human form.
Like so manv rock paintings, that of the so-called "Abyssinian of
Jabbaren" (1) with his wispy beard (Tassili, Algeria) has survived
the passage of time with astonishing freshness owing to the
resistance of the pigment. The dynamic, willowy movements of a
sprinter and two archers are captured in studies from Jabbaren
(5), Sefar (6) and Tafilalet (4) in Algeria. The bow must have
revolutionized life in the Sahara in Neolithic times. The portrait of
the sprinting woman (4), here published for the first time, is fron;
one of several prehistoric rock art sites discovered in the Sahara
in the last few years by the French ethnologist H.-J. Hugot and
the Swiss photographer Maximilian Bruggmann. (2) Curious
study of a "unicorn ox". Artists depicted the horns of oxen with
particular care and often used a convention whereby the animal's
head was shown in profile and the horns frontally. At some
prehistoric Sahara sites small sculptured figures of hares, rams
and other animals have been unearthed. (3) Polished
granite miniature from Oued Amezar, Algeria, is believed to
depict a ruminant lying down.
32

33

Salute from prehistoric man, still visible on rock at Jabbaren in
the Algerian Sahara. Probably of magical significance, the
handprints were obtained by spraying white pigment from the
mouth at the hands pressed against the rock.
different as race, ethnic group, life-style
and culture. People refer to blacks, whites,
Fulani, Africans, Capsians and Sudanic
peoples without defining any of these
terms for obvious reasons.
The "white ladies" in African rock pain¬
tings, like the one in South Africa whose
face only is white (reminding the Abbé
Breuil of the frescoes at Knossos, and
"processions of prospectors from the Per¬
sian Gulf"), no doubt represent priests,
hunters or African girls coming out of in¬
itiation ceremonies, just as they are to be
seen today, painted with white kaolin
which denotes the death of a previous per¬
sonality and the acquisition of a new
status.
African prehistoric art is not dead. In the
field of aesthetics proper, it is the source of
inspiration for modern African art. To this
day its characteristic range of colours is
repeated in masks and in dancers' regalia.
It lives on, if only in the unchanging place-
names. A valley running into the Oued
Djerat is called Tin Tehed, or "place of the
she-ass" and there is indeed a fine carving
of an ass there. Issoukai-n-Afella is
reputedly haunted by spirits (junun),
perhaps because there is a horrible animal
figure, part-fowl, part-owl, with a colossal
sex organ who peers over a pile of votive
stones thrown there to propitiate it.
Africans are cut off from this art-form by
distance, a barrier overcome only by
scholars and experts from wealthy coun¬
tries, and it deserves to be reintroduced in¬
to their lives, at least through the medium
of school syllabuses. It needs to be jealous¬
ly protected from the various kinds of
damage that threaten it daily, for it is a
legacy without price. A complete register
should be compiled, to facilitate com¬
parative study.
Prehistoric art offers many pointers to
aspects of the life of early African man,
from his physical environment to his lof¬
tiest feelings, and the image is sometimes a
sign as eloquent as writing. The evidence
is, of course, ambiguous, enigmatic and
needs to be supplemented from sources
such as palaeontology, climatology, ar¬
chaeology and oral tradition.
Joseph Ki-Zerbo
