Racism in textbooks
Through other eyes
by Hugo O. Ortega
THE ever-increasing store of children's literature forms a
fundamental element in the education of the child, opening
up the world of poetry, of fable and legend and bringing to
him the life stories of national and world heroes. The prestige of
the printed word and the importance that teachers attach to books
weigh heavily with children; it is through books that the founda¬
tions of their knowledge are laid.
The importance of books for transmitting information and values
prompted me to examine the "image" of the "Indian" (or, more
precisely, the indigenous inhabitant) as it appears in thirty
children's books recently published in Argentina. Eighty-three per
cent of the passages I analysed refer to the Indian in the past, a
past that stretches from pre-Columbian times, through the age in
which America was "discovered", the Spanish colonial period and
its end, to the era of independence and national construction. The
few references to the "Indian" of today bear no relation whatever
to the actual conditions of their lives.
Most of the texts which give prominence to the past deal with
occasions when the Indians came into contact with the troops of
Christopher Columbus and his successors. One of them tells how
Columbus sailed westwards in the service of the Spanish crown
until the day when "A sailor on the Pinta spied land. It was the
twelfth of October, 1492. Christopher Columbus went ashore on
an island populated with Indians, and called it San Salvador. The
Indians were wide-eyed with astonishment at the sight of the white
men. Columbus thought that he had reached the Indies, but he
had discovered a new world. Points to remember: Christopher
Columbus discovered America on the twelfth of October 1492".
The central idea the child is intended to grasp is that of
HUGO O. ORTEGA, Argentine educationist, is director of the Albert
Schweitzer College, at Mendoza, Argentina. He took part in the organiza¬
tion of the technical education programme of the Republic of Panama of
whose Panamerican Institute he was formerly the director. He has made a
study of indigenous groups in Argentina, in particular, of the Toba Indians.
His articles have appeared in several Latin American and Spanish magazi¬
nes and he was one of the contributing authors of Youth in Latin America,
published by Friendship Press, New York, in 1970.
"discovery". This is a concept of European historiography; it is an
ethnocentric concept since it presumes that the continent, its peo¬
ple and its wealth only acquired value because they were discove¬
red and recognized by the centre of the world, in other words,
Europe., It is hardly surprising, then, that civilization (clothes, big
ships, white men and the faculty for naming places and people)
should be equated with Europe and that barbarism (the Indians
and the "new" world) should be equated with America.
The artist who illustrated this text depicted a handsome and
angelic Columbus stepping ashore amidst a fierce and menacing
group of "Indians". The illustration is accompanied by exercises in
which the child is required to fill in blanks in an incomplete sen¬
tence; the words "Columbus discovered America" are given as the
correct words to complete the sentence: "When 	, he met
savages whom he called Indians". At that moment and for all time,
the indigenous people of this continent were wrongly labelled
"Indians". This fallacious generalization subsequently came to
describe the multitude of indigenous nations of America whose
people would be presented as half-naked "savages" garbed in
feathered head-dresses.
Another description of the "discovery" runs as follows:
"Land ahoy!
Land ! Land!
The Indies! The Indies!
At last! We've made it! An island! Palm trees!"
There's something moving over there in the trees...
Look! Half-naked men!
They're wearing feathers! They're signalling to us! They're
coming to us!"
"(...) The island was inhabited by men with copper-coloured
skins; who were half-naked. Columbus called them Indians, for he
was under the impression that he had reached the Indies, the
country he was looking for. However, the land was part of a
hitherto unknown continent which would later be called America".
The stereotype begins to take definite shape. The indigenous
people were half-naked and copper-coloured (in English they
would be dubbed redskins) and were generally referred to as
"Indians". Here lies the first major contradiction: a continent in-
28

What will this little girl of the South American high plateaux
learn from school textbooks of her people's history and culture?
All too often she will be offered a distorted, "Westernized"
picture which travesties the values of her people and their world.
habited by people with their own cultures is described as "un¬
known". Why do the authors insist on the European origin of
America, a continent inhabited for over 20,000 years by groups of
émigrés who originated in Central Asia and crossed over what is
now the Bering Strait?
This fundamental historical ambiguity, which the child learns
early in life, prevents him from understanding the link which exists
between Argentines (and Latin Americans in general) and the
great civilizations which flourished inx»ur..continent for thousands
of years. As after generation'of^children teat) this ac¬
count of 'thC'discovèrÇ*'," they are jndu*ced to denigrate thaXpart
of our "origins which goes back to men who lived at the beginning
ot the Bronze Age and to men who at the end of the Middle Ages
came into contact with a Genoese sailor and a handful of
Spaniards.
The authors of the second description of the "discovery" quot¬
ed above have also published an account of the foundation of the
city of Buenos Aires by the Spaniard Pedro de Mendoza in 1536:
"When they (the Spaniards) disembarked, the Indians were very
astonished. They had never seen men with white skin, nor such
clothing... Mendoza named the settlement 'Santa Maria del Buen
Aire'... The Indians offered them food: fruit and game. But conflict
soon broke out and provisions began to grow short. The settlers
set out in search of food and often had to fight the savages. One
day the Indians attacked the city and burned it".
Why, one might ask, do the authors fail to explain the changes
in the relationship between the "Indians" and the "white men"?
Why do they insinuate that the indigenous population was capri¬
cious and savage by nature, while keeping silent about the many
extortionate demands made on them by the Christian conquista¬
dors? What a contrast between this ethnocentric reading of history
and the following denunciation of the conquistadors penned by
the Spanish Dominican Fray Bartolomé de las Casas in 1513!
"When they arrived at the village [of Camaguey in Cuba] they
found the Indians living peacefully in their habitations. And yet
they increasingly wronged and scandalized them and, not content
with what the Indians offered them of their own free will, robbed
them of the few valuables they possessed. Even worse, some of
them attacked women and girls, for such is and always has been
the usual behaviour of the Spaniards in the Indies".
The illustrations to the story of Buenos Aires show the "sav¬
agery" of the attacking Indians and the superiority of the Euro¬
peans; Mendoza, dressed like a lord, founds the city and gives it its
name while an "Indian" squatting at his feet gapes in astonish¬
ment. The exercises which go with the text require the child to use
the words he has just learned: "savage, tribe, chief, bow, arrow" k
in order to complete such sentences as "The Indians lived in a f
state".
"When Columbus discovered
America he encountered savage
men, whom he called Indians."
(From a book of exercises for
children)
"The native American is depicted in
pejorative fashion as a half-naked
savage wearing a feathered head-dress,
irrational and inferior to the white
European." (Illustration from a
textbook on the history of America)
"The settlers went out in search of
food and often had to fight the
savages. One day the Indians attacked
the city and burned it." (From an
account of the history of America)
Children are taught how to make
animals, objects and an Indian, using
paper, string and other materials. (In a
manual of handicrafts for eight-year-
olds)
29

One third of the passages referring to "the Indian" in the age of
independence and national construction present their positive
characteristics; the rest are pejorative. In general, the texts give
prominence to three moments in Argentine history: the war of libe¬
ration beginning in the nineteenth century; the organization and
expansion of the nation; and the age of the liberal republic.
All the texts favourable to "the Indian" fall in the first period.
The author of a text for ten-year-old children recounts how, in
1819, "a chief of royal blood". Inca Atahualpa Huascaringa, a des¬
cendant of Peruvian sovereigns, also known as José Manuel de
Minoguyé, gave "30,000 armed Indians of his personal guard to
fight the Spaniards". Although the context aims to express the
idea that the indigenous population took part in the liberation
struggles waged by the criollos (Latin Americans of Spanish des¬
cent), the author does not say whether or not the proposal was
accepted, nor does he say what became of the chief and his
troops.
Elsewhere, the same author tells the story of Cumbay, chief of
the Chaco, who offered the Argentine general Manuel Belgrano
some 2,000 Indians to fight the Spanish forces. Yet again the read¬
er is not informed whether the offer was accepted nor whether the
indigenous people took part in the liberation of the nation. In each
case omission of this vital information suggests that the matter in
question was to be considered a trifling one and even pre¬
figures the decline of the indigenous nations; liberation brought no
improvement in their living conditions, indeed they fell victim to a
new domination which completed the process of making them a
marginal people.
A general textbook for eight- to nine-year-old children recounts
how, during the long process of national consolidation, "a landed
proprietor named Juan Manuel de Rosas, who was governor from
1820 to 1832, carried out a mopping-up campaign against the
Indians who were attacking the towns". The textbook does not
indicate which Indians were concerned, for many of them had
come to terms with Rosas and were not involved in these attacks.
It does not explain why the indigenous peoples felt such animosity
towards the criollos; nor does it place the facts in the context of
the criollo policy of achieving secure frontiers, expanding to the
limits of the former Spanish vice-royalty, and occupying all the fer¬
tile land for stock-raising and agricultural purposes. Their historic
goal of dominion was in total opposition to the aims of the indige¬
nous peoples who had enjoyed free use of these lands for thou¬
sands of years before the arrival of the Spaniards and criollos.
Nor, indeed, is there any mention of Rosas' conviction that "the
Indian problem would only be resolved by their total submission or
by the extermination of the recalcitrant among them, that is to say
by pursuing the methods used during the Spanish conquest"
(Ernesto Palacio, History of Argentina, 1515 to 1955, Buenos
Aires, 1977). The children are not told that during Rosas' campaign
more than ten thousand Indian warriors were liquidated and four
thousand taken prisoner. All these historical omissions reinforce
the idea of the indigenous population as "savage Indians", "irra¬
tional" and "barbaric" enemies of civilization.
Another work from the same publishers, intended for seven- to
eight-year-old children, affirms that: "It is difficult today to ima¬
gine what life was like in the countryside in the past. The Indians
had left the towns but were still masters of the plains. Can you
imagine how dangerous it was to cross the pampas? Think of the
long, hard roads, the wild animals, and the Indians always lying in
wait". The author shows concern only for those who lived in the
small towns in the interior of the country, for their security and
their anxieties. But what of the indigenous peoples who never for¬
med a majority or even a significant minority in any creóle town?
What were the feelings of these peoples who had once been mas¬
ters of the land living free of the menace of better-armed enemies?
This ethnocentric reading of history gives children a totally false
picture of the facts. It presents a slanted account of the confronta¬
tion which led to the defeat of the indigenous peoples. The
"Indians" are depicted as wild animals of the jungle, always lying
in wait for their prey.
How does this picture of the "Indian" of our historic past com¬
pare with the image of the indigenous Argentine of today to whom
reference is made in some seventeen per cent of the texts?
According to certain authors: "In the Chaquena region today,
some Matacos and Tobas still live in the primitive state. They gen¬
erally work at weaving, at picking cotton and cutting sugar cane.
30
From the carob bean they make a drink called aloja (a kind of
mead) of which they are very fond. The preparation of this drink is
the occasion for festivities during which large quantities are
drunk." Why, of all the aspects of the Mataco and Toba culture,
do the authors choose to emphasize their "primitive state" and the
fact that they are makers and festive drinkers of aloja? Why are we
not told of their concept of the communal nature of property, of
the way they share their food, of the solidity of their family ties, the
absence of sexual promiscuity, their skill at building cool dwellings
in a sub-tropical climate, their strong religious beliefs and the deco¬
rum of their social life? If they live in a "primitive state", this is not
from choice, but because they are the descendants of conquered
peoples, forced to inhabit the poorest and most inhospitable
regions of a rich republic. This then ¡s a highly biased account
which completely ignores the special values and characteristics
that have ensured the survival of these ancient peoples.
In another work, the same authors explain that "the Puna (a
region of north-west Argentina) is virtually uninhabited; the native
element is predominant there; it consists of the Coyas who can
stand the rarefied air of the mountains better than the white man".
Although the name of the tribe (Coya) is mentioned, the general
reference is to a dehumanized thing, the "native element", as
opposed to the white "man". Even more serious is the fact that the
Coya is depicted as organically different from the white man as if
the human race in general could not live in the mountains after a
period of acclimatization! In this text, the Coya is portrayed as just
another denizen of the region, on a par with the llama, the vicuna
and the alpaca.
A handicrafts guide for eight-year-old children explains how to
make a doll, a shadow theatre, a farm, a dining-room, a colonial
building, a piglet and other objects. The young reader is also
shown how to make just two figures the mythical figure of
Father Christmas and an Indian and his hut. Thus the indigenous
Argentine is placed firmly in the world of objects and myth; he is
not seen as a real person. The "Indian" is a thing that children can
make out of paper and string and paint; his hut is not even a replica
ofan Argentine dwelling, but a stereotyped imitation of the teepee
of the Sioux Indians of the great prairies of North America, as
depicted throughout the world by the mass media.
Yet another text makes play with a similar stereotype. The hero
of the story is a little boy whose name, Gerónimo, inevitably
evokes the famous Apache chief who defied the federal troops
of the United States from 1850 to 1880. Why did not the author
choose an indigenous name from the thousands still in use in our
tribes today?
In a "note to the teacher", the author of a book of stories for
children of pre-school age explains that "in addition to fairies and
other magical creatures, the characters children feel most affection
for are other children, toys and animals dogs, cats, rabbits, hor¬
ses, ducks, and squirrels. The teacher should take care to present
each animal in accordance with its real characteristics since this
helps the child to situate himself in the world and to under¬
stand it (...). It is the task of the school to achieve this".
Later on in the same book we come across a piece of dialogue
between children who are "playing at Indians": "I am the chief",
says Luis, "because I am the biggest." "I am the doctor of the
tribe", says Jorge, "because I have got a satchel. " "I am an Indian
hunter", cries Carlos, "because I have some sticks pointed like
arrows." Then chief Blue Eagle speaks: "Come on, Indians, let's go
into the forest." The story ends with a song: "I'm an Indian, I'm an
Indian, Me killpuma, I'm an Indian, I'm an Indian, And I eat maize,
I'm an Indian, I'm an Indian, I'm off to bed".
The writer is putting into the heads of five-year-old children the
notion that chiefs are chosen for their physical stature, whereas, in
fact, wisdom and experience are the most important considera¬
tions in a complex selection process; similarly, the medicine man is
chosen for his spirituality and religious knowledge. No one can
claim any special right simply because he possesses a particular
object. An Indian does not become a fisherman because his father
has given him a boat this would be more in line with the way
things are done among the wealthier classes in the west but
because his father and, indeed, the whole tribe have taught him to
fish, an activity that is practised collectively in a communally
owned boat.
The indigenous Argentines do not refer to themselves as
"¡ndians". We know that some tribes refer to each other aspaisa-
CONTINUED PAGE 34

Through other eyes
nos, and this is how they wish to be known. It is insulting to make
the "Indian" use the infinitive ("me kill puma"). This may well raise
a laugh in the nursery school, but not from the indigenous pupils
for whom, even today, Castilian Spanish is the language of the
dominant culture. The author has forgotten his own warning note
to the teachers "animals must be presented in accordance with
their real characteristics". Why did he not follow his own advice
when describing the native peoples of his own land?
The picture that emerges from all this leads to the following con¬
clusions:
the indigenous Argentine is a creature of the past;
little is known about the different aboriginal peoples and their
cultural characteristics they are all "Indians";
the native American is depicted in pejorative fashion as a half-
naked savage wearing a feathered head-dress, irrational and
inferior to the white European;
the emphasis on the "discovery" of the continent over-values
Europe to the detriment of ancient American civilizations and
covers up Europe's appropriation of the continent;
the indigenous person is often denigrated and considered an
object children play at Indians, make models of Indians and their
huts;
history omits information essential to the understanding of the
complex causes of the decadence of the indigenous Argentine
nations;
instead of presenting the true situation of the "Indian" there is a
tendency to reproduce North American stereotypes teepees,
Gerónimo, Blue Eagle.
All this amounts to a process of negation, of a kind of cultural
genocide which in turn leads to an indirect form of real
genocide no less serious because it is indirect which consists of
depriving an important ethnic minority of a share in the resources
of their land of origin.
Hugo O. Ortega
