Common heritage
or licence to exploit?
A new world economic order:
a hard look
at its meaning for international law
by Mohammed Bedjaoui
social and cultural systems; to exercise full
permanent sovereignty over all its posses¬
sions and to regulate the activities of
transnational corporations and foreign in¬
vestment; to suffer no discrimination in in¬
ternational trade, within the context of in¬
ternational co-operation; to form organiza¬
tions of producers with other States; to
share in technological progress and to en¬
joy its rewards.
Nowhere, it 'is true, is the right of
i-ï.îr-iKï
WHAT should be done about the
resources of our planet? The
whole development of modern
international law seems to hinge on this
crucial issue, which brings into play a con¬
test between two principles, that of the
sovereignty of the State and that of the
common heritage of mankind.
Work on the codification of the law of
the sea has shown the price to be paid
before the idea of a common heritage of
mankind can come into its own. One-third
of the surface of the world ocean has been
allocated to thirty-five States in the form of
an "economic zone", extended to 200
miles by the Conference on the Law of the
Sea and by national jurisdictions; thus the
application of the principle of the common
heritage of mankind is excluded from vast
areas of the planet. What is more, this
heritage is so constituted as to afford the
State, at least the technologically and
financially powerful State, many oppor¬
tunities to prosper.
The Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on 12
December 1974, can also be seen to
crystallize a number of contradictions.
Sovereignty is made much of in this
document as being particularly desirable to
the poor countries, favouring their attain¬
ment of international dignity and respect
for their rights.
In the Charter the idea of sovereignty is
refracted into myriad facets which reflect
above all the new-found economic
sovereignty of the developing countries. It
stresses that each State has a sovereign
right to choose its own economic, political.
MOHAMMED BEDJAOUI is Ambassador of
the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria
in France and his country's Permanent Delegate
to Unesco. He is a member of the United
Nations International Law Commission and an
associate of the Institute of International Law.
This article is taken from his book Pour un Nou¬
vel Ordre Economique International, published,
in French, by Unesco. An English edition is to be
published shortly.
12

sovereignty, expressed in such terms,
regarded as being designed for Third World
States alone. But it is no secret that the
rich countries have held sway not only
within their own frontiers but in other
countries too. Recognition of the right of
sovereignty was not being solemnly enjoin¬
ed and re-expressed with the rich countries
in mind but for the other, less developed
States whose enjoyment of sovereignty
had hitherto been frustrated.
At the same time, however, the Charter
seems to outline a theory of
"responsibility" or "responsibilities" which
devolve on States as a counterpart to this
sovereign right. In particular, it declares
that States have a duty to respect the
legitimate interests of other States when
exploiting natural resources which they
share. This is clearly an allusion to com¬
modities which may be affected, now or in
the future, by the application of the con¬
cept of a common heritage of mankind.
The duty of States to contribute to the
development of world trade and to en¬
courage the progress of other peoples as*
well as their own, also evoked in the
Charter, suggests a theory of "solidarity"
based on possible developments of the
concept of a common heritage.
And so these two approaches, which are
leaving their imprint on international law as
it is now taking shape, appear to be utterly
irreconcilable.
The first approach boils down to the
claim that all States possess permanent
sovereignty over their natural wealth and
resources. Certain jurists consider this
claim to be scandalous. Dubbed "intoxica¬
tion with sovereignty" by some, and as a
thoroughly "retrograde" sovereignty by
others, it is not seen by everyone in its
historical perspective as the driving force
behind a great'change towards a more
equitable world.
The second approach looks to the no¬
tions of "collective economic security" and
the common heritage of humanity for its in¬
spiration. As voiced by some these ideas
have emerged strongly as demands which
run counter to the sovereign rights of
States. As a result this approach is regard¬
ed with suspicion in Third World countries.
It is, in fact, perfectly clear that certain
current trends of thought in the West
reflect a belated discovery of the virtues of
collective economic security. But these vir¬
tues are presented more as a justification
for maintaining access to the vital or impor¬
tant resources of a Third World which is
determined to claim full sovereignty over
them than as part of a desire to make this
new economic and juridical order pro¬
gressively more equitable.
Any attempt to impress on Third World
countries that they bear certain respon¬
sibilities, arising from their legal authority
as nations for managing natural resources
which are theirs yet are needed by the
whole world, must be preceded by a
recognition that their claim for effective
control over these resources is a legitimate
one. It is clear that the organization of
world interdependence and solidarity on
bases that are at once fair and rational
presupposes the economic independence
and sovereignty of the developing coun¬
tries, as well as the preparation of all States
.for the individual and collective respon¬
sibilities which they must assume in the in¬
ternational community, for the benefit of
all.
Secondly, if Third World States are
perfectly justified in voicing some suspicion
of the "unilateral pooling" of their
resources in the name of an innovating
concept such as "collective economic
sovereignty" or "the common heritage of
humanity", they are nonetheless still in
favour of the concept as long as it is ap¬
plied impartially to everything and
everyone. .
It has been pointed out that the basins of f
Sphere 6, a bronze globe by the Italian sculptor Amoldo Pomodoro.
Photo Dick Wolters © Boymans van Beuningen Museum, Rotterdam
13

In a world that has shrunk to the
dimensions of a "global village",
isolated solutions to problems of
the protection of the environment
and the use of natural resources
are no longer possible. The planet
itself has become the microcosm
suggested by this image of the
creation of the world portrayed by
Hieronymus Bosch on the back of
the wing panels of his famous
triptych The Garden of Earthly
Delights.
Photo © Mas, Barcelona. Prado Museum, Madrid
the Amazon and the Congo, the world's
* most abundant source of oxygen, could be
taken as typical examples of the common
heritage of humanity. On these grounds,
and because oxygen is absolutely vital to
the life of the whole planet, the States
which control these basins should be ac¬
countable to the whole international com¬
munity for their management of this vital
resource.
There is nothing intrinsically shocking in
this idea. But it must be seen in the context
of a pooling of the earth's resources and
wealth founded on solidarity and excluding
all selfish considerations of national self-
interest. The behaviour of the nations, not
to mention the tacit assumptions on which
it is based, gives the impression that it is up
to the Third World to shoulder the obliga¬
tions inherent in the application of the con¬
cept of the common heritage of humanity,
while the industrialized countries enjoy the
corresponding rights and benefits.
In other words, a kind of international
division of labour would perpetuate and ex¬
acerbate the mechanism of domination,
obliging Brazil and the Congo, for example,
to preserve oxygen so that the industrializ¬
ed powers could use as much of it as they
pleased. Thus no account is taken of the
obligation incumbent on the rich countries
not to destroy the thin layer of the earth's
atmosphere by the extravagant and anar¬
chic use of the internal combustion engine.
The notion of a "common heritage of
humanity" therefore only achieves a signifi¬
cant degree of credibility insofar as it em¬
bodies an equitable sharing of the rights
and duties of States, or incorporates ine¬
quality only as a means of compensating
the developing countries. If oil is part of the
common heritage of humanity, then it
should be considered as such wherever it is
found, regardless of its geographical
location.
American, British, Norwegian or Soviet
oil should belong to everyone just as much
as oil from the Middle East. And before oil
is even considered, agricultural foodstuffs,
of which the North American continent is
still by far the biggest source of supply,
should be declared part of the common
heritage, with food producers being
answerable to the international community
in general and, in particular, to the hungry
multitudes of Asia and Africa.
It has been pointed out that if such con¬
ditions are not met, and if the concept of a
common heritage is promoted before its
time, "instead of facilitating the coming of
A world working in harmony is
evoked in this sphere from a
monumental clock on which the
Flemish painter Quentin Massys
(c. 1466-1530) depicted a variety of
domestic and agricultural tasks.
Photo © Louvain Museum, Belgium
14

a new and equitable system of relation¬
ships, [it] could well establish a basis for a
return to relationships of dependence bet¬
ween the strong nations, on the one hand,
which would like to remain in a predomi¬
nant position and continue to exercise the
prerogatives of strength, and, on the other,
the weak countries which would continue
to hanker vainly after real equality of oppor¬
tunity which would continue to elude
them".
But the fact is that the two approaches
examined above, reflecting on the one
hand the sovereignty of the State over its
natural resources and on the other collec¬
tive economic security and the common
heritage of humanity, only appear to be ir¬
reconcilable. Transcending their points of
conflict, they both contribute to the evolu¬
tion of international law in the direction of
more elaborate forms of collective welfare
and above all to the establishment of a new
law for all mankind.
Were we rash enough to lift a corner of
the veil which conceals from us the future
of humanity on this planet, we might see
that mankind is today at a turning-point
and that international law is on the brink of
drastic changes.
Any reference to the principle of a com¬
mon heritage as an idea which has a conti¬
nuing validity necessarily means that pre¬
sent generations are answerable to future
generations for their stewardship of this
heritage. This holds unprecedented im¬
plications for international law, which
transcends the self-interest of individual
men and States and, in a truly global ap¬
proach, relates to all humanity. For the first
time man can reflect on his ultimate goals, i
not only as an individual but as a species. I
15

Constructive thought along these lines,
concerning the common interests of
mankind in the vast unexploited areas of
the planet such as the ocean floor, the
polar regions and the world's rivers as well
as the atmosphere and outer space, would
only be a beginning and would by no
means exhaust the juridical and political
possibilities of the concept of a common
heritage.
The idea of a common heritage of
humanity has already been suggested with
regard to cultural property. Its progressive
extension into many other fields would be
nothing less than revolutionary in its im¬
pact and would effect a complete transfor¬
mation of international law, corresponding
to profound changes in the way of life and
the quality of life of all mankind.
But only a Utopian dreamer could im¬
agine that the time is yet ripe for the abrupt
framing of laws in this spirit. At the present
stage of human development, the widest
possible application of the notion of the
common heritage of humanity in interna¬
tional law is simply not a practical possibili¬
ty. However, the day may come when its
scope will be extended to all spheres of the
"international law of land, water and sky",
and this would constitute a tremendous
revolution. Through this concept, the new
international law could not only apply to in¬
ert matter and manufactured goods but
directly to peoples and to man himself, for
whom the standards of international law
are primarily intended.
Work has yet to begin on the standards
and institutions that would enshrine the
concept of a common heritage of humani¬
ty. States and international organizations
will be faced with enormous, totally new
problems, by no means the least of which
are those of human rights and the conser¬
vation of the environment. Each of these
problems is of the highest importance to
the idea of a common heritage, for what
would be the point of exploiting the
tremendous riches of the ocean floor for
the benefit of humanity if human dignity or
integrity are threatened or if the environ¬
ment is despoiled to the point where
human life is imperilled.
On 4 July 1976, on the occasion of the
200th anniversary of the Declaration of In¬
dependence of the United States by the
representatives of the thirteen English col¬
onies of North America, a Universal
Declaration of the Rights of Peoples was
adopted in Algiers under the auspices of
the Lelio Basso Foundation. Article 17 of
the Declaration extols "the right of every
people to use the common heritage of
humanity, such as the high seas, the ocean
floor, and outer space". This text is
another signpost boldly pointing the way to
a wider application of the principle of a
common heritage. But let it not be forgot¬
ten that if this principle is to achieve its
fullest significance the mainspring of the
law must be service to mankind, for the
foundation stone of the common heritage
of humanity is man himself.
There is today a growing awareness that
the problems facing the world must be
seen in a truly global perspective. Nowhere
is this need more apparent than in the case
of ecology. One American diplomat has
proposed the creation of an "international
authority for the environment", since "the
ecology of our planet eludes all national
compartmentalization". At the seventh
session of the Third Conference on the
Law of the Sea, held in Geneva in April and
May 1978, speakers concerned about the
dangers of oil slicks and other forms of
marine pollution urged that the obligation
to protect the marine environment be
recognized as a fundamental tenet of inter¬
national law. Such a step would endow the
new law of the oceans with the capacity to
safeguard the interests of all States and all
peoples, including environmental conser¬
vation, through the application of the con¬
cept of a common heritage which makes
present generations accountable to future
generations for the environment.
The notion of a common heritage of
humanity seems to be of fundamental im¬
portance to the establishment of a new in¬
ternational economic order. Science and
technology offer a vast potential as a
source of rational solutions to the problems
that plague humanity. The misguided use
of this potential to promote the kind of
development which would only benefit a
minority must one day come to an end. The
fundamental irrationality of the kind of
development imposed on man throughout
history cannot be perpetuated or rein-
vigorated to challenge and negate
technological, scientific and human pro¬
gress.
To allow new forms of energy and new
human resources to become the
prerogative of a minority of nations and
social classes will be to invite nuclear
apocalypse. A perverted use of the concept
of the common heritage of mankind would
be the worst and most precarious solution
to the problems of the future of our planet.
As for the idea of "collective economic
security", it is all-encompassing, or it is
nothing: it must apply to all States and to
the totality of their resources. The
possibilities this concept has to offer will
only become credible when its all-
encompassing nature is fully accepted.
With the fulfillment of this condition,
which today seems a very distant prospect,
the time will have come for a real and
beneficial change from a world of division
to a world of sharing.
Mohammad Bedjaoui
16

«
Disarmament, ecological
problems and the
exploitation of natural
resources are issues that
involve the interests of all
mankind and call for a
growing spirit of solidarity.
Yet, though men are
becoming increasingly
aware that this solidarity is
a necessary pre-condition
of their development as
equals (symbolized by this
remarkable ninth-century
Irish cross, left, depicting
the twelve apostles),
communities throughout
the world are today striving
to preserve their Identity
with a tenacious fidelity to
their cultural traditions that
is a vital source of
enrichment for the world's
cultural heritage. Right,
three images of this
cultural diversity (from
top): a fragment of Coptic
cloth (Ethiopia) bearing a
design representing the
Nile, with men, birds, fish
and other animals; majestic
figures on the façade of the
small temple of Abu Simbel
(Egypt); aerial view of
pattern of fields and
dwellings (Mali).
17
