Paul Dirac seen with
Einstein at the fifth
Solvay Conference, held
in Brussels in October
1927.
Photo © Palais de la Découverte,
Paris



The test of time
by Paul Dirac
PAUL DIRAC, eminent British physicist, won
the 1933 Nobel Prize in physics with Erwin
Schrödinger, an Austrian scientist, for his bril¬
liant studies and research in atomic physics. He
is a Professor Emeritus of Cambridge University
and Professor ofphysics at Florida State Univer¬
sity, USA. This article is an abridged version of a
lecture given by Prof. Dirac ata Unesco sympo¬
sium on the Impact of Modern Scientific Ideas
on Society, held in September 1978 at the Uni¬
versities of Munich and Ulm (Federal Republic of
Germany).
THE big discoveries in science are
made in two ways. Sometimes the
time is ripe for a certain discovery
and there are many people hot on the trail.
It becomes a race between them and
whoever wins the race gets the credit.
If you look through the list of Nobel Prize
winners you will see that very often the
prizes are awarded to two or three people
who have worked on the same subject and
the credit is divided between those who
win the race. This kind of discovery is such
that if one particular man had never existed
the discovery would soon have been made
by somebody else.
Now there is another kind of scientific
discovery where one man works all alone,
follows new lines of thought entirely by
himself with no rivals and no competitors.
He goes into new domains of thought
which no one has previously entered. The
work of Einstein is mostly of this kind.
If Einstein had not existed these
discoveries would not have been made by
anybody else for many years or for many
decades. Einstein alone entirely changed
the course of scientific history.
Einstein's theory of relativity remained
unknown, except to a few specialists, until
the end of 1918, when the First World War
came to an end. It then came in with a ter¬
rific impact. It presented the world with a
new style of thinking, a new philosophy.
It came at a time when everyone was
sick of the war, those who had won as well
as those who had lost. People wanted
something new. Relativity provided just
what was wanted and was seized upon by
the general public and became the central
topic of conversation. It allowed people to
forget for a time the horrors of the war they
had come through.
Innumerable articles about relativity were
written in newspapers and magazines.
Never before or since has a specific idea
aroused so much and such widespread in¬
terest. Most of what was said and written
referred to general philosophical ideas and
CONTINUED PAGE 21
17

perihelion
finish still waterstart
Mercury violates a cosmic schedule. Scientists
were bothered for a hundred years because
Mercury in reaching its perihelion, or point
closest to the sun, did not revolve exactly once
around the sun from one perihelion to the next.
It seemed to exceed the celestial speed laws by
travelling a little bit more. In the course of a
century, this discrepancy amounted to forty-
three seconds of arc, represented in the
diagram by A...B. Einstein's explanation of this
"aberration" was one of the outstanding
results of his general theory of relativity.
start with the tide finish
Relativity of speed. The speed of any moving object is relative to an observer,
as these three drawings illustrate. The submarine is moving forward under the
maximum speed of its engines in each case, but the distance covered in one
hour varies because of the motion of the water. Thus, while the ship's velocity
in relation to the water remains the same in each case, its speed appears to be
variable to an observer on land, who, not knowing about the tides, would
assume that the submarine's engines were being run moderately fast, then very
slowly, and finally with great speed.
Speed of light is constant. Two mythical cannon at opposite ends of the earth
fire a projectile at the moon. Because of a difference in speed due to the motion
of the earth, the two projectiles arrive at their destination days apart. But the
beams of light which appeared from each cannon at the same instant arrive at
the moon simultaneously, exactly one and one third seconds after the firing of
the cannon. The speed of light is not affected by any motion at its source or of
the medium through which it passes, and for that reason is an important
standard of measurement under the theory of relativity.
RELATIVITY
IN
PICTURES
Relativity of direction. What appears to us as a straight line may in reality be a
curve. A person dropping a stone from the top of the tower sees it fall in a
straight line to earth. But he forgets that the earth is moving. Because of this
motion, an observer in space would see the stone fall not in a straight line but
along the curved path A...B.
Drawings and captions on these pages were done under
Einstein's guidance. They are taken from Albert Einstein
Maker of Universes by H. Gordon Garbedian © 1939
Cassell and Co. Ltd., London.
20

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17
did not have the precision required for
serious scientific discussion. Very little
precise information was available. But still
people were happy just to expound their
views.
I was an engineering student at Bristol
University in England at the time, and of
course the students took up this subject
and discussed it extensively among
themselves. But neither the students nor
the professors had precise information
about it or knew anything about the
underlying mathematics. We could only
talk about the philosophical implications
and accept the universal belief that it was a
good theory.
In England, one man, Arthur Eddington,
really understood relativity and became the
leader and the authority on the subject. He
was very much concerned with the
astronomical consequences of the theory
and the possibility of checking it by
astronomical observations.
Three possible tests of the theory were
proposed.
The first of these concerned the motion
of the planet Mercury. The perihelion of
Mercury (the point in the planet's trajectory
nearest to the sun) was observed to be ad¬
vancing about forty-three seconds of arc
more than it should be according to the
Newtonian theory, a fact that had been
bothering astronomers for a long time.
Einstein's new theory predicted just this ef¬
fect and Eddington's tests confirmed this
prediction.
This was really a wonderful success for
Einstein's theory, but it is said that Einstein
himself was not very excited when he
heard of Eddington's confirmation because
he felt that his theory had to be right in any
case.
The second test concerned the deflec¬
tion of light passing close by the sun. Ein¬
stein's theory of gravitation requires that
light passing close by the sun shall be
deflected. The Newtonian theory also re¬
quires a deflection, but only half the
amount of the Einstein theory. So, by
observing stars on the far side of the sun,
whose light has passed close to the sun to
reach us, we can test Einstein's theory.
Now we can only observe the stars close
to the sun at a time of total eclipse, when
the sun's light is blotted out by the moon.
There was a suitable total eclipse in 1919
and Eddington prepared two expeditions to
observe this eclipse, leading one of them in
person.
Both expeditions obtained results which
confirmed Einstein's theory. However, the
accuracy of this confirmation was not very
great because of the difficulties in making
these observations. So people were not
altogether satisfied with it. At many total
eclipses of the sun that have occurred since
then, people have again checked for this
effect and they have always got results
agreeing with Einstein's theory with a
greater or lesser accuracy.
More recently it has become possible to
check this effect with radio waves instead
of light waves. Radio stars have been
discovered and when a radio star is behind
the sun we can observe whether the radio
waves passing close by the sun are
deflected. This can be done without
waiting for a total eclipse because the sun
is only a very weak emitter of radio waves.
Using radio waves instead of light waves
there is an added complication because
radio waves are deflected by the sun's cor¬
ona. But this deflection is different for
waves of different lengths, so by making
the observations for two different
wavelengths, we can separate the effect
arising from the corona from the Einstein
effect. The result is that Einstein's theory is
confirmed with an accuracy much greater
than can be attained with light waves.
The third test concerned the prediction
of the general relativity theory that light
waves which have been emitted from a
source in a gravitational field will be
deflected towards longer wavelengths, i.e.
towards the red end of the spectrum, an ef¬
fect known as the red shift. The obvious
place to look for this effect is with a light
that has come from the surface of the sun.
But it is difficult to observe the Einstein ef¬
fect there because of another phenomenon
(the Doppler effect) arising from the mo¬
tion of the matter in the sun's atmosphere
which is quite large and which is not very
well understood. Nevertheless, we can
make estimates of the effects of this mo¬
tion and obtain a rough agreement of the
requirements of Einstein's theory.
The discovery of the white dwarf star
provides a better way of testing for this ef¬
fect. With the white dwarf stars we have
matter in a very highly condensed state.
The gravitational potential at the surface of
a white dwarf is very much greater than it is
at the surface of the sun and the Einstein
effect is correspondingly greater. If we
have enough information about the white
dwarf to be able to infer what its mass is
and its size, we can get a very good check
of Einstein's theory. This effect can now
also be checked by laboratory observations
with greater accuracy than we can get with
astronomical observations.
Recently a fourth test has been added to
the three classical ones. This is concerned
with the time taken by light to pass close by
the sun. The Einstein theory requires a
delay. This can be observed if we project
radar waves to a planet on the far side of
the sun, and then observe the time taken
for the reflected waves to get back to
earth. With the use of radar waves the
retardation is affected by the sun's corona
and again we have to use two different
wavelengths to disentangle the corona ef¬
fect from the Einstein effect.
The observations have been carried out
by Irwin Shapiro and again there is good
confirmation of the Einstein theory.
This enumeration of the successes of
Einstein's theory is impressive. In every
case Einstein's theory is confirmed, with
greater or less accuracy depending on the
precision with which the observations can
be made and the uncertainties that they
involve.
Let us now face the question, that a
discrepancy has appeared, well confirmed
and substantiated, between the theory and
the observations. How should one react to
it ? How would Einstein himself have
reacted to it ? Should one then consider
the theory to be basically wrong ?
I would say that the answer to the last
question is emphatically No. Anyone who
appreciates the fundamental harmony con¬
necting the way nature runs and general
mathematical principles must feel that a
theory with the beauty and elegance of
Einstein's theory has to be substantially
correct. If a discrepancy should appear in
some application of the theory, it must be
caused by some secondary feature relating
to this application which has not been ade¬
quately taken into account, and not by a
failure of the general principles of the k
theory. f
Relativity of time. Two widely separated
lighthouses flash a warning beacon at the
same Instant. A man on the ground, exactly
half-way between the two towers, sees the
two flashes simultaneously. But to an observer
in the airship, moving towards the beacon at
the left, the two flashes would not be
simultaneous. Relative to him, the flash from
the tower nearest to him would appear a
fraction of a second ahead of the other, as it
has less distance to cover.
21

*
* *
1 . -1
1 - .
m ^ ft *
*
1
_^^T&fl_ _ i- -^.
ftr>-
* * ^^* ' ' w
' \ -
* *
m : !
*
*
*
*
*
*
Above, the first ever picture of an X-ray star was transmitted from the three-ton orbiting
space observatory HEAO-2. The star is called Cygnus X-1. It is part of a dual system in the
Cygnus constellation about 6,000 light years away. This dual system is believed to contain
a black hole (see page 15). Below, four quasars photographed through the Hale telescope
at Mount Palomar in California. Quasars (quasi-stellar radio sources), celestial bodies that
emit radio waves, were first discovered in 1962. Some quasars also emit X-rays. The quasar
known as 3C-273 (lower left) is the most powerful X-ray source so far discovered.
Photos © I.P.S., Paris
When Einstein was working on building
up his theory of gravitation he was not try¬
ing to account for some results of observa¬
tions. Far from it. His entire procedure was
to search for a beautiful theory, a theory of
a type that nature would choose.
He was guided only by the requirement
that his theory should have the beauty and
the elegance which one would expect to be
provided by any fundamental description of
nature. He was working entirely from these
ideas of what nature ought to be like and
not from the requirement to account for
certain experimental results.
Of course it needs real genius to be able
to imagine what nature should be like; just
from abstract thinking about it. Einstein
was able to do it.
Somehow he got the idea of connecting
gravitation with the curvature of space. He
was able to develop a mathematical
scheme incorporating this idea. He was
guided only by consideration of the beauty
of the equations.
The result of such a procedure is a theory
of great simplicity and elegance in its basic
ideas. One has an overpowering belief that
its foundations must be correct quite in¬
dependent of its agreement with observa¬
tion.
I had the privilege of meeting Einstein on
various occasions. The first time was at the
22

Solvay Conference in Brussels in 1927 at
which the leading scientists of the world
discussed recent developments.
By that time Einstein's theory was firmly
established and generally accepted and it
was not a subject of discussion at that con¬
ference. The major topic was the new
quantum theory of Heisenberg,
Schrödinger and others. Of course, we all
wanted to have Einstein's impressions of
the new ideas.
Einstein was a little hostile to these ideas
because he had obtained such a marvellous
success with his own ideas of introducing
geometry into physics and he thought that
further development would also be on the
lines of introducing more exotic kinds of
geometry. He had spent many years of his
life working on those lines without any very
substantial success. Probably these ideas
of Einstein are basically correct but they
have not yet led to a satisfactory
solution.
I also met Einstein at a later Solvay Con¬
ference; then he came to Cambridge,
where I was working, and later went to
Princeton and became a permanent
member of the Institute for Advanced
Study. I was also a temporary member of
the Institute from time to time.
I attended lectures which Einstein gave
and sometimes he invited me to his. house
which was a great privilege. I got to know
KNUDIIH HIRIIN JlANl
*t»lvlt WIIH
»«»»I« CU»I
him personally on those occasions. I was
able to see how scientific ideas dominated
pretty well all his thoughts; even when you
were given a cup of tea and you stirred it,
the motion of the tea-leaves was
something which Einstein figured out how
to explain.
During the course of Einstein's discus¬
sions with physicists, he made one remark
which has become very famous and is now
carved into the stonework over the
fireplace in the common-room of the
Mathematics Institute at Princeton Univer¬
sity. To appreciate this remark you really
have to be a research physicist and under¬
stand that God has set certain problems
which the research physicist is trying to
solve. Furthermore, you must try to ap¬
preciate the mentality of God in setting
these problems. Einstein summed up his
view of this situation with these words :
"Raffiniert ist Gott, aber bösartig ¡st Er
nicht", "God is clever, but not dishonest".
Paul Dirac
IINtTIIK L1KIIV
The first Solvay Conference (so named
after the Belgian industrialist Ernest
Solvay who sponsored it) was held in
Brussels In 1911 to discuss the
consequences of Max Planck's law of
black body radiation, formulated in 1901,
which laid the foundation of the quantum
theory. This group of scientists, perhaps
the most prestigious ever gathered
together, was responsible for advances in
knowledge that form the basis of
modern physics.
23
