UNESCO
and the International Year of the Child
UNESCO's activities in connexion
with the International Year of the
Child (1979), proclaimed by the
General Assembly of the United
Nations, form part of a continuing effort on
behalf of the world's children which began
when Unesco was created over thirty years
ago and faced the urgent task of helping
children whose lives and education had
been tragically disrupted by war.
Ever since then, Unesco has sought,
through its work in education, the social
sciences, culture and communication, to
strengthen global and national commit¬
ment to the welfare of children and to pro¬
mote action designed to bring about lasting
improvements in their lives.
During the International Year of the
Child, Unesco is covering a very broad
spectrum of activities encompassing the
education of handicapped children; the pro¬
tection of the rights of children, with spe¬
cial attention to those of migrant work¬
ers and refugees; the promotion and deve
lopment of children's books and libraries;
the encouragement of international support
for action programmes in favour of children
in developing countries; studies on such
questions as the impact of educational tele¬
vision on young children and the ways in
which children form scientific and techno¬
logical concepts; the training of staff for
pre-school education.
To help attract the attention of the world
community to children and their needs, and
to make Unesco and its work better known
to a youthful audience, a range of publica¬
tions, films and radio and television pro¬
grammes have been produced.
A programme co-produced by Unesco
and French television (TF.1) brings to the
screen seven world leaders whose mess¬
ages on the theme of IYC are interwoven
with songs and dances by children's groups
from different parts of the globe. Already
broadcast in France, it is being adapted into
many different languages and is expected
to be shown in some forty or fifty countries.
As part of an international film exchange
project co-ordinated by Unesco, TV net¬
works In ten countries are exploring child¬
hood in different social and cultural envi¬
ronments. Each network has agreed to pro¬
duce a film on the theme "the child and his
world" and to exchange a copy freely with
the others, so that all participating coun¬
tries will benefit from the complete series.
Unesco is also preparing a series of radio
programmes on children's rights, while a
number of short cartoon films for children
on "Discovering Unesco" are being made in
co-operation with Channel 3 of French tele¬
vision. Unesco will shortly be publishing a
study, based on recent research, of the
effects of educational television on chil¬
dren.
New Unesco publications specially writ¬
ten for young readers include A World for
Everybody, a booklet for children up to nine
years old which describes Unesco's aims
and action in simple, informal terms, and a
braille book with pictures in relief explai¬
ning Unesco to blind children.
A travelling exhibition of children's toys
and games from all over the world, already
held at Unesco's Paris headquarters, will be
on show in a joint Unicef-Unesco pavilion at
the "Man and his World" Exhibition at Mon¬
treal, Canada, between June and Septem¬
ber, while an international exhibition of
children's books is scheduled to take place
In Paris in April.
Young people from eighty-five countries
are taking part in a drawing competition
sponsored by National Commissions for
Unesco or national press or radio and televi¬
sion organizations. The entries, on the
thema "My life in the year 2000", will be
judged by an international jury at Unesco
headquarters on 15 May.
Finally, the illustrations on these pages
bear witness to another Unesco initiative
for IYC. They are taken from a forthcoming
catalogue of reproductions of paintings
depicting children, a publication inspired by
the popularity, over the years, of Unesco's
two-volume guide to reproductions of
major works of art.
A Little Girl
by Mabuse (1472 7-1536 ?)
The National Gallery, London
27
