As television has become a worldwide force, its impact on
children's ideas and behaviour has generated growing concern
and controversy. In some quarters, optimism about TV's
potential has turned sour. Others believe that the medium is
often unjustly attacked as a scapegoat for the ills of an
increasingly complex world and that TV should be seen in a more
balanced perspective as only one of many factors which interact
in the development of the child.


in focus
by James Halloran
IN most western countries children spend a great deal of time in
front of the television set, be it in the general living room, a
special recreational room, or their own bedroom. In some
relatively affluent areas there may be three or more television sets
in the same home, and there are reports of children spending more
time watching television than they spend in school, and certainly
more than they spend talking to their parents.
Clearly, a medium which attracts so much attention and takes
up so much time cannot be ignored. In fact we have to be prepared
JAMES HALLORAN is director of the Centre for Mass Communication
Research at the University of Leicester and president of the International
Association for Mass Communication Research. A member of the United
Kingdom National Commission for Unesco, on whose Communication
Advisory Committee he serves, he is the author ofmany books and articles
on communication and sociology. His recent publications include: the
introduction to Ethnicity and the Media, Unesco, 1977, and Social
Research in Broadcasting Further Development or Turning the Clock
Back?, Journal of Communication, volume 28, no. 2, 1978.

to accept the possibility that television should be regarded, along
with family, school, church, etc., as an important agent in the
development or socialization of the child. Additionally, in some
countries, most schools have the necessary facilities and equip¬
ment and, consequently, many children are also able to view (even
if what they watch is somewhat different) in the school as well as
in the home.
Although in western countries television is primarily seen as an
entertainment medium, it may also be used for educational purpo¬
ses. There are still those, although understandably not as many as
when the medium was first introduced, who speak in terms of the
medium's great potential for good. In fact, at times they appear to
regard it as a panacea for the social and educational ills of society.
However, when television figures prominently in the public
debate, it is generally its perceived potential for harm that receives
the attention, produces the concern and leads to public outcries,
the formation of pressure groups, the demands for censorship, the
setting up of special enquiries and commissions, and so on. In
many western countries television is accused of a wide variety of
offences, including the destruction of moral values, trivialization,
desensitization,' inhibiting creativity, forming an obstacle to educa¬
tion, wiping out hard-earned social and educational gains, fur¬
thering greed and unrealistic expectations and increasing crime
and violence.
The attack on television does not really represent a new pheno¬
menon; throughout history, technological innovations in commu¬
nication have been received with hostility. It is convenient for us to
be able to find a scapegoat, a single explanation for the ills of
society since this absolves us from examining our own possible
involvement in them. Admittedly, there are some who regard tele¬
vision as being entirely different in nature (and therefore in
influence) from print and sound media, but what people are saying
now about television has been said before by their forebears about
films, comics, magazines and the press.
It is worth noting that, until quite recently, in the developing
world the use of television was viewed with much more optimism,
with regard to its potential for development, than it has been in L
most western countries. Even now, the complaints in the develo- '

how the media experience fits in with other experiences and infor¬
mation are all influenced by other factors. These include the stage
of development of the child, role of parents, availability of other
relevant information, alternative sources and perceived substitu¬
tes, attitudes of peers, need for expression, search for meaning,
and so on.
Parents from different social classes control the viewing of pre¬
school children in different ways (some, not at all). Young delin¬
quents talk far less about what they see on television, not only to
parents, but also to teachers and friends, than do non-delinquents
from similar backgrounds; success at school, the degree of com¬
mitment to school values and the meaningfulness of the school
experience influence the degree to which young people become
involved in various aspects of pop culture; university students and
the police interpret the portrayal of political demonstrations on
television in quite different ways (individuals from both groups
actually "seeing" things which didn't actually happen); those with
personal experiences of living or working with ethnic minorities
make different use of the media treatment of race-related material.
There are some social scientists in the United States, however,
who would not equate television viewing with experiences with
other media, still less with non-media experiences. To them, the
ping countries about the medium's performance and shortcomings
are not unconnected with western influence, and in particular with
the import of western programmes.
Unfortunately, the debate about the influence of television, and
the media generally, tends to be conducted at a rather low level.
Quite simply, this is because the right questions are rarely asked.
This is not surprising, for those who ask the questions and make
the statements (including many who would claim to be social
scientists) work within the boundaries of inadequate models (rarely
explicitly articulated) of both society and the communication
process.
Questions and statements about "the effects of television on
children", "television as a cause of some form of behaviour", etc.,
whether made from a positive or negative standpoint about media
influence, place the medium firmly in the middle of the stage. From
the outset the medium is central in the explanatory process of
whatever attitude or behaviour is being examined.
Yet the use of a more appropriate model and the utilization of
more refined knowledge about the behaviour in question would
invariably suggest a different approach. Television would be
placed in context, where due attention would be given to media
other than television, and to other institutions (e.g. family, school)
that might be expected to have contributed to the development of
the specific behaviour and played a part in the general socialization
of the child.
Television is a force, in some cases it may be an important force,
to be reckoned with. But usually it is only one force amongst sev¬
eral forces, which interact in a complex manner in the develop¬
ment of the child.
To emphasize these points, however, is not to deny that tele¬
vision has influence. On the contrary; children may identify with
television models, they may imitate what they see on the screen,
and obviously they may learn from television, directly and in¬
directly, at several levels, just as they learn from other sources.
But television rarely, if ever, operates in isolation. Most western
societies are not homogeneous. They are differentiated or strati¬
fied in some way or other. Children, in addition to basic differences
in their make-up, come from a wide range of backgrounds, where
they have met different people, had different experiences and
opportunities, and so on. When they watch television they do so
with their own special filtering equipment, which in general terms
may be seen as a mesh of past experiences, present relationships
and affiliations, and future expectations. It is, then, not so much a
question of what television does to children as what children do
with the material that television, portrays.
Research suggests that, although we have mass media, it might
be misleading to talk about mass communication ("a contradiction
in terms in a heterogeneous society"). It is misleading to refer to
children as such, and to television as such.
Children differ in so many ways. What children actually watch
on television, how they attend to it, what they perceive, how they
interpret the experience, what they remember, what they recall.

electronic medium as it currently operates in the USA, is qualita¬
tively, in fact totally, different from other media and other sources
of information and experience. They see television as the cultural
arm of society, disseminating cultural symbols into the public
consciousness and producing a cultural homogeneity far more per¬
vasive than researchers in other countries, as well as other resear¬
chers in their own country, have been able to detect.
The extensive portrayal of violence on television is seen not so
much as a source of imitation or stimulus to aggression but as
creating fear, apprehension and insecurity which may then be
translated into a firm, possibly an excessive, support for the forces
of law and order, and may even lead eventually to submission and
subservience to the State.
This argument, although many would question its validity, is
another, more up to date and more complex version of the oft sta¬
ted general case that, on the whole in western society, the media
operate in the interests of the establishment and tend to serve the
system by legitimating, maintaining and reinforcing the status quo.
In passing, we might note that in non-western societies the media
may perform the same basic function, albeit in a different, more
direct and deliberate manner. Everywhere the medium is the
system, and the medium is an agent in the socialization of the
child.
It is important, however, to emphasize that there is much more
to the influence of television and to an understanding of its role in
child development than can possibly be ascertained by the use of
the conventional, and perhaps misleading, research approaches
which focus on imitation, modelling, identification, attitude
change, and so on.
But to question the validity of this research is certainly not to
deny the influence of television. On the contrary, it is to demon¬
strate the complexity and subtlety of a process which could be far
more pervasive and influential than many would believe possible.
Basically it has more to do with frameworks of interpretation than
discrete messages and direct effects.
For example, children are almost bound to be influenced in some
way or other by the basic values which underlie so much of what
television provides. In most western societies television, particu¬
larly when associated with advertising in emphasizing "planned
obsolescence", "constructive discontent" or "the ostentatious
display of conspicuous consumption" gives the message loud and
clear, and the message is that material prosperity is what matters.
The medium becomes the menu
when the TV set dominates the
dining table like an electronic guest.
Television can play a valuable role in
the young child's life, providing
information, sparking ideas and
dramatizing human feelings. But
addictive TV watching may be a
mechanism for avoiding discussion of
family problems and for eliminating
the rituals and pastimes of family
life. Left, sketches by two nine-year-
old French children who were asked to
"draw a television" as part of a study
on children and television carried out
in the Paris region.

»v
7%M
School and community television in India
In August 1975 India launched a unique, year-long experiment in
TV satellite communication in order to speed the growth of
knowledge In its rural areas. During this Satellite Instructional
Television Experiment (SITE) programmes were beamed via the
U.S. ATS-6 satellite to community TV receivers In some 2,400
villages. Below, rooftop antenna In the village of Pilikltilai near
Jaipur. Children were the main beneficiaries of SITE, and
according to one report the experiment generated so much
interest in learning that there was a fall in the number of school
drop-outs. Right, educational TV broadcast in a Pilikltilai school.
As part of the experiment Unesco helped train programme
producers, who often work in consultation with psychologists,
educators and social workers. When SITE ended in 1976 the
experiment was continued with ground transmitters which
brought to rural areas, especially in the Ahmadabad region,
programmes on such themes as farming, nutrition and hygiene.
Above, adult viewers watch an evening broadcast on the
community TV set In a village square. Educational TV in India is
broadcast in many languages Including Hindi, Bengali, Tamil,
Marathi, Gujerati, Urdu and English. It seeks active participation
from children In a variety of entertaining programmes which
present music, dance, drama, games, quiz shows, and offer
training In handicrafts. Care is taken to respect cultural values
and traditions, and the content of advertising Is governed by a
special code. India, which already has a million TV receivers, is
planning to launch its own satellite, INSAT, in 1982, to bring the
benefits of educational television to an even wider area of the
country.
8

(. Material prosperity is undoubtedly the predominant value in
western society a value which is daily promoted by the media.
The media pay great attention to the goals and objectives but they
have little to say about the legitimate ways of achieving the
advocated goals, and there is no doubt that there are many people
in most countries who do not have the chance to achieve them
legitimately.
By operating in this way television may help in the development
of unrealistic expectations, make some people aware of their rela¬
tive deprivation and lead to frustration, and possibly aggression or
deviance. When television programmes with such values are
exported to developing countries, the position becomes even more
problematic.
The points just made may not appear compatible with the earlier
comments about individual selectivity with regard to perception,
interpretation, reaction, etc. In this connexion it should first be
stressed that when it is said that different children make different
use of the media, we are not thinking in terms of a sort of indivi
dual anarchy. Children may be grouped together, and groups
which have several relevant factors in common (e.g. age, sex,
social class, education) may be found to use the media in similar
ways.
Secondly, and more importantly, the children's selections are
not unlimited. They are restricted by what is provided by televi¬
sion. Television sets the agenda, and to that degree controls the
discourse, usually in a relatively consistent, conformist manner.
Children select from television and the other media in an attempt
to give meaning to their lives, and these selections will reflect their
non-media experiences and general situations.
This is how television becomes an agent in the socialization
process a process which may involve coming to terms, or other¬
wise dealing with, several sets of values (although one might be
predominant) rather than simply conforming (or not conforming)
to just one.
In the same way, it can be misleading to talk about television per
se. Some research indicates that increasingly, over the years, tele
vision has come to be regarded as the most used and the most
reliable source of information. But it is interesting to note that
when questions are asked in research which deal with the different
matters covered bv television (e.g. music, morals, politics, sport,
fashion, etc.) then the use, perceived credibility and influence of
television, vis-à-vis other sources, vary according to the subject.
Moreover, television varies from country to country, not only in
terms of output, but also in terms of its relationship to other insti¬
tutions. More than simply an electronic medium, television is,
above all, a social-political institution and its policy, modus ope¬
randi and output have to be seen within the appropriate social-
political frameworks which it will reflect and reinforce.
If we are looking at the relationship between television and chil¬
dren, then the overall picture will be different in those countries
where communication policies and education policies are clearly
articulated and closely related from what it will be in those coun¬
tries where there is no planned relationship between the two, and
where the forces of the market-place might predominate, at least
as far as television policy and programmes are concerned.
In one case there is a conscious attempt to use both the media
and the educational system as part of a deliberate policy to meet
needs which have been defined from some value position. In the
other, it seems to be assumed (although the problem is rarely
couched in this way) that needs (ill-defined) will be best met
through the free play of market forces. Both approaches (and
there are differences within each) have advantages and disadvan¬
tages. It is the latter system, or some version of it, that holds sway
in most western societies. Not surprisingly, it is often characterized
by internal contradictions with regard to values, policy and prac¬
tice, not only between television and education, but also between
different departments (e.g. education, entertainment, advertising)
within the same broadcasting institution.
We need to remember that, although some broadcasting institu¬
tions provide excellent educational programmes for children and
young people, these programmes are but a drop in the ocean of
total output, and frequently represent values which do not appear
consistent with those of general output.
The fact that there are different policies with regard to education
and television in different countries means, quite obviously, that
alternative approaches are available for consideration in any given
country. Unfortunately, because of the nature of the relevant
social systems, the debate is often polarized into a not very fruitful
confrontation between "freedom" and "central control".
There must be something to learn from all systems. Perhaps we
could start by questioning the elitist or top-downwards approach
to broadcasting which seems to prevail in all countries, irrespective
of political climate. We know it is not necessary that television
should always take the form of the few talking to the many often
about the position of the many from the standpoint of the
few but it usually does take this form.
We might begin to look for alternative forms. Decisions about
media policy are governed by considerations of ideology, political
expediency, private profit and the need to maintain existing struc¬
tures, although needless to say these are usually rationalized in
terms of the public good, or the communication needs of society.
Perhaps one of our main tasks in this year of the child should be
to cut through these tautologies, test the various claims and try to
ascertain precisely what specific needs of children are being met,
to what degree and with what consequences, by different broad¬
casting systems in different parts of the world. We might then be
in a position, by drawing on experiences from many countries, to
make recommendations about the structures and policies most
likely to meet basic needs and, it is to be hoped, to take the appro¬
priate action.
Such an approach to communication, particularly if linked to
systematic attempts to educate children in media understanding
and appreciation, might also help to foster international under¬
standing, the prime aim of Unesco's policy.
James HaJloran
