THE ARMS RACE
The quality spiral
TIE competition in armaments be¬
tween the largest military Powers is
even more intense than is suggested
by the immense size and the rapid expan¬
sion of their arsenals, because it takes
place primarily in a qualitative rather than a
quantitative dimension, each new genera¬
tion of weapons being more complex and
more destructive than the systems it
replaces.
The strong qualitative momentum of the
current arms race influences both the way
it develops, the insecurity it generates and
the possibilities for disarmament. In an
arms race where the emphasis is on quanti¬
ty, where technological development is
slow and of little consequence, countries
may be expected to match their armament
efforts to the stocks or the growth rates of
the military forces of their opponents.
There is room for saturation levels or for
mutually agreed ceilings and reductions.
Under conditions of rapid military in¬
novation, on the other hand, the decisive
factor in the military procurement plans of
countries at the forefront of the
o.
technological arms race is not so much the
actual military strength of their opponents
but rather those technological advances
which opponents might be able to achieve
over the next decade or so. Inevitably, as
the apprehensions of military planners shift
from the force levels towards the research
and development efforts of their op¬
ponents, it is increasingly on the research
and development efforts of their own
country, which are known, that they will
have to base their plans.
In an arms race where the stress is on
technological advances the process of
weapon and counter-weapon development
therefore tends to become in some
measure an intra-national process, in some
cases only marginally related to the stages
actually reached by other countries. Each
country is actively seeking means of
defeating its own most advanced weapons
and of neutralizing its own most recent
defences, thus conferring on the develop¬
ment of military technology a momentum
and a rate of obsolescence much greater
than in comparable civilian applications.
A qualitative arms race with its long lead
time and its emphasis on future possibilities
rather than current realities tends to move
in one direction only: one country's ad¬
vances in weaponry will be emulated by
others, but its self-restraint heed not be.
Similarly an increase in international ten¬
sion may accelerate the arms race, but an
improvement of the international climate
will not necessarily suffice to slow it down.
In advanced military technology, the
achievement of exacting technical
specifications and early delivery schedules
tends to take precedence over cost con¬
siderations when new weapons are being
designed. The large cost-overruns which
have become an almost normal feature of
advanced military projects illustrate this
fact. The result is an increasing volume of
research and development with each new
generation of weapons.
For example it is estimated that the
amount of draughtsmanship required for
the design of a military aircraft today is
typically of the order of 4,000 man-years,
spread over a seven to ten-year period.
This may be compared with about 170
man-years spread over two to three years
required for the design of the Halifax
bomber on the eve of the Second World
War.
For many years now rising research and
development requirements have been met
by expanding staff rather than lengthening
the design cycle to prevent weapons from
becoming obsolete before they entered in¬
to service. This trend which is inherent in a
qualitative arms race cannot fail to create
problems of surplus capacity both in design
and in production unless military procure¬
ment expands for every new generation of
weapons.
Continuous employment is only com¬
patible with rapid development and design
if production cycles are short and military
stocks are replaced at a rapid rate. The
abandonment of many advanced weapons
programmes before production started but
after hundreds of millions of dollars had
been spent on development, again a recur¬
rent feature of the past decades, has of
course helped to alleviate somewhat this
problem of surplus capacity.
Even disregarding the inherently
wasteful character of weapons themselves,
arms production under the conditions of a
qualitative arms race appears as an excep¬
tionally wasteful process, whether the
waste takes the form of project cancella¬
tions half-way through, of intermittent i
underemployment or of military arsenals I
15


THE QUALITY SPIRAL
which are allowed to expand for industrial
rather than military reasons.
In an arms race so consistently bent on
qualitative improvements and the quest for
achieving or pre-empting technological
breakthroughs, a mere examination of
trends in military expenditure gives a wrong
impression of the true rise in destructive
potential.
In civilian production it is a well-known
proposition that under conditions of con¬
tinuous technical progress even a policy of
zero net-investment will lead to a constant¬
ly increasing output. Worn-out machines
are replaced by machines incorporating a
more advanced technology and this results
in higher productivity.
The same applies to military expenditure.
Even if it does not rise in real terms, the
devotion of a large proportion to research
and development and to qualitative im¬
provement means that the destructiveness
and the potential danger of the military ap¬
paratus continues to grow.
Thus it is necessary to distinguish bet¬
ween the economic and the military conse¬
quences of armaments expenditure. They
bear no necessary relationship to one
another: a rise in the (real) volume of
military expenditure will almost always imp¬
ly an increase in lethality and destructive
power. But when such expenditure is
reduced there may well be a divergent
movement: a certain relaxation of the over¬
all economic burden can be accompanied
by a further extension of destructive
power, as indeed we are witnessing today
in some countries.
However, since concentration on the
qualitative (i.e. technological) arms race re¬
quires a high input of specially scarce
qualified manpower (scientists, techni¬
cians, management, highly-skilled
workers), shifts towards greater emphasis
on rapid qualitative change can be
economically harmful, even when they are
accompanied by a reduction in total
military expenditure.
The facts about the qualitative character
of the arms race alarming and growing in
importance have to be kept in mind when
measures against a continuation of the
arms race are discussed. It will not suffice
to take cuts in total military expenditure as
the sole criterion of progress unless they
are very substantial indeed.
One form of progress consists in setting
limits on special weapons and weapon
systems. The ABM (Anti-Ballistic Missile)
Agreement between the United States and
the USSR or the Biological Disarmament
Convention are cases in point. Similar
steps covering wider ranges of weapons
and modes of warfare, nuclear and
chemical means of warfare in particular,
would help to erect important boundaries
for the arms race.
To be most effective these measures
should be directed at new developments,
that is before any significant research and
development work has been done and
before the projects acquire a political, in¬
stitutional and industrial momentum.
There is also a case for seeking prohibi¬
tion of the development and manufacture
of new types and systems of weapons of
mass destruction as called for in several
resolutions of the General Assembly of the
United Nations. Such action must be close¬
ly linked to firm measures to halt the pro¬
duction of nuclear weapons, the liquidation
of existing stockpiles and the complete and
definitive prohibition of nuclear weapons.
'A decisive attack on the qualitative arms
race would also be achieved if an agree¬
ment could be reached among the leading
military powers to cut down expenditure
on military research and development.
Such a measure could alsoafter redirec¬
ting the released resources lead to impor¬
tant economic and social benefits to both
the developed and developing nations.
The commitment to incessant qualitative
change is deeply embedded in the inner
logic of the arms race. Agreements on
qualitative and technological restrictions
are not easily reached, not least because of
difficult verification problems. But if the
difficulties of securing some measure of
control over this aspect of the arms race
are particularly great, so too is the urgency
of the need to take determined steps in this
direction. Each passing year sees the initia¬
tion of a spate of new weapons, and ex¬
isting programmes become more deeply
entrenched in the military and political
systems of countries.
