WHAT IS RELATIVITY ? The following way of illustrating the
concept of relativity was thought up by the celebrated French
mathematician Henri Poincaré. Just suppose, said Poincaró, that
one night while you were fast asleep everything in the universe
somehow became a thousand times bigger. Everything : the
stars, the sun, the earth, your home, your bed, you yourself, the
length of light waves, atoms and electrons. When you woke up,
would you know that anything had changed ? No, said Poincaré;
no experiment could possibly prove that anything had changed.
It would be meaningless to say that the universe had become
bigger, because if you say that a thing is "bigger" you imply that
it is bigger than "something else" and in the case of the universe
there is no "something else". In other words size is a relative
concept.
Drawings Philippe Gentil Studio, Paris © Unesco Courier



Relativity
in a nutshell
by Isaac Asimov
ISAAC ASIMOV of the USA is internationally
known as a popularizer of science anda science
fiction writer. His huge output of published
works reflects the variety of his interests which
include : literary criticism, psychology, mathe¬
matics, mystery, poetry and humour. Earlier this
year he published his 200th book, assigning the
same number to two works: Opus 200 (Hough¬
ton Mifflin), an Asimov anthology, and In
Memory Yet Green (Doubleday), the first
volume of his autobiography.
ACCORDING to the laws of motion
first worked out in detail by Isaac
Newton in the 1680s, different mo¬
tions add together according to the rules of
simple arithmetic. Suppose a train is mov¬
ing away from you at twenty kilometres an
hour and a person on the train throws a ball
at twenty kilometres an hour in the direc¬
tion of the train's motion. To the person,
moving with the train, the ball is moving
twenty kilometres an hour away from him.
To you, however, the motion of the train
and the ball add together, and the ball is
moving away from you at the rate of forty
kilometres an hour.
Thus, you see, you cannot speak of the
ball's speed all by itself. What counts is its
speed relative to a particular observer. Any
theory of motion that attempts to explain
the way velocities and related phenomena
seem to vary from observer to observer
would be a "theory of relativity".
Albert Einstein's particular theory of
relativity arose from the fact that what
works for thrown balls on trains doesn't
seem to work for light. A moving source of
light might cast a beam of light in the direc-
tion of its travel, or against the direction of
its travel. In the former case, the light
should (according to Newton's laws) travel
at its own speed plus the speed of the light-
source. In the latter case, it should travel at
its own speed minus the speed of the light-
source. That's the way the thrown ball on
the moving train would behave.
Light doesn't behave so. It always seems
to travel at its own speed regardless of the
motion of the source. Einstein attempted
to arrange the laws of the universe to ac¬
count for that.
Einstein showed that, in order to ac¬
count for the constancy of light's velocity,
one had to accept a great many unex-k
pected phenomena. He showed that ob- f

Einstein's topsy-turvy universe
The curious tale of a ride on a beam of light, clocks that
run slower when they are in motion than when they are
stationary, the long-playing record whose centre is older
than Its outer rim, light rays that bend, objects that
change in size and weight, a man only half as old as his
twin, black holes in space from which not even light can
escape all these Alice-in-Wonderland notions which
seem to fly in the face of common sense form part of
Einstein's topsy-turvy world of relativity. Did Einstein
really throw common sense out of the window ? Not at
all. The curious effects his theory postulates only become
evident when we enter the world of very high velocities.
Although they are of great importance in physics, in
ordinary life they are so infinitesimal that they can be
ignored. Many of the implications of the theory of
relativity are so complex that they can only be fully
expressed in mathematical terms. The drawings and
captions on this and following pages are an attempt to
give an approximate visual introduction to Einstein's
mysterious universe.
300000 km
nz7,
A street-car named relativity
As a teenager in Zurich, Einstein asked himself a seemingly innocent question the
answer to which contained the core of the principle of relativity. "What would the
world look like", he pondered, "if I rode on a beam of light ?"
Let us make this imaginary journey with Einstein. Picture yourself boarding a street¬
car at the foot of a clock-tower in Berne, as Einstein used to do every day on his way
to work at the Swiss Patent Office. Imagine that, instead of travelling along its usual
track, the street-car carried you away at the speed of light (300,000 kilometres per
second) on the very beam of light with which you saw the time indicated on the clock.
Suppose the clock showed three o'clock when the street-car whisked you off to a
destination 300,000 kilometres away. The journey ought to take you exactly one
second. But the clock as you see it (assuming that you could see it from a distance of
300,000 kilometres) would still say three o'clock; this is because it takes the beam of
light from the clock showing the time you set off as long as it has taken you to reach
your destination. By keeping up with the speed of light you as a passenger in the
street-car are cut off from the passage of time. But to a man left standing on the
pavement in Berne the same clock would indicate one second past three. In other
words, time runs differently for you in the street-car and for the man on the pavement
in Berne; contrary to what Newton thought, therefore, there is no such thing as
universal time. Furthermore, although in the street-car you discover the same laws,
the same relations between time, distance, speed, mass and force as everyone
everywhere discovers, the actual values that you get for time, distance, and so one,
are not the same as for anyone else. The only value that is invariably the same for
everyone is the value for the speed of light.
For Newton, time and space formed an absolute framework and the world looked the
same to every observer, wherever he might be and however he might travel. For
Einstein, what two observers see is relative to each of them, to their position and their
speed. We cannot know what the world is like, we can only compare what it looks
like to each of us. Relativity is the understanding of the world not as events but as
relations.
Drawings Studio Philippe Gentil © Unesco Courier
kjects would have to grow shorter in the
"direction of their motionshorter and
shorter as their motion was faster and
faster, until they would have zero length at
the speed of light; that moving objects
would have more and more mass the faster
they moved till their mass was infinite at
the speed of light; that the rate at which
time progressed on moving bodies decreas¬
ed the faster they moved till it stopped
altogether at the speed of light. For each of
these reasons the speed of light in a
vacuum was the maximum speed that
could be measured.
Furthermore, he showed that a little bit
of mass was equal to a great deal of
energy, according to his famous equation,
E = me2, where c stands for the speed of
light.
All this, he worked out in 1905 for bodies
moving at the same speed in an unchang¬
ing direction. This special kind of motion
10

Time out of joint
A curious prediction of the theory of relativity was that a
stationary clock would run faster than a moving clock. In 1905,
Einstein wrote "that a clock fixed at the earth's equator will run
slower by a very small amount than an identical clock fixed at
one of the earth's poles". This was proved experimentally by the
English scientist H.J. Hay who visualized the globe squashed into
a flat disc with the North Pole at the centre and the equator at
the rim. Placing a radio-active clock at the centre and another at
the rim he set his model turning. Einstein's prediction was
proved correct, the clock at the rim kept time more slowly than
the clock at the centre. This holds true for any spinning disc on
every turntable, and each time a long-playing record revolves on
a record-player its centre is ageing faster than its rim.
was dealt with in Einstein's "special theory
of relativity."
The effects predicted by Einstein are
noticeable only at great speeds. The simple
arithmetic of Newton's laws therefore
works at ordinary speeds, simply because
Einstein's effects are too small to notice.
Because we are always surrounded by the
working of those laws, they come to seem
like "common sense" to us while Einstein's
effects seem strange.
Nevertheless, at the time Einstein
published his theory, scientists were work¬
ing with subatomic particles hurled out¬
ward by exploding atoms. These sub¬
atomic particles moved at great speeds and
the Einstein effects could be noted in them
exactly. Atom-smashing machines and
nuclear bombs couldn't exist unless the
special theory of relativity was correct.
In 1916, Einstein worked out a more
complicated version of the theory of
relativity, one that included not only mo¬
tion at constant speed in the same direc¬
tion any kind of motion at all, motion
that changed speed or direction or both.
Since it dealt with any motion in general,
this version of his theory is "the general
theory of relativity."
The most common reason why objects
move at varying speeds and in changing
direction is because a gravitational force is
acting on them. A ball when dropped
moves faster and faster because earth's
gravity is pulling it. A thrown ball follows a
curved path because earth's gravity is pull¬
ing it. The earth follows a curved path in
space because the sun's gravity is pulling
it.
For this reason, Einstein's general theory
had to deal with gravitation.
Einstein worked out a set of equations
which showed that if there were no matter
anywhere and no gravitation, a moving
body would follow a straight line. If there
were matter, the surrounding space would
be distorted so that the moving body
would follow a curved line. Einstein's
general theory showed what those curves
ought to be and they weren't quite what
Newton's theory of gravitation predicted.
The differences between Einstein's equa¬
tions and Newton's equations are very
slight indeed, and only the most careful
and delicate measurements can show us
which set of equations is actually followed
by moving bodies.
One way of telling whether Einstein or
Newton is right is by studying the
behaviour of light when it passes through a
strong gravitational field. According to
Einstein, the light would pass through the
distorted space and follow a very slightly
curved path. This would not be so accor- w
ding to the Newtonian rules. f
11

Drawing studio Philippe Gentil <& Unesco Courier
A matter of gravity
To Newton, gravitation represented the mutual attraction of
masses of matter, the power of bodies to influence each other in
proportion to their size and the distance between them. This
force acted everywhere in the cosmos, whether causing an apple
to fall to the ground or the moon to circle the earth. Setting
aside this concept of an active force, which formed the
underlying mechanism of the Newtonian universe, Einstein
thought in terms of the "gravitational field". Thus the
gravitational field of the earth governed the fall of Newton's
apple and the solar gravitational field governs the motion of the
planets around the sun. Matter, Einstein maintained, creates this
gravitational field by distorting what he called the "space-time
continuum" around it. This has been likened to an outstretched
rubber sheet which is deformed by heavy objects (the sun, the
stars) placed upon it. Diagram shows how light rays move along
the curves thus formed and are thus "bent" round large heavenly
bodies.. Einstein predicted that starlight passing near the sun
would follow the curved pathways in space caused by the sun's
presence, thus seemingly "bending" round it. His prediction was
confirmed in a famous experiment by the English astronomer Sir
Arthur Eddington in 1919 (see page 19)
12

\\a\\\\WLmmL\WLmL\a\\UÊLWLwmLmm
y In 1919, a total eclipse was observed and
the positions of the stars near the sun were
accurately measured. If the light travelled a
curved path, each star should seem to be a
little farther from the sun than it ought to
be. The amount of displacement would de¬
pend on how near the sun the light passed.
Einstein's theory predicted exactly how
large the displacement ought to be. The
measurements at that 1919 eclipse, and at
every total eclipse since then, seem to
place the stars where Einstein predicted
they would be.
These were hard measurements to
make, though, and difficult to get exact. In
our space age, we have been able to do
better.
In 1969, for instance, two probes were
sent toward Mars. When the probes were
on the other side of the sun, the radio
waves that they beamed back to earth had
to pass near the sun and therefore followed
a distorted path. Because of the distortion,
the path was longer than a straight line
would have been, and it took a bit more
time for the waves to reach us. It took them
a ten-thousandth of a second longer, ac¬
tually, something which could be measured
and which was just what general relativity
predicted.
Another prediction of Einstein's general
theory is that in space distorted by gravity
time slows up.
A large object giving off light, emits that
light in waves that are longer than they
would be otherwise, because the slowing
of time in the object's gravitational field
keeps one wave going longer before the
next one comes out. Even the sun, though,
has a gravitational field that is not strong
enough to show a measurable effect.
Just about the time Einstein advanced
his theory of general relativity, however, a
new kind of star was discovered. This was
the "white dwarf." A white dwarf might
have all the mass of the sun squeezed
down into a volume no larger than that of
the earth. Its gravitational field at its sur¬
face would be two hundred thousand times
as intense as the sun's gravitational field
was.
Particular light-waves emitted by a white
dwarf would have to be longer by a par¬
ticular amount than those same light¬
waves emitted by the sun. In 1925,
measurements were taken of the light com¬
ing from a white dwarf and were found to
be longer by just the right amount
predicted by Einstein.
It was, of course, very difficult to take
the measurement of the light from a white
dwarf. Such stars are very dim and trying
to analyse their feeble beams of light is a
tricky matter.
It has been found, however, that under
certain conditions, a collection of atoms in
a crystal would emit gamma rays. Gamma
rays are made up of waves like those of
light, but much shorter. The crystal emitted
' gamma rays that all had the same
wavelength exactly, and the wavelength
could be measured with great accuracy.
If Einstein's general theory were correct,
however, the gamma ray wavelength could
be slightly changed if the gravitational pull
upon the crystal were either increased or
decreased.
Here on earth, gravitation increases as
one gets closer to earth's centre. If you live
in an apartment house, earth's gravity gets
stronger with each floor you descend but
so slightly that you can't possibly tell the
difference.
But it shows up in the gamma rays. As
the crystal was taken down from the attic
to the basement, the wave grew very
slightly (but detectably) longer, and by ex-
CONT1NUED PAGE 16
161/2 grams at the North Pole
grams at 40°
ilMorth Latitude
0 grams at the centre
of the earth
151/2 grams
at the Equator
An object does not weigh the same at all
points on the earth's surface. This is
because the earth is not perfectly round
and It is rotating. An object would weigh
nothing at the centre of the earth because
the earth's matter pulls on it equally from
all directions.
Drawing studio Philippe Gentil © Unesco Courier
adapted from The World Book Encyclopedia © 1979 World
Book-Childcraft International, Inc.
13

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 13
y actly the amount predicted by Einstein's
theory.
Still another consequence of Einstein's
treatment of gravitation in his general
theory of relativity is that gravitation, like
light, can be given off in waves. In this
way, gravitation, like light, can carry
energy away from the object giving it off.
Such gravitational waves are given off
when an object moves round and round in
response to gravitation, or back and forth,
or pulses in and out. The earth, when it
moves around the sun, gives off gravita¬
tional waves, according to Einstein. It is
losing energy so that it is slowly dropping
in closer to the sun.
Gravitational waves are so weak,
however, and carry so little energy that the
waves given off by earth are far too feeble
to be detected. The energy they carry off is
so tiny that earth won't drop closer to the
sun by more than a few metres in billions of
years.
It may be, though, that somewhere in
the universe there are more intense gravita¬
tional fields than there are here in the solar
system. Extremely rapid motions may in¬
volve the giving off of gravitational waves
that are just barely energetic enough to
detect.
Many scientists have been trying to
detect such gravitational waves using very
delicate instruments. Some have reported
success, but the results were very
borderline and such reports have not yet
been accepted.
In 1967, however, a new kind of star was
discovered, a "pulsar". Such a star is even
smaller and more compressed than a white
dwarf is. A pulsar may have a mass equal
to our sun and yet have it all squeezed into
a little ball no more than twelve kilometres
across. The gravitational field at the sur¬
face of such a pulsar would be
10,000,000,000 times that of the sun.
In 1974, two pulsars were found that
circled each other. With circlings in so in¬
credibly powerful a gravitational field, ef¬
fects that are barely noticeable in our solar
system become easy to measure.
For instance, there is a small component
of Mercury's motion about the sun that
isn't accounted for by Newton's theory of
gravitation. A particular point in Mercury's
orbit makes a complete circle about the sun
in a little over 3,000,000 years although by
Newton's theory it shouldn't move at all.
Einstein's theory, however, accounts for
the motion exactly.
That same point in the orbits of that pair
of circling pulsars should make a complete
circle in a mere eighty-four years according
to Einstein's theory, and the point is mov¬
ing at the proper speed to do so.
What's more, the pulsars should be giv¬
ing off gravitational waves as they revolve,
much stronger ones than earth does. The
energy carried off by the gravitational
waves ought to be enough to cause the
pulsars to be spiralling in toward each other
at a noticeable rate. This, in turn, should
cause certain radio wave pulses they give
off to reach us at shorter and shorter
intervals.
In 1978, delicate measurements of those
radio pulses were made and they were
found to be coming at shorter and shorter
intervals by just the predicted amounts.
What it comes to is this: In the three-
quarters of a century since Einstein advanc¬
ed his theory of relativity, scientists have
tested it in every way they could think of,
over and over again, and Einstein's theory
has passed every single test they have
devised without exception.
Isaac Asimov
Einstein's work gave new impetus
to cosmology, the study of the
universe as a unified whole. The
Russian mathematician Alexander
Friedmann had shown that
Einstein's theories suggested that
the universe was unstable and
probably expanding. Einstein
himself was at first unable to
accept the logic of his own
equations and in order to arrive at a
closed model of the universe he
introduced a factor into his
gravitational equations which he
called the "cosmological constant"
(see article page 29). In 1924, the
American astronomer Edwin
Hubble proved experimentally that
Friedmann's view was correct, that
the distant galaxies were receding
at increasing speeds and that the
universe was in fact expanding.
Einstein finally bowed to the
evidence and described his earlier
stance as "the biggest blunder of
my life". Right, representations,
top, of an open universe which will
expand for ever, and, bottom, of a
closed universe that will .eventually
contract.
Drawings studio Philippe Gentil © Unesco Courier
16
