A new dawn
for Sukhothai
With Unesco aid Thailand
is restoring
an ancient metropolis
to its former splendour
by M.C. Subhadradis Diskul
IN northern Thailand, some five hundred
kilometres from Bangkok, stand the
ruins of Sukhothai, once the capital of
a historic Thai kingdom.
The "Sukhothai kingdom" only lasted
about two hundred years but it is regarded
as the cradle of Thai civilization, and its art,
considered to be the most sublime in
Thailand's history, exercised a strong in¬
fluence on later Thai art and on the arts of
neighbouring countries such as Laos.
Sukhothai should therefore be seen as
belonging to all humanity and not to
Thailand alone.
The city of Sukhothai (the word literally
means "the dawn of happiness") was vir¬
tually abandoned in the late fourteenth
century, but many monuments have sur¬
vived as reminders of its glory, although
they have suffered from the ravages Of time
and vandalism. The ruins rise against the
backdrop of a mountain range, some
distance away to the west; to the east the
land is flat. Two canals bring water to the
city from the northeast and the southwest.
Twelve kilometres away on the river Yom is
the later town of Sukhothai, which was
founded by King Rama I in 1786.
The Sukhothai kingdom was probably
established in the middle of the thirteenth
century AD, after the expulsion of Khmer
overlords. According to the latest research
M.C. SUBHADRADIS DISKUL, eminent Thai
historian and archaeologist, is Dean of the
Graduate School, Silpakorn University,
Thailand. After graduating from the Faculty of
Arts at Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, he
completed his studies in the history of art and
eastern archaeology in London and Paris. He is
the author of many books and articles on the
history of art'and archaeology of Thailand and
neighbouring countries.
there seem to have been nine kings of the
Sukhothai dynasty, ruling from about 1240
to 1438. The most famous of these mon-
archs is probably King Ram Khamhaeng
the Great, the third king of the dynasty,
who reigned from 1279 to 1298 and extend¬
ed Sukhothai territory to its furthest limijs.
He invented the Thai alphabet in 1293 and
as "Pra Ruang" features in many Thai
legends as the possessor of great magical
powers.
His successor. King Loethai, seems to
have lost much of the territory he inherited.
Ram Kamhaeng's grandson, King Lithai,
who reigned from 1347 to about 1368,
restored the kingdom's unity though
without recovering all the lost lands. A
zealous adherent of Theravada Buddhism
which had reached Thailand from Sri
Lanka, King Lithai was the first monarch in
Thai history to spend part of his life as a
monk. He resisted the power of the
Ayudhya kingdom which was set up in the
south in 1350 and according to one stone
inscription was forced to abandon
Sukhothai and settle at Pisnulok, an impor¬
tant town in the east of the kingdom.
From that time onwards, although there
were three more kings of the Sukhothai
dynasty, the city of Sukhothai was over¬
shadowed by Pisnulok and by Chakangrao
or Kampaengpet in the south. The last king
of the Sukhothai dynasty probably died in
1438, and from then on the kingdom form¬
ed part of the Ayudhya empire.
A contemporary stone inscription gives a
detailed picture of the paternal administra¬
tion of King Ram Khamhaeng: "In the life¬
time of King Ram Khamhaeng, this Muang
(town) Sukhothai is good. In the water
there are fish, in the fields there is rice. The
ruler does not levy a tax on the people who
travel along the road together, leading their

When two Thai chieftains, Pha Muang and Bang Klang Thao, revolted against their Khmer
overlords and proclaimed the first independent Thai kingdom of Sukhothai in the 13th century
A.D., they not only laid the foundations of present-day Thailand, they also opened the way to
a flowering of Thai sculptural and architectural art whose influence remained long after the
kingdom they founded had sunk back into oblivion. The Buddha images created by Thai
sculptors were the most original contribution of the Sukhothai period. They portrayed a new,
supernatural, more idealized conception of the Higher Being. These images were cast in
bronze or fashioned in stucco on a core of laterite, a reddish-coloured weathered rock.
Above, still imposing In their serenity despite the ravages of time, these laterite cores of stucco
Buddha images guard the remains of Wat (temple) Pra Kaew, at Kamphaeng Phet, some fifty
kilometres south-west of Sukhothai.

Located at Wat Sri Chum
in the north-western
outskirts of Sukhothai,
this imposing Buddha, in
the cross-legged "victory
over Mara" attitude,
measures over 11 metres
from knee to knee. The
sanctuary in which it is
housed is surrounded by a
moat and has walls 3
metres thick and 15
metres high.
Photo Palrot Chlrapong
© Cultural Committee
of the Thailand National
Commission for Unesco
>oxen on the way to trade and riding their
horses on the way to sell. Whoever wants
to trade in elephants, so trades. Whoever
wants to trade in horses, so trades.
Whoever wants to trade in silver and gold,
so trades. When a commoner, noble or
prince is dead, let his ancestral home, his
clothes, his elephants, his family, his rice
granaries, his servants and his ancestral
groves of areca-nut and betel all devolve on
his children. If commoners, nobles or
princes have a difference and dispute, [the
King] makes a true investigation and then
only does he decide the matter for his sub¬
jects uprightly, without siding with him
who steals or showing preference for him
who conceals. On seeing the rice of others,
he has no covetous desire. On seeing the
wealth of others, he has no seething
desire. To anyone who comes on elephant
to see him, he affords aid and assistance. If
he lacks elephants and horses, men and
women, silver and gold, he gives them to
him... If he captures a fighting foe, he does
not kill or beat him. At the gateway there is
a bell hung up. If anyone of the public has a
complaint or grievance of body or of mind
to place before the King, it is not difficult.
He goes to sound the bell that is hung up.
King Ram Khamhaeng hears him call and,
on questioning him, makes an upright in¬
vestigation for him."
As for Buddhism, King Ram
Khamhaeng's stone inscription tells us:
"The people in this Muang Sukhothai are
charitable, pious and devoted to alms¬
giving. King Ram Khamhaeng, the ruler of
this Muang Sukhothai, as well as princes
and princesses, gentlemen and ladies of
the nobility and men and women, one and
all, have faith in the Buddhist religion,
everyone observing the precepts during
Buddhist Lent [rainy season], at the end of
which Kathin offerings [presentation of a
monastic robe] take place for a whole
month. In the Kathin offerings there are
heaps of cowries, heaps- of areca-nut,
heaps of flowers, cushions and pillows.
The Kathin accessories presented each
year amount to two million. For the recital
of the Kathin resolution people go even as
far as Aranyik [forest monastery] yonder.
On their return to the city, they line up from
Aranyik yonder to the border of the open
ground, joining together in striking up the
sound of musical instruments and lutes,
carolling and singing. Whoever wants to
play, plays. Whoever wants to laugh,
laughs. Whoever wants to sing, sings. This
Muang Sukhothai has four main gateways.
People would flock in to see the King light
the candles and play with fireworks. This
Muang Sukhothai is noisy as if it would
burst."
The old town of Sukhothai is rec¬
tangular, 1,810 metres long and 1,400
metres wide, surrounded by three rings of
earthen ramparts. There are three gates at
each of the four cardinal points; in front of
each inner gate traces of a semi-circular
earthen and brick fort can be seen. A moat
about twenty metres wide lies between
each rampart.
Inside the town stand the ruins of sixteen
Buddhist monasteries, four Hindu shrines
and two Buddhist wat (monasteries). There
are also four large ponds inside the town.
Among later constructions are a statue- 1
monument of King Ram Khamhaeng and j

Left, stone inscription from the old city of Sukhothai dating from
the time of Ram Khamhaeng, greatest of the Sukhothai kings, who
reigned during the latter part of the 13th century. "In my father's
time", runs part of the inscription, "I served my father, I served my
mother... When I conquered a town and captured elephants, men or
women, silver or gold, I gave them all to my father. When my father
died, then came my elder brother's time. I served my brother just as
I served my father. My brother died and I received the whole
kingdom for myself". Below, view of part of the old city of
Sukhothai which is situated in central Thailand some 500 kilometres
north-west of Bangkok. At centre, the chedi (a solid round
monument with a tall finial or spire) of Wat Sra-Sri. The old city has
been designated as an historical park. Work on preservation and
restoration of its priceless monuments is being undertaken by the
Government of Thailand In co-operation with Unesco.
Photos Alexis Vorontzoff, Unesco
* *3&-> "*^*: ÜT

This impressive 12.5-metre-high
stucco figure of Pra Attharot, a
standing Buddha figure, at Wat
Sapan Hin, looks down on
Sukhothai from the summit of a
hill to the west of the city in an
area known as Aranyik. The right
hand is held out in the attitude of
dispelling fear.
> the Ram Khamhaeng National Museum.
Outside the town are about seventy
monuments: some have been restored;
others await restoration.
The most important monument in old
Sukhothai is Wat Mahathat, situated in the
middle of the town. At the centre of the
wat is a lotus-bud stupa (a solid monument
built to enshrine the relics of the Buddha)
typical of the Sukhothai period. The royal
palace may have stood to the northeast of
the wat, but the buildings were con¬
structed in wood and so far no traces of it
have been found.
In the southern part of the town, Wat Si
Sawai, with its three imposing towers, was
probably built as a Hindu shrine and later
became a Buddhist monastery. To the
north stand two important monuments:
Wat Trakuan, whose round chedi (a com
memorative shrine of the Buddha with a
base and a tall finial) derived from Sri
Lanka, and San Ta Pha Daeng, a laterite
Hindu shrine which may have been built in
the early twelfth century.
Wat Chetupon, south of Sukhothai, is
noted for its four stucco images of the
Buddha, each in a different attitude: walk¬
ing, standing, reclining, and seated (at the
centre of the wat).
About one kilometre north of Sukhothai
stands an important monument called Wat
Pra Pai Luang, which may have been the
original centre of a settlement which ex¬
isted before the Thai constructed the old
town of Sukhothai. Three laterite prang
(towers like those of Khmer sanctuaries),
dating from the late twelfth or early thir¬
teenth century used to form part of the
main structure of the wat, but only one of
8

them is still standing. On the eastern side
of the wat are many Buddhist ruins of the
Sukhothai period.
Traces of forty-nine ceramic kilns have
also been discovered in this area. These
kilns produced Sukhothai ware at the same
time as Sawankhalok ware was being made
at Sisatchanalai, a twin city of Sukhothai in
the north. These glazed ceramics were the
chief exports of the Sukhothai kingdom
and were sent far and wide. According to
one hypothesis, production may have con¬
tinued until the middle of the fifteenth cen¬
tury, when it came to an end because of
the wars between the kingdoms of
Ayudhya and Chiengmai (in the far north of
Thailand). However, archaeological
evidence from sunken cargo ships along
the eastern coast of Thailand suggests it
may have gone on until a century later,
when it was ended by the wars between
Burma and Thailand.
Outside the town to the northwest
stands another important Buddhist
monastery, Wat Si Chum, which has a
huge seated stucco Buddha ¡mage under a
mondop, a square structure with a pointed
roof. The mondop, which may have been
constructed later than the Buddha ¡mage,
has a double wall in which there is a tunnel
leading to the top of the building.
In the hilly area known as Aranyik, west
of the town, are many ruins of Buddhist
monasteries, the most important of which
is probably Wat Sapan Hin. There, on a hill
some 200 metres high, stands Pra Attharot,
a standing Buddha figure over twelve
metres high.
An outstanding monument to the east of V
the town is Wat Trapang Tong Lang, noted f
The base of the chedi complex of
Wat Mahathat. A row of stucco
Buddhist disciples walk round in
adoration beneath two Buddha
images.
Photo Pairot Chirapong
© Cultural Committee
of the Thailand National
Commission for Unesco

tor its beautiful stucco scene representing
the Buddha descending from Tavatimsa
Heaven after preaching to his mother.
Professor Silpa Bhirasri, an Italian-born
artist, who devoted his life to the study of
Thai art, has paid a striking tribute to the
art of Sukhothai in his comments on a
superb Sukhothai statue of the Buddha
after His Enlightenment, His body in com¬
plete, repose. "The features are serene",
Bhirasri wrote, "and a faint smile reflects a
state of total inward contentment. After
His Enlightenment, the Buddha attained
Nirvana and to express this condition the
Thai conceived an almost ethereal form of
statuary. Sitting, walking or reclining, their
¡mages of the Buddha convey an impres¬
sion of soaring, undulating movement
which renders the bronze immaterial. Yet
such spirituality does not detract from the
sculptural qualities of the statues, for
although they are highly simplified and
idealized, the human forms are exquisitely
modelled... In the Sukhothai statues there
is always a harmony between the abstract
idea and its material realization...
"Exceptional artistic skills are not
enough where representing the ¡mage of
the Buddha is concerned, because the
idealized forms also have to convey the
essence of Buddhist doctrine. Indeed, it is
the doctrine which inspires the image, not
the actual physical form of the Teacher.
Did the sculptors of old Sukhothai solve
this complex problem? Perhaps it would
not be excessive to say that they solved it
in an incomparable way. The expression of
these statues is such as to give us strength
to master the tumult of our passions,
whereas the faint smile tells us how hap-
10
piness may be achieved by mastering our
animal instincts."
Professor Silpa Bhirasri has also analys¬
ed the bronze walking Buddha, portrayed
in the round, a form of depicting the Bud¬
dha which is the major innovation of
Sukhothai art. "The representation of the
walking Buddha had a special appeal for
the artists of Sukhothai", he noted, "and
truly they succeeded in creating master¬
pieces. When we look at these beautiful
statues, they seem to move gently forward:
with a gesture of the fingers symbolizing
the circle of the Law, the Teacher advances
to announce the Doctrine. The body seems
to undulate gracefully as a result of the har¬
monious movement of legs, trunk and
downstretched arm. The head is shaped
like a lotus bud and the neck spreading at
its base is elegantly attached to the
shoulder. The delicately shaped lobes of
the ears turn slightly outwards. This and
every other detail serves to emphasize the
harmony of the whole composition. The
hands look more divine than human, so ex¬
quisite is their modelling".
The Thai Government has now decided
to create a national historical park in
Sukhothai and the surrounding area. The
monuments will be restored and everything
possible will be done to recreate the splen¬
dour of Sukhothai as it is described in King
Ram Khamhaeng's inscription.
Agriculture will be developed, water sup¬
plies will be improved, and plants mention¬
ed in the inscription will be regrown. The
promotion of tourism also forms part of the
project, which aims not only to safeguard
the site and its monuments but also to
develop the whole region for the benefit of
the local population.
To bring the Park Development Project
to fruition Thailand needs approximately
$11 million. Financial aid and equipment
are being sought from other countries and
from foundations. Working in close col¬
laboration with the Thai Government,
Unesco is playing an active part in this pro¬
gramme of international co-operation.
Work has already begun on the restora¬
tion of the town of Sukhothai and the
monuments nearby. Many young
specialists from Thai universities have car¬
ried out surveys of the local topography
and are engaged in research on possibilities
for development, urban settlement and
irrigation systems. Archaeologists are
excavating sites in search of traces of
monuments and dwellings. An¬
thropologists and ethnologists are studying
the oral traditions and folk-tales of the local
population, together with their customs
and the tools and utensils they use in every¬
day life. Two festivals based on the
description of life in Sukhothai given in the
Ram Khamhaeng inscription have been
performed. Illustrated books in Thai and
other languages have been published to
help arouse public interest in the Historical
Park. With adequate funds and specialist
aid, this vast project sponsored by Unesco
should be successfully realized.
M.C. Subhadradis Diskul

Not only did the sculptors of the Sukhothai
school bring a new spirituality to their
representations of the Buddha, they also were
the first to introduce the walking Buddha
beneath whose footsteps "the ground became
level and the lotus blossomed". Buddha was
depicted in four postures, reclining, seated,
standing and walking. The typical Sukhothai
Buddha has hair curls which come to a point in
the middle of the forehead and a prominent
ushnisha, or cranial protuberance, surmounted
by a rasml, or flame-like motif symbolizing
power and glory. Photos : above, walking
Buddha on a four-sided mondop, or pavilion, at
Wat Chetupon; each of the other three sides has
a Buddha image in a different posture. Top right,
walking Buddha, now preserved in the Bangkok
National Museum, reflects the serene, meditative
spirituality the Sukhothai sculptors sought to
convey through deliberate stylization of both
facial features and the body. Left, wall
decoration from a mondop at Wat Trapang Tong
Lang, perhaps the finest example of Sukhothai
stucco-work, depicts the Buddha descending
from the heaven of the Tavatimsa (thirty-three
gods), flanked by Indra, Brahma and other gods.
Right, 47-centimetre-high bronze from Chieng
Mai, now in the Bangkok National Museum,
depicts Buddha making the imprint of his foot
after descending from the heaven of the thirty-
three gods.

