Children
of
apartheid
by Mazisi Kunene
IT has been the fate of several gen¬
erations of the past three or four hun¬
dred years to experience conquest and
occupation of their homelands on a
massive scale. This same process has led to
the emergence in recent years of a much
more closely knit world, of world links and
international institutions such as Unesco
itself, and of a spirit of world citizenry that
seeks to establish a wider world polity.
More and more, nations are realizing that
the various regions of the world we call
countries are no more than villages on the
overall cosmic scale. No longer can any na¬
tion afford to detach itself from the fate of
MAZISI KUNENE is a scholar noted for his
work on the epics of his people, the Zulu, and a
poet who has himself written an epic on the Zulu
Emperor Shaka the Great. His English verse
translation of this work, originally written in
Zulu, has just been published as Emperor Shaka
the Great by Heinemann Educational Books,
Ltd., London, and is the latest title in the African
Authors Series of Unesco's Literature Transla¬
tions Collection. A former head of the depart¬
ment ofAfrican studies of the University College
at Roma (in what is now Lesotho) and director
of education for the South African United Front,
he is currently Associate Professor in African
Literature and Languages at the University of
California, Los Angeles.
others on the same planet, much less af¬
ford an education that distorts the reality of
others.
This has particular implications for the
generation that is' emerging today. Educa¬
tion can no longer concern itself with the
local virtues of insiders and the vices of
outsiders. It can no longer afford the
ethnocentric conceptions which characr
terized the age of expansionism and
occupation.
Education in this context means more
than formal classroom education and ex¬
tends to cover the social education a child
acquires through its association with the
adult population which bears the primary
responsibility for teaching children ethics
and skills. The education of children,
broadly speaking, must prepare them for a
changed world as visualized by a sensitive
and imaginative adult population.
It is within this context that the life and
development of children in South Africa
should be examined. First we should focus
on the black child since it is the black child
who is disadvantaged and victimized by the
system.
The black child in South Africa is born »
stateless, without an automatic citizenship Y
This photo is a reminder, in
International Year of the Child,
that the apartheid regime in
South Africa counts thousands
upon thousands of child-victims
whose plight is as .tragic as that
of their elders. The oppression
and exploitation which are
institutionalized in apartheid
pervade their existence,
affecting their education, health,
nutrition and housing, even in
some cases claiming their
parents' lives. The photo shows
the orphan of the black South
African leader Steve Biko at his
father's funeral. A founder of
the black consciousness
movement which is dedicated to
helping black Africans to
recover their dignity, Steve Biko
died aged thirty in Pretoria Jail
on 12 September 1977, after
being detained without trial,
kept naked for much of the time
in his cell, and being brutally
interrogated. An enquiry was
held into the circumstances of
his death, which aroused
international indignation, but no
criminal proceedings were
instigated. On 8 December 1977,
the General Assembly of the
United Nations adopted a
resolution expressing inter alia
"deep shock" at his "cowardly
and dastardly murder in
detention" and condemned
the "arbitrary arrest,
detention and torture which led
to his murder".
Photo © International Defence
and Aid Fund, London



Like their parents, black children in South
Africa face a life as the unprivileged
outcasts of a rich society. Their housing is
liable to be poor and insufficient, while
standards of white housing and other
amenities are high. Apartheid policy is to
house only migrant black workers In the
urban areas and not to provide for family
housing. Shanty-towns mushroom on the
outskirts of towns and cities (below) where
blacks live in wretched conditions in
"locations" to which they must return each
evening under curfew regulations. Left, a
group of children asleep on the steps of
Cape Town City Hall.
Photos © Steve Bloom and International Defence and Aid Fund,
London
that assumes responsibility for its health,
mental development and all-round cultural
and educational welfare. The black child is
born into a deliberately contrived poverty,
which is entirely unnecessary in a country
that is among the world's richest in
resources.
Not too far from the black child's
precinct live the white children and their
parents. These white children have so
much abundance that they play games
with the most coveted morsels of food;
food that could, in fact, feed two or three
children who are dying of kwashiorkor.
Should the parents of a white child choose
they may keep a dog or a cat. These would
be fed on the best food available with the
result that many animals live far better than
humans. This in itself is an education. For
in time the child comes to value animals
more highly than members of its own
(human) race.
Examining the physical world into which
black children are born, we notice that they
are born of parents who are so impoverish¬
ed that they are physically weak and
unhealthy. Consequently, the children
themselves are physically weak and
unhealthy. They may well be potentially
among the 200 per 1,000 infants who are
going to die. If they are from the rural areas
their chances of survival are even lower.
They may be among the 400 per 1,000 in¬
fants destined to die young. The only
reason for this state of affairs is that they
are victims of a deliberate policy of racial
discrimination. Should they survive the
hazardous period of infancy, they remain
candidates for many illnesses and diseases
that beset those who are members of their
race.
Let us take the example of two typical
girl babies, one black, the other white.
Although the black child's parents pay
the highest taxes in the land (750 Rands
minimum taxable income for whites; 360
Rands minimum taxable income for
blacks), her area suffers gross neglect by
the cleaning and health services. Should
she fall ill, she has to undertake a long
journey to a crowded hospital where her
parents may have to wait with her in the
blazing sun the whole day. Why? Her peo¬
ple are supplied with only one doctor per
44,000 people, unlike the white child
whose people boast one doctor per 400
people.
The white child, then, not only eats well
and lives in a healthy and thoroughly super-
7

spoke of my plight to the tall Boer man
who owned the farm. I wanted employ¬
ment, any employment for whatever he
could give me. He was a strange and
unusual person. He actually invited me in,
staring straight into my eyes. I was not
afraid of him. I did not beg. I simply
repeated what I had said before.
"Without a word he went to the
telephone and talked to his brother in
Johannesburg. He asked if he had a job for
me in his firm, and when his brother
answered that he had, still without saying a
word, he wrote down the address and gave
vised environment, she is also given im¬
mediate medical safeguards. Should she
fall ill, all medical facilities are available to
her and within easy reach. She grows up
being looked after and catered for by all the
health agencies of the State. Her nanny
may well be the mother of the black child
who sings:
"So my child died
While I cared for the conqueror's
children,
While they grew fat
On the rich marrow of our forefathers'
wealth."
From this picture it is clear that neither
child is being trained for the world as it is
evolving. The white child develops a wrong
perspective, assuming that she belongs to
a world of an eternally privileged race. The
black child either develops a "victim syn¬
drome" or stocks up bitter hatred of the
brutal world around her. As she grows up
she may well witness the police brutally
dragging her parents out of bed in the early
hours of the morning, leaving her, if she is
lucky, in the care of an older sister. If not,
the neighbours, who know only too well
the violence of the life around them, may
look after her. The reason for the arrest of
her parents may be simply that they have
no permit to live in an urban area.
If such an infant has grown up in the
country, she may grow up knowing only
one parent, since her father may well be
contracted to work in the mines for three
years at a time. Thus she may grow up
without the mutual love and care of both
her parents, a factor that may in itself be
deeply disturbing to her. The "one parent"
feature is common because the laws are
such that the male parent is either working
on contract labour, or in jail (for one or
other of the numerous petty offences set
up by discriminatory legislation), or else his
work-place is so far away that he can only
come home occasionally.
Thus black children suffer not only from
a cruel physical environment but also from
the lack of normal upbringing enjoyed or¬
dinarily by all children. For them life is
hazardous physically, psychologically and
emotionally. For, indeed, even the adult life
that constitutes their environment breeds a
sense of social decay. In such a situation
the family either breaks up or must embark
on some illegal activity to survive. In this at¬
mosphere infants grow into adults very
quickly. For while- remaining physically
young, they have to learn to survive in an
adult, brutal world. They have to learn to lie
to protect their parents from the ubiquitous
police. They have to learn very early that
the adult world is a violent one capable of
extreme physical and mental abuse.
One African father tells a story whose
unusual happy ending only serves to em¬
phasize the horror of his harrowing ex¬
perience.
"I was desperate. I did not know what to
do. I had just lost my child through starva¬
tion. Does anyone know what it is for a
parent to watch a child starve to death? I
have often wondered as I passed by the
homes of the rich whites how they could
give food to animals while our children
starve to death.
"When my second child died I simply
walked until I came to a large farmhouse. I
The battered blackboard in this secondary school at Soweto, the black township
outside Johannesburg, could symbolize some of the grave handicaps which the
South African school system imposes on young blacks. Education is free and
compulsory for whites, but blacks have to purchase their school equipment and
contribute to school funds. Most black pupils never get beyond primary
education, and according to figures provided by the South African Institute of
Race Relations in 1977, 51.8 per cent of black South Africans over fifteen had
actually received no schooling whatever (the figure for whites was 0.9 per cent).
Figures cited in a paper presented by the International Labour Office to a seminar
on "Children under Apartheid" held at Unesco's Paris headquarters in June 1979
reveal that in 1975 only 0.09 per cent of all black pupils obtained the qualifications
necessary to enter university. In 1976-1977, 824 million Rands were spent on
education for whites (17.7 per cent of the population) while 117 million Rands
were spent on education for blacks (65.7 per cent of the population).
8

me twenty Rand. I was dumbfounded. My
ancestors had heard my prayer. From that
day I never ceased to dream of my child.
"When I arrived in Johannesburg, I was
met by a Mr. Buysen who picked me out
from among hundreds of faces. It was pro¬
bably because I was so lost and confused. I
can now tell the story because Mr. Ross
has given me and my family a new life. I
work as a manager on one of his farms and
live there with my family in a comfortable
house. Is this South Africa? How can peo¬
ple like this live here?"
I myself have witnessed many tragedies
involving children. Our neighbours lost
many children through kwashiorkor. The
symptoms were always the sameweep¬
ing eyes, swelling stomachs and slowed
down movements, followed almost in¬
evitably by death. Even as children we
knew that a particular child would soon die
because of these common symptoms.
Such a child would suddenly grow "old",
isolating himself or herself from the rest.
We too began to keep away, peering over
the fence to see what was happening to
our friend. Days after we would be told
that so and so had died.
I'll never forget how we carried our
young cousin in a wheelbarrow because no
ambulance was available for blacks. He
later died. He was only a little boy. He
seemed resigned to death and in his
"matured" state he was better able to cope
with his illness than we could. He was tell¬
ing us what to do like someone who had
suddenly attained great authority over life.
We all became part of a world he had
created. Even the adults stood back as we,
the children, sang and laughed under his
guidance.
- The truth of the matter is that children f

The peaceful rural scene, below, is only
superficially idyllic for it reflects what is for
thousands of African women a tragic situation.
Far from their husbands, employed in the white
urban communities, they must remain in special
locations set aside for blacks or in the bantustans.
To provide for their children they must eke a living
from the land. If they follow their husbands into
the white urban areas, they may be committing an
offence, and fear is added to their burden of
poverty. Left, a mother and her children flee in
terror from police and dogs raiding an "illegal"
squatter settlement near Cape Town.

quickly grow up emotionally under these
' strange and violent conditions. Such
"growth" cannot allow for a healthy men¬
tal and emotional development. Some
children do indeed survive and live to be
normal adults; but some, more sensitive
than others, are permanently maimed by
the shock experiences of their childhood,
accounting for the high population of in¬
humane South African black asylums.
At this point let us observe black children
as they reach school-going age. Being
black they will have no government finan¬
ced or subsidized playschools and
therefore will have had very little exposure
to early pre-school education. The parents
are too busy eking out an existence to
teach their children anything. This is the
complete reverse of the normal African
tradition in~ which grandmothers and
mothers assume early responsibility for
teaching the children through tales and
children's poems.
Under the current discriminatory system
children have become part of the white
man's production machine. This may be
either directly or indirectly; in the latter in¬
stance, which is the more frequent, the
children take over the domestic chores so
that their parents can earn or supplement
their meagre, earnings.
When the children go to school for the
first time, they already consider
themselves, and are considered by their
parents, as an important means of improv¬
ing the family income. This is not so
strange as it might seem since their educa¬
tional life span is often shortjust long
enough to enable them to understand the
white bosses' instructions.
Formal education, therefore, is itself
designed to generate feelings of inferiority,
through an inferior quality education. Its
main purpose is to prepare the black child
for a pre-ordained inferior status in society.
This preparation takes elaborate forms.
Books, teaching and school facilities are all
designed to mould the black children to ac¬
cept their inferior position.
Under the apartheid system, the world is
limited not only for the black child but for
the white child as well. For white children
must also be taught to accept this system
as normal. They must be given a religion
and an ideology that claims supernatural
sanction for this brutalized and disem¬
bowelled world. Their vision of life, of the
world, of history, is circumscribed and
tailored to the propaganda requirements of
power and its maintenance. Hence, both
black and white children are unfit to live in
a wider, changing world. Indeed, the black
child, after rejecting the premise of apar¬
theid, is better adjusted to grow with a
growing world. Nevertheless, this is small
consolation in view of the many thousands
of black children that die needlessly of
disease and are mentally retarded by a
system that is brutal and tyrannical.
In the Year of the Child it is a terrible
paradox that South Africa, a country that
mercilessly maims children, finds moral and
financial support from nations that are
most vocal and sentimental about the
child. Could this be a case of a Judas
Iscariot wailing over his own betrayal?
Mazisi Kunene
3l_ .1 V
.c
5
\
c
c
£.
a.
11
