The Buddhist
vision
in Thai art
by Adul Wichiencharoen
THAI traditional painting, of which
the mural is the most important
category, is characterized by the
insistent flow and rhythm of elegant and
graceful lines. Many of these murals are
creations of great artistic value by the stan¬
dards of any age or culture, but they could
only have been the work of devout Bud¬
dhists who conceived and executed them
anonymously as an act of love and worship.
For like the world-renowned sculptures of
Thailand, Thai mural paintings are religious
and didactic, their primary purpose being to
convey the essence of Buddhist philosophy
with its emphasis on the virtue of overcom¬
ing the baser desires and evil thoughts.
Yet this conception of visual art as a
means of spiritual edification, and the re¬
quirement that it should be consistent with
the Buddhist view that visible forms and the
world of matter are deceptive, presented the
early Thai artists with a seemingly insur¬
mountable problem. Naturalistic representa¬
tion would have focused the viewer's
thoughts on what he saw and, by pre¬
venting him from thinking about the reality
that lay behind, would have become an ob¬
stacle to imagination and thus to inspiration.
ADUL WICHIENCHAROEN, of Thailand,
formerly rector of Silpakorn University, is chair¬
man of the Thai National Committee on Land Use
and a member of the National Education Council
and of the National Environment Board. He is the
author of many studies and articles on Thai soci¬
ety andphilosophy as well as on international law,
development planning and public administration.
The illustrations for this article are taken from
Mural Paintings in Thailand, by Klaus Wenk, Inigo
von Oppersdorff Verlag, Zurich, 1975-1976;
photographs by Franz Horisberger.
With great artistic ingenuity, made possi¬
ble only by a deep understanding of Bud¬
dhist tenets and inspiration, the artists of the
' Sukhothai period (1238-1350 AD) solved the
problem of representing the image of the
Buddha by creating an idealized form
presented in terms only abstractly related to
the human physique and in such a manner
as to evoke peace of mind and contentment
in the beholder. This stylized, symbolistic
representation of the Buddha, used in both
sculpture and painting, gave rise to the
rhythmical and graceful curvilinear forms so
typical of Thai painting.
After the Sukhothai period, this idealized,
curvilinear form was also used to depict
Bodhisattvas, other celestial beings, royalty
and dignitaries who are portrayed in
rhythmical, flowing lines with the symbolic-
oval shape of the head, delicate facial
delineations and graceful gestures of the
hands; the facial expression is serene, slight¬
ly smiling or impassive. Emotions such as
joy, sorrow, reverence, hate, rage or love
are expressed by conventionalized lines and
gestures.
Humble folk are usually stylized, but less
elegantly, and they are portrayed with a
variety of facial expressions and explicit
gestures. The rough, tough characters, on
the other hand, and those in folklore scenes,
are more realistically depicted with some
degree of exaggeration employed to express
ridicule, sympathy, humour and lighthearted
sentiments..
Representation of bad characters is left :
entirely to the imagination and artistic skill of
the painter, with the results that Jujaka, the
Brahmin rascal in the Vessantara Jataka,
looks different in different murals, but he is
always identifiable. Scenes of hell are k
depicted in fantastic imagery and in folklore t
25

^ scenes and in portrayals of the rank and file
characters from the Jataka and the life story
of Buddha the artists give full rein to their
originality and creative talents. Thus,
despite the elements of conventionalism in
Thai painting, the individuality of the artist
still shines through.
Thai murals are two dimensional, ex¬
cluding both linear and atmospheric
perspective. They obtain the effects they
desire by linear treatment, with colour fulfill¬
ing only a secondary function. Never by
itself a statement of form, colour is an ac¬
cessory adding to the fluent affirmations of
the elegant flowing lines and as such must
not be a distraction. Colours are subdued
and mellow and thus specially effective in
lending an air of mysticism where this is
needed. The chromatic effect is enriched by
gilding the crowns and ornaments on
celestial beings and on royal personalities as
well as the ornamental parts of palaces, the
overall effect of the combined colours
blending harmoniously with the linear
forms.
The colours used are not intended to
represent the visible colours of objects in
nature. The sky may be bright blue and the
forest foliage green, but Thai artists vary
their colours according to their conceptual
scheme. There are some conventions in the
use of colours: royalty and the upper classes
are always painted in white or a very light
tone, while darker tones are reserved for the
lower classes.
A unique feature of Thai mural painting
lies in the technique of constructing and
blending many different scenes into a
unified large picture on the wall. The unity
of construction is such that, at a distance, a
mural appears as a whole picture with its
various component parts artistically arrang¬
ed. But when attention is drawn to any par¬
ticular part, the observer sees a picture,
complete in itself, depicting a certain scene.
This ordered composition interests the eye
and prompts the observer to range im¬
aginatively over a mural from one scene to
another unimpeded by any visual barrier.
Although the fresco technique was occa¬
sionally used in Thailand, as witness the
15th century murals at Wat Tatburuna in the
old capital of Ayuthya, tempera answered
the needs of Thai painters better and was
almost universally adopted. Unlike the
tempera emulsion commonly used in Europe
and elsewhere, which was prepared by mix¬
ing powdered colour with egg yolk or the
whole egg and then thinned with water, the
binder used in the preparation of Thai
tempera was gum from the Nakwid tree.
This was mixed with pigments of local origin
made from plants and mineral substances.
These natural pigments contributed to the
mellowness and harmony of colour achieved
in the old Thai murals. It was the glaring
vividness of imported chemical pigments
that threw the traditional harmony of colour
out of balance in the murals of the later
Bangkok period.
With few exceptions, mural paintings in
Thailand are located in the complex of
buildings that makes up the typical Thai
Buddhist temple-cum-monastery institution
known as a Wat. The murals may be on the
inside walls of the Vihan (a hall housing the
Above, the Vihan (hall of the Buddha) at Wat Phra Singh, the most
important monastery at Chieng Mai. The monastery was founded in
1345, but the Vihan was built in 1806 and the mural, right, which
adorns its north wall dates from about the middle of the 19th
century. The mural recounts the story of Prince Sang Thong. Cast
off by his father. Sang is brought up by a man-eating ogress named
Phanthurat. One day, in her absence, he discovers that in a part of
her palace which he is forbidden to enter are pools of silver and
gold as well as a golden staff which enables anyone holding it to
fly. In the right foreground Sang is seen dipping his finger into the
silver pool; on the left he is bathing in the pool of gold; above he
grasps the magic golden staff, while hovering near him is a ghost¬
like mask in which he disguises himself to escape from
Phanthurat's palace.
26

Above left, the imposing monastery
complex of Wat Ratchasitharam. The large
building centre left is the Ubosot (hall of
ceremonies) on the south wall of which is
the mural, left, depicting the "allegory of
the three strings". In the wilderness
Siddhattha lies on a bare rock, semi¬
conscious with exhaustion from rigorous
fasting and meditation. Five ascetics kneel
before him and at his feet is Indra playing a
three-stringed guitar. When Indra plucks
the first string it sounds harsh because it is
too taut; the second string lacks resonance
because it is too slack, the third string,
which is moderately taut, gives forth the
sweetest sound. This Siddhattha
interpreted as meaning that he should
avoid extremes and follow "the middle
way". From this time onwards he gave up
excessive fasting.
Buddha image), the Chedi (stupa), the
Prang (a tower-like stupa), or the Sala Kan-
parien (preaching and study hall), but those
inside the Ubosot (hall of ceremonies) con¬
stitute an organic part of the overall design
of the interior in relation to various other
parts, in particular the large, principal Bud¬
dha ¡mage which, by convention, is placed
among the smaller images on the altar at the
west end of the hall facing the entrance on
the east side.
Paintings cover the four walls and are ar¬
ranged in a set pattern. The entire top sec¬
tion of the wall above the entrance facing
the large Buddha ¡mage is devoted to the
scene of the Temptation and the Triumph
over Mara, a symbolic representation of the
overcoming of Evil. On the opposite wall,
behind the large Buddha ¡mage are scenes
of Lord Buddha's Sermon in Heaven and His
Descent to Earth, or, less frequently, a por¬
trayal of Buddhist cosmology. On the upper
portion of the two side walls are rows of
Buddhas with disciples, or rows of celestial
beings in the act of worship. Below these
are narrative murals depicting the life of the
Buddha, or stories from the Jataka, or, oc¬
casionally, scenes from the Ramayana, the
Hindu epic poem. Narrative murals also
cover the lower east wall below the Tempta-*
tion and the Triumph over Mara, while
graceful guardian figures adorn the inner
sides of the doors and shutters.
Apart from the primitive cave paintings
found in several parts of Thailand, the
earliest Thai traditional murals known to re¬
main are those of the Sukhothai period
(1238 - 1350 AD) found at Yala, in southern
Thailand, and at Sukhothai, the ancient Thai
capital. These are believed to have been
painted during the last quarter of the 13th
century. In the Sukhothai murals can be
seen the stylized representations of Buddha
¡mages which later became conventional.
Towards the end of the Ayuthya period
(1350 - 1767 AD), Thai mural painting came
to full maturity, but we know little of its
evolution since only four examples of murals
from the early and middle Ayuthya periods
are still extant. As in pre-Ayuthya murals on¬
ly four colours, black, white, red and yellow,
were used; composition remained simple
with the portrayal of Buddha figures either
alone or with attendants arranged in rows.
But at the beginning of the late Ayuthya
period, around the first quarter of the 17th
century, a new chapter in Thai mural pain¬
ting was opened.
The many murals that remain from this
period show a number of innovations. A
wider range of colours was introduced and
the conventional, stylized forms, postures
and gestures were fully established. The
simple, ceremonial designs of the Sukhothai
and earlier Ayuthya periods gave way tow
more complex compositions. After the fall f
27

Above, mural at Wat Phumin
Nan, depicting Nemi on the way
to the Tavatimsa heaven, was
heavily restored in about 1870.
The Buddha, in a previous
existence as King Nemi, was
famed ior his lavish distribution
of alms and his obedience to
moral precepts. The thirty-three
gods of the Tavatimsa heaven
all wished to hear the royal sage
and Indra sent the heavenly
carriage to bring him before
them. On the journey, Matali,
the driver of the carriage,
showed him all the wonders of
the infernal and the heavenly
regions.
Right, portrait of "the physician
Kumanaphek" dates from about
1875 and comes from Wat
Phumin Nan. It is not known
whether the painting is a true
portrait or an ideal ¡mage of a
physician or a legendary
character. His features and the
style of his beard are unlike
those of any peoples of northern
Thailand or Laos. His clothing
seems equally foreign to the
region, but his long finger nails
indicate that he is of high rank.
k of Ayuthya in 1767, the tradition established
in the late Ayuthya period continued to
flourish, with variations, through the Thon-
buri period (1767-1782) and the early
Bangkok period (since 1782). But in the se¬
cond half of the 19th century, mural painting
began to degenerate due to indiscriminate
adoption of Western art techniques, the
blending of Western perspective, shading
and realism with traditional elements as well
as the use of glaring chemical colours prov¬
ing disastrous.
In recent years there has been a revival of
interest in traditional painting among artists.
Some are working along conventional lines,
while others are experimenting with dif¬
ferent compositions, forms and ideas in an
attempt to find a new direction. Outstanding
among the latter group is Thawal Dachani,
whose many works include wall-size can¬
vases and murals.
In the true tradition of the old masters,
Thawal seeks to express the Buddhist con¬
cept of truth through symbolism and
idealistic form, but in his own personal,
original style. His work is a continuation of
traditional painting, developed in one
specific direction, which seeks to convey the
Lord Buddha's message in a bolder, more
forceful style. It was precisely this cor¬
respondence between the Buddhist ideal in
life and the old masters' ideal in art that
enabled them successfully to develop their
own unique, idealistic style of painting.
Adul Wichiencharoen
28
