Albert Einstein
1879-1955
The story of a genius
by Jürgen Ehlers
JÜRGEN EHLERS, noted German theoretical
physicist, is a Scientific Member of the Max
Planck Institute of Physics and Astrophysics at
Munich (Federal Republic of Germany). This
article is an edited and abridged version of a lec¬
ture given at Munich University in September
1978, at a Unesco symposium on the Impact of
Modern Scientific Ideas on Society.
ACCORDING to the eighteenth-
century German romantic poet and
science-enthusiast Novalis, "theo¬
ries are nets: only he who casts will catch".
Using this metaphor one can say that no
fisherman in this century was more suc¬
cessful than Albert Einstein.
In his annus mirabilis, 1905, comparable
in the history of science perhaps only to the
memorable year 1666 when Isaac Newton
conceived most of the ideas which were to
govern science for more than two hundred
years, Albert Einstein published in one and
the same volume of the German scientific
journal Annalen der Physik three papers
each of which, besides containing impor¬
tant specific results, laid the ground for ex¬
tensive new areas of fundamental research.
Who was this man Albert Einstein who,
as a twenty-six-year-old technical expert,
third class, at the Swiss patent office in
Berne, invented in his spare time new
methods in statistical mechanics,
discovered light quanta, gave a proof of the
existence of atoms, solved the problem of
constructing a correct electrodynamics of
moving bodies, a problem attacked without
definitive success by leading scientists of
the time like Hendrik Anton Lorentz and
Henri Poincaré, by setting up a new theory
of space and time?
Albert Einstein was born on 14 March
1879, in Ulm, Germany, in the same year in
which Max von Laue and Otto Hahn were
born and James Clerk Maxwell, the
founder of the modern theory of electro¬
magnetic fields, died.
The Einsteins were Jews, but did not
follow the rituals and laws of the Jewish
religion any more. In 1880 the family moved
to Munich, where Albert's father Hermann
ran a small electrochemical factory with his
brother. In the same year Albert's sister
Maja, his only sibling, was born. The
young Albert has been described as a
taciturn, pensive, day-dreaming little boy,,
slow at learning to speak, not liking
physical activities or playing much with
other children.
When he was four or five years old,
Albert Einstein experienced, according to
his recollection, what appeared to him as a
miracle. A magnetic compass, shown to
him by his father, appeared to be drawn
steadfastly and by a mysterious, invisible
power, always into the same direction, ir¬
respective of how one moved the housing
of the compass.
Does this deep impression, vividly
remembered after many years, indicate a
longing for something dependable,
something which the young as well as the
mature Einstein did not find in the human
world surrounding him, but which he did
find in the unchanging, impersonal struc¬
ture of nature?
Albert attended a Catholic elementary
school, and at the age of ten entered the
Luitpold Gymnasium. He disliked the strict
discipline, the authoritarian spirit, the lack
of freedom at the gymnasium, where he
had to learn Latin and Greek grammar
which interfered with his studies of
mathematics and science, the interest in
which had been excited in him by his uncle
who was an engineer.
Unhappy and depressed, an ill-adapted
outsider, considered by his teachers as
having a disruptive influence on his class¬
mates, Albert Einstein soon followed his
parents, without a school diploma, to
Milan where they had moved in 1894
because of business difficulties. After one
year of studies at a school at Aarau in
Switzerland where he felt much happier,
Albert Einstein was admitted as a student
of mathematics and physics to the famous
Polytechnic Institute in Zurich.
Among his fellow students were Mileva
Marie, a Serbian girl who in 1902 became
his first wife and who was to be the mother
of his two children, and Marcel
Grossmann, who eighteen years later k
became his mathematical collaborator.*


k Among his teachers was the outstanding
mathematician Hermann Minkowski, who
in 1907 invented the concept of space-time
and thus contributed in an essential way to
the development of the theory of relativity.
i After graduation in 1900 Einstein failed to
obtain a position at the Polytechnic or as a
teacher, but in 1902, with the help of his
friend Marcel Grossmann, he got a post at
the Patent Office in Berne. Here he
prepared himself for the examination for his
doctor's degree which he took in 1905, and
found enough time to pursue his research
in theoretical physics.
Einstein kept the position in Berne until
the end of 1909 when he accepted his first'
full-time academic appointment as
associate professor at the University of
Zurich. His accomplishments had by then
been widely recognized. He had extended
his research on the agitation of microscopic
particles known as Brownian motion, on
light quanta and relativity. He had created
the first quantum theory of specific heats
of solids; and, in 1907, he had formed the
opinion that a satisfactory theory of
gravitation would have to incorporate in a
basic and natural way the equality of iner-
tial and gravitational mass, and the fact,
already noted by Galileo, that all test bodies
fall with the same acceleration.
Gravity and inertia are essentially the
Photo © Parimage, Pans
One of the few surviving pictures of
Einstein as a young man. It was taken
when he was a pupil at the Polytechnic
Institute in Zurich in 1900, five years
before the publication of the great paper
in which he set forth the special theory of
relativity.
Photo © Ullstein, Fed. Rep. of Germany
Albert Einstein at the age of four. He was far from being a precocious
child and did not begin talking until he was three years old. Later, his
mother wrote anxiously to a friend : "I really don't know what we shall
make of Albert later on; he learns next to nothing".
same thing, Einstein decided, and therefore
a satisfactory theory of gravity required a
generalization of the space-time framework
of his theory of relativity, for if gravity is
taken into account the concept of a finitely
extended, strict inertial frame of reference
is no longer adequate.
In 1910 Einstein accepted a full pro¬
fessorship at the German University of
Prague. For the reasons just indicated Ein¬
stein was searching for a generalization of
what he now called the "special theory of
relativity", in order to include gravitation.
Gravitation theory was his main concern
between 1907 and 1916. Whereas the ma¬
jority of physicists had by then accepted
special relativity as a solid part of the
building of physics, Einstein was occupied
with finding out its limits of validity and
struggled for a more inclusive and more
precise mathematical representation of
physical processes. In Prague, in 1911, he
arrived at the prediction that light waves
are bent by gravitational fields, but not un¬
til 1914 was an expedition ready to make
appropriate observations during a solar
eclipse. The First World War ruled out this
attempt, and the first measurement had to
wait until 1919.
After eighteen months in Prague, at the
end of 1912, Einstein returned to Zurich,
this time to become a full professor at the
Polytechnic Institute where he had studied
a dozen years before.
In Zurich, in collaboration with his friend
Marcel Grossmann who had become a pro¬
fessor of mathematics, Einstein published a
preliminary version of a new theory of
gravity.
At the end of 1913, on the initiative of

the German physicists Max Planck and
Walter Nernst, Einstein was offered a well-
paid position as a member of the Royal
Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin
and director of the yet-to-be-founded
Kaiser-Wilhelm Institut für Physik.
His duty was to be the organization of
research. He was not obliged to teach, but
could do so if he wanted. Einstein had
always considered formal teaching a
burden, and he was attracted to the lively
scientific atmosphere of Berlin. So he ac¬
cepted the offer. Soon after his arrival in
Berlin he separated from his wife Mileva.
Einstein was now thirty-four years old and
a star of the first magnitude in the sky of
science.
In Berlin, in spite of many contacts with
colleagues, in particular with Max Planck,
Max von Laue, Walter Nernst and later Er¬
win Schrödinger, and many others, Ein¬
stein felt somewhat isolated and a
foreigner. He did not lecture, but par¬
ticipated actively in the discussions follow¬
ing colloquia. Being a pacifist and opposed
to nationalism, he felt even more isolated
during the First World War.
, He now concentrated fully on the theory
of gravitation and after a strenuous effort
Einstein succeeded at the end of 1915 in
formulating a coherent theory which is still
considered as the most admirable part of
classical physics. This theory has come
through all experimental tests performed
up to now with flying colours.
In 1917, in a paper which is regarded as
his most important contribution to quan¬
tum theory, Einstein proposed a statistical
description of the interaction of atoms and
photons and gave a new derivation of
Planck's law of radiation, which had laid
the foundations of quantum theory. In the
same year Einstein founded modern
cosmology, the science of the large-scale
structure of the universe, by constructing
the first mathematically consistent model
of the universe containing gravitating,
homogeneously distributed matter.
During the years 1921, 1922 and 1923
Einstein travelled in the United States,
Europe and Asia. Convinced by Chaim
Weizmann, he engaged himself for the
Zionist movement. In 1921 he was awarded
the Nobel prize, not for his relativity theory,
but "for the photoelectric law and his
works on theoretical physics".
When Hitler came to power in 1933,
Einstein was travelling in the United States.
He never again entered Germany. After a
short stay in Belgium, during which he
resigned from the Prussian Academy and
the Bavarian Academy of Sciences in pro¬
test against the passive attitude taken by
these academies when academic freedom
was suppressed in Germany and many
scientists and intellectuals were removed
from their positions for "ideological
reasons", Einstein accepted a position at
the newly founded Institute for Advanced
Study in Princeton (U.S.A.). He continued
research, concentrating mainly on the crea¬
tion of what he called a unified field theory
which would, so he hoped, give a deeper
account of both gravity and elec-
tromagnetism, and in addition would
describe particles as stable regions of high
concentration of the field. In these efforts.
Einstein did not succeed, but in a modified
form his programme of using geometry to
create such a unified theory has received a
strong new impetus and has had con¬
siderable success in recent years.
' Besides these efforts Einstein occa¬
sionally returned to his gravity theory of
1915 and enriched it by new results. In
1932, he collaborated with the Dutch
astronomer Willem de Sitter to construct a
model of an expanding universe which is
still a possible candidate to represent the
large-scale structure of the material world.
Joint work with Nathan Rosen in 1937
resulted in solutions of his field equations
which describe gravitational waves, and a
celebrated paper published in 1938, written
with Banesh Hoffmann and Leopold Infeld,
was devoted to the derivation of equations
of motion of particles from the gravitational
field equations. The subject of this paper is
still under discussion. Research on it is be¬
ing carried out by, among others, my col¬
laborators and myself at the Max Planck In¬
stitut für Physik und Astrophysik, at
Munich (Federal Republic of Germany).
Even after his retirement in 1945 Einstein
continued to work right up to his death on
18 April 1955, at the age of seventy-six.
One important characteristic of Ein¬
stein's approach to basic problems of
physics was that he questioned the ade¬
quacy of even those concepts and relations
which were generally regarded as evident;
in this sense he was a philosopher.
According to Einstein, concepts are free
inventions, and the axioms or basic laws of
a theory are guesses; they cannot be
deduced. or inductively inferred from ex-|
periences or observations. '
Photo © Ullstein, Fed. Rep. of Germany
With his second wife Elsa, homeward bound after a trip to California. In the 1920s
and early 1930s, Einstein travelled widely, visiting the United States, China, Japan
and most of Western Europe to explain and discuss his theories.

On the other hand, a theory should per¬
mit the derivation of propositions which
can be tested experimentally, and therein
lies its value. Thus, science requires three
human activities: free invention or guess¬
ing, logical-mathematical deduction, and
observation or experiment.
As Einstein as well as Paul Dirac (see arti¬
cle page 17) remarked, the process of
guessing is guided hot only by factual ex¬
perience and experience with previous
theories, but also by a sense of structural
simplicity and mathematical beauty. There
is not much point in classifying Einstein as
a positivist, a rationalist, an empiricist or
any other "...ist", but if some such label
were required, I would propose to call him
a logico-empirical artist.
It appears that Einstein has strongly in¬
fluenced natural philosophy not so much
through his philosophical statements as
such, but because of the manner in which
he practised science, constructed new
theories and thus contributed to
knowledge, often in a surprising way.
Einstein regarded himself as a physicist
and not as a philosopher. He was proud of
the general theory of relativity which he
considered as his greatest intellectual
achievement.
"Einstein's Theory of Relativity has ad¬
vanced our ideas of the structure of the
cosmos a step further", wrote the German
mathematician Hermann Weyl. "It is as if a
wall which separated us from Truth has
collapsed. Wider expanses and greater
depths are now exposed to the searching
eye of knowledge, regions of which we had
not even a presentiment. It has brought us
much nearer to grasping the plan that
underlies all physical happening."
Jürgen Ehlers
At the blackboard during a lecture to the American Association for the
Advancement of Science. In 1933 Einstein accepted a post at the Institute for
Advanced Study at Princeton, where he worked until he died in 1955, a
page of uncompleted equations at his bedside.
Photo © Keystone. Paris
* «
i II
-
i ' \ ! 4
1 lIM I =£# i
-
4ft
15L * *w ,
HEBT K*- fTvl - V
L
