Photo © Louvre Museum, Paris



THE ARMS RACE
The military
establishment
On occasions of rejoicing precedence
is given to the left; On occasions of
mourning precedence is given to the
right. A lieutenant's place is on the
left; The general's place is on the
right.
This means that it is mourning rites
that are observed.
Lao Tzu (c. 570-490 B.C.)
Book of the Way and Its Power
CONTEMPORARY military institu¬
tions are often so powerful and
pervasive that they can have a con¬
siderable impact on political and social con¬
ditions and perceptions and can impose im¬
portant constraints on the evolution of
societies. In this sense they can represent a
major social force, influencing the social,
political and ideological development of a
country.
The extent to which military forces also
act as a social and political force, and the
form taken by their action, depends very
much on circumstances, on the social
framework, on economic conditions and
on the political context. It would be a crude
oversimplification to assume that the
military establishment has the same
characteristics everywhere or that its
specific political impact could be talked
about in general terms. Traditions, political
and social affiliations, historical ex¬
periences in connexion with former wars or
liberation struggles and the pattern of inter¬
relationships with other institutions in
society are too diverse.
There are cases in which the armed
forces have become, for one reason or
another, centres of attraction or incubation
of modernizing forces in society and have
played a role in social develoment going far
beyond their strictly military functions.
In other cases they have constituted a
major hindrance to social development and
have served to perpetuate privileges and to
repress popular aspirations. Nevertheless,
it should be recognized that the military in- W
stitution in the wide sense (including such '
29

institutions as paramilitary forces or secret
' services which may be formally indepen¬
dent of it) enjoys a unique position of
strength in many societies.
This is due to a variety of factors. First,
there is its sheer mass combined with its
highly centralized organization. Second,
the armed forces may enjoy privileged rela¬
tions with key sectors of industry, being at
once a customer and a link with govern¬
ment. Thirdly, they are in a privileged posi¬
tion vis-à-vis the State and many areas of
government policy (foreign, industrial, in¬
frastructure!, regional and others, depen- ,
ding on the circumstances). Fourthly, the
military institution can, to a varying degree,
protect its operations from public scrutiny,
and conduct a variety of activities under
the label of national security.
These may range from the establishment
of a full-fledged covert foreign service or
the covert conduct of military activities in
foreign countries to keeping- political op¬
ponents under more or less close
surveillance. Last, but of course not least,
the armed forces enjoy a monopoly of
physical force and appear as the ultimate
arbiter, both vis-à-vis other States and
internally.
Militarization often goes hand in hand
with social tension. As a means of
domestic repression it is characteristic of
countries where considerable social dif¬
ferences and extreme exploitation of large
sectors of the population prevail. South
Africa may serve as an extreme illustration,
but a similar pattern, minus the racial
dimension, can be found elsewhere. In
such countries it is not unusual to find, for
a period at least, a considerable rate of
economic growth together with heavy ex¬
penditure on armaments and on domestic
policing. To conclude from such instances
that high military expenditure is consonant
with economic growth is to disregard the
social ends for which growth is only a
means.
In most cases it may be assumed that the
military institution and the armed forces
have a double role. They are at once an
ultimate recourse in external affairs and an
ultimate arbiter in internal affairs. These
roles are not always unrelated. During con¬
frontation with an outside enemy the limits
of tolerated dissension become narrower,
and the real or supposed external threat
may become a pretext for increased
repression.
Conversely, when internal dissension
transgresses the accepted limits, and when
means for satisfying basic needs and
aspirations are scarce, there may be a
temptation to seek temporary, refuge in
domestic repression or in the escalation of
foreign confrontation. Here governments
may get trapped in an impossible situation
where an increasing burden of military ex¬
penditures further delays economic and
social progress, causes social structures to
ossify and exacerbates social tension, while
other policies seem to be precluded by a
confrontation and an arms race with
neighbouring countries. The conjunction
of external and domestic confrontation,
both of them temporarily stabilized through
a military build-up but ultimately exacer¬
bated by it, can give rise to a particularly
precarious situation.
