Africa's dialogue
MAN is an historical animal, and
African man is no exception.
Just as everywhere else all over
the world, he created his own history and
his own idea of it. Yet at first glance, and
even after reading many ethnological
studies, one gets the impression that the
Africans were submerged, almost drown¬
ed, in mythical time, a vast ocean without
shores and without landmarks, while the
other peoples of the world advanced down
the avenue of History, a great highway
marked out with the milestones of pro¬
gress.
And it is true that myth, the imaginary
representation of the past, does often
dominate African conceptions of the
development of the lives of nations. So
much so, that the choice and significance
of real events sometimes had to obey a
mythical model predetermining even the
most prosaic actions of ruler or people.
Myth, in the guise of immemorial customs,
thus governed, as it also justified, history.
From this context emerge two striking
characteristics of African historical
thought: its timelessness and its essentially
social aspect.
In this situation, time is not duration as it
affects the fate of the individual. It is the
rhythm of the collective breathing of the
social group. It is not a river flowing in one
direction from a known source to a known
outlet. Traditional African time includes
and incorporates eternity in both direc¬
tions. Bygone generations are not lost to
the present. In their own way they remain
contemporary, and as influential as they
were during their lifetime, if not more so.
In these circumstances causality
operates in a forward direction, of course,
from past to present and from present to
future, not only through the influence of
bygone facts and events, but through a
direct intervention which can operate in
any direction. When Kanku Musa, emperor
of Mali (early 14th century), sent an am¬
bassador to the king of Yatenga asking him
to be converted to Islam, the Mossi ruler
answered that he would have to consult his
ancestors before taking such a decision.
This shows the past in direct connexion
with the present through religion,
ancestors acting as special and direct
agents in matters occurring centuries after
their death. Similarly, at many royal courts
officials responsible for the interpretation
M. BOUBOU HAMA, of Niger, specializes in
research on the kingdoms of the Niger Valley, on
which he has published several works, drawing
his inspiration largely from the oral tradition. A
former president of the National Assembly of
Niger, he is the initiator of a drive for the collec¬
tion and preservation of ancient manuscripts in
Arabic and Ajami (texts in African languages,
but written in Arabic characters).
12

with time
by Boubou Hama and Joseph Ki-Zerbo
of dreams had considerable influence on
political action, and might almost be
described as ministers of the future.
In this kind of suspended time, the pre¬
sent may even act on what is regarded as
the past but in fact remains contemporary.
The blood of sacrifices offered up today
can help the ancestors of yesteryear. Right
up to our own times, Africans have ex¬
horted one another not to neglect offerings
made in the name of their ancestors, for
those who receive nothing are the poor in
the parallel world of the dead, and have to
live on the charity of those in whose name
generous sacrifices are made.
In a more fundamental way still, some
cosmogonies attribute to some mythical
time advances which were made in
historical time; as the latter is not perceived
as such by each individual, it is replaced by
the historical group memory. An example
of this is the Gikuyu legend about the first
making of iron. Mogai (God) had divided
up the animals between men and women.
But the women were so cruel that their
animals ran away and became wild. The
men interceded with Mogai on behalf of
their wives, saying, "We wish to sacrifice a
lamb in thy honour, but we do not want to
do it with a wooden knife lest we run the
same risk as our wives." Mogai con¬
gratulated them on their wisdom and, so
that they could have more efficient
weapons, told them how to smelt iron.
This mythical and collective conception
of time made it an attribute of sovereignty.
King Shilluk was the mortal repository of
immortal power, for he combined in his
own person both mythical time (he was the
incarnation of the founding hero) and
social time, regarded as the source of the
group's vitality.
Indeed, one has to go as far as the
general conception of the world in order to
understand the Africans' vision of time and
its real meaning for them. We then see that
in traditional thought, time in the ordinary
sense is only one aspect of another time ex
perienced by other dimensions of the in¬
dividual. When a man lies down at night on
his mat or his bed, to sleep, that is the mo-
' ment his double chooses to set out and
retrace the path the man himself followed
during the day, to frequent the places he
was in, and to repeat the work and actions
he performed consciously during his daily
life. It is in the course of these peregrina¬
tions that the double encounters the forces
of good and evil, both benevolent spirits
and the sorcerers who eat up doubles or
cerkos as they are called in the Songhay
and Zarma languages.
It is in his double that a man's personality
resides. When the Songhays say óf
someone that his bya (double) is heavy or
light, they mean that his personality is
strong or weak, and the purpose of
amulets is to protect and strengthen the
double. The ¡deal is to succeed in merging
into one's double so as to form a single en¬
tity, which thus acquires superhuman
wisdom and strength. Only the greatest in¬
itiate or master (korté-konynii, zimaa) can
attain this state, in which time, like space,
ceases to be an obstacle.
Social time. History, experienced in this
way by a group, amasses power, and this
power is usually symbolized and given con¬
crete form by some object which is
transmitted by the patriarch, the chief of
the tribe, or the king, to his successor. It
may be a golden ball kept in a tobal or war-
drum, together with parts of the body of a
lion or elephant or panther. Or it may be
kept in a box or chest, like the regalia (tibo)
of the Mossi king. Among the Songhay
and Zarma, the object is a rod of iron
pointed at one end. Among the Sorko in
the old empire of Gao it was an idol in the
shape of a big fish with a ring in its mouth.
Among those who worked in iron it was a
mythical forge which sometimes grew red-
hot at night to express its anger.
The transfer of such objects constituted
the legal transmission of power. The mosu
striking example is that of the Sonianké,*
The cosmology of many African peoples includes a god of creation, invoked through
secondary deities or mythical ancestors which mediate between man and the invisible
world. Ancestor figures are depicted in African statuary in poses which correspond to
their role or refer to an event in popular mythology. This wooden statuette (13 cm high) of
the Dogon people (Mali) probably represents Dyongu Seru, a mythical ancestor, hiding his
face after violating a series of taboos. The statuette is a reminder of the forbidden acts
committed by Ogo, the first living creature created by Amma (God). Opposite page,
wooden figure (48 cm high) of a female ancestor of the Songo people of Angola.
13

of Sonni Ali, who have chains
of gold, silver or copper, each link
representing an ancestor and the whole
chain representing the dynastic line back to
Sonni the Great. The chains are produced
from the mouths of the celebrants in the
course of magical ceremonies, much to the
amazement of the onlookers, and when a
Sonianké patriarch dies, he disgorges the
chain for the last time, and it is swallowed
from the other end by his chosen suc¬
cessor. He dies as soon as he has passed
the chain over to whoever is to continue
the line a concrete will and testament
which well illustrates the strength of the
African conception of mythical and social
time.
Some people have thought that such a
view of the historical process was static
and sterile, placing the perfect archetype
far back in the past, in the origins of time,
and thus seeming to set before succeeding
generations an ideal which consisted in
stereotyped repetition of the doings and
exploits of their ancestors.. Myth would
then be the motive force of a history which
was immobile. But as we shall see, African
historical thought cannot be confined to
this one approach.
It must also be recognized that a
mythical approach lies at the origins of
every nation's history. Every history starts
off as religious history. But can African
time be regarded as a historical time?
Some people have said it cannot, arguing
that the African only sees the world as a
stereotyped reproduction of what has gone
before. This would make him a stubborn
disciple of the past, justifying all his actions
by saying "That was how our ancestors did
it".
The social nature of the African concep¬
tion of history itself lends it a historical
dimension, for history is the developing life
of a group. From this point of view, we
may say that, for the African, time is
dynamic. Man is not a prisoner marking
time, or condemned to do the same things
over and over again, either in the traditional
view or according to the belief of Islam.
Of course, in the absence of the idea of a
mathematical and physical time made up of
homogeneous units added together and
measured by special instruments, time re¬
mains something pragmatic and social. But
that does not mean, in this context,
something neutral and indifferent. In the
black African overall conception of the
world, time is the area where man can
always carry on the struggle against the
depletion and for the increase of his vital
energy. That is the main feature of African
animism, in which time is an enclosed
space, a market where the forces that in¬
habit the world contend or conclude
bargains. The ideal of both the individual
and the group is to defend themselves
against any diminution, to improve their
health and strength and the size of their
fields and flocks, to increase the number of
their children and wives and villages. And
this conception is undoubtedly a dynamic
one.
Power in Black Africa is often expressed
by a word that means force or strength.
But it is not just a matter of crude material
force. It is a question of the vital energy
which contains various polyvalent forces
ranging from physical integrity through
chance to moral integrity. Ethical value is
regarded as a sine qua non of the benefi¬
cent exercise of power. Popular wisdom
bears witness to this idea in many tales
which depict despotic chiefs who are finally
punished, thus literally drawing the moral
of history.
This vision of the world in which ethical
values and requirements form an integral
part of the ordering of the universe itself
may appear mythical. But it exerted an ob¬
jective influence on people's behaviour,
especially on that of many African political
leaders. In this sense one may say that
while history is often a justification of the
past it is also an exhortation for the future.
In pre-state systems moral authority
capable of guaranteeing the conduct of
public affairs or of chastising those who
conducted them was vested in special,
sometimes secret groups, such as the lo of
the Senufo or the poro of Upper Guinea.
These groups often constituted parallel
powers which could be appealed to outside
the established system. They sometimes
ended by clandestinely usurping official
power. The people then saw them as oc¬
cult centres of decision depriving the na¬
tion of control over its own history.
In the same type of society, the organiza¬
tion into age-groups is of prime importance
for establishing the people's history. This
structure, in so far as it conforms to a-
known periodicity, makes it possible to
trace history back to the eighteenth cen¬
tury. But at the same time it played a
specific rôle in the life of the societies
themselves. Even in rural communities
which knew no major technical innovation
and were therefore fairly stable, conflict
between the generations was not
unknown.
So it had to be controlled, and relations
between the generations so structured that
the conflict would not degenerate into
violent confrontation and sudden change.
The generation engaged in action sent one
of its members as a delegate to the next
generation, the one that would immediate¬
ly succeed it. The rôle of the delegate was
not to stifle the impatience of the younger
group, but to channel their reckless energy
so that it was not harmful to the communi¬
ty as a whole and did not impair the
younger group's ability to take over public
responsibility when the time came. The
Alladians of Moosou (near Abidjan), for
example, are still organized into five gene¬
rations, each reigning for nine years, even
for modern activities such as building, cele¬
brating a diploma or promotion.
Africans are vividly aware of time past,
but time past, though it greatly influences
time present, does not do away with its
dynamism, as is attested by many pro¬
verbs. The conception of time as one sees
it in African societies is certainly not inhe¬
rent in or consubstantial with some essen¬
tially African nature. It is the mark of a cer¬
tain stage in economic and social develop¬
ment. Proof of this is the striking differen¬
ces one sees even today between the time-
is-money of African city-dwellers and time
as it is understood by their contemporaries
and brothers in the bush. The essential ele¬
ment in historical time is the idea of a deve¬
lopment starting from origins which are to
be sought and examined.
Even beneath the crust of tales and
legends and the dross of myths, there is an
attempt to rationalize social development.
Sometimes even more positive efforts have
been made to try to calculate historical
time. This may be linked with space, as
when a period of short duration is referred
to as a step. It can also be linked to biology,
in references to a breath, in or out. But it is
often linked to factors not connected with
the individual, and the references then are
to cosmic, climatic or social phenomena,
especially when these are recurrent. In the
savannah of the Sudan, the followers of
traditional African religions usually count
age by rainy seasons. To indicate that a
man is old, one says how many rainy sea¬
sons he has lived through, or, more ellipti-
cally, that "he has drunk much water".
More developed systems of computation
have sometimes been attempted. It has
been shown that the Akan (Fanti,
Ashanti...) evolved a complex calendar
system, with a week of seven days, a
month of six weeks and a year of nine
months, which was regularly re-aligned on
the sun by methods that are not yet fully
understood. But the decisive step will
come only with the spread of writing,
though the existence of a literate class is no k
guarantee that the whole people will r
Time and the river
Striking aerial photo of the Niger, right, shows jutting sandbanks narrowing the river's
course. In the 16th century a great State, the Songhay empire, flourished on the middle
reaches of the Niger. It succeeded in unifying much of the western Sudan and became the
centre of a brilliant civilization. The Songhay and other peoples which constituted the
empire were traders and farmers but also included fishing peoples of the Niger, notably the
Sorko. The trading cities became Muslim but the great mass of the Songhay and the
peoples of the empire lived outside the towns and remained attached to their ancestral
beliefs, honouring magical counterparts or "doubles" known as holes and nature spirits
whose favours they sought. The Sorko, who practised animism and invoked the spirits of
the air, the soil and the river, have a rich mythology featuring such ancestral figures as the
gluttonous giant Faran-Maka, who devoured a whole hippopotamus at each meal and
swallowed ponds of water at a single gulp. The female patron of the Sorko is Haraké, a
beautiful girl with light-coloured hair who is supposed to emerge from the river's depths at
nightfall and sit on the rocks to await her lover. When he arrives she leads him beneath the
Niger waters to a fabulous world of glittering cities where her marriage is consummated to
the sound of tom-toms and stringed instruments.
14

/
/
if
\
\
A


^ become aware of possessing a common
history. But at least it makes it possible to
establish certain points of reference around
which that history shaped itself.
The introduction of monotheistic
religions rooted in another history has ser¬
ved to provide the mental image of the col¬
lective past with another, parallel set of
models which can often be glimpsed in the
background in various stories. For exam¬
ple, the dynasties are often linked arbitrarily
to the sources of Islam, whose values and
¡deals the black prophets were to make use
of to change the course of events in their
own countries.
But the greatest upheaval in time comes
with the introduction of the world of profit,
and the amassing of money. Then accultu¬
ration changes the sense of individual and
collective time into the mental schémas
operative in the countries which influence
Africans economically and culturally.
The Africans then see that it is money
that makes History. African man, once so
close to his history that he seemed to be
creating it himself, in microsocieties, is
then confronted both with the risk of a
colossal alienation and with the chance of
being a co-author of world progress.
Boubou Hama and Joseph Ki-Zerbo
E
U
S
< m
© £
2 =
S 2
The importance of women in African
history as mothers, wives, daughters and
sisters of kings is matched only by their
prominence in African mythology. Photo
shows a wooden statue (57 cm high) of
the mother-ancestor of the Kongo people
who live around the. lower course of the
Congo river and whose religion centres on
veneration of their ancestors. The sculptor
has succeeded in creating an expressive
image by a combination of realism and
stylization. Note how the size of the head
is emphasized in relation to that of the
rest of the body.
16
