The paintings of Pagan
Temple walls that tell the story
of the Buddha's many lives
by Klaus Wenk
Scenes from
Buddhist scripture
Mural-covered temple walls in
Pagan (accent is on second
syllable. Pagan) have been
likened to a picture-book of
Buddhist scripture and tradition.
Many of the wall-paintings,
whose place in Burmese and
Oriental art is now coming to be
more fully appreciated, portray
incidents from the Jataka, the
tales of the Buddha's previous
lives before the final human
incarnation in which he
achieved enlightenment (see
also photo caption page 25).
Colour photo top left shows
Brahmadatta king of Benares
clasping a palm tree while
captivated with the splendours
of nature. Strange-shaped
bushes sprout in foreground
where a tiger peeps out from a
forked branch. This mural, from
Ananda Okkyaung temple, is
one of many painted in the late
18th century, when a new
flowering of artistic creativity
came to Pagan six centuries
after the city had been sacked
by the armies of Kublai Khan.
"The Bodhisatta Medankara's
Flight from the World", (bottom
colour photo), is a mural from
Upali Thein, the "Ordination
Hall", which was named after
the thirteenth-century monk
Upali. It is inspired by an event
from the Buddhavamsa ("the
lineage of the Buddha"), which
describes the lives and work of
twenty-four Buddhas who lived
before the Buddha Gautama.
Preening parrot, top right, from
Yadana Myitzu temple, shows
how Pagan mura lists could also
turn their hands to purely
ornamental painting. Photo this
page shows decorative motif on
the ceiling of Ananda
Okkyaung. A figure with a
crown and royal ornaments rises
from the centre of a circle.
BURMESE painting is one of the
"great unknowns" of world art, and
except for a handful of specialists
few people are aware of the wealth of mural
paintings in the monuments of Pagan, Bur¬
ma's ancient capital.
Pagan itself, situated on the east bank of
the Irrawaddy river, some 145 kilometres
downstream from Mandalay, is an
astonishing spectacle. A forest of shrines
and temples (the Burmese Archaeological
Service has counted as many as five thou¬
sand) stretches as far as the eye can see.
Some of them are in ruins, others are
relatively well preserved in spite of the
vicissitudes of Pagan's history and nature's
slow process of decay, to which the earth¬
quake of 8 July 1975 added a disastrous
hammer-blow. (See Unesco Courier, May
1976).
Standing out from among the host of pin- k
nacles and pointed cupolas on this gran- f
35

diose site is the delicately-proportioned
white mass of Ananda, the most famous
temple in Burma.
Just in front of Ananda's north entrance
stands a more insignificant, though still
massive, tower-like building of brick covered
with plaster. In Burmese it is known simply
as Ananda Okkyaung, "the brick temple (in
front of) the Ananda Temple".
This rather unsatisfactory situation beside
a dominating neighbour may explain why
Ananda Okkyaung attracts few visitors ex¬
cept for those who know that within its
shadowy passages are the crowning glory of
eighteenth-century Burmese painting, a set
of murals which are still well preserved.
The visitor who steps into the temple
through the entrances with their low, round
arches, cannot fail to be impressed. From
the mystical atmosphere of semi-darkness,
shines out a gallery of paintings the like of
which as far as number and completeness
are concerned, can no longer be seen
anywhere else in Burma.
The murals, although the work of various
hands, give the impression of forming a
complete whole. They illustrate many typical
characteristics of Burmese painting, and to
be fully understood they must be seen as
part of a long tradition which is itself in¬
separable from the history of Pagan.
First of all, Burmese painting is on the
whole Buddhist painting. Its most important
impulse came from the great religious move¬
ment that originated in India in the 5th cen¬
tury BC and subsequently spread across the
whole of south and east Asia the teachings
of the Buddha, the great one who overcame
the world.
In Burma the Theravada variant of Bud¬
dhism became dominant during the reign of
King Anawrahta (1044-1077) who united the
country politically and initiated the develop¬
ment of Pagan as one of the most important
centres of Buddhist learning in South-east
Asia. According to Theravada beliefs, pain¬
tings on the walls of temples are considered
only as incidental decorations which
demonstrate and illustrate the teachings of
Buddha. For believers such works could
never in themselves be the object of
aesthetic contemplation.
But Burmese painting does not owe its
development and refinement to this one im¬
pulse only. It also reflects the teachings of
Mahayana Buddhism, the Buddhism of the
"Great Vehicle", which in contrast to the
stricter teachings of Theravada Buddhism
permits belief in a large number of holy men
and Bodhisattas (enlightened beings
predestined for Buddhahood) and thus
meets the need for a more popular doctrine
of salvation. Other influences were due to
the geographical proximity of India and
Tibet, intensive contacts with Ceylon, and
the deep-rooted animist beliefs of the peo
ple. Hindu deities are also depicted on the
walls of many temples at Pagan, and there
are signs of the influence of Tantrism, the
so-called "magic Buddhism" which was
formerly practised primarily in Tibet and
which stresses ritual, the strict observance
of cults, initiation, consecration and magic
formulae.
Few monuments from Anawrahta's reign
have survived, and it was not until the time
of his second successor Kyanzittha
(1084-1112) that the era of great temple
building began. The mural paintings that
can still be admired on their walls mark the
start of the artistic tradition of which the
Ananda Okkyaung paintings are a later
brilliant expression.
Well preserved murals from this early
period can still be seen today in the Wetkyi-
in-Kubyauk-gyi temple, which was probably
completed in or a little before the year 1200,
because fortunately the mortar layer on the
temple walls is relatively thick and well
smoothed-down, and has thus provided a
durable support for the paintings. (This is
not always the case at Pagan, where mortar
was often made of local red soil which pro- .
vided a breeding ground for insects. As a
result, the greater part of the plaster in most
of the temples has fallen from the walls, and
where it remains, the surfaces and con¬
sequently the murals are covered with the
nests of wasps, termites and other destruc- h
tive insects).
36

Enormous figure
of a snarling
lion outside a
Burmese
pagoda was
meant to keep evil
spirits at bay.
Pagan's forest of Buddhist temples and
stupas (some 5,000 monuments in all)
extends across a site covering over 70 sq.
km. Opposite page, the gleaming white
contours of the famous Ananda temple can
be seen on the horizon from the terraces of
Thatbyinnu, Pagan's tallest edifice (it is as
high as a 20-storey building). In July 1975
this unique site was rocked by a violent
earthquake which caused extensive
damage. Murals in some of the temples
sustained irreparable harm. The Burmese
authorities are carrying out a major rescue
operation (below) on Pagan's stricken
monuments.
37

"At the River Televaha", above, is inspired
by a Jataka text which contrasts the
behaviour of two hawkers, one of whom is
predestined for Buddhahood. In this
unusual example of a Burmese painting
depicting water, one of the hawkers
(probably the man standing upright with
hands upraised in the stern of the boat) is
seen crossing the River Televaha on his
way to the town of Andhapura (All photos
on this double page show eighteenth-
century murals from Pagan's Ananda
Okkyaung temple).
y The year 1287 brought to an end the first
dream in Buddhist history: a Mongolian ar¬
my conquered and devastated Pagan, burn¬
ing down its wooden monastery buildings,
its palaces, and the houses and huts of the
inhabitants. It seems that Burma had lost all
sense of political realities in the second half
of the 13th century, for only a few of these
buildings lay within the area protected by
the city walls. One of the most splendid
manifestations of Buddhist piety collapsed
all too easily, a prey to the Mongol hordes.
For the next five hundred years there was
no Burmese Empire. Various dynasties of
the different peoples living on each side of
the Irrawaddy and Walwin Rivers warred
with each other inconclusively. New capitals
and new centres of culture came into be¬
ingAva, Sagaing, Amarapura. The great
age of Pagan would not be matched until
the end of the eighteenth century with the
creation of the incomparable paintings
which were executed in many of the little
stupas (commemorative relic mounds or
shrines) and temples of Pagan. Ananda Ok¬
kyaung, built between 1776 and 1785, was
part of this renaissance, which began with
the accession of King Alaungpaya in 1752
and restored to Pagan its former role as Bur¬
ma's cultural metropolis.
Executed in dominant tones of red and
brown, with ochres obtained from the iron
géodes which litter the bed of the nearby Ir¬
rawaddy, the Ananda Okkyaung murals take
up the Buddhist themes which had inspired
the artists of Pagan hundreds of years
before. Many of these themes are taken
from the body of Buddhist scripture known
as the Jatakas, a collection of stories, anec¬
dotes and pithy sayings which relate
episodes from one of the many lives of the
Bodhisatta, or "Buddha-to-be".
According to tradition, the Buddha
Gautama, before his Great Enlightenment,
had undergone many existences in many dif¬
ferent forms living among men as a god, a
king, a minister, an ascetic, a merchant, a
gardener, a musician, and adopting other
human guises. He also appeared in the form
of various animals or birds. In the Jatakas,
the Buddha-to-be, in one of his former
births, plays a part as the hero or as some
other character. Sometimes he is merely an
onlooker, but he always shows one or more
of the virtues, such as sympathy, compas¬
sion or altruism, by which he prepared
himself for Enlightenment.
The enormous popularity of the Jatakas
as vehicles for Buddhist teaching is revealed
in the number of texts and pictures they
inspired.
What is particularly remarkable about the
Ananda Okkyaung murals is the freedom
with which the painters conceived their sub¬
jects. As the illustrations on these pages
show, they do not depict only what is
necessary to narrate the Jakata stories, they
also make use of the opportunity to paint
genre scenes from court life and from the
lives of ordinary people of the time. In this
way they present a wealth of interesting
facts about the cultural history of the
Burmese people.
The murals belong to a tradition in which
the representation of reality, of the external
world, is based on certain formulas and
matrices which, once fixed, became univer¬
sally valid. In executing each picture and
each part of a picture, the Burmese artist
took certain basic figures or models as his
starting point. Traditionally, four artistic
elements were used in the composition of
Burmese painting: Kanut, Nari, Kapi and
Gaja, which are Pali and Sanskrit terms used
to define both subject and treatment.
Kanut designates every type of ornamen¬
tation in the form of rounded or curved
lines. Vegetation, especially the com¬
ponents of the lotus plant, is depicted in this
way, but these curved, climbing motifs are
often used for snakes and other creatures,
stylized waves and clouds, and abstract
figures.
Nari, which literally means "woman", i
describes more generally any depiction of I
38

Although the youngest of a
hundred brothers, prince
Gamani is elected king
because of his wisdom.
Above left, two of the
brothers on horseback and
one mounted on an
elephant. They are
accompanied by servants,
canopy-carriers and soldiers
armed with guns.
Preceded by ten
servants carrying
golden vessels,
and followed by a
canopy-bearer
and two other
attendants, an
elegantly attired
wedding guest
rides through an
open gate, left.
Detail from a
mural illustrating
the marriage of a
young man to the
daughter of the
King's Treasurer,
described in the
Jataka. The
framed object at
left of the
document is part
of a loom.
Slim, graceful lady of the court,
above, seems to be dancing to
the rhythm plucked from a
crocodile-shaped musical
instrument held on his knees by
the man seated behind her. The
painters of the Ananda
Okkyaung murals did not limit
themselves to portraying
Buddhist themes, and their
fondness for depicting genre
scenes from court and everyday
life is a source of many side¬
lights on Burma's cultural past.
39

KLAUS WENK, professor at the Department of
Oriental Studies at the University of Hamburg,
Federal Republic of Germany, is the author of a
number of important works on the history,
literature and art of south-east Asia. These in¬
clude a three-volume illustrated study Mural Pain¬
tings in Thailand (1975-1976), and Murals in Bur¬
ma, Volume I, Paintings from Pagan of the Late
Period (1977), which includes a contribution by
professor U Tin Lwin of the University of Man-
dalay, both published by Inigo von Oppersdorff
Verlag, Zurich. Both these works, from which the
illustrations for this article and the article by pro¬
fessor Adul Wichiencharoen (page 25) are taken,
have been awarded the International Emblem for
Works of Art and Culture. Franz Horisberger car¬
ried out the photographic work for Paintings from
Pagan in 1975, shortly before the area was hit by a
devastating earthquake. For many murals only
the photographic record remains.
k the human body, as well as representations
of the gods and of the Buddha.
The term Kapi strictly refers to the pain¬
ting of monkeys, but is extended to cover
the portrayal of animals of any kind, as well
as various mythological creatures. On the
whole, the term Kapi is linked with the idea
of rapid movement, birds in flight, leaping
animals, with the playfulness of monkeys,
the capricious laziness of the Kinnari (half-
man, half-bird), and the playing of celestial
musicians.
Gaja is the term used to describe the por¬
trayal of the elephant, which is a common
figure in Burmese painting. The body of the
elephant is associated with the idea of size,
height and length, as well as the idea of
strength and immobility.
The whole of Burmese painting, with few
exceptions, is composed of these four basic
types. It represents the concrete, the visible,
the material form of things, the surface.
Those things that cannot be depicted or can
only be suggested the element of at¬
mosphere, the mental and spiritual forces by
which man is moved, emotions and com¬
prehension, the various degrees of con¬
sciousness of salvation or of the wrong
path are immanent in the paintings and
can be deduced from the material forms. In
a Buddha delineated with solid contours,
without the link of colouring that might have
an aesthetic appeal, a viewer who inhabits
the Buddhist world of ideas spontaneously
sees a depth of inner peace and acquires the
deepest insight into the forms of existence.
In other words, in Burmese pictures we
find decorative painting with its origins in
floral ornaments, which in the course of
development has emerged as geometric
forms; we find figurative painting in which
solid, undifferentiated forms are found side
by side with ethereal and attractively and
gracefully painted figures; we find action
painting represented by playful animal
movements or by the gay frolics of
mythological creatures; and we find the
painting of objects, which cannot basically
be compared with still-life painting but
40
which depicts large dimensions and through
these immobility.
Finally, like all Eastern painting, Burmese
painting is arranged in parallel perspectives.
It is set out in surfaces; it spreads out figures
and objects in front of the viewer and for
this reason does not, with a few rare excep¬
tions, give the impression of spatial depth.
There is no horizon. Painting of this kind
must necessarily rely on a framework of
drawing, on outlines and on linear designs.
Horizontals and verticals merge with each
other. They merely divide up the surface and
do not create space.
Figures and objects are placed in a
sequence or in a group as if in a picture
book. Landscape and figures are not usually
in harmony with each other, and the figures
are isolated from their environment. The
Kanut formulae are linked neither in shape
nor in colouring with the Nari painting, and
only in some of the murals is there even a

"Once upon a time in the Kasi
country the squire of a certain little
village had promised a sacrifice to
the Fairy of a banyan-tree which
stood at the entrance to the village.
Afterwards he offered for sacrifice
a number of creatures and betook
himself to the tree to get released
from his vow.
"But the tree-fairy standing in the
fork of the tree repeated this
stanza:
Take thought of life hereafter
when you seek
Release, for this release is
bondage strict.
Not thus the wise and good
release themselves;
For this the fool's release in
bondage ends.
"Thenceforth, men refrained from
such taking of life and by walking
in righteousness thronged
thereafter the city of the Devas".
n this mural from Ananda
Okkyaung, the sovereign figure of
the deity stands in the centre of a
tree whose roots, trunk and
branches flicker like flames. The
foliage might be a nimbus for the
deity. At right of the tree the
walled estate of the "rich citizen"
begins; behind it, in the courtyard
of his domain he reclines on a
couch, surrounded by his wives. On
the roof a monkey performs playful
tricks. This genre scene, only
loosely connected with the Jataka
narrative, recreates the opulent
atmosphere surrounding a man
who could afford to sacrifice many
sheep, pigs, cattle and fowls.
partial removal of the alienation between
one person and another, between object
and object.
The whole mode of representation in
these remarkable paintings at Pagan is thus
unemotional and rational. There is a sense
of order. Society is arranged on hierarchical
principles, and the whole cosmos is a
system ordered according to Hindu-
Buddhist cosmography.
Klaus Wenk
41
