The Hamitic
myth exploded
Modern findings have refuted
a once-prevalent theory
on the peopling of the African continent
by Dmitri A. Olderogge
HISTORIANS were long convinced
that the peoples of Africa had
never had any history of their
own, nor any evolution that was particular¬
ly theirs. Everything in the nature of a
cultural achievement was thought to have
been brought to them from elsewhere, by
waves of immigrants coming from Asia.
Such convictions are reflected in the works
of many nineteenth-century European
scholars.
These views provided linguists with a
basis for what is known as the Hamitic
theory, according to which the develop¬
ment of civilization in Africa was influenced
by the Hamitic peoples who came from
Asia. This theory reflects the influence of
the ideas of Hegel, who divided the peoples
of the world into two kinds: historical
peoples, who had contributed to the
development of mankind, and non-
historical peoples, who had taken no part
in the spiritual development of the world.
According to Hegel, there was no real
historical evolution in Africa proper. The
destinies of the northern fringes of the con¬
tinent could be said to be linked to those of
Europe. As a Phoenician colony, Carthage
was an appendage of Asia and there was
nothing of the African spirit in Egypt.
It was in Asia, said Hegel, that the light
of the spirit dawned and the history of the
world began. This was considered to be
beyond dispute and European scholars
regarded Asia as the cradle of. mankind
from which emerged all the peoples who
invaded Europe and Africa. Hegel's ideas
exercised a considerable influence over
almost all the scientific research done on
Africa in the nineteenth century. The
cultural and historical school of thought
repudiated the theory of a uniform, overall
development of mankind and advanced a
diametrically opposed theory, postulating
the existence of different cycles of civiliza¬
tion, differentiated by intrinsic elements
derived from a mainly material culture.
DMITRI A. OLDEROGGE, of the USSR, is an
egyptologist and specialist in the history and
social and cultural anthropology of Africa. A
corresponding member of the USSR Academy
of Sciences, he is the author of several books
and studies including Western Sudan, Peoples
of Africa and The Hamitic Question in African
Studies.
According to these writers, the spread of
cultural achievements was due mainly to
migrations. The original population of
Africa consisted of dwarfish races the
Pygmies and the San possessing virtually
no elements of culture. Then, from south¬
east Asia, dark-skinned, fuzzy-haired
Negritic peoples arrived in migratory
waves; they spread all over the Sudanese
savannah and penetrated into the
equatorial forest, bringing with them the
beginnings of agriculture, the cultivation of
bananas and root tubers, the use of
wooden implements and bows and arrows,
and the building of round and square huts.
They were followed, so the theory main¬
tained, by waves of proto-Hamites, also
from Asia, but in this case from regions fur¬
ther north than those where the Negritic
people first developed. The newcomers
spoke agglutinative-type languages with
noun classes and they taught the in¬
digenous peoples of Africa the use of the
hoe in agriculture, the cultivation of
sorghum and other cereals, the rearing of
small-horned cattle, and so on. The cross¬
breeding of the proto-Hamites with the
Negritic peoples resulted in the birth of
Bantu peoples.
The next arrivals were successive waves
of fair-skinned Hamites, coming into Africa
through the Suez isthmus and across the
Bab-el-Mandeb Strait. They were said to
have been the ancestors of the Fula,
Hausa, Masai, Bari, Galla and Somali
peoples and also of the Khoi-Khoi. They
brought further elements of culture to
Africa, large-horned cattle, spears, multiple
uses of skins and hides, shields, and so on.
These fair-skinned Hamites, it was main¬
tained, came originally from the steppes of
western Asia.
The next migratory wave brought the
Semitic peoples, who provided the basis
for the development of the culture of an¬
cient Egypt. They brought with them the
cultivation of cereals, the use of the plough
and various objects of bronze. They were
followed, in Egypt, by the arrival of the
Hyksos and the Hebrews and, in Ethiopia,
by that of the Habashat and the Mehri. The
last to come were the Arabs, in the seventh
century. All these peoples brought with
them to Africa many elements of civiliza¬
tion that were quite unknown before their
arrival.
In linguistics, the Hamitic theory began
to emerge parallel with the theories of the
cultural-historic shool. The founder of this
theory, C. Meinhof, held that the ancestors
of the present-day San were the original in¬
habitants of Africa, that they spoke
languages with the click consonants and,
in general, that they belonged to a par¬
ticular racial type. The Negritos, con¬
sidered to be the original inhabitants of the
tropical and Sudanese region, spoke
languages of an isolating type, with
monosyllabic roots. Subsequently Hamitic
peoples came into the Sudan from Arabia
by way of North Africa. These newcomers
spoke inflected languages; they engaged in
cattle-breeding and, from the cultural point
of view, were on a much higher level than
the Negritos. Some of the Hamite invaders,
however, traversed the savannahs of East
Africa and cross-bred with the indigenous
population to produce peoples speaking
the Bantu languages.
In short, this pattern can be reduced to a
film in four sequences. At the outset, there
were, the click languages and these were
followed by the highly rudimentary
isolating languages spoken by the Negritic
peoples of the Sudan. The mixture of these
languages with the Hamitic languages pro¬
duced the Bantu group of languages of the
superior agglutinative type. Finally, the
languages spoken by the Hamitic con¬
querors introduced the inflected languages
which were eminently more developed.
The Hamitic theory, which originated in
Germany, was upheld by many linguists
and was widely accepted throughout
western Europe and beyond.
In the period between the two World
Wars, however, all these theories collaps¬
ed. The discovery in Cape Province, in
1924, of Australopithecus raised the first
doubts. Other discoveries followed and arew
still constantly being made, not only in theP
This black Hermes, from the mid-2nd century AD, was found
in the Antonine baths at Carthage, Tunisia.
Photo W. Hugentobler © Musée D'Ethnographie, Neuchâtel, Switzerland
24

/ L.
^
. V
« »
/<}
«%*

southern part of Africa, but also in North
Africa and, more particularly, towards the
east, in Tanzania, Kenya and Ethiopia. All
these discoveries combined to show,
without any possibility of error, that the
development of man in all his racial variety
took place in Africa. Thus, any theories ac¬
cording to which Africa was populated by
consecutive waves of immigrants are
untenable.
Africa is the only continent where there
is evidence, in unbroken chronological se¬
quence, of all the stages in the develop¬
ment of man. In fact, specimens of
Australopithecus, Pithecanthropus,
Neanderthal man and Homo Sapiens suc¬
ceeded one another, each with their im¬
plements, from the most distant eras right
through to the Neolithic age. These
discoveries proved that it would be totally
wrong to deny that Africa had an en¬
dogenous cultural development. In this
respect, the rock paintings and petroglyphs
in the Atlas mountains, in southern Africa
and in the Sahara, provide striking
evidence with the most far-reaching im¬
plications.
There is no longer the faintest shadow of
doubt about the great age of ar¬
chaeological remains, since relative
chronology (based on the form and treat¬
ment of objects and their position in the
various geological strata) has now been
supplemented by absolute chronology bas¬
ed on such scientific methods as carbon-14
and potassium-argon dating. The picture
of the pattern of the cultural evolution of
the African peoples has been completely
transformed. For instance, it has been
found that the Neolithic era at the latitudes
of the Sahara and the Sahel dates back
much further than was thought. This
discovery completely alters the relationship
between African development, the
Mediterranean world and especially the
Near East.
The remains discovered in the moun¬
tainous regions of Tassili N'Ajjer and also at
Tadrart-Acacus in the borderland between
Algeria and Libya are quite conclusive. Ex¬
amination of the traces of hearths and the
remnants of ceramics discovered, shows
that the people were already using pottery
in 6000 BC. From these findings we may
conclude that the Neolithic age in Tassili
N'Ajjer and the Ennedi is apparently older
than the Neolithic age in the countries of
the Maghreb and is contemporary with that
of southern Europe and Cyrenaica.
Of particular significance are the results
of research done on the organic remains
found in Lower Nubia in camps going back
to the Neolithic age. From the results ob¬
tained it has been possible to draw the con¬
clusion that people already gathered and
prepared grain from wild cereals in the thir¬
teenth millennium before our era.
We may expect that some chronological
tabulations may subsequently be made
more precise. However, the theory about
the peopling of the Old World is completely
discredited. Instead, Africa must be
recognized as the centre from which men
and techniques were disseminated in one
of the key periods in the development of
mankind (the lower Palaeolithic). In later
eras we find evidence of a reversal of this
trend with migratory currents flowing back
to the continent of Africa.
Dmitri A. Olderogge
Over 3,000 years old, this
portrait of a girl holding a duck
and a papyrus stem is a detail
from a wall painting in the tomb
of Ipi at Thebes, Egypt. Figures
with similarly negroid features
frequently appear in ancient
Egyptian effigies of persons of
every rank, including those of
such pharaohs as Ramses III,
Khefren, Zoser and
Thutmosis III.
Photo © Louvre Museum, Paris
II
M I *
,1
26
