Photo Maximiiien Bruggmann © La Spirale, Lausanne, Switzerland
With its shifting sand dunes (above) and rocky wastes, the Sahara, the world's largest desert,
forms a climatic hiatus between the Mediterranean and the tropical worlds. Inhabited by
nomads and traversed by caravan routes, it acted not as an absolute barrier but as a filter
limiting the southward penetration of Mediterranean influences. The great rivers of Africa too,
although important as communication routes over their navigable stretches, played a role in
the compartmentalization of the continent. The cataracts of the Nile, the falls and rapids of the
Zambezi, the Senegal, the Orange and the Limpopo, particularly in their lower reaches, formed
virtually impassable barriers. At the Victoria Falls (right), one of the scenic wonders of the
world, the Zambezi plunges 100 metres over a sheer precipice 1,700 metres wide, sending into
the air a wall of spray that at times is visible up to 40 miles away.

Africa and its history
A continent
viewed from within
by Joseph Ki-Zerbo
AFRICA has a history. The time has
long gone by when maps had great
empty spaces representing the
African continent as marginal and subor¬
dinate, and the knowledge of scholars on
the subject was summed up in the cryptic
phrase : Ibl sunt leones here be lions.
But then came the discovery of the
mines and their profits, and incidentally of
the "native tribes" which owned the
mines, but which like them were annexed
as the property of the colonizing countries.
The history of Africa, like the history of
mankind as a whole, is really the story of an
awakening. The history of Africa needs
rewriting, for up till now it has often been
masked, faked, distorted, mutilated, by
"force of circumstance" I.e. through ig¬
norance or self-interest. Crushed by cen¬
turies of oppression, Africa has seen
generations of travellers, slave-traders, ex¬
plorers, missionaries, governors, and
scholars of all kinds give out its ¡mage as
one of nothing but poverty, barbarism, ir¬
responsibility and chaos. And this image
has been projected and extrapolated in¬
definitely in time, as a justification of both
the present and the future.
For Africans, the history of Africa is not
a narcissistic mirror nor a subtle excuse for
avoiding the tasks and burdens of today. If
it were an alienating device of that kind, the
scientific objects of the whole enterprise
would be compromised. But is not ig¬
norance of one's own past, in other words
of a large part of oneself, even more
alienating?
All the evils that afflict Africa today, as
well as all the possibilities for the future,
are the result of countless forces transmit¬
ted by history. And just as the first step in a
rational diagnosis and therapy is the
reconstruction of the evolution of the v
disease, in the same way the first task in r
JOSEPH KI-ZERBO, of Upper Volta, is pro¬
fessor of African history at the University of
Ouagadougou and Secretary-General of the
African and Malagasy Council for Higher
Studies. A recently appointed member of the
Executive Board of Unesco, he also serves on
the Governing Board of Unesco's International
Institute for Educational Planning. He is the
author of many articles and books on Africa in¬
cluding Le Monde Africain (The African World)
and Histoire de l'Afrique Noire (The History of
Black Africa). He is editor of Volume I
(Methodology and African Prehistory) of The
General History of Africa, now in preparation
under the auspices of Unesco.

AFRICA AND ITS HISTORY
,any overall analysis of the African conti¬
nent must be a historical one. Unless one
chooses to live in a state of un¬
consciousness and alienation, one cannot
live without memory, or with a memory
that belongs to someone else. And history
is the memory of nations.
And thus we come to the formidable
question of methodology.
In this connexion, as in others, we have
to steer a middle course between treating
Africa as too exceptional a case on the one
hand, and on the other, dealing with it too
much in terms proper to other parts of the
world. Some people say that before we can
talk of a real history of Africa we should
wait to find the same kinds of evidence as
in Europe, the same array of written or
epigraphic documents. In short, for them,
the problems of the historian are the same
everywhere, in the tropics as at the poles.
In fact, the difficulties specific to the
history of Africa can already be seen when
one looks at the facts of the physical
geography of the continent. Africa, a lone¬
ly continent if ever there was one, seems to
turn its back on the rest of the Old World,
to which it is joined only by the fragile um¬
bilical cord of the isthmus of Suez.
It is to the south, amid the austral
waters, that Africa thrusts her solid mass,
bound in by coastal ranges through which
rivers force their way by means of heroic
defiles, in themselves great obstacles to
penetration. The only sizeable passage bet¬
ween the Sahara and the Abyssinian
mountains is blocked by the vast marshes
of Bahr el Ghazal.
Strong winds and sea currents guard the
coast from Cape Blanc to Cape Verde,
while in the middle of the continent three
deserts add internal barriers to isolation
from without: in the south, the Kalahari; in
the centre, the "green desert" of the
equatorial forest with all its dangers which
man had to overcome before he could
make it his refuge; and in the north, the
Sahara, desert of deserts, a huge continen¬
tal filter, a wild sea of shifting sand dunes
and rocky wastes which joins with the
mountain fringe of the Atlas to separate the
fortunes of the Mediterranean part of
Africa from that of the rest of the conti¬
nent. These ecological forces have weigh¬
ed heavily on every aspect of Africa's
destiny.
They have also enhanced the value of all
the natural loopholes which were from the
start to act as corridors in the exploration
of Africa, begun thousands of millennia
ago. One example is the great meridian
groove of the Rift Valley, stretching from
the very centre of Africa and across the
Ethiopian ridge as far as Iraq. The curve of
the valleys of the Sangha, Ubangi and Zaire
must have acted as a corridor in an east-
west direction. It is not by chance that the
first kingdoms of black Africa developed in
these more accessible regions, these
Sahels at once permeable from within, to a
certain extent open towards the exterior.
and in contact with neighbouring regions
of Africa with different and complementary
resources.
These open areas, with their com¬
paratively rapid evolution, afford, a con¬
trario, the proof that isolation was one of
the key factors in Africa's slowness in pur¬
suit of certain kinds of progress. The very
vastness of the African continent, with a
diluted and therefore readily itinerant
population living in a nature generous with
its fruits and minerals, but cruel with its
endemic and epidemic diseases, prevented
it from reaching the threshold of
demographic concentration which has
almost always been one of the precondi¬
tions of major qualitative changes in the
social, political and economic spheres.
Moreover, the slave trade, a severe
demographic drain from time immemorial
and especially from the fifteenth to the
twentieth century after the traffic was
organized on a large scale, can only have
helped to deprive Africa of the stability and
human dynamism necessary for all out¬
standing creativeness, even on the
technological plane.
Neither nature nor man, geography nor
history, have been kind to Africa. And it is
indispensable that we should go back to
these fundamental conditions of the evolu¬
tionary process in order to pose the pro¬
blems in objective terms, and not in the
form of such myths as racial inferiority,
congenital tribalism and the so-called
historical passivity of the Africans. The
best these subjective and irrational ap¬
proaches can do is conceal a deliberate ig¬
norance. As for the worst, the less said the
better.
It must be admitted that as far as Africa
is concerned the question of sources is a
difficult one. There are three main sources
for our historical knowledge of Africa: writ¬
ten documents, archaeology and oral tradi¬
tion. These are backed up by linguistics
and anthropology, which enable us to
elaborate and refine on the interpretation of
data which may otherwise be crude and
unyielding.
Written sources, if not very rare, are at
least unevenly distributed in time and
spaced The most obscure centuries in
African history are "those which lack the
clear and precise illumination that comes
from written accounts, for example, the
centuries preceding and following the birth
of Christ (here North Africa is an
exception). But even when such evidence
exists, its interpretation is strewn with dif¬
ficulties and ambiguities.
On the quantitative plane, large masses
of written material, archival or narrative,
have still not yet been exploited, as is
shown by the incomplete inventories of
unpublished manuscripts concerning the
history of black Africa which are being
found not only in libraries in Morocco,
Algeria and Europe, but also in the libraries
of Sudanese scholars and leading citizens
in towns throughout the Bend of the Niger,
and whose titles suggest some promising
new veins. Unesco has established the
Ahmed Baba Centre at Timbuktu to pro¬
mote the collection of such material. The
archives of Iran, Iraq, Armenia, India and
China, not to mention the Americas, must
hold many scraps of African history
awaiting some perspicacious and im¬
aginative researcher.
The silent witnesses revealed by ar¬
chaeology are often more eloquent than
the official chroniclers. The marvellous
discoveries of archaeology have already
served African history well. These include
articles made of iron, together with the
technology involved; ceramics, with their
production techniques and styles; objects
made of glass; writings, and different .
graphic styles; the techniques of naviga¬
tion, fishing and weaving; foodstuffs; and
geomorphological, hydraulic and eco¬
logical structures linked to the evolution of
climate.
The language of archaeological excava¬
tion has by nature something objective and
irrefutable about it. Thus a study of the
typology of the pottery and objects of bone
and metal found in the Nigero-Chadian
Sahara demonstrates the link between the
pre-lslamic peoples (Sao) of the Chad
Basin and cultural areas extending as far as
the Nile and the Libyan desert. The living
ties of the past are revived, beyond the
modern landscape with its crushing
loneliness and apathy, by the kinship
shown in statuettes of baked clay wearing
cross-belts, in the designs of the bodies of
figurines, in the shapes of jars and
bracelets, harpoons and bones, in ar¬
rowheads or tips, and in throwing knives.
Besides the first two sources of African
historywritten documents and ar¬
chaeology tradition takes its place as
a real living museum, conserver and
transmitter of the social and cultural crea¬
tions stored up by peoples said to have no
written records. This spoken history is a
very frail thread by which to trace our way
back through the dark twists of the
labyrinth of time. Those who are its custo¬
dians are old men.
Whenever one of them dies a fibre of
Ariadne's thread is broken, a fragment of
the landscape literally disappears
underground. Yet oral tradition is by far the
most intimate of historical sources, the
most rich, the one which is fullest of the
sap of authenticity. Tradition clothes
things in flesh and blood and colour, it
gives blood to the skeleton of the past.
Of course, in epic the weakness of the
chronological sequence is the Achilles'
heel: mixed-up temporal sequences cause
the image of the past to reach us not clear
and stable as in a mirror, but like à fleeting,
broken-up reflection on the surface of a
ruffled stream. The average length of
reigns and generations is a highly con¬
troversial question, and extrapolations bas¬
ed on recent periods have to be accepted
with very great reserve, because of
demographic and political changes, to
name only two factors. Sometimes an ex¬
ceptional and magnetic dynast polarizes
the exploits of his predecessors and suc¬
cessors around his own person, and thek
others are literally eclipsed. Y
8

The written word
à
Towards the end of the 4th millenium BC, the Egyptians invented a system of hieroglyphic writing
that employs characters in the form of pictures. The signs could be read as pictures or as symbols for
oictures, but they quickly acquired a phonetic value regardless of their original pictorial meaning.
Many ideograms (pictorial representations) were however retained and a complicated system had
to be devised to prevent misreadings. Above, an Egyptian hieroglyphic taxt dating from the time of
Darius the Great (550-486 BC) which reads: "The Pasha, the Count, the Royal Chancellor, the sole
companion, 'he who lives among them', the prophet, the great doctor Udjahorresne, son of Atermitis,
jdeclares: His majesty the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, Darius, may he live for ever, ordered me to
return to Egypt whilst his majesty remainad in Elam; at that time he was the Great King of all the
other countries and Sovereign of Egypt."
Early examples of Egyptian hieroglyphics show the beginnings of the
transition from the pictorial representation of an event to symbolic use of
signs. The famous "Palette of Narmer" (above) depicts king Narmer
(about 3100 BC), the first monarch of the first dynasty triumphing over his
enemies. The falcon (see detail above right) symbolizes the god Horus, the
patron divinity of the royal house of Upper Egypt, who is seen ho/ding a rope
that binds a captive; beside him are six papyrus stems, the hieroglyphic sign
for the figure 1,000. The meaning of the pictograph is thus that the king of
Upper Egypt triumphed over his enemies and took 6,000 prisoners.
The origin of the Nsibidi writing of the Ekoi people of southern
Nigeria is not known. It consists of highly conventionalized
pictographs and is used chiefly by a secret society and for magical
purposes. Each sign represents a particular concept or association
of ideas. Above, a Nsibidi writer portrays the joys and problems of
four married couples. From left to right, This husband and wife
love each other dearly and embrace each other with joy (out¬
stretched arms). The yare rich for they have three cushions and a
table on either side of them. The second couple have quarrelled;
they have turned their backs on each other and are separated by a
cushion. The third couple belong to the Egbo tribe whose emblem
is a feather. The fourth couple are separated by a river (note the
canoes tied up at each bank). The crosses show, however, that
they have been able to exchange messages.
CO
r-
Oi
Alphabet Computer
transcription
6 Hieroglyphic Cursive
0)
c Ss 4 L
& ; M
<K N
S3 C P
A /T Q
. o oO R
us 3 Z
Z5> P T
The Meroitic language was spoken in the ancient
Kingdom of Meroe (see article page 55) from about
200 BC to the 4th century AD. Surviving only in
inscriptions, Meroitic was written from right to left
in an alphabet derived from Egyptian hieroglyphics
and in a cursive form. Although a few Meroitic
, words and some elements of the grammar are known,
it remains largely undeciphered. Attempts are now
being made to unravel the mystery of the Meroitic
language with the aid of a computer.
Extinct as a spoken language, Ge'ez is a Semitic
language of the same group as Amharic, the official
language of Ethiopia. Unlike other Semitic langua¬
ges it is written from left to right. Although Ge'ez
ceased to be spoken sometime between 900 and
1 200 AD, it continues as a literary and liturgical
language. Above, 1 6th century portrait on wood of
Saint George on which his name is inscribed in
Ge'ez.
Child %
Measurement '
Lying
Sheep
À
0^
An event
o~
5¡-
5
A«) Oberi
r\ V Okaime



1 A,
i- Tr Mende
s /
I W Mending
nLa guageant r 1
'//j- Wolof
O
¡2 (j " Kpelle /S Sere
1 \\\ Bassa
*MAs?
î
Bamun writing (above left) was invented in 1895 by Sultan Njoya of Foumban (Cameroon). The first syllabary consisted
of over 1 ,000 signs, but successive simplifications have reduced it to 70 signs. Above right, the sound "ka" as represented
in nine indigenous West African languages.
First saven vatsas of the Koran reproduced In
Maghrtbitn style calligraphy.

^ Furthermore, an oral account taken out
of its context is like a fish out of water: it
dies. Taken in isolation, oral tradition
resembles African masks wrested from the
communion of the faithful and exhibited to
the curiosity of the uninitiated. It loses its
significance and life. Yet it is through that
life, because it is always being taken over
by fresh witnesses charged with transmit¬
ting it, that oral tradition adapts itself to the
expectations of new audiences; and this
adaptation relates mainly to the presenta¬
tion, though it does not always leave the
content intact.
Even the content of the message is often
hermetic or esoteric. For the African,
speech is a weighty matteran ambiguous
force which can make and unmake, which
can be the bearer of evil. That is why the
message is not articulated openly and
directly, but wrapped up in fable, allusion,
hint, proverbs that are hard to understand
for the ordinary man but clear for those
who possess the antennae of wisdom.
The hermeticism of this half-speech
shows at once the inestimable value of oral
tradition, and its limits: it is almost impossi¬
ble to transfer all its richness from one
language to another, especially when that
other is structurally and sociologically very
remote. Tradition does not stand up well to
translation. When uprooted it loses its
vigour and authenticity, for language is
"the home of being". And many errors
ascribed to tradition itself are due to in¬
competent or unscrupulous interpreters.
The number of different versions
transmitted by rival groupsfor example,
by the various griots-clients of each noble
protector (horon, dyatigui) far from
Wooden mask (above) of the Ivory Coast's Baulé people
represents a male divinity. The disc-shaped headdress and
ornamental scarifications on forehead and temples represent rays
of light projected by the gods, while the zigzag line around the
face evokes rain, the source of life. The plaited beard is both a
symbol of the life-force and an emblem of power. The beard
resembles that on the golden mask which covered the
mummified face of the boy-pharaoh Tutankhamen (above right).
There is also a resonance between the striations of the Baulé
headdress and the flowing bands of Tutankhamen's headgear,
with Its royal insignia of vulture and uraeus (the sacred asp),
symbols of life and death. Perhaps such points of resemblance
explain why the faces have an identical expression of absolute
sovereignty (see also central colour pages and photo p. 26).
Door-lock carved in the form of a
woman by a sculptor of the Samo
people of Upper Volta. In black
Africa artistic skills have always
been lavished on the simplest
household objects as well as on
those used in ritual or religious
ceremonies.
10

being a handicap, is on the contrary only a
further guarantee for critical history. When
accounts agree, as in the case of the Bam-
bara and Fula griots, who belonged to op¬
posing camps, the authenticity of the
evidence is reinforced.
This rigid, formal and institutionalized
oral tradition usually has its structure rein¬
forced and supported by court music,
which unites with it and measures it out in
didactic and artistic sections. Some of the
instruments used are so old that they
would repay an archaeological Investiga¬
tion in themselves. These instruments, the
vehicles of spoken history, are sacred, the
object of veneration. In effect they are part
of the artist, and their importance in com¬
municating the message is all the greater
because music is directly intelligible; the in¬
strument becomes the artist's voice, and
he does not need to utter a word.
In linguistics African history has not an
auxiliary science but an independent
discipline which nevertheless leads history
right to the heart of its own subject. True,
much still remains to be done in this com¬
plex fieldand what needs doing first
is to define scientifically the languages
concerned.
The descriptive approach must not be
sacrificed to a comparative and synthetic
one which aims at being typological and
genetic. It is only through minute and
laborious analysis of the facts of language,
in the living experience of the speakers of a
given community, that one can extrapolate
backwards, an operation often made dif¬
ficult by a lack of historical depth in
people's knowledge of the languages con¬
cerned.
Linguistic studies show that the routes
and paths of migration, and the diffusion of
both material and spiritual culture, are
marked out by the diffusion of related
words. Hence the importance of diachronic
linguistic analysis and glotto-chronology to
the historian who wishes to understand
the meaning and dynamics of Africa's
evolution.
At any rate, linguistics, which has
already done African history good service,
should discard from the outset the
disparaging ethnocentric attitude which
characterized the African linguistics accor¬
ding to which the languages of the Indo-
European family are at the summit of evolu¬
tion, and the languages of the blacks are at
the very bottom of the ladder, though it us¬
ed to be thought that they were interesting
in that they revealed a state near to the
original state of language, when languages
were supposed to be without grammar,
speech just a series of monosyllables, and
vocabulary restricted to an elementary
inventory.
The same remark applies a fortiori to an¬
thropology and ethnology. Ethnological
discourse has by the force of circumstance
been a discourse with explicitly
discriminatory premises, and conclusions
implicitly political, with, between the two,
a "scientific" exercise which was
necessarily ambiguous. Its main presup¬
position was often linear evolution, with
Europe, pioneer of civilization, in the van of
human advance, and at the rear the
primitive "tribes" of Oceania, Amazonia
and Africa. It asked the question: what on
earth was it like to be an Indian, a black, a
Papuan, an Arab?
Other people, whether backward, bar¬
barous, savage to a greater or lesser
degree, are always different, and for this
reason objects of interest to the scientist or
of greed to the trader. The ethnologist was
thus delegated to be the "Minister of Euro¬
pean Curiosity" vis-à-vis "the natives".
The ethnological outlook, strong on
nakedness, misery and folklore, was often
sadistic, lubricious and at best pater¬
nalistic. Ethnological essays and reports
usually sought to justify the status quo and
contributed to the "development of
underdevelopment".
Thus the whole of Africa was presented
in ¡mages which Africans themselves might
regard as strangejust as if, at the beginn¬
ing of this century, Europe was personified
by the housing conditions, table manners
or technical level of certain rural com¬
munities.
Lastly, by an implacable dialectic, the
very object or "other" of ethnology
gradually disappeared under the influence
of colonialism. The primitive natives who
lived by hunting and gathering, if not by
cannibalism, were transformed into sub-
proletariats of peripheral centres in a world
system of production which has its pole of
attraction in the northern hemisphere. That
is why those who had been cast in the role
of objects, in this case the Africans, decid¬
ed to initiate an independent mode of
discourse of their own, as subjects of
history.
All that is necessary is to admit that while
CONTINUED PAGE 70
11

A continent viewed from within
the "being" of Africans is the same that
of Homo sapiens their "being-in-the-
world" is different. Once this is done, new
instruments can be developed with which
to apprehend their particular evolution.
Four main principles must govern
research if we want to push forward to a
new frontier in African historiography.
To begin with, interdisciplinarity. This is
so important that it can almost be regarded
as a source in itself. The application of
political sociology to the oral tradition con¬
cerning the Kingdom of Ségou, for exam¬
ple, has filled out considerably a picture
which would otherwise be nothing but a
bare genealogical tree decked with a few
stereotyped exploits. And was it not a
datum of cultural anthropology the in¬
itiatory text of the Fula shepherdswhich
enabled prehistorians to unravel some of
the enigmas of the Tassili frescoes in
Algeria ?
The expansion of the Bantus, as attested
by the concordant sources of linguistics,
oral tradition, archaeology, anthropology,
and the early written sources, Arab, Por¬
tuguese, British and Afrikaaner, becomes a
living reality which can be set out in a vivid
synthesis. Similarly, while linguistic
arguments converge with those of
technology to suggest that royal gongs and
twin bells spread from West Africa to
Lower Zaire, Shaba and Zambia, ar¬
chaeological evidence would of course pro¬
vide invaluable confirmation of this.
The Ennedi provides an excellent exam¬
ple of the coming together of all available
sources. In this region it has been possible
to establish a diachronic typology of pic¬
tural and ceramic styles and to draw from
them a chronological series extending over
eight millennia; and all this supported by
stratigraphie soundings, and confirmed by
carbon datings and the study of flora and
fauna, the habitat, and oral tradition.
When eclipses are linked to the reigns of
various dynasties, a list of dated eclipses,
more or less visible according to area, can
occasionally help with chronology. But, in
general, chronology requires the use of
several sources, for a variety of reasons:
firstly, the average length of reigns and
generations varies; secondly, the nature of
the relationship between a sovereign and
his successor is not always clear.
On the other hand, it is very important
that the whole course of the historical pro¬
cess should be reintegrated into the con¬
text of African time. The Africans' idea of
time is based on the principle of causality.
But of a causality applied according to par¬
ticular norms, in which logic is steeped in
and diverted by myth; in which the
economic stage reached is elementary, and
time is not money, so that there is no need
for it to be measured numerically; in which
the rhythm of work and of days is
metronome enough for human activity; in
which calendars are not abstract or univer¬
sal, but deal in natural phenomena such as
moon and sun, rain and drought, and the
movement of men and beasts.
Every hour is defined by concrete acts.
Thus, in Burundi, amakama is the time to
milk (7 a.m.); maturuka is when the herds
are let out (8 a.m.); kuasase is when the
sun spreads out (9 a.m.); kumusase is
when the sun spreads out over the hills (10
a.m.), and so on. Jn this cattle-raising
country, time is measured in terms of
pastoral and agricultural life.
This conception of time is historical in
several respects. In gérontocratie African
societies the idea of anteriority is even
more significant than elsewhere, because
upon.it alone are based such rights as
public pronouncement, participation in
special dances and certain dishes, mar¬
riage, the respect of other people, and so
on.
Primogeniture is not usually a matter of
exclusive right to royal succession, and the
number of those with potential claims
(uncles, brothers, sons) is always high. The
fact that age is taken into account in the
context of a very open competition again
lends significance to chronoiogy.
Another imperative requirement is that
African history must be seen at last from
within, not still measured by the yardstick
of alien values. There cannot be an in¬
dependent collective personality without
an awareness of self and of the right to be
different. Of course, the policy and practice
of self-examination do not consist in ar¬
tificially abolishing Africa's historical con¬
nexions with the other continents of the
Old and New Worlds. But these connex¬
ions have to be analysed in terms of mutual
exchanges and multilateral influences, in
which something will be heard of Africa's
contribution to the development of
mankind.
Moreover, this history can only be the
history of the peoples of the African conti¬
nent seen as a whole, including the
mainland and neighbouring islands such as
Madagascar. The history of Africa obvious¬
ly includes the Mediterranean sector in a
unity consecrated by age-long and
sometimes bloody links, which make the
two parts of Africa on either side of the
Sahara the two leaves of one door, the two
sides of one coin. It has to be a history of
peoples, for even the despotism of certain
dynasts has always been tempered in
Africa by distance, by the absence of those
technical means which add to the weight of
centralization, and by the permanence of
village democracies, so that at every level.
from base to summit, the council called
together through and for discussion con¬
stitutes the brain of the body politic. It
must be a history of peoples because, ex¬
cept for a few decades in modern times, it
has never been shaped according to the
frontiers fixed by colonization, for the good
reason that the territorial bases of the
African peoples differ everywhere from the
frontiers inherited from colonial partition.
So in the continental context, the em¬
phasis should be on common factors
resulting from common origins and age¬
long inter-regional exchanges of men,
goods, techniques and ideas, in other
words of both material and spiritual com¬
modities. Even since prehistory, despite
natural obstacles and the low level of
techniques, there has been a certain degree
of historical solidarity on a continental
scale, between the Nile valley and the
Sudan on the one hand and the forest of
Guinea on the other; between the Nile
valley and East Africa, including among
other things the dispersion of the Lwos;
between the Sudan and Central Africa,
through the diaspora of the Bantu; and
between the Atlantic and east coasts,
through transcontinental trade across
Shaba. Migration, which took place on a
large scale in both space and time, is not to
be seen as a vast human tide attracted by
emptiness and leaving emptiness in its
wake.
Our history of Africa must avoid being
too narrative, for otherwise it would be in
danger of according too much importance
to external factors and influences. Of
course, the establishment of key events is a
task of the first importance, indispensable
to the task of defining the original outline
of African evolution. But the main concern
will be civilizations, institutions, structures:
agrarian and metallurgical techniques, arts
and crafts, trade networks, and conception
and organization of power, religion and
religious and philosophical thought, the
problem of nations and pre-nations, tech¬
niques of modernization, and so on. The
methodological approach makes inter¬
disciplinarity even more necessary.
Finally, why this return to African
sources? While for an outsider this quest
for the past could be merely a way of satis¬
fying curiosity, a highly stimulating intellec¬
tual exercise for someone eager to solve
the riddle of the Sphinx, the real intention
of our enterprise should go far beyond
these purely individual aims. For the history
of Africa is necessary to the understanding
of world history, many passages of which
Will remain impenetrable enigmas as long
as the historical horizon of the continent of
Africa has not been lit up.
Joseph Ki-Zerbo
70
