Herbal therapy in the
war on drug addiction
THE poppy may be considered one of the
first medicinal plants known to man.
Sumerian records from 5 000 BC refer
to the poppy and Assyrian tablets record its
medicinal properties ; Hippocrates made
extensive use of opium and its virtues were
extolled by Galen. Indeed the opiates from
the poppy opium, heroin, codeine,
etc.are still among the most powerful
pain-killing, sleep-inducing agents available
to man.
Unfortunately, this boon of nature has
another face ; abuse of these drugs can
lead to physical dependence upon them, or
drug-addiction. In the addict, the cells of
the central nervous system become ac¬
customed to the presence of an opiate and
eventually become unable to function in its
absence, the euphoric effects decline and
the addict requires ever higher doses. If the
supply of the drug ceases, the addict suf¬
fers severe withdrawal effects including
vomiting, convulsions, respiratory failure
and even death.
Drug abuse is a problem which affects, to
some degree, many countries of the world.
Various methods of treatment including the
use of substitute chemical drugs such as
methadone and psycho-social therapy have
been tried but, for a variety of reasons, have
only met with partial success.
In recent years, however, scientists in a
number of countries of the south-east
Asian region have begun to look again at
traditional approaches to the management
of drug addiction. Acupuncture is the most
often quoted example of this approach, but
yoga, meditation, bio-feedback and the use
of various medicinal plant remedies are also
commonly practised. Sometimes, two or
more of these methods are used in com¬
bination.
In Malaysia, as part of the national pro¬
gramme of research on drug addiction, the
National Drug Dependence Research Cen¬
tre, under its director. Dr. V. B. Navaratnam
is making a scientific evaluation of the effi-
cacity of traditional methods of drug-addic¬
tion management, especially those involv¬
ing the use of medicinal plants.
The traditional healers of Malaysia are
reluctant to reveal the exact ingredients of
their medicinal concoctions and each of
them has his own treatment methods. But
38

certain similarities can be observed. All
healers use one or more medicinal "teas"
during the detoxification phase and these
concoctions are given regularly for periods
varying from three days to one month. As
part of the treatment programme a spiritual
component is often included.
In general, the medicinal teas appear to
be made up from roots and tubers and from
the leaves of various herbs. One healer used
a tea consisting of a mixture of water and
the ground-up leaves of a creeping herb and
of turmeric. The same healer indicated that
he used another concoction to' be taken in
small amounts internally and to be applied
externally as an ointment during massage
of the patient. This concoction contained
black turmeric, white turmeric, leaves from
the white hibiscus tree and of the
macarange plant, the roots of the "stone
banana", of rough grass and of the "dragon
shrub", as well as ginger, the fruit of the
Acorus calamus and other ingredients.
The therapeutic value of these teas Is still
not clear. However interviews with pa¬
tients who have undergone treatment by
traditional healers indicate that the con¬
sumption of these concoctions does
alleviate somewhat the severity of
withdrawal pain.
Research Into the pharmacological pro¬
file of some of these concoctions is current¬
ly being carried out at the School of Phar¬
maceutical Sciences of the University of
Science, Penang. Studies have been made
of two teas supplied by traditional healers
and of an extract of buah mengkudu, the
fruit of the morinda tree.
Preliminary results show that the extract
of the pulp of the buah mengkudu sup¬
presses precipitated withdrawal jumping in
mice but has a spasmogenic effect on
guinea pig muscle. It was found that one of
the teas examined also suppressed
precipitated withdrawal jumping. Both teas
had a general depressant action on mice as
well as inducing hypothermia. Both teas
were found to have a marked pain-relieving
effect and to reduce motor activity in ex¬
perimental animals. Both samples were
found to be devoid of any opiate type
substance. Preliminary results therefore
seem to indicate that both teas and the
buah mengkudu extract have the ability to
suppress withdrawal symptoms in addicts
and to induce a general depressant effect.
It is very tempting to assume that other
traditional treatment procedures may have
similar effects. But until such time as ade¬
quate scientific data are made available on
these traditional treatment approaches
they must remain classified among the
many possibilities that have yet to be pro¬
ven or discredited on a scientific basis.
^ÙÊ£.*f¥i
f^jfmoisaiiH.li, Mi/ruM« M4XUII k-ri \*t?ui h'i . HflfrtV
JL »iMM-i ^nnmu jíín^m i-t imh» . hiijkmh iiénê mut
JL fin)i Minn mmiaIi», n4ii.+*nnAtnn u'l í otrtii mt4fu .
', ^L- '*«» 1111*11-11 M*H IVHtlWf, M4INMH ttA*ti.>M\OAI*VH.
NÄy.^rniit'l-fOiiiiiMv.'w itfUrii^i ii*r'i£nÍHfr«mt4
4i'' (<H ,1'otll-l-fl HMII i<r»A<HIIUt MM4tHltUI.«3|K»
' r
Ok-u-MrlfUMtiin. yîiv»»i«.ivi
^ 'fAtr* H«MM<jMMf4.lfl ifrllf¿if H4 Uff 11 {f'ïf
The first page of John the Exarch's Hexameron, a 9th-10th century
Bulgarian religious work with a glossary annex describing the
therapeutic properties of various plants and trees.

