THE ARMS RACE
Military
expenditure
the
ever-rising
tide
The Disarmament Decade solemnly declared by the
United Nations in 1969 is drawing to an end. A number
of international agreements and treaties on aspects of
disarmament have been signed in the last ten years, but
the fact remains that the arms race, far from slowing
down, is actually gathering momentum, swallowing up
vast material and human resources which are urgently
needed for development and constituting a grave danger
for world peace and security. The prospects for general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control seem as distant as ever.
To help alert world opinion to this problem of universal
concern, the Unesco Courier presents in this issue long
extracts from a United Nations report on "the economic
and social consequences of the arms race and of military
expenditures". The facts and figures revealed in this
important document, produced in 1976 and 1977 by a
group of experts from different world regions, draw
attention to the dangers inherent in the present situation
and stress the urgent need for resolute action to counter
them.
The following experts took part in the preparation of the
report:
Mr Gheorghe Dolgu, Chairman of the Group; Professor of Economics,
President of the Academy of Economic Studies, Bucharest; Mr. Simón
Alberto Consalvi, Permanent Representative of Venezuela to the United
Nations, New York; Mr. Hendrick de Haan, Professor of International
Economic Relations, University of Groningen, The Netherlands; Mr. Dragomir
Djokic, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations
Office at Geneva; Mr. Vasily S. Emelyanov, Corresponding Member of the
Academy of Sciences of the USSR; Mr. Plácido García Reynoso, Former
Professor of Economics, National University of Mexico; Mr. Saad M. Hashmi,
Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations, New York;
Mr. Ronald H. Huisken, Visiting Fellow, Strategic and Defense Studies
Centre, Australian National University; Mr. Ladislav Matejka, Deputy
Minister, Presidium of the Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic-
Mr. Akira Matsui, Adviser, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Japan; Mr. Isaac M.
Randolph, Former Commissioner for Customs, Liberia; Mr. Kurt W.
Rothschild, Professor of Economics, University of Linz, Austria; Mr. Yves
Ullmo, Directeur des Synthèses à l'I.N.S.E.E. (Institut National de la
Statistique et des Etudes Economiques), Paris.
FOR a number of years now the world
has been diverting annually about
$350 thousand million (1) to military
purposes. The six leading countries in
terms of military expenditure the USA,
the USSR, China, France, the U.K. and the
Federal Republic of Germany account for
three fourths of this total. Altogether bet¬
ween five and six per cent of the world's
total output of goods and services is
diverted to military ends. In most countries
the figure is between two and eight per
cent, although in some cases it exceeds 30
per cent.
The rapid rise in military expenditure dur¬
ing the 1960s followed by a levelling off
over the past eight years repeats a pattern
which has been encountered several times
before. Periods of massive military expan¬
sion, mostly in connexion with a war (the
Second World War, Korea, Viet Nam) have
alternated with plateaux lasting for some
years.
The resulting impression that there are
certain periods of relative stability is largely
an illusion. In fact, the underlying trend for
the great majority of countries is one of
long-term irregular rise in military budgets,
punctuated occasionally by modest and
temporary decline, it is merely the over¬
whelming weight of a few leading coun¬
tries in the total which gives the ap¬
pearance of stepwise growth.
National arms inventories are not
published, and for most types of arm¬
aments only highly tentative estimates of
world stocks can be made. Nevertheless,
some indications of a very general nature
can be given.
Current stocks of nuclear weapons are
sufficient to destroy the world many times
over. These weapons and the missiles, air¬
craft and artillery to deliver them are con¬
stantly being diversified and their perfor¬
mance improved. The number of nuclear
warheads in arsenals is not known, but the
number of carriers of different types is
known with a fair degree of accuracy.
From these figures it can be inferred that
in 1974 so-called "strategic" nuclear forces
in the United States and the Soviet Union
included between 10,000 and 11,000 ther¬
monuclear warheads deliverable from
missiles or bombers. This number has been
rising very fast. Nuclear arsenals are also
increasing in other States. Figures given by
the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute (SIPRI) indicate that the
number of missile-deliverable warheads
possessed by the two major nuclear
Powers more than tripled between 1970
and 1976, rising from about 3,700 to nearly
12,000. Their combined explosive power is
believed to be equivalent to 1.3 million
Hiroshima-size bombs.
With regard to so-called "tactical"
nuclear weapons the situation is more
uncertain. Their number is believed to be k
about four times larger than the number of f
(1) Estimates of world military expenditure come
mainly from the United States Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency (ACDA) and the
Stockholm International Peace Research In¬
stitute (SIPRI). The figures supplied by these
two sources differ considerably in some cases,
but not enough to affect conclusions substan¬
tially. ACDA figures are generally higher. Figu¬
res quoted in extracts from the UN report are
those provided by SIPRI except where otherwise
stated.


"strategic" nuclear warheads, but their
combined explosive power is but a fraction
of the latter. According to one source it is
equivalent to about 700 million tons of TNT
or to some 50,000 Hiroshima-type bombs.
As for the major types of conventional
weapons such as aircraft, fighting vessels
and tanks, estimates have been made
which provide a rough indication of trends.
They indicate that the value of the world
stock of fighting ships (in constant dollars)
doubled between 1960 and 1970 and rose
by a further 30 per cent between 1970 and
1976. This pattern appears to be valid for
several other types of armaments as well;
world stocks reckoned in numbers have re¬
mained fairly constant, but in terms of cost
and performance they are increasing very
rapidly, and, in the 1970s in particular, cur
rent models have been spreading very fast
to an increasing number of countries.
This is true of modern aircraft. Only 13
developing countries had supersonic air¬
craft in 1965. A decade later the number
had risen to 41. Over the past 30 years a
few major arms-producing countries
together developed and procured over 70
types of intercepters, fighter and attack air¬
craft and twice as many variants of these
types. Even after correction for inflation,
the unit price of fighter aircraft has been
doubling every four or five years, rising
from about $250,000 per aircraft (1975
prices) during the Second World War to
well over $10 million today, reflecting im¬
provements in performance and armament.
The six major military spenders not only
account for three-quarters of world military
States Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency, which gives the most comprehen¬
sive figures, estimates the total value of
goods actually delivered in 1975 at $9.7
thousand million in current prices. This
excludes training services and construction
which, if figures for the United States are a
valid guide, would add another 30 per cent
to the total, raising the figure for the value
of military goods and services transferred
world-wide in 1975 to an estimated $13
thousand million.
About one third of the total is traded
among industrialized countries; another
third, approximately, is made up of exports
to oil-exporting developing countries,
mainly in the Middle East, and the remain¬
ing third goes to all other developing coun¬
tries together. The total value of arms
The war-drums are sounded.
Men force their features into
frightfulness and gnash their teeth;
and before they rush out to gather
raw human flesh for death's larder,
they march to the temple of Buddha,
the compassionate,
to claim his blessings,
while loud beats the drum rat-a-tat
and earth trembles...
They will punctuate each thousand of
the maimed and killed
with the trumpeting of their triumph,
arouse demon's mirth at the sight
of the limbs torn bleeding from
women and children;
and they pray that they may befog
minds with untruths
and poison God's sweet air of breath,
and therefore they march to the
temple of Buddha, the
compassionate, to claim his
blessings, while loud beats the drum
rat-a-tat and earth trembles.
Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941)
This poem by Tagore, the quotation from
Voltaire on the back cover, and all the other
quotations from poets and writers appearing in
this issue are taken from a forthcoming an¬
thology of writings on peace to be published by
Unesco. The preparation of the anthology,
which comprises texts from many lands and
periods, was made possible by the award of the
John XXIII Peace Prize to Unesco in November
1974.
WORLD MILITARY EXPENDITURE, 1908-1977 (constant 1973 prices) US $ thousand million
Already in this century 60 million persons have died in two world wars and since 1945 over
100 regional conflicts have also claimed millions of lives. Military expenditure has steadily
risen. Since the Second World War the direct costs of the arms race have exceeded $6,000
thousand million (In 1975 prices), almost as much as the aggregate GNP of the entire
world in 1975.
spending, but for practically all military
research and development (R and D) and
for practically all exports of weapons and
military _ equipment. All significant
developments in armaments originate in
these countries and spread from them to
the rest of the world.
The total value of transfers of military
goods and services cannot be determined
with accuracy, although several institutions
now publish counts and estimates of arms
transfers on a regular basis. The United
transfers has been growing steadily over
the years, increasing by a minimum of
three to four per cent over the past decade.
Despite this appearance of continuity,
very important changes in the pattern of
arms transfers have in fact taken place in
this period.
First there has been a rapid rise in the ex¬
port of major weapons to a number of
developing countries and in some cases
these are increasingly highly sophisticated
8

^L^L^L^L^L^L^L^L^L^L^L^-m-^m
WORLD MILITARY EXPENDITURE IN 1976
Drawing shows breakdown by groups of
countries of world military expenditure In
1976. The two major world powers
accounted for almost half (46.5 per cent)
of the total, the three other permanent
members of the United Nations Security
Council 16 per cent. A group of 33 countries
spending over $1,000 million each per
annum provided 31.5 per cent of the world
figure, while the remaining 6 per cent came
from the rest of the world. Half of what is
spent on military purposes every day
would be enough to fund the World
Health Organization's programme to
eradicate malaria, a disease which is
endemic in 66 developing countries whose
total population Is over one thousand
million. World military spending In a single
year would finance 25 years of economic
aid to developing countries (at 1978 rates).
weapons. According to SIPRI estimates,
exports of major weapons to developing
countries rose from $3 thousand million in
1970 to $6.3 thousand million in 1975 and
57.3 thousand million in 1976.
Second, there has been a major shift
towards transactions on commercial or
near-commercial terms. For most suppliers
commercial considerations have become
predominant to an unprecedented degree
and the only remaining constraint appears
to be the resources recipients are able and
willing to commit to the purchase of
armaments.
The arms trade affects the economies of
importing and exporting countries in
diametrically opposite ways. It is a highly
unequal exchange which is detrimental to
efforts to bridge the gap between poor and
rich countries. For the importer it is purely
and simply a waste of economic resources
which could have been used productively.
Even when weapons are provided as gifts,
operation and infrastructure costs must be
included on the debit side. In contrast to
the import of non-military goods these
outlays raise neither consumption nor pro¬
duction and generate no future output
from which to pay for them.
Not so for the exporting country. That
part of its arms production which is destin¬
ed for its own armed forces constitutes, at
first approximation, an economic loss. But
its production of weapons for export is no
different in economic terms from any other
export production. In some cases it may be
in fact more advantageous than other kinds
of export because the advanced-
technology component in arms exports is
particularly high.
These exports therefore tend to
stimulate important sectors of the
economy of the exporting country, such as
mechanical engineering, electronics and
the industries supplying these sectors.
Recent arms deals involving highly
sophisticated equipment have enhanced
these tendencies since the price of such
equipment often includes a large compo¬
nent to cover research and development
costs. In addition to orders for existing
weapons, some recent contracts have even
involved the development of new or im¬
proved weapons systems specially for ex¬
port to the contractor. In this way impor¬
ting countries are subsidizing military
research and development in the arms ex-
' porting countries. This also applies when,
instead of importing weapons, countries
produce them under licence.
In most cases this subsidy is of marginal
importance for the exporting country but in
some instances the viability of certain na-
. tional arms industries or of particular com¬
panies is significantly affected. In a very
real, although often marginal, way impor¬
ting countries are thus helping to
perpetuate the lead in military technology
of the main arms exporting countries and
to sustain the rate of innovation and ob¬
solescence in weaponry.
In addition to the growing volume of
arms transfers, various forms of interna¬
tional co-operation in arms production are
gaining importance. In the industrialized
countries the tendency is toward co-
production, , several countries pooling
facilities to produce different components
for a particularly costly and sophisticated
weapons system, and, less frequently, col¬
laboration (and cost-sharing) in design and
development.
In the developing countries the usual
pattern is to establish local maintenance
facilities and then gradually to take charge
of repairs, the assembly of imported com¬
ponents, local production of certain com¬
ponents, and so on. More recently, some
countries have been able to accelerate this
process by purchasing complete produc¬
tion facilities, with the foreign contractor,
whether it be a firm or a government, pro¬
viding the whole system design, plant,
.know-how and some of the parts of the
finished weapon.
Seen from a social and political angle,
something extremely important and
radically new is involved here. In some
cases, it could be the beginning of a pro¬
cess whereby the military-industrial com¬
plexes of the supplying countries expand
beyond their own borders, take root
abroad and reproduce the whole network
of relations between industry, producers
and sub-contractors, unions, government
and armed forces in the new environment.
With the transfer of complete and opera¬
tional weapons systems and the provision
of military advisers, as with other forms of
military co-operation, relations between
recipient and supplier tend to remain con¬
fined to the armed forces. But in the types
of multilateral production or dependent
domestic production considered here, a
whole set of mutually supportive relations
and of vested interests in the perpetuation
of the armaments process is built up and
spreads through society, far beyond the
military establishment proper.
While it is not likely, even in the long run,
to provide any genuine independence from
the main arms producing countries, the
multinational expansion of military-
industrial complexes could in time become
a significant impediment to effective arms
limitation and disarmament in the regions
where it is taking place. This underlines
once more the urgency of achieving pro¬
gress towards disarmament. The size and
complexity of the problems will only in¬
crease with the passage of time.B
