Photo © Télérarna, Paris
François Truffaut with a young actor
during the shooting of his film Une Belle
Fille Comme Moi (A Gorgeous Bird Like
Me), made in 1972.
COMPARED with their importance in
everyday life, children are under-
represented on the cinema screen.
There are, of course, films with children in
them, but few films actually about children.
The reason is simple: there are no child
stars today. And since the star system
forms the commercial basis of the cinema,
children can only be used in films as sub¬
sidiary characters, extraneous or marginal
to the main course of the action, decorative
frills to the plot.
And yet in the old days Hollywood had
its child-stars whose adventures the public
loved to follow from film to film. But to my
mind these productions, though often
highly entertaining and of excellent quality, i
were not of a nature to enrich our under- 1
FRANÇOIS TRUFFAUT, the French film direc¬
tor, left school at the age of 14 and became in
turn shop storeman, office clerk and welder. A
cinema-lover from an early age, he became film
critic of the magazines Cahiers du Cinéma and
Arts before working as an assistant to Roberto
Rossellini. In 1959, his first feature-length film.
Les Quatre Cents Coups (The 400 Blows), won
the prize for best direction at the Cannes Festi¬
val. His other well-known films include: Fahren¬
heit 451 (1966), Baisers Volés (Stolen Kisses,
1968) and L'Enfant Sauvage (The Wild Child,
1970). He is the author of several books inclu¬
ding: Le Cinéma selon Alfred Hitchcock C77?e
Cinema According to Alfred Hitchcock), pub¬
lished by Seghers, Paris, in 1975.



Children
are
born
actors
by François Truffaut
François Truffaut's film L'Enfant Sauvage (1969) is based on the true
story of a boy found living wild and abandoned in a forest of southern
France In 1798. The child was taken to the Institute for the Deaf and
Dumb in Paris, where he was cared for by a doctor, Jean Itard, who set
out to educate him, inventing certain methods which are still used
today in the education of the deaf and dumb. In the film the role of
Itard was played by Truffaut himself, who relied heavily on the doctor's
account of the case when preparing the scenario. Below, the "wild
child" shortly after being captured by hunters. In a later scene, bottom
photo, the* boy plays with the glimmerings of candlelight. Thought by
many to bp ineducable, his intelligence has been awakened by Itard's
devoted tutoring.

Standing of children and may even have
* given film-goers a false idea of childhood.
They usually travestied the truth, ramming
a diet of optimism down the throat of a
mainly youthful public.
Some film scenarios play false to chil¬
dren, who are cheated out of their due by
something or other, an animal, say, or an
object, which is considered intrinsically
poetic. Since children automatically bring
poetry with them wherever they appear, I
feel that film-makers should not delibera¬
tely introduce a poetic note into films about
children. The poetry should emerge spon¬
taneously; it should not be a means to an
end nor should it be an end in itself.
Let me give a concrete example of what I
mean. I find more poetry in a sequence
showing a child wiping the dishes than in
one showing the same child in velveteen
picking flowers in a garden to a soundtrack
of music by Mozart.
It should never be forgotten that the
about children can be made from seem¬
ingly insignificant events, for the truth of
the matter is that nothing to do with
childhood is insignificant.
The adult cinema-goer sees childhood as
linked to the idea of innocence and above
all to the idea of purity; an adult who be¬
comes emotional when he sees a child on
the screen is actually indulging in self-pity
and mourning his own lost "innocence".
So it is essential to be realistic : and what is
realism but a refusal to peddle either pessi¬
mism or optimism. Let the viewer make up
his own mind without taking his cue from
the director!
In my opinion the most fascinating age,
and the one which offers the most cinema¬
tographic possibilities, is that between
eight and fifteen, the age of awakening
consciousness.
For parents, everything before adoles¬
cence, and even the word adolescent itself,
is of little significance. For mum and dad
public expect children to play on their
heartstrings. Consequently, it is difficult to
avoid coyness when making a film about
children. The only solution is a deliberate,
calculated hardening of the heart when
deciding on how to treat the subject; this
does not mean that the film will lose any of
its impact.
A child smiles on the screen, and lo and
behold you've got the audience in your
pocket. But in real life the most striking
thing is that children are serious when
adults are futile. This is why I believe that a
higher level of truth can be achieved by
filming not only children's games but also
their dramas which are huge and have
nothing to do with adult conflicts.
The adult world as seen by children is
one where nothing is punished; anything
goes. A father laughs as he tells his friends
how he smashed his car against a tree; but
if his eight-year-old son accidentally drops
a bottle while trying to help out at home he
will think he has committed a crime, for
a child makes no distinction between an
accident and a misdemeanour.
An incident of this kind can produce a
dramatic situation on the screen: a film
Los Olvidados (The
Young and Damned)
directed by Luis Bunuel
(Mexico, 1949).
you are a child until you do your military
service, which makes a man of you... or so
they seem to think.
And yet adolescence brings with it the
discovery of injustice and the desire for
independence. The adolescent's affections
are weaned away from his or her parents ;
sexual curiosity begins to stir. Adolescence
is a hyper-critical age which sees the first
conflicts between the absolute morality of
childhood and the relative morality of adult¬
hood, between purity of heart and the
impurity of life. In a word, it is the most
interesting age for any artist to spotlight.
I know that most people take a poor view
of those who get children to act on stage or
screen. For myself, I reject out of hand the
view that children's personalities suffer
serious damage when they become actors.
This is far from the truth. And in France at
least the employment of child actors is
today strictly controlled by law. A commit¬
tee goes through the scenario with a tooth-
comb; the child is medically examined; the
head teacher of his or her school is consul¬
ted; the case is submitted to the local
authorities. The parents receive only
twenty per cent of the fee, the remainder
Scene from Charlie Chaplin's film The Kid
(USA, 1921).
being put in a savings bank account for the
child. If the film is shot during term-time, a
teacher must supervise the child's educa¬
tion.
Adolescent actors contribute to a film an
extraordinary purity of which professionals
are not always capable. If something in the
action or dialogue is ridiculous they sense it
immediately and make no bones about
saying so. The director must be sufficiently
modest and flexible to make use of their
frankness and realism and modify various
details of his film accordingly, adapting the
character to the young actor rather than
artificially forcing the young actor to fit in
with the character. A children's film must
be made with the collaboration of the chil¬
dren themselves, for they have an infallible
nose for truth in natural, uncontrived situa¬
tions. In a classroom scene, for example,
they know that the sound of pens scraping
in inkwells is all-important.
Unlike professional actors children have
no technical gimmicks; they do not try to
hog the camera; they do not know whether
they have one profile better than another;
they are always honest where feelings are
concerned. This may seem curious, but
everything a child does on the screen he
seems to be doing for the first time.
Film which records the transformation of
young faces is doubly precious because of
the tension between each action and its
wider symbolic significance.
This is why, for twenty years now, I have
never wearied of making films with children
and why I shall make more films about
them in the years to come.
François Truffaut
14
