The
scientist's
dilemma
by Albert Einstein
WE are living in a period of such
great external and internal in¬
security and with such a lack of
firm objectives that the mere confession of
our convictions may be of significance
even if these convictions, as all value
judgements, cannot be proven through
logical deductions.
There arises at once the question: should
we consider the search for truthor, more
modestly expressed, our efforts to under¬
stand the knpwable universe through
constructive logical thought as an
autonomous objective of our work? Or
should our search for truth be subordinated
to some other objective, for example to a
"practical" one? This question cannot be
decided on a logical basis. The decision.
however, will have considerable influence
upon our thinking and our moral judge¬
ment, provided that it is born out of deep
and unshakeable conviction. Let me then
make a confession: for myself, the struggle
to gain more insight and understanding is
one of those independent objectives
without which a thinking individual would
find it impossible to ha"ve a conscious,
positive attitude towards life.
It is the very essence of our striving for
understanding that on the one hand, it at¬
tempts to encompass the great and com¬
plex variety of man's experience, and that
on the other, it looks for simplicity and
economy in the basic assumptions. The
belief that these two objectives can exist k
side by side is, in view of the primitive state f
31

of our scientific knowledge, a matter of
faith. Without such faith I could not have a
strong and unshakeable conviction about
the independent value of knowledge.
This, in a sense, religious attitude of a
man engaged in scientific work has some
influence upon his whole personality. For
apart from the knowledge which is offered
by accumulated experience and from the
rules of logical thinking, there exists in prin¬
ciple for the man in science no authority
whose decisions and statements could
have in themselves a claim to "Truth". This
leads to the paradoxical situation that a
person who devotes all his strength to ob¬
jective matters will develop, from a social
point of view, into an extreme individualist
who, at least in principle, has faith in
nothing but his own judgement. It is quite
possible to assert that intellectual in¬
dividualism and the thirst for scientific
knowledge emerged simultaneously in
history and remained inseparable ever
since.
Someone may suggest that the man of
science as sketched in these sentences is
no more than an abstraction which actually
does not exist in this world, not unlike the
homo oeconomicus of classical economics.
However, it seems to me that science as
we know it today could not have emerged
and could not have remained alive if many
individuals, during many centuries, had not
come very close to the ideal.
Of course, not everybody who has learn¬
ed to use tools and methods which, direct¬
ly or indirectly, appear to be "scientific" is
to me a man of science. I refer only to,
those individuals in whom the scientific
mentality is truly alive.
What then, is the position of today's
man of science as a member of society? He
obviously is rather proud of the fact that
the work of scientists has helped to change
radically the economic life of men by
almost completely eliminating muscular
work. He is distressed by the fact that the
results of his scientific work have created a
threat to mankind since they have fallen in¬
to the hands of morally blind exponents of
political power. He is conscious of the fact
that technological methods, made possible
by his work, have led to a concentration of
economic and also of political power in the
hands of small minorities which have come
to dominate completely the lives of the
masses of people, who appear more and
more amorphous. But even worse: the
concentration of economic and political
power in the hands of a few has not only
made the man of science dependent
economically, it also threatens his in¬
dependence from within; the shrewd
methods of intellectual and psychic in¬
fluences which it brings to bear will prevent
the development of independent per¬
sonalities.
Thus the man of science, as we can
observe with our own eyes, suffers a truly
tragic fate. Striving in great sincerity for
clarity and inner independence, he himself,
through his sheer superhuman efforts, has
fashioned the tools which are being used to
make him a slave and to destroy him also
from within. He cannot escape being
muzzled by. those who have political power
in their hands. As a soldier he is forced to
sacrifice his own life and to destroy the
Relativity
and
the atom
According to the relativity theory,
the mass of an object increases
with its velocity (see drawing
page 14). In the everyday world
velocities are much too low for us
to notice the effects of relativity,
but in the world of the atom
smasher, or nuclear accelerator,
relativistic effects become very
noticeable indeed. Atom smashers
are huge machines in which
atomic particles are accelerated to
fantastic speeds. At the Linear
Accelerator Center at Stanford,
California (aerial view, right)
electrons are accelerated so close
to the speed of light that their
mass is increased 40,000 times. At
the end of the 3,050-metre-long
installation is a storage ring where
the particles are smashed into one
another, creating new matter.
Scientists can observe colliding
particles in detail using a "bubble
chamber" containing a special
superheated liquid under pressure.
The particles, which are too small
to be seen are shot through the
liquid and create strings of tiny
bubbles which, when
photographed, enable scientists to
measure the mass and other
properties of the invisible
particles. Top photo, far right,
shows traces made by particles in
the "Gargamelle" bubble chamber
of CERN (European Council for
Nuclear Research) in Geneva.
Lower photo, view of
"Gargamelle's" observation
portholes. Accurate
measurements can be made of
the conversion of the energy of
motion Into matter and mass
which confirm Einstein's famous
equation expressing the
equivalence of mass and energy,
E = mcJ.
lives of others even when he is convinced
of the absurdity of such sacrifices. He is
fully aware of the fact that universal
destruction is unavoidable since historical
development has led to the concentration
of all economic, political and military power
in the hands of national States. He also
realizes that mankind can only be saved if a
super-national system, based on law,
would be created to eliminate for all time
the methods of brute force. However, the
man of science has slipped so much that he
accepts the slavery inflicted upon him by
national States as his inevitable fate. He
even degrades himself to such an extent
that he helps obediently in the perfection of
the means for the general destruction of
mankind.
Is there really no escape for the man of
science? Must he really tolerate and suffer
all these indignities?
Is the time gone for ever when, aroused
by his inner freedom and the independence
of his thinking and his work, he had a
chance of enlightening and enriching the
lives of his fellow-human beings? In placing
his work too much on an intellectual basis,
has he not forgotten about his responsibili¬
ty and dignity? My answer is: while it is true
that an inherently free and scrupulous per¬
son may be destroyed, such an individual
can never be enslaved or used as a blind
tool.
If the man of science of our day could
find the time and the courage to think
honestly and critically over his situation and
the tasks before him and if he would act ac¬
cordingly, the possibilities for a sensible
and satisfactory solution of the present
dangerous international situation would be
considerably improved.
Albert Einstein
This article is a slightly abridged version of
a message read before the forty-third
meeting of the Italian Society for the Ad¬
vancement of the Sciences in 1950.
32

Unesco Medal
for
Einstein Centenary
To commemorate the hundredth anniversary of Albert
Einstein's birth on 14 March 1879, Unesco has issued a
medal minted in gold, silver and bronze. The work of the
French engraver Max Léognany, the medal (above)
shows on one side the scientist in his later years, with
the inscription 1879 ALBERT EINSTEIN 1955 - UNESCO
1979. On the other side a silhouette of Einstein's head
forms the background for three of the mathematical
equations that sum up Einstein's essential contributions
to physics. The best-known equation, E = mc2,
established a fixed, quantitative relationship between
energy (E) and matter (m) as determined by the square of
the speed of light. The second equation symbolizes the
results of Einstein's research on the law of the photo¬
electric effect, for which he was awarded the Nobel
Prize for physics in 1921. The third stems from his work
on the theory of relativity. Einstein is the first man of
modern times to be honoured in Unesco's "Anniversaries
of Great Men" series, in which medals have already been
dedicated to Aristotle, Michelangelo and Rubens. The
medals, struck by the Paris Mint, are also available with
a chain-ring for wear as jewellery. They can be obtained
from : the Philatelic and Numismatic Programme of
Unesco, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris.
Photo Michel Claude, Unesco
Further reading
on Einstein
Einstein: A Centenary Volume, edited by A. P. French. Pub¬
lished by Heinemann, London, for the International Commission
on Physics Education, 1979. (Initiated by Unesco, the centenary
volume project was carried out with Unesco co-operation and
financial support).
Einstein's Universe, by Nigel Calder. Published by the British
Broadcasting Corporation, 1979.
Albert Einstein and Relativity, by D.J. Raine, Priory Press
Ltd., London, 1975.
Einstein and the Generations of Science, by Lewis S. Feuer,
Basic Books, Inc., New York, 1974.
Relativity for the Layman, by James A. Coleman, Penguin
Books, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, U.K. Revised edition 1969.
Relativity and Common Sense, by Hermann Bondi. Hejne-
mann, London, 1965. Reprinted 1978.
The Einstein Century : Four Generations of Revolutionary
Thought is the theme of Unesco's scientific quarterly Impact of
Science on Society, Vol. 29, No. 1 (Jan.-March 1979).
The Ascent of Man, by J. Bronowskl. British Broadcasting Cor¬
poration, 1973.
33
