by Josep Palau i Fabre
EARLY in January 1937, Pablo Picasso
was commissioned by the Government
of the Spanish Republic to paint a large
canvas or mural for the Spanish Pavilion at
the Paris International Exposition, which
was due to open in the late spring.
On 8 January, he produced a multiple
engraving, consisting of a single plate divid¬
ed into nine rectangular sections and con¬
taining a story or fable which he entitled the
Dream and Lie of Franco, which was clearly
meant to be a caricature. Only three features
were not treated in the comic manner the
effigy of the Republic, the bull and the wing¬
ed horse.
The same day, the artist began a second
plate, also divided into nine rectangles, only
one of which he may have filled in, while
completing two more on the following day.
The remaining six were completed after he
had painted Guernica or while he was put¬
ting the finishing touches to it. On this plate,
as on its predecessor, the central figure was
the bull, which was drawn on 9 January.
January, February and March and much
of April went by and still Picasso did not
start the work that had been commissioned.
It was as if inspiration would not come to
him or as if he could not find a suitable
theme. And then, on 26 April 1937, Nazi
bombers flying for General Franco
destroyed the Basque town of Guernica in
what has been regarded as the first
totalitarian bombing raid in history.
The London 7»r?es of 29 April and the
Paris Ce Soir of 30 April reported the event
with despatches from their correspondents
and, on 1 May, Picasso produced his first
dated sketches or drafts on the subject.
Why should he have been inspired by
Guernica rather than any other event in the
Spanish Civil War? After all, the war had
been going on for more than nine months
and the fighting on the Aragon front and in
defence of Madrid had been on a scale suffi¬
cient to arouse passions and attract
widespread interest. On 13 February
Franco's troops entered Málaga, Picasso's
birthplace. But none of these events ap¬
pears to have ignited the artist's inspiration.
What difference was there between these
actions and the raid on Guernica?
To my mind there was one obvious dif¬
ference. The fighting on the Aragon front,
the defence of Madrid, and the fall of
Málaga were all episodes in a fratricidal
struggle which Picasso may well have found
repugnant. But these were combats in
which fighting men were matched against
fighting men, however unequal the contest
may have been in military terms. Guernica
was different. The bombing of Guernica was
a flagrant display of all-powerful military
strength against a defenceless civilian
population. Picasso's reaction to this was a
moral reaction.
What stage had Picasso reached in his life
and art as he began work on this great
painting?
In the four years before Guernica, he had
evolved his own highly personal Mediterra-

A universal image of the inhumanity of war
Guernica
At twenty minutes to five in the afternoon of 26 April, 1937, at the height of the Spanish
Civil War, bombers of the Nazi Condor Legion flying for General Franco destroyed the town
of Guernica, the historic capital of the Basque people in northern Spain. The first terroristic
bombing of a civilian population, the raid claimed thousands of innocent victims and
Immediately provoked an international outcry whose echoes have still not faded away. To
express his furious protest at this crime, Picasso turned to his art. Below, the smoke-
blackened ruins of Guernica.
nean mythology, centred on the figure of
the Minotaur which, needless to say, is
Picasso himself. He used this mythological
creature to tell us, in cryptic language, many
of the secrets of his personal and inner life.
Some of these secrets are to be found in the
engravings of the Suite Vollard. The great
Minotauromachy etching of 1935 (illustra¬
tion page 36) appears to constitute a syn¬
thesis of these developments in his work. In
that year the various matters that lay behind
the creation of this coded language finally
came to a head: he broke with his wife Olga
Koklova, and Maïa, the daughter of Marie-
Thérèse Walter, with whom he had been
maintaining clandestine relations since 1927,
was born.
Much nearer in time to the execution of
Guernica is a picture entitled Girls Playing by
the Sea (dated 12 February 1937). In it can
be seen the culmination of a process that
had begun some years before and consisted
of representing the human form in a manner
similar to bone-like structures. This
discovery, here in its full maturity, can be
regarded as the product of the coupling of
Cubism with Surrealism.
One of the problems with which Picasso
would grapple when he embarked on the
Guernica mural was the elimination of the
symbols which had previously formed the
basis of his artistic language. This was
necessary if he was to achieve a simpler,
more direct approach to nature and to feel
untrammelled in face of the tragedy which
he now proposed to represent.
Another question should be asked at this
point. Why did Picasso turn towards the
past at this crucial moment, instead of
creating a new style or method for his art?
Why did he not cast his inspiration in an en¬
tirely new mould, as he had already done so
many times before, either because of a
woman or because of an event that had af¬
fected him? To my mind, the answer con¬
firms the hypothesis that ethical motivations
outweighed aesthetic considerations. The
sense of indignation which overcame
Picasso at this time was too intense to allow
him to think in terms of style or to indulge in
meditations on aesthetics. The case of Guer¬
nica presents the problem of artistic com¬
mitment and committed art with a depth
and authenticity which it would be vain to
seek elsewhere. Picasso's attitude and the
painting itself provide an unequivocal
answer to this problem.
However, Picasso was still wrapped up in
the symbols through which he had express¬
ed his personality, for the sketches which he
began on 1 May still bear the marks of that
allusive language of which he would only
divest himself gradually and not without dif¬
ficulty. This struggle is visible in the contrast
between the bull and the horse, by which he
had initially wished to represent the Spanish
people and Fascism respectively.
In fact the horse is the only really prob¬
lematical figure; it is depicted either in a
comic or deliberately childish language, or
with an antipathetic and repulsive expres¬
sion, or else in its simplest form. Then came i
a moment when a tragic depiction of a J
15

f <î>
o.
A
/min ii
['
¡«ffiTVÎ
ra> §
Guernica, 1937. Oil on canvas, 349.3x776.6 cm. In the 1940s Picasso's vast mural was loaned,
with the artist's consent, to the New York Museum of Modern Art. But Picasso said on
several occasions that its natural home would be a Spain which had regained its democratic
freedoms. Now that these have been restored, Guernica's long exile can be brought to an
end. Early in 1981, one of the most famous paintings of our time will be moved, in
accordance with its creator's wish, to the Prado Museum in Madrid, where Picasso first
came to know the work of the great Spanish masters in the closing years of the 19th
century. There it will be exhibited with Picasso's dozens of preparatory studies and
sketches, as well as the "postscripts" which he drew later.
> horse, harking back to his youth, forced
itself upon him and supplanted his previous
projects which were not in tune with the
tragic subject. Picasso now banished sym¬
bols and produced figures that were naked
and unadorned. After all, the bull and the
horse, two animals familiar to all the people
of Spain, would be important figures in the
painting.
Even so, the preliminary sketches do not
present us with the ultimate features of the
canvas. Even sketch No. 15, dated 9 May,
which is the closest to the final structure of
16
the painting, gives no idea of the amalgam
of styles that would appear in the finished
work.
Accordingly, the mural when completed
differed from the preliminary sketches not
only because of its size (it measures 349.3
by 776.6 cm.), its proportions (the first
sketches were almost square), or the
medium of expression, but because once
Picasso stood before the canvas he assumed
his responsibilities, and became aware of
the gravity of the commission he had ac¬
cepted almost as a self-imposed challenge.
In its first stage, as we know from a
photograph taken by Dora Maar, the picture
was a vast drawing, much larger than the
previous sketches. Although it was done
with a brush it was, nevertheless, a drawing.
At this point Picasso performed a feat of
magic, summoning up his entire past as a
painter and applying it to the needs of the
moment. It might be thought that by reac¬
ting in this way he was not only failing to
create a new style but was actually
retrogressing.
In my opinion his attitude was significant
on two counts. Picasso's past was a
glorious one which had been crowned by
many victories (the Blue Period, the Rose
Period, Cubism, the papiers collés, Curvism,
and so on). He wished to give the best of
himself to the cause he was defending, and
the best he had to offer in compensation for
the holocaust of Guernica was his past as a
painter.
At this time of trial, Picasso mobilized
himself and became a soldier; as a con¬
sequence his art became totally committed.

F
j^><
cy
^>
ß
^
and his past, which had merely seemed to
be of aesthetic significance, became com¬
mitted to the present and assumed a moral
value. But this act of commitment was freely
made.
It is clear that had his previous stages of
development not existed and had they not
been the fruit of complete freedom, then
Guernica could never have come to fruition.
Not only are the problems of freedom and of
artistic commitment not contradictory; they
illuminate and support each other.
And so Picasso, through a feat almost
worthy of a magician or a demi-god, suc¬
ceeded in combining in Guernica both
realistic features, elements from his Blue
Period (which appear in the early sketches
drawn on blue paper but which, like the
Rose Period, would eventually be reduced
to a single evocative patch) and his most re¬
cent experiments in Surrealism and naive
art. Cubism and flat perspectiveless painting
are the two features which most clearly give
the work its overall unity.
Picasso abandoned the contrast between
the bull and the horse, and all the figures in
the finished work share a common
fate that of victims. However, the other
factor in the drama which had initially been
earmarked for the horse did not disappear
from the picture; it actually came to pervade
the spectacle which unfolds on the canvas
before our eyes.
For if we analyse Guernica in plastic
terms, we see that the picture is closed at
the bottom, confined at the sides, and open
at the top. Almost all the elements in the
composition contribute to the creation in
one form or another, of a large number of
gaps or openings towards the top: the bull's
horns and tail, the arms of the falling
woman, the horse's neighing, the woman
with the oil lamp.
The effect of all these elements is to give
the picture a second centre of gravity
situated outside the canvas itself, in the
place which we know to be the origin of
what is happening, the place where the air¬
craft responsible for the havoc we are
witnessing are concealed from sight. In this
sense the mural can be said to rise higher
and higher and, while it is actually rec¬
tangular in shape, its physical proportions
are psychologically counterbalanced and
even transcended by the composition's up¬
ward thrust.
An equally important mystery also calls
for explanation. How did Picasso manage to
create harmony and even a sense of unity
out of such disparate elements as realism.
Cubism, Surrealism, Curvism and papiers
collés? How is it that such a varied mixture
of styles did not result in a chaotic
monstrosity? To my mind the answer is that
Picasso's passion, the inner flame of his in¬
spiration, succeeded in fusing disparate or
even antagonistic features in much the same
way as fire at very high temperatures melts
together the most diverse materials.
It is impossible to conclude this brief
analysis of the gestation and plastic qualities
of Guernica without referring to its striking w
relevance to modern life which, in my opi- t
17

nion, makes it an even more impressive
work of art.
Sketch No. 15 of 9 May, which I believe to
be the most highly developed, as well as
Dora MaaKs photos of the first two stages
of the painting, clearly show that Picasso
originally intended to include in it an uprais¬
ed arm with a clenched fist. That fist was
significant. It meant that there would be no
divine forgiveness for what was happening
in the painting; it was an appeal for God to
take vengeance. When he painted out the
fist, Picasso did away with the idea of
vengeance and I think he did so consciously
and deliberately. In this way the work
became a cry of despair voiced by those
who were suffering the consequences of a
barbarous and unjust act of destruction; it
became Picasso's quejio, or lamentation.
Some features of the painting, the many
despairing cries which echo through it, are
the expression in plastic terms of the heart¬
rending, long-drawn-out notes of typical
Andalusian music. As I see it, Guernica is
Picasso's cante jondo, the "deep song" of
Andalusian tradition. All that was most
deeply held in the artist's cultural
background reaching back not only to his
childhood but beyond, to the times of his
ancestors rose to the surface and merged
with his past as a painter.
JOSEP PALAU I FABRE, Spanish poet,
essayist, dramatist and historian of art, was a per¬
sonal friend of Picasso, about whom he has
published several works including Vidas de
Picasso ("Picasso's Lives"), El "Gernika" de
Picasso ("Picasso's Guernica'7 anda monumen¬
tal study on the artisfs early life and work,
Picasso Vivo 1881-1907. The article published
here is a hitherto unpublished version of a paper
presented to a congress on Picasso held in the
summer of 1980 at the International University of
Santander (Spain).
I have always thought that Picasso's
work, taken as a whole, is the most
representative expression of twentieth-
century man because it englobes so many
different styles and periods, each linked to a
different form of humanity. In the modern
world people everywhere know that there
are others whose beliefs, ways of life, rites,
customs, speech, colour, and other
characteristics are different from their own.
There are only two ways of settling the
problems arising from such diversity. If each
person believes that he alone is right and
everyone else is wrong, then the outcome
must be incessant strife. The alternative is
the way of tolerance and mutual under¬
standing, based on an acceptance of the
fact that other people's ways of life are as
valid as our own, and that had we been born
in some other place or in different cir¬
cumstances then our beliefs and scales of
values might have been the same as those of
people whom we look upon as enemies or
antagonists. I believe that Picasso's work is
a response to this diversity and that as far as
possible it embodies human differences and
contradictions.
Since Guernica is clearly a summing up of
Picasso's past as an artist, the diversity of
styles and periods which it displays is a
lesson that the most diverse and an¬
tagonistic ways can coexist and shape each
other. Guernica is therefore not only a war
picture: it is a picture that preaches human
coexistence. And bearing in mind the
creative process which produced it, its
message seems to be that such coexistence
can only be achieved by deploying the same
strength and passion with which Picasso
achieved a coherent work of art. The name
of that passion is love, for it was love for
those who had suffered, for those who had
been so brutally destroyed, that drove him
to paint his most immortal work. H

