UNRWA and Unesco:
a thirty-year partnership
A comprehensive education service
for Palestine refugees
by Hussein Husnu Feridun
AUGUST 1980 will mark the 30th
anniversary of a unique internatio¬
nal co-operative effort in educa¬
tion. In August 1950, Unesco entered into a
partnership with UNRWA, the United Na¬
tions Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, to provide educa¬
tion services for a people who had been the
victims of a situation which reduced them to
the state of refugees.
During the Palestine conflict t of 1948,
some 750,000 Palestine Arabs fled 'from their
homes and lands and sought refuge in parts
of Palestine which had not been proclaimed
as Israel the Gaza Strip and on the West
Bank of the River Jordan or in neighbour¬
ing Arab countries (Jordan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Lebanon).
This exodus has had far-reaching con¬
sequences over the years. It has compelled
Palestinians to transform their way of life.
Until 1948 some two-thirds of the in¬
habitants of Palestine made their living from
agriculture; today, as refugees, they have
become a more diversified community. For
them the education and professional
achievement of their children represent not
only a vital practical necessity but also a
form of moral support and a source of pride,
the pride of a people who have little else.
The sudden arrival of some hundreds of
thousands of refugees in the neighbouring
Arab countries during 1948-49 created so
many urgent relief problems (food, shelter,
health care) that, at first, only the most im¬
mediate and elementary needs could be
met.
Nevertheless, .although provision for
education was not formally part of the pro¬
gramme of the then United Nations Relief
for Palestine Refugees (UNRPR), efforts
were made in the winter of 1948-49 to pro¬
vide some welfare and educational
assistance to the children among the
refugees. International voluntary and
religious organizations served as the
operating agencies for UNRPR in the field of
education, and with funds from Unesco to
the amount of $38,000 in 1949, the first
classes for refugee children began in the
camps. In some instances, the refugees
themselves made the initial moveteachers
who took charge of children they knew and
could collect together; sheikhs who gave
readings from the Koran, and so on. The
very first classes were held in the open air,
without desks, blackboards, copy books or
pencils. However, by 1 May 1950, 64 such
schools had been established, employing
730 teachers and providing elementary
education for 33,631 children, in the propor¬
tion of about three boys to one girl.
On 8 December 1949, the General
Assembly established the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
thus took over from UNRPR as from 1 May
1950.
Again in 1950, following an appeal
launched by the UN General Assembly,
Unesco undertook activities on behalf of the
Palestine refugees in the Near East. An
agreement was signed betwen the
Commissioner-General of UNRWA and the
Director-General of Unesco. Under the
terms of this agreement, which was
renewable every two years, Unesco assum¬
ed technical responsibility for the educa¬
tional services to be provided by UNRWA
for the children of registered Palestine
refugees. This marked the birth of the
UNRWA/Unesco Education Programme for
the Palestine Arab refugees.
From the first UNRWA/Unesco agree¬
ment in 1950-51, the emphasis of the
Unesco contribution and participation has
been on technical guidance and direction of
the refugee education programme.
Recommendations of the UNRWA/
Unesco Department of Education on educa¬
tion matters have been crucial over the past
thirty years in the formulation of policies and
the development of programmes for
Palestine Arab refugee education. Each new
step in the development of the education
programme can usually be traced back to a
Unesco source.
To give practical effect and proper
technical direction to the programme,
Unesco has made itself reponsible for
seconding appropriate experts to UNRWA,
and paying their salaries, for varying periods
of service. In a certain way, Unesco
assistance to UNRWA has been unique.
Unesco experts are usually provided as ad¬
visers or consultants to governments and in¬
stitutions; but in the UNRWA context, the
Unesco experts are executors and super¬
visors as well as advisers or consultants.
Special reference must be made to
Unesco's efforts towards solving the text¬
book problem for UNRWA's schools in the
occupied territories of the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip, following the 1967
Arab/ Israeli war.
After June 1967, the Israeli occupation
authorities banned the use of most of the
textbooks in UNRWA/Unesco schools in
the occupied territories on the grounds that
they incited hatred. UNRWA referred the
matter to the Director-General of Unesco
and it has occupied the attention of the
Unesco Executive Board at various sessions
from the seventy-seventh, in November
1967, to the present.
On the basis of Executive Board deci¬
sions, the Director-General has been engag¬
ed in taking action towards resolving the
textbook problem. Textbooks for the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip approved by the
Director-General of Unesco are subject to
the further requirement of a special import
permit from the Israeli authorities. As a
result, on 1 April 1980, there were 28 text¬
books which had been approved by Unesco
but refused import permits by the occupa¬
tion authorities into the West Bank and
Gaza Strip.
Another important activity by Unesco was
the organization in August 1969 with the
collaboration of the Egyptian and Israeli
authorities, of the Egyptian secondary
school leaving certificate examinations for
some 7,000 boys and girls (the majority of
whom are refugees) in the Gaza Strip. The
hostilities of June 1967 had halted this Egyp¬
tian State examination in Gaza, and con¬
sequently thousands of young people who
had completed their secondary education
were being denied the opportunity to qualify
for entry to higher level studies. The efforts
of Unesco were successful in solving this
crisis at the time. The holding of the ex¬
aminations under Unesco supervision in
Gaza was resumed from the summer of 1969
until 1979, when the Israeli authorities
ordered the Unesco team conducting these
examinations to leave the Strip.
Today, the education services provided by
the UNRWA/Unesco programme for
registered Palestine refugees are com¬
parable to a national system of education for
a population of nearly 1.8 million spread
over five fields of operation Lebanon, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Jordan and the
Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
They comprise elementary education,
preparatory (lower secondary) education, k
vocational education and teacher training )
HUSSEIN HUSNU FERIDUN, of Cyprus, is
director of the UNRWA/Unesco Department of
Education, based in Vienna. An expert on science
teaching, he is the author of several articles and
studies on the development of educational
systems.
31

Thirty years ago, when Unesco began working in
partnership with the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency (UNRWA) to provide education for Palestine
refugees, many classes (above) were held in the open air
or in improvised classrooms set up in tents, with rocks as
benches and the desert sands as "blackboards". Photo
below, taken in 1980, shows buildings of UNRWA-Unesco
educational facilities for the large Palestine refugee
community living in the Jabal-el-Nuzha area of Amman,
the capital of Jordan. Today there are 628 UNRWA-
Unesco schools attended by over 340,000 refugee pupils.
.(both pre-service and in-service). In addi¬
tion, through a system of financial grants-in-
aid and scholarships, the UNRWA/Unesco
Department of Education has been pro¬
viding assistance for refugee students at the
upper secondary level in government or
private schools and at Middle Eastern
universities and other higher educational in¬
stitutions.
Today the enrolment ratio of registered
Palestine refugee children for the age group
corresponding to the elementary cycle is
83.5% (about 232,000), and for the age
group corresponding to the preparatory cy¬
cle this ratio is 70.5% (about 100,000). The
percentage of girls in each of these cycles is
47.7% and 45.4% respectively. From the
age group 15-17, corresponding to the
secondary cycle, 40.4% are attending
UNRWA/Unesco post-preparatory voca¬
tional training centres (about 2,300) and

Left, student
pharmacists at an
UNRWA-Unesco centre
which provides
technical training for
young Palestine
refugees. Over 22,500
trainees have graduated
since the launching of
the UNRWA-Unesco
vocational and technical
training programme in
1953.
government and private secondary schools
(about 52,500). At post-secondary level
some 2,300 attend UNRWA/Unesco
technical and teacher training centres and
about 354 receive UNRWA fellowships to
attend higher educational institutions and
universities, mostly in the Arab States.
About 24% of the teaching force of 9,372
in the UNRWA/Unesco system are universi¬
ty graduates and of the total 43% are
women.
UNRWA/Unesco elementary and
preparatory schools have to follow the cur¬
riculum and textbooks prescribed by the
relevant Ministry of Education in the host
country where they are located. Although
this policy obliges the UNRWA/Unesco pro¬
gramme to operate four allied but different
systems of education with four curricula and
four sets of textbooks, it has the over¬
whelming advantage of permitting refugee
children in UNRWA/Unesco schools to take
State examinations at the end of each cycle,
and thus to qualify for upper secondary and
university education in the region on terms
of equal educational opportunity with the
local population.
The UNRWA/Unesco education system
provides six years of elementary and three
years of preparatory education (four in
Lebanon). When the education services
started in the 1950s many schools were ac¬
commodated in tents. Gradually these tents
were replaced by buildings specially con¬
structed for the purpose, though many
schools are still in unsuitable rented
premises. Today there are 628 administrative
school units which are accommodated in
423 buildings, through extensive double-
shifting. Of these buildings, 278 have been
constructed by UNRWA in the course of the
past 30 years.
The UNRWA/Unesco system operates
four teacher education centres: one in Jor¬
dan, one in Lebanon, and two in the West
Bank which take 50 per cent of their enrol¬
ment from the Gaza Strip. Total enrolment
capacity in the two-year courses at these
four teacher education centres is 740 men
and 620 women.
The programme is of two years' duration
and prepares teachers for the elementary cy¬
cle, with. some degree of specialization.
About six hundred teachers graduate from
the centres each year.
In the early years of UNRWA's existence
the vast majority of teachers in UNRWA/
Unesco schools had little experience and no
professional training.
In 1963, an estimated 90 per cent of the
UNRWA/Unesco school teachers were still
professionally unqualified, which was a ma¬
jor obstacle in the way of developing a
satisfactory education programme. The
UNRWA/Unesco Department of Education
recognized that an innovative approach to
teacher training was needed, and the UNR¬
WA/Unesco Institute of Education, a
specialized institution for in-service training
which has focussed on introducing modern
teaching methods throughout the UNR¬
WA/Unesco education programme, was
created and began operating in 1964, with
the aim of improving the quality of educa¬
tion in UNRWA/Unesco schools.
In the first stage of its operation, the In¬
stitute devoted most of its efforts to the up¬
grading of professionally unqualified
elementary school teachers. Later, in-
service courses were organized for
preparatory school teachers. With the
decline in the number of unqualified
teachers in UNRWA/Unesco schools, it was
possible to diversify the activities of the
Institute.
The UNRWA/Unesco vocational and
technical training programme provides op¬
portunities for young refugee men and
women, thereby augmenting the supply of
craftsmen for the developing Arab world,
craftsmen with the skills that are essential to
the progress of the area.
It dates from 1953/1954 when the Kalan-
dia (West Bank) and Gaza vocational train¬
ing centres were established for Palestine
refugees with a capacity of fewer than 400
trainees. Today there are seven UNR¬
WA/Unesco training centres, altogether of¬
fering about 40 different trade and technical
courses for post-preparatory and post-
secondary school graduates. The total train¬
ing capacity is 3,436 (including around 500
women). With the exception of a few one-
year courses, the courses cover two years.
Some 1,750 male and female trainees now
graduate from these vocational training
courses annually. More than 22,500 have
graduated since the training programme
began in 1953. Most of them work in the
Middle East.
Employment opportunities for vocational
training graduates in UNRWA's area of
operations and in the neighbouring Arab
States continue to exceed the output from
the UNRWA/Unesco training centres. At
the same time, applications from suitably
qualified Palestine refugees to join the train¬
ing centres greatly surpass the number of
places available. Already, to derive max¬
imum use of the training facilities, many
courses are operated on double-shifts.
Recently, funds to the extent of $2.5
millions have been made available by the
OPEC Special Fund which will be used to
expand the centres' capacities through
enlarging the existing facilities by providing
a wider range of current courses and exten¬
ding the double-shift arrangement.
It is obvious that the UNRWA/Unesco
Department of Education provides the
registered Palestine refugees with essential
educational services. Less obvious, but
perhaps equally important, is that the
educational system has significantly con¬
tributed to the preservation of the cultural
identity of a displaced and dispersed people.
The achievement of both objectives is an in¬
creasingly arduous task in a rapidly chang¬
ing world and in a political climate ag¬
gravated by recurring crises. The system is
correspondingly dynamic and in need of
continuously increasing support in order
that its immediate and long-term objectives
can be met.
Unfortunately, as has happened all too
frequently in the past, the programme is at
present threatened with serious cut-backs
unless UNRWA's cash deficit of over $56
million for 1980 can be bridged. Out of this
huge deficit, savings of about $16 million
will need to be made in the school pro¬
gramme unless additional funds are received
from the international community.
It is paradoxical that this programme, the
largest single and longest lasting United Na¬
tions co-operative enterprise in the field of
education, may have to be drastically curtail¬
ed or wiped out because of lack of funds.
Hussein Husnu Feridun
33
