WOMEN ARE HUMAN BEINGS
"The emancipation of women is only part and parcel of the
emancipation of society as a whole. I don't find the
emancipation of women (if it is possible) sufficient in itself. I
would remove all kinds of oppression, whether of men or
women or social classes. But women must learn theory if they
are to advance. Do you know what women lack most? The
knowledge, the deep-rooted knowledge and conviction, that they
are human beings."
44-year-old Egyptian writer and playwright
WOMEN PREPARE THE FUTURE
"I would educate women more than men. Women bear and
raise the children so women prepare the future. How can the
future be good if women are ignorant?"
Semiliterate Zapotee Indian woman
TO BE BORN A WOMAN IS A SIN
"I would rather have been a man; to be born a woman is a sin.
To be born a man is a privilege. Those who have done good
things or have not done bad things will have an opportunity
to be born men. If men's and women's education is equal, there
are no differences, reallyI know that whatever a man can do, a
woman can do also but it is still a privilege to be born a man."
45-year-old Sri Lankan woman
A BIT OF AN EXCEPTION
"In Tunisia, I think I am considered a bit of an exception. My
parents and my children feel this when they compare me to
other mothers. My husband is very active; so am I. My children
objected when I accepted the position of president of the
Women's Union. They had had enough. They thought we were
both too politically- minded, too active. My children would like
to keep me as a mother. When I read the newspaper at the table
they say, 'That's the end. We've had it. Y.ou have become just
like our father'.
President of the National Union of Tunisian Women
A NATIONAL HERO
"Do you know what I would choose for a statue of a national
hero in this country? The working woman. The working woman
is the national hero because she goes to school and then goes to
a university and graduates. She works too takes a job. She
works exactly like a man. Even in the fields, the peasant woman
works beside the husband, seven hours a day at hard work.
Then she goes home and is required to play the role of
housewife 100 per cent cooking, cleaning, washing, caring for
the children. A woman does two major jobs, which no man
would ever be able to do."
Woman director of an Egyptian publishing house
SO MANY THINGS TO DO
"Women, you know, have more talents for doing things than
men. It's only that men's talents are better recognized because
they only concentrate on a few things. Women have got so many
things to do that nobody ever looks at how many things they
do. If I had a chance to learn something, I would like to learn
how to help people. I would like to be a nurse".
17-year-old Kenyan villager
© Magnum, Paris
18

Women speak
A CERTAIN NUMBER OF EGGS TO LAY
"My husband used to say that it isn't normal to avoid a life that
you are destined to have. He said that if I had been given a
potential to bear a certain number of children, it was necessary
to bring them into the world. He said I didn't have the right to
prevent itthat I was like a chicken with a certain number of
eggs to lay, and that I had to lay them. He said it would be a sin
not to. My husband at first didn't know that I had a
contraceptive device. I didn't want any more children. My health
wouldn't stand it. Now he agrees because they talk about it on
the radio."
Tunisian nomad woman with ten children
WHAT A PITY YOU DID NOT HAVE A SON
"I was an only child, and a girl. In a Sri Lankan family, that is
a sad thing for a father. Right in front of me people would say.
to my father, 'What a pity you did not have a son'. I don't
know for what reason, but I think my father always believed
that women should be emancipated. For example, he was against
the dowry. He even brought a motion against the dowry system
in parliament in 1936. But the motion was defeated. He had
modern ideas, and he always pushed me on. He treated me as if
I were a boy. He pushed me on from one class to another, and I
would say, 'Oh, that's enough. I'm a mere girl. How can I pass
that examination?' But he would say, 'Go on, go on'. He'd take
me somewhere and say 'This is my daughter. She's in school and
she's done this and that', and I would feel embarrassed and
ashamed. My father influenced me very much."
Famous Sri Lankan political scientist
WOMEN ARE VERY COURAGEOUS
"You know, women are very courageous just like men. We
have women leaders who step right up, give .speeches or lead
demonstrations. If our women see this, it will encourage them. It
will make them feel that, after all, we are not still in the past."
Sudanese social welfare worker
THE LAST WORD.
.FROM A MAN
"The reason men don't want to have women in authority is
because they don't want women giving them orders. They are
accustomed to giving orders themselves, and they don't want
women doing it. That's very clear. But I wish a woman would
get elected mayor of this town. The men haven't done any good.
All they do is get drunk. We should give women a chance to see
if they can do better".
Mexican Indian husband
Ins from Third WdffíTWomen Speak Out by Perdita* Huston
© Praeger Publishers, New York, and the Overseas Development Council
19
