Latin America:
a twofold servitude?
by Lourdes Arizpe
ANY social change, any evolution in established ways of
thinking, brings its attendant dangers. The past refuses to
die and intermingles with the present.
We Latin Americans possess what the Spanish writer Miguel de
Unamuno (1864-1936) called, in connexion with Spanish culture,
"the tragic sense of life". For a woman life is "a vale of tears", a
tragedy which can only be coped with if it is stoically accepted.
Anyone who needs convincing of this has only to listen to the
peasant women of Mexico, Colombia and Guatemala, or the women
of the shanty-towns and tenements of Caracas, Monterrey and Rio.
For them, life on earth is a matter of husband, children, pain and suf¬
fering; everything happens because it is "God's will". They have
every reason to think like this, since they possess no powers of deci¬
sion over their bodies, over their lives, over the lives of their children
and husbands, and over their community. Fatalism and lamentation
go hand in hand.
According to another analysis, Latin America suffers from the ef¬
fects of an economic and social system in which it is bound, on un¬
equal terms, to the great industrialized centres; meanwhile, this state
of dependence is exacerbated by the persistence of class interests
and internal ideological pressures. It would be wrong to say that
women's role in this process has been a marginal one; on the con¬
trary, it is their essential (though invisible) contribution to the
economy, their political passivity and their attitude of extreme
resignation which allow the situation to continue. And certain in¬
terests would like to preserve the advantages Which clearly stem
from the exploitation and oppression of women.
Our struggle has a single goal: to establish societies based neither
on injustice nor on exploitation. In dependent market economies
which create a pool of surplus labour, the occupational structure is
such that no salaried employment can be provided for women. Con¬
sequently, governments seek to encourage big families even if this
means a drop in living standards, with more people depending on a
single breadwinner. The woman's unpaid housework makes up for
the man's low wages. When even this arrangement is inadequate for
the maintenance of the family unit, the woman carries out a "double
work-day", usually finding ill-paid and unproductive casual work.
At this point the discussion about the family becomes more com¬
plex. Can we really destroy the family? Even in a socialist society like
that of Cuba, productive forces have not yet developed to the stage
which would permit the complete socialization of household work.
The first question to be asked is whether the double work-day in the
socialist countries (and in such countries as the United States where
more and more women are in paid employment) is an improvement
or a twofold servitude. In our countries, the fact that women remain
within the family sphere mitigates the very high levels of visible
unemployment and underemployment, but at what psychological
cost? Is the price not male chauvinism and its female counterpart, in
other words a man who needs to feel he dominates the situation in
face of a woman who will do all in her power not to lose him, since
without him she could not survive economically?
At the same time we need to analyse why Latin American women
feel less urgency than their European and North American sisters
when it comes to fighting for their emancipation. A key factor which
has been insufficiently studied is the existence of a pool of cheap
domestic labour which frees middle class women from the double
work-day and from the onus of looking after their children. I also
believe that another element in the situation is the fact that Catholic
Latin culture apportions to women two major spheres of influence.
Photo © Ken Heyman,
"For Latin American women life is 'a vale of tears'... a
matter of husband, children, pain and suffering;
everything happens because it is 'God's will'. They have
every reason to think like this since they possess no
powers df decision over their bodies, over their lives, over
the lives of their children and husbands, and over their
community. Fatalism and lamentation go hand in hand.'
the family and the Church, in which they compensate for their
marginal position in political life. If this analysis is correct, the
feminists' insistence on giving women control over their body (by
limiting the birth-rate through contraception and abortion) and their
critique of the family would actually militate against the power of
women in Latin America. Seen from this standpoint, feminism
would weaken the position of women instead of liberating them,
confirming the belief of some Marxists that feminism is a strategy of
advanced capitalism designed to liberate working men and women
from family tasks.
If these processes are inevitable, it follows that instead of vainly
trying to hang on to privileges which history has accorded them and
is now taking away, Latin American women should not fear change
but should devise strategies which would enable them to find new
ways to participate in the political and economic life of tomorrow's
societies. And so it is vital for them to understand the experiences of
women both in the capitalist industrialized countries and in the
socialist countries. It is wrong to think that the conditions in which
these women live are of no concern to us. They do concern us
because they hold out the hope of possible alternatives for the
future. We possess the great historic opportunity of being able to
anticipate these changes and to channel them for our own benefit
and for the benefit of our society.
LOURDES ARIZPE, Mexican sociologist, teaches at the College of Mexico
in Mexico City. The text published here is adapted from a paper prepared for
the First Mexican-Central-American Symposium on Women's Studies, held
in Mexico City in November 1977.
34
