The secret of the stars
by Ahmed Siiheyl Unver
IN the 11th century a Turkish ruler who
was known only by the name of
Giyaseddin, wondered why stars are
visible at night and not during the day.
Some of the learned men of the time offered
him the explanation that during the daytime
the more intense sunlight overshadowed the
light cast by the stars, whereas at night,
after the setting of the sun, stars once more
became visible. This answer was then com¬
pared by the ruler with another explanation
given by a smaller group of learned men. Ac¬
cording to their answer to Giyaseddin's in¬
quiry, the intensity of starlight is diminished
during the daytime; because of this, light
cannot penetrate into the depths of heaven.
Giyaseddin, the ruler, who viewed these
answers critically, asked of Avicenna: "How
can sunlight vanish from the semi-spherical
heaven? That sunlight can be completely
screened from heaven at any time of the day
is not possible since it is known that the
world which comes in between the sun and
the semi-spherical heaven is not so large as
the sun itself. The world can prevent the
sun's rays from falling on a part of heaven
AHMED SUHEIL UNVER, of Turkey, is a mem¬
ber of the Turkish Historical Institute anda former
professor at the Faculty of Medicine and the Aca¬
demy of Fine Arts at Istanbul. The founder of the
Istanbul Institute of Medicine, he has published a
number of studies on Avicenna as well as works
on Turkish miniatures, calligraphy and painting.
that is equal only to its own size. But since
the sun is many times larger than the world,
the part of heaven that is screened from the
sun's rays at any time will be very small in
relation to the world and even much smaller
in relation to the sun."
Avicenna, too, was not convinced of the
validity of the explanation offered by his col¬
leagues. Indeed, no one ventured further in
solving this important problem than the ex¬
planations cited above.
Avicenna offered the following explana¬
tion: it is true that at night the sun's rays are
transmitted to this end of Space. Space, like
air is transparent. Transparent substances
possess two important properties: one is
that they are not luminous but transmit
light; they are not brightened themselves.
The second property is that they do not
obstruct the path of vision. During the day
the sun which is above the horizon brightens
the foreign components in air, such as dust
and vapour. These components, which of
themselves are not transparent appear
bright on account of light rays falling on
them from other sources. Thus during the
daytime our surroundings appear bright and
the stars become invisible. This is easily
proved when at night the visibility of stars in
the light of a flame becomes diminished.
By this explanation, it becomes evident
that Avicenna has satisfactorily attributed
the solution of the present problem to the
effect of the diffusion of light.
0 Vault of Heaven, 0 Firmament,
In the name of the Creator, tel me.
Do you spin above us by your own design?
Or are you by another's power constrained
To eternal movement?
For mortal man you are Infinity;
Perplexed we wonder within what frame
Your revolutions are set. Can it be
That for you a greater Infinite exists?
Are you the haven to which souls return?
Or do they perish with our mortal coil?
The Sun that you uphold
Shoots out its rays
As though from the feathers
Of a great bird's wing.
But the Milky Way!
Is it a billow in the ocean of the sky?
Or is it the image of a sword
Reflected in a burnished breastplate?
The crescent Moon? Is it a pendant
On the necklace of the Stars
Shining through the night obscure?
Or is it a bracelet on an unknown hand?
The Stars? Are they encrusted pearls?
Or foaming bubbles crowning mighty waves
Whose weaving patterns by the night revealed
Uke some great sail, when daylight comes.
Are folded carefully away?
¡Extract from a poem by Avicenna)
45
