SEX STEREOTYPES
IN THE CLASSROOM
by Fay E. Saunders
IN most countries, parents, educators
and the public at large would protest
at the suggestion that discrimination
and inequalities exist between the sexes in
respect of educational opportunities. It is
still, in fact, too often held that there have
always been and always will be particular
and specific roles for men and women in the
organization of any society. They might add
that education should prepare young people
for these roles.
A closer look at what actually occurs in
the upbringing and education of children in
the majority of countries reveals that
organizational barriers have in fact been
removed in many places in recent times at
various levels of the formal educational pro¬
cess but that this is not true of the attitudinal
barriers. Certain attitudes die hard among
most of those on whom rests responsibility
for preparing the young to contribute to
FAY E. SAUNDERS, Jamaican educator, has
been Parliamentary Secretary to her country's
Ministry of Education, President of the Jamaica
Teachers' Association, and Vice-President of the
World Confederation of Organizations of the
Teaching Profession.
society while providing them with the best
and widest opportunities for personal
development and realization of individual
potential.
Although much progress has been made
in many countries, the achievements have
not perhaps been as marked as they could
have been because of the great influence ex¬
ercised in the child's education by the home
and community. It is in the home that the in¬
culcation of ideas about sex roles is so effec¬
tive and therefore, even before children ar¬
rive at school, they have a clear appreciation
of the role they will play in the scheme of
things.
This subtle but very lasting influence con¬
tinues after they enter school and plays an
ongoing role in their development.
And from their earliest experiences at
school, the role learnt so well at home is
continually reinforced, often unconsciously
perhaps, by much of what takes place at
school.
Perhaps the most marked examples of
discriminatory practices and unequal oppor- |
tunities are to be found in some developing I
33

N~
^.^^
~»^as"gffl*
«
^ '*lhef
*
> countries where few provisions for educa¬
tion for girls exist at any level at all. In 1976,
it was estimated on the basis of United
Nations population statistics that 79 per cent
of the 712 million girls in the world under 15
years of age were to be found in the
developing countries. Of these, the majority
live in rural areas where the problem of eking
out an existence forces most families to re¬
tain girls in the home to perform the
household chores and this occupies the
greater portion of their time.
In addition, time for education is not con¬
sidered necessary since women are tradi¬
tionally seen as "producers of food as well
as life-givers". As a result, very few girls
have access to education or skill-training. In¬
deed, a United Nations report states that
agricultural training for girls as compared
with boys was in the ratio 14:86 although
women make up one-third to one-half of the
world's agricultural labour force.
Even in countries where educational op¬
portunities do not present a problem, the old
idea of giving education to the boy rather
than the girl, if it comes to a choice, dies
hard. This is the case in some countries of
Africa where the burden of maintaining the
family, particularly in rural areas, continues
to rest very heavily on the women and girls.
Indeed, in spite of tremendous progress
made in providing education com¬
pulsory education in places such as
Nigeria and Kenya, the percentage of
children admitted into primary schools con¬
tinues to be low and the higher the grade the
lower the proportion of girls.
Enrolment patterns for the 6 to 11 -year-
old group show that in 1975 in many
34
developing countries (22 in Africa, 2 in Latin
America, 7 in Asia) fewer than half of the
children were enrolled in school. The picture
as regards enrolment of girls was even more
dismal, with 41 developing countries enroll¬
ing fewer than half the girls in this age
group. In fact, in 1975, there were 30 million
more boys than girls aged 6 to 1 1 enrolled in
school.
Within recent years, more and more anx¬
iety has been expressed, especially by
teachers and women, that the formal pro¬
cess of education should be reorganized in
such a way as to provide experiences at all
levels for boys and girls, based on genuine
choice in which the only criteria are interest,
ability and the will to succeed. No society
can any longer justify, on the basis of tradi¬
tional sex roles alone, the failure to provide
opportunities for the full development of all
its members.
It is worth noting that changes are taking
place, in real terms, in a wide variety of ways
and at different rates, depending partly on
the milieux and partly on the disposition of
parents, pupils, teachers and society at large
to acknowledge that inequalities do exist
and that it will be to the benefit of all con¬
cerned if changes, properly identified, are in
fact implemented.
Some of the most far-reaching changes
are taking place in the developing world.
This may be attributable, in part, to the
desire of such countries to divest them¬
selves of as many practices as possible
which are considered to be related to their
former colonial status. In addition, it is ob¬
vious that their extensive development plans
are geared to the full training and use of all
their human resources. For example, in
Singapore, teachers report that:
Girls... are not excluded from technical
and science subjects. In fact, their atten¬
dance and performance in technical
workshops on basic electricity, metalwork
and woodwork are compulsory in the
lower secondary classes. The girls are
never automatically channelled into
courses with domestic science subjects.
In certain schools, boys are encouraged
to become members of a special home
economics society for boys.

At the tertiary level also, young women
frequently choose courses in practical elec¬
tronics (e.g. television and radio repairs) to
the extent that it is not unusual for the pro¬
portion of women in such courses to exceed
that of men. On the other hand, in Sweden,
a country long recognized as being in the
vanguard of positive action for sexual
equality "not all parents are happy about
their boys baking cakes."
A major factor in the perpetuation of
discriminatory practices in several places is
the fact that some of those most influential
in effecting changes are unaware of how
deeply engrained are their own ideas of the
traditional sex roles and expectations.
Hence, while they openly deplore such prac¬
tices, they themselves unconsciously con¬
tinue to inculcate the very things they claim
to abhor.
One teacher-leader from a developing
country, who is very sensitive to the "rem¬
nants of male chauvinism" in her culture, in¬
sists that "discrimination between sexes
with respect to the objectives and contents
of education is no longer found, except that
the curriculum... includes such special sub¬
jects as are suited to women only, that is
sewing, cooking, etc."
Similarly, while many teachers in different
countries have been making vigorous at¬
tempts to remove needlework as a com¬
pulsory subject for girls at certain levels,
there are others who resolutely resist these
attempts.
It is probably in the area of the school cur¬
riculum, particularly at secondary level, that
the unequal opportunities offered to, and
provided for, boys and girls become most
evident and most widespread. The disad¬
vantages arising from this perhaps most af¬
fect girls. It is not sufficient to aspire to a
particular career or occupation if the
necessary academic foundation is lacking.
The consequent frustrations and disillu¬
sionment (especially when it is noted that
others have the necessary opportunities)
often result in a retreat to the traditional
role. Further, while we are not suggesting
that equal opportunities should be
synonymous with identical opportunities,
the common practice of deliberately plan¬
ning curricula solely on the basis of sex is a
direct violation of the concept of the right of
the individual to education. For unless
education is so designed as to fulfil the
needs and aspirations of the individual as
well as to provide the base for effective liv¬
ing in a society, the whole education exer¬
cise can be little more than a sham.
Freedom of choice should be the only fac¬
tor in determining educational programmes
once the individual has the ability and the
basic tools of learning, is knowledgeable
about the choice he or she is required to
make and is motivated in a particular direc¬
tion. Thus pupils who wish to follow the
traditional feminine or masculine orientation
should be free to do so just as they are free
to take different or even unorthodox direc¬
tions without being made to feel guilty or
inadequate.
In the majority of societies, the traditional
role determined for a boy from the earliest
stages is that of family breadwinner. The
education provided is, therefore, geared to
prepare him for this role. Schools guide him
in this direction and he is encouraged to pur¬
sue certain subjects which will provide the
foundation for higher and further education.
He soon discovers the specific qualifications
for which he must aim.
This is particularly the case at the secon¬
dary stage when he is expected to study
certain "boys' " subjects such as
mathematics and the sciences. In a survey
carried out by the Department of Education
and Science in England and Wales it was
recorded that at the fourth- and fifth-form
levels of secondary schools, 90 per cent of
the boys and 71 per cent of girls were of¬
fered physics as an option. Of these, 47 per
cent of the boys and 12 per cent of the girls
actually studied the subject. Similarly, 70 per
cent of the boys and 76 per cent of the girls
were offered the choice of chemistry with 27
per cent of the boys and 17 per cent of the
girls accepting the offer.
On the other hand tradition dictates that
girls should pursue subjects of a more
"feminine" or generally cultural nature.
This, it is argued, will better equip them for
their role as housewife, mother, helpmeet
and assistant. Hence, girls opt more fre¬
quently for such subjects as modern
languages, music and art. It is interesting to
note, furthermore, that even where girls are
not restricted in subject choice, they have
been so conditioned that many reject the
"boys' " subjects in order not to appear
"unfeminine" and possibly even, sub¬
consciously, to avoid competition with their
male counterparts.
There are other considerations, too,
which often limit choices where there mayP
Photo © Surakiat Kongyingyong, Thailand. Third Photo Contest in Asia
TRADITION'S HOMESPUN THREADS. In a
mountain village, a girl works at her
mother's feet. It is in the home and the
family that traditional ideas about manhood
and womanhood are transmitted to
children long before their schooldays.
35

( seem, at first glance, to be no curriculum
differences. In some countries, there are still
a number of single-sex educational institu¬
tions, both public and private. It is not un¬
common in such institutions to find fewer
facilities for certain subjects than in co¬
educational institutions.
In many girls' schools, provision for the
study of science and mathematics is not
as extensive as in co-educational or boys'
schools, whereas in boys' schools, modern
languages, music, drama and other cultural
pursuits receive less than adequate atten¬
tion. It is also worthy of note that funds and
facilities for physical education for boys, in
both single-sex and co-educational schools,
are usually much greater than those provid¬
ed for in girls' programmes. In addition, the
emphasis placed on organizing and projec¬
ting physical education activities for boys
can very readily be judged by the attention
given to this facet of school work in the
media in many countries.
36
Single-sex schools do, however, continue
to have a number of advocates even in
societies where equalization of social roles
between the sexes is at a very advanced
stage. It should also be recalled that in
places where strong religious traditions
prevail, such as are to be found among
Muslim people, girls either receive an educa¬
tion in single-sex schools or not at all.
Still, arguments stressing the harm which
single-sex schools can do to the functioning
of the individual in adult life continue to be
put forward ever more vigorously by several
groups, especially teachers and young
people themselves. That they are making an
impact is evident in as far as curriculum dif¬
ferences have lessened quite considerably in
an increasing number of countries.
It is also encouraging to note that greater
care is being taken in the preparation of
reading schemes at all stages, in an effort to
eliminate the marked sex differences which
were so typical, especially in the earlier years
of schooling. In addition, reports indicate
that many secondary schools are respon¬
ding favourably to changing attitudes on the
part of parents and employers and under
pressure from the young people themselves.
In developing countries, the need to make
the fullest use of all human resources has
probably been a very important factor in the
drive to overcome the severe shortage of
trained personnel. As a Nigerian specialist,
Pumla Kisosonkole, has written:
, The question is still being asked: what are
girls educated for? and, What should be
included in their education? There was a
time when it was believed that it was
enough for a girl to be educated to be a
homemaker, that is, a good wife and
mother. She was, therefore, subjected
and conditioned to a curriculum which
would result in a mass production of
homemakers. To a large extent, some
women still prefer the protected life of the
home, but grumble at the chores that the

Hems and seams
hold no mysteries for
this Swedish
schoolboy, but is he
interested in sewing
or in the functioning
of the sewing-
machine? Too often
schools tend to
accentuate the rift
between the sexes by
arranging their
syllabuses in
accordance with
preconceived ideas
about the roles of
men and women. In
some countries,
schools are
attempting to
counter the notion
that there are such
things as "boys'
subjects" and "girls'
subjects". The
attitudes of the
children themselves
in this respect is
largely determined by
the attitudes of the
society in
which they live.
role carries with it. On the other hand,
there is growing a levelling-up of interest,
with men wanting to be involved in the
preparation of their families. I have lived
to see in my own society, young fathers
looking after the baby and preparing the
family meals, whilst the young wife goes
to college to study for her degree.
Closely allied to the problems caused by
differing educational programmes between
the sexes is the matter of career and voca¬
tional guidance. First, it would seem that in¬
sufficient attention is given to this in many
school systems. Second, guidance is often
provided by persons whose attitudes and
traditional orientation to the world of work
perpetuate and extend the obvious ine¬
qualities and latent discriminations in the
curriculum.
It is fair to admit that in an increasing
number of countries, there have been ef¬
forts to furnish information about a wider
range of occupations for girls but the
tendency to underplay certain types of
careers for both boys and girls along restric¬
tive sex lines is still quite prevalent. There is
some evidence, too, that unduly early
specialization combined with a guidance
programme initiated at too late a stage tends
to result in the choice of a career normally
distinguished by a sexual stereotype. This
has been further reinforced by school
systems which make no effort to change the
status quo.
Further, the whole scope of guidance and
counselling programmes needs, in too many
places, to be seen in far wider terms, making
provision for young persons to develop
greater understanding and acceptance of
themselves and their capabilities. From this,
more realistic career goals can be set. It is
encouraging to note that there has been a
considerable development in this area of
school life and that, from all indications, the
tendency to present a more useful and wide-
ranging programme continues apace.
The efforts of schools could be greatly
assisted by employers who should be active¬
ly involved with the school and other com¬
munity groups in providing a better
understanding of the problems and of the
need for change in sex stereotyping as far as
employment is concerned.
It is obvious that teachers play one of the
most important roles in the full development
of the individual child. It is therefore, critical
in any consideration of how discrimination
operates within the school for their at¬
titudes, perceptions and expectations to be
examined as to the part played in differentia¬
tion processes. To recognize that these have
far-reaching effects is not to detract from
the contribution that the majority of
teachers make to the overall process of
education.
However, teachers, like all other human
beings, are the products of the societies in
which they have lived and reflect the condi¬
tioning inherent therein. It is, therefore, to
be expected that, unwittingly perhaps, they
pass on to their students the ideas and at¬
titudes which are a part of their make-up.
At the early stages of formal education,
the vast majority of teachers are women.
Thus, they are very likely to expect their girl
students to behave, learn and respond in
the manner which is second nature to
themselves. They also expect the boys to
respond and to show interest in the way
they have "known" that boys behave.
A study carried out among Canadian
secondary teachers revealed a "tendency for
teachers to use their own behaviour as the
norm for, their particular sex on the dimen¬
sions 'active-passive' and that these inter¬
nalized norms fit the socialized stereotypes
(male active and females passive)". Fur¬
ther, it was pointed out in the same study
that "teachers observe noticeable traditional
sex role differences in the class-room and
feel that students want to be treated
accordingly. This evidence suggests that
teachers may be shaping sex role behaviour
along traditional lines".
Thus teachers provide learning ex¬
periences in keeping with pre-determined
concepts. For example, boys are provided
with mechanical toys and girls with things
which pertain to a domestic role. The dif¬
ferentiation in treatment is even manifest in
what pupils are required to do around the
classroom and school.
A group of African teachers observed that
in some places, especially in rural areas, the
girls "are treated as if they were there to
serve the male students and teachers". Fur¬
ther, in order to ensure success for the boy
who is being prepared for higher studies and
for earning a living, the teacher devotes
more time and attention to him than to her
girl students.
It has also been observed that girls whose
scholastic achievements are comparable to
those of boys, are more likely to be influenc¬
ed by social pressures and are often diverted
from their goals because of misgivings and
lack of confidence resulting from teacher at¬
titudes. It also happens quite frequently,
whenever restrictions have to be made in the
provision of programmes or facilities for pro¬
grammes, that girls' programmes are the
first to be considered.
The discriminatory practices which are
due to teacher attitudes are those which will
be the most difficult to change. There are
those who believe that they will only disap¬
pear with time as societies themselves res¬
pond to change. While there is, of course,
validity in this argument, teachers can assist
in accelerating changes by recognizing their
need for reorientation and by being ready
to carry out their own personal self-
examination to ascertain how their attitudes
and perceptions are in fact determining the
development of their pupils.
It is to be hoped that action will then
follow to dissipate those attitudes which
may be having a less than desirable effect.
Teacher training institutions should also
make it an integral part of their programmes
to help students to appreciate this problem
and its implications and provide adequate
opportunities to overcome it during this vital
pre-service period of preparation.
H Fay E. Saunders
This article is adapted from a paper first published
in The Child's Right to Education, published by
Unesco, 1979
37
