Composition based on details from a
painting entitled "Children of Every Clime"
by the pupils of the Casa del Sole school,
Milan, Italy.
PAUL MORREN, of Belgium, is State Inspector
at the Ministry of Education and Dutch Culture in
Belgium. He has been editor, since its inception
in 1972, of the Dutch edition of the Unesco
Courier. The author of many books, articles,
radio and television scripts on human rights, he
was recently awarded the 1979 Unesco Prize
for the Teaching of Human Rights (seepage 34).
by Paul Morren
IN 1953 Unesco created tne Associated
Schools system as part of its pro¬
gramme of education for international
understanding and peace. Today over 1,600
institutions at every level, in almost eighty
countries, are involved. These Member in¬
stitutions are to be found in Africa, Asia,
Oceania, the Middle East, eastern and
western Europe, Latin America and North
America. Thus they are situated in regions
with widely different economic and social
systems, cultural traditions, levels of
development, and necessarily, educational L
systems. '
31

Each school is directly associated with the
activities of Unesco, whose education sec¬
tor has a special unit which handles the co¬
ordination of the system. Since 1961 this
unit has published a magazine. International
Understanding at School, in order to pro¬
vide a link with the Member schools.
The Associated Schools are selected by
authorities in the various countries-
National Commissions for Unesco, Minis¬
tries of Education, specially constituted
committees. Ideas are exchanged and plans
drawn up at seminars held in these countries
and attended by teachers, civil servants and
in some cases the pupils themselves.
Schools taking part in the programme lose
none of their autonomy. It is up to them to
decide, in the light of what is feasible and
the interest shown by pupils and teachers,
on the form their collaboration should take.
The main thing is that a new spirit should
infuse their everyday work and that the
Associated Schools should be innovating
institutions capable of exercising a lasting
influence on the entire educational system.
When the programme was launched,
Unesco proposed three subjects for study:
international organizations within the United
Nations family; human rights; and the cultu¬
res of other countries. These options were
not in any way exclusive, although most
schools decided to take one or other of
them, and a strong preference was shown
for the third (and undoubtedly the easiest)
choice.
The field is immense, and the scope for
dynamism and initiative is limitless. But
facile sermonizing and the preaching of sim¬
plistic propaganda are always ruled out. "If
the choice has to be made between truth
and international citizenship, then I'm for
truth", said one of the delegates at the first
meeting of the Associated Schools. The
transmission of tendentious, incomplete or
falsely optimistic information would be the
worst kind of disservice to education for
international understanding (or to any other
kind of education, for that matter).
Presenting the United Nations as the infal¬
lible solution to all political problems is not
the way to help young people to understand
the conflict-ridden situations on which their
security may depend. Shouting from the
rooftops that all men are brothers is not the
way to fight racism, prejudice and discrimi¬
nation. Vaunting the beauty of the Taj
Mahal is not the way to explain India and its
people, its achievements and its problems,
its international relations, its economy and
the meaning of its culture. Let us make no
mistake: we must talk about the United
Nations, put the accent on human solidarity
and pay tribute to outstanding achieve¬
ments, but critically and within a broad
context.
As I see it, education for international
understanding should primarily seek to pro¬
mote an awareness of the international
aspects of the human condition, of contem¬
porary civilization and social relations, of the
dynamics of their evolution, and of the con¬
sequently growing interdependence of peo¬
ples and nations. This awareness will grow
out of the critical analysis and study of the
facts through active methods.
In 1974, Unesco's General Conference
adopted a Recommendation concerning
education for international understanding,
co-operation and peace and education rela-
Understanding and respect for all
peoples, their cultures, civilizations,
values and ways of life, including their
ethnic cultures, are among the guiding
principles adopted by Unesco for
education at all levels for mutual
comprehension and international
peace. Within the Associated Schools
System, pupils and teachers are free to
select a culture which they find of
special interest and to set up special
projects, of varying duration, for its
study. The pupils of the
Comprehensive Girls' High School,
Sargodha, Pakistan, decided, for
example, to study Japanese culture
customs and traditions with which
they are now thoroughly familiar.
Above, teachers and pupils are seen
during the traditional Japanese tea
ceremonial. The history, religions and
arts of India form the subject of the
special project set up at Northmead
Primary School, Lusaka, Zambia.
Right, rendering of a popular Zambian
song on an Indian musical instrument.
The teachers of the Girls' Primary
School, Birkirkara, Malta, selected a
series of themes or "centres of
interest" concerning Greek culture.
The girls divided themselves up into I
groups to study Greek writing, arts I
and crafts, theatre and dance (bottom
photo).
32

ting to human rights and fundamental free¬
doms. This text sets forth seven guiding
principles: an international dimension and a
global perspective in education at all levels
and in all its forms; understanding and res¬
pect for all peoples, their cultures, civiliza¬
tions, values and ways of life, including
domestic ethnic cultures and cultures of
other nations; awareness of the increasing
global interdependence between peoples
and nations; abilities to communicate with
others; awareness not only of the rights but
also of the duties incumbent upon indivi¬
duals, social groups and nations towards
each other; understanding of the necessity
for international solidarity and co-operation;
readiness on the part of the individual to
participate in solving the problems of his
community, his country and the world at
large.
This list illustrates the range and possibili¬
ties of education for international understan¬
ding which, according to the same recom¬
mendation, should focus mainly on the follo¬
wing themes: equality of rights of peoples,
and the right of peoples to self-
determination; the maintenance of peace;
action to ensure the exercise and obser¬
vance of human rights, including those of
refugees; racism and its eradication; the
fight against discrimination in its various
forms; economic growth and social develop¬
ment and their relation to social justice; colo¬
nialism and decolonization; ways and means
of assisting developing countries; the strug¬
gle against disease, illiteracy and famine; the
fight for a better quality of life... the use,
management and conservation of natural
resources, pollution of the environment; the
preservation of the cultural heritage of man¬
kind; the role and methods of action of the
United Nations system...
' The recommendation shows that the
study of human rights is necessarily central
to the education which is being advocated.
In the last analysis, our work for peace,
disarmament and justice will always be
based on respect for Human Rights.
Ever since its early days the Associated
Schools system has had an eventful ex¬
istence and has been involved in many
pioneering experiments both in teaching
methods and content, including such
modern educational techniques as group
activities, projects and educative games.
In some cases there have been efforts to
involve parents, former pupils, and cultural
organizations in the system, and to promote
co-operation with school television and
radio.
This does not imply that all the problems
have been solved, especially those concer¬
ning evaluation and interdisciplinarity. But it
is now an established fact that States are
interested in incorporating education for
international understanding into their educa¬
tional systems on equal (if not preferential)
terms with other objectives. It is impossible
to ignore the contribution of the Associated
Schools system and, above all, to believe
that education with an international outlook,
if it is too searching, can be prejudicial to
national interests. National and international
values are not antagonistic, they comple¬
ment each other. No one has the right to
deprive today's young people, who are pre¬
paring to shape the twenty-first century, of
the knowledge, the critical approach and the
attitudes they will need and on which
human survival may hinge. paui Morren
33
