Australian bark paintings
The Aborigine artists
of Arnhem Land
by Karel Kupka
Text Copyright © Karel Kupka. Reproduction Prohibited
FOR the aborigines of Australia art and
life are permanently interlinked. As
well as the sacred objects used in
ancestral rites, they paint, etch and carve
their weapons, their tools and their everyday
domestic utensils. Their paintings decorate
their huts, which are made of bark, the sur¬
faces of rocks and even the ground itself.
They carve reliefs on trees and scratch out
ornamental designs in the sand.
Their majestic, finely sculpted mortuary
totem poles, the vessels in which are kept
the bones of the dead, even the skulls of the
dead are all richly painted. And despite the
fact that modern civilization is opening up
new horizons for the younger generation of
aborigines, these arts and rites have surviv¬
ed to this day in the purity of their traditional
forms, even if they are now less frequently
practised.
There is an overall unity of conception in
the aborigine plastic arts, but styles differ
from region to region. It may be that natural
conditions have encouraged the develop¬
ment of certain forms of art in Australia as
they have in other continents. The hot
climate of the north, with its stark sunlight
mirrored by the sea giving a light which
draws out the true value of colours and
seems to bring the horizon closer, seems to
encourage painting, just as do the natural
conditions of the Mediterranean area in
Europe and of Central America in the New
World. The cold grey mists of the south,
however, tend to inspire drawing rather than
painting.
Bark painting is the most characteristic of
the various aborigine arts and the form that
retains today the most vitality. It consists of
painting on panels of bark from the eucalyp¬
tus tree. The most common species of tree
in Australia, the eucalyptus provides a pain¬
ting surface which is easy to obtain and con¬
venient and simple to handle.
The tree must be healthy, straight and
have no cracks in its bark. A small section is
cut out with an axe, trimmed down to a thin
sheet and cleaned. The panel thus obtained
is then heated over a fire and pressed
against the knee or the foot until it is
CONTINUED PAGE 12
The Australian aboriginal painters who live
in the region of Milingimbi, on the northern
coast of Arnhem Land, use eucalyptus bark
as a "canvas" on which to portray the
complex myths of their people in an
otherwordly setting which they call "the
time of dreams". To conjure up this
universe of myth they use with great
freedom a wealth of figurative signs. Bark
painting, left, was produced in 1963 by an
artist named Djulwarak. It illustrates the
myth of the Wavilak sisters, which relates
the peopling of the Australian continent. At
bottom of painting is a waterhole beside
which grows a eucalyptus tree. One of the
sisters wakes the sacred snake Yurlunggur
which emerges from the waterhole (right of
painting). When the snake emerges a
second time (centre) it coils itself around
the two sisters and their children and
swallows them. In bottom right corner, the
two sisters reappear. The painting is
crowded with symbolic forms enabling the
viewer to "read" and memorize the story.

Photo © Klee Foundation, Kunstmuseum, Bern
Photo © Nationel Museum of Victoria, Australia
The art
of high spirits
The spirit world is a favourite theme of
Australian bark painters. The most popular
spirits are the mimi or rock-spirits, frail and
timorous ghosts who shun adults and are
only visible to children. Photo 1 shows two
slender, bony mimi; the male is carrying a
basket on his shoulder. Gesticulating with
their long, ribbonlike arms, the four mimi
in photo 3 are conducting an animated
conversation. An unusual feature of the
work is that the artist has not indicated the
sex of the figures. Although as a rule the
mimi are inoffensive creatures, they are
sometimes roused to ferocity. Bark
painting 5 shows mimi engaged in battle.
Two of the combatants, their broken bones
indicated by swellings, are lying flat out,
one on top of the other. The third, above
them, has had his legs broken in the fray.
By simplifying and reorganizing natural
shapes, the aborigine painters create a
sense of force and a figurative symbolism
which evoke the works of many modern
artists including Paul Klee (2) whose self-
proclaimed purpose was "to penetrate to
the interior and not reflect the surface".
Certain figures by Picasso (4) also recall
those created by the bark painters, while
the affinity is even more startling in the
case of the Cuban artist Wifredo Lam (6).
This puzzling figure in the form of a
question-mark, half-horse, half-woman,
displays the same fascination with linear
composition and the same preoccupation
with symbolism as those of the bark
painters.
10

Photo from Pablo Picasso, by Christian Zerros © Ed. Cahiers d'Art, Paris
Photos 1 Two spirits (bark painting from Geimbo
region, 1914).
Bust of a Child by Paul Klee (1963).
Four mimi by Namatbara (Croker Island,
1963).
Figures by Pablo Picasso (1929)
Battle of the mimi by Irvala (Croker Island,
1963).
Etching by Wifredo Lam (1966). .
Photo © Wifredo Lam, Paris
11

Clouds are depicted in
this bark painting from
the region of Milingimbi
(1959-1960). In works
whose resemblance to
abstract art is only
superficial, the aboriginal
artist uses signs,
symbols and colours to
convey his message.
Thus when painting
clouds the colours he
chooses will indicate
whether his subject is
the morning mist,
looming storm clouds or
clouds at twilight.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 9
straight. It is then kept flat under the weight
of some stones or sand. After a few days it
is dry enough to be painted and a first pro¬
tective coating of a sticky juice from the
stem of a wild orchid is applied to the
smoother inner side.
The colours used are yellow, red and
brown (natural ochres), white (from kaolin
or plaster) and black (chiefly from crushed
charcoal). The aborigines jealously protect
the sites from which they obtain their col¬
ours and the natural ochres that produce the
finest tints are valued highly enough to be
used in barter.
Aborigine artists handle their paint¬
brushes with extraordinary dexterity. The
brushes are made from thin stems of wood
chewed at one end or from the stalks of
plants to which hairs, plant fibres, shreds of
feathers or carefully cut leaves have been at¬
tached. After the first coating has been ap¬
plied, the colours are usually simply mixed
with water and this accounts for the fragility
of these paintings. But it should be
remembered that, for the aborigine artist,
the action of painting, the creative act itself,
is the important thing. Now that their works
have become popular with collectors, they
tend to take more trouble to preserve them
by the use of modern fixatives. But, clearly,
their fragility makes it absurd to judge these
works on the basis of their age; even in
museums there are very few bark paintings
more than fifty years old. The only valid
criterion of judgement is that of artistic
quality.
Nevertheless, this form of painting stems
from a long tradition. Modern scientific tests
have proved that the remains of rock pain¬
tings and petroglyphs found throughout
Australia are several thousand years old.
Since a large proportion of bark paintings
reproduce the same subjects as appear in
the rock paintings and use identical tech¬
niques, we may suppose that their origins
also date far back in time.
In spite of modern influences, the themes
of bark painting have hardly changed at all.
The aborigine painter is primarily a sym¬
bolist. He refines and simplifies his figures,
creating an almost abstract decoration to ex¬
press his ideas concisely. This pictorial art
form is still regularly employed in Arnhem
Land and its immediate surroundings in the
Northern Territory of Australia.
Bark paintings can be divided into three
main groups according to their
characteristics.
The painting of the west and south of
Arnhem Land and of Groóte Eylandt is
figurative painting; but it is extremely sub¬
jective, reflecting directly the inner feelings
of the painter. Although the natural shapes
reproduced, mainly animal or human, are
easily identifiable, it is not realistic painting,
at least not as realism is generally
understood. Reality as he sees it is less im¬
portant to the artist than reality as he knows
it and feels it. He expresses reality as he
knows it, imagines it or wishes it to be, not
as he sees it, accentuating the details which
help him to put across his ideas and
deliberately omitting details that do not in¬
terest him.
A "cubist" without knowing it, he
reconstructs his subject, bringing together
aspects which are normally seen from dif¬
ferent angles, and it does not bother him at
all that in fact they cannot all be seen at the
same time from the angle he has chosen.
The most striking proof of his subjectivity
is his habit of representing the bone struc-
Bark painting of a eucalyptus tree (left)
was created in 1960 by Dainganngang, an
artist living on the island of Milingimbi. The
form of the tree has been so radically
simplified that it is easy to see why such
works are sometimes thought to be
abstract compositions by those who do not
know what their creators are seeking to
depict.
12

tures and internal organs of a creature that
are not normally visible, a form of "X-ray
painting" that has achieved a certain
measure of fame. His line of thought can be
more readily understood if we note that the
animals he paints in this way are the animals
which provide his favourite food. He does
not See them with his eyes alone, but with
his stomach also, an explanation which is
confirmed by the fact that he does not stress
these internal features when painting totem
animals which interest him for quite dif¬
ferent reasons. Since he is not attracted by
the meat of totem animals, he stresses their
outward appearance, as he does with
human figures, shaping them according to
his own conceptions and supplementing his
colour range by the use of cross-hatching
and dots.
The "people" in these paintings are main¬
ly "spirits" who are widespread in the area
known as the "Stone Country". The
mystery of the caves and the shadowy
darkness of the ravines exert their power as
they do in similar regions in other con¬
tinents. The aborigines interpret all natural
phenomena as manifestations of the spirits.
Storms, for example, are caused by the
Thunder-Spirit who appears in paintings
surrounded by an encircling line in the shape
of a cloud. At his elbows and knees, stone
axe-heads symbolize lightning and claps of
thunder.
The most popular spirits are the spirits of
the rocks, the Mimi. These are a whole race
of normally peace-loving, shy ghosts who
are seen only by children. They hide
themselves from adults not only because
they are shy, but also because of their
physical frailty. "They have to hide and live
in caves and underground; they are so weak
that the wind would break their necks at
once", say the aborigines.
There are also some dangerous ghosts,
the Maams or Mamandis. Deprived of
repose in the "land of the dead", they haunt
and disturb the living. The painters express
their supernatural power by depicting them
with several arms and legs.
The bark paintings of the eastern part of
the north coast and the adjacent islands are
quite different from those of the western
and southern parts of Arnhem Land.
Although they are not really non-figurative
paintings, they often give that impression.
Natural shapes get lost in the decorative
composition of the paintings, which the
painter divides into several different areas,
using colour right across the surface and
creating forms which are often so far from
reality that the resulting work seems to be
abstract. Here, painters show a preference
for totemic subjects for which they invent
representative symbols and signs.
These artists do not paint their totems and
symbols with the broad brush-strokes of
those accustomed to working on the vast
expanses of rock-face. Their technique is in¬
fluenced by totemic painting on the human
body. The artist creates graphic forms in
which each motif has a specific function.
These bark paintings sometimes resemble
body-painting so closely that they adopt not
only the same graphic forms and themes but
also its format. Thus the artist practises on
bark so that he will be better able to execute
ritual paintings on the face and torso for in¬
itiation ceremonies.
Bark painting is generally considered to
have an educative function, whether it be a
matter of teaching others or of perfecting
oneself. Each feature, each shape in a pain¬
ting has a precise meaning which the in¬
itiates must be able to distinguish. For
anyone else, the paintings remain in¬
decipherable.
By simplifying and recomposing natural
shapes, the aborigine painter therefore
achieves a kind of abstraction not unlike that
of many modern artists, the only difference
being that he does not set out to achieve
this effect deliberately. The motivation is
quite different.
It has often been said that "the chief
characteristic of modern painting is that it
does not tell a story"; aborigine art,
however, is constantly telling stories. In¬
deed, that is its main object and the essen¬
tial purpose of its symbols. The aborigine ar¬
tist wants to portray the inner nature rather
than the outward appearance of things. The
fine criss-cross lines he draws may represent
honey or fire, seaweed or water, air, sand,
rocks, bark, herbs, skin, fur or feathers.
For the aborigines, this pictorial sym¬
bolism is a way of writing down folk-tales,
the stories of the "Dream Time" (the sub¬
conscious life), or the recital of historical
events of importance. Line and colour rein¬
force the aural memory and their "spoken
literature" becomes a "painted literature".
This explains the astonishment of students
of aboriginal mythology when they find a
vast "literature" preserved without the i
benefit of the written word.
The dotted circles which intersperse the
leaves and branches in this bark painting
are the artist's way of representing, not
flowers, but flying foxes, large bats which
sleep hanging from the branches of a tree.
The aboriginal artists often depict animals
in this way, by means of a characteristic
sign or symbol which unmistakably
identifies the animal in question. In the
case of the flying fox, this distinctive sign
is the animal's droppings, which are
represented, as here, by coloured circles.
The circles not only heighten the decorative
effect but also indicate that the trees
featured in the painting are those favoured
by flying foxes as a refuge.
13

The artists of Milingimbi Yirrkala and
other places in this region are past masters
in the creation of a real "literature in paint".
In this way they reconstruct on bark the
complicated action of a whole history. Their
abbreviations and particularly their signs and
symbols are wonderfully suitable for the pur¬
pose. The artists do not arrange them in a
preconceived order, but make a free com¬
position, a picture. So if we want to under¬
stand the story an artist is painting in all its
detail, as it unfolds in his personal version,
then we must be present when he is working
on it and watch him and listen to him as he
progresses step by step.
On the islands of Bathurst and Melville,
which lie north of Darwin, the aborigines
paint bark solely for the decoration of
special baskets. These are ritual objects
destined to crown the carved and painted
totem poles erected to the memory of the
dead. But they are not content to be mere
decorators; they know how to create true
paintings in which natural forms end up as
unintentioned abstracts. In these islands
too, bark painting is linked to the ritual pain¬
ting of the body. It reproduces totems which
here are chosen from plants or places rather
than from the animal world.
The artists give free rein to their fantasies
and their imagination, conceiving shapes to
represent a tree, a bush, a particular place,
an island, rocks, a pile of clay (especially the
clay or natural ochres they use in their
work), a stretch of sand, a water-hole, a
stream, a bay.
Ignoring visual reality, they create
abstractions to which they can attribute any
meaning they like. Either they remain
deliberately indifferent to the physical ap¬
pearance of natural phenomena, making no
attempt to describe that appearance
recognizably, or they have already gone so
far along the road of graphic representation
that we can no longer follow their line of
thought.
Other forms of ornamental painting, link¬
ed to rock painting and to its symbolism or
inspired by etchings on wood or mother of
pearl, are to be seen in the bark paintings of
the Port Keats area, on the northern shores
of western Australia. They reflect, as do all
the other forms of bark painting, the
mythology of the region. Natural forms like
the snake, for instance, are favoured by
these artists who find inspiration in the
curves of its body, in the circles and coils of
young snakes and the pale speckles of their
eggs. As they re-arrange and recompose
these forms, we can see the gradual transi¬
tion towards ornamentation.
With so-called "primitive" art enjoying in¬
creasing popularity, aborigine painting is
particularly sought after today. As a result,
bark paintings are proliferating throughout
Australia and this over-production is causing
their quality and educative value to suffer.
Nevertheless, among this excessive output it
is still possible to find works of value. H
KAREL KUPKA, French ethnologist of Czech
origin, is a research officer with France's National
Centre of Scientific Research, and is currently
studying the basis and purpose of art in the "pri¬
mitive" family. He began toJay the foundations of
his extensive first-hand knowledge of Australian
aboriginal art and customs on his first visit to the
continent in 1951 and laterplanned the Australian
Arts room at the Museum ofAfrican and Oceanic
Arts in Paris.
Bark painting of a "barramundi" fish is an
example of the remarkable "X-ray art" in
which some Australian aboriginal painters
depict not only the exterior outlines but
also the internal organs of their subjects.
The technique is often used by artists for
painting the animals which provide them
with meat. The work shown here was
painted in 1963 by an artist of Croker
Island, off the northern coast of Australia.
Bottom photo, a ritual body painting is
being executed on the skin of a participant
in the corroborée dances which mark
initiation ceremonies and other ritual
occasions. Eucalyptus bark is a readily
available material which aboriginal body
painters may use as a "sketchbook" in
which to practise their art.
Photo © K. Kupka. Museum of African and Oceanic Arts, Pans
14
