Carved from the trunk of a carefully selected and prepared red cedar tree, this totem-pole
is a typical example of the art of the coastal Indians of British Columbia, Canada. The
erection of a totem-pole was the occasion for a festive ceremony known as a potlatch. An
important potlatch could take years to organize. Guests were invited from far and wide
and gifts of all kinds were prepared for each of them. The festivities themselves
sometimes lasted several weeks. During the ceremony, the person erecting the totem-pole
would make a speech in which he would proclaim his right to the various emblems carved
on the pole. The guests would make speeches in reply. This would be followed by
dancing, the distribution of gifts, games and feasting.
This article and the box on pages 6 and 7 are
based on extracts from a recently published
L/nesco study on Children and Play, Theoretical
Approaches and Teaching Applications. Specia¬
lists from a number of countries collaborated in
the preparation of the study. The first part, from
which our extracts are taken, was written by
Juliette Raabe, of France, who also directed the
preparation of the study as a whole.
Photo © Chantai Lombard, Pans


The
ALTHOUGH the development of the
child and children's games and the
overall need for play can be seen as
a universal fact, play activities are none the
less profoundly rooted in each individual
people, whose cultural identity can be
discerned through the games and toys it has
invented.
In retracing the basic stages in the
psychological development of the child as
manifested through his games, one is aware
time and again of close dependence on the
environment; play is directly linked to the
social context.
The mother's presence or premature
absence, the family structure, the living and
housing conditions, the environment and
means of subsistence all have a direct bear¬
ing on play activities, which cannot develop
when children live in conditions that are too
unfavourable.
For play cannot occur just anywhere,
anytime, or anyhow. It comes about in an
environment which, without being
altogether committed, is prepared to pro¬
vide a dynamic setting that we may call a
play context. Such a context is made up of
the following components: (a) the actual
space, qualified by its dimensions and con¬
tent; (b) the individual with his experiences,
resources and aspirations; (c) pressure from
outside; and (d) adaptability to change.
Thus it may be said that for an infant up to
the age of one year, the play context is

Left, two African girls play at pounding millet, using
makeshift utensils and make-believe millet. By
converting what for the adult is a daily chore into an
imitative game they are unconsciously preparing
themselves for a task that will be theirs later in life.
~ Disquieting if not macabre, the photo right is a reminder
of a phenomenon which, lamentably, is becoming more
and more evident: the proliferation of toys of a military,
warlike nature. From their earliest years many children
handle toys which, in one way or another, encourage
warlike attitudes and tendencies. In Sweden, the
praiseworthy principle has been adopted "not to produce,
import or sell toys, games or military dressing-up kits
relating to wars later than 1914".


games peoples play
defined spatially by his crib, rush mat, his
pram or his mother's back, the sides of his
cot, his mattress, sheets and blankets, his
mother's garment, as well as her body and
his own.
One can therefore speak in terms of a
specific play context shaped by society both
in the strictly spatial sense and in the tem¬
poral sense. According to whether the
society he lives in is rural or urban, industrial
or still developing, the child will either have
the run of a virtually limitless expanse of
fields, woodland or bush to roam about in,
or will be cooped up in an over-populated,
hyper-rationalized environment in which he
cannot come by the smallest portion of
"free" space to call his own.
In industrial-type countries, even when
people are adequately housed, it is not un¬
common to find parents labouring under the
delusion that they are giving their children a
better chance to play by cluttering up their
rooms with furniture and complicated,
stereotyped objects which mean nothing to
the child and result only in inhibiting more or
less completely their play capacity.
From the temporal standpoint, a wide
variety of conditions can lead to situations
objectively detrimental to play. Some
children left entirely to their own devices,
lose their ability to play, as is also the case
with those who are caught up in the
vicious circle of day-to-day chores-
helping adults in their tasks or under
pressure from schoolwork and do not have
even a few spare moments a day to them¬
selves.
The attitude of adults to children's play,
reflecting ideological patterns, is also
decisive. Hostile or indifferent, or again
possessive, adults can annihilate the child's
play opportunities as much by rejecting
them as by appropriating them or turning
them to their own advantage. The child is
well and truly turned into an object and
becomes no more than a toy in the hands of
the adults, who use him to act out their own
psychological problems or the system of
values to which they are attached.
As for toys, especially when they are
bought, they are part of a whole system of
implications inherent in the act of giving.
Certain ritualistic practices connected with
offering gifts, such as the potlatch, the
ceremonial distribution of gifts during the
winter festival, formerly practised by the In¬
dians of British Columbia, implicitly brought
an idea of challenge into the play structure.
Giving Christmas or New Year presents, a
common practice in the Western world, is a
chance for parents to lavish on their sons or
daughters an attention that does not always
find expression in day-to-day life. And one
could quote numerous examples of unloved
or ill-loved children constantly plied with
gifts.
In consumer societies, toys are produced
industrially and are the source of substantial
commercial profit. They are given wide
publicity of all kinds, put out on display in
trade fairs and glittering shop windows. For
the giver, they are a token of wealth and
social standing, and they are a source of
cruel social inequalities between children
in the same school or the same
neighbourhood, distorting neighbourly or
friendly relations by introducing a spirit of
competition based on the commercial value
of the toys owned.
More serious still is the fact that- an
industrially-made toy, stereotyped and
technically perfected, forfeits much of its
value as a plaything. It is a closed object,
setting up a barrier against creativity and im¬
agination. In almost all instances, an
elementary plaything is preferable, be it a
stick or a pebble, which the small player can
turn into a musical instrument, a tool, a
weapon, a car or a boat, a doll or an animal,
as his mood dictates.
Thus, on the one hand, millions of
children are expected to make do with the
same dolls or cars, mass-produced in a de¬
personalized universe, while elsewhere there
are toys made by the child himself, by an
elder brother or sister, a parent or the village
craftsman, which remain intrinsically
democratic and closely bound up with the
family and cultural environment.
Unlike what goes on in the modern, over-
stratified societies, in the so-called tradi- 1
tionalist ones of Africa and some countries I

of America and Asia all forms of play activity
are accessible to all social categories. This
democratic character can perhaps be ac¬
counted for by the fact that play activities
are primarily a field open to all, and especial¬
ly to the children, who imagine, design and
make their own toys.
Children in the Western world have
scarcely any opportunities left to make their
own toys: they live in an environment in
which the basic materials are difficult to ob¬
tain (and non-existent for town children;
even municipal dumps are gradually disap¬
pearing). As for tools, there is such an
obsession about safety that the children are
given only wooden hammers or plastic
saws, paltry substitutes for the real thing,
and although there are no physical risks in¬
volved, they have a disastrous effect on their
psychological development.
Such is not the case in Africa, for exam¬
ple, where parents let their children use their
tools, or make them scaled-down but usable
tools of their own. In these societies,
however, adults "see to it at all times that
any play behaviour out of line with the tradi¬
tional patterns is repressed. They have no
intention of letting the child spend too much
time on such 'futile occupations' which
might keep him back at an age which he
must grow out of as soon as possible, for in
terms of the unwritten but ever-present
socio-educational laws, the young African
must grow up as quickly as possible, in
order to assume his proper role both in the
family and as a full, productive member of
the community".
It should not, however, be inferred from
this that the Western child is better off as
regards play. On the contrary, the more a
child is showered with toys, the more firmly
he becomes entrenched in an "extra-social"
category, the more unimaginative his play¬
ing is and the more strained his relationship
with adults becomes.
Games and societies are so intricately
bound up that some theorists have sug¬
gested a close interdependence between the
principles and rules of games of strategy and
socio-economic patterns: for instance,
chess, bridge and monopoly are typical of
societies based on commerce, while games
such as awélé, played by Baoulé children in
Africa, correspond to trade by barter.
Play is thus directly connected to actual
social institutions and not only to housing or
subsistence conditions. One need only look
at the element of play in physical and in¬
tellectual contests and the role it assumes,
for example, in the choice of leaders (tour¬
naments, verbal "jousting" in election cam¬
paigns, etc.).
Do we not use expressions such as "the
political game"? The close connexion bet¬
ween play and police investigations is
brought out in the accounts of thousands of
true or fictitious criminal cases to be found
in novels, films or serials. Financial or stock
exchange speculations are also partly a
game, not to mention the great money-
winning games like bingo, lotteries,
sweepstakes, pools or other betting games
which have become veritable institutions.
Whereas this type of game seems to be a
typical feature of industrial societies, in
other parts of the world play has an essential
function at times of transition from one age
group to the next, in the shape of ordeals or
initiation rites, which are often painful or
dangerous but have an element of play in
them and are an occasion for festivities and
community celebrations.
Prepared for the ordeals over a period of
years by means of make-believe "games
about games", the child grows up in har¬
mony with his environment. Even in
societies of an industrial type, in which
rituals marking the transition to adolescence
or adulthood are obscured and discarded by
the body of society, boys and girls spon¬
taneously put themselves to the test in
various ways (motorcycle racing, drug-
taking...); but these formidable games have
lost any ties with the community as a whole,
which rejects them, refuses to set any value
upon them and does what it can to prevent
them without proposing any alternative.
If one accepts the psycho analytical inter- \
What is play?
THERE is no way of telling categorically that a particular form of
behaviour is in fact a game, or a particular object a toy. The same
object a hammer ora saw for instance will be a tool in the hands
of a carpenter and a toy for the child who borrows it from his father or the
handyman who uses it in his spare time.
Several specialists in animal behaviour have attempted to throw light on
the problem of play by observing animals. As.far back as the beginning of
the century, the American scientist Karl Groos advanced his theory of play
as "practice". In his opinion, for young human beings and young animals
alike, play was an instinctive process of acquiring forms of behaviour rele¬
vant to situations that the adult would have to face up to in later life.
More recently, the Austrian zoologist Konrad Lorenz, analysing the
behaviour of kittens, wrote: "How do these movements of play differ from
those of real earnest? In their form, even the most practised eye may fail to
detect a difference, but nevertheless there is one. In these games, com¬
posed as they are of the movements of catching a prey, fighting a fellow
cat and repelling a foe, serious injury is never done to the playmate acting
one of these parts. The social inhibition against real biting or deep scrat¬
ching is fully enforced during play, while, in a case of real earnest, it is
obliterated by the emotion evoking the particular series of movements. In
serious situations, the animal is in a particular psychological state which
brings with it the readiness for a particular way of behaving and for this
way only. It is typical of play, that, during it, highly specific behaviour is in¬
cited without the corresponding emotional state. The relationship of all
play to play-acting lies in the fact that the player 'pretends' to be obsessed
with an emotion which he does not really feel." Play may therefore be con¬
sidered as a sort of fictional practice for instinctive hunting and defence ac¬
tivities.
While these attempts were being made to grasp the specific nature of
play through the observation of particular types of behaviour, various other
authors, by contrast, 'sought to define the problem of play in terms of a
universally applicable theory. One of the most important is the French
author Roger Caillois. His work Les Jeux et les Hommes was published
twenty years ago and was an attempt to produce a universal definition and
classification of games.
Caillois proceeded from the definitions set forth by the Dutch historian
Johan Huizinga in Homo Ludens, his study of the play element in culture.
According to Huizinga, the game is a voluntary action or activity, perform¬
ed within certain fixed time and space limits according to rules freely ac¬
cepted but binding and an end in themselves; bound up with feelings of
tension and joy and the awareness of its being different from real life.
Caillois set forth the characteristics of games as distinct from other
human occupations; according to his definition, the game "is an activity
which is:
1) free: in which the player is under no compulsion to take part, failing
which the game instantly loses its appeal and pleasurable nature;
2) separate, taking place within precise, pre-determined space and time
limits;
3) uncertain, having no foreseeable progression or result, some latitude
for resourcefulness being necessarily left to the player;

Kite by Jacqueline Monnier. Photo © Jean-Louis Bloch Laine, Paris.
4) unproductive, not giving rise to material gains or new elements of
any kind and, except for items of property which may change hands within
the group of players, leading to exactly the same situation at the end of the
game as existed at the beginning;
5) subject to certain rules or conventions superseding ordinary laws and
temporarily substituting for them a new code which alone counts;
6) fictional, the player being specifically aware that he is experiencing a
substitute reality or even a complete lack of reality distinct from everyday
life."
Apart from this attempt to describe games as objects, there are the
various psychological approaches seeking to apprehend the role of the
game in the development of the individual psyche.
For the Englishman Henry Bett, games are an involuntary resurgence of
vital instincts which have lost their significance today; for others, play is a
functional relaxation activity or, again, a way of using up excess energy
that cannot, or can no longer, be absorbed by survival activities.
In this field, two major theories prevail in current research.
Genetic psychology, founded by the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget,
sees play both as the expression of and the prerequisite for a child's
development. A certain form of play is indissolubly linked with each stage
of development, and although the rate or age at which various games ap¬
pear may vary from one society to another or one individual to another, the
order in which they appear is always the same. Play is a yardstick of a
child's mental development.
' From the viewpoint of Freudian psychoanalytical theory, "play can be
correlated to the child's other fantasy activities, especially dreams". The
essential function of play can thus be seen as the reduction of tensions
arising from the inability to fulfil one's desires, but unlike dreams, play is
based on a permanent compromise between drives and rules, between
fantasy and real life.
The universal character of play in the mental development of an in¬
dividual is subject, as we have seen, to variations from one period of time,
culture or type of society to another. Thus in ancient societies the contrast
between work and leisure or play was not nearly as clear-cut as in industrial
societies, which from the eighteenth century onwards placed emphasis on
productive work to the detriment of any occupation that was thought to be
unproductive.
Huizinga goes so far as to consider play the very foundation of culture,
in so far as it is the only form of behaviour that cannot be traced back to
the basic survival instinct. He postulates that play underlies all social in¬
stitutions, political power, war or commerce, and points out the element of
play in all of them. In his view, play is also at the root of art, and it is true
that play has a strong element of creative activity and that similarities do
exist, although play, unlike art, is not intended to last.
In contrast to Huizinga, the Swede Yrjö Hirn sees games as the final
stage in a process of decaying social institutions. He sees proof of his
theory in the numerous rites that have disappeared, of which games are a
degenerate survival.
There can be no doubt, either, that while play is deeply ingrained in a
people's cultural traditions, it also evolves with society, and history has
shown that it is conditioned by economic and political systems. Thus the
simple toy made out of whatever happened to be at hand at the time, often
by the child himself, evidence of which can still be found in the recent past
of Western societies, has been supplanted in our industrial age by the toy
as a commercial product and a marketable item, a source of substantial
profit.

pretation of play as a way of resolving libido
' tensions, one can account for the number of
play practices in which the player deliberate¬
ly tries to flirt with death or put himself in a
physical or psychological state at the ex¬
treme limit of his endurance, or to provoke
in himself a feeling of dread or horror.
Folklore the world over is full of masked
festivals, tales about death, imaginary
characters such as witches, ghosts,
bogeymen and ogres. In Mexico, they sell
candy skulls and cross-bones, which are
relished by children and old people alike.
There are countless word and drawing
games that provide an opportunity to
tamper with the laws of decorum, morality
or logic (nonsense rhymes or games).
Games of make-believe make it possible for
a child, with his teddy-bear or doll, to strike
a blow at the family hierarchy by parodying
parental or social authority, or even enacting
the death of his father or mother in dramatic
games. Play functions as a veritable "institu¬
tion of transgression", which cannot be
obstructed without serious psychological
consequences for both the child and the
adult and without profoundly affecting the
child's capacity to integrate.
It is not surprising that play, society's way
of providing an outlet for the pent-up forces
within it, is both a vital safety valve and an
actual educational institution operating
spontaneously.
Play assumed this role even before there
was such a thing as school, and continues
to do so today, before and during a child's
school-going years. Technological know-
how and knowledge in general are transmit¬
ted through play. A child deprived of the
first rudiments of knowledge that it brings
him would be incapable of learning anything
at school, and would be irreparably cut off
from his natural and his social environment.
When a child plays, it is his initiation into
adult behaviour, into the role he will be call¬
ed upon to play in subsequent life. He
develops his physical, verbal and intellectual
capacities and his ability to communicate. It
constitutes a far broader factor of com¬
munication than speech and it facilitates
communications between individuals from
different linguistic or cultural backgrounds.
Through its institutional aspect, the ar¬
bitrary nature of its rules and the virtually
compulsory ways in which they are
transmitted and through the hierarchical
structure of the group of players, play is a
micro-society in which children receive their'
initial training in social behaviour.
Watching children playing marbles in the
Geneva area, Jean Piaget noted the im¬
mutable way in which the "laws" were pass¬
ed on, each child spontaneously accepting
them as binding without being remotely
aware of how or by whom they had been
transmitted. The same applies to other
cultural models.
"In group games, the child learns to see
where he stands in relation to the others,
within a definite hierarchical framework. In
doing so, he learns to appreciate his own
position as a member of the group, thereby
determining his personal status, and
ultimately to perceive the group in terms of
himself and of other groups." It is in the
course of play that a newcomer will be
welcomed or turned away, and that children
assimilate the ethical values of the society to
which they belong. The children's group or
association therefore has an essential role.
The ethnologist Pierre Erny gives the
following description of the function of the
group among African children:
"Children from a whole village or from a
whole neighbourhood mix at a very early
age. Individual differences are brought face
to face; to begin with, children go about
their activities separately, then gradually
these activities interact and finally, with
rapidly acquired maturity, they are shared.
Thus a sort of mutual education process
takes root within the juvenile society, more
or less on the fringe of the adult world, and
it is perhaps not exaggerating to say that
there is in this education the element of
socialization that is a preponderant in tradi¬
tional societies.
"In the peer group organized to all intents
and purposes as an educational institution,
the child encounters an environment that is
different from his family, and is able to
undergo his training for life in society away
from over-restrictive bonds of affection,
belonging and dependency. There he will
find, in embryo, the atmosphere which will
later be characteristic of the public life of an
adult. He will perceive society in a new light
and step by step will prepare to make his en¬
try into that society and meet all of its re¬
quirements".
It goes without saying that the educa¬
tional institution of play is the carrier, along
with the cultural heritage, of certain social
norms that may become obsolete, such as
segregation between boys and girls. While
respecting play, the educator, in his capacity
as such, can endeavour to propose new
patterns.
Indeed, not least among the virtues of
play are its existence as a particularly effec¬
tive channel of transmission and its recep-
tiveness to innovation and creativity. It may
often happen that children's games are
technologically and ideologically ahead of
their social context and are a vital source of
invention and progress. Any would-be pro¬
gressive society therefore owes it to itself to
regard play as being of the utmost impor¬
tance and to keep a watchful eye out for any
premonitory signs foreshadowing its
decline.
Left, variants of the
game of "keeping a
straight face" are
played all over the
world by children in
the 8 to 11 years age
group.
8
