Male chauvinism
in the mass media
?8<>
20
>"
**»°
"A further indication of
the media's emphasis on
male authority is the
reliance on male voices
in advertizing to 'sell'
products."
Photo © I. P.S., Paris

by Margaret Gallagher
i
| "In almost every country
I the media work force is
I predominantly male...
I Women are exploited in
I terms of their sexuality
I and physical appearance.
IN many ways, mass media systems are
a reflection, in microcosm, of distri¬
butions of power and control. In a world
where women's access to political and
economic power is in most cases severely
limited, their status and roles are defined
within political, economic and cultural
systems which tend to exclude them from
active participation. So, in the sense that
cultural agents or institutions contribute to
the socialization process within systems
which are directed by political and economic
imperatives, the mass media's role is
primarily to reinforce definitions and iden¬
tities set in a framework constructed for and
by men.
A number of factors particular to the
structure and internal demands of media
organizations have suggested to some
theorists of sexual inequality that the mass
media may play a particularly conservative
role in socialization, reinforcing traditional
values and beliefs.
These factors include the sexual com¬
position of the media work-force which in
almost every country is predominantly male,
overwhelmingly so in the influential areas of
management and production. Then there is
the reliance of many mass media organiza¬
tions on commercial backing and a con¬
sequent pressure to deal in known and ac¬
cepted images and contents. Thirdly, mass
media products, whether television or radio
programmes, magazines, newspapers or
films, are, in general, required to make an im¬
mediate and vivid impact and to be quickly
and easily absorbed by their audience. Con¬
siderable reliance is therefore placed on the
use of simplified, recognizable and standar¬
dized characterizations in media output.
For these reasons, the concern of resear¬
chers has been to identify the extent to
which the media present a social reality
which, if not demonstrably false, feeds on
the most conservative forces in society, ig¬
noring new trends until they have become
relatively established and accepted, thus
fulfilling a primarily reinforcing role rather
than a transforming one in the culture.
A problem arises, however, from the
geographical bias of the available data,
much of which originates in North America
and Western Europe, although there is a
growing body of research and documenta¬
tion from Australia, Latin America and the
Caribbean, and from Asia.
Information from Africa and the Pacific re¬
mains scant, while data from Eastern Euro¬
pean countries are difficult to locate. In the
case of Africa and the Pacific, the lack of
documentation primarily reflects a pre¬
occupation with developing what are rela¬
tively young media systems. Experiences
tend to be documented at later stages in
the process.
The difficulty in obtaining data from
Eastern European socialist countries arises
largely from the fact that a specific set of
problems concerning the relationships of
women and the mass media do not seem to
be formulated in a distinct way in these
societies.
Overall, media treatment of women can
CONTINUED PAGE 24
MARGARET GALLAGHER, British specialist in
media studies, is a lecturer in media research
methods at the United Kingdom's Open Univer¬
sity and a consultant with Unesco's Social
Sciences Sector. This article has been adapted
from a report on a global Unesco study on
research and action programmes relating to the
portrayal of women by the mass media and to
their participation in the media industries.

"On film, in the press and the broadcast
media, women's activities and interests
typically go no further than the confines of
home and family."
"Overall, the proportion of
women employed in film,
broadcasting or in the
national press rarely exceeds
30 per cent in any country."
Nevertheless, a number of
outstanding women have
stamped their mark upon the
media, including the famous
US photographer Margaret
Bourke-White, seen here, in
1934, perched on a gargoyle
outside her 61st-floor studio
in the Chrysler building
shooting the New York
skyline.
w
"Women are rarely portrayed as rational, active or
decisive... they are seldom in a position to exercise
authority over an adult male." This is especially true of
children's books in which stereotype portraits of women
as wives, mothers and daughters are the rule. A recently
published French children's book. Moi, Ma Grand-Mère...,
(My Grandmother is a...), from which this drawing is
taken, is a notable exception. In it one child after another
tells how his or her grandmother is a cosmonaut, a
soldier, an animal-trainer, a racing-driver or, as here, the
captain of a fishing boat.
22

/

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 21
best be described as narrow. On film, in the
press and the broadcast media, women's ac¬
tivities and interests typically go no further
than the confines of home and family.
Characterized as essentially dependent and
romantic, women are rarely portrayed as ra¬
tional, active or decisive.
Both as characters in fictional media
material and as newsmakers in the press and
broadcasting, women are numerically
under-represented, an absence which
underlines their marginal and inferior status
in many spheres of social, economic and
cultural life.
, Prevalent news values define most
women, and most women's problems, as
unnewsworthy, admitting women to
coverage primarily as the wives, mothers or
daughters of men in the news. In their own
right, they make the headlines usually only
as fashionable or entertainment figures.
Much media advertizing directed at women
as consumers is condescending in tone and
manipulative in intention; as the "bait"
through which products are advertized,
women are exploited in terms of their sex¬
uality and physical appearance.
An overwhelming body of North
American and European research indicates
that, in relation to women's actual participa¬
tion in the work force, all media under-
represent women workers.
This is significant because the question of
power and status of men vis-à-vis women in
media portrayals relates in part to the kinds
of occupational role to which each sex is
predominantly assigned. Since women are
rarely seen in authoritative positions such as
lawyers, doctors, judges, scientists they are
seldom in a position to exercise direct
authority over an adult male.
A study of the pattern of advising and
ordering in male-female interactions found
that dramatic characters on television were
selected, occupations were assigned and
plots developed in such a way as to
minimize the chances for women to display
superiority, except in traditionally accepted
female areas of knowledge. A further indica¬
tion of the media's emphasis on male
authority is the reliance on male voices in
advertizing to "sell" products.
In one of the very few cross-cultural
studies of media imagery in Latin
American and U.S. working-class and
middle-class magazines it was found that
although there were some class and cultural
differences, women were overwhelmingly
idealized in terms of dependence, humility,
lack of initiative, lack of career, lack of self-
control, intense emotionality, and so on, in
both cultures. According to the fictional
reality of the media, then, women are ac¬
tually rewarded for ineffectually, rather
than for actively controlling their own lives.
Although information is fragmentary and
the evidence is perilously thin, there is some
indication that images of women in certain
African countries may reflect and benefit
from a relatively self-conscious use of the
media in the general process of develop¬
ment. Reports suggest a growth in stories
about women, as well as a stress on their
potential contribution to development at
national and international levels.
Relatively little is known about the extent
and nature of women's participation in the
media industries. Incomplete and often
unreliable data paint a patchy picture.
Overall, the proportion of women employed
in film, broadcasting or in the national press
rarely exceeds 30 % in any country: often
the percentage is very much lower.
To give some examples from broad¬
casting: in the United States, 30 % of the
work force at television network head¬
quarters and also at network-owned stations
in 1977 was female; in Italy, women ac¬
counted for 20 % of the jobs in the national
television network (RAI),1975. It has been
estimated that in India women constituted
about 25% of the work force in broad¬
casting in the same year.
Women do slightly better in some Scan¬
dinavian countries: in Sweden women com¬
prise 33 % and in Norway 38 % of all
employees in the national broadcasting cor¬
porations (1976 figures). At the other end of
the scale, only 6 % of those employed in
NHK, the Japanese broadcasting system,
are women.
In the print media, the picture is really no
better. As far as can be established, women
rarely account for more than a quarter of the
jobs in journalism overall: Hungary, Poland,
Canada all have about that proportion and
Britain and the Lebanon have slightly fewer
(around 20 %). Several European countries
report about 15 % of women in press jobs
example, Norway, Denmark and Ger¬
many had this proportion in 1977.
Elsewhere, the proportions can be even
lower. Estimates put the percentage of
women in the Pakistan press at not higher
than 10 %, and in the Kenyan press at about
5 %. In Korea, only 2 % of jobs in the press
are held by women, while Japanese women
"To date, evidence of the impact of women working within the media, in terms of
producing an output which is qualitatively different, is slight... Until women
constitute a 'critical mass' within the media, their ability to work against accepted
cultural and professional values will be negligible." Valentina Leontieva (in profile
at right of photo below), of Central Television, Moscow, is one of the rare women
television personalities whose influence is felt throughout the Soviet Union. She is
seen here during one of her widely popular discussion programmes at which the
principal guest was world-famed geneticist Nikolai Dubinin.
Photo V. Sozinov © Tass, Moscow

occupy no more than 1 % of positions in the
press medium.
In some countries, certainly, women now
occupy more than 30 % of media jobs' in a
few, they approach 40 % of media workers.
The Swedes have settled on a 60:40 ratio in
most occupational sectors as representing
national equality. Is it not arguable that in
some countries, at least, equality at that
level has almost been achieved?
However, scrutiny of the data to see just
where in the media women are employed
shows that the global figures mask even
greater disparities between men and
women. For instance, although 38 % of
broadcasting jobs in Norway are held by
women, 63 % of jobs at the lowest wage
level are also filled by women.
Women are generally concentrated at the
lower levels of particular job categories, or
else hived off into areas which are over¬
whelmingly "female". For that reason, the
Equality Project in Sveriges Radio (the
Swedish national broadcasting organiza¬
tion) aims for a minimal 60:40 ratio within
any particular occupational category.
The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
found that in 1975, although 16 % of jobs in
top management or as departmental heads
were filled by women, most of these women
were not in key policy-making positions. In
the same year, the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation found that 93 % of
management-level jobs were held by men. In
the Australian Broadcasting Commission in
1977, no management positions were oc¬
cupied by women. The Italian RAI had 4 %
of women in a category spanning ad¬
ministrative and managerial jobs in 1975. In
Finland in 1978, all fourteen members of the
Board of Directors were male, while at
.middle-management level 6 % of posts were
held by women. The Norwegian broad¬
casting corporation (NRK) has 50 different
departments: only two are headed by
women. Of the 71 women in the Ghana
Broadcasting Corporation in 1975, two were
heads of section: these were the Head of
Audience Research and the Assistant Con¬
troller of External Broadcasting.
The same pattern is repeated at the
creative/ professional level, where access to
top posts is very limited for women, unless
the area of activity is "feminized". Thus,
though there are a fair number of women
heading programme departments in
children's, women's or even religious and
educational programming, and a large
number of women editing similar features
pages in the press, current affairs, news,
drama, science and sport remain almost
completely barred.
In Britain in 1975, for example, the
Association of Cinematograph, Television
and Allied Technicians (ACCT) found that
only 8 % of its members employed by the
independent television companies (ITV) as
directors or producer-directors were
women. In fact, it established that in all job
categories, a much higher proportion of
men reached the top grade than women.
Only 2 % of television producers in the
ABC (Australia) were women in 1977. These
are particularly depressing figures, consider¬
ing that the bulk of programme support
staff, production assistants and production
secretaries are women. Two broadcasting
organizations with untypically high propor¬
tions of women producers are the Swedish
and the Singaporean services, where
women account for 30 % and 38 % of all
producers, respectively.
In journalism too, women predominate at
the lower echelons, although the overall pic¬
ture seems somewhat better than in broad¬
casting. Thus, about a quarter of the
editorial jobs are said to go to women in the
U.S.A. while 28 % of editorial posts in Bri¬
tain are held by women. However, this
general picture is heavily influenced by the
very large number of female editorial staff
concentrated in traditional women's areas.
In general, women are relegated to areas
which are seen as having only marginal im¬
portance. The ACTT in Britain found its
members working primarily on educational,
arts and children's programmes in 1975. In
the United States, only about 10 % of news
personnel in television and radio stations,
for instance, were female in 1974, and most
of these were in low-level editorial jobs. In
Japan, NHK has recruited no women news
reporters for 20 years: women programme-
makers (about 1 % of the total production
staff) are almost exclusively concerned with
children's programmes or programmes deal¬
ing with cookery and similar activities.
At the technical level, there is a negligible
number of women in any broadcasting or
film organization anywhere. This an almost
universally male-dominated area. One ex¬
ception is Finland, where 20 % of all
technical staff in the Finnish Broadcasting
Company were women in 1978: women ac¬
counted for 42 % of film editors and 28% of
film supervisors, although only one of the
eighty camera operators was female.
The ABC in Australia found that 95% of
its technical staff were male, in 1977. In Bri¬
tain, the ACTT found that less than 10% of
its women members were technicians. Even
in Sweden, only 9% of women in Sveriges
Radio were working in technical areas in
1978. Almost everywhere, women tech¬
nicians are confined to the very lowest
grades.
At the same time, the secretarial and
clerical jobs are almost completely filled by
women in most broadcasting organizations.
In fact, when we talk of "women in the
media", we describe for the most part
women working as production secretaries,
script/continuity staff and clerk-typists.
In Britain, 100% of production
secretaries/producers' assistants among
ACTT members were female in 1975; in
Taiwan, nearly 90% of these staff across all
three television networks were women in
1976; all 83 continuity staff in the Finnish
Broadcasting Corporation were women in
1978. In the ABC in 1976, 58% of women
employees were clerks. Of all ACTT women
members in Britain, 60% were employed in
1975 as producers' assistants/production
secretaries or as continuity personnel.
These facts become particularly important
when seen in the context of earning levels
and career development. Not only are
women's jobs lower-paid than, for instance,
the technical jobs dominated by men: they
are also "dead-end" jobs, with no obvious
line of promotion.
It is difficult to find any hard evidence to
support the proposition that the portrayal of
women in the media differs when a woman
is producing the ¡mages. This is partly a con¬
sequence of the way in which research in
this area has typically been carried out.
A heavy research focus on content
analysis means that there have been virtually
no attempts to establish links between the
dominant ¡mages and the dominant values,
beliefs or attitudes of media personnel. A
few scattered studies have managed to
establish that, for instance, the female
editors of women's pages are on the whole
oriented by the same traditional concerns
and priorities as their male counterparts, and
that women's judgements about news-
worthiness resemble those of men.
Another study, examining the news
perceptions of journalism students, found,
that women students had the same
stereotyped picture of women as male
students. Although they themselves were
interested in politics and not "traditional"
women's concerns, they thought that they
were unusual and that "ordinary" women
were more interested in mundane matters.
It is also true that many instances can be
found of individual women producers, jour¬
nalists or decision-makers being associated
with, or directly responsible for, anti-female
material. This underlines the simplistic
nature of some statements made about
media output and male domination.
The fact is that most women and most
men share common cultural perspectives.
The problem is not, therefore, simply to
open up media employment to women, but
at the same time to work towards changing
women's self-perceptions, evolving and
directing measures against a cultural value
system which at present not only accords
women lower status, but also frequently
leaves them unaware of the fact.
To date, evidence of the impact of women
working within the media, in terms of their
producing an output which is qualitatively
different, is slight. This has been attributed
partly to the decision-making patterns of
most media organizations, and their rela¬
tionship to dominant economic and political
institutions, as well as to the existence of
established professional practices. Until
women constitute a "critical mass" within
the media, their ability to work against ac¬
cepted cultural and professional values will
be negligible.
Margaret Gallagher
25
