Living on
borrowed
time
Humanity is rapidly
overdrawing its
account with nature
In the world's tropical rain forests shifting cultivation using the "slash and burn" technique
has been successfully employed for thousands of years. A small section of forest is felled,
the trees and undergrowth are burned (photo above) and crops are planted in the ash. When
the areas involved are small and the period of fallow is long enough to allow the forest to
return to the site, the system works well; but, with populations growing, the fallow periods
shorten and the soil has no chance to recuperate. Tropical rain forests are an invaluable
resource and a reservoir of genetic diversity, but, today, eleven million hectares a year, or
twenty hectares a minute, are being felled or burned for agriculture. At this rate all of this
type of forest will have disappeared within 85 years.
THE current world energy crisis has
brought home forcibly to us all that
certain of the earth's resources, such
as oil and coal, are non-renewable and
sooner or later will be completely exhausted.
Luckily for humanity, however, resources
such as corn, rice and other cereals, cattle,
fish and timber renew themselves and can
be regularly cropped to provide the food,
clothing and shelter essential to human sur¬
vival.
What is not perhaps so clearly realized is
that these resources are renewable only to
the extent that their use is rationally planned
and managed. There are limits to the extent
to which we can draw on these resources
which, if exceeded, will destroy their capaci¬
ty for renewal. Making use of resources in a
manner which can be sustained indefinitely
is rather like living on interest while main¬
taining capital. Unfortunately, most current
utilization of aquatic animals, of the wild
plants and animals of the land, of forests
and of grazing lands is not sustainable.
On average, fish and other aquatic
animals account for 6% of the total protein
and 17 % of the animal protein in the human
diet. If this seems small, it should be
remembered that on a world basis most
(65%) protein comes from plants chiefly
cereals, beans and peas, nuts and oilseeds.
Meat accounts for 16% and milk products
for 9.5% of the average total protein intake.
These averages conceal substantial dif¬
ferences between and within countries.
Thirty-two countries get 34% or more of
their animal protein from seafood, and
another 11 countries consume double the
world average for seafood consumption.
Aquatic animals are also important for
trade. There are no world figures for
domestic trade, but it is clear from export
values alone that trade in seafood is both
substantial and growing fast. In 1978 ex-
28
ports of fish and fishery products reached
$10.8 thousand million, an increase of 15%
over the previous year.
Because much utilization of fisheries is
not sustainable, their contribution to na¬
tional diets and incomes is likely to diminish.
The result of past and present overfishing is
that the annual world marine catch is 15-20
million tonnes (or about 20%-24%) lower
than it might otherwise have been, and at
least 25 of the world's most valuable
fisheries are seriously depleted.
The consequences of such overexploita-
tion can be illustrated from the northwest
Atlantic, where due to overfishing in the late
1960s cod catches are still only a third of
their estimated potential. The drops in cod,
herring and haddock catches (all caused by
overfishing) could not be compensated by
increased catches of capelin and mackerel;
and the total catch of the fishery as a whole
has declined from 4.3 million tonnes in 1970
to 3.5 million tonnes in 1976.
It can no longer be assumed that depleted
stocks will recover to their full potential,
because: the spawning fishes and juveniles
may continue to be caught by industrial
fisheries (which take fish for conversion to
animal feed); ecosystem dynamics can
change and another species may take over
because the depleted species can no longer
compete effectively with it; and habitats
essential for spawning or as nurseries may
be degraded or destroyed.
Overfishing is the main threat to marine
living resources and a significant threat to
freshwater ones. It occurs locally in all
regions, but it is generally most pronounced
in regions dominated by developed
countries.
Five of the eight regions with most stocks
that are depleted are developed (northwest
Atlantic, northeast Atlantic, Mediterranean,
northwest Pacific, northeast Pacific). Of the
remaining three, two (eastern central Atlan
tic and southeast Atlantic) are dominated by
developed country fishing fleets: France,
Japan, Poland, Spain, USSR, South
Africawith Cuba and the Republic of
Korea operating the only major developing
country fleets. The only developing region
dominated by developing country fleets is
the southeast Pacific, where most of the
fishing is done by Peru and Chile.
As well as depleting many fish and a few
mollusc stocks, overfishing has almost ex¬
tinguished entire species of whales, sea
cows and sea turtles. Many aquatic animal
groups are also under pressure because of
accidental overexploitation or "incidental
take".
The incidental capture and killing of non-
target animals in the course of hunting or
fishing for other species is one of the more
destructive yet neglected problems of
aquatic living resource management. It is
not only highly wasteful, destroying an
estimated 7 million tonnes of fish every year,
it also threatens the survival of several sea
turtle species, notably the Kemp's ridley tur¬
tle which has been reduced almost to extinc¬
tion. A million seabirds are killed accidentally
in nets every year; and more cetaceans,
notably dolphins and porpoises, are taken
incidentally than deliberately.
Wildlife is an important subsistence
resource in developing countries and an im¬
portant recreational resource in both
developed and developing countries. Many
wild plants and animals of the land are an
important renewable resource and source of
food, particularly for rural communities in
developing countries. In parts of Ghana,
Zaïre and other countries in west and central
Africa, for example, up to three-quarters of
the animal protein comes from wild animals.
The nutritional importance of wild animals
and plants for large numbers of people is in¬
variably underestimated (and often ignor-

ed), largely because many of the more fre¬
quently eaten plants and animals (for exam¬
ple, vetches and porcupines) seldom feature
in the diets of nutritionists and are harvested
in areas far from the scrutiny of statisticians.
This is unfortunate for were the true nutri¬
tional value and the use made of wild plants
and animals appreciated by governments
they might be more ready to encourage
these resources to be managed sustainably
and to take steps to retain their habitats.
Wild animals and plants also provide a
significant, and sometimes the Only, source
of income for rural communities. In Canada,
for example, the wild fur trade helps support
40,000 trappers, who in the 1975-1976
season caught $25 million worth of pelts,
mostly from beaver, muskrat, lynx, seal,
mink and fox. By comparison in the same
season, farms produced $17 million worth
of furs, 99% being mink. World trade in
wildlife and wildlife products has become
big business: in 1975 the USA alone im¬
ported more than $1,000 million of wildlife
products.
International trade has become a threat to
many species as well-organized commercial
enterprises attempt to supply a vastly ex¬
panded market (mainly industrialized coun¬
tries) with increasingly scarce "commo¬
dities" taken from the wild (mainly in
developing countries):
hides and skins for the luxury fur and
leather industry; exotic meat and fish for
luxury food; a wide range of other animal
and plant products for pharmaceuticals,
perfumes, cosmetics, aphrodisiacs,
decoration, souvenirs or investment;
specimens for natural history museums;
live plants for horticulture; live animals
for the pet trade, zoos and menageries,
aquaria and other collections; and for the
testing of new chemical products and for
biomedical research.
Most of the trade is openly advertised, but
a significant part of it takes place illegally,
often through channels and by methods not
unlike those of the drug traffic. The impact
of this trade on many species and eco¬
systems is now serious.
For example, overexploitation threatens
almost 40% of all vertebrate species in
danger of extinction, and is the most serious
of the threats faced by reptiles. Because of
the difficulty of securing supplies, world
trade in crocodilian hides has dropped from
an estimated 10 million hides to 2 million.
Finally, wildlife is a major resource base
for recreation and tourism. Tourism, largely
based on wildlife, is among Kenya's top
three foreign exchange earners. In Canada
11% of the population hold hunting
licences; in the USA 8% hold hunting
licences and 13% hold fishing licences; and
in Sweden from 12% to 18% hold fishing
licences.
Many more people enjoy simply looking at
wildlife: in the USA there are about 7 million
birdwatchers, 4.5 million wildlife photo¬
graphers, and almost 27 million nature
hikers. For a great many people, too, wildlife
is of great symbolic, ritual and cultural im¬
portance, enriching their lives emotionally
and spiritually.
Forests and woodlands provide a rich
variety of goods, useful to affluent industrial
and poor rural communities alike; timber,
sawnwood and panels for construction,
walls, doors, shuttering and furniture;
pulpwood for pulp, paper, cartons and
rayon; poles, posts, mining timbers and
railway track sleepers; fuelwood; fodder,
fruits, game meat, honey, pharmaceuticals,
fibres, resins, gums, dyes, skins, waxes and
oils; beauty, amenity and recreation.
Forests have unquestioned importance
for industry and commerce. The value of the
annual world production of forest products
exceeds $115,500 million, and international
trade is worth about $40,000 million a year.
Thirty countries (eight of them developing
countries) each earn more than $100 million
a year from exports of forest productsand
five of these each earn more than $1,000
million a year.
In developing countries the heaviest de¬
mand on forests and woodlands is for fuel
and as a site for shifting cultivation. More
than 1,500 million people in developing
countries depend on wood for cooking and
keeping warm. Their annual consumption of
wood is estimated to be more than 1,000
million m3, well over 80% of developing
countries' total wood use (excluding ex¬
ports). In Africa the contribution of trees to
total energy use is as high as 58%; in
Southeast Asia and Latin America it is 42%
and 20% respectively.
The effect of such intense demand is to
denude the land of wood over wide areas.
Around one fishing centre in the Sahel
region of Africa, where the drying of 40,000
tonnes of fish consumes 130,000 tonnes of
wood every year, deforestation extends as
far away as 100 km.
Fuelwood is now so scarce in the Gambia
that gathering it takes 360 woman days a
year per family. Even when firewood is
available for sale, it is often beyond the
budgets of poor householders. In the
highlands of the Republic of Korea cooking
and heating can cost up to 15% of the
household budget; and in the poorer parts
of the Andean Sierra and the Sahel it can be
as high as 25%. Consequently many
families are forced to do without.
Permanent pastures (land used for 5 years
or more for herbaceous forage crops,
whether cultivated or wild) are the most ex¬
tensive land-use type in the worldoccupy¬
ing 30 million km2, or 23% of the earth's
land surface.
Permanent pastures and other grazing
land are generally in areas of low and ir¬
regular rainfall and are usually unsuitable for
crops without intensive capital investment.
Their productivity is generally low, ranging
from 1 hectare supporting 3-5 animal units
on fertile, well-managed pastures in central
Europe to 50-60 hectares to support 1 animal
unit in Saudi Arabia.
Nonetheless, grazing lands and forage
support most of the world's 3,000 million
head of domesticated grazing animals, and
hence most of the world's production of
meat and milk.
Unfortunately, mismanagement of graz¬
ing lands is widespread. Overstocking has
severely degraded grazing lands in Africa's
Sahelian and Sudanian zones. In parts of
North Africa, the Mediterranean and the
Near East, it is a major contributor to deser¬
tification. In many areas farmers are moving
onto land that is marginal for agriculture,
thereby displacing pastoralists onto land
that is marginal for livestock rearing.
Overstocking together with uncontrolled
grazing is also a serious problem in moun¬
tain areas, such as the Himalaya and the
Andes. There, too many improperly tended
animals remove both trees and grass
coverwhich is often very poor, both as
forage and for soil protection and erosion
accelerates.
Photo © Jean-Loup Charmet, Bibliothèque des Arts Décoratifs, Paris
Noah's Ark, an engraving based on a drawing in a 12th-century manuscript.
29
