Wonders
of
the world
by Georges Fradier
Photo >5 CAF. Warsaw
Cracow's historical
and architectural urban centre, Poland D
Trees have replaced the ramparts, except to the north where walls, towers and
barbicans still stand. Otherwise, Cracow is still as its planners designed it in
1257. On the huge market square in the centre (above) stand buildings that
symbolize three powers of the city: the tower of the Gothic Town Hall, the
Church of Our Lady of the Assumption, and the Cloth Hall. This exemplary
model of town-planning is being matched today by a conservation plan which
covers the whole of the ancient capital, as well as the town of Kazimierz, on
the other side of the River Vistula, which was absorbed into the municipality
long ago. Between these neighbourhoods, where dozens of monasteries cluster
round Cracow University (founded 1364, the second oldest in central Europe
after Prague), rises Wawel Hill and its two imposing monuments, the Royal
Castle and the Cathedral. They contain valuable works of Polish art that have
escaped the pillaging of the centuries. In the castle, originally of Gothic design
but transformed into a Renaissance palace at the beginning of the sixteenth
century, is a famous series of tapestries which were executed in Brussels
around 1560 on the instructions of King Sigismund II Augustus. Among the
many priceless objects in the cathedral, whose Gothic vaults house the
sepulchres of kings and queens, is the so-called lance of Saint Maurice, which
the Holy Roman emperor Otto III gave to Boleslav the Valiant in 1000 AD.
The Bialowieza National Park, Poland
In 1919, the European bison vanished from the great Polish forest. Today herds
of these powerful animals have been reconstituted and roam freely in the
Bialowieza National Park. Like the hardy tarpán wild horses, which have also
been saved from extinction, the bison were part of the original fauna of the
Bialowieza forest which lies on the watershed between the catchment areas of
the Baltic and Black Seas, and Is one of the oldest expanses of natural lowland
woods in Europe. Some 700 species of vascular plants are found in the Park,
and twenty-three species of broad-leaved and coniferous trees. As for animal
life, in addition to bison and horses, fifty-four species of mammals and 200
species of birds find sanctuary there.
AT first sight it is bewildering, this list of
fifty-seven wonders of the world (not that
it is closed: in a few years time it will have
swollen towho knows? a hundred, a thou¬
sand and one). When contemplating these mas¬
terpieces proposed by twenty-odd States one is,
momentarily, perplexed. "Here are the most
authentic, the most individual things we
possess", one can almost hear the representa¬
tives of each State presenting their case. So
are we looking at a cavalcade of each nation's
history, a panoply of symbols of its "cultural
identity"?
A people's awareness of its birthright does not
come about by accident. However puerile it may
be, patriotic drum-beating about a nation's archi¬
tecture, exploits, inventions or philosophy, none¬
theless presupposes some kind of education and
publicity. How can you talk to people about a his¬
toric monument if they have no idea about history
and are blind to architecture? So let us welcome
the teaching of national history, the advance of
education, the work of the media.
In a sense, then, the World Heritage Conven¬
tion is a reflection of the state of national cultures
in the late twentieth century.
But it is much more than that; unlike many a
diplomatic treaty, it is ahead of its time. For the
property it presents to us is considered to be of
universal value. Now what civilization has ever
acknowledged that areas of national territory, or
objects of every possible origin and form can pos¬
sess a "universal" value? (True, the ancient
Greeks drew up a list of Seven Wonders of the
World. But what a small world it was! Five of the
seven had been built by the Greeks themselves,
six were products of their own times. The Egyp¬
tian pyramids were the only exception; they were
already 1,500 years old and are, incidentally, the
only wonder to have survived). How justified is
the proposition that monuments and sites ad¬
mired in one country should command admiration
in all the rest in other words that the whole of
humanity now has a common heritage?
In the case of natural property the idea is not
too hard to accept. The world's biological re¬
serves are of concern to everyone on earth. The
great ecosystems know no frontiers, and there is i
something faintly ludicrous about "national" |
33

i ownership of geological phenomena. Everyone
feels that "the beauties of nature" should be
shared or respected by all human beings precisely
because they were not made by human hand. As
for man's own works, it requires little imagination
to realize that we are all heirs to the treasures of
human knowledge and thought. The trouble is
that we are dealing here not with abstractions but
with tangible, immovable things: buildings firmly
established on a plot of land, inseparable from a
landscape, built by the sons of that particular
piece of soil acting in accordance with their own
specific aims and standards.
The list urges us to appreciate the universal
value of the temples of Abu Simbel and those of
Tikal. Mont Saint-Michel and its bay are included
as being capable of stirring the emotions of peo¬
ple all over the world. And why not? One hundred
and fifty years ago, this monastery on a desolate
wave-swept rock was used as a prison, it was a
. miniature Gothic Alcatraz. Presumably, the
French authorities of the day attached no value to
it except as a penitentiary. But today the Mont
Saint-Michel is presented to us as a "wonder" in
the fullest sense. And everyone is bound to agree,
provided that he or she sees the place, can expe¬
rience a sense of wonder at it, is interested in
medieval Christianity, twelfth-century European
architecture, and the glint of wet sand.
At any rate, this is what the World Heritage
Convention implies. History has begun to take on
a human face. Exchanges take place in a spirit of
equality which shatters national self-centredness
and disturbs us as we smugly contemplate "our"
monuments, the inimitable repositories of "our"
values. Here, "in the same bag", we have Aachen
and Isfahan, the age of Charlemagne and that of
Abbas I, Quito and Dubrovnik, Cairo and Kath¬
mandu, because it is seemingly accepted that the
Swedes (among others) will see Isfahan like the
Iranians, and that the Iranians (among others) will
see Kathmandu like the Nepalese.
Far from being backward-looking, the Heritage
Convention seems to be prophetic. But there is
one point where States party to it make a particu¬
larly striking innovation. They pledge to preserve
the cultural and natural property on their inven¬
tory. Each State "recognizes that the duty of
ensuring the identification, protection, conserva¬
tion, presentation and transmission to future
generations of the heritage.. .belongs primarily to
that State". Such an obligation is quite without
precedent!
For we are talking about a heritage, a legacy:
old towns and ancient monuments. People think
that we have inherited this legacy from our ances¬
tors to whom it was bequeathed by their own
forebears and who religiously preserved it with us
in mind. But this is simply not true, except for a
few items on the list. National parks are fairly
recent creations and have obviously been protec¬
ted ever since they were established. Previously,
their contents needed less protection because
they were further from the reach of interference
by our forefathers. In addition, certain buildings
have been deliberately bequeathed to us: royal
palaces, which now belong to the "nation" or the
"people", churches, mosques and temples which
are still in use. But all the other property on the list
is there by chance or through the tireless efforts
of archaeologists who reconstruct ruins and are
still today rescuing monuments from the jungle,
from the earth, from oblivion.
Governments now make it their business to res¬
tore cultural monuments, and sometimes the
general public rallies to the defence of buildings
which have survived from their past. The reasons
for this about-turn in public opinion are well
known. The adoption of the Heritage Convention
coincided with mounting concern about the dete¬
rioration of the environment, the exhaustion of
natural resources, and the stultifying monotony
of much international architecture. In more than
one town and city the authorities actually began
fo stop demolishing. A few voices crying in the
wilderness had already insisted on the value of
buildings and quarters that had miraculously sur¬
vived the centuries. Suddenly their cries were
being echoed by millions of people. These buil¬
dings were seen to be remarkable by any stan
dards, not just objects of nostalgic regard. Each
one is unique and therefore irreplaceable.
These treasures are not only beyond price, they
are terrifyingly fragile. They need the kind of pro¬
tection they have never been given; they could,
not survive a few more years of neglect. Natural
parks are equally vulnerable: a few concessions to
the motorway planners, hotel chains or promoters
of big game hunting would make short work of
them. Protection is becoming a permanent duty.
The States party to the Convention perform this
duty all the more effectively because public opi¬
nion is not only behind them but often ahead. We
have decided to remove from present or future
dangers the little we have salvaged from the past.
In the way of "immovable" property we have
nothing better to transmit to them.
So far none of the cultural property on the Heri¬
tage List (with one exception which I will mention
shortly) is less than two hundred years old. Let us
hope that the twentieth century will be fittingly
represented one day. But how? By which piece of
architecture of universal value? And which monu¬
ment capable of being preserved, in an age when
buildings are designed to last until their cost has
been recovered? Which steel tower, Olympic
monument or nuclear power station will be regar¬
ded as unique and irreplaceable?
And now for the exception, the one twentieth-
century monument already on the list. Its name,
Auschwitz-Birkenau, is that of two localities in
Poland. It is the most hideous compound imagi¬
nable, a fitting site for a place which saw human
absurdity reveal its fullest scope for crime in its
most rational and clinical form. Between 1940 and
1944 Hitler's henchmen packed the camp with
starving deportees from twenty-four countries to
provide slave labour. In those years they slaugh¬
tered four million men, women and children. The
remains of some of themspectacles, teeth, hair
and fabric made from hair have been pre¬
served, with various instruments of torture, in the
Auschwitz "museum". The Polish Government,
which has turned Auschwitz into a Monument to
the Martyrs, has created a zone of silence
stretching one kilometre round the camp.
To this camp of horror should we not add ano¬
ther group of buildings which, behind the ele¬
gance of their eighteenth-century façades, con¬
ceal a sinister reality? This is the Island of Gorée,
off the coast of Senegal near Dakar, where for
centuries millions of black slaves men, women
and children were confined before being trans¬
ported to the Antilles. The prosperity of Gorée
lasted for a long time, as long as the traffic in
"ebony wood". Today the deserted "slaveries"
have been eroded by time and salt. The Senega¬
lese Government wishes to transform this symbol
of the suffering of an entire people into a place of
dialogue, a shrine of reconciliation. Once res¬
tored, Gorée will house a centre of studies on the
black diaspora, a conference centre, and a history
museum.
The members of the World Heritage Committee
deserve our gratitude for having selected these
two monuments. In so doing they have given us a
clearer understanding of the extent to which the
notion of the natural and cultural heritage not
only includes but goes beyond aesthetic and
scientific criteria. The world heritage mirrors the
world. Its natural glories possess a value we che¬
rish because they are untouched by human hand,
except by the hand which seeks to preserve them.
The value of the cultural heritage lies in the quality
of the work through which artists and builders
have expressed the civilizations to which they
belonged. But there is also a moral value: it is for
us to ensure that, tomorrow, the worst no longer
rubs shoulders with the best.
Georges Fradier
GEORGES FRADIER, French novelist and
essayist, was for many years a member of
Unesco's staff, latterly as Director of the Division
of Human Settlements and Socio-Cultural Envi¬
ronment. His published works include Encoun¬
ters and Celebrations (1963) and About the Qua¬
lity of Life (1976) published by Unesco.
z+*
-JL-*
fc*J
" ',>
,
The Island of Gorée. the former slave-trade
centre, off the coast of Senegal. Above, the
Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp.
34
BRODARD GRAPHIQUE. COULOMMIERS - Dépôt légal C 1 -Août 1980- IMPRIMÉ EN FRANCE ¡Printed in France). Commission paritaire N" 27.253.
