Highlands and Islands
Ecosystems in danger
by Francesco di Castri and Gisbert Glaser
IN the fascinating kaleidoscope of
peoples and cultures that make up
our world highlanders and ¡slanders
stand out as a breed apart, characterized by
a fierce independence of spirit and a pro¬
found attachment to their place of origin.
For the ¡slander the physical barrier of the
sea acts as a permanent reminder that he is
distinct from the man of the mainland, cut
off from easy access to many of the
resources readily available to his continental
counterpart and untouched by the cultural
waves that ebb and flow ceaselessly across
land frontiers.
In the fastnesses of his upland home,
those mountains that rise like landlocked
islands from the continental plains, the
highlander too is often so cut off from the
plainsmen below that, even in today's world
of instant communication through radio and
television, his cultural patterns retain their
distinctive forms.
But independence of spirit born of isola¬
tion is not all that unites highlanders and
islanders. The peoples occupying these
microcosmic areas have shaped some of the
most harmonious landscapes in the world,
often achieving an equilibrium, a partnership
with nature, that has lasted for centuries.
Today, in a shrinking world, from the Alps
to the Andes and from the Mediterranean to
the Pacific, the pressures of population
growth and movement and the demands of
development have placed this equilibrium in
danger.
For scientists working within the
framework of Unesco's international
research undertaking, the Man and the
Biosphere. (MAB) Programme (see article
page 5), islands and highlands offer ideal
fields for research on the interactions bet¬
ween ecology and development. Being
small, relatively clearly defined units, the
forces and interactions that affect the com¬
plex man/environment relationship can be
fairly readily identified and modelled and the
lessons learnt applied to other larger and
more intricate systems.
In two of the mountain areas and two of
the island ecosystems in which MAB
research teams have been working the
Andes, the Alps, the Tunisian island of Djer¬
ba in the Mediterranean and the Fiji Islands
in the Pacific population movements of
various kinds have been the underlying
cause of instability and environmental
change.
For many centuries, human habitation in
the central Andes was concentrated mainly
in the altiplanos, or high plateaux, with set¬
tlements spanning the range from isolated
rural communities to large urban centres.
The adjacent downslope areas were more
sparsely settled, particularly the tropical
forest areas in the lowlands west of the
Andes. During this century, and especially
since 1950, there have been great
movements of population to the urban areas
in the mountains, to the lower altitude areas
and, above all, to the coastal towns and
cities.
Emigration from the highland areas results
in part from growing population pressure on
a limited resource base and in part from a
real or an expected better quality of life in
other areas. For a variety of social and
political reasons the patterns of land ex¬
ploitation established in the altiplanos after
the Spanish conquest remained static and
when faced with rapid population growth
the capacity of the highland areas to support
ever-increasing numbers was rapidly
stretched to the limit. The result was over¬
use of land, particularly over-grazing, a
decline in productivity in many areas and a .
consequent increase in emigration, especial¬
ly among the younger and more dynamic
people.
Migration on the scale now being ex¬
perienced in the Andes affects the environ¬
ment through over-use in some areas and
under-use in others. Another consequence
has been that for the first time in history the
downslope areas below the altiplanos are
being massively exploited. Unfortunately,
lack of sound agricultural practice is leading
to accelerated erosion of the soil which not
only affects the productivity of these areas
directly but also has a negative effect on
lowland areas.

Migration is also putting serious pressure
on the housing and health services and
other amenities in the urban areas, especial¬
ly in the coastal towns and cities to which
the population flow is the greatest. The
health problems are enormous since the
altiplano populations arriving in the humid
low altitude areas are especially vulnerable
to bacterial, viral, parasitic and microbial in¬
fections against which they have no natural
immunity.
In the Alps, population movement has
been in two directions. The traditional
mountain populations are abandoning some
of the higher altitude areas, while adjacent
lower areas are becoming comparatively
crowded. But the main cause for concern is
the transformation of what was formerly a
relatively stable agricultural and pastoral
system due to seasonal inflows of people
from outside the area on such a vast scale
that the carrying capacity of these areas may
well be exceeded.
These inflows are made up of summer
and winter tourists and weekend visitors
from the densely populated neighbouring
regions. To these must be added owners of
second homes who often become perma¬
nent residents upon retirement. Many tradi-
more marked by ski-lifts and ski-run erosion
than by the beauty of the traditional Alpine
landscapes, and even winter tourism will be
discouraged if the areas become too crowd¬
ed, too built-up and if traffic on the moun¬
tain roads rivals that in the towns.
Agriculture, too, is very much af¬
fected only in tourist areas but
throughout the Alpine region. New attitudes
towards agricultural work and rural life are
as important as the profitability of
agricultural and pastoral use of steep and
isolated mountain lands in provoking the
abandonment of certain areas or the ap¬
pearance of phenomena such as undergraz-
ing. As fewer and fewer pathways for the
herds remain available the old practice of
transhumance (the moving of cattle from
winter to summer pastures) is disappearing
in the western Alps. One immediate side ef¬
fect of this abandonment of grazing land is
that changes in the vegetation cover create
surfaces more conducive to avalanches.
The direct effects of the massive increase
in the numbers of skiers over the past
decade must also be taken into account.
Aerial photographic surveys have shown
how much the impacting of snow by
thousands of ski descents every winter
islands. The impact of the mass tourist in¬
dustry has upset the balance of what were
once relatively self-sufficient, traditional
agricultural and pastoral systems.
On the Tunisian island of Djerba, for ex¬
ample, the traditional system was already
not fully self-sufficient, as emigration was
always extensive, and remittances from rich
emigrants in Tunis or even further afield
have played a major role in keeping the
economic system functioning, and in main¬
taining a standard of living which is higher
than that in most other areas of Tunisia.
Large-scale tourism was introduced only
in the late 1960s. During the peak tourist
seasons 0/ the last few years, the number of
visitors on the island has been twice that of
the native population. The needs of these
tourists for hotel accommodation, water,
food and services, and their contacts with
the local population, have modified the en¬
vironment, the land-use systems, the overall
economy, the physical infrastructure, the
society, the maintenance of cultural tradi¬
tions and the aspirations of the people of
Djerba.
Major problems arise from the competi¬
tion between agriculture and the tourist in- k
dustry for the two main limiting resources, Y
tional villages, Alpine pasturelands and, in¬
deed, whole valleys can no longer meet the
demands of this additional population for
avalanche-safe building land, water, roads,
energy supplies, ski-lifts and ski-runs. There
is also the risk that excessive population
concentration may lead to water, air and
land pollution.
Certain areas may risk losing their attrac¬
tion for summer tourists if landscapes are
hinders the run-off of water in the spring.
Vegetation is destroyed by the cutting edges
of skis and it has been found that along the
ski runs the insect population is decimated
and the number of earthworms per square
metre along some trails, scientists have
discovered, has been, reduced from 130 to
ten.
Tourism has also been one of the major
causes of change in many Mediterranean
FRANCESCO DI CASTRI, Italian terrestrial
ecologist, is director of Unesco's Ecological
Sciences Division and Secretary of the Interna¬
tional Co-ordinating Council of Unesco's Man and
the Biosphere (MAB) Programme.
GISBERT GLASER, of the Federal Republic of
Germany, is a geographer in the Ecological
Sciences Division of Unesco and co-ordinator of
the mountain and island ecosystems project areas
of Unesco's Man and the Biosphere (MAB)
Programme.

w
Below right, the spreading outskirts
of La Paz, Bolivia, the world's
highest capital (3,577 metres above
sea level). Growing population
pressure on the limited resources of
the rural areas of the Andean
altiplanos, or high plateaux, is
leading to increasing migration to
the towns. Bolivia has no coastline,
but in other Andean countries the
main pattern of migration is from
the high rural areas to the high
urban areas and from the high
urban areas to lowland and coastal
towns. Right, harvesting the potato
crop in the department of
Ayacucho in the highlands of south
central Peru.
water and labour. The risk of under-use of
the land, with all its ecological conse¬
quences, cannot be ignored, given the
changing attitudes towards agricultural
work. Under these circumstances,
agriculture and pastoralism require special
support and guidance.
-The socio-cultural impact of tourism may
well be the cause of the most serious prob¬
lems at the present time. The sudden "con¬
frontation" of a traditionally rural, mainly
Islamic society with "liberalized", mainly ur¬
ban Western Europeans, their lifestyle and
their money, may lead too abruptly to
changes in attitudes and cultural identifica¬
tion within the local society.
Another important problem is the
transformation of the traditional Djerbian
landscapes through these new dev¬
elopments. Tourists come, not only in
search of sunshine and beaches, but also of
the remnants of this traditional landscape
and the traditional life-style.
Although their population is small in
numerical terms, the outlying eastern
islands of Fiji appear to have more in¬
habitants than they can at present support.
The situation in which they find themselves
is common to many other tropical islands
and, indeed, to many rural areas in the
developing world. Typical of this situation is
the use of land to produce a single crop for
export (in the case of Fiji this is copra) which
is in economic decline because of falling
world market prices, at the expense of food
production for the subsistence of the island
populations.
Inter-island produce exchange in Fiji has
virtually disappeared and the network of
flows of materials and people between
islands has almost completely collapsed.
With the decline in demand for copra, fewer
and fewer ships call on them and they
become more and more isolated. The
response to this situation is increased
8

Each year, the 300 inhabitants of
the Austrian Alpine village of
Obergurgl (below) act as hosts to
40.000 tourists. On the Tunisian
island of Djerba (bottom), situated
in the Gulf of Gabès and known to
the ancients as the "land of the
lotus-eaters", tourists outnumber
the approximately 11,000 islanders
by two to one at the height of the
holiday season. Although large-
scale tourism has brought
economic advantages to these
areas, it threatens to upset both
their environmental equilibrium and
traditional life-styles.
emigration to the larger islands or to con¬
tinents where the economic growth centres
are.
Thus, while the outer islands are under¬
used, the main islands are no longer self-
sufficient in food production and food im¬
ports are increasing. In Fiji, the size of the
population flows to the two major islands of
Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, and especially to
the capital area, Suva, has become so great
that housing, employment and schooling
needs can no longer be met.
Have the Unesco/MAB researchers any
solutions to offer to the decision-makers
who have to cope with the kinds of prob¬
lems outlined above? The answer is that in
the two cases where their research is near-
ing completion they certainly have.
The village of Obergurgl, at the head of
the Oetz valley in the Austrian Tyrolean Afps
faces many of the problems affecting Alpine
areas described above. Situated at an
altitude of about 2,000 metres, the village
draws an ever-increasing number of summer
and winter tourists. The first signs of the en¬
vironmental consequences of this "develop¬
ment", expressed largely in terms of hotel
and ski-lift construction and a sharp increase
in the presence of people (and cars) in the
village and its surroundings, are beginning
to appear. The people of Obergurgl (300 in¬
habitants) perceive these as negative, and
fear that eventually tourists might stay away
from their village because they no longer
find it attractive. Another potential limit to
this type of economic growth is simply the
availability of avalanche-safe land.
The MAB National Committee of Austria,
following proposals put forward by resear¬
chers of the University of Innsbruck and
working in collaboration with the Interna¬
tional Institute of Applied Systems Analysis
in Laxenburg, Austria, chose Obergurgl as aw
site for intensive study. Y

Hay
" imports
Import
cost
Diagram, above, shows the many
interlinked factors which have to be
taken into account in planning for the
balanced development of even a small,
well-defined community like the village
of Obergurgl in the Austrian Alps.
Alteration of any one of these factors
may have complex and sometimes
unexpected repercussions on the
others. To take the simple example of
ski-lift waiting time if winter visitors
have to queue up for more than a
certain length of time, they will stay
away in future years; if more ski-lifts
are built, more winter tourists will
come, and more hotels will have to be
built, thus reducing the land available
for cattle grazing and the production of
forage; summer tourists will stay away
as the scenic attractions of the area are
increasingly marred by unsightly ski-
lifts and additional building; summer
employment in tourism will fall and
emigration will increase. The study of
Obergurgl undertaken by the Austrian
National Committee for Unesco's Man
and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme,
in collaboration with the Institute of
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg,
set an example in that the population of
Obergurgl was consulted and involved
at every stage of the investigation.
Diagram from Alpine areas workshop on the Obergurgl
model by Franz and Holling © IIASA, 1974, Laxenburg,
Austria
. The disciplines working together in this
project include meteorology, botany,
zoology, microbiology and pedology, as well
as economic . geography, anthropology,
sociology, regional planning sciences and
economics. The great success of the project
lies, however, in the fact that it was possible
to involve in its work not only the research
workers, but also those actually concerned
by the research and in need of the informa¬
tion generated by it.
In fact, since its beginning in 1973, the
project has provided a framework for a per¬
manent dialogue and feedback mechanism
between the local population, local political
representatives, the village administration,
the Tyrolean government and the research
workers.
Thus, the three different dynamic models
of Obergurgl which have been developed in
successive stages of the project combine the
insights and knowledge of scientists and of
the people of Obergurgl. The first model
was a preliminary attempt to show human
impact on a simple mosaic of Alpine
ecosystems, and the policy options
available. It dealt with recreational demand
predictions, population growth in relation to
alternative economic development, farming
and environmental change,' animal popula¬
tion patterns, forests and the rates of
avalanche and erosion. The model allowed
the simulation of predictive scenarios of
alternatives for the development of
Obergurgl in the coming twenty to forty
years, and their constraints.
Obergurgl Model II enriched Model I with
the results of various concurrent scientific
and anthropoiogical studies such as the
determination of thresholds of necessary en¬
vironmental disturbance before erosion oc¬
curs, and the weighting of the factor of
landscape quality by tourists and local
populations. Both models, however,
represented the very particular situation of
Obergurgl, and were not easily transferred
to other geographical areas in the Alps.
Model III was developed for transferring
results to other regions. It is based on the in¬
vestigation of the types of changes which
occur in the major types of ecosystems and
physical terrain under different degrees of
environmental stress and forms of use (graz¬
ing, skiing, etc.). Thus, by simulating the
environmental consequences of various
development alternatives. Model III provides
a useful and widely applicable planning
instrument
In Fiji, with financial assistance from the
United Nations Fund for Population Ac¬
tivities (UNFPA), Unesço-MAB conducted a
pilot research project with a broad inter¬
disciplinary approach.
For about two years, from 1974 to 1976,
field studies were undertaken in Fiji, concen¬
trating on the systems relations between:
(a) human population dynamics; (b) use of
natural resources from a set of interlinked
ecosystems ranging from marine to coastal
and terrestrial; (c) the function of the few
outer islands in eastern Fiji which were-
studied, in relation to national and global
economic development structures.
By integrating the various component
studies the project has been able to for¬
mulate suggestions for more rational
management of the resources of the outer
islands. For the farmers of the outer islands,
the economic reward of coconut growing is,
in cash terms, far smaller than that of the
Fiji-consumed taro, and yaqona is even
more lucrative.
A first suggestion is that the agricultural
production of the islands relatively close to
10

the urbanized areas of Fiji in Viti Levu and
Vanua Levu be developed so as to be wholly
absorbed into the national market. For the
more distant islands, a mix of export pro¬
duction and supply to the national market
should be envisaged.
The project also provided detailed recom¬
mendations on the potential diversity of land
and sea use, including development of pine
schemes and methods of aquaculture for
more intensive fish production.
I
Programmes to increase rural incomes,
expand employment opportunities, and im¬
prove the quality of life in rural areas would
reduce the rate of urban immigration and
alleviate problems in the urban areas of the
two largest islands. The project analysed the
possibilities for this change and developed
alternative scenarios for the future.
It was, of course, not sufficient to study
various outer islands in isolation. Emphasis
had to be laid on the study of the flow of
material and people, political influence/deci¬
sions, etc., among these islands and bet¬
ween the islands under study and the out¬
side world, mainly the two major islands of
Viti Levu and Vanua Levu.
This approach alone made it possible to
consider important questions related to
population carrying capacity. Are these
islands overpopulated? Can they carry more
people than they do now? Alternatively, is a
shortage of people likely to become critical
as a limitation to development?
A methodology has been developed to
calculate the carrying capacity of these
islands under different human use systems.
Surprisingly, results show that the outer
islands are underpopulated for other types
of land use. Even the number of people that
could be supported at minimum recom¬
mended standard-of-living levels in a pure
subsistence economy would be far higher
than the present population, under a copra
economy in decline. In fact, most of the
islands under study could support larger
populations if their economies were based
on more diversified and rational use of the
land.
MAB research findings are now helping to
shape the decision-making process at
Obergurgl and in the Fiji Islands. But, more
than this, they are helping to solve the prob¬
lems of other mountain tourist areas and
other island groups. For although both pro¬
jects involve very specific local problems,
every MAB project is designed to provide
"core" material applicable to other regions.
The research methods evolved during the Fi¬
ji project, for example, are already being us¬
ed in a current study of Caribbean islands,
and the Obergurgl study led to the develop¬
ment of a model applicable to many other
Alpine regions under environmental stress
as a result of changing agricultural practices
and the pressure of tourism.
Altogether some 950 MAB research pro¬
jects of all kinds are now in progress.
Research findings are being fed into a com¬
puterized information system and a body of
basic information on appropriate methods
for handling environmental and resource-
use problems is gradually being acquired
which is freely available to decision-makers
the world over. The MAB dream of a world
in which man lives in partnership with nature
making rational use of the natural resources
of the biosphere is slowly but steadily
becoming a reality.
Francesco di Castri
and Gisbert Glaser
Below, a Fiji islander tends a taro
plant. The taro's large, starchy,
spherical underground root forms
the staple food of many Pacific
island peoples. The Unesco/MAB
study on Fiji suggests that it would
be advantageous for the farmers of
some of the outer islands to
increase production of taro for
consumption by Fijians and to
reduce production of copra for
export. Bottom photo, a typical
cluster of outer Fijian islands.
i
m- f
w
o_
O Jj
<H
©
¡5
c-bVJ
o
0.
3 H
YyV(7
1 5i F^^vJ
Photo Griffiths © Magnum, Paris
