Of mammoths and men
Conservation for human survival
by Michel Bâtisse
Agréât deal of talk is heard these days
about protecting threatened animal
species, preserving forests, improv¬
ing the environment, and even restoring the
"quality of life". And yet these notions
sometimes seem hazy and the motives
behind them are as a rule neither very clear
nor very rational. The case for the conserva¬
tion of nature must be more satisfactorily
explained before it can be more effectively
defended.
Some 10,000 years ago, an abundant and
noble form of animal life, the mammoth,
disappeared forever from the face of the
earth, perhaps as a result of the long hail of
blows inflicted on it by our distant
ancestors, doubtless too because its disap¬
pearance had in any case been pre-ordained
in the pitiless book of the evolution of
species.
No one today is concerned about the fate
of the mammoth, whose extinction has
been no hindrance to the development and
flowering of human civilizations. The sur¬
vival or disappearance of a single species
notwithstanding, the great adventure of life
goes on. On the other hand, the world as we
and our children envision it today would
undeniably be the poorer if the elephant, for
example, became extinct. The philosopher
Immanuel Kant maintained that man has
duties to himself only. Does he, then, owe
none to the elephant? Or to the whale?
MICHEL BATISSE, Deputy Assistant Director-
General for Sciences at Unesco, is a French
physicist specializing in problems of the environ¬
ment and natural resources. He was instrumental
in launching the International Hydrological
Decade and Unesco's Man and the Biosphere
programme.
The truth is that in every age certain
civilizations have shown respect for living
species and certain religions have even
raised such respect to the level of dogma. In
every age, too, the rural world has patiently
harvested the bounty of nature's resources
without jeopardizing their productive
physical and biological mechanisms, thereby
securing the very foundations of human
societies and cultures.
These processes are still going on today.
But at the same time new phenomena have
appeared and their impact has been increas¬
ingly felt since industrial civilization and the
agricultural revolution extended their sway
to every corner of the world, since unbridled
population growth began, and since our
needs of all kinds, whether real or imagined,
have come to impose on nature and natural
resources a pressure which is constantly
mounting, often excessive, and will soon
become intolerable.
The idea of "conservation" is simply a
healthy reaction to the new situation created
by the technological and demographic ex¬
plosions. Healthy but belated. There have,
admittedly, been numerous cases of action
in various parts of the world to protect
unique sites and to regulate the use of cer¬
tain resources.
Four centuries before the Christian era
Plato was already decrying the fact that the
mountains of Greece were being stripped of
their trees. As early as the thirteenth century
in Europe, efforts were starting to be made
to bring some order to the practice of
forestry, after the extensive deforestation of
the early Middle Ages. In France, the
celebrated decree on watercourses and
forests drawn up in 1669 by Louis XIV's
minister Colbert was primarily concerned
with obtaining wood supplies for ship¬
building but also provided for the conserva¬
tion of forests. More recently, in 1872, the
world's first national park was created in the
United States on the magnificent site of
Yellowstone.
However, until the Second World War all
the combined efforts to protect nature could
not be said to amount to a solid and struc¬
tured movement. Even in 1946 when Unesco
was founded, governments attached much
more importance to the protection of
monuments and works of art than to the
conservation of the natural heritage.

Fortunately this situation was soon
destined to change. Chance, which
sometimes orders matters wisely, decreed
that the first Director-General of Unesco
should be Sir Julian Huxley, an eminent
- biologist with a passionate interest in evolu¬
tion. In 1948, on the instigation of Huxley
and a group of far-seeing scientists, Unesco
in co-operation with the French government
organized a conference at Fontainebleau
which led to the creation of the International
Union for the Protection of Nature. This
dynamic non-governmental organiza¬
tion in 1957 the International
Union for the Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources has now launched a
World Conservation Strategy whose broad
outlines are presented in this issue of the
Unesco Courier.
In the last thirty-odd years we have come
a long way, in terms both of ideas and of
practical accomplishments. It has to be ad¬
mitted that the earliest essays in the conser¬
vation of nature were tinged with roman¬
ticism and were not always based on a pro¬
found analysis of the hierarchy of needs.
The emphasis was laid on the protection of
attractive animal species, above all the great
mammals, and on that of the most spec¬
tacular sites. I
In partnership with nature, man
has created some of the world's
most pleasing landscapes, living
sculptures like these hillside rice
terraces in Java, Indonesia. Over
the centuries man has altered
his environment, modifying it in
ways favourable to himself, but
at the same time respecting the
physical and biological
mechanisms of nature. Only
since the industrial revolution
and the technological and
demographic explosions to
which it cjave rise has human
pressure on the world's natural
resources become excessive and
even, at times, intolerable.

A world strategy for the conservation of Earth's living resources is
needed now because:
1. Living resources essential for human survival and sustainable
development are increasingly being destroyed or depleted. At the
same time human demand for these resources is growing fast. The
problem is illustrated above. If current rates of land degradation
continue, close to one third of the world's arable land (symbolized
by the stalk ofgrain) will be destroyed in the next 20 years. Similar¬
ly, by the end of this century (atpresent rates of clearance), the re¬
maining area of unlogged productive tropical forest will be halved.
During this period the world population is expected to increase by
almost half- from just over 4,000 million to just under 6,000
million. The predicament caused by growing numbers of people
demanding scarcer resources is exacerbated by the dispropor¬
tionately high consumption rates of developed countries.
2. The action required to cure the most serious current conserva¬
tion problems and to prevent still worse ones takes time: time for
planning, education, training, better organization and research;
and when such action is undertaken, it takes time for the biosphere
to respond reforestation, the restoration of degraded land, the
recovery of depleted fisheries, and so on, are not instantaneous
processes.
3. National and international capacities to conserve are ill-
organized and fragmented split up amongst sectors such as
agriculture, forestry, fisheries and wildlife with consequent
duplication of effort, gaps in coverage, competition for money and
influence, and conflict; and they have little influence on the
development process, with the result that development, the prin¬
cipal means of tackling human problems, too often adds to them
by destroying or degrading the living resource base of human
welfare.
Many cases of land devastation are due to the extraction
rather than the use of certain mineral ores and fuels.
Open-cast or strip-mining can turn vast areas of
productive land into barren, eroded wasteland unless
rehabilitation measures are planned before mining begins.
These usually involve the removal and storage of topsoil
for replacement when mining is completed and the
reshaping of spoil heaps to blend with the surrounding
countryside. Opposite page, above; at Ordjonikidze in the
Ukraine, the desolation caused by strip-mining for
manganese ore. Right, at the same site, after
rehabilitation, scientists check the crop yield.
This baby mammoth (left) was seven months old when it
died of drowning some 40,000 years ago. Dima, as he has
been named, was discovered in 1977 by a Soviet gold
prospector in the Magadan region of eastern Siberia. The
animal's remarkable state of preservation is due to the
fact that he was buried under a landslide of ice, crushed
stone and frozen mud shortly after he died. Although the
mammoth was hunted by prehistoric man, it is unlikely
that this was the direct cause of the extinction of the
species which more probably resulted from climatic
changes towards the end of the Pleistocene Epoch some
10,000 years ago.

Photos Vladimir Bogatyrev © APN, Moscow
i. The methods used were not always very
appropriate. Some twenty years ago, for ex¬
ample, an immense photograph of a scor¬
pion was used in a campaign to inform the
Egyptian public about the conservation of
nature; meanwhile, in Cairo alone, stings by
these fearsome arthropods were claiming
several lives each day.
The prevailing approach, a correct one
but followed too exclusively, was to draw up
lists of endangered animal species and to
demand that these species be protected. At
the same time interest was growing in the
creation and management of national parks
and biological reserves. The tourist boom
brought unprecedented crowds of visitors to
those parks which had already been
established, notably in North America and in
Africa, and the creation of new parks was
not entirely divorced from the hope that
they would be a source of revenue. Along
with these efforts, however, certain dif¬
ficulties arose.
How, outside the great parks, would it be
possible to preserve animal and plant
species which might one day be useful,
without protecting the environment' in
which and from which they lived? How
could it be explained "to the peoples who
were traditionally users of areas transformed
into national parks that the transformation
was in their interests, whereas these peoples
needed more land for their herds and their
crops? How could the massive influx of
tourists be prevented from vitiating the very
objectives of nature conservation? How
could protected areas be established on a
long-term basis and achieve full acceptance
except in regions of slight economic in¬
terest, such as high mountains?
Meanwhile, profound changes were tak¬
ing place in the world. Many once-
dominated countries were acceding to
sovereignty, seeking the roots of their
cultural identity, and grappling with the in¬
tractable problems of underdevelopment.
The nexus of problems relating to
economic development, social justice,
human dignity, the use of natural resources
and the preservation of the environment
became the major theme of international
debate and was increasingly felt to be the
essential precondition to peace and har¬
mony between all the peoples of the
planet a planet which the astronauts on
the moon revealed to us as suddenly
shrunken and limited in size, isolated and
fragile in a hostile universe.
In this dynamic situation, in whose fabric
all world problems were interwoven, conser¬
vation was bound to assume a new dimen¬
sion. No longer would it be a more or less
tolerated hobby for some scientists, a hand¬
ful of romantics or a privileged few. It was
taking its place in the very core of world
problems.
A particularly important milestone in this
process came in 1968 with the intergovern¬
mental conference on the rational use of the
resources of the biosphere. The somewhat
abstruse scientific term biosphere, which
designates the very thin layer on the earth's
surface in which life in all its multifarious
forms can exist, was to become part of the
layman's vocabulary.
But above all, the holding of this con¬
ference was the first response from the
world of international politics to the growing
concern felt by scientists biologists, i
pedologists; ecologists, and so onabout I

the increasingly rapid use and simultaneous
degradation of the earth's resources.
The conservation of individual species or
landscapes was no longer enough; what had
to be done was to ensure that the exploita¬
tion of nature was put on a rational scientific
basis which would guarantee the permanent
survival of the delicate mechanisms which
condition life. Conservation, which
preserves the genetic capital and the poten¬
tiality for use of all living species, was an in¬
tegral part of this rational approach reflec¬
ting the wisdom and intelligence which
should govern any responsible management
of fragile and limited resources. In other
words, economic and social development
and the protection of the environment must
be systematically integrated.
A new scientific term, ^ecosystem, came
into popular parlance, indicating that living
organisms, including man himself, cannot
be considered in isolation from one another
but belong to ecological systems in which
any modification of one component has an
impact on the rest of the system. The
essence of human genius is to use these
ecosystems for the benefit of mankind
without endangering the very bases which
enable them to function.
Out of the biosphere conference came a
far-reaching programme of interdisciplinary
research aimed at working out the best
methods of managing ecosystems. Some
hundred countries are today participating in
this programme on Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) established by Unesco, within which
a new tool for conservation, the biosphere
reserve, has been defined.
Each of these areas of land, which are
scattered throughout the world, is situated
in an ecosystem representing one of the
world's great biogeographic regions. Each
contains a central protected area in which
the evolution of animal and plant species
can take place in as "natural" a state as
possible.
Around this central core is a more exten¬
sive "buffer" zone in which research is con¬
ducted into the structure and functioning of
the ecosystem when it is subjected to
various forms of manipulation and use by
man. At the same time, the biosphere
reserve constitutes a specimen area in which
environmental change can be continuously
monitored. It can also be used for training
specialists and for educating the public.
The fact that the reserves are linked to
studies and experiments on land use also
means, that their advantages can be shown
to people living in the vicinity who are thus
associated with the protection of the
reserves. Today 177 biosphere reserves have
been officially established in forty-six coun¬
tries, but much remains to be done before
the international network which they are
now beginning to form fully reflects the
various representative ecosystems which
must be studied and protected.
The Biosphere Conference was a kind of
dress rehearsal for the future, as the interna¬
tional community and political circles
became more deeply aware of the capital im¬
portance in the modern world of the preser¬
vation of the environment and the conserva¬
tion of nature and natural resources.
Four years later at Stockholm the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environ¬
ment set the seal on this fundamental
change in the order of priorities of peoples
8
and governments. The Stockholm Con¬
ference led to the creation of the United Na¬
tions Environment Programme whose task
was to stimulate international and national
action in this immense field, in co-operation
with all the other organizations of the United
Nations system.
Meanwhile a bold initiative was to mark
the equal importance for man of
simultaneously conserving the two vital
elements in his environment: culture, with
which he nourishes his mind; and nature,
with which he nourishes his body. In 1972
Unesco's General Conference adopted a
Convention on the Protection of the World
Cultural and Natural Heritage which has so
far been ratified by over fifty countries.
The Convention has, firstly, a symbolic
value. Nature and culture have long been
the subject of separate if not rival study
and devotion. Today they both appear to be
simultaneously threatened, along with man
himself, who can exist only when the two
are combined. By bringing together and
reconciling the cultural and natural dimen¬
sions of the human heritage, the Convention
seeks to harmonize human activities and
aspirations.
From the legal viewpoint, moreover, it is
something radically new. It proclaims that
certain monuments, sites and living systems
are so important for the whole of humanity
that it is incumbent on the international
community to make sure that they are pro¬
tected. It provides for machinery and
finance allowing action to be taken when
any item of cultural or natural property on
the world heritage list is threatened. The aim
of the Convention is not, strictly speaking,
the conservation of nature in general, but it
is yet another tool and one enjoying con¬
siderable prestige in the service of an
overall strategy.
In vast regions of the world the problems
of poverty, sickness and malnutrition
monopolize the attention of governments
and public opinion. Elsewhere there is rising
unemployment and inflation. Everywhere
the arms race goes on apace. Against this
canvas of daily events conservation usually
has to wait. However, an exclusive pre¬
occupation with what is urgent may spell
neglect for what is important. In trying to
cope with the problems of today we treat
the future with contempt. It is imperative to
integrate without further delay the dimen¬
sion of the future into the preoccupations
and actions of today.
On our ill-treated planet, whenever a
patch of fertile land is covered with con¬
crete, whenever tropical soil is transformed
into latérite, whenever a species disappears,
whenever the capital of resources is vainly
squandered, it is for the whole of mankind
that the "bell tolls".
In the course of its slow emergence,
mankind has never had an easy or a
guaranteed future threatened in the past
by plague and famine, threatened today by
nuclear holocaust and by shortages, real or
of its own making. But for the first time in
his long history man now has the capacity
and the obligation to act upon the factors
which condition his very survival. Will he
take heed early enough? Will he act in time?
The answer depends on every one of us. For
it is not the conservation of the mammoth
that is at stake. It is simply that of the
human species.
Michel Bâtisse
Defying
the sands of time
The rocky islet of Mont Saint-
Michel, just off the coast of
Normandy, France, is a site which
combines great natural beauty with
profound historical and cultural
interest. Rising sheer from the calm
waters of the Bay of Mont Saint-
Michel, it has been a place of
worship and pilgrimage since the
8th century. The base of the islet,
some 900 metres in circumference,
is encircled by medieval walls and
its summit is crowned by the
ancient Benedictine abbey, founded
in 966 by Richard duke of
Normandy. Over the years, the Bay
has gradually become silted up until
today the islet is completely
surrounded with water for only 124
days a year and by the end of the
century it will be permanently
attached to the mainland unless
action is taken. In France, 1980 has
been declared the Year of the
National Heritage and the French
Government has decided to launch
a programme of works designed to
halt further siltation and to
maintain this historic site in its
natural island setting. Mont Saint-
Michel is one of the 57 sites listed
under the Convention concerning
the Protection of the World's
Cultural and Natural heritage,
adopted by the Unesco General
Conference in 1972. The Convention
declares that, "it is incumbent on
the international community as a
whole to participate in the
protection of the cultural and
natural heritage of outstanding
universal value." Mont Saint-Michel
typifies the need for a common
approach to the conservation of
both the natural and the cultural
heritage.
