Notes and nostrums
from Dr. Avicenna's casebook
by Ahmed Aroua
FROM examination of the character
and writings of Avicenna (Ibn Sina)
there emerges a picture of that
perpetual search for balance and unity that
is characteristic of Arabo-lslamic culture.
There is no contradiction, nor should there
be, between body and mind, between the
individual and society, between science and
faith, between nature and man.
The medical arts as propounded by
Avicenna are free of all those harmful and ir¬
rational explanations with which the
medicine of Antiquity was blemished and
which can still be found in certain practices
of modern fringe medicine. With Avicenna
medicine became a science.
He divided medicine into "theoretical"
and "practical" medicine, the latter being
sub-divided further into "curative" and
"preventive" medicine. Attaching as he did
great importance to preventive medicine,
Avicenna listed the following areas in which
it should be applied:
"The essential considerations ¡n the art of
preserving the health consist in maintaining
equilibrium between various concomitant
factors. But there are seven matters concer¬
ning which special care must be expended
to ensure just proportion: Equilibrium of the
temperament; Selection of the articles of
food and drink; Evacuation of effete mat¬
ters; Safeguarding the composite; Maintain¬
ing the purity of the air respired; Guarding
against extraneous contingencies; Modera¬
tion in regard to the movements of the body
and the motions of the mind, which include
sleep and wakefulness. "
With his view of health as a dynamic con¬
cept affecting the whole person, Avicenna
took into consideration questions of age,
temperament, constitution, climate, and the
psychosomatic duality of the individual.
He devoted many pages of the Canon to
the safeguarding of the health of the infant:
"Bathing the infant. In summer time it
should be bathed in suave, tepid water. In
winter the water should be on the warm
side. Whenever possible the mother's milk
should be given and by suckling. For that is
the aliment of all others most like in sub¬
stance to the nutrient material which the in¬
fant receives while in the womb. Experience
AHMED AROUA is an Algerian medical doctor
and poet. These extracts from Avicenna's Canon
of Medicine and the accompanying commentaries
appeared in his book Hygiène et Prévention Médi¬
cale chez Ibnou Sina (Avicenne) {Hygiene and
Preventive Medicine in Ibn Sina [Avicenna]),
1974.
shows that merely to place the mother's nip¬
ple into the infant's mouth is a great help
towards removing whatever is hurtful to the
infant. "
Ahead of his time in many areas of
medicine, Avicenna was especially con¬
scious of the importance of physical
exercise:
"Now'exercise is that agent which most
surely prevents the accumulation of these
matters and prevents plethora. It is this
exercise which renews and revives the in¬
nate heat and imparts the necessary
lightness to the body. For it causes the sub¬
tile heat to be increased and daily disperses
whatever effete substances have ac¬
cumulated. To forsake exercise would often
incur the risk of 'hectic', because the
faculties of the members are impaired in¬
asmuch as deprivation of movement
prevents the access to them of the innate
breath. And this last is the real instrument of
life for every one of the members. "
Avicenna also laid great stress on the ef¬
fect of sleep on mental activity:
"Sleep in moderation assists the
vegetative faculties in their functions and
brings the sensitive faculties into repose and
in so doing restores them and thereby ar¬
rests the dissipation of the breath. The good
qualities of sleeping by night are that it
should be continuous and deep. It is also
bad to go to sleep during the day. The best
sleep is that which is deep and that which
occurs after the food has passed on from
the upper part of the intestine. "
The Canon also offers much advice on the
effect on man of the air he breathes and of
his environment:
"As long as the air is attempered andpure
and has no substances admixed which
would be contrary to the temperament of
the breath, health will come and remain.
Otherwise the contrary occurs. The
substance of the air is good when it is not
contaminated with extraneous matter such
as the vapours from marshes and lakes or
canals and open sewers or the gaseous pro¬
ducts from chemical works or smoke or
soot. Air is good when it does not interfere
with one's breathing or cause the throat to
contract. "
Avicenna expressed in the Canon his
views on the effects of climate and the
seasons on human health:
"Spring. When the temperament of the
spring conforms to type, it is a very healthy
season. Diseases of the spring: Inflam¬
matory deposits, carbuncles, anginas, ab-
| scesses of various kinds. There may be
haemoptysis and troublesome coughs.
Puberty and the time of life thereabout are
benefited by the spring".
"Summer. In summer: the humours are
dispersed. The faculties and natural func¬
tions are impaired owing to the excessive
dispersion. The blood and serous humour
are diminished and the bilious humour in¬
creases. Diseases of the summer: if very
hot, tertian and burning fevers, emaciation,
pains on the ears, ophthalmia. Erysipelas is
common, also furunculosis; if spring-like,
mild benign fevers. Rheumatisms and catar¬
rhs also occur. Old people and those of
similar nature feel stronger in summer. "
"Autumn. The autumn season brings
many diseases for these reasons: there is ex¬
posure to sun by day and the nights are
cold. The blood is much less in amount
because this season is contrary in tempera¬
ment to the blood. Diseases of autumn:
fevers, rheumatisms and sciatica, oliguria
and dysuria, angina, worms.
"Winter. Winter is a help for digestion.
Diseases of winter: coryza, pleurisy,
pulmonary infection, hoarseness and sore
throat, pains in the chest, side, back and
loins, apoplexy and epileptic seizures.
Winter is inimical to old persons. "
The views expressed by Avicenna on mat¬
ters of housing and public health have an
astonishing topicality since today these
problems face urban authorities in ag¬
gravated form:
"Characters upon which the effect of
habitable regions on people depends:
whether high or low-lying; type of adjoining
country, whether open or sheltered; state of
soil; whether the water is plentiful or scarce,
stagnant or flowing; local factors, trees,
mines, cemeteries, putrescent pools, etc. "
Finally, it is perhaps somewhat surprising
to' find a physician of the year 1000 AD giv¬
ing careful instructions about the hygienic
precautions to be taken before operations, a
matter which was generally treated very
lightly as late as the 19th century:
"The greatest care must be taken during
surgical operations to prevent infection,
because a wound can only be treated in the
absence of infection. Should infection or
contusion occur, it will accumulate at the
wound which will suppurate, making
surgical intervention impossible until it has
been treated. If the blood in a wound
becomes infected it must be got rid of as
quickly as possible. "
18

AVICENNA AND THE LOVESICK YOUTH
In this 15th-century miniature, Avicenna is seen at the bedside of an
ailing young nobleman. It illustrates an incident in Avicenna's life
which reveals that he was no less aware than modern physicians of
the psychosomatic nature of certain illnesses.
For many months a young nobleman lay sick unto death of a
strange malady against which the potions and cures proposed by
the learned doctors called in to treat him were of no avail. In
despair, his relatives summoned to his bedside the most famous
doctor in the land. When Avicenna (for he it was) arrived, he
examined the ailing youth briefly and then asked to be left alone
with him. Holding the patient's pulse he said: "Tell me, my son,
about yourself, your life, your relations with your family, your plans
for the future." "I am very ill and like to die", was all the youth's
reply. "Do not upset yourself like this, you will surely live", replied
Avicenna. "Tell me, what think you of women?" And, feeling the
youth's pulse quicken, he went on: "Has your heart never been
captivated by a woman's beauty?" "No, no", exclaimed the youth
hotly. "Why do you say 'No' to me", said Avicenna, "When your
whole body cries out the answer 'Yes'? What is the maiden's
name?" Finally, after a long silence, the young man spluttered out
the name of his beloved. Avicenna summoned his parents and
announced solemnly: "The patient is suffering from an incurable
disease. He is lovesick and fears to tell you of the woman who has
won his heart. There is but one cure marriage". Some days later,
after the wedding festivities were over, Avicenna returned home,
leaving the young nobleman in the care of his new wife and fully
restored in mind and body.
