Letters for
a young nation
by Paulo Freiré
The Democratic Republic of Sao Tomé and Principe consists of
two volcanic islands situated in the Gulf of Guinea, some 300
kilometres from the coast of Africa. Formerly a Portuguese
colony, this small country (964 sq. km.; population less than
100,000) achieved independence in 1975 and became a member
of Unesco on 22 January 1980. Its economy is based on
agriculture, the main crops being cocoa, coffee, palm oil and
copra. Below we present excerpts from a literacy teaching
handbook prepared by the Brazilian educator Paulo Freiré as a
contribution to a literacy campaign recently launched in Sao
Tomé and Principe. The handbook is written in the form of
letters addressed to the country's literacy workers and shows
how the method of education based on "conscientization",
which Freiré has developed, can be put into practice. It is
published by the Co-ordinating Commission of the Popular
Culture Circles of the Republic of Sao Tomé and Principe.
OUR task is to enable many of our
comrades, especially but not exclu¬
sively those living in rural areas, to
read and write, which they were forbidden
to do under the colonial régime. This task is
a political one. The very decision to teach
people to read and write is a political act.
And come what may we must be on our
guard against insinuations, sometimes in¬
genuous, sometimes sly, which are made to
convince us that teaching reading and
writing is purely a technical matter, a ques¬
tion of training, and that accordingly it
should not be "mixed up with politics". The
fact is that education, teaching adults to
read and write, can never be neutral. All
education presupposes, by its very nature, a
political intention.
And so, as the people's educators and
"candidates for education", we should con¬
stantly be bringing our political choices into
clearer focus and making sure that there is
no contradiction between our self-
proclaimed objectives and the work we do.
We must be clear-minded about our
ultimate aims and clear-minded about those
for whom our work as educators is intend¬
ed. And the focus becomes sharper as we
devote ourselves, in a militant and critical
spirit, to our practical tasks, and as a result
we can learn more about how we should
act. The proper form of militancy is that
which teaches us that only through unity,
discipline and work with the people shall we
become educators conforming to the
revolutionary choice which we proclaim.
In Sao Tomé and Principe our most
urgent need is for clear-thinking militants
who can become specialists through work¬
ing with the people, not for "experts" who
are remote from the people, do not believe
in the people, and are incapable of com¬
municating with the people.
If teaching people to read and write, like
all education, is a political act, it is also an
act of knowledge. In the relationship bet¬
ween the educator and the person being
educated, the acquisition of a piece of
knowledge is always at stake. And in
broaching this problem we are bound to in¬
sist, yet again, that there must be no in¬
coherence between our political choice and
our practical work as educators. For exam¬
ple, can we as revolutionary educators act
towards those who are being educated in
the same way as colonialist teachers, con¬
forming to a colonialist ideology, behaved
towards "their" pupils? When faced with
this question, we must not simply tell
ourselves that we should be different from
colonialist teachers; we must consciously
adopt a practice which is totally opposed to
theirs.
The colonialist educator usually transmit¬
ted "his" knowledge to us, and it was up to
us to swallow wholesale this knowledge
which, to cap everything, distorted our own
experience by colouring it with the interests
of the colonialists. The colonialist who
taught reading and writing "taught" that b
and a equalled "Ba", and this had to be
repeated and memorized by the learner.
Our revolution now underway demands
us to be in tune with it at every level of our
action. And so we do not talk of "Night
Schools for Adults" but of "Circles of
Culture"; we do not speak of illiterates but
of persons "on the way to literacy"; we do
not speak of . "literacy teachers" but of
"Culture Group Leaders" who work with the
Circles of Culture; we do not talk about
lessons but about debates, about the peo¬
ple's authentic experience referred to by
what are called "generator words" and
depicted in "codification" which is analysed
and discussed with the people.
And so, in a society in which "silence is
not possible", the function of the man or
woman who becomes a culture group
leader, considered in relation to the
members of the group who are on the way
to literacy, is not that of a transmitter of
knowledge but that of someone who,
through discussion, tries to learn jointly with
those who are on the way to literacy.
According to the political principles which
guide our movement, literacy teaching is an k
activity during which the persons on the Y
PAULO FREIRÉ, noted Brazilian educator, is the
originator of a method of literacy teaching which
has attracted widespread attention. He developed
this system, which is based on encouraging
adults to become "critically conscious" of their
situation, in Brazil, Chile and other Latin Ameri¬
can countries. Formerly professor of history and
philosophy of education at the university of
Recife (Brazil) and a visiting professor at Harvard,
he has also worked with the United Nations and
Unesco. He is now a consultant with the World
Council of Churches in Geneva. Among his
published works in English translation are: Peda¬
gogy of the Oppressed (Penguin, London, 1972),
Education for Critical Consciousness (Sheed and
Ward, London, 1974) and Education and the
Practice of Freedom (Writers and Readers Pub¬
lishing Co-operative, London).
27

way to literacy and the group leaders jointly
' "read and write their own reality, thinking
critically about their world, becoming more
aware and integrating themselves more fully
in a real situation which is being transform¬
ed". And so it is of paramount importance
that we should not remain at the "b and a
equals ba" stage but should slowly,
together with the comrades who are learn¬
ing with us, come to a "reading", a "new
reading" of our experience. Another con¬
sequence of this approach is that we must
relate literacy teaching to production and
health, and link it whenever we can with
concrete community action programmes.
Since we conceive of literacy teaching as
a cultural activity in favour of the
reconstruction of our country and not simp¬
ly as training pupils how to read and write,
we may find in some parts of the country
that our work with the people has to focus
initially on a "reading", "rereading" and
"writing" of reality and not on language
learning.
This means that in certain situations the
crucial thing is to organize the people in
groups and discuss with them their real ex¬
perience, always in terms of down-to-earth
activities; to analyse local conditions with
them and find solutions to some of their
problems in such fields as health and produc¬
tion; to encourage them to organize
themselves, for example, around a com¬
munity work project, a collective farm. And
the act of "reading", "rereading" and
"writing" their own experience in this way
may induce them to want to read and write .
words as well, acquiring a skill which comes
to possess a real meaning for them.
In other instances, cultural action begins
with literacy teaching per se. In these cases
the literacy teaching should be a kind of
launching pad for a determined effort to
create projects in which the people can
make an impact on the local situation. A
dynamic relationship is thus established bet¬
ween the educational work of the culture
groups and the down-to-earth task of
transforming a real-life situation; each activi¬
ty is vitalized and revitalized by the other.
Now I should like to raise a number of
points which, when explained, will help us
to understand what the Culture Groups
should do. These points can be summed up
in three terms: the "generator word",
"codification", and "decodification".
A generator word is one which, chosen in
accordance with certain criteria, can be
broken down into component syllables
which when combined enable other words
to be formed. If, for example, we take the
word MATÁBALA, the name of a root
vegetable widely cultivated in Sao Tomé,
and break it down into its syllables, we
obtain:
ma, me, mi, mo, mu
ta, te, ti, to, tu
ba, be, bi, bo, bu
la, le, li, lo, lu
We call each group of syllables a
"family"; hence we have the ma, me, mi,
mo, mu family; the ta, te, ti, to, tu family,
etc.
Using these four families, a series of
words can be created, such as: mata (tuft of
grass); mate (maté, infusion); meta (goal,
objective); mimo (pampering), lata (tin); tela
(cloth, fabric); tomo (I take); tomate
(tomato); tema (theme); cola (tail); libelo
28

Learning to read is a political act and constitutes a step
towards full participation in the life of the community.
Men and women, whether literate or not, are creators of
culture. Some of the conditions in which people live are
man-made and can therefore be changed. The difference
between nature and culture is based on the distinction
between man and the other animals, and in this
distinction oral and written language plays an important
role. These are some of the principles which form the
basis of the method of adult education originated by
Paulo Freiré, the Brazilian educator and sociologist.
Working in Recife (Brazil) Freiré was instrumental in
creating a number of "Circles of Culture" whose
members, aided by a series of ten pictures and without
any written material, were encouraged to analyse the
realities of their lives (in a process which Freiré called
"conscientization") and to become aware that they could
transform the situation in which they lived. Reproduced
on these pages are four of the pictures, the work of the
Brazilian artist Francisco Brennand. Left: an image
designed to show a basic distinction between nature and
culture. The co-ordinator of the Circle of Culture asked
questions such as: Who made the well? Why did he do
so? Who made the house? the hoes? the book? Who
made the tree? the pig? the birds? In what way is the tree
different from the well? Gradually the discussion moved
to the conclusion that people use natural materials to
change their situation and create culture. Members of the
circle knew the distinction but the discussion taught
them words to clarify it. The second discussion,
prompted by picture above left, concerned the
relationship between people. People can create culture,
whereas animals cannot, and people can communicate
extensively with each other. The natural world is real and
can be known through investigation and dialogue.
Communication should take place as a dialogue between
equals. Picture at left illustrates the transformation of
nature into culture. Not only has the clay been
transformed into a vase but flowers, which in the field are
part of nature, have been changed into culture by the
person who arranged them. In this picture a "graphic
symbol" is introduced for the first time, in the drawing of
flowers which decorates the vase. Nature, transformed
into culture, has been transformed once again, this time
into a written symbol. The last of the ten pictures (above)
enabled the group to look at itself and reflect on its own
activity. It shows a Circle of Culture at work and the
members could easily identify it as representing
themselves. The function of the Circle was examined:
what the experience signified, what dialogue was, what it
meant to develop one's consciousness. By now the
participants had gained great confidence and pride in
their culture, and the desire to learn to read. The next
stage was literacy teaching in the strict sense (see
overleaf).
(pamphlet); batuta (orchestra conductor's
baton); bebo (I drink); batata (sweet
potato); and so on.
But it should be stressed that where these
"families" of syllables are concerned, the
role, of the Group Leader is not to form the
words but to encourage the persons on the
way to literacy to create them for them¬
selves.
Nevertheless, whenever the group leader
notices that the learners seem to be hanging
back because they feel shy, he should en¬
courage them by creating two or three
words himself. This is a common occur¬
rence during work on the first generator
words.
The generator words are always
associated with certain themes which
should be dealt with in the Circles of
Culture. The word matábala, for example,
can be the starting point for discussions on a
series of themes such as production, the
need for crop diversification, or the nutri¬
tional qualities of plants, which in turn leads
to the problem of health. This question, like
that of production, can and should broaden
out into a political analysis concerning, for
example, the conscious participation of the
people in boosting production and in health
care.
The generator words are not chosen at
random but in accordance with certain
criteria such as thematic richness, in other
words the variety of themes to which they
refer and which can be connected with the
local experience of those on the way to
literacy and make it possible to analyse cer¬
tain aspects of the national situation;
phonetic richness and the possibilities of¬
fered by these words to the learners when
overcoming difficulties such as the sounds
LHA, NHA, double s, double r, and so on.
The word codification, put in in its
simplest terms, means the graphic represen¬
tation of reality, as in a poster, a photograph
or a film strip. The generator word is
superimposed on the codification.
Let us take as an example the word
PUEBLO (people) as given in the First
Notebook of Popular Culture, a guide for
literacy teachers and learners. The codifica¬
tion of the word PUEBLO is a photograph of
a popular demonstration on Independence
Day, with the people gathered in the square
which is now theirs.
It should be stressed that codification
must always be considered as a challenge
for the group and the group leader, as an
"object" which must be analysed by the
group with the participation of the leader,
and not as an aid which he "gives to his
class".
Decodification is the act of analysing the
poster or photograph. Decodifying a graphic
representation of certain aspects of the real
world gives us a "reading" of reality. The
group leader plays an important and sen¬
sitive role in this process. He must not be
too self-effacing, nor must he intervene too
much; decodification is a dialogue in which
all the learners are involved. While respec¬
ting the way in which the group com¬
prehends the meaning of its experience, he
should also provoke debate so that both he
and the learners can together progress to
more complex ways of understanding their
world.
It now becomes apparent that a culture |
group is a school but a school with a dif-J
29

ference in which there are neither
teachers, nor pupils, nor lessons in the tradi¬
tional sense. The culture group is not a cen¬
tre for the diffusion of knowledge but a
place a school hall, a room in a house, a
shady spot under a tree, or a cabin built by
the community where a group of com¬
rades meet to discuss what they do at work,
the local and national situation and also in
certain cases to read and write.
In this "school with a difference" the
traditional type of teacher who talks and
then makes the pupil illustrate and repeat
what he has said, is replaced by the culture
group leader, who should be a militant who
sees things clearly. Instead of the passive
pupil, the "illiterate" who is on the receiving
end of the teacher's lessons, there is
someone who is on the way to literacy,
someone who is as much a participant in the
group's activities as its leader. Instead of
reading primers, which the pupils have to il¬
lustrate with drawings and repeat from
memory, we have generator themes referred
to by generator words, both themes and
words being depicted in the "codifications".
Now let us look for a few moments at the
work of the culture group leader. First of all,
since his or her task as an educator has a
political dimension and is not that of the
teacher who gives purely technical instruc¬
tion in reading and writing from a supposed¬
ly neutral point of view, it is not confined to
debates within the group but should range
widely over the life of the district, farm or
village in which the group meets. The more
deeply the leader identifies with the people,
the better he or she performs his or her
political-educational task.
It may help the leader if he gets into the
habit of jotting down in a notebook things
that attract his attention in the area where
the group meets. He should also make a
point of noting down salient points from the
group's discussions. These notes will be of
great help in day-to-day work and will be ex¬
tremely valuable when it comes to the
evaluation seminars which we shall have to
hold with everyone.
Another possibility is for the group leader
to present from time to time as discussion
topics some of the observations he has
made during the group's sessions, as well as
impressions drawn from his experience
within the community. However, it is essen
tial to avoid any comments of a personal
nature and he must be sure not to lose the
respect he should feel for the people. When
presenting one of his observations to the
group, the leader should act as someone
who is questioning himself and trying to
learn; he should not hold forth about what
he has noted down. This does not mean,
however, that he should not also express his
way of seeing things.
While the group leader should not allow
the group's activities to revolve around him,
he should not be the only one to have a say,
nor always have the last word and give the
impression that he knows all the answers,
neither should he be reserved and self-
effacing.
Both the group leader and "those on the
way to literacy" must be active participants
in the culture group. In the political perspec¬
tive which is ours, in accordance with the
principles of our movement, it is not the
leader's role either to manipulate the
learners or to leave them to their own
devices. In other words we should try to
steer a middle course between control and
spontaneity.
Paulo Freiré
30
Literacy in 30 hours
Paulo Freiré believes that adults can learn to read rapidly as long as reading is not part of a "cultural
imposition" on them and that teaching is rooted in the daily life of the community. He and his
colleagues discovered that no more than 17 words (which they call "generator words") were necessary
as a basis for teaching adults to read Portuguese and Spanish. According to Freire's method, which has
been practised in Brazil and other Latin American countries, as well as Sao Tomé and Principe, the ideas
represented by these words must be critically discussed before the words themselves are analysed as
"graphic symbols". And so a picture was prepared to illustrate each word. In the case of the word tijolo
("brick" in Portuguese) the picture (called a "codification" in Freire's terminology) depicted a
construction scene. At first the picture was shown without the word tijolo. Only after the group had
taken part in a discussion (the process which Freiré calls "decodification") on building with bricks, their
own houses, and housing as a community problem, was a second picture introduced which showed the
construction scene together with the word tijolo (above). In the third picture the word tijolo appeared alone.
The same procedure was followed for the 16 other words. The adults learned, to read in 30 to 40 hours.
