A world
conservation
strategy
THE World Conservation Strategy is
intended to stimulate a more focuss-
ed approach to the management of
living resources and to provide policy
guidance on how this can be carried out by
three main groups:
policy makers and their ad¬
visers;
conservationists and others directly con¬
cerned with living resources;
development practitioners, including de¬
velopment agencies, industry and com¬
merce, and trade unions.
1. The aim of the World Conservation
Strategy is to achieve the three main objec¬
tives of living resource conservation:
a. to maintain essential ecological pro¬
cesses and life-support systems (such as
soil regeneration and protection, the recycl¬
ing of nutrients, and the cleansing of
waters), on which human survival and deve¬
lopment depend;
b. to . preserve genetic diversity (the
range of genetic material found in the
world's organisms), on which depend the
functioning of many of the above processes
and life-support systems, the breeding pro¬
grammes necessary for the protection and
improvement of cultivated plants, dom¬
esticated animals and microorganisms, as
well as much scientific and medical ad¬
vance, technical innovation, and the securi¬
ty of the many industries that use living
resources;
c. to ensure the sustainable utilization
of species and ecosystems (notably fish
and other wildlife, forests and grazing
lands), which support millions of rural com¬
munities as well as major industries.
2. These objectives must be achieved as a
matter of urgency because:
a. the planet's capacity to support peo¬
ple is being irreversibly reduced in both
developing and developed countries:
thousands of millions of tonnes of soil
are lost every year as a result of
deforestation and poor land manage¬
ment;
at least 3,000 km2 of prime farmland
disappear every year under buildings and
roads in developed countries alone;
b. hundreds of millions of rural people
in developing countries, including 500
million malnourished and 800 million
destitute, are compelled to destroy the
resources necessary to free them from
starvation and poverty:
in widening swaths around their villages
the rural poor strip the land of trees and
shrubs for fuel so that now many com¬
munities do not have enough wood to
cook food or keep warm;
the rural poor are also obliged to burn
every year 400 million tonnes of dung
and crop residues badly needed to
regenerate soils;
c. the energy, financial and other costs
of providing goods and services are
growing:
throughout the world, but especially in
developing countries, siltation cuts the
lifetimes of reservoirs supplying water
and hydroelectricity, often by as much as
half;
floods devastate settlements and crops
(in India the annual cost of floods ranges
from $140 million to $750 million);
d. the resource base of major industries
is shrinking:
tropical forests are contracting so rapidly
that by the end of this century the re¬
maining area of unlogged productive
forest will' have been halved;
the coastal support systems of many
fisheries are being destroyed or polluted
(in the USA the annual cost of the
resulting losses is estimated at $86
million).
3. 777e main obstacles to achieving conser¬
vation are:
a. the belief that living resource conser¬
vation is a limited sector, rather than a
process that cuts across and must be con¬
sidered by all sectors;
b. the consequent failure to integrate
conservation with development;
c. a development process that is often
inflexible and needlessly destructive,
due to inadequacies in environmental plann
ing, a lack of rational use allocation and un¬
due emphasis on narrow short term interests
rather than broader longer term ones;
d. the lack of a capacity to conserve,
due to inadequate legislation and lack of en¬
forcement; poor organization (notably go¬
vernment agencies with insufficient man¬
dates and a lack of coordination); lack of
trained personnel; and a lack of basic infor¬
mation on priorities, on the productive and
regenerative capacities of living resources,
and on the trade-offs between one manage¬
ment option and another.
e. the lack of support for conservation,
due to a lack of awareness (other than at the
most superficial level) of the benefits of con¬
servation and of the responsibility to con¬
serve among those who use or have an im¬
pact on living resources, including in many
cases governments;
f. the failure to deliver conservation-
based development where it is most
needed, notably the rural areas of develop¬
ing countries.
4. The World Conservation Strategy
therefore:
a. defines living resource conservation
and explains its objectives, its contribu¬
tion to human survival and development and
the main impediments to its achievement;
b. determines the priority requirements
for achieving each of the objectives;
c. proposes national and subnational
strategies to meet the priority re¬
quirements, describing a framework and
principles for those strategies;
d. recommends anticipatory en¬
vironmental policies, a cross-sectoral
conservation policy and a broader
system of national accounting in order to
integrate conservation with development at
the policy making level;
e. proposes an integrated method of
evaluating land and water resources,
supplemented by environmental
assessments, as a means of improving en¬
vironmental planning; and outlines a pro¬
cedure for the rational allocation of land
and water uses;
36

Future park wardens and game
scouts from thirteen African
countries are being trained in
wildlife conservation at the College
of African Wildlife Management, on
the slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro, in
Tanzania. Left, a student from
Kenya holds an impala he has just
tagged so that it can be traced and
its migration habits studied.
f. recommends reviews of legislation
concerning living resources; suggests
general principles for organization
within government; and in particular pro¬
poses ways of improving the organiza¬
tional capacities for soil conservation
and for the conservation of marine liv¬
ing resources;
g. suggests ways of increasing the
number of trained personnel; and pro¬
poses more management-oriented
research and research-oriented mana¬
gement, so that the most urgently needed
basic information is generated more quickly;
h. recommends greater participation in
planning and decision making concerning
living resource use; and proposes en¬
vironmental education programmes and
campaigns to build support for conserva¬
tion;
i. suggests ways of helping rural com¬
munities to conserve their living
resources, as the essential basis of the
development they need.
5. In addition, the Strategy recommends in¬
ternational action to promote, support and
(where necessary) coordinate national ac¬
tion, emphasizing in particular the need for:
a. stronger more comprehensive inter¬
national conservation law, and increas¬
ed development assistance for living
resource conservation;
b. international programmes to promote
the action necessary to conserve tropical
forests and drylands, to protect areas
essential for the preservation of genetic
resources, and to conserve the global
"commons" the open ocean, the at¬
mosphere, and Antarctica;
c. regional strategies to advance the con¬
servation of shared living resources par¬
ticularly with respect to international river
basins and seas.
6. The World Conservation Strategy ends
by summarizing the main requirements
for sustainable development, indicating
conservation priorities for the Third
Development Decade.
Architects of the strategy
IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources) is a network of governments, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), scientists and other conservation experts, joined together to promote
the protection and sustainable use of living resources.
Founded in 1948, IUCN has more than 450 member governments and NGOs in
over 100 countries. Its six Commissions consist of more than 700 experts on
threatened species, protected areas, ecology, environmental planning, environ¬
mental policy, law and administration, and environmental education.
IUCN:
monitors the status of ecosystems and species throughout the world;
plans conservation action, both at the strategic level through the World Con¬
servation Strategy and at the programme level through its programme of con¬
servation for sustainable development;
promotes such action by governments, intergovernmental bodies and non¬
governmental organizations;
provides assistance and advice necessary for the achievement of such action.
UNEP (the United Nations Environment Programme) was established
in 1972. Its mandate is to keep the world environmental situation under review in
order to ensure that emerging environmental problems of international signifi¬
cance receive appropriate consideration by governments, and to safeguard the
environment for the benefit of present and future generations. It is the first glo¬
bal UN body with headquarters in a developing country (Kenya).
UNEP plays a catalytic and co-ordinating role with the organizations of the
United Nations family and administers a fund, based on voluntary government
contributions. The Fund of UNEP assists in promoting activities related to envi¬
ronmental assessment and management. Within UNEP's programme, the follo¬
wing priority areas have been identified: environmental health, terrestrial
ecosystems, environment and development, oceans, energy and natural disas¬
ters.
The ultimate aim of UNEP's activities is to promote development that is envi¬
ronmentally sound and sustainable.
WWF (World Wildlife Fund) is an international conservation founda¬
tion, based in Switzerland and with national organizations on five continents.
WWF's scope is the conservation of the natural environment and the ecologi¬
cal processes essential to life on earth.
WWF aims to create awareness of threats to the environment and to generate
and attract on a worldwide basis the strongest possible moral and financial sup¬
port for safeguarding the living world and to convert such support into action
based on scientific priorities.
WWF ensures that its programme has a sound scientific basis by close colla¬
boration with IUCN, with whom it shares a joint world headquarters.
Since its founding in 1961, WWF has channelled funds to more than 2,000
projects in over 130 countries, served as a catalyst for conservation action,
brought its influence to bear on critical conservation situations, and provided a
link between conservation needs, the scientific resources necessary to meet
them, and the governments and other authorities whose action is needed.
WWF, with its distinguished international and national trustees, also provides
a bridge for the conservation movement to the business community.
77?e World Conservation Strategy is available in kit form from the Interna¬
tional Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, 1196 Gland,
Switzerland. A parallel paperback version has also been produced for the
general reader (see "Bookshelf", next page).
37
