Al-Shifa:
the world %\ in a book
o
2?
AVICENNA (Ibn Sina) is rightly
considered the most important repre¬
sentative of Muslim philosophy.
Al-Kindi and al-Farabi laid the groundwork
of this philosophy and established its prin¬
ciples, but it was thanks to Avicenna and his
clear expositions that it acquired its final
form and distinguished itself from other
philosophies.
Today no one can deny that a Muslim
philosophy exists. It is neither purely
Aristotelian nor purely Platonic. It is a
separate philosophy created by special cir¬
cumstances and by a specific environment.
It was influenced by ancient philosophies,
borrowing certain elements from them but
also incorporating others of its own. It has
thus become, in its own right, an inde¬
pendent phase in the development of
human thought.
It took up all the important philosophic
issues and dealt with them in an original
way. It laid great stress on the study of be¬
ing, analysing the one and the many and
20
by Ibrahim Madkur
defining their interrelations. It delved deeply
into the problem of knowledge,
distinguishing between soul and intellect,
the innate and the acquired, truth and
falsehood. It decisively established the
theory of virtue and happiness; it created a
hierarchy of values and then classified them,
thus arriving at the "virtue of virtues" per¬
manent contemplation attained by the
prophets and other exceptional people. It
made a careful study of all the various parts
of philosophy, whether speculative or prac¬
tical mathematics, metaphysics,
ethics, economics and politics adding to
these medicine, biology, chemistry, botany,
astronomy and music, all of which were
regarded as parts of philosophy in the
widest sense.
Assuming this to be the essence of
Muslim i.e. Avicenna's philosophy, the
Shifa, is, among all his works, the one
which expresses it best. In the Shifa, he ex¬
pounds philosophical problems in detail,
analysing them clearly and adding to therr>
certain branches of knowledge considered
at the time as an integral part of philosophy.
The work introduces ideas deriving from
Aristotle, Plato, Plotinus, Zeno and Chrysip-
pus, but presents them in such a way that
they form an organic whole. Therein lies
Avicenna's originality which appears even
more striking when he criticizes and either
refutes or defends the views of the
Ancients.
Avicenna himself described the object of
this great work: "My aim is to include in it all
the fruits of the sciences of the Ancients,
which I have checked and which are based
on outright deduction or induction as ac- I
IBRAHIM BAYUMI MADKUR, of Egypt is
president of the Academy of the Arabic Lan¬
guage, Cairo, and a distinguished scholar who
has specialized in Islamic philosophy, notably the
work of Avicenna. He is the author of several
studies on the age of A vicenna and has taken part
in many symposia devoted to the memory of the
great philosopher. This article is based on his
famous study Introduction to the Shifa.

*S»^W/i^Ä
k V
/
«euras
y
' 'if - '"/M¡
v
Avicenna's Treatise on Terms
is a dictionary of the
principal philosophical
notions such as akl (reason),
nafs (the soul), jawhar
(substance), makan (space),
and haraka (movement). Left,
a page from a 14th-century
manuscript of the treatise,
which is an irreplaceable
source for understanding the
complex terminology of
Medieval Oriental philosophy.
21

It is difficult to make anyone believe
that a person like me is an unbeliever.
My faith in God is unshakable. If I am
an infidel, then there is nota single true
Muslim on earth. Avicenna
cepted by thinkers who have long sought
'the truth. I have tried to incorporate as
much as possible of the entire field of
philosophy." He adds: "I have omitted
nothing that is of any value in the works of
the Ancients. If any element is not found in
its usual place or context, that is because I
have put it in a place which I considered
more appropriate."
In fact, the book contains such a wealth
of subject-matter that it is quite unique, and
unlike any other work of philosophy. It is
divided into four major "Summae" (juman:
Logic, Physics, Mathematics and
Metaphysics. Each "Summa" in turn is
divided into books (funun), each book into
sections (magala) and each section into
chapters (fusul). This is the general plan of
the work, but within each division and sub¬
division there are various subordinate
sciences and objects of study.
The Shifa is in fact an encyclopaedia in
which all the rational sciences have been
gathered together, predating our modern
encyclopaedias by six centuries. The
modern works, of course, deal with very
many more subjects, but the Shifa does
cover the whole range of the rational
sciences as they existed at the time. The
most surprising thing of all is that it is the
work of one man, whereas modern en¬
cyclopaedias, from Diderot onwards, have
been produced by large teams of
contributors.
Though its author lacked the peace and
quiet necessary for a work of such
God is the depth and the surface. He is
manifest everywhere and in all things.
Avicenna
magnitude, he succeeded in producing a
remarkably well-ordered and logically set-
out book. The work, begun in Hamadhan,
was completed in Isfahan within a span of
about ten years. Ibn Sina was forty and in
his intellectual prime when he started the
Shifa. By the time he finished it he was
already past fifty.
Thus the Shifa is not, as was long
thought, a commentary on Aristotle, like
those of Averroës or St. Thomas Aquinas.
Avicenna included in it the results of his own
wide-ranging research and theorizing; ac¬
cepting certain views and rejecting others.
Sometimes he borrows ideas from other
authors and discusses them, but without
mentioning their names or quoting his
sources.
The best description of the book is to be
found in the author's own introduction:
"This book," he writes, "ultimately presents
all the ideas unanimously accepted by prac¬
tically every thinker. Instead of indulging in
personal prejudice, I have done my best to
include in it the greater part of philosophy,
raising objections on each point, then at¬
tempting to disprove them, and showing the
truth as far as possible. I have taken care to
mention the main principles together with
their corollaries, leaving out, however,
anything that seemed to me to be clear from
22
what had gone before or anything that
happened to slip my memory."
This introduction does not seem to have
been available to the Christian thinkers of
the Middle Ages or, if it was, it escaped their
attention. In any case they did not study the
Shifa in sufficient detail to realize that it was
not a mere commentary or gloss on
Aristotle, but an original work in its own
right.
Avicenna made the best use of the wealth
of knowledge available in his time. If one
book can be said to reflect the period in
which it was written, the Shifa is un¬
doubtedly the best source of information on
the intellectual life of the fourth century of
the Hegira.
Scholars who have studied this period
rightly consider it to be the Golden Age of
rational studies in Islam. A school (the
Kalam) for interpreting the Koran was set up
under Ash'ari, and its activities were reg¬
arded as constituting a branch of science.
Mysticism was also following new paths: it
went beyond asceticism and hermitism and
embarked on the explanation of states of
the soul; it analysed minutely the stages of
"initiation"; it claimed to attain union
with God. Muslim philosophy was laying
down its foundations and establishing its
principles: al-Farabi, a profound and
penetrating thinker, organized its various
parts.
Islamic medicine reached its zenith with
the work of the great physician al-Razi
(Rhazes), and no longer confined itself to
repeating the dicta of Hippocrates and
Galen: al-Razi actually made use of his own
experience. And mathematics and
astronomy were making great strides: one
need only mention here the name of al-
Biruni from among a phalanx of renowned
scholars and scientists.
It is generally true to say that while in the
second and third centuries of the Hegira
Islamic scholars concentrated mainly on
translating and assimilating foreign
sciences, in the fourth century they launch¬
ed into research in their own right, moving
from assimilation to original creation.
Usually a book's influence is restricted to
that of its author and it belongs only within
the range of that author's work. But there
are some books which are special and have a
history and influence of their own. Avicen¬
na's philosophy was the philosophy of the
whole Arab world from the fifth century to
the beginning of the fourteenth century of
the Hegira: all authors, philosophers,
If I had made no impact on men's
hearts, they would have ignored me.
They would have been neither for me
nor against me. Avicenna
theologians and mystics, of all schools of
thought, drew upon it. During this time,
even scientific studies in medicine, biology,
astronomy and mathematics used it as a
base. Avicenna is the Philosopher of Islam,
par excellence.
It is true that al-Ghazali's attack on
philosophy and the "falasifa" [philosophers!
turned many scholars away from Avicenna.
But this did not put an end to his influence.
It can be said that such philosophy as sur¬
vived in Islamic culture certainly owes its ex¬
istence to him. The Spanish school of
philosophy which developed later never
CONTINUED PAGE 28
Tt

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 22
lessened Avicenna's prestige in the East
despite the relatively large number and im¬
portance of its representatives, in particular
the prolific Averroës. The fate of this school
was linked to that of Spain itself and it is not
surprising that Averroës' influence should
have been stronger in the Latin West than in
the East.
Avicenna's books continued to be studied
after his death. The Najat and Isharat were
particularly popular, but the Shifa retained
its attraction: it contains many details not to
be found in the two other works, and
scholars wishing to go more deeply into
their subject found they needed to refer to
its lengthy explanations. When, for exam¬
ple, al-Ghazali, in the Tahafot al-Falasifa,
and Shahrastani, in the Nihayat al-lqdam,
discuss in some detail the creation of the
world and the impossibility of its eternity,
the ideas they attribute to Ibn Sina were bor¬
rowed mainly from the Shifa.
Ibn Rushd (Averroës) often quotes ex¬
tracts from the Shifa either to support his
own theories or to contradict Avicenna,
mentioning his name on each occasion.
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi was one of Avicenna's
faithful disciples in spite of the fact that he
lived two hundred years later: his attitude
towards Fakhr al-Din al-Razi and the fight he
waged against him are well known. Similarly
Ibn Khaldun recognized the importance of
the Shifa which he mentions several times in
his Prolegomena.
Three treatises have dominated Muslim
theological studies in the last few centuries:
al-Aqa'id by Nasafi, Iji's Mawaqif and the
Maqasid of Taftazani. If we examine their
content and the commentaries that have
been written on them, we can see that they
made extensive use of the Shifa.
In Logic, the general tendency of scholars
to be as succinct as possible led to works
such as Abhari's Isagoge, Qazwini's Sham-
siyya and Akhadari's Sullam which have
dominated the teaching of Logic in the
Islamic world for the last six hundred years.
One book, however, published during this
period, the Basa'ir al-nasiriyya, recalls the
breadth and clarity of the Shifa's logic. Its
author states that he has drawn some of his
ideas from Ibn Sina, whom he describes as
the "best of the moderns".
Few works, at any period, have exercised
a greater influence than the Shifa on human
thought. In this, Avicenna's masterwork,
the duality of his personality is revealed:
received influence and personal reaction,
assimilation and original contribution.
Ibrahim Madkur
A champion of the rationalist
and scientific spirit, Avicenna
relentlessly attacked the
obscurantist ideas of his time.
To support his rejection of
alchemy he used philosophical
as well as scientific arguments
to show that the then widely
held belief in the transmutation
of metals was untenable.
Illustration is taken from an
Arabic version, produced in
13th-century Baghdad, of the
Materia Medica written by the
Greek physician Dioscorides in
the Ist century AD.
