Disarmament
education
and
social
justice
Drtwng by S*l*t © Cm. FAO
by Jaime Diaz
THE Third World has for the most part
been absent from discussions on
disarmament, because it is wrongly
believed that this problem solely concerns
the superpowers, or the club of countries
possessing nuclear weapons. For the same
reason, "disarmament education" seems
rather out of place, particularly in Latin
America, a region that has always been con¬
sidered to be removed from the international
conflicts which are so frequent in other parts
of the world.
Latin American eyes see the arms race,
disarmament and disarmament education
from a different angle. In the industrialized
countries, when the arms race is discussed,
reference is made to physical arms (with all
the technological development that has
taken place this century) and to formal war¬
fare. These arms are acquired and used by
other countries for formal warfare via the ar¬
maments trade, which means that it is possi¬
ble to distinguish the manufacturers/ven¬
dors and the victims, i.e. the users. At the
JAIME DIAZ, of Colombia, is director of
CODECAL (Corporación Integral para el Desar¬
rollo Cultural y Social), the Bogota-based
organization for cultural and social development,
and Vice-President of the World Council for Cur¬
riculum and Instruction. This article is based on a
paper presented at the World Congress on Disar¬
mament Education of which Mr. Diaz was elected
Chairman.
same time, we observe that the great
powers, instead of coming into direct con¬
frontation with each other, wage war
through the intermediary of lesser powers
which thus virtually become their symbol.



'Arms
are the symptom
of a deep-seated ill
which must be
tackled at its roots'
In Latin America the most costly weapons
are imported, even though they are by then
obsolete in the producing countries. To ac¬
quire these weapons, sums of money out of
all proportion to the countries' resources are
expended.
Following the lead of the rich industrial
countries, our countries are beginning to
produce easy-to-build military equipment,
whilst the rich countries reserve for
themselves the production of large expen¬
sive items and the most profitable business.
The multinational firms make profits either
by exporting directly or authorizing
manufacture under licence. Arms sales take
place without restriction either through the
official market or clandestinely.
Governments use arms mostly to sup¬
press "subversion". However, the term
"subversion" is used arbitrarily to describe
any attempt to change the prevailing
political and economic order.
Thus, the concept of warfare is different:
it is not so much formal or direct warfare as
economic and social warfare, which slowly
amasses great numbers of victims, without
the attendant tumult of war on the
battlefield, through malnutrition, illness,
unemployment and lack of training, coupled
with the political powerlessness of the vic¬
tims to change the system.
Disarmament, as viewed from Latin
America, would first of all involve
eliminating the basic ills that lead to social
violence and hence to the use of arms. Arms
are not a cause but an effect; they are not
the problem but the symptom of a deep-
seated ill which must be tackled at its roots.
In this context, our first reaction as
educators, on surveying the world scene
and the situation in our own region, is that
the task is virtually impossible. Furthermore,
there appears to be a serious contradiction
between government actions towards disar¬
mament and government actions furthering
the arms race and militarism, with those
responsible for the latter constantly seeking
14

. Drawing by Konk © Editions Ouvrières, Paris
to justify themselves on ideological grounds,
using all the mass media, and exploiting to
the full peoples' unhappy memories and
cultural stereotypes of enemy countries.
But despite the daunting size of the
obstacles, and indeed precisely because of
them, effective action towards disarma¬
ment, particularly in the field of education, is
becoming a matter of vital urgency.
The objective of disarmament education is
not just to halt or eliminate the arms race,
but also to seek "non-military", peaceful
alternatives for solving problems between
countries. It is not, therefore, a purely
negative education, seeking to eliminate an
acute evil, but a positive education aimed at
initiating and promoting new ways of
achieving human coexistence.
From the point of view of the so-called
Third World countries, pursuit of such an
objective involves identifying, denouncing'
and critically examining in both theory and
practice the "myths" of militarism and the
arms race in the world which are greatly
amplified by the mass media; examining in
detail the basic causes of violence; analysing
the mechanisms of direct or indirect warfare
at the national and international levels and
their relationships with political systems and
economic interests; denouncing injustice at
all levels; and dedicating oneself to the task
of building a world based on equity instead
of repression or exploitation.
The values of war and the values of peace
are in opposition to each other. Disarma
ment education therefore has to take a dif¬
ferent direction, i.e. create its own set of
values. We have in fact reached the
paradoxical situation where the most
sophisticated and costly arms race is
justified precisely on the grounds of main¬
taining peace, yet this peace is nothing but a
cold war based on official lying, fear,
mistrust, the lust for power and profit, and
the maintenance of a violent political and
economic system whose leaders are firmly
resolved to survive even at the expense of
the greater part of mankind.
For peace we need a fundamental con¬
sistency between what is said and what is
done: that is to say a world where truth is
the norm; where the prevailing attitudes are
ones of sincere co-operation; of trust; of
open-mindedness to others precisely
because they are different and not merely on
the basis of the extent to which they fit into
our own cultural, economic, political or
ideological universe; of respect for genuine
self-determination of peoples; where it is
recognized that, as long as the basic needs
of all people remain unsatisfied, we are at
war; and where it ¡s-accepted that conflicts
should be able to be solved in a human way,
i.e. not through physical force or the law of
the jungle but rather by negotiation and con¬
sensus and even legitimate moral pressure,
which is frequently necessary for just causes
to be acknowledged.
The fundamental value, recognized as
transcending all ideological and religious dif¬
ferences, is man. Every system must be at
the service of man, of all men, not just a
few; of all nations, not just certain ones
among them; there can be no progress
along the road to peace as long as the well-
being and extravagance of a minority are
being financed by the sweat and toil of
deprived multitudes.
Education must create personal attitudes,
develop ethical values in both theory and
practice and stimulate initiative. But for this
a global approach to the problem is
necessary, so that it can be assessed and
dealt with progressively in both its political
and economic dimensions.
This means learning how to look at the
social world and assess it from the point of
view of others, particularly when these
others are the immense multitude of the
non-privileged.
Disarmament education from the point of
view described above is more a state of mind
than a subject or a topic; it is more a feature
of social education than a new area of
study; it is more a process than a theory;
and it is more a thing of the future than
something developed from the past.
Jaime Diaz
15
