What is cubism?
ANALYTICAL Cubism [a new
method of painting evolved by
Picasso and Georges Braque
around 1909] involved presenting
simultaneously several aspects of a
single object as seen from different view¬
points. The same analytical criteria could
be applied to each and every reality and,
indeed, to thought. When Picasso later
combined in a single portrait a full face
view and a profile, he was in fact doing
just what he did in the period 1910-1912,
when he produced spatial break downs
of glasses, fruit dishes or guitars; but,
with faces, these different viewpoints
also reveal the varied, ambiguous facets
of that Protean amalgam, the human
being.
All these facets combine in one, un¬
ique form, or even in a kind of graphic
symbol; but each provides a key to inter¬
pretation, each imposes a different
"reading" of the image.
In one and the same figure are
presented simultaneously not simply
several different viewpoints, but several
different "truths", each one no less
"true" than the others. Thus it is this
ambiguity, this internal contradiction,
that distorts and breaks down the figure
and then re-assembles it in accordance
with its own true, intrinsic structure.
by Giulio Carlo Argan
Herein for Picasso lay the fundamental
error of the constructivists they sought
the structure in reason, whereas the true
structure of human beings is founded in
the irrational.
We come now to the question of the
third dimension. Anything developed in
depth impinges on our vision through an
optical illusion and, as a result, the way
is open to emotive reaction bringing into
play imagination, memory, feeling. It
was this very way that Cubism, with its
new and rigorous objectivity, wished to
close. Both Picasso and Braque resolve
the problem of the third dimension by
the use of oblique lines (indicating
depth) and curves (indicating volume),
thus transposing onto a plane surface
objects which have depth or relief. This
is where the mental factor comes in, the
ideas that the mind conceives about
objects (and this is the typically Carte¬
sian aspect of Cubism, which places it
squarely within the framework of the
fundamental rationalism of French cul¬
ture). This applies to familiar objects
such as fruit, plates, glasses, bottles and
musical instruments. Now a plate placed
on a table is seen as being elliptical in
shape, whereas we know, in fact, that it
is round; since at the mental level there
is no difference in value between what
we see and what we know, the "round¬
ness" of the plate also appears in the
painting. In other words, we grant the
same authenticity to what is in the third
dimension as we do to the measurable
values of the vertical and horizontal co¬
ordinates. As well as our notion of the
object (which we had before looking at
the picture), the time factor comes into
play; we first see the plate as elliptical in
shape and then as round, as though we
had changed its position in space or
were walking around it and seeing it
from different angles. From this it is to
be deduced that, although empirically a
single object cannot be in two different
places at the same time, in the wholly
mental reality of space (that is, as an
ordered, structured reality ¡h the mind)
the same object can exist in different
forms and, naturally, in different places.
GIULIO CARLO ARGAN, Italian art
historian, is a professor at the university of
Rome and was mayor of the city from 1976
to 1979. He is director of the review Storia
dell'Arte and the author of many essays on
art history, urban planning and methods of
criticism. The text published here is taken
from his study L'Arte Moderna 1770-1970
(Sansoni publishers, Florence, 1970).
23
