Photo © Brand Overeem, Barneveld, Netherlands



Education, disarmament
and human rights
by Judith Torney
and Leonard Gambrell P
// ^^^EACE cannot be kept by force.
It can only be achieved by
understanding". These words
of Albert Einstein sum up succinctly the
common point of departure of all those who
believe that peace can be taught and that
the vital first steps are education concerning
disarmament and teaching about human
rights.
But although their objective is the same,
educational experts and writers have devel¬
oped two* distinct but complementary ap¬
proaches to education for disarmament
which are based on somewhat differing
assumptions and rely on different strategies
for attaining their ends.
In the first of these approaches, arms I

races are seen as resulting from political
systems which are malfunctioning and
which can be improved through structural
reform of society. This may involve a basic
rearrangement of the nation-state system
and some of its proponents suggest that
world government is an essential part of the
solution to arms races.
The educational programme implicit
within this approach is the study of the
growth and physical characteristics of
nuclear weapons and of the negative
economic consequences of arms races the
percentage of national resources locked in
by arms production and alternative use of
these resources for economic development.
The risks of nuclear war and the physical
danger of nuclear weapons are stressed. A
wealth of facts is often provided by those
who take the structural approach. This may
be useful in developing awareness of
choices and priorities, but only when
governments demonstrate willingness to
share data with their citizens concerning
types of armaments and their economic
impact.
Some materials used in this approach
repeat the information that each human be¬
ing on earth could be killed many times over
by existing stockpiles of weapons. Certainly
this is true. But this kind of information is
likely to produce a high level of fear and anx¬
iety in people. A common response to such
emotions is to divert attention from the
problem in the hope that it will disappear.
This is especially true because individuals
have little chance directly or immediately to
influence the arms race.
Materials which suggest changes in
economic priorities by the redirection of na¬
tional resources are also hard for individuals
to understand fully. The economic system is
very complex, and citizens want very con¬
vincing assurance that their own well-being
will not take a turn for the worse if economic
priorities change. In periods of inflation or
economic instability, there may be especial¬
ly strong resistance to such changes.
Sometimes this kind of approach also
relies on exhortations labelling disarma¬
ment as moral and armament as immoral.
The proposal of a world government which
will abolish armaments meets with great
scepticism in many nations. Beliefs about
political morality as well as patriotic beliefs
are so deeply held by most people that they
are unlikely to be changed by slogans or
exhortation.
Though the model that stresses structural
problems gives some attention to the fact
that more weapons do not necessarily give
one more security, this is not always suffi¬
ciently emphasized. Unless a link is made
with positive alternative approaches by
which nations can understand each other
better and conflict can be resolved without
resort to increased armaments, it is not likely
that steps will be taken to reduce or control
the growth of arms.
The public may be aware that high levels
of armament increase the chances for war.
However, in the absence of alternative ways
of reacting to threats to security, both policy
makers and the general public are likely to
accept increasing armaments. They see no
other way to eliminate the threats against
which arms are intended to protect. This ap¬
proach is very useful, however, in pointing
to multilateral approaches through organiza
tions like the United Nations and Unesco
and to the interdependent roles of govern¬
mental, inter-governmental, and non¬
governmental organizations in promoting
disarmament.
The second of the two approaches to
disarmament education focuses major atten¬
tion on the behaviour of actors involved in
the arms race (including both policy makers
and the public) and on ways to influence
their behaviour. Concern for structural
reform is less important. Though pro¬
ponents of this approach sometimes make
use of data on arms expenditures and ex¬
press the belief that there is a need for an
alternative use of resources, they devote
more effort to a critical analysis of ap¬
proaches to national security and percep¬
tions of it.
The type of disarmament education pro¬
posed in this model begins with a critical
analysis of defence theories and military
doctrines or policies. Narrow perceptions of
national security are seen as the source of
the problem. More armaments do not
necessarily mean greater security this is
the major message. There must be an
analysis of other ways in which national
security could realistically be guaranteed.
The "logic" of nuclear deterrence may be
examined in this model; the economic im¬
pact of arms development, manufacture,

and sales may be analysed along with the
estimated costs of conversion from military
to non-military production.
This model also requires that the public
have access to information about the arms
expenditures of their own and other nations,
the relation of these expenditures to
legitimate defence, and the trade-offs bet¬
ween increasing arms and meeting basic
social needs. It requires that citizens be able
to obtain information about armaments
from unofficial as well as government
sources, that they have the opportunity to
participate in discussions of processes of
disarmament and goals of national security,
and that policy makers take their views
seriously. Free access to information on
these issues results in a climate for real
disarmament education.
When the connexion between national
security and the arms races is neglected,
discussions about disarmament frequently
break down into arguments which place
blame on other nations rather than exploring
alternative solutions. It is essential to
understand why people and governments
rely on arms and a military approach rather
than simply to denounce them. Teaching in¬
dividuals to examine assumptions regard¬
ing national security will give them a strong
basis of information for judging future
events. This behavioural approach, which
emphasizes the relation between education
for disarmament and teaching about human
rights, is promising for both formal and in¬
formal education beginning with youth
and extending throughout the life span.
Among the most basic rights defined in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
are those related to life and security of the
person. Article 28 proclaims, "Everyone is
entitled to a social and international order in
which the rights and freedoms set forth in
this Declaration can be fully realized".
This notion has been strongly stressed in
Unesco's Medium Term Plan which
declares:
"The assurance of human rights and the
construction of peace are tasks that go
hand-in-hand, no doubt because any war
irremediably compromises the exercise
of rights of all kinds, while denial of rights,
in itself, inevitably ends by engendering
violence; and because a peace based on
inequality, domination, and exploitation,
even if it could be maintained by com¬
pulsion, would be peace in name only".
It is clear that a climate of public opinion
favouring reductions in armaments is one
important component of the process of
assuring stable peace, and that respect for
human rights is equally important.
One may even contrast what might be
called a negative spiral of events relating to
national security with a positive spiral of
such events. Military approaches to main¬
taining regimes in power and ensuring com¬
pliance from the population characterize
many countries of the world. Positive mo¬
tives may underlie the takeover of a govern¬
ment by the military (for example guiding a
country through a stormy period with other
nations). Within a short time, however, the
military regime comes to be seen as an end
in itself. The population nearly always finds
itself ruled in an atmosphere of coercion and
fear.
Use of national security as a justification
for the deprivation of basic human rights in¬
itiates a negative spiral of events. The argu¬
ment is made by those in power that na¬
tional security requires the absence of dis¬
sent. Those who do dissent are punished,
often in disregard of internationally agreed
standards. In the spiralling climate of fear
which results, it becomes impossible to ex¬
amine the role which military power is play¬
ing in the nation's life. And this mentality
also has an impact upon the country's inter¬
national relations. It is not only that ar¬
maments are built up in a physical sense; it
is also that psychological reliance upon
coercion and threat internally builds a lack of
trust in matters requiring international co¬
operation (which is especially important for
disarmament).
In fact, serious international problems ex¬
ist in promoting disarmament in countries
where human rights are not respected. A
government which is not subject to popular
control is not likely to accept international
controls. It may oppose international inspec¬
tion because it fears that its human rights
violations might be exposed or that its
population might complain to outsiders.
Other governments are reluctant to trust a
government which maintains itself by force
and by violating human rights. This limits
the disarmament agreements which are
possible with such a government. Initiatives
which show the willingness of a government

This postcard, produced during the
First World War, is an example of how
the visual media have often been used
to glorify war. The caption reads "I
sleep with my Rosalie every
day" Rosalie being a nickname which
soldiers gave to their bayonets.
s\
~~Zk ,
Posters are a highly effective
instrument for alerting public opinion
to the issues involved in disarmament
education and in the struggle for peace
and human rights. In the three posters,
below, children are used to get the
message across. Two of them
constitute a direct indictment of war.
"The Child and the Aircraft" (1937)
denounces the bombing of civilians,
which leaves children as corpses
labelled with identification numbers.
The text on the chest of the "Tattooed
Baby" (1970), "Bless those who declare
war. They're usually too old to fight
and die", is a condemnation of those
who sacrifice the lives of the young to
the interests of a minority. The third,
used in an election campaign in 1977,
has a civic message: the boy's
admonitory gesture and the text,
"Think of the Year 2000", are designed
to remind adults of their responsibility
for the future of their country and its
children.
to comply with its human rights obligations
will not only create an enhanced sense of
trust on the part of citizens in that country
but will allow a constructive exploration of
alternative means for maintaining national
security. This can set the stage for a gradual
reduction of arms, which can build further
trust.
The negative spiral of events, where
power is maintained through coercive
threat, may be contrasted with national
security which is based on trust by the
population that the government will respect
basic civil and political rights and will work
toward the achievement of social,
economic, and cultural rights.
Many psychological theorists such as Erik
Erikson speak of trust as an essential ele¬
ment in human psychological development.
A variety of studies of political socialization
conducted in many nations shows the ex¬
tent to Which young children express
positive attitudes and trust in personal
representatives of the political system.
Although adolescents may be somewhat
more cynical, the young person whose civic
education is built upon a fund of trust which
is based upon experience with respect for
citizens' rights has a strong base which is
seldom substantially eroded. In countries
where respect for human rights has resulted
in confidence in the government on the part
of citizens, perceptions of national security
can build on a foundation of psychological
power. This is much stronger than the foun¬
dation of coercive power.
The actions taken by governments are
part of the message about national security
which students receive quite apart from any
textbook or school lecture. Governments
can do a variety of things to demonstrate
movement toward a positive climate for
disarmament education: allowing individuals
free access to information from other na¬
tions, opening deliberations on military
policy to public view, demonstrating will¬
ingness to co-operate with international
human rights procedures, to name only a
few.
8

content and status of international human
rights instruments and procedures. At
various levels of education people can be
given experience in applying these universal¬
ly accepted human rights principles to the
analysis of specific current events. With
respect to these cases the following ques¬
tions might be asked: How does this event il¬
lustrate the respect or lack of respect for
human rights? Which human rights? What
concept of national security is illustrated?
How might this event have been handled so
that respect for human rights would have
been enhanced and reliance on military or
coercive power given less emphasis? What
information about this event would citizens
need in order to make informed judgements
about it?
At a somewhat more advanced level,
students might be asked to analyse the in¬
fluence which culture and ideology have on
perceptions of national security. Another
topic would be the role of armaments and
military ideology in the history of their own
and other nations. Questions such as the
following might be asked: To what extent
are the high points of the country's history
defined as battles won? When and in what
context might negotiations have resulted in
arms reduction? How might the history of
the protection of human rights in this nation
have been different if the government had
taken different approaches to national
security at various times in its history? In
what cases have improvements in the
respect for human rights by governments
resulted in a climate for lessened reliance on
force as a way of guaranteeing national
security?
It is also valuable for students to examine
public awareness of the issue of human
rights and disarmament. How much infor¬
mation is available on current or projected
economic priorities? On armaments? Can
the concerned citizen obtain answers to
questions about policies from governmental
and non-governmental sources? Can he or
she join with others to discuss issues of con¬
cern, explore alternatives, and make their
conclusions known to policy makers?
Each of- these topics can contribute to an
educational programme the aim of which is
to build support for approaches to national
security based on respect for human rights,
including freedom of information and
discussion. These approaches are central to
Unesco's mandate to build support for
disarmament and the reinforcement of
peace.
Judith Tomoy
and Leonard Gambrell
Within the last few years the international
community has seen movement in this
positive direction in many countries; impor¬
tant steps have been taken toward
establishing the climate in which disarma¬
ment education can take place. Young peo¬
ple in these countries now have an oppor¬
tunity to learn that there are legitimate
sources of social power which do not de¬
pend on coercion. They have thus
developed a cornerstone of trust on which a
positive view of national security can be
built.
In summary, respect for human rights on
the part of governments can build a climate
of trust within and between nations which
allows the exploration of non-military ap¬
proaches to security and can lead to the
negotiation of agreements regarding gradual
disarmament. A positive spiral of events will
then be created.
There are thus two parts to the core of
education concerning disarmament. An
analysis of alternatives to military power as
ways of guaranteeing national security is
central. Of equal importance is an analysis of
the way in which respect for human rights
by governments along with free access to in¬
formation can build a climate of trust within
and between nations so that aradual move¬
ment can be made toward disarmament.
Students need to become aware of the
JUDITH TORIMEY, of the U.S.A., is professor
of psychology at the University of Illinois, at
Chicago Circle. She is co-author, with Thomas
Buergenthal, of International Human Rights and
International Education (1976) published by the
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington.
LEONARD GAMBRELL, of the U.S.A., is
associate professor of political science at
Wisconsin State University, at Eau Claire,
Wisconsin. A member of the Consortium on
Peace Research, Education and Development
(COPRED), he has conducted extensive surveys
of disarmament education (see page 30).
