{ß) Gurganj
/\
/ Bukhara^Äj
Kharmaithan
Hamadhan
X
	*i
"TEL
S* Samanqan-^^,
V
/
/
/
Nissa (Ä
®Afshana
Raiy
Chaqqa
Isfahan (§)
CD '
Above, map showing the travels of
Avicenna. Below, this mausoleum,
built by the Samanid Emir Ismail I
(892-907), is the only building from
the time of Avicenna still standing
at Bukhara, the city where
Avicenna spent his childhood and
adolescence and wrote his first
scientific and philosophical works.
Tus



>Baward
My Odyssey
by Avicenna
Our knowledge of the early life of Avicenna (Ibn Sina) is based on a book compiled by
Abu Ubaid al-Juzjani, his pupil and companion for twenty-five years. Although the
latter part of the book was written by al-Juzjani, the first part, which recounts the
great philosopher's life from his childhood until his return to Gorgan, was dictated by
Avicenna himself. It paints a vivid picture of a precocious intellect fully aware of his
own genius and of the incredible industriousness that brought that genius to fruition.
MY father was from Balkh. During
the reign of the Samanid ruler
Nuh Ibn Mansur (367-387 AH/
977-997 AD), he moved from Balkh to
Bukhara where he worked as a functionary.
He became the Governor of Kharmaithan,
the centre of a district in the region of
Bukhara, an ancient metropolis. In the
vicinity of Kharmaithan is a district called Af-
shana. He married my mother there and set¬
tled down. I, and later my brother, were
born there. Later we all went to Bukhara and
it was there that I began to study the Koran |
and belles-lettres. By the age of ten I had I
' . -SimT
¡r?***
i s
J
MOg

i reached the end of the Koran and had read
much belles-lettres, so that people were
surprised.
My father was one of those who had
responded to the invitation of the Egyptians
and was counted among the Isma'ilis. He
had accepted their opinions on the soul and
on the intellect. My brother likewise. They
often discussed these matters. I listened to
them, I grasped what they were saying, and
they tried to attract me to their rite. On occa¬
sion, too, they would discuss philosophy,
geometry and Indian arithmetic. Then my
father decided to have me learn Indian
arithmetic by sending me to a grocer who
was in the habit of using that form of
calculation.
Meanwhile, one Abu-Abdallah Nateli,
who professed a knowledge of philosophy,
came to Bukhara. My father invited him to
stay with us in the hope that he would teach
me. Before his arrival I had visited Ismail
Zahid, becoming an assiduous student of
Muslim jurisprudence and one of his best
pupils. I became familiar with the various
methods of argumentation used by the pro¬
fessionals. Later, under Nateli's guidance, I
began reading the Eisagoge [an introduction
to the Categoriae of Aristotle by the third-
century-AD philosopher Porphyry]. When
he explained to me the definition of genus, I
set about verifying the definition in a manner
whose like he had never heard before, so
deeply impressing him that he advised my
father that I should not engage in any other
occupation but learning. Whatever the
problem my Master set for me, I succeeded
in solving it better than he. I learned from
him the rudiments of logic, a science with
whose subtleties he had scant acquain¬
tance. From then on I began to read books
and study the commentaries on my own, so
that I achieved mastery of logic. I also read
Euclid's Geometry, under Nateli's guidance
from the beginning to the fifth or sixth
figure; as for the rest of the book, I managed
to solve all the difficulties on my own. Then I
moved on to [Ptolemy's] Almagest. When I
had finished the preliminary work and came
to the geometric figures, Nateli said to me,
"Read it yourself and solve the difficulties;
then' explain to me what you have read so
that I can distinguish for your benefit the
true from the false." (The book was beyond
the poor man's powers). And so I began to
elucidate it by myself, before expounding
the questions to my Master. How many
were the difficult problems Nateli had not
solved until then and which he understood
thanks to me!
Then Nateli left for Gorgan. As for me, I
applied myself to reading and studying al-
Farabi's Fusus al-Hikam and other commen¬
taries on physics and metaphysics. As each
day went by, the doors of knowledge open¬
ed before me. Then I took up medicine and
proceeded to read the works that had been
written on that subject. Since medicine is
not a difficult science, I soon excelled in it
and skilled doctors studied it under my
guidance. In addition, I cared for the sick
practically. Thus the doors of treatment bas¬
ed on experience opened before me, in a
way that cannot be described. At the same
time I kept up with my studies of religious
law and disputation. By then I was sixteen
years of age.
During the next year and a half I became
increasingly immersed in my studies. I went
over logic and all the problems of philosophy
10
once again. At that period I did not sleep
one night through, and worked all day, ac¬
quiring knowledge. I reduced every state¬
ment and proposition I came across into its
syllogistic premisses; then I examined the
possible results of the premisses and observ¬
ed their conditions until the moment when
the correct solution of the problem became
indubitable. Whenever I was baffled by a
problem, or could not work out the middle
term of a syllogism, I repaired to the
mosque. I begged and prayed the creator of
the universe to reveal to me what had been
locked in obscurity and to make difficulties
easy for me. Then, at night, I would return
home, set my lamp before me and begin
again to read and write. Whenever sleep
began to overcome me or I felt exhausted, I
drank a frugal glass of wine and waited for
my energy to return. Then I began to read
again, and when I dozed off I would see in a
dream the very same question that I was
pondering, so that the solutions to many
problems appeared to me in my sleep. I con¬
tinued unremittingly to follow this routine
until I possessed a solid mastery of the
sciences and held them in my grasp as far as
our human faculties allow. Everything I
learned at that time is not replaced by what I
have learned more recently, even until to¬
day. Thus I mastered logic, the natural
sciences and mathematics.
Then I returned to the study of the divine
science. I read [Aristotle's] Metaphysics, but
without understanding a word of it. The
author's intentions remained lost in obscuri¬
ty to me. Although I read the book forty
times from end to end until I knew it by
heart, I could grasp neither its meaning nor
its purpose. I despaired of understanding it
by my own efforts and said to myself: "This
book is incomprehensible". Then one day I
was walking through the book bazaar when
a bookseller proffered me a book whose
price he was shouting out. Discouraged as I
was, I rebuffed him, convinced that there
was nothing to be gained from this science.
The vendor stood his ground and said: "Buy
this book. It is cheap. I am selling it off for
three dirhams because its owner is in needy
circumstances." And so I bought it. The
book turned out to be Abu Nasr al-Farabi's

Avicenna's pleasant life at Gurganj
came to an abrupt end when Sultan
Mahmud of Ghazna demanded that the
brilliant group of artists and
philosophers gathered under the
protection of Emir Ali Ibn Ma'mun be
sent to grace his own court. Avicenna
was unwilling to comply and, to avoid
the Sultan's clutches, was obliged to
flee Gurganj. Travelling farther and
farther westwards, he crossed the
Karakum desert eventually reaching
IMIssa. Not far from Nissa at the present-
day town of Meyhana, stands the
mausoleum (photo top left) of the sufi,
or Muslim mystic, Abu Said, whom
Avicenna is thought to have known and
from whom he may have acquired a
knowledge of Islamic mysticism.
Another of Avicenna's stopping-places
was Meshked-i-Misriana, then a
beautiful and populous town whose
ruined minarets (photo bottom left)
to.day rise like a mirage from the desert.
After many other vicissitudes Avicenna
at last reached Isfahan where he
became physician and adviser to the
Emir. Here, at the peak of his career, he
wrote in his native tongue, Persian, one
of his major works the Book of
Knowledge. Photo right, the
soaring arches of the Friday Mosque at
Isfahan. Worn out by his travels and the
hardships and alarums of an eventful
life, Avicenna died, in August 1037, on
the desert road between Isfahan and
Hamadhan, to which city his body was
taken. Today, his remains are at rest in
a new mausoleum (photo bottom right)
built during the 1950s by Iranian
architect Khusheng Saihun. The
mausoleum houses a huge library.
Twelve columns form a thirty-metre-
high tower supporting a cone-shaped
roof. They represent the twelve
branches of learning in which the
genius of Avicenna found expression.
Commentaries on the Metaphysics. I rushed
home and read it. The whole purport of
[Aristotle's treatise] straightaway became
clear to me because I already knew the work
by heart. In a transport of delight, I began
the following day to distribute abundant
alms to the poor as a thanksgiving.
At this time the Emir Nuh Ibn Mansur, the
ruler of Bukhara, was afflicted with a serious
illness which the doctors were unable to
cure. I was renowned among these physi¬
cians for the range of my studies. They sug¬
gested to the prince that he should summon
me. So off I went and joined the other physi¬
cians who were treating him. And I
distinguished myself in his service.
One day I asked him to grant me access to
his library, to examine the books there and
to read the medical works. He agreed to my
request. I made my way into a mansion with
many chambers, with chest upon chest of
books in each. Each room was devoted to a
single subject, one room containing works
of literature and poetry, another works of
jurisprudence. I perused the catalogue of
books of the Ancients and asked for all

those I needed. Among them I saw books
whose very names were unknown to
many works which I had never seen before
and have not seen since.
I read these books, profiting from them
and acquainting myself with each author's
rank in his own field of knowledge. At the
age of eighteen, I had finished studying all
these sciences. At that period my knowledge
was due above all to my memory; today I am
more mature, otherwise my knowledge is
exactly the same and nothing has changed.
A neighbour of mine called Abu'l Hassan
al-Aruzi asked me to write a scientific en¬
cyclopaedia for him. In answer to his re¬
quest I wrote the Majmu (Compendium)
which I signed in his name and in which I
covered all the sciences except
mathematics. I was then twenty-one years
old. Another neighbour of mine was a native
of Khorezm named Abu Bakr al-Baraqi. He
had no equal in jurisprudence, Koranic ex¬
egesis and asceticism and had a strong lean¬
ing for the speculative sciences. He asked
me to write a commentary on these scien¬
tific works and so I wrote al-Hasil wa al-
Mahsul (The Import and the Substance) in
about twenty volumes. I also wrote for him a
work on ethics which I called al-Birr wa al-
Ithm (Good Work and Evil), works which
can only be found at his dwelling and which
he never lent out for copying.
Then my father died and my cir¬
cumstances changed completely. I accepted
a post in the Sultan's employment and had
to move from Bukhara to Gurganj. The vizier
of the ruler of Khorezm, Ali Ibn Ma'mun,
was a learned man by the name of Abu-I Hu-
sain as-Soheili. I presented myself to this
ruler, wearing the clothing appropriate to
jurists, with scarf and chin-wrap. A monthly
salary, in keeping with my talents, was fix¬
ed. Some time afterwards, again constrain¬
ed by necessity, I moved from Khorezm to
the confines of Khorasan, passing through
Baward, then Tus then Shaqqan, then
Samanqan, then Jajarm and thence to
Gorgan. My entire purpose was to reach the
Emir Qabus; but it happened at that moment
that Qabus was taken and imprisoned in a
fortress, where he died. After this I went to
Dihistan where I fell very ill, then returned to
Jurjan where Abu Ubain al-Juzjani made
friends with me; and I composed a poem on
my condition in which there is a verse
saying:
And great once I became, no more would
city hold me,
And when my value rose, no one would care
to buy me.
Milestones in a restless life
980 AD (370 of the Hegira), birth of Avicenna (Abu Ali al-Husayn Ibn Abd-Allah Ibn Hassan
Ibn Ali Ibn Sina) near the city of Bukhara (in the present-day Soviet Socialist Republic of
Uzbekistan) in a village of which his father was governor. As a very young child, begins to learn
Arabic and the Koran.
The family soon moves to Bukhara. By the age of ten, Avicenna can recite the 114 chapters
of the Koran from memory.
Under the guidance of gifted teachers, Avicenna extends the range of his knowledge to a
prodigious degree. His last tutor, the philosopher Nateli, leaves because he has nothing more to
teach him.
At sixteen years of age Avicenna has won a reputation as a doctor and is beginning to attract
a growing stream of patients.
Around the age of eighteen he has already assimilated all the knowledge of his time in
theology, Arabic literature, geometry, mathematics, physics, logic and philosophy.
Succeeds, where all other physicians have failed, in curing the Samanid Sultan of Bukhara,
Nuh Ibn Mansur; wins the Sultan's favour and is rewarded with access to his library.
While at Bukhara writes his first works, notably al-Hasil wa al-Mahsul (The Import and the
Substance) and al-Birr wa al-lthm (Good Work and Evil).
In the year 1001 AD (392 of the Hegira) the Samanid State is threatened by the powerful
Sultan Mahmud of Ghazna (in present-day Afghanistan). Avicenna sets out for Gurganj, capital
of Khorezm (in what is now the Turkmen SSR) whose vizier Abu-I Husayn as-Soheili is a lover
of learning. The Emir of Gurganj, Ali Ibn Ma'mun, has gathered around him a galaxy of il¬
lustrious scholars including the renowned al-Biruni, Abu Nasr al-Arraq, the Christian Abu
Masihi, and Abul Kheir al-Khammar.
After a short stay, Avicenna is obliged to leave Gurganj when the Sultan of Ghazna demands
that all the Gurganj scientists be sent to his court. Prince Ma'mun is forced to yield to his
powerful neighbour, but Avicenna, accompanied by the Christian Masihi, who will not survive
the journey, leaves for Gorgan, southeast of the Caspian Sea.
While at Gorgan meets Abu Ubaid al-Juzjani who (until Avicenna's death a quarter of a cen¬
tury later) will be his most faithful disciple and his biographer.
For two years Avicenna devotes himself to study and writing. Finishes al-Mabda wa al-Ma'ad
(The Beginning and the Return) and embarks on one of his masterworks, the Canon of
Medicine.
Leaves Gorgan and journeys to the city of Raiy (whose ruins today stand southwest of
Teheran), the capital of prince Majd el-Dowleh. Avicenna treats the prince and cures him.
In 1014 AD (405 of the Hegira) leaves Raiy and settles near Hamadhan.
Avicenna, whose reputation has preceded him, is summoned to the bedside of prince Shams
el-Dowleh, who appoints him vizier (prime minister).
After being toppled by an army mutiny, Avicenna is reinvested as grand vizier, and for the
next six years lives a relatively stable life governed by a crushing work-timetable.
Begins his great encyclopaedic work on philosophy the Shifa (The Book of Healing). Rises
before dawn, teaches his pupils in the early morning, leads them to prayers as an Imam, writes
fifty pages a day of the Shifa.
In 1021 AD (412 of the Hegira) his protector, prince Shams el-Dowleh, dies, and his son
refuses to reinvest Avicenna as grand vizier. Goes into hiding where he virtually completes the
Shifa, without, as he would later point out, reference to written texts and relying entirely on his
prodigious memory.
A secret letter to the ruler of Isfahan, prince Ala el-Dowleh, is intercepted, Avicenna's hiding
place is revealed and he is cast into prison with his faithful disciple Juzjani. During four months
in prison writes the Risalat Haiy ibn Yaqzan (The Treatise of Living, the Son of the Vigilant), the
al-Hidaya (The Book of Guidance) and the al-Adwiyat al-Qa/biyya (The Cardiac Remedies).
After a war between princes Sama el-Dowleh and Ala el-Dowleh, in which the latter is vic¬
torious, Avicenna is released but is obliged to live at Hamadhan.
In 1023 AD (414 of the Hegira) flees to Isfahan accompanied by the faithful Juzjani.
At Isfahan, the final stage in Avicenna's tumultuous Odyssey, the philosopher spends the last
fourteen years of his life under the protection of prince Ala el-Dowleh.
Works on astronomy, and so the story goes, writes the Book of Know/edge at the prince's re¬
quest. Adds a chapter on music to the Shifa and writes a work on linguistics entitled The
Language of the Arabs.
During a campaign waged against Hamadhan by Ala el-Dowleh, Avicenna is seized by a
severe attack of colic which he tries to cure too quickly.
Dies on the first Friday of the month of Ramadan, 428 of the Hegira (August 1037 AD), aged
fifty-seven.
12
