The plight of the
10

woman-breadwinner
by Mayra Buvinic, Nadia H. Youssef and lisa Schumacher
ONE of the reasons why women are
consistently losing out in develop¬
ment programmes designed to
improve the conditions of the world's needy
is that women's economic activities are
misreported by censuses and other data.
Work that is not performed for wages in
the formal sector of the economy is not
counted as work. Women in developing
countries who work for wages in addition to
performing household duties are often
categorized as "housewives" rather than as
members of the labour force. Thus in perfor¬
ming a double duty of work at home and
work for wages, women are not counted as
working persons.
This inadequate data base for women is
probably due to a deeply ingrained Western
vision that places women inside the home
and restricts their functions to those of
homemakers and childbearers. The data
base for women as reproducers (child-
bearers and child-rearers) is infinitely more
satisfactory than the data base for women
as economic producers.
Development policies have reflected these
data inadequacies and imbalances as well as
harbouring the belief that women's place is
in the home; women have been "targeted"
as concerns to development planners
because of their reproduction and child-
rearing, not because of their productive
functions.
Since the productive economic activities
of women have not been reflected in cen¬
suses and world tables, development
policies whose goal is to raise the standard
of living of the poor have not utilized
women's economic resources. Policy
makers have not realized that women's in¬
efficient and under-remunerated economic
activities add to the grim overall economic
picture of underdevelopment. Nor have they
become aware that increasing women's pro¬
ductivity is crucial to improving this
economic picture.
Directed primarily to women of child-
bearing age, development projects in the
past have been basically designed to provide
family planning and nutrition information.
When they have explored income raising op¬
portunities for women, they have done so
with the goal of reducing fertility rather than
raising income per se. The reasoning was
that when women were provided with viable
options to early marriage and ensuing
motherhood, fertility rates would conse¬
quently decline.
A corollary to the Western vision of
women as homemakers and childbearers
places women in a nuclear family structure
where the man is the sole economic provider
and the head of the household or in a non-
Western family organization characterized
by strong familism and male supremacy.
The traditional family in the non-West (such
as joint and extended families) is seen as a
welfare system that provides psychological,
legal and economic protection toward its
kinsmen and kinswomen. It is assumed that
women's rights are protected, and that
women are extended economic support
regardless of whether they are single, mar¬
ried, divorced, widowed or abandoned.
Relying on assumptions and protected by
the lack of almost any data, development
practitioners have not considered the
possibility of targeting some of their aid to
women-headed households in the develop¬
ing countries. But why should they? While
arousing doubts, the assumption that men
provide for and protect nuclear households
in non-Western countries continues to
prevail in the minds of the development
planners.
In the United States this myth of the ideal
nuclear family structure was debunked
when it became apparent thatyvöfnen were
the sole heads of 34 per cent of all minority
households and 11 per cent of all white
families. In 1972, 52 per cent of the former
and 25 per cent of the latter families were
below the poverty level as compared to only
5 per cent of families with an adult male
head who were below this level.
Additional data have revealed that this is
by no means a phenomenon restricted to
the United States. Women-headed
households account for 35 per cent of all
households in many parts of the Caribbean.
Between 1960 and 1970, the proportion of
such households doubled in Brazil and in¬
creased by 33 per cent in Morocco. Using
census data for 74 developing countries we
calculated the total range of adult women
who because of their current marital/family
status carry the "potential" of being or
eventually becoming family heads. (1)
The percentage of potential household
heads who are women among total potential
household heads (2) varies from 10 per cent
to 48 per cent; the average for 74 countries
is 18 per cent. Their proportion could be 18
per cent in India, 23 per cent in Indonesia,
and about 46 per cent of the household
heads in Botswana, 18 per cent in Kenya
and 15 per cent in Iran.
As heads of families these women are
often solely responsible for providing for and
protecting the social and economic well-
being of their family members. Yet it ap¬
pears that these women have the least
resources to fall back upon and often receive
the lowest wages. Recent international data
lead us to believe that these women's
families constitute a major section of the
poor in all countries (be it in Central and
South America, in sub-Saharan and North
Africa or Asia) and that they might be "the
poorest of them all."
In Santiago, Chile, a 1973 field inquiry in
marginal slums showed that 29 per cent of
the women who headed families as com¬
pared to only 10 per cent of the men fell into
the lowest income bracket. In Guayaquil,
Ecuador, a similar survey indicated that 37.5
per cent of the women and 17 per cent of
the male family heads fell into the lowest in¬
come brackets. A representative sample
survey of metropolitan Belo Horizonte,
Brazil, revealed that 41 per cent of the
female-headed households as compared to
26 per cent of the male-headed households
were at poverty levels.
Moreover, when households headed by
prime age, divorced and separated women
were singled out, the proportion at poverty
levels reached 60 per cent. Reports from a
rural income distribution survey in Botswana
showed women-headed households to be
significantly poorer than men's.
For 15 Commonwealth Caribbean coun¬
tries, 59 per cent of female-headed
households and only 21 per cent of male-
headed households reported "no income"
or "not stated" income; on the other side of
the spectrum, 54 per cent of the male-
hraded households earned a thousand
dollars or more per month while only 13 per
cent of the female-headed households earn¬
ed these amounts. This rise in households
headed by women in developing countries
and their poverty status portray, in extreme
form, the need to correct the biases in
official statistics used for development
planning.
In the industrialized West divorce is a
major cause for the rise in women-headed
households; in Turkey, Algeria, Morocco
and Italy it is the emigration of male and
female labour to industrial centres of
Europe. In sub-Saharan Africa, it is male
emigration to towns and cities; in South
Africa and Zambia, men migrate to work in
the mines, leaving their families behind. In
Central and South America, female head¬
ship is created by women migrating to the
cities and by unstable serial unions in which
reproduction takes place, leaving mother
and children often abandoned in poverty.
In parts of the Middle East, real conflicts
are surfacing between increasing economic
pressures and the continued existence of
traditional obligations that inhibit kinship
units from providing economic support to v
female members as it is "ideally" and even r
MAYRA BUVINIC, of Chile, NADIA
H. YOUSSEF, of Egypt, and ILSA
SCHUMACHER, of the USA are respectively
director, research director and research associate
of the International Center for Research on
Women (ICRW), Washington, D. C. This article is
adapted from "Women Headed Households: The
Ignored Factor in Development Planning", a
study supported by a grant to ICRW from the US
Agency for International Development.
11

Left, Peruvian women sell their produce
at the market at Chincheros, near
Cuzco. In addition to running their
households, women in the developing
countries are active In important sectors
of the economy, particularly in the
growing and marketing of agricultural
produce. But since these activities are
difficult to value and measure and are
outside the formal sector of the
economy, they do not appear in any
account as a contribution to the
national economy. Development
planners, therefore, tend to see
women's contribution as merely
supplementary or optional and to direct
their efforts towards providing more
remunerative and productive
employment opportunities for men,
arguing that men's employment benefits
the whole family. As a result, no help at
all is directed to those who need it
most those households that are
headed by women and which constitute
the major section of the poor in all
countries.
legally prescribed. In many countries, male
unemployment and male marginality have
prevented men from keeping their economic
obligations towards their kinswomen. This
has contributed to the breakdown of the ex¬
tended family.
The fact that an increasing number of
women among the poor are becoming the
sole or main economic providers for their
families, coupled with the fact that their pro¬
ductive activities, ignored by censuses and
planners alike, are mostly marginal, in¬
efficient and under-remunerated should
make women-headed households one of the
main targets of the new development
directions.
Concern has already been expressed that
in implementing the "basic needs strategy"
planners will fall into the trap of providing
adequate i.e., more remunerative and pro¬
ductive to unemployed and
underemployed men, leaving the presently
overworked and undercounted women with
inadequate employment. This concern
becomes overriding when the classic argu¬
ment that men's employment will benefit the
family is no longer applicable. It clearly does
so in the case of households that are headed
by women.
Efforts invested in assisting women
heading poor households with dependents
in developing countries, by providing these
women, above all, with adequate training
opportunities and employment, should have
a positive effect on the economic develop¬
ment of these countries. Increasing the pro¬
ductive capacity of this group of women
workers will help the country's economy in
the short run. Expanding the income poten¬
tial of these women will have a marked im¬
pact upon the economy in the long run by
paving the way for the emergence of a
capable future work force represented by
the children of women who head
households.
Mayra Buvinic, Nadia H. Youssef
and lisa Schumacher
111 "Potential women heads of household" includes all
women who are widowed, divorced, separated or single
mothers.
12) "Total potential household heads" includes potential
women heads of household plus men over the age of
twenty who are not single.
