Asia:
a kaleidoscope
of cultures
by Leela Dube
STUDIES of women in Asia and of programmes aimed at
elevating women's status have been handicapped by a general
lack of understanding of cross-cultural and intra-cultural
variations in the basic organization of societies and in the life con¬
texts of women.
Superficially similar situations may have radically different explana¬
tions and cannot be treated as identical. For example, the low levels
of literacy and education among females, the acceptance of lower
wages by women and the consequent preference of employers for
female labour, and the over-burdening with work of many women
appear to be common features of the condition of women in many
Asian countries. But the forces that bring these features into being
are not the same in each country.
With regard to the quality of relations between meri and women,
for example, Asia can be divided into three regions South Asia,
Southeast Asia and East Asia. In Southeast Asia, while familial con¬
trol over unmarried daughters may be fairly strict in Islamic countries,
women generally have a freedom of action and decision not found in
South and East Asia. While there are some patrilineal groups and
also a few matrilineal groups, the predominant pattern of kinship in
Southeast Asia is bilateral, with right of inheritance for women,
relative flexibility of marital residence and considerable in¬
terdependence between mothers and daughters. Another notable
feature of the societies in Southeast Asia is that their women do not
practice seclusion (Purdah) and, by and large, are not constrained by
a rigid segregation of the sexes.
The use of Western concepts and methodology has been most
pronounced in studies on the Philippines. The emphasis that some
research has given to sex-role differentiation and inequality of status
does not represent real conditions. In many situations, class and
economic differences are more significant than sex-based ones.
Women may have an egalitarian relationship with menfolk within the
family and in kinship networks and close social circles and yet may be
objects of exploitation in the outside world.
The interpretation and explanation of research data and statistics
may vary with the different methods used. Pre-determined
categories and equations as well as the use of hastily adopted com¬
mon denominators often distort the data and detach analysis from
the living contexts.
An apparent comparability of numbers does not necessarily in¬
dicate the existence of similar social patterns or conditions. For in¬
stance, the drop-out rate of schoolgirls in Thailand does not have the
same explanation as the drop-out rate for the same groups in India or
Afghanistan.
LEELA DUBE is director of the Indian Council of Social Sciences Research
and president of the commission on women of the International Union for
Anthropological and Ethnological Studies. A fuller treatment of the subject
of the present article will be published by Unesco's Office of the Regional
Adviser for the Social Sciences in Asia and Oceania, Bangkok.
Although in almost all countries certain categories
of jobs are considered specifically "masculine"
and others specifically "feminine", the kind of
work reserved for men and for women varies from
culture to culture. For example, whereas in many
countries building and construction are exclusive
to men and secretarial work is largely reserved for
women. In India women are often to be seen at
work on building sites and shorthand and typing is
a major form of employment for men. Also In
India, where pre-industrial spinning and weaving
were originally male tasks, the textile and clothing
industries have a large male labour force, in
contrast to the situation in western Europe where
the textile and clothing work force is
predominantly female. Social indicators
concerning the participation of women in the
labour force have, therefore, to be interpreted
with caution and are meaningless if not related to
the cultural context to which they refer.
Photo Rune Hassner © G. Bern, Paris
The segregation and vigilance imposed on girls in India and
Afghanistan which are responsible for sexual disparities in school
enrolment and a high drop-out rate among girls are not a feature of
Thai society. Nor does the unequal allocation of scarce resources
have the same impact for Thai girls. Instead the pattern of life, in
which women have considerable rights but need to shoulder far
greater responsibility than men, has more relevance.
In demographic comparisons of female infant mortality Indonesia
fares worse than India; but in Indonesia infant mortality is higher
among males than among females. It would therefore be misleading
to compare female infant mortality in India with that in Indonesia
without reference to male infant mortality in the two countries.
A great deal of socio-cultural and historical data on Asian coun¬
tries has been provided by foreign scholars. But this information
needs to be carefully evaluated and the gaps in research filled. There
is a need for new data on the status of women to be collected and for
comparative studies within individual countries as well as between
different countries to be planned.
33
