The Soviet peace
DURING the hardest years of the
Second World War, when the
battle against the forces of in¬
ternational fascism was raging on the
Dniepr, in the suburbs of Moscow and
on the outskirts of Leningrad, a move¬
ment was established to aid the Soviet
army.
Money and foodstuffs were collected
for this purpose, and the movement
spread throughout the country. The
money went to equip armoured units
and air squadrons. "Everything for the
front ! Everything for victory !" These
were not empty slogans, and people
gave willingly.
With the coming of victory, as
humanity set out to preserve a peace
whose achievement had claimed so
many victims, there arose a movement
for the defence of peace which is today
the most powerful of our time. A deter¬
mination to be involved in all the great
causes of the age awakened a desire to
contribute to the struggle for peace.
The Soviet committee for the
defence of peace, and other non¬
governmental organizations based in
various parts of the country, began to
receive donations to be used in the
struggle for peace, the strengthening of
friendship between peoples, and aid to
those fighting social injustice, and to
their families. Substantial sums flowed
in and were sent to various recipients. It
became necessary to funnel these out¬
pourings of popular generosity into a
mighty river.
And so a single Peace Fund was
created. Its address, 10 Kropotkin
Street, Moscow, is famous today both
inside and outside the Soviet Union. It
receives all donations and subsidies
contributed by the public to a variety of
peaceful causes.
The Fund, whose organization is now
solidly established, convenes con¬
ferences, organizes international peace
assemblies, sends delegations abroad,
and welcomes visitors. Supplies for
28

fund
hospitals and kindergartens, such as
clothing, blankets and rations, are sent
by air and sea to stricken areas.
The cost of these activities runs to
millions of roubles a year. But the most
remarkable feature of the Fund is that it
does not become depleted. On the con¬
trary, it grows from year to year, just
like the rouble which, in the old Russian
story, was given to a peasant who was
enjoined to spend it unhesitatingly, but
only on good causes. The generous
peasant gave unstintingly, and the rou¬
ble persistently reappeared in his bag.
Boris Polevoi
Chairman of the Board, Soviet Peace Fund.
In addition to gifts of money, the Soviet Peace Fund receives
many contributions in kind. Photos show valued family heirlooms
that have been donated to the Fund.

