The international convention by Gérard Bolla
THE Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural
and Natural Heritage came into being against a background
of changing attitudes reflected by three symbolic events of the
early 1970s.
The first was the completion in Upper Egypt and the Sudan of the first stage
of the international campaign to save the monuments of Nubia, the most im-
portant archaeological rescue operation the world has ever seen. The fact that
international solidarity made it possible to preserve the temples of Nubia for
posterity gave substance to an idea implicit in Unesco's Constitution the idea
that the nations bear a collective responsibility towards monuments whose im¬
portance is such that they belong to the history of all mankind.
The second event was the United Nations Conference on the Human En¬
vironment, held at Stockholm in 1972, at which the international community
stressed the urgent need for measures to conserve the natural environment, as
well as the works of man's creative genius. Here too was an affirmation of the
idea of the collective responsibility of the nations towards an environment in
danger.
Thirdly, the peoples of the developing and industrialized countries alike voic¬
ed the strong conviction that their cultural identity should be strengthened and
. respected. The most tangible and often the highest forms of this cultural iden¬
tity consist of the heritage of monuments and buildings produced by the
creative spirit of the ancestors and the natural environment in which the nation
achieved its fullest self-expression. It was felt that, while it is for each country
to preserve its cultural identity, it is incumbent on them all in the name of col¬
lective international responsibility to join in the task of conservation.
And so an, international agreement which was originally intended only to lay
the foundations for mutual assistance in safeguarding the cultural heritage of
monuments and buildings was transformed, in response to the wishes of those
concerned with the protection of the human environment as a whole, into an
instrument whose goal is the protection of monuments and natural sites, such
as national parks.
Wishing to contribute to the strengthening of cultural identities, the ar¬
chitects of the Convention also provided that a list of monuments and sites
should be drawn up, incorporating all cultural and natural property recognized
by the international community as possessing universal value and hence as
coming under its collective responsibility.
The system of international protection of cultural and natural property is
thus firmly established; countries nominate such property for inclusion on the
list but it is only accepted after a decision has been taken by a twenty-one-
member international committee. If the need arises, the international com¬
munity may contribute to the safeguard of the property by providing technical
and financial assistance.
The inclusion of an archaeological site or a national park on the World
Heritage List is usually a source of satisfaction and pride to those, the descen¬
dants of its creators or the custodians of its integrity, who have inherited the
responsibility of preserving it. But inclusion on the List has serious implications
for national and local authorities, which thereby pledge to resist with the ut¬
most vigour any pressures that may be brought to bear by private interests,
often with few scruples about respecting the cultural heritage of the past or
the integrity of natural sites. Entries may in fact be removed, and a monument
or national park may be divested of the honour of appearing on a list which en¬
joys high prestige and already includes some of the world's most precious
treasures.
It is hard to imagine any public body failing to do its utmost to prevent
the loss, possibly irremediable, of property which it has undertaken to
preserve and for which it has requested the support of the entire international
community.
The 1972 Convention on the Protection of the World Heritage has been
described as "the peacetime Red Cross" for monuments and natural sites
(another convention, the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property
in the Event of Armed Conflict, signed at The Hague in 1954, serves as a
"war-time Red Cross" for monuments) . Whatever we may think of the interna¬
tional system for the protection of cultural and natural property, whatever
motives may have led States to adhere to it, this -system now exists. As the
years go by it will be strengthened as more States add their names to the fifty-,
three which, under Unesco's auspices, have already joined to form a great
family determined to protect, in full solidarity, its most precious
possessions.

