The human
touch
Man has been shaping
his environment
ever since
prehistoric times
by Francesco di Castri
WHEN man is accused of crimes
against Nature, the charges are
invariably the same: pitiless des¬
truction of animal species, disturbance of
the sacrosanct balance of nature, spoliation
of harmonious landscapes, and unscrupu¬
lous exploitation of the genetic wealth of
ecosystems and species.
Sentencing of the prisoner, himself con¬
vinced of his own guilt, has been swift: ex¬
clusion from protected areas in which nature
can be preserved and can develop free from
the pernicious influence of man and to
which man will only be admitted under strict
surveillance.
And yet man has been a factor in the
evolutionary process and an agent of con¬
servation ever since he first appeared in the
biosphere. Things could not have been
otherwise, since it is impossible to stop the
course of evolution in which he is an integral
part; furthermore it is impossible to conceive
of a purely static form of conservation, with
animals as stuffed effigies in museums or
shut away in parks and thus deprived of an
evolutionary potential which has always, in¬
evitably, included the risk of extinction.
Caught up in the whirlwind of demo¬
graphic growth, carried along by the frantic
pace of modern life with scarcely the chance
to fully master his role, man is putting on a
deteriorating performance on the stage of
conservation and the evolution of the
species. But the solution is not for him to
make his apologies and opt out but to make
an even greater impact, fully conscious of
his responsibilities and acting with
dynamism and creativity.
Contrary to what might be thought, the
biological balance did not exist and
20
ecosystems were not absolutely stable, even
before man appeared on earth. In any case,
the concepts of balance and stability are the
least definable and most controversial ones
in ecology: they correspond to a dynamic
and elusive situation, the product of
multitudes of interactions, imbalances and
changing adjustments between species.
In addition to these constant changes, the
biosphere has in its history undergone
gigantic upheavals such as the formation
and subsidence of mountains, continental
drift, volcanic eruptions, and glaciation, in
the course of which millions of species dif¬
ferentiated themselves from one another,
evolved, and then disappeared. It could be
said that just as a city has more dead than
living citizens, so the biosphere has more ex¬
tinct than living species.
In the south of France, for example, there
have been successively tropical and
temperate forests, tundra, pineland and
scrub. The species of trees, herbs and
grasses, vertebrates and insects which live
there today are either relict species, ancient
varieties forced to retreat into these regions
by glaciation or advancing deserts, or
newcomers (especially some of the grasses)
which differentiated themselves in relatively
recent times with the gradual setting in of
the Mediterranean climate during the
Pleistocene Age and then after the last
glaciation.
Furthermore, human action on
ecosystems goes back much further than is
often thought. Even through such simple
activities as hunting and gathering, man
changed the relationship between species,
favouring, intentionally or otherwise, some
at the expense of others. The process
became much more marked with the ap¬
pearance of agriculture: by domesticating
certain animal and plant species such as the
dog, the ox and cereals, man performed the
first conscious act of conservation.
In certain cases, notably in Mediterranean
regions where the climate corresponds to a
recent episode in geological history, the
symbiosis between man and certain species
has been so close that it has influenced their
evolution and their adaptive mechanisms.
Thus several species of grass which grow
spontaneously in the Mediterranean region
have inscribed in their genetic heritage the

Landscape with the Fall of Icarus,
left, executed by the great Flemish
painter Pieter Breughel the Elder
around 1558, isa meditation on
balance, and the relations between
man and nature. According to the
Greek myth, Icarus, wearing wings
made of feathers and wax flew too
near the sun; the wax melted and
he fell into the sea. In Breughel's
painting, curving terraces, trees,
pastures, water and gleaming city
on the horizon form a harmonious
setting shaped by man, while
Icarus, symbol of excess and
overweening pride, has come to
grief. (All that can be seen of the
drowning Icarus is a leg protruding
from the waves near the ship.)
Meanwhile, ploughman, shepherd,
fisherman and sailor go calmly
about their business, oblivious of
the drama which has just taken
place in the sky above them.
adaptations engendered by their interaction
with domesticated herbivores in so marked a
fashion that in the other areas with the same
climate (California, Chile, South Africa and
southern Australia) they have systematically
replaced local plants which were less used
to cohabitation with man and his animals.
When did man begin to influence the ac¬
tual evolution of ecosystems? Pollen
analysis shows that in the Mediterranean
basin the measurable influence of man as a
modifier of the composition of dominant
species goes back some 7,500 years, while
3,500 years ago deforestation was taking
place on a large scale. Massive deforestation
in China began 4,000 years ago, and in the
humid tropics (especially Asia) dates back to
the beginning of agriculture.
The African savannah, the steppes of
eastern Europe and the pampas of South
America are so immense because of the
discovery of fire, which was used by man to
clear his hunting grounds and thus favoured
the great herbivores. Even the island-edens
of the tropics had been profoundly changed
and degraded before the arrival of the Euro¬
peans.
Can man be condemned for such actions?
Have they really prejudiced the evolution of
the biosphere in the very long term?
Besides, what criteria should be used when
judging the "interests" of the biosphere in
relation to the more immediate requirements
of man? The only possible criterion could be
the maintenance of the diversity of
ecosystems, or even its increase, of the
genetic diversity of animal and plant species
and strains, in order to preserve an evolu¬
tionary potential which would enable
mankind to cope with unforeseeable situa¬
tions, to give himself the maximum number
of options for the future.
Even with such unfavourable evidence it
is possible to argue the case for man. By
making clearings in compact and
homogeneous plant formations, by
cultivating mountain slopes, by bringing
water to certain desert areas, and by con¬
tinually experimenting with new types of far¬
ming and animal husbandry, he has increas¬
ed the variety of the world's landscapes and
multiplied the possibilities of evolution for a
vast number of species.
Some of the world's most varied and har¬
monious landscapes have been shaped by
man: the mosaic of flowering meadows,
woodland and alps found in the mountains
of Europe; the terraces and rice-paddies
which stretch as far as the eye can see in
Java and Nepal; the fields and woodlands of
Normandy and Ireland; the pattern of multi¬
coloured slopes and vine and olive terraces
on the coasts and islands of the Mediterra¬
nean; the high plateaux of the Andes with
their precipitous terraces; the luxuriant
coconut groves of the Pacific islands these
ecosystems in all their diversity have been
encouraged by man.
What would happen if man decided to
stop making an imprint on them? Im-
FRANCESCO DI CASTRI, Italian biologist, is
director of Unesco's Division of Ecological Scien¬
ces. Before joining Unesco in 1971, he was vice-
president of the Scientific Committee on Prob¬
lems of the Environment (SCOPE) of the Interna¬
tional Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and
director of the Institute of Ecology of Valdibia
(Chile). He is the author of many published works
and editor of two studies on Mediterranean
ecosystems, Mediterranean Type Ecosystems
and Mediterranean Type Shrublands.
21

A static approach to
conservation, symbolized by
this flock of stuffed birds in
a museum, may prejudice
the development of species
and thus defeat the very
ends of conservation. If
plants or animals are
confined in living
"museums" where
conditions are not
favourable for their
evolution there is a risk that
their genetic potential will
be impoverished.
Conservation in its fullest
sense means not only
protecting a certain number
of species but managing the
genetic diversity of living
resources throughout the
world.
This Tibetan chequerboard,
used in divination, evokes
the diversity and the unity
of the earth's living
resources. On it a cycle of
twelve years is depicted in
the form of animals
associated with the
elements. The balanced and
long-term management of
the biosphere depends on
maintaining the diversity of
ecosystems and preserving
an evolutionary potential
among living species which
will leave humanity the
maximum number of
options to satisfy its needs.

penetrable undergrowth would proliferate.
Most of the animals and cultivated plants
would not stand up to competition with the
new invaders. The terraces would collapse
for want of upkeep, after erosion on a
massive scale (this is already happening in
certain regions). We would thus lose the
"humanized" landscapes we cherish
because they represent Nature's many
responses to the diverse cultural and
aesthetic conceptions of successive civiliza¬
tions.
Seen from this viewpoint, cultural diversi¬
ty and ecological diversity are simply two
sides of the same coin: what is intrinsically
good for the long-term stability of the
biosphere is also good for the stability of
humanity through the strengthening of
cultural, national and regional identities.
Furthermore, man feels attached to
humanized landscapes, sometimes without
even knowing that they have been humaniz¬
ed. The thousands of tourists who each year
make for the African savannah in search of
"wild life" are actually visiting ecosystems
which the earliest ancestors of modern man
fashioned by certain elementary acts of
transformation: they are in fact in an en¬
vironment shaped by the massive use of fire
in very ancient times.
The true "wilderness", nature in its wild
state, only exists in extreme regions (the
Arctic and to a lesser extent the equatorial
regions) or in marginal areas which have
been preserved largely because of their low
productivity; in other words, in areas which
are not strongly representative of the
biosphere as a whole.
It appears that a moderate degree of ac¬
tion by man has more favourable effects on
ecological and genetic diversity than strict
protectionism.
Plant diversity is greater in central Chile
than in California (although the two regions
are fully comparable climatically) because
the wider variety of human intervention in
Chile has fashioned a mosaic-like landscape.
Besides, the strictly protected Californian
chaparrals (vegetation composed of broad-
leaved evergreen shrubs, bushes and small
trees) form an immense mass of potentially
combustible material and constitute a fire
risk of devastating proportions, much more
serious than in Chile.
At the same time, failure to conserve a
given species is, more often than is generally
realized, due to lack of human intervention
to prevent it from multiplying the prolifera¬
tion of a species may lead to a degradation
of the environment on which it depends for
its food. The concept of active management
is thus implicit in the idea of good conserva¬
tion.
Evidence of man's role in multiplying
genetic diversity is provided by the pro¬
digious diversification of domesticated
animal stock (sheep and cattle in the past,
dogs and fur-producing animals today). Not
so long ago, every region and virtually every
village in Europe and the Mediterranean
basin had its own strain of cows, goats,
horses or sheep, each perfectly adapted to
local needs.
It must be admitted that man has
sometimes behaved poorly as. a conserva¬
tionist. Erosion, salination of soils,
deforestation and the massacre of certain
species are not new phenomena, far from it.
But there are extenuating circumstances to
his guilt: if he has acted badly, is it not
because he was forced to fight to ensure his
own subsistence? It is easy, for individuals,
institutions and countries alike, to show
themselves in the best light and condemn
others who are bound by economic and
social constraints, or to recommend for
others courses of action which will in no
way impinge on their own way of life or
economic progress.
Above all, it has to be admitted that, if the
nature of the problems has not changed, the
context in which they have to be faced is
changing at a dizzying pace. Man's action
has cut time short by causing in the space of
one or two generations certain geological
repercussions: unprecedented rates of
deforestation and soir degradation, and the
introduction into the biosphere of vast quan¬
tities of substances which it is difficult to
recycle and whose long-term effects are im¬
possible to foresee.
The quickening tempo is due to human
demographic growth but also to needs
which have been artificially created by part
of the population. The inevitable outcome is
a progressive simplification which will affect
the biosphere, ecosystems and also
domesticated species and strains a rather
extreme means of increasing both ecological
and economic productivity.
The most serious conservation problem is
thus not that of protecting a certain number
of species (not only animals) from the
danger of extinction, but of reconciling the
imperative of productivity with the need to
maintain in the biosphere a network of cen¬
tres of genetic diversity sufficiently vast and
representative to allow the normal develop¬
ment of a wide range of evolutionary pro¬
cesses. Far from being incompatible, these
two requirements are complementary when
long-term productivity is considered. This
approach to conservation of species
necessarily means that we should conserve
their habitats; the alternative is a reclusive
and static form of conservation, that of the
zoological or biological sanctuary, which
would inevitably lead to evolutionary
degeneration.
However, the possibilities at our disposal
when creating a conservation strategy, as
well as our understanding of the problem,
have considerably increased. We must carry
out wide-ranging fieldwork and laboratory
research for, surprising though it may be,
we still lack most of the basic data required
for the management of biological reserves
on a world scale, such as the minimal size of
reserves in the world's different ecological
regions, the amount of disturbance they can
tolerate, or the ¡deal size of the various
animal and plant populations necessary for a
normal evolution.
With the aid of the all-powerful audio¬
visual media, we must also promote the kind
of environmental education which, where
the conservation of species is concerned,
will transcend emotive, manichaean at¬
titudes, reflect the complexity of problems
in a changing perspective, and take into ac¬
count the development needs of much of
humanity. Above all we must involve in con¬
servation activities those who are most im¬
mediately concerned by themthe local
populations, farmers and stock-breeders.
Anyone needing to be convinced that col- k
lective participation in the conservation of f
Guidelines
for environmental
education
Man's behaviour in the biosphere is condi¬
tioned by his understanding and perception
of the environment and of his own position
in it. The nature of the individual's percep¬
tion of his environment is therefore a key
factor in the establishment and achievement
of environmental goals. The problem facing
those concerned with environmental educa¬
tion is how best to help people at all levels to
make sound social choices and decisions.
"The environment" cannot be treated as a
subject in the same sense as, for example,
mathematics, biology or languages. The
need is to provide education in problem-
solving so that, faced with an environmental
problem, the pupil will quickly come to
understand that sound environmental deci¬
sions depend upon a host of interacting
factors.
Organized by Unesco in co-operation with
the United Nations Environment Pro¬
gramme, the World's first Intergovernmen¬
tal Conference on Environmental Education,
held in Tbilisi, Georgia (USSR), in October
1977, laid down the following guidelines for
environmental education.
Guiding principles environmental edu¬
cation should:
consider the environment in its totality
natural and built, technological and social
(economic, political, cultural-historical,
moral, aesthetic);
be a continuous lifelong process, beginn¬
ing at the pre-school level and continuing
through all formal and nonformal stages;
be interdisciplinary in its approach,
drawing on the specific content of each
discipline in making possible a holistic and
balanced perspective;
examine major environmental issues from
local, national, regional and international
points of view so that students receive in¬
sights into environmental conditions in other
geographical areas;
focus on current and potential en¬
vironmental situations while taking into ac¬
count the historical perspective;
promote the value and necessity of local,
national and international cooperation in the
prevention and solution of environmental
problems;
explicitly consider environmental aspects
in plans for development and growth;
enable learners to have a role in planning
their learning experiences and provide an
opportunity for making decisions and accep¬
ting their consequences;
relate environmental sensitivity,
knowledge, problem-solving skills and
values clarification to every age, but with
special emphasis on environmental sensitivi¬
ty to the learner's own community in early
years;
help learners discover the symptoms and
real causes of environmental problems;
emphasize the complexity of environmen¬
tal problems and thus the need to develop
critical thinking and problem-solving ski/Is;
utilize diverse learning environments anda
broad array of educational approaches to
teaching//earning about and from the en¬
vironment with due stress on practical ac¬
tivities and first-hand experience.
23

species is something more than a Utopian
} idea has only to visit Mapimi and La Michilia
in Mexico's Durango State. There the local
farmers, once great hunters of the giant
desert tortoise and the white-tailed deer,
have now become ardent conservationists.
The change was brought about by convic¬
tion, not coercion. It is the product of a new
understanding which has been established
between the farmers, university research
workers and the local authorities, and above
all it is due to the fact that they have been
shown, through experiments carried out on
the spot, other development possibilities
(agro-industries) which are more profitable
than hunting or the spoliation of natural
resources.
Mapimi and La Michilia are two units in
the international network of biosphere
reserves created as part of Unesco's Man
and the Biosphere (MAB) programme. A
wide range of objectives are aimed at in the
biosphere reserves: the conservation of sites
representative of the world's biogeographic
regions, research (into ecological processes
of conservation and development alter¬
natives), education, demonstration and in¬
formation; all these activities are welded
together by the unifying force generated by
the participation of local populations,
researchers from the country in which the
biosphere is situated and elsewhere, and
planners.
The problem of the conservation of
species and ecosystems is extremely urgent.
Immediate action is called for, especially in
terms of legislation appropriate for each
country. Nevertheless, the solution does not
lie in restrictive legislation, still less in the
erection of barbed wire fences around
parks.
A new population explosion, new cases of
famine, the outbreak of political distur-
. bances would mean that the biggest of
these parks, these major tourist centres,
would be swept away by the populations
which are excluded from these protected
areas and in many cases do not understand
why they are there. Presenting them with
simple and realistic development alter¬
natives, strengthening their feeling of "in¬
volvement" through more active participa¬
tion in decision-making these are conser¬
vation measures which are effective where
prohibitions and moral judgements are not.
Instead of seeing ourselves as her con¬
querors or protectors, we must learn to
respect Nature as an ally in the evolutionary
process we are, together, destined to
experience.
B Francesco di Castri
Above, a yoke of oxen draw a plough in Ecuador. Below, replanting young rice
shoots in an Indian paddy field. Man has been shaping his environment for longer
than is often realized, notably since the appearance of agriculture, and became a
conservationist when he domesticated animals and plants such as the ox and rice.
By developing different types of cultivation and strains of livestock, farmers,
multiplied the evolutionary possibilities of many species.
24
