Unesco and the world community
in the greatest archaeological rescue campaign
of all time (1960-1980)
Victory in Nubia: Egypt
by Shehata Adam Mohamed
IN THE LAP OF THE GODS. Work in progress during the reconstruction of the great
temple of Abu Simbel. Completed in September 1968, the mammoth, five-year task
of dismantling, transporting and re-erecting Ramses the Great's most grandiose
construction was a triumph of technical and engineering skill (see pages 10 and 11
and central colour pages).
THE boat weighed anchor and set off
on a voyage up the Nile through
Nubian territory. As it. glided silently
over the water, the first glimmer of dawn
appeared on the horizon. Hemming in the
valley on either side was a desert landscape
that stretched as far as the eye could see.
Here and there, tiers of Nubian houses
stood on the slopes which rose from the left
and right banks of the Nile, the river that is
the life-blood of Egypt and the Sudan.
These houses, remarkable for the decora¬
tions covering their façades and walls, and
for the domes built over their inner
courtyards, were inhabited by the Nubians,
whose loose-fitting robes were as snow-
white as their eyes were piercingly dark.
Before long, as the boat continued quietly
to ply the blue waters, the sun rose on the
eastern horizon and began to climb slowly
into the heavens, revealing, as it did so, a
succession of temples built on either side of
the river temples where Egyptian and Nu¬
bian deities were once worshipped. There
were tombs, too, cemeteries, and the re¬
mains of churches and mosques, some of
them already visible, others still buried in the
ground. And the rock faces bore inscriptions
left behind by the various civilizations that
had passed through or lived in this region in
the course of history.
The twentieth century, however, ushered
in important changes for the peoples who
had for so long been settled on the banks of
the Nile. The building of the Aswan Dam
(1898-1902) and its heightening on two
occasions (1907-1912 and 1929-1934) meant
that the Nubians had to move their towns
and villages to higher ground. Archae¬
ological excavations were therefore carried
out in areas due to be submerged by the
Nile, which would rise to a height of 121
metres above sea level. Certain temples
were consolidated so they could withstand
the fluctuation of the waters which would
cover them for most of the year.
Under the Aswan High Dam project,
however, which was designed to generate
hydroelectric power and increase cropland,
the waters of the Nile would be raised by a
further sixty-two metres above sea level, to k
SHEHATA ADAM MOHAMED, of Egypt, is
president of the Egyptian Antiquities Organiza¬
tion. He was formerly director of the Monuments
of Nubia Service of the Egyptian Ministry of Cul¬
ture and later of the Documentation Centre for
Ancient Egypt in Cairo. He is the author of many
articles and studies on Egyptian archaeology,
including an important thesis entitled Travellers of
Ancient Egypt.

Photos Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
A 1,600-piece
jigsaw puzzle in stone
Re-built by the Emperor Augustus from the
remains of a temple erected in late
Ptolemaic times, the temple of Kalabsha,
120 metres long and 70 metres wide, is as
big as a medieval Gothic cathedral. It was
dedicated to the god Mandulis, the Nubian
equivalent of Horus son of Isis. Photo
above shows temple on its original site on
the west bank of the Nile some 50
kilometres south of Aswan. When the
temple was threatened with total,
permanent submersion following the
construction of the Aswan High Dam, the
Federal Republic of Germany undertook to
dismantle and re-erect it on a new site. The
task of dismantling involved lifting some
one thousand six hundred sandstone
blocks, some weighing as much as twenty
tons, loading them on barges and
transporting them to a storage area (left)
near the new site being prepared on a hill
on the west bank of the Nile about one
kilometre south of the High Dam.
Reconstruction of the temple began in
October 1962 and the last piece in this
gigantic jigsaw puzzle was slotted into
place in October 1963. Meanwhile, in
January and February 1962, the Egyptian
Antiquities Service had re-erected on the
same site the ruins of a small Roman
monument, the Kiosk of Kertassi. Top
right, the temple of Kalabsha, with the
Kiosk to the left, as it stands today on its
imposing new site.

Photo © Hochtief, Essen, Federal Republic of Germany
the south of Aswan as far upstream as the
Dal Cataract in the Sudan, creating a vast
lake that would engulf for ever all trace of
life from ancient or modern times.
This dramatic prospect prompted the
Egyptian and Sudanese Governments in
1959 to ask Unesco to launch an interna¬
tional appeal aimed at saving the Nubian
historical heritage as the embodiment of a
civilization which had played a leading role
in the history of that part of the Nile valley.
Nubia was not unknown to the interna¬
tional community at large. It had not only
featured in the works of classical Greek and
Roman authors, but had been described by
European explorers like Louis Norden,
Johann Ludwig Burckhardt and Amelia Ed¬
wards. Nubia had also been studied and ex¬
plored by various scientific and ar¬
chaeological expeditions during the nine¬
teenth century, including those of François
Champollion, who succeeded in deciphering
hieroglyphic writing, and of Karl Richard
Lepsius, who published a twelve-volume
work devoted to Egyptian and Nubian anti¬
quities. In the twentieth century, too, impor¬
tant excavations and surveys carried out by
successive archaeological missions in both
Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia have thrown
light on the various Nubian civilizations that
once flourished between Aswan in the north
and Kerma in the south.
This time, however, the problem was of a
more complex nature. Unesco therefore
organized a conference of experts whose
task it was to draw up an international plan
of action aimed at saving the Nubian
heritage in its entirety. The experts met in
Egypt in October 1959. They visited Nubia
and examined its monuments between
Aswan and Semna. In their recommenda¬
tions, they pointed to the need to carry out
excavations on each and every archae
ological site, to survey all Nubia's ancient
structures, and to move the threatened
temples and rebuild them on ground higher
than the High Dam lake.
To save the two temples of Abu Simbel, it
was proposed either to build protective
dams or to raise the temples on hydraulic
jacks. The conference eventually recom¬
mended that an earth and rock fill dam
should be built round the two temples.
Three projects to preserve the temples of
Philae were also examined. The first of these
was based on the principle of building a pro¬
tective dam round the temples; the second
provided for them to be dismantled and re-
erected on the island of Philae after its level
had been raised; and the third called for the
construction of three dams linking the island
of Bigeh to that of Agilkia and to the right
bank of the Nile. This solution was adopted
and recommended by the conference.
The work of the conference, which was
carried out at the same time as similar work
on ways of salvaging the monuments of
Sudanese Nubia, resulted in an international
plan of action being clearly defined in accor¬
dance with the wishes of Unesco and of its
Executive Board. Launching an international
appeal on 8 March 1960, the Director-
General of Unesco called on the world com¬
munity to supply the financial and technical
assistance which could save the Nubian
monuments in both Egypt and the Sudan.
He stressed the fact that the treasures were
part of the heritage of all mankind.
His appeal was followed up by intensive
international exchanges which were closely
geared to every phase of the International
Campaign. The Egyptian Government
showed, by its perceptive action, that it had
a clear awareness of the extent of the pro¬
blem involved. Ancient objects were
selected from the nation's museums and
sent abroad for exhibition so as to promote
understanding of the value of the Egyptian
heritage and of its cultural role. Moreover,
the Government set up a Special Committee
for the project, as well as other advisory
committees, made up of experts in the fields
of archaeology, technology and finance.
Egypt also founded a Service for the
Safeguard of the Monuments of Nubia,
which played a very effective role. Further¬
more, the General Conference of Unesco in
1962 set up an Executive Committee, which
was entrusted with the task of supervising
work on the project. These combined efforts
brought the work of the Campaign to a suc¬
cessful conclusion.
The international appeal met with a
favourable response. First to rally to the
cause, not surprisingly, were the teams of
archaeologists who came, at a very early
date, to carry out excavations and surveys in
Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia. They
discovered traces of the ancient civilizations
that had succeeded each other in Nubia,
from the dawn of history up to the Christian
and Islamic eras. Their work helped to reveal
the ruins of cities, forts, cemeteries and
dykes, paved the way for anthropological
studies and for the investigations of human
and animal origins, and, lastly, threw light
on relations and contacts between the north
and the south.
Similarly, research carried out in Egyptian
Nubia focussed specifically on the Nubian
people, their way of life, and their more re¬
cent communities. Other work was carried
out at the same time on the documentation
of Egyptian temples and tombs. From 1956
on, no effort was spared to this end by mis¬
sions from the Documentation and Study
Centre for the History of the Art and Civiliza¬
tion of Ancient Egypt, in collaboration with
Unesco, which had helped to set up the
Centre. The missions included experts from w
France, Poland and Belgium. A team from f

M
Milestones in a twenty-year campaign
à 10 March 1980
August 1979
April 1977
May 1974
1972
S.
1970
6 November 1968
22 September 1968
September 1964
14 May 1964
Spring 1964
1962-63
Nov. Dec. 1962
Summer 1960
8 March 1960
9 January 1960
24 October 1959
6 April 1959
Completion of Unesco's International
Campaign to Save the Treasures of
Nubia
Work completed on Agilkia
Foundations of the Philae
monuments ready on the island
of Agilkia and reconstruction work begins
Cofferdam around the island
of Philae is completed and water
is pumped out
Work begins on Philae rescue
operation; monuments to be
transferred to nearby island of Agilkia
Construction of High Dam completed
The Director-General of Unesco
launches International Campaign to
save the Temples of Philae
Completion of the Abu Simbel
operation
The water begins to rise behind the High Dam
Diversion of Nile to feed the turbines
of the High Dam
Work begins (construction of a protective coffer¬
dam) on transfer of Abu Simbel temples to a
higher site 5îj»
Temple of Kalabsha dismantled,
transferred and re-erected
Unesco's General Conference creates Executive
Committee for the International Campaign
The Nubian temples of Taffa, Dabod and Kertassi
dismantled by the
Egyptian Antiquities Service
The Director-General of Unesco
appeals to the international
community to save the treasures
of Nubia 9 __
Work on the Aswan High Dam
officially inaugurated
The Government of the Sudan appeals to Unesco
for aid in saving the antiquities of Sudanese
Nubia
The Government of Egypt appeals to Unesco for
aid in saving the Nubian historical heritage in
Egypt, threatened by the artificial lake to be
created behind the new Aswan High Dam
Two of the most spectacular engineering
feats of Unesco's International Campaign to
Save the Monuments of Nubia were the
dismantling, removal and re-erection of the
temples of Abu Simbel (see pages 10 and
11) and of Philae (see pages 46 and 47).
These technical exploits rivalled in scope the
achievements of the ancient Egyptians who
raised Philae and carved Abu Simbel from
the solid mass ofa Nubian hillside over 3,000
years ago.
ABU SIMBEL
Total cost: $ 42,000,000, of which half was
borne by the Arab Republic of Egypt and
half provided by international contributions.
Organizers: The Ministry of Culture of the
Arab Republic of Egypt assisted by Unesco.
Advisers: Executive Committee for the
International Campaign to Save the
Monuments of Nubia, composed of
representatives of 15 Member States elected
by the General Conference of Unesco.
Various groups and committees of
experts architects, archaeologists and
engineers.
Consulting engineers and architects:
Vattenbyggnadsbryan (VBB), Stockholm.
>the Oriental Institute of the University of
Chicago explored the temple of Beit el VVali.
Teams carrying out excavations also
recorded rock inscriptions. All these mis¬
sions used photogrammetric maps prepared
by the French National Geographical In¬
stitute in collaboration with the Egyptian
armed forces. The maps, which were fully
developed in Egypt, were made available to
all those working on the salvage projects.
All excavations, investigations and
archaeological surveys were completed
by 1965, the date at which the waters of
the High Dam lake began to rise.
Work on transferring the temples also
started in 1960. At that date, the Egyptian
Government undertook to move the temples
of Taffa, Dabod and Kertassi at its own ex¬
pense. In 1962, it assumed the technical and
financial responsibility of moving the
temples of Dakka, Maharraqa and Dendur.
The Federal Republic of Germany, mean¬
while, took on the task, between 1961 and
1963, of salvaging the temple of Kalabsha
and rebuilding it to the south of the High
Dam, on the site where the Egyptians re-
erected the kiosk of Kertassi. All these
temples date from the Graeco-Roman
period.
Egypt also moved the temples of Beit el
Wali and of Wadi es Sebua, reconstructing
the first near the temple of Kalabsha, and
the second just five kilometres from its
original site, 150 kilometres from Aswan.
Both these temples were among the six
monuments built in the thirteenth century
BC by King Ramses II. Egypt also undertook
to move the tomb of Pennut, a nobleman
who lived under King Ramses VI in the
twelfth century BC, and relocate it on the
new site of Amada in the lee of the moun-
8

Contractor: Joint Venture Abu Simbel,
a consortium consisting of the follow¬
ing firms: Hochtief, Essen; Atlas, Cairo;
Grands Travaux de Marseille, Paris;
Impregilo, Milan; Santab and Skanska,
Stockholm.
PHILAE
Total cost: $30,000,000, approximately, of
which half was borne by the Arab Republic
of Egypt and half provided by international
contributions.
Organizers: The Ministry of Culture of the
Arab Republic of Egypt assisted by Unesco.
Advisers: Executive Committee for the
International Campaign to Save the
Monuments of Nubia, composed of
representatives of 15 Member States elected
by the General Conference of Unesco.
Various groups and committees of
experts architects, archaeologists and
engineers.
Consulting engineers and architects:
Office of Dr. William Selim Hanna, Cairo.
Contractors: Joint Venture for Philae, a
consortium consisting of the following
firms: High Dam Company for Civil Works,
Cairo-Aswan; Condotte-Mazzi Estero, SPA,
Rome.
Etching of Gerf Hussein by FC. Gau © Documention Centre for Ancient Egypt, Cairo
tain. The transfer of these three monuments
was made possible by a financial contribu¬
tion from the United States; the cost of re-
erecting them was borne by the Egyptian
Government.
Egypt also moved the front section of the
temple of Amada, which was built by King
Thutmose III in the fourteenth century BC.
The rear section of the building was salvag¬
ed by the French Government. In order not
to damage the inscriptions engraved on that
part of the temple, covered with plaster and
painted, it was moved on metal rails (see
back cover). Egypt also preserved the chapel
of Ellesiya, which dates from the reign of
King Thutmose III, and those of Qasr Ibrim,
which were hewn out of the rock in the four¬
teenth century BC. In 1964, Egypt moved
the temple of Derr, which had been built to
the glory of King Ramses II, and
reconstructed it between 1971 and 1973 near
the temple of Amada and Pennut's tomb.
The transfer of these last-mentioned
buildings was completed by 1965.
As for the temple of Gerf Hussein, which
was dedicated to King Ramses II, and that
of Abu Oda, which was built in honour of
King Horemheb in the fourteenth century
BC, they were, for technical and financial
reasons, only partly salvaged. Lastly, the
Christian inscriptions from Wadi es Sebua
and from Abu Oda were preserved by a
Yugoslav team of archaeologists. By the
time this work was completed, all the
temples, tombs and chapels of Egyptian
Nubia had been preserved except for the
two temples of Abu Simbel and the temples
of Philae, which were the subject of two
special projects.
For the two temples of Abu Simbel, k
which had been hollowed out of the rock by r
Above, etching dating from 1818 by the French architect
François-Chrétien Gau of the temple of Ptah erected by
Ramses II at Gerf Hussein, some 90 kilometres south of
the First Cataract. Below, a statue of Ramses II from the
courtyard of the temple. The inner sanctuary was carved
into the mountain and, although much smaller and
different in style, was based on that of Abu Simbel. The
temple now lies beneath the waters of the Nile, but some
of the statues and reliefs have been preserved.
Photo Paul Almasy, Unesco

, King Ramses II, two solutions were examin¬
ed in detail: one called for the construction
of an earth and rock-fill dam, while the other
recommended that the temples be raised on
hydraulic jacks. The first plan turned out to
be financially onerous ($82 million), not to
speak of the damage to the temples which
would be caused by damp arising from
capillary attraction. The second solution
was estimated to cost $62 million. So both
schemes were ruled out.
The Egyptian Government then decided
that the two temples should be cut up into
blocks and transferred to higher ground on
the Abu Simbel plateau. The cost of the
operation, which was originally estimated at
$36 million, eventually ran to $41.7 million
(18.5 million Egyptian pounds). A total of
forty-eight nations helped to finance the
project, with Egypt alone shouldering half
the cost.
Work on the project began in November
1963, when a cofferdam was built to prevent
operations being hampered by the rising
waters of the lake. A drainage pipeline was
then installed to pump off seepage. Scaf¬
folding was erected to support the ceilings,
sides and colonnades of the monuments.
An aluminium tunnel was connected to the
interior of each temple to provide access to
them, then their façades were covered with
sand and topped with iron screens to pro¬
tect them from falling boulders as the task of
removing the rocks from behind the temples
got under way.
Once these operations had been com¬
pleted, work started on cutting the temples
up into blocks. Every attempt was made to
respect the integrity of the archaeological
features and inscriptions on the 1,036 blocks
of stone, which weighed between seven and
thirty tonnes each. Work on transferring the
two temples was completed in February/
March 1966. They were re-erected at the top
of the mountain with the same orientation
so that they would catch the rays of the sun
just as before. This operation was finished in
September 1967.
Then work on the final stage began: this
entailed the construction, above each tem¬
ple, of gigantic domes capable of supporting
the rock covering that was intended to make
the mountainside above the temples look as
much as possible like their original site.
Work ended in September 1968, and the
completion of the scheme was officially
celebrated by an historic ceremony on the
22nd of that month.
Thus the most imposing monument ever
hewn out of rock, and the jewel of the Nu¬
bian treasures, had been saved. At the same
time, the transfer of the temples fulfilled
King Ramses t I's dream of immortalizing his
"temple in the land of Nubia, hewn into the
rock, like no other ever carved before," ac¬
cording to the inscription on the façade of
the small temple of Abu Simbel, which he
dedicated to his beloved wife Queen
Nefertari.
The two temples of Abu Simbel, which
perhaps more than anything else symbolize
the success of the International Campaign,
now stand in all their grandeur high on the
mountain. Behind them lies the town of Abu
Simbel, which housed all those whose ef¬
forts helped to make a success of that great
undertaking. This new town, with its
houses, lawns and. trees, today welcomes
visitors from all over the world who come to
marvel at man's achievements both past and
present.
10
Saving the Great and Small
Temples of Abu Simbel from
the rising waters of the Nile
must rank as one of the
great engineering feats of all
time. The brute force
required to hew the temples
from the rocky hillside in
which they were carved and
to lift and transport blocks
of stone, weighing up to 30
tons, to the new hilltop site,
60 metres higher, was
matched by the surgeon-like
delicacy and precision
demanded in cutting the
fragile sandstone statuary
into manageable blocks.
Once installed on the new
site the temples were
topped by soaring reinforced
concrete domes (the one
covering the Great Temple
spans 60 metres) to take the
weight of the overlay that
has recreated the original
appearance of the
landscape. Above,
reinforced concrete arches
2.5 metres thick were built
to support the shuttering for
the construction of the
dome. Above left, a view of
the partially erected dome
from behind. Bottom left,
under the glare of
floodlights the face of one
of the colossi of the façade
being sawn prior to removal.

Drawing © National Geographic Society, Washington, D.C.
With the aid of royal astronomers the
engineers of Ramses' day aligned the axis
of the Great Temple of Abu Simbel in such
a way that twice a year the sun's rays
penetrated the innermost sanctuary (see
photos pages 56 and 57). The artist's
reconstruction, left, of the temples on their
new site and the "ghost" of the old site
now under water, shows the precision with
which the alignment of the temples and the
general appearance of the setting has been
respected. The light of the sun still streams
into the inner sanctuary twice yearly.
Below, photo of the Great and Small
Temples of Abu Simbel on their new site
was taken in September 1968 just after the
work was completed.
How Abu Simbel was saved
, Photo Dominique Roger, Unesco

, The Sudanese Government also took
steps to save its Nubian monuments before
they were submerged by the waters of the
Nile. It organized the transfer of a number of
temples, blocks and rock inscriptions in con¬
junction with the surveys and excavations
being carried out by archaeological
missions.
The temples of Queen Hatshepsut at
Buhen, the temple of the god Knhum at
Semna East, and the temples of Dedun and
of Sesostris III at Semna West were all mov¬
ed. Some blocks from King Ramses I I's tem¬
ple at Aksha as well as reliefs and sculpted
lintels from the tomb of Djehuti-hotep at
Debeira were salvaged. Also rescued were
four column plinths and part of the floor of
the main entrance of Thutmose Ill's temple
at Buhen, along with three blocks of pillars
from the temple of Isis put up by King
Amenhotep II in the town of Buhen.
Inscriptions by the first dynasty King Djer
on the rocks of the Gebel El Sheikh
Suleiman near Buhen, other rock inscrip¬
tions dedicated to a viceroy of Kush by the
name of Setau, and blocks from Faras were
also moved to. safety. The Sudanese
Government transferred all these antiquities
to the Khartoum Museum.
Unfortunately, however, nothing could be
done to prevent the waters of the lake from
engulfing every aspect of Nubian life, both
in Egypt and in the Sudan, as far south as
the Dal Cataract. Nubian houses, with their
decorated walls and façades, villages, even
whole towns vanished for ever. Lush, green
trees and palms still bearing their clusters of
dates Nubia's most delicious fruitwere
consigned to a watery grave. The Nubians
tearfully gathered together their belongings,
beasts of burden and chickens, and set off
for a new life in another town, Kom Ombo.
But they never really gave up all hope of be¬
ing able, one day, to return to their dear
homeland on the banks of the lake.
The lake created by the High Dam con¬
tinued to rise, covering more and more land
on either side exactly as foreseen by the
planners. Attention was then turned to the
island of Philae, between the Aswan Dam
and the High Dam. The temples on Philae,
island of love and the "Anas el-Wagud" of
legend, were submerged. Only the tops of
the buildings were still visible above water.
Studies on the rescue of Philae showed that
the construction of a dam round the island
had several drawbacks, such as the effect
on the temples of damp arising from
capillary attraction, very high' costs, and
maintenance which would require, among
other things, constant pumping to deal with
seepage.
The Egyptian Government then decided
to transfer the temples to the neighbouring
island of Agilkia, which would first be land¬
scaped to resemble Philae. The Director-
General of Unesco launched an appeal to
save this "pearl of Ancient Egypt", and the
project got under way in 1972. When the
building of a cofferdam round the island of
Philae was completed in May 1974, the
water was pumped out, leaving the island
high and dry. At this point, it became possi¬
ble to explore the temples archaeologically
and make photogrammetric records of its
architecture.
Meanwhile, Agilkia was made ready to
receive the temples; and foundations were
laid. This stage of the work was completed
by April 1977. At the same time, prepara¬
tions were being made to transfer the
temples. The first stage of rebuilding them
began in March 1977. The blocks were mov¬
ed in May of the same year, and the final
stone was slotted into the reconstructed
temples in August 1979. Then the final
phase of the project, aimed at making the
island more attractive, was set in motion:
palm trees, acacias, henna, papyrus and
lotus were planted so that the temples of
Philae could have the same setting on the
island of Agilkia that they had once enjoyed
on their previous site before the building of
the Aswan Dam, in other words before the
turn of the century.
Among the reconstructed monuments
was the temple of Augustus, the blocks of
which had been recovered with the help of
the Egyptian and British navies. In all, 45,000
blocks of stone made up the temples of
Philae. The cost of the salvage operation
came to $30 million. Twenty-two nations
made financial contributions to the project,
as did the World Food Programme. Egypt
alone shouldered more than half the total
cost.
The temples of Philae now stand ma¬
jestically on the island of Agilkia, their
beautiful pylons and superb colonnades
enhanced by the water and granite islets
that encircle them.
So at last the aspirations of both Egypt
and the world at large have been fulfilled.
The Egyptian Government showed great
generosity. As a token of gratitude, it
donated an ancient object, a vase or a statue
to each nation that had helped to save the
treasures of Nubia. It even made a gift of
four of its temples to countries which had
contributed substantially to the project:
Dendur was given to the United States,
Dabod to Spain, Taffa to the Netherlands,
and the chapels of Ellesiya to Italy.
It will soon be time to celebrate the
outstanding success of the International
Campaign to save the Nubian heritage,
which has proved to be a victory for world
co-operation.
March 10, 1980, will be the day set aside
to commemorate this enterprise, which was
carried out in all the Nubian territories of
Egypt and the Sudan. It is not only symbolic
of the friendly and fraternal links which unite
peoples with one another, but a token of
mankind's potentialities and of the
achievements of human genius.
The same day, will see the laying of the
foundation stone of the new museum of
Aswan, which will house the antiquities
discovered during the campaign in Egyptian
Nubia.
The boat gliding along the Nile will not be
dropping anchor all that soon: it is continu¬
ing its voyage to bring new life to Nubia,
where there are still more temples, and
where the fertile soil will never cease to give
of its fruit.
Fortunate, indeed, were those who work¬
ed with us on that International Campaign,
the first of its kind ever to succeed in carry¬
ing through such a remarkable salvage
project.
Let me pay tribute to Unesco, to the
countries and organizations, to the scien¬
tists, experts and workmen who toiled night
and day for years, in the freezing cold of
winter or under the scorching summer sun,
to bring this memorable enterprise to a suc¬
cessful conclusion.
Shehata Adam Mohamed
Philae reborn
The rescue of the Philae temples, which
have been rebuilt on another island,
Agilkia, was the final phase in the Nubian
campaign. Before work began in 1972
Philae was permanently submerged and its
monuments flooded to about a third of
their height (see photo caption page 46).
The island was then girdled with an
immense cofferdam consisting of two rows
of sheet steel piling packed with a million
cubic metres of sand, and the water was
pumped out (below). Before being
dissected into some 40,000 stone blocks
and transported to Agilkia the monuments
were cleaned and measured by a special
technique called photogrammetry which
enabled the engineers to reconstruct them
exactly as before, to the last millimetre.
Right, piles of stone (some weighed up to
25 tons) awaiting re-erection on Agilkia. Far
right, protective scaffolding surrounds the
colonnade of the famous mammisi, or
birth-house of the god Horus, during
rebuilding. The dismantling, transfer and
reconstitution of the monuments (total
weight 27,000 tons) was done in record
time, thirty months.
Photo Alexis Vorontzoff, Unesco
12


Monuments rescued
The International
Nubian
Campaign
Philae
,
Dabod
à
Taffa Beit el Wali Kalabsha Dendur
Dakka Maharraqa Wadi Sebua
"Üwirr,
Í H
1
Amada Derr Ellesiya
f
Aniba Qasr Ibrim
1/
Abu Simbel
Kertassi
Gerf Hussein
H \
25 50 km M Ao Aswan
iL Philae
Dabod »\
Kertassi
Taffa
Beit el Wali »V.
Kalabsha
Dendur »V
Gerf Hussein
Aniba L"oi"ra
'/ Qasr Ibrim
Abu Oda Debeira
Egypt
Abu Simbel »
r'Âbu Oda
Buhen
i Debeira Sudan
Buhen Semna West
Semna West i
Semna East

Photo credits page 14 Phi¬
lae: Vorontzoff, Unesco. Dabod:
© Documentation Centre for
Ancient Egypt, Cairo. Kertassi:
© Egyptian Antiquities Service,
Cairo. Taffa: © The Leyden
Museum, The Netherlands Beit
el Wall, Qasr Ibrim: © Almasy,
Paris. Kalabsha, Buhen, Semna
East Semna West: © Rex Kea¬
ting, Paris. Dendur, Wadi es
Sebua: Van der Haagen,
Unesco. Gerf Hussein, Amada,
Dem Almasy, Unesco. Dakka,
Abu Simbel: Laurenza, Unesco.
Maharraqa, Ellesiya, Aniba, Abu
Oda: Unesco. Debeira: © Sudan
National Museum, Khartoum.
Map by Monika Jost, Unesco.
Photo V. Shustov © APN, Paris
Nearly 5,000 years elapsed between the construction of the world's earliest recorded dam, a 15-metre-
high barrage erected at Kosheish on the Nile to supply water to King Menés' capital at Memphis, and
the commencement of work, in 1960, on the Sadd El-Aali or Aswan High Dam (above). Four kilometres
across and a towering 110 metres high, the dam itself was completed in 1964, but it took another six
years before the hydroelectric installations became fully operational. The water impounded behind the
dam has created a 500-kilometre-long lake, the world's second largest man-made lake (after the Kariba
Dam lake in Rhodesia Zimbabwe) with an average volume of one hundred and sixty thousand million
cubic metres of water. Built with the aid of the USSR, the Aswan High Dam has twelve powerful
turbines with a design capacity of around ten thousand million kilowatt hours a year, an output which is
conveyed by two thousand five hundred kilometres of high energy power lines to the big industrial
plants and population centres of Egypt. Below, a colossus from a temple at Tebo in the Sudan on the
way to its new home in Khartoum (see also photo page 17).
Photo Gunvor Jorgsholm © Pressehuset, Copenhagen
15
