Measuring 8.5 by 5.5 cm.,
this remarkable
neopalaeolithic carving found
at Malaia Syia recounts the
story of how night first came
upon the earth (see article
below). The outer outline, in
the form of a mammoth
facing left, represents the
world. Inside can be seen the
outline of a horse's head
(darker part of photo), also
facing left, within which a
wolf-like beast is depicted
about to spring upon and
devour a deer. Below, the site of
Malaia Syia.
24

Stone Age
myth-sculptors
of Siberia
by Vitali E. Laritchev
WITH its snow-covered plains,
its mountains and glaciers, its
impenetrable, bear-infested
taiga forests and bitterly cold winters,
Siberia is still widely regarded in some parts
of the world as an inhospitable region where
life is difficult for man, even when equipped
w'rth all the resources of modern civilization.
Yet, for over a century, geologists and an¬
thropologists have been examining the
intriguing possibility that an area of south
central Siberia was the site of the earliest
human settlements of northern Eurasia.
During the 1870s, Russian scientists
discovered in Siberia several sites of an an¬
cient culture. Following these discoveries
French anthropologists advanced the
hypothesis that during the palaeolithic era
Europe was peopled by migrants originating
from Siberia. But in view of the area's
reputedly impossible climate this hypothesis
was considered improbable and by the 1920s
opinion seemed to favour the diametrically
opposite view that during the Ice Age a
more advanced culture was introduced by
migrants moving northwards from the Euro¬
pean Mediterranean area to Siberia where
they encountered "backward savages".
During the 1930s, a site dating back
24,000 years was discovered at Malta, near
Lake Baikal, but it yielded no conclusive
proof of an ancient indigenous culture
and the "migrants from the south" theory
remained unshaken.
In 1975, however, archaeologists began
work on the site of a settlement at Malaia
Syia, on the banks of the river Bely louss in
central Siberia in a valley high up in the
Kuznecki Alatau mountains between
Novosibirsk and Abakan. Radiocarbon
dating of their finds indicated that the settle¬
ment dated back 34,500 ( +450) years.
The men who settled at Malaia Syia chose
their site well, for the valleys of the Kuznecki
Alatau mountains compare in beauty with
those of the Swiss Alps. Remains of bones
recovered from the site indicate that the
valley was the habitat of a surprisingly varied
and abundant animal life reindeer, wild
sheep, ibex, antelope, bison, deer, mam¬
moth, rhinoceros, wild horses, hares and
foxes.
Relieved by this abundance of game of
the necessity to travel in search of food, the
men of Malaia Syia built themselves per¬
manent dwellings, creating a veritable
township covering an area of several thou¬
sand square metres in which a comparative¬
ly developed and complex culture evolved.
The artistic gifts of the men of Malaia Syia
were revealed by the discovery of traces of
paints of many colours red, yellow, crim¬
son, black, green, violet made with
haematite and magnetite iron ores and
malachite copper ore powdered and mixed
with animal fat.
The archaeologists also discovered stone
sculptures including finely-carved pebbles
and rock reliefs of mammoths, rhinoceros,
horses, deer, bulls, wolves and lions, the
standard subjects of palaeolithic carvings.
But in addition to these there are carvings of
eagles and turtles which differ profoundly k
both in shape and composition from those f
25

> of the very oldest European art. Their
originality argues conclusively in favour of
an art with local roots, independent of all
borrowing or forms brought in by migrants
from outside.
Some of these carvings enable us to trace
back to earliest palaeolithic times stories still
remembered in the mythology of the
peoples of northern Asia. The Evenki people
of Siberia used to recount the story of how
Hêgelên the Deer-Sun was devoured by the
beast Main, illustrated in the photo on the
brevious page of a cosmogonie stone carv¬
ing from Malaia Syia.
The oldest version of this myth recounts
that Hêgelên the Deer (the sun) strayed one
day from the protection of the "heavenly
taiga" (forest) and climbed to the top of a
mountain. The beast Main immediately set
off in pursuit tracking Hêgelên all day across
the vault of the heavens from east to west
until, at evening, he caught and devoured
her. This, say the Evenkis, is how night
came to the world. But one of Hêgelên's
fawns escaped from Main and the next
morning climbed again to the top of a moun¬
tain and Main's eternal pursuit began again.
Reflected in the art of Malaia Syia are
cosmogonie or creation myths that are older
and more profound than the fable of the
rising and the setting of the sun. According
to ancient Siberian myth, the universe ori¬
ginally consisted of the primordial waters.

Drawings V. Jalkovsky Photos G. Kashin .© Institute of History, Philology and Philosophy of the Siberian branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk
The mammoth Shêli entered this ocean and
from its depths began to dig up the earth
with his tusks. But his enemy, the dragon
Diabdar, flattened out the earth dug up by
Shêli and the world he had created disap¬
peared beneath the waters. The illustrations
above of a carving found at Malaia Syia
depict the furious struggle that ensued bet¬
ween the mammoth Shêli and the turtle, the
aquatic equivalent of the dragon. The mam¬
moth's foreleg crushes down on the neck of
the turtle from whose gaping mouth issues a
roar of pain and terror.
The structure of the world and the
emergence of man and fire are depicted in
another carving from Malaia Syia (illustra¬
tions below). The mammoth, representing
the earth and the world father, is locked in a
sexual embrace with the bison, representing
the sky and the world mother. Emerging
between them is an anthropomorphic lion,
representing the sun, the atmosphere, fire
and man, who will eventually bring about a
rupture between the world parents, I.e. the
earth and the sky.
The discovery of these cultural relics of
the art of Malaia Syia, dating back as it does
some 34,000 years, shortly after the first
emergence of homo sapiens, suggests that
the intellectual capacity of our earliest
ancestors has long been seriously
underestimated by archaeologist and
palaeontologist alike.
VITALI LARITCHEV, of the USSR, is an ar¬
chaeologist and orientalist who specializes in the
Stone Age period of north, central and east Asia.
Since 1971 he has been head of the Oriental
History and Archaeology Section of the Institute
of History, Philology and Philosophy of the
Siberian branch of the USSR Academy of
Sciences. The author of a number of monographs
and scientific works, he has also published several
books for the layman on famous scientists and
great inventions.
27
