Beauty and the beast
by Roland Penrose
DURING his long and intensively active
life Picasso produced works which
were acclaimed even by those most
hostile to his disquieting inventions as
masterpieces of undeniable beauty, and yet
there are those who accuse him of being a
destructive and evil influence, a trickster or
mocking demon rather than an artist intent
on quickening our appreciation of the
richness and diversity of human experience.
At an early age he became conscious that
we find ourselves surrounded by both
demons and angels radiating ugliness and
beauty. This is evident in his first drawings
seen at the Museo Picasso in Barcelona of
misery in the streets, battles and matadors
gored by bulls which hang next to tender,
truthful paintings of flowers, landscapes and
the female form.
In early days Picasso's admiration for cir¬
cus folk and his sympathy for the outcasts
of society, the clown, the mountebank, and
his understanding of the misery of blind beg
gars and those in prisons and hospitals were
at the basis of his perception of monsters
rather than the fire-breathing dragons of
romantic tales. It seemed necessary to admit
the co-existence of good and evil and to
achieve the partnership of beauty and hor¬
ror. Inevitably there must be beauty to be
found somehow in ugliness, and beauty, if it
were to be alive, could not be that pure
frozen abstraction made by Pygmalion. A
vital force must emerge from it which will
electrify the duality in our own hybrid emo¬
tional nature.
Picasso found ample acknowledgment of
this situation in myths that symbolize our in¬
ner torments and aspirations; myths in
which the whole of creation gave him the
means of examining that elusive element
called reality.
Frequently in his work he depicts animals
and attributes to them human emotions in
which violence and cruelty play their part. In
the painting Cat and Bird of 1939, a cat with
vicious claws tears its prey to pieces, but the
face of the cat seen against a serene blue
sky is both feline and human. Elsewhere, as
in Bullfight of 1934 (illustration this page),
he shows us with compassion the drama of
a horse gored by the bull in the arena.
Throughout his life Picasso combined a
consciousness of his talent with a
remarkable degree of modesty and self-
criticism. In early days he imagined a
likeness between himself and that legendary
mercurial wanderer and talented outcast.
Harlequin, but in later years he found a more
robust likeness to his own ebullient
character in the mythical monster and
demigod, the Minotaur. Half man and half
bull it brought reminiscences of his childish
fascination for the corrida where man and
bull confront each other in a ritual struggle
between life and death.
In a series of engravings begun in 1933,
known as the Sculptor's Studio, myth is
passionately transcribed as a visual com-

mentary on his own life. An enigmatic
similarity in the depths of desire was the
plane on which this became manifest.
After we have been introduced in several
etchings to the bearded sculptor accom¬
panied by his exquisite model at work in his
studio but unhappy at the lack of satisfac¬
tion that his marble creations give him, there
is a change of atmosphere.
Suddenly his studio is brutally invaded by
the shameless, lustful appearance of the
Minotaur which brings with it a release from
the painstaking labour and scrupulous
respect for the sculptor's models. The orgy
that follows, involving the divine yet in¬
tolerable monster in intimacy with the artist
as well as his placid and beautiful girls,
works up through progressive images to un¬
controlled violence and rape culminating in
the Minotaur being put to death in the
arena, . watched with anxiety by the
spectators.
Bullfight, 1934. Oil on canvas,
97x130 cm. The vigour of its
dramatic impact and the
sheer size of the canvas
make this work perhaps the
most striking of all the
paintings Picasso devoted to
the theme of the corrida. The
violence of the shock as the
bull savagely knocks to the
ground and disembowels the
horse is emphasized by the
double outlines of the two
animals. In Picasso's
symbolism the bull stands for
evil and brute force, whereas
the horse usually represents
good and innocence. Here
the dying animal, its head
thrown back in the final
agony, seems prophetic of
the tragic, poignant posture
of the horse in Guernica (see
page 16), painted three years
later.
Later Picasso added a postscript in which
the amorous demigod meets a different
penalty blindness. Landing from the sea
we now find him being led along the quay by
a child carrying a dove, docile and lamenting
to the stars. The sense of touch becomes his
only «means of contact as he stumbles
through the night (illustration page 36). The
affliction of blindness recalls paintings from
the Blue Period, made some thirty years
before, of the blind beggars in the streets of
Barcelona. He reminds us here that the im¬
agination can function without the aid of
physical sight and that the inner eye is
essential to the poet.
The image of the Minotaur continued to
haunt Picasso in drawings, gouaches and
notably in a large engraving of 1935, which
seems prophetic of the Spanish Civil War
due to begin a few months later and also of
his great mural Guernica.
Minotauromachy (illustration page 36)
presents a dramatic scene into which the
monster intrudes with fierce aggression. He
is attacking a girl dressed sumptuously in a
toreador costume who lies dying on a ter¬
rified horse while the bearded sculptor tries
to make his escape up a ladder. But again
the brute is halted in its onslaught by the
presence of a little girl holding a bunch of
flowers who fearlessly confronts him with a
lighted candle. This steadfast gesture
reasserts a precarious balance between the
ugliness of uncontrolled violence and the
forces of light.
The following year Picasso made another
drawing which again testifies to his desire
that in spite of the coexistence of good and
evil he still hopes that the good and beautiful
will somehow dominate. Drawn with the
highly evocative line of his pencil he
presents us with The End of a Monster (il¬
lustration page 36). The Minotaur struck to
death by an arrow is shown his own bestial
face in a mirror held up to him by a woman
of classical beauty emerging from the sea.
In 1936 Picasso produced a gouache
which was enlarged for the drop-curtain for
"Le Quatorze Juillet" a play by Romain
Rolland.
The theme is a duel between two impos¬
ing antagonists (colour page 28). On the
right a powerful winged demon with the
head of a bird carries in its arms the limp
figure of a defeated Minotaur gasping for
breath. It is challenged as it goes by a young
hero mounted on the shoulders of a bearded
man who has disguised himself in the skin of
a horse and prepares to hurl a stone at the
demon. But it is the figure of the wounded
Minotaur that is of particular significance
because Picasso has dressed him in the dia¬
mond cloth of Harlequin.
He combines both the images that
Picasso had adopted for himself, here ex¬
hausted and carried off by a powerful
monster, a circumstance which may reveal
the "holy doubt" with which he viewed
himself and his achievements.
But Picasso had no need to return to the
past nor to invent legends to find his
monsters. They could be found in contem¬
porary tyrants whom he hated and
caricatured, such as General Franco, or
more personally they could appear as the ex¬
pression of the miseries and provocations
that arose in the course of his married life.
For some years he went through great
emotional stress after his separation from
his first wife Olga in 1934. Submission to
violent attacks from her due to her jealousy
for his new love, Dora Maar, aroused an
anger which echoed throughout his whole
production. Distortions of the human form
became grotesque and terrible.
The monsters he could invent with such
power continued to haunt him. This appears
in many different forms throughout the
years that followed. In a drawing of 1934 (il¬
lustration page 37), in which he had in mind
David's painting of the assassination of
Marat, he seems to be laughing at his own
obsession, for humour even in its blackest
form is often associated with the
monstrous.
A furious female figure has invaded the
room like a whirlwind. Her face with small
cruel eyes is dominated by a large open
mouth with fangs bared and a tongue
swollen and thirsting for blood. With
outstretched arm she plunges an enormous
knife into the jugular vein of her victim
seated like Marat in the bath-tub, but to our
surprise it is not Marat who is the victim. It is
a girl with the profile of Marie-Thérèse
Walter, the sensuous blond model who is
found so frequently in paintings of the early
thirties.
A similar kind of metamorphosis could
have its origin in a mixture of sources, some
benign. The obsessive beauty of Dora Maar
inspired Picasso for a host of inventions.
Frequently her radiant face with shining
eyes was transformed into a bird or the head
of a nymph with budding horns and at times
the long aristocratic head of his Afghan
hound was merged into paintings which,
although they could not be called
portraits, were still in essence Dora.
There is for instance a war-time drawing
of a female figure sitting in the chair usually
occupied by Dora Maar at Royan during the
invasion where Picasso with macabre
humour has substituted the enlarged skull of
a rabbit for her head.
This raises urgently the question as to
why he should wish to mock and demolish
beauty he had known and admired so in¬
tensely even when personal animosity was
absent? Can it be that the deeper the shame
and the anguish brought about by
outrageous catastrophes in the world
around him, the greater must be the
sacrifice demanded of him, if it were to con¬
vey a message of sufficient power? In what
other way could he prove better the violence
of his emotion? By this sacrifice beauty
herself gave birth to, or rather became the
monster.
Among the many studies made for Guer¬
nica .in 1937 there is a large monochrome
canvas known as Woman with a Dead Child
(illustration page 37). It is a poetic statement
containing an acute degree of tenderness
and compassion expressed with terrifying
violence, similar in this respect to the small
painting The Crucifixion painted seven years
before but more direct in its appeal.
The movement of the figure of a woman
across the picture culminates in her head
above the dead child she carries. The head
perched at the extremity of a long straining
neck displays a powerful expression of
agony due to the unprecedented distortions
it contains and the associations they evoke.
The eyes brought together on the same pro¬
file rock like small boats in a storm, the*
nostrils suggest birds caught in a gale, while I
35

from the mouth comes a scream, shrill and
as penetrating as the enormous tongue
shaped like a flame. The tongue itself is sur¬
rounded by teeth sharp and dangerous, with
an outer cordon of lips drawn taut like the
arc of a bow.
The grief expressed by this fusion of im¬
ages is the contrary to a passive acceptance
of misery, it calls with authority for justice
with clear and resounding eloquence. Yet
this head may by some be considered
monstrous and hideously ugly but such
qualifications would be meaningless. They
would fail utterly to apply to the vivid ex¬
perience which is stated clearly in this heart¬
breaking image. It is above all because of the
distortions that emotions of anguish, com¬
passion and indignation are aroused, and it
is by the relevance of the metaphors that, as
in poetry, we are able to attain glimpses of
universal truth.
There are moments when Picasso's
irrepressible sense of humour encouraged
him to invent monsters which could
astonish by their grotesque invention and
bring laughs from children. Their prototypes
were to be found on the seashore or among
n 1933 and 1934 Picasso produced a
series of drawings and engravings
on the theme of the Blind Minotaur
Guided by a Young Girl (top photo,
a drawing in the series made in
1934, 33.5x51.2 cm). The principal
elements the blind minotaur and
the girl, with the fishermen and the
sea in the background are
repeated in each work of the series.
In the final etching, referred to in
the article on these pages, the
figure of a youth has been added
and the young girl is seen holding a
dove instead of flowers and leading
the blind minotaur towards the left
of the picture. The girl, whose face
is that of Picasso's companion
Marie-Thérèse Walter, represents
innocence and intelligence in
contrast to the now tamed
lasciviousness and brute force of
the minotaur. In Minotauromachy
(centre photo, etching made in
1935, 49.8x69.3 cm), innocence,
again in the form of a young girl
holding flowers and a lighted
candle, fearlessly confronts the
powers of violence and evil.
Bottom photo. End of a Monster
(pencil drawing of 1937).

railway station crowds, in the same surroun¬
dings where other faces inspired drawings
of nymphs of disconcerting charm.
The ¡mages he created are rich in associa¬
tions. They contain so often that which is
called beauty on the one hand and the
monstrous, that disconcerting appearance
of terror, on the other. In his fundamental
desire to exclude nothing that can be ex¬
pressed he refused to set up boundaries and
in conversation with his secretary-
companion Sabartes he once said "Beauty,
what a strange thing!... For me it is a word
devoid of meaning for I don't know from
where its significance comes nor to what it
leads. Do you know exactly where to find its
opposite?".
This refusal to accept a simple dichotomy
between beauty and its opposite gives a clue
to Picasso's attitude and the freedom with
which he could enhance his effects emo¬
tionally by a welding of two extremes. We
can gain from him deep experience of reality
through his sacred monsters. These are not
lacking throughout the world, for man made
gods and, even more successfully,
demigods in his own ¡mage. |
ROLAND PENROSE, English writer and painter,
first met Picasso in 1936 when involved in
preparations for the first International Surrealist
Exhibition in London, thus beginning a friendship
which only ended with Picasso's death. He has
written widely on 20th-century European artists
and their work and is the author of some 10
studies on Picasso including Picasso: His Life and
Work, (revised edition. Pelican Biographies, Lon¬
don 1971) which has been translated into six
languages. Sir RolandPenrose is also President of
the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London,
which he was instrumental in founding in 1947.
The Death of Marat, 1934.
Drawing on cardboard,
40x50 cm. This work was
inspired by a famous painting by
the French artist Jacques-Louis
David (1748-1825).
Woman with a Dead Child, 1937.
Oil on canvas, 195x130 cm. One
of a series of compositions
which can be considered as
"postscripts" to the great mural
Guernica.
37
