Unwritten
wisdom
Although they may not be attuned to
the presentation of technical
information, the systems of symbolic
representation elaborated by rural
societies, often highly sophisticated,
bear witness to cultures that have
found ways of expressing themselves
other than through the written word.
Above, The Dismembering of
Huatacame, a mythological "painting"
in coloured woollen yarn by José
Benítez Sánchez, an artist of Mexico's
Huichol people. Left, decorated gourd
from the Yola district of north-eastern
Nigeria. Each motif symbolizes an
element of the real world: a the leaves
of a tree; b river worms; c knife
handles; d the back of a fly; e the
teeth of a fish.
THE portrait which is painted of traditional rural societies, where
illiteracy rates are highest, often tends to be sketchy and
superficial. It is overlooked that the absence of reading and
writing does not prevent people in these communities from perform¬
ing complex mental calculations, transmitting knowledge orally from
generation to generation, and developing a highly retentive memory.
Although he can write nothing down, the illiterate villager makes use
of processes of mental arithmetic, often of a complex nature and
whose mechanisms are little known. It seems likely, although this is
no more than a supposition, that the calculations made by illiterate
villagers are neither more nor less simple than those made by literate
people when they are for some reason deprived of the medium of
writing. Visiting markets in rural or urban areas of non-industrialized
countries, or strolling through the few remaining cattle-markets of
industrialized countries, it soon becomes evident that the transac¬
tions conducted in these places are extremely complicated; fairly
large amounts may be involved, equivalences may have to be
calculated between very varied products of quite different values, »
and all these dealings are carried out without a single written entry, f
This article is based on Contribution to Study of the Rural Environment
within the Framework of Functional Literacy Operations, a document
prepared by the Education Sector of Unesco.
19

All social groups, however illiterate they may be, use arithmetic.
There is no known society that does not possess a sequence of
numbers, though not necessarily with the figure 10 as a base. Many
societies use counting systems based on 5 or 20. Some social
groups use two bases for their arithmetic, according to the type of
activity for which numbers are required. What is striking is the
remarkable agility in mental arithmetic which is displayed both for
practical purposes and in play, for many games require the use of a
highly developed combinative sense.
Another error is to assume that what distinguishes the illiterate, is
the lack of strict accuracy in the use of measurements of length,
area, weight and, especially, time. The peasant certainly does not
know about centigrade, millimetres and seconds; his own units of
measurement are those of experience and not objective units. Many
societies have, for example, a developed sense of the cycle of
events, particularly of agricultural cycles of good and bad crops, the
cycle of the seasons and of the moon. Many coherent systems of
measurement exist which use as units of measure various parts of
the body (hands, feet, etc).
The units of measurement used by illiterate villagers may strike us
as being rather lacking in precision. This does not mean that the
villager is not aware of this lack of precision or that he does not com¬
pensate for it in one way or another. The Western world also ex¬
perienced a similar variety of systems of weights and measures
without major drawbacks as long as the volume of goods traded was
comparatively small. Those involved in such transactions were
familiar with the various systems and switched from one to another
with the greatest of ease. Admittedly abuses may result from these
practices, but they always reflect a power struggle. The creditor,
having the upper hand, easily imposes his conditions on his debtors.
He does not cheat them, he robs them. They are quite aware of this
but are in no position to refuse transactions that are to their disad¬
vantage.
This was the case during the pre-harvesting season in Viet Nam
when the villagers from the mountain plateaux turned, in times of
difficulty, to merchants who lent them a can of paddy in exchange
for two cans of hulled rice to be paid back later once the harvest was
over. The villagers knew perfectly well and to what extent they were
being swindled, but there was no alternative for them as they had no
money to buy supplies.
The illiterate can legitimately boast of having developed a faculty
that industrialized societies have tended to neglect, namely memory,
one of the most important faculties. This functional memory could
even be said to be the main element that holds together these com¬
munities, which are sometimes of considerable size. Memory is the
key to the oral tradition, thanks to which a precious legacy of
knowledge of all kinds has been handed down through the cen¬
turies, especially in Africa (see the Unesco Courier,
August/September 1979). Memory in this instance is not merely
oral, however; it is made up not only of what has been said and
heard, but also of gestures of all kinds. This explains why rituals de¬
pend on memory, both collective and individual.
Careful consideration shows that literacy campaigns can benefit
greatly from the various types of memorization to be found in il¬
literate societies. Unfavourable comment has been made, for in¬
stance, about the so-called mechanical learning of the Koran in the
marabout schools of Africa. Undoubtedly, some criticism is
legitimate, but the fact remains that the memory is activated to a
remarkable degree and individual human potential is built up that
can certainly be used for new learning processes, and especially for
writing, reading and arithmetic.
Cloth woven by the Bobo people of the village of Bondouki, Upper Volta.
20

Ethnological- literature has amply shown that illiterate societies do
not lack systems of symbolic representation. Unfortunately these
systems are often not understood because many illiterate societies
are concerned not with figurative realism but with non-figurative
abstraction. A tourist strolling around a market in any non-European
country may stop to look at some richly patterned local material
which he finds decorative, but nothing more. If, however, he were
to delve more deeply, he would be astonished at the wealth of the
symbols that the patterns or motifs depicted in these products of
local craftsmanship conjure up in the minds of the people.
Representations of this kind are probably ill-suited to convey
technical messages. But it would be a mistake to claim that illiterates
are unable to read (and to draw and write, so to speak) images. All
that can be said is that they find it difficult to understand conven¬
tional graphic representations even if all the objects depicted are
within their visual experience. Either they do not visualize the objects
in their own surroundings in such a way, or they do not understand
the codification of the representation of reality.
It is also time to dispel the prejudice that the illiterate villager can¬
not grasp anything that is technical. If by techniques we mean
operations that make it possible to transform materials efficiently for
man's real and symbolic needs, then it is difficult to deny the villager
credit for mastery of such techniques. Consider the illiterate
carpenters who built those vast, magnificent pagoda roof structures
without a single nail, using only wooden dowels (as did the illiterate
carpenters of Europe until the end of the nineteenth century) and us¬
ing only a few perfectly adapted tools which owed nothing to
technically-minded Europe.
The prejudices most frequently expressed against traditional
cultivation methods are so categorical that no one bothers to acquire
more than a rudimentary knowledge of them, since it is generally
assumed that they are destined to disappear. This attitude deprives
us of the opportunity to appreciate the rich store of experience built
up over years by farming communities in their efforts to survive in
regions where living conditions are often very difficult.
Under the pressures of the world economy profound modifica¬
tions have taken place, bringing such results as the over-utilization
of land and the abandonment of soil conservation practices. The
villager' is perfectly well aware of this and, today, it is no longer so
certain that the old farming methods, for long considered sterile by
the Western world, should be eliminated. Indeed, attention is now
being given, in the Mediterranean area, to early farming methods
that ensured the subsistence of large social groups while limiting the
effects of erosion. A whole series of minor operations, seemingly
trivial but meticulously supervised, sufficed to protect the soil. It is
quite possible that in some countries and this is already the case in
the Sahel it will be necessary to return to "soft technology", a
term adopted, no doubt, so as to avoid having to acknowledge the
debt owed to "traditional" techniques.
Finally, it must be realized that if the countryman sometimes has
difficulty in adapting to new agricultural methods, this is not
because of some kind of deep-rooted mistrust which, with a great
deal of patience, may perhaps be overcome; rather it is because he
feels (even if he does not always say so explicitly) that the adoption
of such methods would disrupt his entire social structure, his whole
system of reference as well as all his customs. He knows that a new
technique is not just a technique as such, but an expression of the
society that produced it.
