The Canon of Medicine
A million-word thesaurus
of medical knowledge
by Hakim Mohammed Said
GREEK medicine reached the Muslim
world before philosophy, via the
medical school at Jundishapur.
During the Ummayyad age (41-132
AH/661-750 AD) a Persian Jew, Masar-
jawaih, translated the Pandects (treatises) of
Ahron into Arabic. Ahron was a Christian
monk who lived in Alexandria not long
before the Arab conquest.
This was followed by Mesue the Elder's
Jawahir al-Tibb al-mufrada (The Essential
Features of Drug Simples) and translations
during the Abbasid age (132-656
AH/750-1258 AD) by Hunayn, who, if his
claim is to be given credence, translated
some of Hippocrates' works (including his
Aphorisms), the whole of Galen's original
works and some of his commentaries on
Hippocrates.
The age of translation was followed by a
period which saw the production of some
original works of high order in medicine. Ali
Ibn-Sahl Rabban al-Tabari (833-923 AD)
produced his Firdaws al-Hikmah (Paradise
of Wisdom). It included some philosophy
and other disciplines like astronomy, but
broke new ground in that it included not
only Greek but also Hindu sources.
Tabari was followed by an even greater
figure, al-Razi (865-923 AD) who has been
called "the greatest and most original of
Muslim physicians, and one of the most pro¬
lific as an author". Unlike Avicenna's
Canon, his Kitab al-Hawi (Continens) is not
a theoretical work but a record of clinical ex¬
periences. Although he was interested in
philosophy, al-Razi mostly wrote treatises of
a practical nature, e.g.. Smallpox and
Measles; On the fact that even skilful physi¬
cians cannot heal all diseases; and On why
people prefer quacks and charlatans to skill¬
ed physicians.
Thus there existed a whole tradition of
medical writing when Avicenna's (Ibn
Sina's) Canon of Medicine appeared. The
literal meaning of Qanun (Canon) is codes of
laws and series of principles. Avicenna
therefore wrote the work not as an en¬
cyclopaedia of the knowledge of his own
time but as knowledge based upon reason¬
ing, logic, and principles. According to one
authority, "Numerous passages occur in the k
Canon which show that it is a series of notes t
HAKIM MOHAMMED SAID, of Pakistan, is
adviser on traditional Islamic medicine to the
Pakistan Ministry of Health, and President of the
Hamdard National Foundation (Karachi) which is
devoted to scientific and medical research. He is
editor-in-chief of the Foundation's periodical
Hamdard Medicine and Managing Editor of the
Urdu edition of the Unesco Courier.
EP*
-Z."-^ . "^*
C--
-
Above, first page of Part 10 of Book III of Avicenna's Canon of Medicine, in the form of a
richly ornamented manuscript in naskhi (cursive Arabic script) dating from 1601 AD. Each
part opens with a multicoloured unvan or illuminated heading and the text is framed with a
border of gold or coloured lines. The marginal notes suggest that the manuscript was once
in the possession of an industrious and attentive student.
13

Diagrams on this page, depicting
(below) the nervous system, (bottom
left) the human skeleton and
(left) the muscles, are from a
Persian manuscript of the Canon of
Medicine dating from 1632 AD. The
text accompanying the anatomical
drawing (right) by Leonardo da
Vinci, in the artist's famous
"mirror-writing", refers specifically
to Avicenna. "The elements of the
foot number sixty", he wrote, using
Avicenna's exact terms.
14

,_« «t»* ^»tt»5» m»»!"'»'* ^****^11"
'-t'l-fi'~
F ' .
-W. ..».« »1^».
iJr,~y <- -"*»' * *"** "**"
. A.- .
-	 -
--
'	H
. .«»M »y»/.* -*¡WS TMy-J-Mf M*ft) -ï.
J-. -
rjr»i -~ -y- -«-
*4 V * ' 'a. ^*
-r -I
ii«>|«wwfqiMi«na
^ .1*.««»). fc.lf . Mf-'< « * «I i^ '
«««
ñ>» * - ^ " ' " «>/
-
-i .^. ,i ,.^- -,
-.»7
./. . ._..r
~» . «... *-,» *» * «
' or skeleton outlines, not too lengthy to be
memorized by his pupils".
The work comprises five volumes. The
first volume discusses the general principles.
It defines medicine and discusses the scope
of medicine, followed by discourses upon
temperament, temperament of organs,
temperament of age and sex, nature and
variety of humours, diseases of the organs,
muscles, nerves, a'rteries and veins, faculties
and functions, diseases and their aetiology,
signs and symptoms, pulse, urine, regimens
to be followed for different ages, preventive
medicine, management of temperamental
abnormalities, effect of climate, and
treatment.
The second volume consists of two parts.
The first part discusses the determination of
the temperament of drugs by experiment
and influence. Conditions for research into
drugs are laid down, e.g. the experiments to
be conducted on the human body, freedom
of the drug from extrinsic and intrinsic
alterations, trial to be on an allopathic basis
and made in simple diseases, and determina¬
tion as to whether the drug is qualitatively
and quantitatively appropriate to the nature
and severity of the disease, and so on.
General principles regarding drug action
and methods of collecting and pre¬
serving various drug products are described
as well. The second part lists 760 drugs
arranged alphabetically.
The third volume discusses the aetiology,
symptoms, diagnosis, prognosis and
systematic treatment of diseases. It
describes diseases of the head, e.g. abnor¬
mal temperaments of the brain, and
headache, epilepsy, paralysis, etc., diseases
of the eye, nose, ear, and throat; diseases of
the alimentary tract, genito-urinary system,
diseases of the muscles, joints, and feet.
The fourth volume treats of general
diseases. Part I deals with fevers and their
treatment, Part II with boils and swellings,
leprosy, minor surgery, wounds and their
general treatment, injuries, ulcers and glan¬
dular swellings, Part III with poisons, and
Part IV with "beauty culture".
Volume V is an aqrabadhin (the Arab
equivalent for formulary). A notable
predecessor to Avicenna's work is the for¬
mulary by the Arab philosopher al-Kindi
(800-873 AD). It comprises description of
special prescriptions and antidotes,
methods of preparing pills, pessaries, sup¬
positories, powders, syrups, decoctions,
confections, elixirs, etc., prescriptions for
different diseases; weights and measures.
The impact of the Canon has been im¬
mense. Translated into Latin a century after
its appearance by the famous Italian
translator Gerard of Cremona, it gained so
much popularity that in the last thirty years
of the fifteenth century it was issued sixteen
times and more than twenty times in the six¬
teenth century. It was still being printed and
read in the second half of the seventeenth
century, and was consulted by medical prac¬
titioners regularly. It continued as a text¬
book until 1650 in the Universities of Mont¬
pellier and Louvain. The medical cur¬
riculum in Vienna and Frankfurt-on-the-
Oder, in the sixteenth century, was largely
based on the Canon and the Ad Alman-
sorem of al-Razi. The noted Avicenna
scholar Soheil M. Afnan, speaking of its
popularity, remarks:
"The translation of the Canon by Andrea
Alpago (d. 1520) of Italy was followed by
even later versions which were taught in
various European universities, especially in
Italy and France. It was not until human
dissection came to be allowed that Euro¬
pean anatomists detected certain
anatomical and physiological errors of Galen
which had been transmitted to Europe
through the works of Avicenna."
A special feature of the Canon is" its
broadness and catholicity. It has now been
established beyond doubt that Ayurvedic*
works had become available in Arabrc in the
seventh 'century, and during the Abbasid i
period Salih Ibn Duhn and the Hindu |
* Ayurveda is the traditional Hindu system of
medicine based largely on homeopathy and
naturopathy.
15

astronomer Mankah were the transmitters
of this tradition. Some descriptions in the
Canon, such as those of the pulse, are
reminiscent of the Chinese system.
A major contribution of Avicenna is to the
aetiology of disease. Taking his cue from
Aristotle, he believes that complete
knowledge of a thing is possible only if we
take into account the material of which a
thing is made, the "efficient cause" that
moulds it, the "formal cause" which deter¬
mines its shape and quality, and the "final
cause" or function for which a thing is
made. Avicenna introduces a theory in
which the concept of the elements sym¬
bolizes qualities of mass and energy at the
same time and interaction between the four
causes. He thus establishes not only the uni¬
ty between organs and functions in the body
but also brings the body and the outer world
in appropriate space-time relationship.
Now the human body is material but is
vivified by the vital force. The vital force is a
life-principle organized from the humours.
He defines psyche as expressing itself as
mind at the cognitive level and as emotions
in the heart and thus an integral part of the
body.
This concept of causation, then, implies
that the internal organs belong to each other
beyond the anatomical limits. Anatomy
regards the heart as a circumscribed organ
while for Avicenna it is the part of force oc¬
cupying the whole of the body.
If we combine the ancient with modern
knowledge, we might just as well say that
the arterial vessels with the blood contained
in them and the autonomic nervous system
including its hypothalamic centre are one
great composite of the functional heart
whose operation pervades the whole body.
The nafs in Avicenna is anima, which, in
accordance with the nature of an organism,
acts as the ultimate determinant or for¬
mative factor for its growth and activity. The
basic thesis with Avicenna is thus that the
whole is greater than the sum of its parts
and that man is a dynamic organism, with
each individual having his own unique
temperament. His dynamism cannot be ex¬
plained on the basis of analysis.
With the help of these concepts Avicenna
offers a constitutional approach according to
which disease is to be explained in terms of
the individual's genetic structure; the kind of
temperament, structure, and strength of
faculties possessed by him; environmental
factors; and Nature's own effort at the
restoration or maintenance of his life-
functions.
The concept of the elements in Avicenna,
in which heat and cold are two opposite
types of energy, and dryness and moisture
are two opposite qualities of mass, is to be
found in Aristotle. Avicenna's elaboration of
the Aristotelian thesis has been translated as
follows: The truth is that the first principles
behind all generable and corruptible
substances are primary, active or kinetic
energies and occur either simply in fire, air,
water and earth or linked to a composite
Illustrations from an edition of the Canon of Medicine, dating from about 1520 AD, show
methods of treatment for various spinal disorders. While Avicenna broadly followed
Hippocrates' methods for the extension of the vertebral column in the treatment of
displaced vertebrae, the use of a specially designed instrument (lower illustration) for
putting a displaced vertebra back in place was his own invention.
16

I
»
s
.i
u
W
P
Avicenna's contribution to pharmacology was original and important and he is credited
with introducing many previously untried herbs into medical use. Book II of his Canon
of Medicine dealt with pharmacology, including the collection and preservation of
medicinal herbs, and formed the basis of many subsequent works on this subject.
Above, excerpt from a manuscript known as The Gift of the Believers, written by
Mohammad Dailani, physician at the court of Shah Ismaili (1686-1694). The illustration is
of Fasafis, a plant resembling the lentil, which was used to cure disorders of the throat
and liver and as an antidote to snake-bite.
temperament. The late Dr. Mazhar H. Shah
observed that, according to Avicenna, the
organization of various objects in nature is
the result of an interaction of the four
qualities of mass and energy and that the
four elements mentioned in the Canon are
merely symbols employed to understand the
various actions and reactions of the body
and its environment in qualitative terms.
Ayurveda has three temperaments: Vata,
Pitta, and Kapha as propounded by
Charak and Sushruta. Hippocrates has also
three temperaments apoplectic, phleg¬
matic, and melancholic.
Galen propounded four temperaments
sanguine, choleric, phlegmatic, and
melancholic. Avicenna formulated four
temperaments hot and moist, hot and dry,
cold and moist, and cold and dry.
Since then several temperaments have
been formulated, among those that are well-
known being those due to Eppinger and
Hess (1917 and 1931) and Pavlov. The
former formulated two temperaments, sym-
patheticotonia and vagotonia, while Pavlov
propounded four temperaments im¬
petuous, calm, and weak. These four types
correspond exactly to the Galenic classifica¬
tion of temperament into the sanguine,
choleric, phlegmatic, and melancholic
types.
The "heart" in Avicenna's system is not
just the structural heart described by the
anatomists but the "functional" heart
which, as the centre of emotions, thermo¬
regulation, sleep and water metabolism is
centred in the diencephalon, a portion of the
brain which in the phylogeny of the race was
the first to develop. The pituitary gland
which subserves as well as regulates the
functions of this region may also be included
in the concept of the "heart". In De Viribus
Cordis (paragraph 172) Avicenna says:
"The foundation or beginning of all these
faculties is traceable to the heart, as is
agreed upon even by those philosophers
who think that the source of visual, auditory
and gustatory power lies in the Brain."
The Canon abounds in original observa¬
tions made by Avicenna during the course
of medical practice, e.g. the distinction of
mediastinitis from pleurisy; the contagious
nature of phthisis; the diffusion of disease
by water and soil; sexual diseases and
perversions; nervous diseases; and careful
description of the diseases of the skin. The
materia medica describes about 760 drugs
and Avicenna has outlined pharmacological
Left, double-ended
instrument used by
pharmacists in
Avicenna's day in the
preparation of medicines;
one end consists of a
spoon and the other of a
small strainer. Below,
10th to 12th-century
bronze medicine phial
discovered in
Uzbekistan.
Photos Sergei A. Davydov
© Museum of the History of the
Peoples of Uzbekistan, Tashkent
methods. The book on materia medica and
pharmacology contains a passage upon ex¬
perimentation which according to the
French scholar A-M. Goichon, sets out the
three methods agreement, difference, and
concomitant variations which are usually
associated with the modern scientific
approach.
The Canon remained far more accessible
than the works of Hippocrates, even though
Arnold of Villanova (1235-1312) described
Avicenna as a "professional scribbler"
whose misinterpretation of Galen stupefied
European physicians. Ibn Zuhr (Avenzoar)
of Spain described the Canon as "waste-
paper". Such criticism belittles the critics
rather than the Shaykh al-Rais. If he
stupefied the European physicians, why
should be have been studied in Europe at all
and why did not European scholars come
out with their own interpretations of Galen?
Nor is the historian of science George Sar-
ton's contention that "His triumph was too
complete; it discouraged original investiga¬
tions and sterilized intellectual life", correct
for there were many notable physicians,
surgeons, and scientists after him among
the Muslims.
Hakim Mohammed Said
17
