A watershed
of modern art
Painted in 1907, Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon revolutionized our vision
of the world
by Santiago Amón
THE break with the traditional order
which Pablo Picasso deliberately
provoked in 1907, as he created with
firm, confident brushstrokes ¿es
Demoiselles d'Avignon, ushered in a new
order whose consequences have shaped the
modern environment. With Picasso began
the development of a new sensibility, a new
capacity for appreciation. A fresh way of
seeing the world and a new appraisal of
man's history came into being.
There is something which is often
overlooked by those who still contest today
the merits and validity of Picasso's art.
Wherever they may happen to be in
lecture-room or living-room, in cafeteria,
supermarket or airportwhen they repeat
the derisory charge that Picasso came into
the world with the mission of ridiculing his
fellow men, their surroundings have been
designed and constructed in accordance
with principles which can in one way or
another be traced back to Picasso. Did not
the great modern architect Le Corbusier
acknowledge that he owed all his architec¬
ture to one of Picasso's still-lifes?
The French writer Jean Cassou once
declared that the name Picasso is a symbolic
target for all the astonishment and indigna¬
tion that the general public feels about
modern art. The truth is, however, that the
public is neither astonished nor indignant.
The ranks of the indignant are led by those
who regard modern art, and its symbol
Picasso, as the deathknell of a past which,
they hoped, would go on for ever, and as
evidence that there can be no return to a
moment in time when, they hoped, the on¬
ward flow of history could have been halted.
This apparently childish attitude merits
closer inspection. Why should the op¬
ponents of modern art be so indignant? Why
should they curse the name of its founding
father? The answer is that modern art (and
its symbol Picasso) has so brilliantly and in¬
exorably achieved recognition. . Mean
while, the feelings of its opponents have
been aroused by the use of ways of think¬
ing, of forms and structures which made it
impossible, not only for them to return to
the glorious past but even to look back on
that past with nostalgia. And all the force of
their loathing was showered on Picasso's
head because they knew only too well that
the battering ram which had opened up this
irreparable breach in the wall of history was
the genius from Málaga.
There can be no doubt about the fact that
modern art is in tune with other aspects of
reality in the contemporary world. This har¬
mony came into being, the new art put its
finger on the pulse of contemporary history
for the first time, when Picasso painted Les
Demoiselles d'Avignon. From then on the
new relationship was fostered and
developed through the bold actions of a
handful of pioneers.
These artists of the recent past Picasso
and those associated with him possessed
E
©
| Photo © Edward Quinn, Nice. From Picasso de Draeger, 1974 2 Photo Giraudon © SPADEM 1980, Paris
Philadelphia Museum of Art. A.E. Gallatin Collection
3 Photo Giraudon © SPADEM 1980, Paris
Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Lillie P. Bliss Bequest
"The aim was to demolish the old image of man ... and Picasso
chose to begin with his own features". In the central figures of
¿es Demoiselles d'Avignon he mirrored his own gaze. Above,
details from (1) photo of Picasso taken in 1955 when he was aged
74; (2) the Self-Portrait of the Painter with a Palette of 1906 (see
p. 2); and (3) the central figure of ¿es Demoiselles d'Avignon of
1907 (see colour page 8). Left, Picasso photographed in 1949
"drawing" a Centaur in the air using a flashlight.
13

.an uncanny prescience (Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon was painted ten years before the
Russian Revolution) which enabled them to
discern the birth and expression of a new
way of living and a new reality. Gertrude
Stein insisted that it was Picasso and
Picasso alone who grasped that twentieth-
century reality bore no relation to
nineteenth-century reality, and that he came
to this realization through painting.
Picasso led the way towards the vision of
an era of rebirth, towards a fresh conception
of man and society. Nor did he lose any time
in propagating this vision through his work
as an artist.
"Death to good taste !" was Picasso's
watchword as, in a state of great excite¬
ment, he worked on Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon, perhaps the boldest and most
challenging act in the history of art. As the
painting took shape, he discovered that it
was becoming the revelation of a side of life
that had been proscribed and concealed for
centuries, of everything that was not on the
side of refinement, ornateness, ostentatious
luxury, and decorum.
This wholesale rejection of good taste
would soon be taken over by the Futurists,
the Dadaists, the Expressionists and others.
But it was made first of all by Picasso. And it
was expressed, not in some defiant
manifesto or programme, but in the
painstaking composition of Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon, a painting whose very existence
is more provocative than all the fulminatory
literature produced by the avant-garde
movements of this century.
"Picasso came into the world to give it a
jolt", wrote the Spanish poet Rafael Alberti,
"to turn it inside out and provide it with a
fresh pair of eyes". The story of his life is in
itself the history of our coming to terms with
a new world into which we have been
"transplanted", the history of our way of
seeing.
It is said that when Gertrude Stein saw an
early study for the portrait which Picasso
painted of her in 1906 she was full of admira¬
tion. Then Picasso requested ninety more
sittings. Next, after correcting and painting
out almost everything on the canvas, he left
Paris for several months, completing the
portrait on his return without any further sit¬
tings. When Gertrude Stein saw the finished
portrait she was unable to conceal either her
surprise or her well-founded misgivings
about its fidelity to her appearance.
Whereupon, according to some sources,
Picasso simply pointed to the picture and
said: "Don't worry, you will look like it one
day." This famous remark has attracted
many interpretations, but perhaps it should
be understood in its simplest terms and be
seen to possess those qualities of directness
and sensitivity, devoid of all theorizing,
which characterized all Picasso's opinions
and were the lodestar of his work.
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon is a synthesis
of all the restless searchings which can be
seen in the studies Picasso made of the
human figure throughout 1906. It expresses
a rejection of the past and illuminates an age
that has been born anew, in the form of a
group of figures, surprised out of their wits,
looking out at a new horizon. "One day you
will look like your portrait", Picasso had said
in 1906. With the Demoiselles, the following
year, that great day arrived and all previously
existing values were overturned. From that
day on, every face would have an essential
14
affinity with those of the figures in the pain¬
ting. And with that of their creator. For
Picasso had not shrunk from using his own
face in the Demoiselles, taking it to pieces
and putting it together again in the violent
upheaval that strikes the five pathetic figures
shown in the painting.
It is surprising to see, in the insulting im¬
age of the five women depicted in Les
Demoiselles d'Avignon how closely
Picasso's Self-Portrait of the Painter with a
Palette of 1906 (see page 2) mirrors the two
central figures whose gaze communicates
itself to their companions. The attitude is
the same, the eyes are identical, and the
faces and colour tones are similar. It is im¬
possible not to make the comparison.
Anyone who cares to set the features of the
Painter with a Palette, or those in a number
of other self-portraits dating from 1906 or
1907, alongside those of the two young
women occupying the centre of the scene,
is bound to reach the same conclusions.
If the aim in Picasso's mind was to
demolish the old ¡mage (imago et similitudo)
of man, it was on his own features that he
inflicted the worst possible insult an insult
which would later become an act of repara¬
tion and would usher in a new era in human
history. Picasso had no hesitation in choos¬
ing the response provided by his own
features. Where, as he embarked on his
great experiment, could he have found a
more familiar and closer face than the im¬
passive face in the mirror?
Picasso, then, is history both through
his systematic rejection of the past and
through the massive breach which Les
Demoiselles d'Avignon opened up and is still
widening in the wall of the future. Picasso
cast a pitiless eye on his own past and on his
own features; he gave equally short shrift to
the onrushing torrent of history. He was an
implacable sniper who smashed to
smithereens the windows of the past and
created from the shattered glass a new land¬
scape and a new face. Beneath the dazzling
zig-zag lines of Les Demoiselles d'Avignon
he left an image whose basic features we
should all, without exception, come to
resemble, just as he had prophesied that
Gertrude Stein would one day come to
resemble her portrait.
SANTIAGO AMON, Spanish art historian, critic
and poet, is the author of Picasso (Madrid, 1973).
He has also published a biography of Giotto anda
number of studies on modern Spanish artists.
