Our evolutionary responsibility
by Sir Otto Frankel
This map indicates regions of the world
described by the Soviet plant geneticist N.I.
Vavilov as "centres of genetic diversity",
that is to say areas where domesticated
plants originated and diversified and where
their primitive progenitors and wild
relatives are still to ba found. Many crop
varieties of traditional agriculture are today
in danger of extinction as they are replaced
by modern strains developed for high yield
and uniformity. The wild species are
threatened by increasing destruction of
their habitats. Thus an important source of
potential evolutionary material, which may
be vital to man's survival in a changing
world, will disappear unless positive action
is taken to organize its protection.
Map im&Tmitonai Board lor Pieni Genetic Resource«, FAO, Rome
THE impact of genetics on society dates
back to the origins of agriculture.
Around 8000 BC our ingenious
ancestors discovered that the variations
which transformed wild plants into crops
could be passed through the seed to the
next generation. Cultivation led to settled
civilization and thus to the origins of our
society. The first agricultural revolution was
the greatest contribution of genetics to
society during the first 10,000 years.
From the areas where plants and animals
were domesticated, they fanned out, diver¬
sifying in the different environments and
cultures to which they migrated, and in
which they continued to evolve and diversify
under the impact of changing technological
economic and cultural conditions. When the
application of science to agriculture, and
especially the advent of scientific plant
breeding, ushered in the second agricultural
revolution, modern varieties, bred for high
production and uniformity, absorbed only a
small proportion . of the ancient stores of
variation.
Today the same, or closely related,
varieties are grown in many parts of the
world. Even in the less developed countries
uniform modern cultivars are rapidly replac¬
ing the traditional or "primitive" varieties
which were still in general use even 25 years
ago. The "green revolution" has greatly in¬
tensified this process in some Asian coun¬
tries. No doubt thj dramatic improvement
of food production has saved mankind from
extensive starvation, at least for the time be¬
ing; but it also has deprived the world of
valuable genetic resources, and much of
what remains is now acutely threatened.
Yet the world needs these genetic
resources more than ever before. The extent
and rapidity of technological and social
change make demands for genetic adapta¬
tion which are as diverse as they are un¬
predictable. They are intensified by the
population explosion and the agricultural
revolution in vast areas previously scarcely
touched by modern developments. The
genetic resources now available are,
foreseeably, the only ones we shall have
available at least for the next few decades.
But even if there is a chance that new
methods of genetic engineering will become
widely applicable in the near future, at this
stage the preservation of what we know and
have seems a responsible measure of evolu¬
tionary insurance.
Genetic conservation has a time scale of
concern, which extends from a day or a year
when there is no need (or plan) for conser¬
vation, to infinity (see table page 27). But
the time scale of concern must not be con¬
fused with the time of action, which clearly
is now.
Let us briefly consider the time scale of
concern for domesticated plants and
wildlife. Neither our pre-agricultural i
ancestor, nor the peasant farmer who sue- 1
SIR OTTO FRANKEL, FRS, is a distinguished
plant geneticist who has been since 1966 Senior
Research Fellow, Division of Plant Industry, Com¬
monwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organization at Canberra, Australia. A former
consultant with the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO), he was instru¬
mental in developing FAO's programme of con¬
servation of plant genetic resources. He has
published many articles in scientific journals and
is joint editor of Genetic Resources in Plants:
Their Exploration and Conservation (1970) and of
Crop Genetic Resources for Today and Tomorrow
(1975). He is a Fellow of the World Academy of
Art and Science. This article is based on a paper
presented by the author at the Xlllth International
Congress of Genetics.
25

> ceeded him had cause for concern beyond
the next meal or the next crop, the former
because he used a pool of great species
diversity, the latter a pool of self-renewing
intra-specific diversity. This came to an end
with the advent of scientific selection. To¬
day's concern is with preserving and
broadening the genetic base. The time
perspective for gene pool conservation
might be the next 50 or 100 yearswhich is
merely an acknowledgment of the un¬
paralleled technological transience of our
age; we cannot foresee even what kinds of
crops will be used at that time.
For wildlife conservation the position is
altogether different. Concern for its preser¬
vation is new, a consequence of our
destructive age. Nature conservation is
fighting for reserves and for legal recogni¬
tion. The sights often are set for the short
term, although perpetuity is its ultimate ob¬
jective. Genetic wildlife conservation makes
sense only in terms of an evolutionary time
scale. Its sights must reach into the distant
future.
In this context genetics has social respon¬
sibilities in two directions: first, to col¬
laborate in planning the biological system of
conservation so as to establish the highest
possible evolutionary potential; second, to
help in establishing an evolutionary ethic, as
Plant geneticists draw on
the genetic resources of
primitive plant species for
the development of high
performance modern crop
strains. Unfortunately, the
success of these new
strains is leading to the
extinction of the very
species from which they
were derived. Graph
shows the decline in the
percentage of primitive
strains in the Greek
wheat crop over the past
forty years. Left, a
selection of ears of wheat
from a primitive crop in
Afghanistan.
Graph from Survey of crop genetic
resources in their centres of
diversity: First report, FAO/IBP
Photo © Pierre Quéméré, Institut Supérieur Agricole, Beauvais, France
part of our social ethics, which will make it
acceptable and indeed inevitable for man to
regard the continuing existence of other
species as an integral part of his own ex¬
istence. This demands continuing evolution.
In the advanced varieties of modern
agriculture the genetic base is greatly nar¬
rowed by comparison with the primitive
varieties from which they are descended.
The great genetic diversity to be found in
the traditional stocks of peasant agriculture
was first emphasized by N.I. Vavilov half a
century ago; and it is thanks to him and his
colleagues that we came to recognize "cen¬
tres of genetic diversity", situated in Asia,
Latin America and Africa, where
domesticated plants originated (or migrated)
and diversified, and where to this day many
of the presumed progenitors and other wild
or weed relatives of crop species can be
found. Wild and . primitive gene pools,
together with induced mutations, constitute
the genetic resources available for the adap¬
tations of present-day cultivars, or for in¬
itiating new and potentially valuable
pathways of crop evolution.
26
The most important genetic resources of
economic plants are the indigenous popula¬
tions of traditional agriculture. They are also
in the most immediate danger of extinction
through replacement by modern cultivars.
The wild relatives are not nearly as exposed,
but there are exceptions. Forest species can
be virtually wiped out through large-scale
land clearing for agriculture or for replanting
with exotics. The progenitors of various
mediterranean vegetable crops are threaten¬
ed by intensification of land use and wild
fruit tree species are in jeopardy in Malaysia.
Foresters urgently call for gene pool conser¬
vation of threatened communities and other
wild plants of economic significance could
be similarly protected within a framework of
ecosystem conservation.
It is usually argued that the conservation
of wild biota is justified because they are
useful to man, and that long term conserva¬
tion is feasible only in a state of continuing
evolution. But there is also the question of
whether continuing evolution itself has an
intrinsic value. Before attempting an answer
the basis of such a value judgment must be
clarified.
The breeding of cattle for specific
qualities, weight or milk yield for
example, leads inevitably to the
gradual disappearance of certain
strains whose characteristics are less
valued at a given time than those of
other breeds. Of the 145 indigenous
cattle breeds of Europe and the
Mediterranean region, no less than 115
are today threatened with extinction.
In France steps are being taken to
protect the black and white Brittany
dairy cow (above left), which in recent
years has gradually been ousted by
new strains obtained by repeated
crossing with American Holsteins.
Concervation measures are also being
taken to protect the donkey of Poitou
(above), traditional progenitor in
France of sturdy mules, now under
threat of extinction as a result of the
development of modern means of
transportation.

THE TIME SCALE OF CONCERN
Period Operator Objective Time scale
Wild-life to 8,000 BC hunter-gatherer next meal 1 day
Domesticated to 1850 AD
plants
from 1850
from 1900
"primitive" or
"traditional"
peasant farmer
plant breeder
crop evolutionist
the next crop
the next variety
to broaden the
genetic base
1 year
10 years
100 years
Wildlife today genetical
conservationist
politician
dynamic wildlife
conservation
current public
interest
10,000 years +
next election
For most people the word "microbe" spells disease; but, in fact, microbes are essential to
human life since they help the body to digest food and to synthesize important vitamins.
Many microbian strains, like the Aspergillus niger (magnified photo below), are used in
industrial processes and constitute an important genetic resource. In 1962, Unesco
established the International Cell Research Organization (ICRO) which is carrying out
microbiology research and housing collections of cultures of micro-organisms in a regional
network of microbiological resources centres in Africa, Latin America, the Caribbean region
and the Arab States.
This basis can only be an anthropocentric
one; any other basis, such as "the right to
life," or "the sacredness of nature," is
mysticism and hence outside scientific
reasoning. But there is another and wholly
materialistic reason. Even now, terrestrial
ecosystems which have not been substan¬
tially modified by human impact are few and
far between. In another century there may
be none. It follows that if some natural com¬
munities are to be preserved for any reason
whatsoever, this can be done only at the will
of man.
The question should be re-phrased more
precisely: has the continuing evolution of
wild species a value for man other than an
utilitarian one? To make an answer possible,
the issue must be defined more closely.
What is at stake is not the extinction of in¬
dividual species, though the current rate of
loss in many parts of the world is high and
accelerating. This may not be without prece¬
dent in evolutionary history. But what is
without precedent is the predictable
destruction of habitats for what remains of
the earth's natural and semi-natural com¬
munities and of most of the species they in¬
clude. Without deliberate protection few of
these communities will have a chance of sur¬
vival; nor does the shrinkage of undisturbed
habitats offer a promise of evolutionary
replacement.
This is a situation outside past experience,
a confrontation between man and other
biota which in the short space of two or
three generations could imperil a large pro¬
portion of the wild species that now remain.
Man would direct the evolution of biota that
are of use to him, and the only ones retain¬
ing their evolutionary independence would
be those he is unable to suppress. This is
heavily overdrawn; but the tendency is there
to see.
Even if we reject the prospect of becom¬
ing the arbiters of evolution, can we assume
that future generations will share our con¬
cern?
If one thing about the future is certain it is
that cultural, technological, economic, and
possibly biological man a century or two
from now will differ more greatly from us
than we differ from the early agricultural set¬
tlers. Future man is more unknown and un¬
predictable than at any time in history.
Hence at this point of decision-making it
may be our evolutionary responsibility to
keep evolutionary options open so far as we
can without undue deprivations for those
least able to bear them. This is a modest
precept, but as much as is at all likely to be
socially acceptable at this time. It may grow
into an evolutionary ethic if and when men
come to regard other species as an essential
part of their own existence.
Otto Frankel
27
