A frozen nightmare by Taro Okamoto
IT is my conviction that the essence of art
is to release uncompensated vitality in
all directions, to challenge and struggle
against the routine and the commonplace.
One should never be content with the status
quo. The life of man is, from the beginning,
violently torn asunder. We must confront this
tragic destiny and with creative intensity make
a noble one.
I remember how awestruck I was, when, at
the World Exposition of 1962, I came suddenly
face to face with Picasso's Guernica. By its very
nature it brought vividly flooding back to my
mind all my own innermost convictions.
The canvas is filled with people screaming,
writhing, crying, exploding. A horse is convuls¬
ed in the last agonies of death. I was over¬
whelmed by the shuddering tension of this
almost monochrome vision.
The world knows Guernica as the indignant
Picasso's message to the world, his scathing
denunciation of the massacre of civilians in a
small Spanish town, indiscriminately attacked
by Nazi bombers. Guernica will live in
the history of world art as a model of angry
denunciation.
Yet the shock I felt at that time was more
than simply astonishment and horror, or even
human outrage. I was struck rather by the ar¬
tistic expression itself, which explodes across
the surface of the work in an unmistakable pas¬
sion of rage.
Amid this graphic explosion, the painting as a
whole evokes an uncanny tranquillity. A naked
light bulb hangs from the ceiling and within the
confines of what seems to be an ordinary
domestic interior tragedy appears as a frozen
nightmare. To the left of the picture a bull is
seen in profile. His cold look of indifference
seems to underline the power of brutal
callousness; there is menace in his immobility.
Yet at the same time there is a romantic ele¬
ment, an expression and a movement which
seems to be bursting out beyond the bounds of
the picture, destroying all repose. To the right,
a woman, thrusting up both hands and crying
out, forms an inverted triangle. A horse neighs,
its head thrown back. The arms and legs of the
fallen stretch out toward the outside as if trying
to reach beyond the picture.
With its forceful dynamism and heartless,
austere stillness it is a calculated composition,
uplifted and elaborated to the point of insanity.
Its silence evokes terrible screams, and the
void. Opposites brought together in the com¬
position produce a fearsome sense of tension.
Challenge is essential in art. Art is omni¬
directional, unconditional attack. Compositions
that compromise so that they will find favour
with the public and an easy acceptance cannot
be called art. I recoil when faced with the kind
of work which is labelled "a good picture", a
"Picture" with a capital "P", with paintings
that are merely displays of talent, of facile
virtuosity.
But every time I see Picasso's works I am im¬
pressed, because here is a man who, while
possessing talent and incomparable skill, is able
to transcend these very attributes. "I am saved
because normally I draw so poorly", he
declared, and the calm assurance with which
he challenges both himself and others is the
true measure of his greatness.
TARO OKAMOTO, Japanese painter and
writer, became a leader of the modern art move¬
ment in Japan in the late 1940s. His works have
been exhibited in Paris, New York and at the
Venice Biennale. Among his major works are
eleven monumental ceramic frescoes at the
prefecture in Tokyo and the "Sun Tower" at the
Osaka International Exposition (1970).
18
