'Man belongs to the earth../

Acentury and a quarter ago. Chief
Sealth of the Suquamish Indians
rebuked white emissaries who
offered to buy his tribe's land with the
words: "The Earth does not belong to
man; man belongs to the Earth".
That was in 1854. Since then the
world's population has increased by
some two thousand two hundred and
fifty million and at current rates will
reach six thousand million by the year
2000.
Until recently, man and his activities
could be considered as just one among
the many natural processes that are
continually modifying the state of the
biosphere, that thin envelope of soil,
water and air surrounding our planet to
which all life is confined. Today,
however, in the words of the late Pro¬
fessor Vladimir Vernadsky, world-
famous Soviet earth scientist, "humani¬
ty as a whole has become a powerful
geological force". Changes which have
occurred in the biosphere over recent
decades as a result of accelerating
human activity are comparable in scale
with natural changes occurring over
periods of millions of years.
The problem now is how, given this
increasing human pressure, can produc¬
tivity be maintained and enhanced not
only for today but for future generations
as well. The time has come for man to
make rational use of the natural
resources of the biosphere.
A number of difficulties arise,
however, when, having recognized the
problem, we attempt to do something
about it. For though, over the years,
scientists have accumulated a vast
store of knowledge about the Individual
components of the biosphere, the tradi¬
tional specialized approach to scientific
research has meant that the complex in¬
terrelationships and interactions bet¬
ween these components have largely
been ignored. Walking the lonely road
of specialization, the scientist has con¬
tributed a very great deal to human
well-being and progress, but this pro¬
gress has been uneven. A new in¬
tegrated, global, interdisciplinary ap¬
proach to research is needed if the
biosphere, man's life-support system, is
to be properly managed.
The promotion of this new approach
to research is at the heart of Unesco's
Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Pro¬
gramme, which was set in motion early
in the 1970s.
The general objective of this Pro¬
gramme has been defined as: "... to
develop within the natural and social
sciences a basis for the rational use and
conservation of the resources of the
biosphere and for the improvement of
the relationship between man and the
environment; to predict the conse¬
quence of today's actions on
tomorrow's world and thereby to in¬
crease man's ability to manage effi¬
ciently the natural resources of the
biosphere".
Under the MAB Programme, the em¬
phasis of research has shifted from in¬
tensive scientific examination of in¬
dividual topics towards examination of
all the variables and all the processes in
volved in an ecological unit or
ecosystem a kind of self-contained,
self-supporting microcosm of the
greater world.
The specific aims of the Programme
are:
To identify and assess the changes
within ecosystems resulting from man's
activities and the effects of these
changes on man.
To study and compare the structure,
functioning and dynamics of natural,
modified and managed ecosystems.
To study and compare the dynamic in¬
terrelationships between "natural"
ecosystems and socio-economic pro¬
cesses and especially the impact of
changes in human populations, settle¬
ment patterns and technology on the
future viability of these systems.
To establish scientific criteria to serve
as a basis for rational management of
natural resources.
To establish standard methods for ac¬
quiring and processing environmental
data.
To promote the development of
simulation and other techniques of
prediction as tools for environmental
management.
To promote environmental education
in its broadest sense and encourage the
idea of man's responsibility for and per¬
sonal fulfilment In partnership with
nature.
The MAB Programme consists of
fourteen project areas, but these by
their very nature are inevitably overlap¬
ping and interlinked. They include the
main ecological systems and
physiological units: tropical forests;
temperate and Mediterranean-type
forests; grazing lands (savannah,
grasslands, etc.); arid and semi-arid
zones; lakes, marshes, rivers, deltas,
estuaries and coastal zones; mountain
and tundra lands; and island
ecosystems. Man-made as opposed to
natural ecosystems and man's use or
abuse of energy are also covered as are
four major fields of human activity or in¬
teraction with the biosphere: conserva¬
tion of natural areas, effects of
pesticides and fertilizers, major
engineering works, and genetic and
demographic changes. Study of our
perception of environmental quality
views the global problem with the aim
of providing criteria for the value
judgements which the programme
necessarily entails and there is provision
for research on environmental pollution
and its effect on the biosphere.
How does MAB work? Underlying the
Programme are three concepts on
which its approach to research is bas¬
ed : MAB is intergovernmental in struc¬
ture, it is problem-oriented and it is in¬
terdisciplinary.
MAB ¡s intergovernmental for the ob¬
vious reason that environmental prob¬
lems do not stop at national boun¬
daries; regional and global solutions
must be found for those problems
which were formerly tackled piecemeal
within the national context only. The
Programme is controlled by an Interna- 1
tional Co-ordinating Council consisting I

the representatives of the ninety-five
member countries sitting together with
representatives of the United Nations
organizations concerned Unesco, the
United Nations Environment Pro¬
gramme (UNEP), the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO)
well as representatives of the Inter¬
national Union for Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN)
and the world scientific community as
represented by the International Council
of Scientific Unions (ICSU). Unesco pro¬
vides the general secretariat. Each
country's contribution to the Pro¬
gramme is the responsibility of a Na¬
tional Committee consisting of scien¬
tists from universities and research in¬
stitutions sitting alongside government
representatives.
This is extremely important for the
problem-oriented approach to research,
since It means that the government of¬
ficials, who make the decisions, are in¬
volved from Its very inception in the for¬
mulation and carrying out of research. It
means that research is designed to pro¬
vide the Information on which decisions
can be based. Instead of building a dam,
for example, and then asking the scien¬
tist to assess its effects on the environ¬
ment, the question now put to the
scientist Is "What would happen if we
were to build a dam?"
This kind of approach necessarily im¬
plies the third concept of inter-
disciplinarity. It would be useless to ask
only hydrologists the question "what
would happen If we were to build a
dam?" Such factors as the effect on
local populations, on their health, on
food production, etc., demand that
social scientists', medical scientists'
and agronomists' views be also taken
into consideration before any decision
to build a dam is taken.
On almost any problem of this kind
scientists from several disciplines will
necessarily be involved, but there are
considerable practical difficulties in
creating interdisciplinary research
teams and integrating fully the results
achieved. For example, the social scien¬
tist concerned with population effects
may need to study migration trends
over a number of years, whereas a
botar ist may be interested in changes in
the output of a plant community over
the period of a single growing season. In
fact, for interdisciplinary research to
succeed, each research worker must
learn to adapt to the methods and re¬
quirements of other disciplines and this
is never easy.
Unesco's role in all this is to stimulate
and co-ordinate research and to provide
organizational support to the teams of
experts now carrying out MAB projects
throughout the world.
The ultimate human goal of the MAB
Programme implied by the concept of
rational use of the resources of the
biosphere is twofold: the achievement
of development and a high standard of
living for all men coupled with the
safeguarding of the world's natural
resources and genetic stock so that
future generations will have as many
evolutionary options open to them as
possible. Man is the steward of posteri¬
ty. He must recognize his true position
in the order of things and come to terms
with the environment of which he is a
part. "The Earth does not belong to
man; man belongs to the Earth".

