by Jean Piaget
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited
CHILDREN'S games constitute
the most admirable social insti¬
tutions. The game of marbles, for
instance, contains an extremely complex
system of rules, that is to say, a code of
laws, a jurisprudence of its own. Only the
psychologist, whose profession obliges him
to become familiar with this instance of
common law, and to get at the implicit
morality underlying it, is in a position to
estimate the extraordinary wealth of these
rules by the difficulty he experiences in
mastering their details.
With regard to game rules there are two
phenomena which it is particularly easy to
study: first the practice of rules, i.e. the way
in which children of different ages effective¬
ly apply rules; second the consciousness of
rules, i.e. the idea which children of dif¬
ferent ages form of the character of these
game rules, whether of something
obligatory and sacred or of something sub¬
ject to their own choice.
The relations which exist between the
practice and the consciousness of rules are
those which will best enable us to define the
psychological nature of moral realities.
The rules [of the game of marbles as it is
played in Geneva and Neuchâtel, in the
districts where we conducted our work]
constitute a well-marked social reality, "in¬
dependent of individuals" and transmitted,
like a language, from one generation to
another. This set of customs is obviously
more or less plastic. But individual innova¬
tions, just as in the case of language, suc¬
ceed only when they meet a general need
and when they are collectively sanctioned as
being in conformity with the "spirit of the
game".
But while fully recognizing the interest at¬
taching to this sociological aspect of the
problem, it was from a different standpoint
that we raised the questions which we are
now going to study. We simply asked
ourselves (1) how the individuals adapt
themselves to these rules, i.e. how they I
observe rules at each age and level of mental I
29

development; (2) how far they become con¬
scious of rules, in other words, what types
of obligation result (always according to the
children's ages) from the increasing ascen¬
dancy exercised by rules.
The interrogatory is therefore easy to
carry out. During the first part, it is sufficient
to ask the children (we questioned about 20
boys ranging from 4 to 12-13) how one plays
marbles. The experimenter speaks more or
less as follows. "Here are some marbles."
(The marbles are placed on a large baize-
covered tablé beside a piece of chalk.) "You
must show me how to play. When I was
little I used to play a lot, but now I've
quite forgotten how to. I'd like to play again.
Let's play together. You'll teach me the rules
and I'll play with you."
The child then draws a square, takes half
the marbles, puts down his "pose", and the
game begins. It is important to bear in mind
all possible contingencies of the game and
to ask the child about each. This means that
you must avoid making any suggestions.
All you need do is to appear completely
ignorant, and even to make intentional
mistakes so that the child may each time
point out clearly what the rule is. Naturally,
you must take the whole thing very serious¬
ly, all through the game. Then you ask who
has won and why, and if everything is not
quite clear, you begin a new set.
It is of paramount importance during this
first half of the interrogatory to play your
part in a simple spirit and to let the child feel
a certain superiority at the game (while not
omitting to show by an occasional good
shot that you are not a complete duffer).
In this way the child is put at his ease, and
the information he gives as to how he plays
is all the more conclusive. Many of our
children became absorbed in the game to
the extent of treating me completely as one
of them. "You are dished!" cries Ben (10
years) when my marble stops inside the
square.
In the case of the little ones, who find dif¬
ficulty in formulating the rules which they
observe in practice, the best way is to make
them play in pairs. You begin by playing
with one of them in the manner described
above, and ask him to tell you all the rules he
knows.
Then you make the same request of the
second boy (the first being no longer pre¬
sent), and finally you bring the two together
and ask them to have a game. This control
experiment is not needed for older children,
except in doubtful cases.
Then comes the second part of the inter¬
rogatory, that, namely, which bears upon
the consciousness of rules. You begin by
asking the child if he could invent a new
rule. He generally does this easily enough,
but it is advisable to make sure that it really
is a new rule and not one of the many ex¬
isting variants of which this particular child
may already have knowledge.
"I want a rule that is only by you, a rule
that you've made up yourself and that no
one else knows the rule of N (the child's
name)."
Once the new rule has been formulated,
you ask the child whether it could give rise
to a new game: "Would it be all right to play
like that with your pals? Would they want to
play that way? etc."
The child either agrees to the suggestion
or disputes it. If he agrees, you immediately
ask him whether the new rule is a "fair" rule,
a "real" rule, one "like the others", and try
to get at the various motives that enter into
the answers.
If, on the other hand, the child disagrees
with all this, you ask him whether the new
rule could not by being generalized become
a real rule. "When you are a big boy, sup¬
pose you tell your new rule to a lot of
children, then perhaps they'll all play that
way and everyone will forget the old rules.
Then which rule will be fairest yours that
everyone knows, or the old one that
everyone has forgotten?"
The formula can naturally be altered in ac¬
cordance with the turn which the conversa¬
tion is taking, but the main point is to find
out whether one may legitimately alter rules
and whether a rule is fair or just because it
conforms to general usage (even newly in¬
troduced), or because it is endowed with an
intrinsic and eternal value.
Having cleared up this point it will be easy
enough to ask the two following questions.
( 1 ) Have people a Iways played as they do to¬
day: "Did your daddy play this way when he
was little, and your grand-dad, and children
in the time of William Tell, Noah, and Adam
and Eve, etc., did they all play the way you
showed me, or differently? (2) What is the
origin of rules: Are they invented by children
or laid down by parents and grown-ups in
general?
Sometimes it is best to begin by these last
two questions before asking whether rules

Jte.
Photo © G Bern, Pans
can be changed; this avoids perseveration,
or rather reverses its direction, and so
facilitates the interpretation of the answers.
All this part of the interrogatory, moreover,
requires extremely delicate handling; sug¬
gestion is always ready to occur, and the
danger of romancing is ever present.
But it goes without saying that the main,
thing is simply to grasp the child's mental
orientation. Does he believe in the mystical
virtue of rules or in their finality? Does he
subscribe to a heteronomy of divine law, or
is he conscious of his own autonomy? This
is the only question that interests us. The
child has naturally got no ready-made beliefs
on the origin and endurance of the rules of
his games; the ideas which he invents then
and there are only indices of his funda¬
mental attitude, and this must be steadily
borne in mind throughout the whole of the
interrogatory.
The results which we obtained from this
double interrogatory are roughly as follows:
From the point of view of the practice or
application of rules four successive stages
can be distinguished.
A first stage of a purely motor and in¬
dividual character, during which the child
handles the marbles at the dictation of his
desires and motor habits. This leads to the
formation of more or less ritualized
schémas, but since play is still purely in¬
dividual, one can only talk of motor rules
and not of truly collective rules.
The second may be called egocentric for
the following reasons. This stage begins at
the moment when the child receives from
outside the example of codified rules, that is
to say, some time between the ages of two
and five.
But though the child imitates this exam¬
ple, he continues to play either by himself
without bothering to find play-fellows, or
with others, but without trying to win, and
therefore without attempting to unify the
different ways of playing.
In other words, children of this stage,
even when they are playing together, play
each one "on his own" (everyone can win at
once) and without regard for any codifica¬
tion of rules. This dual character, combining
imitation of others with a purely individual
use of the examples received, we have des¬
ignated by the term Egocentrism.
A third stage appears between 7 and 8, l
which we shall call the stage of incipient co- f
31

( operation. Each player now tries to win, and
all, therefore, begin to concern them¬
selves with the question of mutual control
and of unification of the rules. But while a
certain agreement may be reached in the
course of one game, ideas about the rules in
general are still rather vague.
In other words, children of 7-8, who
belong to the same class at school and are
therefore constantly playing with each
other, give, when they are questioned
separately, disparate and often entirely con¬
tradictory accounts of the rules observed in
playing marbles.
Finally, between the years of 11 and 12,
appears a fourth stage, which is that of the
codification of rules. Not only is every detail
of procedure in the game fixed, but the ac¬
tual code of rules to be observed is known to
the whole society. There is remarkable con¬
cordance in the information given by
children of 10-12 belonging to the same
class at school, when they are questioned
on the rules of the game and their possible
variations.
These stages must of course be taken on¬
ly for what they are worth. It is con¬
venient for the purposes of exposition to
divide the children up in age-classes or
stages, but the facts present themselves as a
continuum which cannot be cut up into
sections.
This continuum, moreover, is not linear in
character, and its general direction can only
be observed by schematizing the material
and ignoring the minor oscillations which
render it infinitely complicated in detail. So
that ten children chosen a*t random will
perhaps not give the impression of a steady
advance which gradually emerges from
the interrogatory put to the hundred odd
subjects examined by us at Geneva and
Neuchâtel.
If, now, we turn to the consciousness of
rules we shall find a progression that is even
more elusive in detail, but no less clearly
marked if taken on a big scale. We may ex¬
press this by saying that the progression
runs through three stages, of which the se¬
cond begins during the egocentric stage and
ends towards the middle of the stage of co¬
operation (9-10), and of which the third
covers the remainder of this co-operating
stage and the whole of the stage marked by
the codification of rules.
During the first stage rules are not yet
coercive in character, either because they
are purely motor, or else (at the beginning of
the egocentric stage) because they are
received, as it were, unconsciously, and
as interesting examples rather than as
obligatory realities.
During the second stage (apogee of
egocentric and first half of co-operating
stage) rules are regarded as sacred and un¬
touchable, emanating from adults and
lasting forever. Every suggested alteration
strikes the child as a transgression.
Finally, during the third stage, a rule is
looked upon as a law due to mutual con¬
sent, which you must respect if you want to
be loyal but which it is permissible to alter on
the condition of enlisting general opinion on
your side.
The correlation between the three stages
in the development of the consciousness of
rules and the four stages relating to their
practical observance is of course only a
statistical correlation and therefore very
crude. But broadly speaking the relation
seems to us indisputable.
The collective rule is at first something ex¬
ternal to the individual and consequently
sacred to him; then, as he gradually makes it
his own, it comes to that extent to be felt as
the free product of mutual agreement and
an autonomous conscience. And with
regard to practical use, it is only natural that
a mystical respect for laws should be accom¬
panied by a rudimentary knowledge and
application of their contents, while a
rational and well-founded respect is accom¬
panied by an effective application of each
rule in detail.
There would therefore seem to be two
types of respect for rules corresponding to
two types of social behaviour. This conclu¬
sion deserves to be closely examined, for if it
holds good, it should be of the greatest
value to the analysis of child morality. One
can see at once all that it suggests in regard
to the relation between child and adult.
Take the insubordination of the child
towards its parents and teachers, joined to
its sincere respect for the commands it
receives and its extraordinary mental docili¬
ty. Could not this be due to that complex of
attitudes which we can observe during the
egocentric stage and which combines so
paradoxically an unstable practice of the law
with a mystical attitude towards it?
And will not co-operation between adult
and child, in so far as it can be realized and
in so far as it is facilitated by co-operation
between children themselves, supply the
key to the interiorization of commands
and to the autonomy of the moral
consciousness?
Let us therefore not be afraid of devoting
a certain amount of time to the patient
analysis of the rules of a game.
Jean Piaget
Piaget maintained that numerical evaluation in the child's mind is for a long
time linked with the way in which objects are arranged spatially. In one
experiment a child at a certain stage of development is shown two rows of
beads each of the same length and each containing the same number of beads.
If the beads in one row are spaced out further, the child concludes that the
longer row contains more beads. Photo shows an experiment on numerical
correspondence with a seven-year-old child.
This article has been adapted from "The Rules of
the Game", a study carried out by Jean Piaget
(with the collaboration of Mme V.-J. Piaget and
Messrs M. Lambercier and L. Martinez) which
constitutes the first chapter of The Moral Judg¬
ment of the Child, published in 1932 by Kegan
Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. Ltd, London.
32
