(1919-1933)
Design for living in the modern world
The Bauhaus, the school of design, art and architecture founded by
Walter Gropius sixty years ago at Weimar (Germany), has had a
seminal influence on the environment modern man has created for
himself. Its impact on the design of buildings, furniture, typography,
household goods, tools and many other articles in everyday use,
extended far beyond its native Germany for when the school finally
closed down in 1933 after the Nazis came to power, its leading staff
members and students emigrated and carried its message to many
other countries.
What was this message? For Gropius, the school's "specific mission
was the realization of a modern architecture which, like human nature,
should be all-encompassing". Gropius proclaimed the unity of the arts,
obliterating the traditional distinction between artisan and artist and
seeking to forge new links between industrial mass production, the
crafts, the sciences, the creative forces of the time and the eternal
laws of materials. He wished, he wrote later, "to draw the creative
artist from his ivory tower, to bring him back to the world of everyday
reality". Under his direction the Bauhaus studios became laboratories
where prototype designs for industry were developed. "Although these
prototypes were hand-made", he wrote, "their creators had to be
completely familiar with methods of industrial production; and so the
Bauhaus sent its best students to work for a time in factories during
their studies".
One facet of Gropius's genius was that he attracted to the Bauhaus as
teachers some of the most outstanding European artists of his time.
These were, Gropius noted, "not men who would behave like
musicians in thrall to the conductor's baton", and throughout its
lifetime the Bauhaus was in fact a ferment of debate as these great
figures wrestled with the problems of finding a "truer relationship
between form and function, form and material, form and production
methods". On pages 14 to 17 we attempt to give the general reader a
glimpse of the teachings on the "elements of form" developed by two
of these artists, Wassily Kandinsky and Paul Klee, while they were
instructors at the Bauhaus. Pen drawing at left by Oskar Schlemmer is
another reminder of the school's all-embracing ambitions and
preoccupations. It arose out of the course on man which Schlemmer
taught from 1922 to 1929 and whose goal was, Schlemmer noted,
nothing less than to familiarize the student "with man in the totality of
his being". "The relationship between man's dimensions and the
outside world", wrote Schlemmer, "constitutes an initiation into the
problems of housing and its disposition."
From the moment when it was created in the climate of limitless hopes
and possibilities which prevailed in Europe at the end of the First World
War, the Bauhaus has never ceased to generate controversy. The
article by Claude Schnaidt on page 18 is a new contribution to this
endless debate about an institution whose purpose in its founder's
words was "not to propagate any style, system or dogma but to exert
a revitalizing influence on creation".
"Egocentric Outline of Space" by Oskar Schlemmer (1924)
13

Kandinsky at the Bauhaus
The grammar of a visual language
"The drawing course at the Bauhaus is an education in perception, teaching
precise observation and representation, not of the external appearance of objects
but of the elements of which they are constructed, their laws of tension... "This
was the guiding principle followed by the Russian painter Wassily Kandinsky
(1866-1944), one of the great innovators and theorists of non-figurative art, in the
analytical drawing course which he taught at the Bauhaus, where he was a
professor from 1922 to 1933. Already the author of a celebrated pioneering treatise
on abstract art. Concerning the Spiritual in Art (1911), Kandinsky during his
Bauhaus years evolved a comprehensive science of abstract art which he
presented in a major work entitled Point and Line to Plane (1926). In this book he
rigorously analyses the two basic elements of form, the point and the line, first in
abstract terms and then in their different manifestations in nature and such arts
as architecture, dance, music and the graphic arts. Building on this analysis,
Kandinsky goes on to formulate the principles of a new formal logic which is
based on the inner "resonances" of forms and heralds a synthesis of the arts
through the equivalence of the "languages" they use. The ultimate aim of this
new science, as Kandinsky saw it, was to provide the artist with a means of
mastering his creation, and consequently the initiation into the grammar of a
visual language held an important place in the theoretical training which he gave
at the Bauhaus. Illustrations on this double page and the commentaries
accompanying them are all taken from Kandinsky's book Point and Line to Plane,
published in the "Bauhaus Books" series directed by Gropius and Moholy-Nagy.
Wassily Kandinsky (left) with Paul Klee, at
Hendaye, France, in August 1929.
Photo © Bildarchiv Felix Klee, Bern, Switzerland
A leap by the dancer Palucca. In modern dance a leap
sometimes describes a five-point plane the head, two
hands, the points of the two feet, the ten fingers sketching
ten other smaller points.
A nitrite formation magnified a thousand times.
We can also consider the entire "world" as a
complete cosmic composition, itself composed
of an infinite number of smaller and smaller
autonomous compositions, all of which are
finally composed of points, both in the
macrocosm and in the microcosm, which,
moreover, brings the point back to its original
geometric state.
The Beauty of the Dragon
pagoda, in Shanghai (built in
1411). It is precisely in these
constructions that we can
assume a conscious use of the
point, since it is manifest in
deliberate compositions which
stretch out the volumes to an
ultimate point.
Diagrammatic representation of an extremity of
a vertebrate. Completion of the central
construction. The growth of a finger on the
hand is like that of a twig which grows on a
branchaccording to the principle of a gradual
development starting from the centre.
14
Diagrammatic representation of the leap.

A musical theme expressed in points.
A circle forming. If the point is pushed by two
forces (...) the result is the most
ephemeral and at the same time the most
solid plane the circle.
Planes resulting from curves (...) always
maintain a link, however imprecise, with the
circle, for they carry within them the tensions
of the circle.
Spontaneous thickenings of a free curved line.
Here too arises the question to which no
precise answer can be given: "At what instant
does the line, as a line, disappear, at what
instant is the plane formed?" What answer is
there to the question: "Where does the river
end, where does the sea begin?"
Every space within the original plane
(by original plane is meant the surface
on which the work is executed) is
individual, with its own sonority and
interior coloration.
A I Vertical position "calm hot".
A II Horizontal position "calm cold"
B I Diagonal position "discordant"
B II Diagonal position "harmonious"
Line.
With the point
at the limit of the plane.
Line.
Horizontal/vertical construction
with opposed diagonal
and tension of points
of the painting
"Intimate Message" (1925).
15

Klee at the Bauhaus
The linear logic of fantasy
Photo Felix Klee, Bern © Cosmopress, Geneva, and ADAGP, Paris. L. S Rosengart Collection. Lucerne
Photo Paul Klee Foundation, Kunstmuseum, Bern © Cosmopress, Geneva, and ADAGP, Paris
Photo Feux Kiee, Bern © Cosmopress, Geneva, and ADAGP, Paris
One of the outstanding figures of twentieth-century
European art, the German painter Paul Klee (1879-1940)
taught at the Bauhaus from 1921 to 1931. A gifted teacher
as well as a great artist, he developed a theory of art
rooted in his own work and founded on the principle that
"movement is at the basis of all becoming". The idea of
movement underlies his definition of line as the trajectory
of a moving point and space as resulting from the
movement of line. Klee's theory is illustrated here in a
drawing significantly entitled The Formation of Space by
a Straight Line in Movement (1). The free-ranging
inventiveness with which Klee experimented with line is
evident in Fool in a Trance (7) which the artist described
as an "example of the superposition of movements
captured on the spur of the moment". The figure is
delineated with a single, unbroken line. The
preoccupation with movement recurs in the watercolour
Choppy Rapids (2), in which the mounting speed of the
rushing torrent is expressed by the progressive
subdivision into smaller units of a number of broad
stripes. Klee sought constantly to refine and purify his
theory of dynamics, and in the course on "the mechanics
of form" which he gave at the Bauhaus in March 1924, he
took the circle as the prototype of movement and the
arrow as signifying directed movement. The watercolour
In Copula (5) illustrates this development in Klee's
thinking: a figure consisting of stretched segments
oscillates in space between a red circle and a blue arrow.
The arrow hurtles along horizontally; it escapes the
clutches of gravity but does not climb as it gathers speed.
The work symbolizes cosmic space in which movement is
the norm and balance is the law. Klee believed that the
deepest sources of the creative process reach into the
unconscious. Hence his preoccupation (which made him
one of the first artists to take an interest in drawings and
paintings produced by children and the mentally ill) with
the transfer of apparently irrational subconscious
impulses into the world of consciousness. Something of
this aspect of the artist's work can be felt in the pen
drawing Winged (6). If the drawing is turned 90 degrees
on to its right side, the two pointed shapes are seen to be
energetically flapping wings. However, Klee specifically
indicated that the figure (actually an angel) should be
looked at horizontally.
16

Klee believed that painting should seek a
reality beyond that of appearances, though
without discarding elements of the visible
world. Like all his works the watercolour
Olympus Destroyed (3) illustrates this
desire "to penetrate to the interior". A
conglomeration of jagged saw-tooth peaks,
haphazard flights of stairs, a door leading
nowhere, pillars all askew, evoke the
disaster which struck the abode of the
gods. Although the treatment could hardly
be more different, the theme recalls The
Fall of the Giants (4) by Giulio Romano (the
Italian Renaissance painter and architect,
disciple of Raphael and Michelangelo and
teacher of Rubens). Breaking with the
representational tradition in European art,
Klee coined the saying: "art does not
reproduce the visible; it renders visible".
Photo © Alinari, Florence
» ..
:v.v.v:í::v.v:.,.v:íi:,.v,,.v.v.>:::.'.*.	
» * I » - * <
Photo Ludwig Museum, Cologne © Cosmopress, Geneva, and ADAGP, Paris
Photo Kupferstichkabinett, Kunstmuseum, Basel © Cosmopress, Geneva, and ADAGP, Paris
17

Colour page right
"There is no difference in nature between the
artist and the craftsman: the artist is nothing if
not an inspired craftsman", wrote Walter Gropius
in the opening Manifesto of the Bauhaus in 1919.
The unification of art and technically expert
craftsmanship found expression in such fields as
tapestry weaving, which had a prominent place in
the school's curriculum. This brightly coloured
tapestry was created in 1927-1928 by Gunta
Stadler-Stölzl, then a teacher at the Bauhaus.
Featuring several motifs associated with the work
of great artists who taught at the school, it forms
a kind of visual synthesis of some of the
intellectual and artistic currents which met there.
The motifs include the chequerboard patterns at
left and right (Klee. Itten and Kandinsky) and the
mountain and wave in upper
section of tapestry (Klee).
Photo %i Bauhaus Archiv, West Berlin
Photo © Bauhaus Archiv, West Berlin
Architects of an
educational revolution
by Claude Schnaidt
w
£jfl M IHEN a young man who feels in himself the
soul of a creator starts out by learning a
craft, as he would have done in olden times,
then he ceases to be an unproductive artist fated to practise
his art imperfectly, for the craft, in which he can excel, gives
him scope to cultivate his gifts. Architects, sculptors,
painters, we must all return to the craft... Let us all together
imagine and create the new edifice of the future, in which
painting, sculpture and architecture will be one, and which
will one day rise to the sky from the hands of millions of
workmen, a crystalline image of a new faith".
This was the message set forth in the inaugural manifesto
of the Bauhaus, the school of architecture and the applied
arts which was created at Weimar in 1919 out of the fusion
of the city's Academy of Fine Arts and School of Decorative
Arts. The Bauhaus (the term literally means "house of
building" and evokes the Bauhütte where medieval
cathedral builders were lodged) moved to Dessau in 1925,
then to Berlin in 1932, and closed down in 1933 when the
Nazis came to power. The school's directors were in turn the
architects Walter Gropius, Hannes Meyer and Ludwig Mies
van der Rohe. Among the famous artists who taught there
were Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Josef Albers, Laszlo
Moholy Nagy, Johannes Itten, Lyonel Feininger, Oskar
Schlemmer and Georg Muche.
CONTINUED PAGE 23
CLAUDE SCHNAIDT, Swiss architect, is a professor at the Ecole
Nationale Supérieure des Arts Décoratifs, Paris. He is the author of
a monograph on Hannes Meyer (director of the Bauhaus 1928 to
1930) and of a number of works on technical, cultural and environ¬
mental problems.
Centre pages
Five paintings by artists who taught at the
Bauhaus evoke the brilliant and versatile creativity
of which the school was the focus. Left hand
page, below: Ober Weimar, an oil painting
executed by the U.S. artist Lyonel Feininger in
1921. The upward-sweeping beam of light has been
likened to a ray of hope in the sombre and chaotic
world of Germany emerging from the post-war
crisis. Above, The Staircase at the Bauhaus (1932)
by the German painter Oskar Schlemmer. The
German critic Ludwig Grote has seen the
significance of the painting as symbolizing "all the
Bauhaus meant for the young students who
received its creative training. In harmony with the
luminous architecture of Gropius, with its
simplicity, its classicism, young people go up and
down the staircase of the Dessau Bauhaus. They
are inspired by its spirit and by the grandeur of the
mission entrusted to them". Right hand page,
below left: oil painting by the Hungarian painter
and photographer Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, Mein
Buntes Bild ("My Many-Coloured Picture"). 1933.
Moholy-Nagy had a life-long interest in the effects
of light and light in motion. He epitomized the
Bauhaus's determination to create artefacts which
could be easily reproduced (even from instructions
given by telephone), standardized objects of
"industrial art" for use in everyday life. In 1937
Moholy-Nagy became founder of the New Bauhaus
in Chicago. Top, Yellow-Red-Blue (192S), oil
painting by Wassily Kandinsky. It displays many of
the characteristic motifs of his work which
through his teaching became part of the school's
collective heritage. Below right, Eros (1923), a
watercolour by Paul Klee. The colour range is
graded to follow dynamics of arrows and triangles.
Photo © Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Gift of Philip Johnson
Photo Boymans van Beuningen Museum, Rotterdam
© ADAGP 1980. Paris, and Cosmopress, Geneva
Photo Réunion des Musées Nationaux, Parts
ADAGP 1980, Parts
Photo © Klihm Gallery, Munich
Photo S. Rosengart Collection, Lucerne
S Cosmopress, Geneva, and ADAGP, Paris
18





Colour page
The Black Prince (1927), oil painting on canvas
fixed to wood, by Paul Klee. The mysterious and
powerful image is painted with the artist's usual
economy of form.
Photo Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen
© Cosmopress. Geneva and ADAGP, Paris
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18
Those who would epitomize this legendary institution as a
community of exceptional personalities, a synthesis of arts
and crafts, a shrine of functionalism, a home of the interna¬
tional style, or a leftist utopia of the turbulent twenties, do
not entirely miss the point but they do not tell the whole
story either. The originality of the Bauhaus stemmed from its
refusal to be confined within the world of art and theory and
from its insistence on making a mark on the material aspects
of culture and on education. The Bauhaus went beyond the
interpretation and comprehension of the modern world;
drawing on all the most vital currents of its time and produc¬
ing a wealth of innovations, it physically transformed the
modern world, thereby strengthening its own influence. And
yet, beset by the forces of conservatism, closed down three
times in fourteen years, many of its ambitions were destined
not to be fulfilled.
The school's existence might be broken down into three
phases which in a way matched the three-act drama of the
first German Republic: 1919-1924, a tinte of expressionism
ending in the betrayal of revolution, in fear and inflation;
1925-1929, years of rationalistic hope for prosperity, trium¬
phant technology and social-democratic management;
1930-1933, when perfectionism was paralyzed by crisis,
unemployment and fascist terror.
In the early years, the students were taught jointly by two
instructors, one a craftsman, the other an artist. Later when
Bauhaus professors photographed on the terrace of the
students' house at Dessau in 1926. Left to right: Josef Albers,
Hinnerk Scheper, Georg Muche, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy,
Herbert Bayer, Joost Schmidt, Waiter Gropius, Marcel
Breuer, Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Lyonel Feininger,
Gunta Stölzl, Oskar Schlemmer.
a new generation had emerged from this mode of training,
the two branches were combined in a single teacher. The in¬
struction was provided in two stages. First of all, during a
preliminary course, each student performed a series of exer¬
cises which gave him an opportunity to learn how to handle
materials, forms and colours. His creative energy was
liberated and he developed his individuality through manual
and artistic activities as well as through direct contact with
nature. During the second stage, the pupil acquired through
his experience of craftsmanlike production that sense of pro¬
fessional standards which would make him a responsible
member of a team. The Bauhaus thus transformed the
Romantic ideal of a return to craftsmanship into an educa¬
tional instrument which could integrate the creator into the
world of work and prepare him for a collective approach to
industrial activity.
But if the teachers at the Bauhaus believed that manual
work was a necessary part of the training of those who
would do creative work in industry, they disagreed when it
came to defining the nature of such work. For Gropius the
school's existence depended on the development of
marketable products in its studios and 'workshops. Kandin¬
sky, on the other hand, regarded this approach as insidious.
The motto coined by Gropius, "Art and Technology A k
New Unity", aroused vigorous opposition within the school. Y
23

> "Whichever way you look at it, it is crazy to call for the
coupling of art with technology", Feininger objected. "A
true technician will rightly shun any form of artistic in¬
terference, while the most consummate technical perfection
can never replace the divine spark of art". To which Muche
added: "Art and technology are not a new unity. They re¬
main essentially different in their creative value... The formal
artistic element is a foreign body in the industrial product".
Within the German economic system of the 1920s
Gropius's "new unity" had no chance to develop beyond the
experimental stage and become a social reality. Most of
those associated with the Bauhaus were only dimly aware of
this incompatibility. Lacking any clear idea of how to adapt
their work to the existing system of productive relationships,
they sought aesthetic solutions to the economic and social
problems generated by the transformation they desired.
They believed that an intensive search for a new formal
vocabulary could somehow compensate for the absence of
the historical conditions necessary for the fulfilment of their
ideals. But this vocabulary would soon be appropriated by
those whose clients belonged to an elite which loved
anything and everything new, while the mass public for
which the vocabulary had been intended had to make do
with its degenerate and incomprehensible left-overs.
For Hannes Meyer, Gropius's successor as director of the
Bauhaus, the quality of the man-made environment was
something more than a problem posed by the relationship
between art and technology. Meyer believed that if the
creator wished to play an effective social role he should join
forces with the workers' movement in its struggle to
transform society. This meant leaving the ivory tower of
aesthetic speculation, with its coterie of initiates, and
creating standard products for the poorest members of the
community. This new direction in the policy of the Bauhaus
brought a greater emphasis on the exact sciences in the
school's curriculum and the stepping up of productive work.
But by those for whom the Bauhaus was nothing if not a
citadel of art, the new approach was seen as a betrayal.
Meyer paid dearly for his ideas; two years and three months
after being appointed he was dismissed. Nonetheless, dur¬
ing his term of office he developed a system of polytechnic
education which reconciled thought and action and which
attached a higher value to the creative zeal of students and
teachers alike.
The incessant fertility of this short-lived institution was a
product of the political and educational climate of the times.
The Bauhaus expressed in microcosmic form the immense
hope for a new life which inspired millions of people after the
First World War. Without this hope, which arose from the
collapse of the great European monarchies, from the birth of
new nation-States, from great progress in the development
of productive forces, the Bauhaus would certainly not have
been what it became. The abundance, variety and boldness
of the experiments carried out at the Bauhaus were largely
due to the conviction that this was an age of limitless
possibilities.
"Art and the people should form a single unity; art should
no longer be the privilege of a minority but a source of hap¬
piness and life for the masses; our goal is to integrate the
arts in great architecture." Thus, in 1919, proclaimed the
Arbeitsrat für Kunst (Work Council for Art) of which Walter
Gropius was a member. The work of the Bauhaus can be
seen in this revolutionary perspective.
Ever since the beginning of the century traditional school¬
ing had come under fire, and attempts to develop a new ap¬
proach to education were being reflected in a host of ex¬
periments in many countries. The Swiss educationalist
Adolphe Fernere, the founder of the International Bureau of
New Schools, was crusading for active methods. In Italy
Maria Montessori had founded the famous Case dei Bam¬
bini ("Children's Houses"). In the United States, John
Dewey and William Heard Kilpatrick proposed that the pupil
should be placed in a context of authentic experience. The
motto of the school founded by Ovide Decroly near Brussels
was: "Few words, many facts". At Geneva, Edouard
Claparède was working on the idea of functional education.
Kerschensteiner in Germany put toward the concept of the
"work school" in which the child was to measure his crea¬
tions by his own experience; Lay and Meumann werei
developing experimental forms of teaching; Avenarius had Y
24
Art in everyday life

Photo Bauhaus Archiv, West Berlin © Klihm Gallery, Munich
"The school must serve the workshop; one day
it will find fulfilment there" said the Bauhaus
programme of 1919. Rejecting the academicism
of the traditional art schools, the rigorous
Bauhaus courses combined theory with
practical training in workshops of carpentry,
stained glass, painting, metalwork, weaving,
pottery, stagecraft, wall painting, photography,
architecture, typography and book-binding.
The goal of this training was to prepare pupils
to create functional artefacts which could be
mass-produced in industry yet would still '
possess aesthetic qualities. After a spell of
factory work, the best apprentices developed
prototype designs for products used in
everyday life; many of these products were
later adopted for large-scale manufacture and
marketed. Ultimately, it was hoped, a new
generation would emerge to infuse reason and
humanity into the impersonal world of industry
and create a new art of living appropriate for
the twentieth century. A belief in unity,
creativity, simplicity, the functional conception
of the object these and other principles kept
the Bauhaus from being side-tracked into
"style for style's sake" and brought it a far-
reaching influence in industrial design.
Photo Louis Held, Kunstverlag Schmiedicke
© Kunstsammlungen zu Weimar
1 Dispersed Order (Disorder), plastic study by
Joost Schmidt
2 Footbridge (1926), photograph by
Laszlo Moholy-Nagy
3 Poster by Joost Schmidt for the Bauhaus
Exhibition, Weimar, 1923
4 Spring-chair by Alfred Arndt
5 Lamp 11923-1924) by Wilhelm Wagenfeld and
K.J. Jucker
6 Cradle (1922) by Peter Keler
7 Teapot and sieve (1924) by Marianne Brandt
25

The intellectual climate of
the Bauhaus was influenced
by the abstract geometric
forms characteristic of the
constructivist movement in
art. Below, Project for
Sculpture of Angle (around
1915) by constructivist leader
Vladimir Tatlin, considered
the greatest Russian
architect of the time. Right,
constructivist principles of
geometric logic applied by
the Dutch painter Piet
Mondrian in Composition in
Blue-A (1917).
Above, entrance to a wing
of the Bauhaus building at
Dessau, designed by Walter
Gropius and completed in
1926 (photo was taken after
extensive repairs in 1976). All
the Bauhaus workshops
contributed to the new
building, a classic of 20th
century architecture. Its
cubist rigour of volume, the
absence of ornamentation
and almost exclusive use of
glass for the façade are
typical of the new
architecture of the 1920s and
1930s. With the move from
Weimar to Dessau came an
intensification of
architectural work at the
Bauhaus.
26
The geometry
of the
functional
Hannes Meyer, who suceeded Walter
Gropius as director of the Bauhaus in 1928,
saw architecture as above all a collective
activity. Left, Meyer's project for the Palais
des Nations, Geneva (1926-1927). Meyer was
followed as director by Mies Van Der Rohe,
who emigrated to the United States after
the Nazis came to power and the Bauhaus
was closed. Right, worm's eye view of his
39-storey Seagram Administration Building,
New York (1954-1958).

launched the artistic education movement; Otto, Gaudig and
Wyneken practised in their respective schools global
methods, personality education, and community training.
All these educators were trying to answer the following
questions: What role should the school play in the develop¬
ment of society? How could the school be brought closer to
life? What connexion should there be between education
and work? How could pupils be encouraged to become more
active and spontaneous? What could be done to prevent
teaching methods from becoming formal and rigid?
The revolutionary events of 1917 and 1918 gave a new im¬
pulsion to this movement. The U.S.S.R. adopted the Marx¬
ist principle of polytechnic education based on the necessary
link between education and productive work. Lunacharski,
Krupskaya and Blonski directed the implementation of this
programme, while Makarenko founded the famous
children's communes. Under the new German constitution
the "work schools" became compulsory. A large number of
experimental schools were organized as Lebensge¬
meinschaften ("life-communities") which aimed to establish
close co-operation between teachers, pupils and parents.
The anarchistic "free schools" movement, inspired by the
methods of expressionistic art, began to spread from Ham¬
burg and Bremen. In these schools without any set cur¬
riculum everything the children learned was to be drawn
from their own experience. Different though the various
systems were, the intention behind all of them was to give
the child the active role in his education in a school with an
open outlook on the world. The Bauhaus was an episode in
this great movement; its distinction lay in introducing the
new approach into higher education.
The very structure and size of the Bauhaus contributed to
its vitality. Even at its biggest in 1929 it had no more than
197 students, a dozen full-time and five temporary teachers,
and one or two lecturers. The roster of all the enrolments
totals only 1,250 names. And yet, small though it was, this
school on the fringe of the public education system had a
relatively generous budget and was not handicapped by the
traditions and privileges which take root in old institutions.
Information circulated freely. There was a minimum of
bureaucracy, and responsibilities were decentralized to a
large degree. At the highest level, the load of teaching and
administration was shared. The size of the decision-making
bodies meant that they could act quickly. The school's out¬
put was also stimulated by the close contacts between some
of the students and the teachers (some of whom lived on the
premises), as well as by the atmosphere of militant interna¬
tionalism.
Furthermore, the Bauhaus broadcast its own message, in
the full understanding that a school must give in order to
receive. Through books, through its magazine, through ex¬
hibitions and other events, it sparked off exchanges and
debates which won its work a wider audience and at the
same time benefitted the school. It was this outward-looking
spirit which led those associated with the Bauhaus to
record, sometimes naively but always effectively, the
theories which underlay their activities, and to present their
works in such a way that they were accessible to the largest
possible number.
And yet, looking back at the Bauhaus, one cannot fail to
be struck by the contrast between the profusion of its
discoveries and the paucity of their consequences, between
the confidence of its assertions and the precarious fate
which lay in store for them. During its lifetime, the Bauhaus
was a constant target of calumny, intrigue and attacks from
the hidebound. When it was dead, the Nazis did all they
could to obliterate its memory. Most of the countries where
its former teachers and pupils settled did what they could to
render them inoffensive. In the undying controversy which
surrounds the legacy of the Bauhaus it is possible to discern
an attempt to discourage and to alienate those who are
struggling for a better world and to destroy the idea of pro¬
gress which still, in spite of everything, has a future.
Claude Schnaidt
27
