Engraving René Magritte from René Magritte by
Patrick Waldberg 1,965 & André de Rache, Brussels
by Rodolfo Stavenhagen
RODOLFO STAVENHAGEN, Mexican
sociologist and anthropologist, is Unesco's Assis¬
tant Director-General for Social Sciences and
their Applications. He has taught at the National
University of Mexico, at the Universities of Paris,
Geneva and the Catholic University of Rio de
Janeiro, and was director of the Centre for Socio¬
logical Studies at El Colegio de Mexico (Mexico
CityI from 1972 to 1976. Among his many publica¬
tions are Agrarian Problems and Peasant Move¬
ments in Latin America (New York, 1970) Social
Classes in Agrarian Societies (New York, 1975)
and El Ingenio del Hombre (Mexico, 1976), a
social science textbook for secondary schools.
THROUGHOUT the world, in both
developed and developing coun¬
tries, women are the mainstay of the
hidden support economy which allows the
rest of the economy to function and which is
not mentioned in national accounts, which
does not appear in census reports and which
is not clearly reflected in the social and
economic indicators used by social scien¬
tists and planners to describe a country's
current situation or to measure its changes.
Economic and social development implies
the increasing participation of women in
economic activities at all levels, in educa¬
tion, politics and culture. Indeed, when we
compare the statistics of different countries,
we notice that one of the principal dif¬
ferences between economically developed
and underdeveloped countries is the fact
that in the former the number of women
participating in the labour force, in the pro¬
fessions, in the educational system, and in
cultural activities, is proportionately larger
than in the latter.
We may therefore confidently state that
the process of socio-economic development
(which is much more complex than the sim¬
ple increase in industrial output or gross na¬
tional product or per capita income) also
means the progressive improvement of the
status of women in society.
But does this mean , that in those
societies where such changes have not
occurred, women are unproductive
economically or that they are outside of the
economic system? Not at all. In keeping
"the home fires burning", as the saying
goes, in taking care of domestic chores and,
particularly, in bearing and raising children,
women play a decisive role in one of the key
elements of any economy: the reproduction
of the labour force.
This domestic economy is in fact essential
for the functioning of the economic system.
Yet it is often neglected, if not completely
overlooked in the analysis of economic tran¬
sactions, and the women who are responsi¬
ble for its operation are relegated, in¬
credibly, to the category of non-productive
household labour. It is assumed, statistically
at least, that they make no contribution to
the economy.

woman a conspiracy of silence
conceals and devalues
women's essential contributions
to economic
A famous British economist is reported
once to have remarked that if all gentlemen
were to marry their (paid) housekeepers,
then the indicators would show a decrease
in the participation of women in the labour
force and a reduction in the national in¬
come. This merely emphasizes the fact that
any indicator can be used very ambiguously
and that careful thought should be given to
the concepts which lie behind them.
The question then is not how can women
be integrated into development, but rather
how do we assess the nature and impor¬
tance of the domestic economy within the
total economy. It is precisely due to their
role in the hidden domestic economy that
women occupy the lowest ranks on the
various scales of indicators of social and
economic participation.
There are different and complex reasons
for this, and when we ask why don't women
participate in development or why do they
occupy such low positions on the social
scale, we are really inquiring about the
nature of social institutions and relations
and of cultural values.- Changes in the par
ticipation rates of women in various
economic and social activities (such as at¬
tending schools and universities, becoming
members of the professions and so forth)
sometimes actually require deep changes in
a society's structure involving not only an
improvement in the status of women but a
transformation of the social relations bet¬
ween men and women and of basic institu¬
tions such as the family.
Woman's position in the world can only
be properly understood if it is seen in the
perspective of her relationship with man and
within the context of the social institutions
that determine the interactions between the
sexes. Improvement in the status of women
therefore implies a redefinition of traditional
roles both within the family and in working
life.
The situation of women in society varies
from culture to culture. In traditional
agricultural societies, where the division of
labour between the sexes is not greatly
developed, there is an essential equality bet¬
ween men and women, at least in the
economic sphere. Where traditional sub
sistence agriculture becomes commercializ¬
ed, more money-oriented and market-
oriented, it is the men who tend to to take
over the economic activities, often by
becoming migrant labourers, and the situa¬
tion of women tends to deteriorate. There
are exceptions to this, of course, and in a
number of rural societies (in Africa and the
Caribbean, for example) women have taken
an active part in the mercantile economy.
In general, wherever labour is
remunerated it has an economic value, and
therefore non-remunerated labour (such as
the domestic labour of women) becomes
devalued economically and thus also socially
and culturally. If, in addition, the quan¬
titative indicators designed to measure the
performance of the economy neglect these
facts, then it is easy to see why women are
systematically said to be excluded from par¬
ticipation in development. Non-participation
is one thing, but the relegation of women to
spheres of activity which are essential to the
economy but which in male-oriented
societies are systematically downgraded,
undervalued and discriminated against ¡s j
quite another. t

Photo © Bulloz, Paris, Stavenhagen Collection

> Discrimination against women in public
activities is certainly not limited to any one
geographic area or cultural region; it occurs
in both highly developed and in
underdeveloped countries. Whereas in
some places it is the result of long-standing
cultural traditions, in others it takes on more
subtle psychological forms. Women in
German-speaking regions have long borne
the brunt of the three "K's" (Kinder, Kirche,
Küche, children, church, kitchen).
In many developed countries where
higher education and jobs have opened up
for women in recent decades, it is note¬
worthy that women tend to concentrate
in certain kinds of services which may be
seen simply as an extension into the market
of their domestic sphere: schoolteaching,
nursing, sewing, food services, main¬
tenance, secretarial, entertainment and
similar activities of a subordinate nature.
Again, when the issue of participation is
raised it is useful to analyse the types of jobs
to which women haVe easier access and to
study the social significance of these ac¬
tivities in each particular culture. .
It is commonly held that equality between
the sexes will be achieved when women
have equal access to what has been tradi¬
tionally a "man's world". Much less is said,
however, about men's equal responsibility in
the domestic sphere; the implication being
that women will continue to cover that area
as their own special domain, in addition to
their new achievements.
Obviously, the issue is more complex than
simply exchanging sex-roles, a process
which in many societies is staunchly resisted
not only by men but by numerous women as
well, and which runs counter to many of the
basic cultural values that children learn at
home and at school. The long term improve¬
ment of the status of women in society must
needs imply a social redefinition of the
domestic support economy and of the func¬
tions of the family institution. The fact that
this issue is scarcely mentioned when the
"integration of women in development" is
proclaimed, simply shows that the domestic
economy is still very much "hidden" from
public perception.
Before the growth of the modern urban
industrial society, the large or extended |
family was the basic social institution, the I
"Woman's position in the world can only be properly understood if It is seen in
the perspective of her relationship with man and within the context of the
social institutions that determine the interactions between the sexes.
Improvement in the status of women therefore implies a redefinition of
traditional roles both within the family and in working life." Below, the head of
one of the world's largest motion picture companies surrounded by her male
assistants. Opposite page, the god and goddess of procreation depicted with
equal stature by a Totonac Indian sculptor some 1,500 years ago, in what is
now Mexico.
Photo S. Schapiro © Sygma, Paris
tanne
utiiift i
<*

Educational statistics (such as enrolment, attendance and drop-out
figures) are much more than cold figures that reveal the bare facts
about the degree of access of women to educational systems. They
constitute a highly significant "social Indicator" or yardstick of
broader aspects of women's position in society which can be used
for monitoring change in public attitudes towards the liberation of
women and girls from traditional social prejudices, evaluating the
opportunities available to them to achieve self-reliance and self-
fulfilment, and assessing their potential contribution to national
development. Right, off to school in Upper Volta.
"In taking care of domestic chores and, particularly, in bearing
and raising children, women play a decisive role in one of the key
elements of any economy: the reproduction of the labour force."
But the fact of motherhood often becomes the pretext for
isolating women from the social and economic fabric of which
they are part. This reinforces the concept, often ascribed
originally to ethnologists, of the dichotomy between man as
Homo faber, the technician, and woman, closer to nature as wife
and mother.
Photo © Erling Mandelmann. 4th World Photographic Exhibition, Stern, Hamburg
Photo Constantin Manos © Magnum, Paris
"A famous economist once remarked that if all gentlemen were
to marry their (paid) housekeepers, the indicators would show a
decrease in the participation of women in the labour force and a
reduction in the national income." As wives they would no
longer be listed as wage-earners and would therefore not figure
in national statistics. In rural communities wives contribute
largely to the economy through the production of food. Right, a
Greek woman prepares the family bread.
8

Women constitute 40 per
cent of the work force in
China today. Since 1957,
the number of women
workers has Increased
from three million to
thirty million in the fields
of trade, industry,
communications and
finance. Amongst them
are numbered many
"labour heroines"
drillers, pilots, bridge-
builders and high tension
power line workers.
Many more take part in
the management of State
affairs and in scientific
development. Left, a
young botanist carrying
out artificial pollination
at the Evergreen
Commune, near Peking.
Photo © New China Pictures Co., Peking
Average Female Earnings as a
Percent of Average Male Earnings in 19
OECD* Countries, 1968 and 1977
1968 1977
Australia	 70(1972) 82
Austria 67(1960) 74
Belgium 67 70
Canada	 54(1961) 50(1971)
Denmark 74 85
France 86 (1972) 86
Fed. Rep. of Germany 	 69 73
Greece	 68 70
Ireland 55 61 (1973)
Japan 43(1960) 56(1975)
Luxembourg	 57 65
Netherlands 74 81
New Zealand	 70(1972) 79
Norway 75 80
Portugal 	 64(1974) 73
Sweden 78 87
Switzerland	 64 68
United Kingdom 	 60 72
United States 66(1973) 66
Note: Data for Belgium, Denmark, France, Fed. Rep. of Germany,
Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Switzerland and
United Kingdom are based on average hourly wages in non-
agricultural industries from Table 16, 1978 Yearbook of Labour
Statistics, ILO; data for Norway and Sweden are based on hourly
wages for manufacturing given in Table 17 in the same Yearbook.
Data for United States are average full-time hourly estimates; for
Canada, full-time earnings; and from National Reports, hourly for
New Zealand, weekly for Australia, monthly for Japan and Por¬
tugal, and annual for Austria.
»Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
fundamental economic unit of production
and consumption. It had many social func¬
tions: education, security, care for the ill and
the aged, solidarity, community integration,
among others. Most of the needs of its
members could be satisfied within the family
structure. In many parts of the world this is
still the case, particularly in the rural areas of
the Third World countries. Indeed, perhaps
a majority of the world's families are of this
kind.
However, with the industrial revolution
came a basic cleavage between outside
economic activities and family life. Other
specialized institutions, both public, and
private, took over many of the functions
formerly dealt with by the family. And
whereas the menfolk became basically in¬
volved in these institutions, the women
stayed behind to take care of what remained
of home and household.
In the urban-industrial society the old con¬
cepts relating to family structure are no
longer pertinent, and women are torn bet¬
ween the two roles that a complex society
holds up to them as a model: home on the
one hand, career on the other. The position
of women in society will definitely improve if
and when the family is able to redefine its
own functions and when the hidden
domestic economy is brought out into the
open and dealt with on an equal plane
with, say, the production of foodstuffs or
the energy problem.
Recent years have witnessed the growth
of academic interest in the problems of
women. In a number of countries "women's
studies" have achieved university status as
special courses are taught or research cen¬
tres are organized. To be sure, this is not on¬
ly the result of scientific concerns. Women's
studies are more or less closely related to
women's organizations for political and civic
action, in other words, to the ever widening
movements in favour of women's emancipa¬
tion. These studies. have provided much im¬
portant new knowledge about the situation
of women in different societies, and are
creating everywhere a new awareness,
mainly among women themselves, about
the issues at hand.
Yet it is precisely their very success which
should sound a note of caution. As was sug¬
gested above, the problems of women can¬
not be isolated from those of the general
evolution of the economy and the society,
with which they are deeply enmeshed. By
underlining the specificity of women's
studies, is there not a danger of isolating
them from the general social fabric of which
they are a part? To be sure, a middle class
urban housewife in an industrialized country
may have much in common, as a woman,
with a peasant mother in the Third World.
But is not the former more closely linked to
the problems of her own particular society
and the latter to the destiny of peasantries
the world over?
The new academic discipline of "women's
studies" cannot afford to lead a ghetto ex¬
istence in isolation from the necessarily in¬
terdisciplinary approach which is required to
fully comprehend the social and economic
problems of women in different cultures.
This new and exciting field of research and
analysis is an important step in laying bare
the multiple and complex problems of the
"invisible" woman in the contemporary
world. -
Rodolfo Stavenhagen
