From man of war
to man of peace
The Venerable Gyotsu Ko Sato attending a session of the World
Congress on Disarmament Education, held at Unesco headquarters,
Paris, from 9 to 13 June.
by Howard Brabyn gg
P
HOWARD BRABYN is editor of the English
edition of the Unesco Courier.
EACE" and "Repentance" are
words that come constantly
to the lips of the Venerable
Gyotsu Ko Sato. The peace he proclaims is
peace for the world, with nuclear disarma¬
ment as the first step. Repentance is for
himself, for incredible as it may seem today,
the serene, ever-smiling figure in the saffron
robe of a Buddhist monk was once an
avowed militarist and a diehard member of
the Japanese warrior caste.
Gyotsu Ko Sato grew up in the troubled
climate of the years that followed the First
World War, a period which saw the revival
of Japanese militarism, the occupation of
Manchuria in 1931, the "China Incident" of
1937, and the gradual but inexorable drift
towards the Second World War.
"I was born in 1918 in a very remote
corner of the Japanese main island,
Honshu, in the northern part in a small
and peaceful village. My father was a
teacher. Then we moved to the middle
of Honshu island where I went to
school. Just at that time Japan was en¬
tirely changing, particularly in the
education field, because of the
militarization that was going on. The
China incident, as it was called in
Japan, was started by the invasion of
Manchuria. I was in the 6th year grade
at primary school. I remember many
young people were being mobilized into
the forces and they were telling us we
had to defend our nation. We had to be
loyal to the emperor and when an
emergency arose we had to go to the
battlefield with no hesitation what¬
soever in order to defend our nation.
That was what our teachers told us. We
were taught to respect the ancient
Samurai warrior code and to believe
that it was an honour to die in battle."
The sweeping successes of Japanese
armies during the early days of the war
served to confirm all that the young Sato
had been brought up to believe and sub¬
sequent defeats only hardened his resolve.
Even after atomic bombs fell on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, on 6 and 9 August 1945,
Major Sato, then working at a weapons
research establishment, could not face the
"dishonour" of defeat and urged continu¬
ation of the war.
"I was serving in the military aero¬
nautical research institute working on
communications systems and on radio
control of missiles. The Japanese
weapons systems were rather inferior
compared with those of the United
States and the allied forces and I was
eager to improve them. When
Hiroshima was bombed I believed that
the United States had played its last
card and that they had no other means
to defeat us, so that if we persevered
then we might be able to conclude an
honourable peace. I urged people not
to surrender, but to wait and persevere.
Later I was ashamed to have said this
when I saw with my own eyes the
devastation of Hiroshima."
When an armistice was signed on
14 August 1945, Major Sato together with
other military extremists forced their way in¬
to a Japanese army air base and attempted
to take off in the notorious "kamikaze"
suicide planes for a desperate final attack on
the Allied fleet. The attempt was foiled by
Japanese military police and Major Sato
found himself a prisoner in his own country.
"Warriors were supposed to die if their
mission was not fulfilled and many of
my friends and colleagues committed
suicide. I was about to do so when I
was arrested without any weapons near
me. I tried to obtain a weapon to kill k
myself, but the watch was tight. The r
25

í military police officer guarding me told
me repeatedly not to die. He told me
that I should let myself sink to the bot¬
tom of society for some time and that
later I would be able to raise my head
again. Until then, he said, I should
simply survive. In the end I was
somehow convinced by him that I
should not kill myself. He had a friend
outside the military and I was introduc¬
ed to him. That friend was a Buddhist,
a retired naval officer of high rank, and
he suggested that I should become a
Buddhist monk".
Upon his release, Sato shaved his head
and donned the robes of a novice monk.
Though his heart was not in it he went
through the Buddhist rites and rituals; but it
was not until some two months later that he
discovered that a fundamental change had
occurred within him. He visited Hiroshima
and Nagasaki and learnt at first hand the full
horror of the atom bomb, whose effects he
discovered were far greater than even the
United Nations reports had revealed. On
25 February 1946 he was ordained and
became a fully-fledged Buddhist monk.
The wheel had turned full circle and the
former traditional militarist decided to wage
his own personal war on war. Today, as
Vice-president of the International Peace
Bureau, his voice is heard throughout the
world calling for peace.
Disarmament, he says, depends upon
governments, but the political will to disarm
originates in the minds of the people;
without that no treaty, however solemn and
binding, will achieve anything. A firm con¬
viction of the need for peace must exist at
the bottom of each and every person's
heart, otherwise humanity will not survive.
"My father and mother were both
teachers and they were not in favour of
my becoming a military officer. Both of
them were opposed to my decision as a
young boy, but school education over¬
whelmed the family teachings and I
paid no heed to my parents. Educa¬
tional systems must be carefully con¬
trolled by peaceable people. When I am
asked what the ordinary individual can
do for peace I tell them 'fear not'. Even
though the threat of violence may be
there we need not be fearful about it.
We need not arm to defend ourselves.
This is the first conviction that came to
me after I became a monk, for the
teaching of the Buddha is clear fear
not and therefore kill not. The. right to
live in peace must be made an individual
right as well as a fundamental national
right. In this way we will deny States
the right to declare war or to use war as
a solution for conflicts between States.
The theory that nuclear weapons are a
deterrent to war and that armaments
are a necessary evil is a false concept
that should be swept away".
Gyotsu Ko Sato has become a man of
peace, but the traces of his own inner strug¬
gle are still evident in everything he says and
does. He believes that his experience may be
of help to many who have faced, or may in
the future have to face a similar personal
dilemma. To have his story spread abroad,
to be obliged to re-live, again and again, and
in public, what he now sees as the shame of
his early life is part of his never-ending
penance.
Howard Brabyn

