Nine
award-winning
campaigns
The 14th International Literacy Day, 10 September 1979, was marked by the
presentation by Unesco Director-General, Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, of two
literacy prizes administered by Unesco, the Nadezdha Krupskaya Prize and
the International Reading Association Prize. The international jury
responsible for selecting the prizewinners from the twenty-seven
candidatures presented made two awards of the 5,000 rouble Nadezdha
Krupskaya Prize, established in 1969 by the USSR Government. They went
to the Supreme Council of the National Compulsory Comprehensive
Literacy Campaign, in Iraq, which has mounted a mass drive to eradicate
illiteracy, and to the Popular Union of Peruvian Women, which has
organized women's participation in development activities through literacy
courses. The $5,000 International Reading Association Prize, being awarded
for the first time, went to the Papua New Guinea Branch of the Summer
Institute of Linguistics, which has been working for several years on the.
transcription of local languages and the training of local literacy teachers.
Photo © Upper Volta National Commission for Unesco

Papua New Guinea
The Papua New Guinea Branch
of the Summer Institute of Linguistics
International Reading Association Prize
The Papua New Guinea branch of the Summer
Institute of Linguistics started work in 1956, in co¬
operation with the Education Department, on
problems of literacy and adult education in rural
areas. Work began with the analysis of the
grammatical and phonetic systems of local
languages, the establishment of rules for the
transcription of local and vernacular languages
and the preparation of teaching materials. By 1973,
126 languages had been transcribed and literacy
programmes were being carried out in 90
languages. A preliminary linguistic and literacy
directory for all Papua New Guinea has been
completed which indicates that there are 717
languages, many of them without alphabets.
Literacy instructors are chosen from local
community members and are given a short
training course followed by in-service training.
Over the past five years more than 18,000 people
have been taught to read in their vernacular
language, 470 instructors have been trained,
village libraries have been established in 4 villages
and people of 17 different language groups have
been selected to attend courses in community
development at Ukarumpa.
Drawing © Gudia Muri, Papua New Guinea
q Photo Kay Lawson © Rapho, Paris
Popular Union of Peruvian Women
Nadezdha Krupskaya Literacy Prize, 1979
Founded in 1970, the Popular Union of Peruvian Women has always paid
particular attention to the problem of illiteracy, since two thirds of Peruvian
illiterates are women. Since 1975, the Union has taken an active part in the
Peruvian Government's Integral Literacy Programme. At present the Union
is preparing a National Literacy Campaign aimed at bringing literacy to
some 10,000 illiterates throughout the country. The problem of illiteracy in
the Quechua language is being tackled by the employment of literacy
teachers of Quechua mother tongue in the provinces of Huancavelica and ,
Junin. The Union's programme has given rise to other activities such as the
creation of day-nurseries in nine provinces and the publication of the
magazine Rehilete.
Photo © Permanent Delegation of Iraq to Unesco
Iraq
Supreme Council of the National Compulsory Comprehensive
Literacy Campaign Nadezdha Krupskaya Literacy Prize, 1979
Launched in December 1978, Iraq's National Campaign for Compulsory
Literacy was set the target of bringing literacy to some two million (one
sixth of the country's total population). Earlier attempts to eradicate
illiteracy, while achieving a certain success, had been hampered by lack of
co-ordination among literacy agencies, lack of follow-up programmes and a
serious drop-out problem in primary education. These problems have now
been resolved. With primary schooling now compulsory the flow of new
illiterates has been cut off at source. Of illiterates over primary school age
1,394,000 women and 660,000 men are registered at literacy centres where
they follow 14-month literacy courses. During the basic stage students
receive instruction in reading, simple arithmetic and general knowledge,
and at the integrated stage the reading material is diversified and support is
given by special lessons transmitted by television. Follow-up is provided in
the recently established People's Schools which offer condensed study
programmes lasting 16 months.
15

Bolivia
Professor Mario Guzman Molina
Honourable mention
For long an outstanding figure in the educational field.
Professor Molina, now National Director of Bolivia's
adult education and non-formal education
programmes, began his lifelong struggle against
illiteracy when, at the outset of his career, he created
a night school for workers which provided literacy
courses as well as courses in mechanics and electricity
for men and in sewing and home economics for
women. Realizing the educational potential of the
mass media, he established a centre for adult training
by radio (CETCAR) and launched the periodical Acción
for new literates and a specialized educational journal
Educación Popular para el Desarrollo. Meanwhile he
had founded and become the first director of the
Institute of Cultural Research for Popular Education
(INDICEP) where the outlines of a truly popular .
pedagogy were drawn up. After a meeting with the
Brazilian educationist Paulo Freiré, Professor Molina
developed a method for popular education, known as
Dinamización Cultural, which incorporated many of
Freire's ideas adapted to the social and cultural
realities of Bolivia.
Benin
Literacy and Rural Press Directorate
Honourable mention
Established in November 1974, the Directorate was
given the task of promoting popular culture and
literacy as an essential factor of development.
Following a massive, two-year sensitization campaign,
a four-stage literacy method was elaborated, teaching
personnel were trained and the work of producing
spelling books in the national languages was begun.
Between 1974 and 1979, 10,000 spelling books in 18
languages were printed. The new literacy method was
tried out in experimental courses which brought
literacy to some 33,000 people. A post-literacy
programme was developed involving the promotion of
the rural press and the publication of literacy material
in the national languages. The Directorate produces or
co-operates in the production of monthly journals in
the Bariba, Fon, Waama and Dendi languages; in
addition it selects and publishes works of great literary
merit in the national languages.
~ ^ :	
WS«
___
Panama
General Directorate of Literacy and Adult
Education Honourable mention
The General Directorate implements literacy
programmes at the national level aimed to reach the
entire illiterate population within the context of
lifelong education and the social and economic
development of the country. Breaking with traditional
educational patterns, the Directorate makes use of all
available existing human and material resources to
carry out its programmes: rural and agrarian
committees, co-operatives, trade unions, mining and
sugar refinery community groups and educational
development centres. In the literacy programmes
addressed to specific indigenous groups, special
attention has been paid to the preservation of their
cultural values and customs whilst bringing them into
the mainstream of national life. Between 1970 and
1978, 4,432 centres gave instruction to almost 170,000
adults in literacy, completion of primary education,
popular culture and technical and word-related
subjects. A total of 28,806 adults achieved literacy
during this period.
_
16

Viet Nam
The Commune of Cat Hanh
Honourable mention
The commune of Cat Hanh, in the province of iMghla
Binh, has a mainly agricultural population of some
10,000. After the war, at the end of 1974, the commune
had about 2,000 illiterates. As literacy was one of the
requirements for voting in the 1976 elections, an
intense campaign was mounted and the first
programme was launched in the village of Khanh Loc
which had suffered particularly during the war. The
work in Khanh Loc was a great success and the
campaign spread rapidly to other villages. The villagers
of the commune themselves built sixty classrooms
which were used by children by day and adults by
night. Within a few months, in 1975, 1,896 men and
women of the Cat Hanh commune became literate. As
literacy became more general greater emphasis was
placed on complementary education. First and second
level classes for professionals and first level classes
for workers have been instituted. The first level
classes serve as a post-literacy follow-up.
Thailand
The Functional Literacy Programme, Adult
Education Division, Department of Non-Formal
Education Honourable mention
The Thai Functional Literacy Programme has adopted
a problem-oriented approach to the task of bringing
literacy to the approximately 14 per cent of the
population over the age of ten considered illiterate.
The programme's specific objectives are to develop
the process of problem solving and critical thinking, to
prepare learners to seek and use the services available
and to provide literacy and numeracy skills which will
serve as learning tools. The curriculum offered
provides for 200 hours of study divided into four
subject areas: occupational, health, economics and
civic responsibility. Most of the teachers are formal
school teachers who volunteer or are specially
recruited for the programme. In order to take regional
differences into account there are six literacy sub-
programmes: courses given at specific centres,
courses given by volunteer travelling teachers, courses
given by Buddhist monks, courses given in ordinary
schools, courses given by radio and special courses for
the mountain peoples. So far more than 100,000 people
have taken advantage of these literacy courses and
the programme is expanding steadily every year.
Indonesia
Agency for the Development of Education in the
Malang District Honourable mention
Established in 1973 to tackle the problem of illiteracy,
the Agency consists of institutions active in education
such as the Institute of Teacher Training and the Boy
Scout Movement. The Agency has four task forces
responsible for primary school drop-outs, the training
of the young unemployed, the development of the
national character, and the eradication of illiteracy. In
1976, the Agency established a literacy programme in
the village of Sidodadi where 1,430 of the population
of 3,597 were illiterate. Following the success of the
Sidodadi experiment (92 per cent of the pupils passed
the literacy test after a four-month course), the
programme has been extended to over 400 other
villages. Each course consists of three, four-month
stages. During stage I pupils are expected to learn to
read and write and do simple arithmetic. In stage II
they learn about Indonesia, geography, nutrition,
civics and hygiene. At stage III they can acquire skills
such as farming, serving, automobile repair, cattle-
raising, welding, radio repair and carpentry.
17
