Picasso's debt
to African art
by Beseat Kiflé Selassie
MM I
don't say everything, but I paint
everything," Picasso once remark¬
ed in the course of a conversation
with an old friend. And it is true that when
Picasso speaks his words tell us less than do
his paintings. In this respect he is already a
true initiate in the African sense of the word.
For the initiate in African cultural traditions
is a disciple who is sufficiently worthy and
persevering for the spirit of the ancestors to
disclose and pass on to himthrough pro¬
verbs, myths, poertis and riddles the
meaning of the symbols representing
knowledge of man and the universe.
In order to keep away laymen, non-
initiates and "blind" disciples whom the
spirits will never be able to "open" to the
"light" of knowledge or whose "ear" they
will never succeed in "piercing", the initiate,
like Picasso, must not say everything nor
"reveal" everything. The idea is to exclude
opportunists, envious or indiscreet people
who are unfit to acquire the secrets of
nature and to be admitted to the mysteries
of the essence of man and the universe.
In May 1907, during a chance visit to the
Paris Ethnographical Museum (now the
Musée de l'Homme) in the old Palais du
Trocadéro, Picasso experienced a "revela¬
tion" at his first sight of the masks of Africa,
Oceania, the Caribbean and America. Tak¬
ing this discovery as a departure point, some
working hypotheses can be advanced which
may throw new light on the different stages,
high points and itineraries in his works and
on the hidden, underground influences
which marked his prolific and varied output,
both before and after his African phases.

Several authors have already discussed in
detail the impact and lasting consequences
which the visit to the Trocadéro had on
Picasso's development, especially on the
final version of the painting Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon, regarded by art historians and
critics alike as "one of the touchstones of
20th century art". There is no need to dwell
on this further, but controversies and
disputes between different schools of
thought continue to this day as to the real
sources which inspired Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon.
Picasso himself helped to maintain con¬
fusion among critics, by denying at times
that Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, which he
claimed was painted before his visit to the
Trocadéro, had been influenced by the
African masks and sculpture. Yet all the
evidence points to the contrary. Picasso, the
initiate, did not say everything, he painted
everything. In the process, he sometimes
took a sly pleasure in creating myths, among
them the myth of Picasso, the greatest
creator of all times.
In this proclivity for "joking" he also
shows himself to be an initiate, for in African
cultural traditions the initiate knows how
much more revealing "jokes", humour and
laughter are of true knowledge than is or¬
dinary discourse. But in fact what Picasso
says, or does not say, or denies about the
sources that inspired Les Demoiselles, is not
really important. For the figure on the left
and the two figures on the right patently
recall African masks, perhaps even those of
Oceania. Besides, are we not free, indeed
bound to look at the picture differently from
the way in which Picasso claims to present
it? After all, he warned us that he paints
everything but does not say all.
Thirty years later, during a conversation
with André Malraux and the Spanish
philosopher José Bergamin, Picasso recall¬
ed his visit to the Trocadéro, "at the time he
was finishing Guernica," in 1937. In this very
important "admission" he explains what so-
called "Negro" art meant to him far better
than anyone else could do. Malraux begins
by explaining the context in which Picasso
made this statement and emphasizing its im¬
portance. Then he lets Picasso speak in his
own words: "We had talked about Spain
and about painting; he became more reveal-
ingly confidential than I have ever heard
him:
'Everybody always talks about the in¬
fluences that the Negroes had on me. When
I went to the old Trocadéro... I was all
alone. I wanted to get away. But I didn't
leave. I stayed. I understood that it was very
important: something was happening to me,
right?
'The masks weren't just any other pieces
of sculpture. Not at all. They were magic
things. The Negro pieces were in¬
tercesseurs, mediators; ever since then I've
known the word in French. They were
against everythingagainst unknown,
threatening spirits. I always looked at
fetishes. I understood; I too am against
everything. I too believe that everything is
unknown, that everything is an enemy!
Everything! Not just the detailswomen,
children, babies, tobacco, playing but the
whole of it!'"
All the elements in the cosmogony of
African arts and all the themes which stand
out as landmarks in Picasso's life's work are
contained in this statement. First the impor¬
tance of detail, for it is beneath simple
things and gestures and the banality and
triviality of each individual being's daily life
that the essence of Man and Nature is hid¬
den or revealed. In African cultural traditions
supreme knowledge is seen in humble guise.
Next women, who symbolize fertility and
the source of life, nourishing men with the
forces of the universe and of love, but who,
at certain times, can also be incarnations of
malice and evil.
Children, too, play an important role in
traditional African religions, symbolizing the
light of truth; not only the family but every
member of the community must contribute
to their education so as to create that com¬
plex "classical masterpiece" which each
child must become for the whole of society.
And lastly animals, which in African
beliefs symbolize good or evil according to
their species. They appear very early on in
29

Picasso's work, as is shown by the bull in
Picador, his first known canvas, painted in
Málaga when he was eight, as well as in his
drawings of Pigeons, dogs and in Blue and
White, all produced in Málaga about the
same time, and especially in The Acrobat's
Family with a Monkey painted in Paris in
1905, sixteen years later. Such "details", in
African philosophy, make up the "sum
total" of daily existence.
For Africans art is deeply rooted in every¬
day life. This is borne out by the importance
attached to familiar objects such as cups,
gourds, stools, pottery, combs, knives,
spears and animal skins with their variety of
decorative styles. All are of practical use and
the trained initiate sees them not only as
works of art integrated into daily life; he is
also able to discern coded messages and
spiritual symbols in the distinctive patterns
decorating each individual object. This is
even more true of ritual objects, masks and
sculpture which in Europe are generally
regarded as purely decorative, whereas in
Africa they are an integral part of belief and,
as such, are not restricted to the small and
privileged circle of initiates but belong to the
whole community.
To sum up, African arts function on the
level of Being, Existence, the Universe and
man's Ideas concerning them; not on the
level of appearances as the eye perceives
them. They seek to embody Thought and
Ideas rather than their superficial, outward
representations and manifestations. This
probably is what led Picasso to say that the
"Negro" arts are "rational". "Rational" in
the sense that he found in them, instinctive¬
ly perhaps at first, but later deliberately,
thanks to his great capacity for assimilation,
a fruitful and coherent source of inspiration
which eventually led to Cubism.
The French poet René Char wrote that
Picasso's faculty of assimilation proves that
he was "naturally revolutionary in his rela¬
tionships and inspiration". By this he meant
that Picasso "created" even when he bor¬
rowed ideas, for however enthusiastic, he
never let himself be carried away. And it is a
fact that, compared with Gauguin, for ex¬
ample, who seemed to be for ever casting
about for exoticism in his revolt against the
society of his time, Picasso adopted the
stance of a revolutionary, drawing strength
wherever he found inspiration and turning
this inspiration into a new basis for discus¬
sion and a new weapon which was none
other than Picasso himself faced with the
challenge of his universe. This shows how
important the arts of Africa were to Picasso
as a springboard but only a spring¬
board the creation of more and more
original work.
The force of the African conception of art
which Picasso had assimilated so perfectly,
lies in the fact that it exists in relationship to
an everyday attitude to life which makes use
of symbols as protection against the evil eye
and the assault of "unknown", external
forces, whether of evil or of good. We are
dealing therefore first and foremost with
fetishes. This is the African approach to art
and Picasso grasped this the very first time
he came into contact with it at the
Trocadéro:
"I understood what the Negroes used
their sculpture for. Why sculpt like that and
not some other way? After all, they weren't
Cubists! Since Cubism didn't exist. It was
clear that some guys had invented the
30-
models, and others had imitated them,
right? Isn't that what we call tradition? But
all the fetishes were used for the same thing.
They were weapons. To help people avoid
coming under the influence of spirits again,
to help them become independent. They're
tools. If we give spirits a form, we become
independent. Spirits, the unconscious
(people still weren't talking about that very
much), emotion they're all the same thing.
I understood why. I was a painter. All alone
in that awful museum, with its masks, its
dolls made by the redskins, its dusty
models. Les Demoiselles d'Avignon must
have come to me that very day, but not at all
because of the forms; because it was my
first exorcism-painting yes absolutely!"
In practical terms exorcism meant that
Picasso succeeded in combining two-
dimensional perspective as used in Western
painting and a third dimension as
represented in the forms of African
sculpture. It was this combination which led
to Cubism.
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon marked the
beginning of Picasso's so-called "Negro"
period (1907-1909), which comes between
his "Blue" (1900-1904) and "Rose"
(1904-1906) periods and the birth and
development of Cubism (1909-1914).
The final version of Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon was painted at the earliest at the
end of July 1907. The first sketches of the
picture, of which there are several, were
done in April 1907. Between then and the
This specimen of the art of
Guinea's Baga people once
belonged to Picasso.
time he stopped working on the painting
Picasso experienced his "revelation" of
African masks and sculpture. Critics often
compare the compositional elements and
general theme of the first rough sketches
with Cezanne's Cinq Baigneuses, or,
because of the tones, with certain paintings
by Matisse and Gauguin. But in my opinion
we might here postulate another new
African phase in Picasso's work, one which
was marked by what I would call Arab-
Muslim influences.
In support of this theory one has only to
consider Picasso's own earlier pictures as
the first source of inspiration for Les
Demoiselles d'Avignon, in particular The
Harem, La Toilette and La Coiffure. All these
pictures were painted during the summer of
1906 in the little Catalan village of Gosol, 10
kilometres from the French border. It is
tempting to explore this theory since the
months that Picasso spent at Gosol con¬
stituted one of his last long visits to his
native country after he moved to Paris and
settled at the Bateau Lavoir. What could be
more natural than for him to draw inspira¬
tion for Les Demoiselles from his own
cultural heritage and environment in order to
maintain his identity as a Spaniard, a native
of a country at the crossroads and meeting
point of European Christian civilization and
the spiritual trends of Islam and North
Africa?
After all. Málaga, where Picasso was born
and where he spent the first ten years of his

life, is an Andalusian town in southern Spain
and therefore quite near the coast of Africa.
Málaga was formerly an important centre of
al-Andalus, that is, of Muslim Spain which,
for eight centuries, covered a large part of
the Iberian peninsula and which left a par¬
ticularly strong imprint on present-day An¬
dalusia. As a native of Málaga, therefore,
the young Picasso would have felt the pull
of Arab-Muslim influences across centuries
of Spanish history. His attachment to his
birthplace is attested to by the fact that he
returned from La Coruna and Barcelona to
spend his holidays there in 1895, 1896 and
1897.
This early African phase in Picasso's work
is important chronologically, but up to now
it has never properly been explored. Yet
already in 1905 Guillaume Apollinaire had
drawn attention to this source of inspiration
in the following words: "That Spaniard...
his roots are deep... they go down to the
rich composition and startling decoration of
17th century Spain... his quest for beauty
led him in many directions; he ended up
spiritually a Latin and rhythmically an Arab."
This emerges from the rhythmic tones of
the blue draperies which can be seen in the
background behind the two African women
on the right hand side of Les Demoiselles.
The draperies and rhythmic movement of
the two women in the centre of the picture,
although obviously inspired by Iberian
sculptures, also recall the women in The
Harem and Picasso's first wood carvings, in
particular Head of a Woman and Nude with
Raised Arms, which were both carved in
boxwood between 1904 and 1906, long
before his visit to the Trocadéro.
Taking into account the two African
phases before Picasso painted Les
Demoiselles, as well as the inspiration pro¬
vided by the Iberian sculptures and Spanish
environment and Spanish painting, African
art exerted an obvious influence on all his
subsequent development. On the one hand,
the themes he treated during this
period women, children and animals
(which he reinvents in symbolic form, such
as the Minotaur) are all found in his later
work. His constant preoccupation with
Thought and Ideas, rather than their outer
forms and appearance, and his more than
realistic that is surrealistic represent¬
ations of still life, all testify to the lasting in¬
fluence of African art. Mention should also
be made of his decorated ceramics which
show how art can be integrated into simple,
everyday objects, as it is in Africa.
All this can be summed up in a simple pro¬
position: by retaining and strengthening his
cultural identity as a Spaniard, instead of
allowing it to become diluted, Picasso
"rationally" assimilated African art. And so,
when we look for him in Africa, we find him
in Spain. The work of Picasso, who
"painted everything", teaches us that the
specific and the universal, human difference
and human solidarity, are but two aspects of
a simple reality which finds its synthesis only
in art. I
BESEAT KIFLE SELASSIE, Ethiopian specialist
in interdisciplinary research, lectures at the
University of Paris on problems of culture and
communication. He is the author of several
critical studies on art and artists of the Third
World, including Skunder: l'Homme et le Peintre
and An Introduction to Abstract Painting in
Ethiopia (1970).
Nude with Drapery, 1907. Oil on canvas, 152 x 101 cm.
31
