YUGOSLAVIA : A KALEI
I . The tides of history
by Milan Prelog
This curious terra-cotta head was
unearthed at a neolithic site near Prístina in
Yugoslavia. It is one of many archaeological
finds which attest to the region's
cultural importance in prehistoric times.
THE visitor to Yugoslavia is immedi¬
ately overwhelmed by the extra¬
ordinary variety of the country's artis¬
tic heritage. In fact its territory has been
criss-crossed down the centuries by so
many political and cultural boundaries,
divided into so many States and shared bet¬
ween so many different languages and
religions that it would be more appropriate
to speak of several heritages.
Every work, even if its beauty is timeless,
manifestly belongs to a particular form of
society or a particular tradition among the
many which have flourished in the area.
Often a work ¡s evidence of a victory or a
defeat, symbolizing either an acceptance or
a rejection. Highly original variants of
culture and civilization have developed in
these lands, building on the ruins of the
past, and sometimes alternating with one
another.
In each case, the relationship between
native and foreign influence was not only
expressed in intellectual terms but reflected
the struggle waged by peoples to defend
and preserve their ways of life, sometimes
even their existence. Seen in this context
the phenomenon of "backwardness" in the
development of artistic and literary forms,
the debate between traditionalism and
modernism and the question of provin¬
cialism are basic to an understanding and
appraisal of historical evidence.
Art historians faced with the geographical
and cultural complexities of this area of
Europe have tended to oversimplify, dividing
it into two major spheres of influence: an
eastern zone where Byzantine Christianity
dominated, and a western one where the
main influence was the Church of Rome.
And because the boundaries drawn bet¬
ween the zones were generally based on
ideological assumptions rather than a
serious analysis of the monuments
themselves, scholars regarded them as
watertight compartments, refusing to
acknowledge the existence of mutual
influences between regions, in particular
between the Adriatic coastal area and the
hinterland.
Such divisions made it impossible to ap¬
praise the importance of many works which
did not conform to the simplistic definitions
of "eastern" or "western".
The architecture of many religious
buildings on the Adriatic coast erected bet
ween the tenth and twelfth centuries can
only be explained by Byzantine influence.
Similarly, the succession of churches from
Studenica to Decani built by the Serbian
kings between the twelfth and sixteenth .
centuries cannot be understood without
reference to Romanesque style. These
monuments and dozens like them are not
products of closed spheres of influence but
of crossroads of civilization where different
cultures met and mingled.
Again, the famous "stetchak" tomb¬
stones of Bosnia and Herzegovina were
carved or engraved in a specific historical
context: the struggle of a native community
against both "east" and "west". Moreover,
from the fifteenth century onwards, the
Turkish conquest and, consequently, the
presence of Islam in many of the lands that
make up present-day Yugoslavia added a
new dimension to the concept of the
"East", while highly specialized forms of
culture grew up in the so-called "western"
zone.
History does not mould geography, but it
does unfold in and adapt to a natural set¬
ting. From the earliest times centres of
cultural life formed around natural lines of
communication: the coast and inland water¬
ways. Soldiers and merchants travelled
these main routes and with them went their
myths, their gods and forms of worship.
Along them were to be found the first
human settlements, the first stone inscrip¬
tions and the earliest towns.
Life was harder on the bare plateaux and
in the forests of the mountain ranges that
rise between the Adriatic and the Danube
and Sava valleys to the north. Thus
geography and climate influenced the
development of habitats and life styles, in¬
cluding their variety and duration, as well as
the separateness of the different regions
whose originally natural frontiers later
hardened into political and religious ones.
If one were to begin the history of
Yugoslavia with the arrival of the Slavs, it
would go back no further than the seventh
century. However, the succession of civiliza¬
tions which flourished in these lands in both
historic and prehistoric times have left
countless remains not only those brought
to light by archaeologists, but monuments,
still standing, which today as in the past re- k
main permanent features of the landscape, f

DOSCOPE OF CULTURES
Portrait of a lady. A striking detail from a fresco in a 14th-century Serbian church.
Photo © Arsenije Jovanovic, Belgrade

The great funeral mounds containing
stone tombs, built by the lllyrians more than
three thousand years ago, are still a distinc¬
tive feature of Adriatic hillsides. The general
outline of prehistoric settlements survives in
the oval or circular shapes of many medieval
cities, especially in the highlands of Istria.
And roads built by long-forgotten peoples
continue to be used, while the names these
peoples gave to rivers, mountains and the
iarger islands have been retained in the
various languages spoken in present-day
Yugoslavia.
In Antiquity, the economic and cultural
growth of the Hellenistic and Roman periods
left its mark throughout Yugoslavia and
greatly influenced subsequent development.
In coastal towns such as Porec or Zadar, the
city plan still follows the basic lines laid
down by Roman surveyors. And when Split
was established in the Middle Ages, it
developed within the walls of the huge
palace built at the end of the third century
near Salona, capital of Roman Dalmatia, by
the emperor Diocletian.
In many other places the imposing ruins
of temples, triumphal arches, theatres, cir¬
cuses and necropolises are part of the land¬
scape and of people's daily life. And
churches built by the early Christians during
the last centuries of Antiquity are still used
as places of worship: a prime example is the
great cathedral of Porec, in Croatia, built by
bishop Euphrasius in the sixth century and
decorated with magnificent mosaics.
It is not surprising that this heritage
should have been an inexhaustible source of
inspiration for artists, particularly in areas
close to the Adriatic. In the eleventh cen¬
tury, anonymous sculptors used as models
statues found in Roman tombs. And in the
thirteenth century the master craftsman
Buvina, who carved the doors of Split
cathedral, borrowed ornamental designs
from a temple built during the reign of
Diocletian.
A few years later, disciples of another
master, Radovan, surrounded the statues of
saints on the portals of the cathedral of
St. Lawrence, at Trogir in Dalmatia, with
huntsmen, wild animals, satyrs, mermaids
and foliage reminiscent of ancient designs.
Depicted on the same doorway are two large
figures of Adam and Eve, the latter modestly
shielding her breast with one hand in a
gesture which irresistibly brings to mind the
figure of Venus.
Models from Antiquity recalling the
Roman history of the area were popular dur¬
ing the sixteenth century, and in literature
authors imitated the themes and forms of
Latin poetry.
For five hundred years, from the ninth to
the fifteenth century, the cultural life of
Yugoslavia developed within a variety of dif¬
ferent political systems. The earliest Slav
States were established in the hinterland
behind the Adriatic where, up to the end of
the eleventh century, the kingdom of
Croatia played a vital role linking the rural
communities of the interior to the ancient
urban civilization of the coast.
The towns which grew up during this
medieval period remained centres of Cro¬
atian culture for hundreds of years. But a
series of crises undermined the Croatian
State and it finally succumbed to Hungarian
intervention early in the twelfth century.
There followed a long period of Croat-
Magyar "association", which, after the six¬
teenth century, continued in the framework
of the Austrian empire, and, though marked
by constant friction and antagonism, lasted
until 1918.
Venetian interests dominated in the area
where sea-borne trade along the Adriatic
coast linked central Europe to the
Mediterranean. At first the Venetians were
content to occupv ports, but in the
thirteenth century they began to annex
territory on the west coast of Istria to
begin with and, later, along the Dalmatian
seaboard.
By the beginning of the fifteenth century
they had become masters of all Dalmatia,
with the exception of Dubrovnik (Ragusa)
which with its surrounding territory
developed into a city-state and maintained
its independence up to the Napoleonic wars.
Its end came shortly after the fall of the
Venetian republic.
Other states were formed in the interior.
First Serbia in the eleventh century, which
soon extended its influence to the south¬
east, establishing its hegemony over part of
Macedonia. Its rulers dreamt of conquering
Constantinople. But the Turkish invasion
put an end to these dreams and, in 1389, the
Serbian princes suffered final defeat at the
battle of Kossovo.
Bosnia's independence was even more k
short-lived. During the fourteenth and fif- f

Eastern and Western traditions
meet at the monastery of
Studenica, in the church of the
Holy Virgin (far left). The
monastery, which was founded in
the late 12th century by the Serbian
ruler Stefan Nemanja, is widely
regarded as the finest example of
the "Raska" school of architecture
which flourished in medieval Serbia
and whose hallmark was a blend of
Romanesque and Byzantine
elements. At Studenica,
Romanesque influence is very
strong in the architectural
structure, whereas the frescoes
inside the church (left, detail from
the crucifixion) are Byzantine in
inspiration.
Photo Rune Hassner © G Bern, Pans
The skyline of Sarajevo,
below, is studded with
mosques and minarets many
of which date back to the
16th century when the town
became a stronghold of
Muslim culture. Sarajevo is
today the picturesque capital
of Yugoslavia's Socialist
Republic of Bosnia-
Herzegovina.

, teenth centuries it extended its domination
over vast territories between the Adriatic
and the Sava river. But, here too, the
Turkish conquest cut short its expansion.
The north-west of present-day
Yugoslavia Slovenia and inner Istriawas
part of the Holy Roman Empire. In this area,
powerful vassals of the emperor both
secular lords and churchmen including
bishops, abbots and heads of religious
orders such as Cistercians and Templars,
custodians of temporal power ruled over
huge feudal estates and enjoyed relative in¬
dependence on a regional level.
In the medieval cities, harmonious and
lasting forms of social organization
developed independently, particularly on the
Adriatic coast where towns, while paying
allegiance to different powers, governed
themselves according to their own laws and
minted their own coins. But in the struggle
against Venice and the drive to gain free
access to sea-borne trade and establish
themselves as States, only Dubrovnik really
succeeded.
The evolution of cultural life in Yugoslavia
has not followed a simple course. It is like a
complex web of cross-currents which meet,
diverge and intersect. Some flow peacefully
in the same direction for centuries, others
gush forth like springs and then vanish.
Sometimes these currents run parallel to
one another, close yet separated by ac¬
cidents of history.
The centres of social, political and
religious life where these trends and
movements originated also had a chequered
history. Some faded out after a few dozen
years of intense activity, then revived, or
sank into oblivion ; while others developed
regularly without interruption.
Monasteries and bishoprics (both Or¬
thodox and Roman Catholic) as well as
princely courts played a part in this process.
But the most important centres were the
towns, for economic and social activity pro¬
moted the growth of culture and it was in
the cities that creative artists painters,
sculptors, miniaturists, goldsmiths and
silversmiths established their workshops.
Here, too, the towns of the Adriatic
seaboard took the lead. From the earliest
times, craftsmen in these centres of trade
and exchange produced works of high quali¬
ty. They were well aware of the importance
of the written word as a means of recording
both individual and collective achievements
for posterity, as can be seen in countless
manuscripts, archives and inscriptions in
crypts ; from the ninth century onwards
donors had their names carved in the
stonework in churches.
Very early on, too, artists began to sign
their works. Books were written in Latin but
also in Croatian in the Glagolithic alphabet.
Romance or Italian were spoken in addition
to Latin and Croatian. In fact, "multil-
ingualism" gave a specific stamp to the
region's cultural history. It was in these
coastal districts that the first literary works
in a "national language" were written, as
well as the first studies on the ethnic groups
of the region, the hinterland and the Slav
world in general.
In contrast, urban development in the in¬
terior was slow. A few boom towns grew up
near the mines in mountain areas during the
Middle Ages ; but they were short-lived.
Generally speaking towns developed
gradually round monasteries or castles. In
the north-west of the country (Slovenia and
northern Croatia), the first townships ap¬
peared only in the thirteenth century, and in
Bosnia and Herzegovina as late as the fif¬
teenth century when the Turkish occupation
became stabilized. But in most cases they
were no more than small country towns and
up till quite recently living standards there
were low. In certain border areas urban
development was arrested or slowed down
by the wars against the Turks.
Photo © Drag. Kazic, Belgrade
t*> "v^^m
These monumental stone tombs, known as "stetchaks", are examples of a
highly original funerary art created by the Bogomils, a Christian sect which
flourished in the Balkans from the 10th to the 15th century. About 30,000
stetchaks, some weighing over 30 tons, can still be seen scattered in the
mountains and forests of Bosnia and Herzegovina. They are decorated with a
wealth of carvings depicting heraldic signs and symbols, conventionalized
portraits and scenes of games, hunting and tournaments. The meaning of these
carvings is still not fully understood.
tSMCTK
~ _ £fc

YUGOSLAVIA
II. The language of styles
ART works are the best yardstick of
cultural evolution, and Yugoslavia
possesses a remarkable range of
historic buildings, paintings, frescoes and
sculpture. The greatest concentration of
monuments of all periods is to be found in
and around the coastal towns where secular
and religious architecture mingle, as do
private and public buildings.
Palaces and rich mansions, cathedrals,
churches and monasteries rise within the
cities' walls and ramparts and on all the
roads leading to them. And in the succes¬
sion of styles from Romanesque to Gothic
and Renaissance, all the major influences
common to European culture can be seen
interacting with one another.
Many works from this region are mention¬
ed in standard histories of art, but they are
generally listed under headings which take
no account of their origin or affinities. For
example, works from Istria and Dalmatia
have been classed arbitrarily as Italian art.
It is, of course, a historical fact that the
constant movement of people and goods
across the Adriatic and the links established
between communities on both sides of the
sea created a basic unity throughout the
region. But this does not mean that
everything can be reduced to a single ethnic
designation or a single political "amalgam".
Until a few years ago only a limited
number of important monuments
documented the evolution of art in this
region. But recent research has brought to
light a variety of works,- all bearing the mark
of the dominant style of their period. The
distinctive forms of Romanesque and Gothic
styles not only shaped palaces and
cathedrals, they are also to be found in
craftsmen's cottages and small churches in
poor neighbourhoods.
The "language" of these styles became a
lingua franca used by different social
classes. The semi-circular arch of Roman¬
esque windows and later the pointed arch of
Gothic façades indicated membership of the
urban community, while symbols carved
above doorways (ancestors of the coat of
arms) meant that their owners had risen in
the social scale to become leading citizens.
Style, particularly in architecture, was
thus a means of expressing social distinc¬
tions, much as Latin, the official language of
government and the courts, marked the
division between town and country. (In
Dalmatia this form of linguistic "separatism"
disappeared in the fifteenth century when
scholars in the towns began to write literary
works in the national language.)
Along with the evolution of style, a
deeper process was taking place: the
secularization of themes and traditions.
Already painters and sculptors of the
Romanesque period had abandoned the
Byzantine tradition. In its concern with ex¬
pressiveness and its narrative style linking
the religious universe to worldly reality, the
art of the region followed a trend common
to the whole of Europe.
In the fifteenth century the naturalistic
tendencies of late Gothic blended with the
new Renaissance style, producing in ar¬
chitecture, sculpture and painting forms
which it is difficult to attribute to a single
style. Romanesque art throughout the
coastal areas in the thirteenth century had
pervaded urban architecture; the ensuing
Gothic period broadened the scope of ar¬
tistic endeavour to include semi-urban and
even rural communities.
In the big cities artistic activity was condi¬
tioned by the classical training of the ruling
classes, whereas in smaller, less affluent
communities a dominant influence was ex¬
erted by the great mendicant and preaching
orders the Dominicans and Franciscans.
A similar evolution was taking place in the
north-east of the country. Mural painting
was an important feature in many village
churches built during this period in Istria,
Slovenia and northern Croatia. Bible history
was told in the form of racy picture-stories in
which traditional motifs mingled with a kind
of popular theology. A favourite theme in
these paintings is the Dance of Death
regarded by the faithful as an assertion of
the basic equality of all human beings in the
face of mortality.
Easel painting also flourished during the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Rooted
in the traditions of Byzantine icon painting,
it was influenced to some extent by the Ven¬
etian school. But Gothic mannerism had not
yet given way to the brilliance of the
Renaissance, except in the work of a few
great painters such as Giorgio Schiavone,
Nicolaus Ragusinus and Mihailo Hamzió.
In the east and south-east of present-day
Yugoslavia, Byzantium was the dominant
influence in social, political, religious and
cultural evolution. The complex relations
which the Slav population of the Balkans
maintained with the centre of the empire at
Constantinople was marked by a succession
of offensive and defensive wars, com¬
promise and resistance. The Slav States
achieved independence and established
their power in battle, but that did not
preclude cultural and religious ties with
Byzantium.
The rise of the Bulgarian State, the
flowering of Tsar Samuel's short-lived em¬
pire and the establishment of the Serbian
State marked a rejection of Byzantine
domination. But though Serbia in the early
days showed certain "western" tendencies
CONTINUED PAGE 12
The west portal of the cathedral of St.
Lawrence, in the Dalmatian port of
Trogir, is a masterpiece executed by the
artist Radovan and his pupils in the
mid-13th century. The carvings around
it, on the theme of original sin and
redemption, include two large figures
of Adam (below) and Eve, as well as
scenes and motifs recalling the styles of
classical Antiquity.

¿r
m
ri
... Sí H
^
% v
x\; > .
u
Photos © National Museum, Belgrade
Church walls in the great monasteries of medieval Serbia were covered with frescoes painted
by artists working within the Byzantine tradition of stylized religious iconography. Above
right, detail from the Descent from the Cross In the monastery church of Mileseva, founded
by King Vladislav in the middle of the 13th century. The fresco belongs to an important
ensemble of New Testament scenes. The Mileseva artists also left for posterity a unique
portrait gallery of medieval Serb rulers in accordance with a custom whereby the founder of a
monastery was portrayed as part of its decoration, surrounded by members of his family.
Medieval Serbia was also a major centre of ¡con painting. Above left, icon of the Virgin Mary
from the monastery church of Decani.
"The paths of glory lead but to
the grave." Photo right shows a
detail from a late 15th-century
fresco in a church at the little
Istrian village of Beram
(Croatia). The complete work
shows prince and peasant,
innkeeper and churchman, each
followed by a skeleton. In a
"Dance of Death" symbolizing
the equality of all men and women
in face of mortality.
Detail from a 16th-century
painting of The Last Judgement
in the monastery of Moraca in
Montenegro. The monastery
was built in 1251-1252 by the
grandson of Stefan Nemanja,
the founder of a great medieval
Serbian dynasty.
10

A group of musicians is depicted in
this tiny detail from the 1,260
square metres of frescoes in the
church of the monastery of Piva.
Founded in 1573, Piva was for
almost four centuries little known
because of its remote location in
the mountain fastnesses of what is
today the Yugoslav Republic of
Montenegro. Its art treasures were
undocumented. Then the decision
to build a power station on the river
Piva jeopardized the monastery's
existence and aroused widespread
interest in its plight. In view of
Piva's importance and the fact that
its architecture and early 17th-
century frescoes make up an
indivisible entity, it was decided to
remove the monastery stone by
stone and reconstruct it high above
its original site. Work on the highly
delicate removal operation began in
1970 and since then the monastery
complex has been transported to
the new spot and the church has
been rebuilt. Work on restoring the
frescoes, which present a wealth of
iconographie themes influenced by
Cretan art, is still in progress.
11

Law and or(e)der
in Novo Brdo
Miniature above is part of a
recently discovered 16th-century
copy of a legal code drawn up to
regulate the mining industry at the
instigation of the Serbian ruler
Stefan Lazarevic (1389-1427). It
shows members of the council of
jurists during their deliberations.
The laws, known as the Code of
Novo Brdo after the town where
Serbia's biggest silver mine was
located, vividly evoke life in the
mining communities of medieval
Serbia. Miners' pay and working
conditions are rigorously defined
and provisions for security, such as
ventilation shafts, are laid down.
An annexe document highlights the
privileged status of miners:
merchants were forbidden to sell
food to anyone else as long as a
miner was waiting to buy it.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 9
due to its access to the Adriatic, Constan¬
tinople continued to inspire the area's
cultural life.
In 1014, Samuel was defeated at T.he bat¬
tle of Belasica and his empire collapsed: the
conquerors put out the eyes of 14,000 of his
soldiers. A few years later, at Ohrid, Con¬
stantinople was to win a very different kind
of victory when the new cathedral of Saint
Sophia was consecrated: the magnificent
murals it contained were directly inspired by
Byzantine court painting, as were the
Richly embossed cover of a
Gospel-book (1557) from the
village of Besenovo in
Vojvodina.
frescoes in the small church of Saint Pan-
theleimon (1164) at Nerezi, near Skopje.
Painted by an exceptionally gifted artist,
these murals display several novel
features including a Pietà and deserve a
special place in art history.
Gradually the imperial art of Byzantium
spread to workshops in the smallest country
towns: the paintings at Kurbinovo, near
Lake Prespa, which date back to 1191, are
one example. This trend continued during
the next two centuries and, as the number
12

of donors increased, so did the activity of
artists.
The influence of the Byzantine-
Macedonian school of painting reached Ser¬
bia towards the end of the thirteenth cen¬
tury. Initially it met with resistance. For ex¬
ample, in the "royal church" of Studenica
monastery the architecture and even the
sculpture on the doorways reveal Roman¬
esque i.e. Western influence, whereas
the paintings inside belong to the Constan¬
tinople school.
This contrast reflects the political tension
rife at the time: Stefan II, son of Stefan
Nemanja whose dynasty was to last for two
centuries, was crowned king of Serbia in
Rome, but his brother, Sava, abbot of
Studenica monastery, threw in his lot with
Constantinople and became the first
patriarch of the Serbian Church. It is
therefore not surprising that he should have
called on Byzantine artists to decorate
Studenica. After his death, the decoration
of the funeral chapels of the Nemanja dynas¬
ty continued in the best tradition of Byzan¬
tine art: the frescoes in the monasteries of
Mileseva and Sopócani are just two
examples.
This trend received fresh impetus when
Serbia extended its rule to northern
Macedonia where artistic life was not
restricted to the court but also flourished in
centres established on the great secular and
church domains. At Ohrid, early in the four¬
teenth century, two masters Eustachius
and Michael painted magnificent works for
the church of Saint Clement, putting for¬
ward and developing the aesthetic ideas of
fhe Palaeologus Renaissance.
After the defeat of Kossovo at the end of
the fourteenth century, the Serbian rulers
moved their capital northwards to
Smederevo, in the Morava valley, and with
them went the artists. For more than a hun¬
dred years the "Morava School", heir to a
long tradition, was to produce remarkable
works both in painting and architecture (see
the Unesco Courier, August-September
1978).
This tradition continued, taking on a new
form after the fall of Smederevo in 1459.
Nothing now remained of the Serbian State,
but for Serbs living under Turkish domina¬
tion and those who had emigrated massively
to the north and west, the ¡cons, illuminated
manuscripts and fresco-decorated churches
were not mere relics of the past but symbols
of national identity.
These artistic traditions enabled the Serbs
in exile in Vojvodina to maintain themselves
as a national group resisting all pressures. In
fact, it was in this exile that modern Serbian
cultural life developed. Centres established
in exile remained active long after the rebirth
of Serbia in the nineteenth century. Recent
, research has shown that this latter-day
Byzantine art was not content with
repeating set formulas: it actually broke new
ground in Vojvodina during the eighteenth
century blending the Byzantine with the
new Baroque iconography.
YUGOSLAVIA
III. Birthright
of a modern State
BY the end of the fifteenth century the
Ottoman empire had occupied a large
part of present-day Yugoslavia and,
up to the end of the seventeenth century, it
continued to annex new provinces. Islam is
therefore an important factor in under¬
standing the cultural life of the country. But
the wars that devastated central Europe,
threatening even Vienna, and the bitter
struggle waged by the conquered peoples
left lasting memories which made it difficult
to speak of Islam's contribution to cultural
life.
Religion was the key to social position in
the empire, and the conditions under which
the conquered peoples maintained their
beliefs and coherence as national groups
were very hard. Conversion offered a means
of changing one's status, and in several
areas, especially Bosnia and Herzegovina,
part of the population adopted this solution.
Constraints and resistance notwith¬
standing, changes did take place in areas
where Turkish power had become stabiliz¬
ed. This evolution can be seen in the
characteristic plans of certain towns and the
architecture of religious and trade centres.
This architecture, however, was not entirely
foreign to the country, for Turkish culture in
the Balkans already embodied certain tradi¬
tions of the occupied areas: it had been In¬
fluenced in particular by the style of secular
and religious buildings in the Christian east.
Many fine dwellings recall this period, as
do bridges and several outstanding
mosques. In turn, the Christian population
assimilated elements of Islamic culture,
though in the literary field language proved
an Insuperable barrier.
Yet billnguallsm and even "pluri-
linguallsm" was common in some circles.
Yugoslavs served in the army and civil ser¬
vice and taught in the schools of the Turkish
empire as they did in those of Austria or
Venice. Political and ideological divisions
Imposed various forms of alienation, the
most severe being when men speaking the
same language found themselves fighting^
under different flags. f
These heads from the apse of
the cathedral of Sibenik in
Croatia are examples of the
Renaissance art which began to
flourish on the Dalmatian coast
in the middle of the 15th
century. In the opinion of some
specialists the finest works of
art in Croatia, if not the whole
of present-day Yugoslavia, date
from the Renaissance.

Baroque became the predominant style
of religious architecture and decoration
in Croatia where it was introduced by
the Jesuits in the 17th century and was
favoured by the Franciscans in the
18th. Photo shows part of a sculpture
from a church at Belec, Croatia, dating
from between 1743 and 1746.
Francesco da Laurana, one of the great
Renaissance sculptors, left Dalmatia to work
in Naples and Sicily before settling in Avi¬
gnon. Similarly the reformer Flacius II-
lyricus abandoned his native Istria never to
return, as did the historian Lucius of Trogir
who settled in Rome.
One of the greatest masters of Baroque
art, the painter Federico Bencovich, worked
in Italy and Germany, while the only links the
famous eighteenth century mathematician,
physicist and astronomer Ruggiero
Boskovic retained with his birthplace,
Dubrovnik, were memories of his youth.
For the provincial artist, passive imitation
of foreign models or static traditionalism
were the order of the day. The middle
classes were not powerful enough to In¬
fluence the evolution of art and as for the
aristocracy, they satisfied their aesthetic
needs by buying art works in the big cities.
Here and there some activity continued.
For example, during the Baroque period, in
teresting works were still being produced
outside the areas of Turkish occupation, and
several townships grew up or were rebuilt in
the north-west of the country. But from the
sixteenth to the end of the eighteenth cen¬
tury, one of architecture's main tasks-
judging by the size of the building projects
and the quality of the workwas to build
fortresses and ramparts.
The same period saw the rise of a growing
movement of revolt in all the provinces
under Austrian, Turkish and Venetian rule
and, as time went on, these movements
became increasingly national in character.
Linguistic imperialism and the refusal to
recognize national or regional differences
met with stronger and stronger resistance.
In the Ottoman empire these movements
developed into armed uprisings leading to
the liberation first of Montenegro, then of
Serbia. With Turkey now on the defensive,
the great powers sought to eliminate it from
the Balkans. Austria seized Bosnia and
Photo shows one of Slovenia's Kurenti dancers wearing a beaked and bewhiskered
mask surrounded by feathers. Kurenti dancers take part in an ancient Slav ritual
which, although pagan in origin, became part of the customs of the Catholic
population of Slovenia and is still practised today near Ptuj, a little town in the
north of the Republic of Slovenia. During the Austrian domination of Slovenia,
which lasted until 1918, the ritual was proscribed by Church and State and became
an expression of resistance to the authorities. This spirit of resistance to the
domination of another culture and language is also apparent in certain colloquial
forms of Slovene which, unlike other languages of the region, has conserved some
archaic Slav expressions.
From the fifteenth century onwards war
was a permanent feature in these parts. The
territory of present-day Yugoslavia was split
up between three powers Austria, Turkey
and Venice and there was fighting on all
their borders. It did not always take the form
of full-scale military campaigns, but there
were continual skirmishes and guerilla at¬
tacks as well as raids between rival factions
serving different powers. All this led to
widespread destruction and where fighting
was severe and continued for long periods
whole areas emptied of their population and
became nomanslands.
Worse still, the frontiers arbitrarily drawn
by the three great powers blocked natural
lines of communication between the interior
and the coast, curtailing the movement and
exchange of information, goods and people.
Thereafter each region developed in a kind
of vacuum, dependent on decisions taken in
far-off capitals. These territories were only
of marginal interest to the big States which
had fought so hard for their possession.
Differences between the provinces and
the main centres of power, and between
small and large towns grew more marked in
the seventeenth century when the develop¬
ment process was centered in the capitals
and major cities. Distant areas found it in¬
creasingly difficult to keep pace with impor¬
tant changes taking place in social, political,
economic and cultural life.
Signs of this "provincialism" can be
observed in art in the early sixteenth cen¬
tury. There were fewer and fewer building
projects, fewer and fewer commissions and
a decreasing demand for public work. In the
narrow, stifling atmosphere of provincial
towns emigration seemed the only solution
and the best artists sought fortune abroad.
14

Herzegovina, as she had seized the coastal
region after the fall of Venice and the end of
the Napoleonic wars. Up to 1918 Croatia and
Slovenia remained part of the Austro-
Hungarian empire.
Within this framework a new national
consciousness developed which found ex¬
pression not only in political struggles but
also in intense cultural activity. Among
major achievements of this nineteenth cen¬
tury revival were: the promotion of national
languages, new forms of historical research,
the attainment of higher education and the
creation of theatres and museums.
It is true that in areas formerly sealed off
from one another by historical circum¬
stances, revival sometimes coincided with
the awakening of several often conflicting
national movements a situation which was
to plague independent Yugoslavia between
the two World Wars: the centralization im¬
posed by the authorities clashed with the i
special interests and national feelings of the I
Striking contrast between
sober symbolism and
picturesque realism appears
in these examples of
Yugoslavia's remarkable
tradition of funerary art. Left,
symbolic carvings on a
tombstone from a Turkish
cemetery at Sarajevo. Below,
realistic human figures
sculpted on a group of
Serbian gravestones of the
kind which commemorate
men and women who died
far from home (while
travelling, at work, or on the
battlefield). Such
gravestones can still be seen,
notably in western Serbia,
standing singly or in groups
at the roadside. The figures
are posthumous portraits
featuring details of clothing
or articles associated with a
particular profession or
office, which indicate the
dead person's position in
society. Most of the stones
are painted, and many bear
epitaphs which are as
redolent of serenity,
melancholy or resignation as
the portraits themselves.
Photo © Drag. Kazlc, Belgrade
^*ú:
Ék#

A gigantic flower with immense petals
opening skywards. With this symbol of
hope, faith and dignity the sculptor
Bogdan Bogdanovic has
commemorated over 700,000 persons
who perished during the Nazi
occupation (1941-1945) in Yugoslavia's
biggest concentration camp. The
monument stands on the site of the
camp, in the Croatian village of
Jasenovac on the river Sava.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::^
:::::::
::::::: SLOVENIA^' \::: \\j¿¿
	::::L f" NjJ ^ ^^T
J »ZAGREB N-»^*lU--'^ x V]..
> \ VOJVODINA Y : : : : : : : :
¡i*	^ **0 CROATIA > Xi¿: :::::::::: :::::::
N~-# N0VI SAD ^J.	
vEESS ; \ / "'"'»«.»-.«n---^ r"' .. 4:::::::::::::::::
; *_' \ ! <
^k& ! \i-"x ' .. XlLi:::;-^:::::::
\ / V/ z*-3*
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA * Belgrade V
^^^^T5^ * ' T^i;
¡Sk \ \ fi?:::
,--' SERBIA
\ SARAJEVO \ V-
s \ \	
=^===^^=^^=^=^=5=^=?^--«=^ \ _/ Vf 	
-"^^^111111111^ V\ v
p^ r \ y-
¡=^v MONTENEGRO"?--''
*	' JK^Á PRISTINA* . /
titogra# ^KOSOVO v--'X::
âTx::::::::\ ^'^/ \!i
Z^z^^z
ä>j :::::::: y-' skopje
:{ MACEDOISMAjr!
o
c
0)
c
3
O
n
o
o
0)
c
>
.
a>
u
c
(O
16

various peoples making up the community.
The resulting divisions were among the
major causes of the Yugoslav kingdom's
collapse in 1941.
Thus a form of provincialism continued
well into the twentieth century. The cultural
achievements of this period were often im¬
portant but, generally speaking, they took
place in isolation and could not keep pace
with the major trends of European cultural
development. Many of the best Yugoslav ar¬
tists suffered from this backwardness at the
turn of the century. Any attempt to compete
with the great masters of the day met with a
complete lack of understanding. What they
had learned in famous schools abroad had
to be forgotten directly they returned home,
and many lofty projects never saw the light
of day.
Under the guidance of the late Marshal
Tito, a new Yugoslavia emerged from the
resistance struggle against the Nazi invader
and the war of liberation which had created
the conditions necessary for resolving past
conflicts and fostering development.
The establishment of six federal republics
and two autonomous regions enabled the
country's diverse ethnic groups to give full
expression to their respective cultural iden¬
tities within the framework of a multi¬
national federal State.
The immediate post-war period was one
of great difficulty; during the war large areas
of the country had been devastated, towns
and villages had been destroyed and more
than a million and a half inhabitants had
perished. It was in this context that began
the twin processes of industrialization and
urbanization which, in a relatively short
period, were to transform the social and
economic structures of the country,
creating a new way of life and determining
the options open to coming generations.
The repercussions of this evolution made
themselves felt progressively in the cultural
life of the country. Traditional forms and an¬
cient customs intermingled with avant-
garde art and new cultural developments
under the impulsion of the increasingly in¬
fluential mass media.
Whatever separate judgments one makes
about the literary, artistic and scientific work
produced by Yugoslavia in the last thirty
years, there can be no doubt that the scope
of its creativity, give it a definite place in the,
mainstream of contemporary European
culture. H
MILAN PRELOG, of Yugoslavia, is an art histo¬
rian and a professor at the university ofZagreb in
Croatia (Yugoslavia). From 1976 until this year he
was a member of Unesco's intergovernmental
World Heritage Committee. He is the author of
several studies on art history, urbanism, and the
protection and renovation of ancient towns and
monuments.
Photos © Politika, Belgrade
