Highlights of
the archaeological
expeditions
EXPEDITION: UNIVERSITY OF
CAIRO
Chronological summary
NUBIA BC EGYPT
Emergence of
"A-Group" culture
3000 Early Dynastic Period
( 1st and 2nd Dynasties)
Royal burials at Saqqara
2500
Old Kingdom
(3rd to 6th Dynasties)
Great Pyramid at Giza
End of "A-Group"
Emergence of
"C-Group" culture
1st Intermediate
Period
(7th to 10th Dynasties)
The Egyptian fortresses
in Nubia
2000
Middle Kingdom
(11th to 12th Dynasties)
Amenemhet
2nd Intermediate
Period
(13th to 17th Dynasties)
The Hyksos in Egypt
"C-Group" people
culturally absorbed
by Egypt
1500 New Kingdom
(18th to 20th Dynasties)
Amenophis III
Ramses II
1000
Late Period
(21st to 31st Dynasties)
Taharqa (25th
"Ethiopian" Dynasty)
The Meroitic Kingdom 500
AD
Graeco-Roman Period
Alexander the Great
and the Ptolemies
The Romans in Egypt
(3rd to 6th centuries)
Break up of the Meroitic
Kingdom
"X-Group" culture
in Nubia
500
The Arabs in Egypt
The Christian kingdoms
of Nubia
Faras capital of Nobatia 1000
Installation of Timothy,
one of the last
Nubian bishops at
Qasr Ibrim
SITE: ANIBA
REPORTER: ABD-EL-MONEIM ABU
BAKR
The tomb of Pennut
DURING the 1960-61 and 1961-62 seasons the
University of Cairo expedition carried out excava¬
tions in the Aniba region. The expedition record¬
ed all the inscriptions in the tomb of Pennut,
governor of Miarn (the ancient name of the Aniba
district) during the reign of Ramses VI, prior to
the removal of the tomb and its reconstruction
near the new site of the temple of Amada. The ex¬
pedition also attempted, unfortunately without
success, to find the temple of the god Horus
which was known to have existed in Miam in an¬
cient times but of which all trace had been lost.
A thousand burials
The expedition also excavated a thirteen-
kilometre-long stretch of the west bank of the
Nile, on either side of Pennut's tomb, discovering
over a thousand tombs in two distinct groupings.
The necropolis of Nagaa el-Tahouna consisted of
A-Group tombs. The bodies uncovered were sur¬
rounded by Kerma type terra-cotta vases,
necklaces and scarabs. These findings indicate
that the population of Aniba of the period had
close links with the Hyksos kings of the Nile
Delta. One of the scarabs was inscribed with the
name of the Hyksos king Apophis who sought to
form an alliance with the Nubians against the
threat from the princes of Thebes.
The second group of tombs, situated much closer
to Aniba, belongs to the second Meroitic period.
The most important find was a chest whose four
side surfaces are incrusted with ivory representa¬
tions of the goddess Hathor and the god Bes.
Ivory figures of Hathor and Bes, from a Meroitic chest.
Photo © Egyptian Antiquities Service, Cairo
SUDAN ANTIQUITIES SERVICE
AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHIC SURVEY
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY
SUPPLEMENTARY EXCAVATIONS
AT the outset of the Nubian campaign the situation
in Sudanese Nubia was that there had been no
previous surveys which could provide a data base
comparable in any way to that available in Egypt.
32

The Sudan Antiquities Services therefore organiz¬
ed both an aerial and a ground survey of
Sudanese Nubia from Faras to Dal. Concessions
in the area were offered to foreign expeditions
and these were backed up by supplementary ex¬
cavations by the Sudan Antiquities Service at
sites not taken up. The achievement of the
surveys was staggering. In 1959, only ten sites in
the area had been excavated, but by the time the
surveys were completed, in 1969, more than a
thousand sites had been identified. The aerial
survey offered some unexpected finds, including
the natural rock barrier across the Nile at Semna,
where traces were discovered of a barrage con¬
structed by Egyptian engineers thirty-nine centu¬
ries ago. (See also article page 16).
EXPEDITION:
SITES:
FRENCH INSTITUTE
OF ORIENTAL
ARCHAEOLOGY
WADI ES SEBUA TO
SAYALA
REPORTER: FRANÇOIS DAUMAS
THE temple of Ramses II at Wadi es Sebua was the
first site excavated and the approach road, or
"dromos", to the temple produced an unusual
find. This was a sort of portable bronze stove,
discovered in a complex of buildings at the side of
the dromos, which bore what seemed to be the
emblem of Ramses II.
A strange sacrifice
The expedition also examined a nearby quarry
from which blocks of stone for the construction
of the temple had been extracted. Near the top of
the quarry a cavity was discovered, which must
have been used as a tomb since it had a carefully
carved door. A 19th dynasty plate and a gourd as
well as portions of goat's meat, goose and goose
eggs had been placed inside. This curious find is
thought to be the remains of a sacrifice made to
mark the opening of the quarry.
A prehistoric site
Excavation of the temple of Ramses itself reveal¬
ed that it was built on a site that had been oc¬
cupied in prehistoric times. In a small valley near¬
by a number of unusually fine rock carvings of
animals were found. It was not possible to date
them exactly.
A thirty-nine-century-old barrage.
Photo © Sudan Government Aerial Survey
Drawing Lenthéric © F. Daumas, France
Ramses offers a bouquet to St. Peter
A Coptic church had been constructed inside the
temple of Ramses and one section of this church
presented an astonishing spectacle. The Christian
artists had plastered over the Egyptian reliefs and
at one spot had painted a representation of
St. Peter. Over the years part of the plaster fell
away revealing the ancient Egyptian reliefs and
we were treated to the sight of Ramses II offering
a bouquet to... St. Peter!
Other paintings, such as that of an angel holding
in her arms a mummy, which probably
represented the soul of a deceased person por¬
trayed at one side, give us a better understanding
of Coptic painting.
A C-Group village
On a cliff overlooking the Nile a Nubian C-Group
village was discovered dating back to the 18th
century BC. It was enclosed with a dry stone wall
with a fortified gateway on the more vulnerable
east side. Excavation brought to light some Nu¬
bian pottery and a number of bone tools and wea¬
pons.
EXPEDITION: ARCHAEOLOGICAL
MISSION OF THE
HENRY M.
BLACKMER
FOUNDATION AND
THE CENTRE OF
ORIENTAL STUDIES
ON THE UNIVERSITY
OF GENEVA
SITES: AKASHA REGION
REPORTER: CHARLES MAYSTRE
THE mission had the good fortune to find a
palaeolithic site which yielded a fine selection of
stone tools comparable to those of the Levalloi-
sian stone industry. Over 9,000 neolithic artefacts
were also found. The tools were of the "Early
Khartoum" type and the potsherds showed a
variety of decorative styles.
Over two hundred Kerma tombs
Another exciting discovery was that of a
cemetery containing more than two hundred
tombs dating from the three periods of the so-
called "Kerma" civilization (about 2500 to 1500
BC). Although the tombs had been plundered
once, considerable finds were made including
some fine tulip-shaped, black-bordered, red
vases.
A Meroitic vase with ten left eyes
The area appears to have been virtually abandon¬
ed during the New Kingdom period, but in the
Meroitic era it was occupied again as the many
cemeteries of the period attest. These tombs
were later emptied and re-used for Christian
burials, but a number of Meroitic objects of quali¬
ty survived, including a fine terracotta vase
curiously decorated with a ring of ten left eyes.
Evidence of the Christian era
Four groups of dwellings, three churches, a small
fort, the fortified surround of the church of
Kageiras and a large number of Christian
cemeteries and re-used tombs from earlier eras in¬
dicate that the region was comparatively heavily
populated during the Christian era (up to 1500
AD).
Meroitic vase with ten eyes.
Photo © C Maystre, Switzerland
33

EXPEDITION: USSR ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES
SITES: DAKKA REGION,
WADI ALLAQI
REPORTER: BORIS PIOTROVSKY
WORK in the Dakka area involved the exploration of
ancient settlements and burial grounds and
monuments along the bank of the river. Important
collections of palaeolithic tools were made, a
large number of predynastic rock carvings were
found and Ancient and New Kingdom graves
were investigated.
Wadi Allaqi, the golden road
The most interesting phase, however, was the in¬
vestigation of Wadi Allaqi, one of the largest
wadis in Nubia, through which led the road to the
ancient gold mines of Nubia. Even before pro¬
specting for gold in Nubia began in the time of the
New Kingdom the Pharaohs of the Sixth Dynasty
had sent caravans along the Wadi Allaqi in search
of stone, ebony, ivory and panther skins. These
expeditions are described in detail in a number of
inscriptions along the route. We came by chance
across an inscription by a "chief of caravan", the
Prince Hunes, a noble court official of the Sixth
Dynasty whose tomb at Aswan is well known.
Even more surprising was the discovery of a short
inscription by another famous court official. Uni,
who travelled many times to Nubia. Most of the
two hundred inscriptions that we discovered,
however, date from the Eighteenth and Nine¬
teenth Dynasties, at a period when Nubia became
the main supplier of gold for Egypt. We now
know, for example, that some of the objects
found in the tomb of Tutankhamun were made of
gold from Nubia.
The well of Ramses, the beloved of Amon
One of the major problems facing these caravans
was the lack of water along the Wadi. In 1842, in
the ruins of an ancient fortress at Kubban, at the
mouth of Wadi Allaqi, the French archaeologist
Prisse d'Avennes found a large stela depicting
Ramses II bringing offerings to the god Horus "of
the land of Bak" and to Min "who dwelt in the
rocks". The extensive text tells how the Pharaoh
was concerned about the lack of water along the
road leading to the lands rich in gold.
Although his father had tried in vain to find water,
Ramses ordered the governor of the region to
pursue the search. At last water was found and a
well was dug and named after the Pharaoh. When
found by Prisse d'Avennes, however, the lower
part of the inscription was broken off precisely at
the point at which the name of the well was writ¬
ten: "Ramses, the beloved of Amon, valiant...".
For years Egyptologists puzzled over the problem
of what the end of the phrase could be and the
precise location of the well.
Our expedition, too, was anxious to solve the rid¬
dle of the missing text and to locate the well and
our hopes were pinned on a site at which many in¬
scriptions had been found and which was known
as "Bir-al-Askari", the soldier's well. Indeed,
there were signs of excavations there, but our
guide assured us that these were the work of
British soldiers who had established a military
camp there during the last century and had
themselves dug in search of water.
On the very last day of our stay at Bir-al-Askari,
on the site of the old military camp, we found
fragments of stone, bearing hieroglyphs, which
when pieced together were found to form a stela
depicting Ramses making a sacrifice to the god
Min. At first it seemed of little interest as the
hieroglyphs were so damaged that they were im¬
possible to decipher. Then we noticed that a
single phrase remained undamaged. It read: "The
well of Ramses, the beloved of Amon, valiant in
life". We had found the stela that marked the
position of the well and the part of the inscription
missing from the stela found by Prisse d'Avennes
at the Kubban fortress. Thus was solved a
120-year-old mystery. g
Ramses' well, the completed stela.
Drawing £> B. Piotrovsky, USSR
EXPEDITION: INDIA
SITES: AFYA, TOMAS
REPORTER: B.B. LAL
EXPLORATION of the terraces of the Nile around
Afya and Tomas brought to light Middle and Late
Stone Age tools. These are believed to be the first
Stone Age tools to be discovered in the Afya-
Tomas region.
Carbon-dating of the A-Group
The A-Group Culture of Nubia had generally been
thought to be contemporary with the late pre-
Dynastic and Early Dynastic Cultures of Middle
and Upper Egypt, although this was still a matter
of debate. The Indian work would appear finally
to have settled the issue once and for all since it
provided three 14C dates which, after Masca-
correction, show a clear range from" 3160 BC to
2985 BC. ;
A link between Nubia and India?
Of no less interest was the "C-Group" cemetery,
ascribable broadly to the first half of the second
millennium BC. The dead were buried in round-
ended oblong pits measuring about 1.5 to 2
metres in length, about 1 metre in width and 1 to
1 .5 metres in depth, with the knees drawn up and
usually resting on the right side with the head
towards the south-east. After burial, a stone-
circle often with a tumulus, was raised around the
grave. Amongst the objects recovered from the
graves were: a quartz dish with kohl-marks, a
wooden mirror-handle and a lot of pot¬
tery black-and-red, red, and buff wares in
a variety of shapes and designs. Particularly
pleasing was a bowl with a white-filled incised
design depicting a series of hand-in-hand
dancers. Certain similarities were detected bet¬
ween these C-Group graves and the megaliths of
South India.

EXPEDITION: POLISH CENTRE FOR
MEDITERRANEAN
ARCHAEOLOGY
SITE: FARAS
REPORTER: K. MICHALOWSKI
The church under the sand
THE most important contribution of Polish
archaeology to the Nubian campaign was
incontestably the discovery of Faras in Sudanese
Nubia. There, among a whole complex of sacred
and profane buildings buried in the sand, under
the walls of an Arab citadel, the expedition
uncovered an imposing early Christian church the
walls of which were decorated with more than
120 frescoes in excellent condition. Today Faras
lies some forty metres beneath the waters of the
Nile, but in the 7th century it was the capital of
northern Nubia. During three years of excavations
the Polish expedition succeeded in resuscitating a
hitherto unknown chapter of the history of early
Christian Nubia and a large portion of its art.
Saint Anne enjoins silence
Among the most famous works discovered are a
head of Saint Anne with a finger to her lips in the
sign for silence, the Black bishop Petros under the
protection of the Apostle Peter, the olive-skinned
bishop Marianos, the dark-complexioned Queen-
mother Martha, and a vast Nativity scene which
includes the shepherds and the Three Wise Men.
It would be impossible to list all the objects such
as the splendid 11th century glass chalice found
during the excavations which covered not only
the great church but also a whole complex of
buildings including an eparch's palace, two
monasteries and a second church.
A race against time
The excavations at Faras were a race against
time. In the course of four seasons, each lasting
five to six months, the expedition succeeded in
salvaging the most important objects, not only
the frescoes of the church, which were taken
down and packed in cases, but also the bronzes,
the ceramics, the inscriptions and the tombs of
the bishops complete with their skeletons. The list
of their names which was found on the walls of
the church constitutes one of the original
documents of Christianity in Nubia. Hardly had
the expedition finished nailing up the cases for
removal when the water of the Nile reached the
level of the hill on which the excavations had
taken place. Some months later, the tops of a few
palm trees emerging from the waters were all that
remained to mark the spot where Faras had once
stood.
EXPEDITION: THE ARGENTINE
EXPEDITION TO
NUBIA
SITE: AKSHA
REPORTER: A. ROSENWASSER
SINCE 1961, Argentina has sent several teams of
archaeologists to work in collaboration with
French archaeologists in Sudanese Nubia. These
teams cleared the temple of Aksha and removed a
number of important reliefs which are now in
Khartoum.
Royal son of Kush
During the 1962-63 season, the Argentine mission
discovered five chapels built by the Pharaoh Seti
I, father of Ramses II and part of a door to a
chapel dedicated to Heqanakht, who was Nubian
viceroy under Ramses II. On the door the viceroy
is seen in ceremonial dress with the inscription
"Heqanakht, Royal Son of Kush".
M
Saint Anne, Faras
Photo K. Michalowski,
National Museum, Warsaw
Heqanakht, Royal Son of Kush, Aksha.
Photo © A. Rosenwasser, Argentina
Removal of fresco at Faras. Photo © Rex Keating, Pans
39

EXPEDITION:
SITES:
CANADA
THE KOM OMBO
PLAIN
REPORTER: PHILIP E. SMITH
The Kom Ombo Plain
THE Canadian Expedition to Nubia chose to do
research not in the reservoir area itself but about
50 kilometres downstream from the Aswan High
Dam, on the Kom Ombo Plain. This was because
the majority of the Egyptian Nubians were shortly
to be resettled on reclaimed lands around Kom
Ombo, the ground levelling had already begun
and prehistoric sites were liable to be destroyed.
In the 1920s a local French engineer, Edmond
Vignard, had published several reports on
prehistoric sites in the area; as late as 1962 these
reports provided virtually all our knowledge of the
Upper Palaeolithic period in Egypt. Palaeolithic
peoples very likely lived in the area for several
hundred thousand years, but little evidence has
been preserved in situ until roughly 15000 BC.
Five prehistoric cultures
Vignard had identified a culture he named the
Sebilian with a peculiar style of stone tools, and
he suspected the presence of others. There were
in reality at least five "cultures" (as defined by
their stone tools) in existence around Kom Ombo
between ca. 15000 and 9000 BC. We were able to
salvage some of their campsites, both surface and
subsurface and to produce the first radiocarbon
dates for the Palaeolithic of Egypt.
Briefly, our reconstruction of human occupation
of the Plain is as follows. Around 15000 BC there
was a group making flint tools of a type called
"Halfan" in Nubia, and apparently grinding some
plant foods as well as hunting and fishing. This
was followed between 13000 to 12000 by two
newly defined and distinct groups: the Silsilian,
which emphasized small, even microlithic stone
tools, and the Sebekian whose tools were mainly
on long, narrow blades. About 11000 BC we find
a fourth industry which we called the Menchian
which has many heavy flake tools especially
scrapers, and a considerable number of sand¬
stone grinding slabs which probably reflect food-
preparation activities. Finally, from roughly 11000
BC onward there is Vignard's Sebilian, which
seems to have continued into early Holocene
times.
The picture we obtain during these six millennia is
of small bands of people, probably totalling
several hundred at any one time, who frequented
the Kom Ombo Plain and adjacent zones during
all seasons of the year. They were essentially
hunters.
A unique style of rock art
We also recorded a series of rock drawings of wild
animals engraved on the cliffs at the northern end
of the Plain. These may reflect the activities of
local hunters in the millennia before food produc¬
tion reached Egypt after (presumably) 6000 BC.
Although their precise age is uncertain the art
style seems unique in the Nile Valley.
The results of our research on the Kom Ombo
Plain should of course be seen in the context of
the revised view of prehistoric life in the Nile
Valley of both Egypt and the Sudan that has
become accepted in the past twenty years. The
Valley is now known to have been in late
Palaeolithic times not a thinly-inhabited, isolated
and impoverished culture area but one where
many different groups of people lived and in¬
teracted in what at the time was one of the
world's most congenial environments.
The reconstruction we have been able to make
can be seen as a microcosm of how many similar
pre-agricultural peoples must have lived in Nubia
and Upper and Lower Egypt at this time and an il¬
lustration of how they adapted themselves to the
peculiar conditions of the Nilotic environment and
its adjacent hills and desert fringes.
Liturgical text fragment, Sunnarti.
Photo © E. Dinkier, Heidelberg
EXPEDITION: GERMAN
ARCHAEOLOGICAL
INSTITUTE, FEDERAL
REPUBLIC OF
GERMANY
SITES: KULB, ISLANDS OF
SUNNARTI,
TURMUKI AND
TANGUR
REPORTER: ERICH DINKLER
THE Institute carried out excavations on the three
islands of the Batn el Haggar, between the Se¬
cond Cataract and Akasha, as well as at Kulb,
some three kilometres to the west of Akasha on
the west bank of the Nile.
Three village churches
Three churches were excavated, each of which at
one time served a small village and could hold no
more than twenty to twenty-five people. The best
preserved church was that found on the island of
Sunnarti. The altar was still standing with its mar¬
ble top. The central part of the church was
dominated by the pulpit. On the west side were
separate entrances for men and women. This
church dated from the 12th or 13th century.
Three fortified settlements were also excavated
and once again the most impressive fortifications
were those on Sunnarti. Constructed in the form
of a triangle in natural stone, they were adapted
to the topography of the ground and enclosed a
group of some fifteen dwellings and enough open
space for some cattle.
The fortified village of Kulb
The fortified village of Kulb was particularly in¬
teresting and dates probably from the 8th cen¬
tury. The encircling wall, however, is probably of
later construction. In many of the dwellings
fragments of objects marked with the name
Michael or with monograms representing this
name, all in Greek lettering, were found. These
fragments had holes pierced through them,
presumably so that they could be hung on the
walls. In view of the large number of such graffiti
found it would seem that the inhabitants of the
village knew the Greek alphabet.
The oldest liturgical text
Perhaps the most important find of all was that of
a small piece of parchment lying in the sand on
the floor of the church of Sunnarti. It contained
the oldest liturgical text of the Nubian Church so
far known. On one side was carefully written out,
in red and black ink, the text of a Greek
eucharistie prayer.
EXPEDITIONS: UNIVERSITY OF
TURIN
UNIVERSITY OF
MILAN
UNIVERSITY OF
ROME
SITES: DEHMIT,
KALABSHA,
IKHMINDI,
MAHARRAQA,
KUBBAN,
SABAGURA, TAMIT,
SONQI
REPORTER: SERGIO DONADONI
THE Italian contribution to the Nubian campaign
was a three-pronged effort: the University of
Turin investigated sites at Dehmit and Kalabsha,
the University of Milan at Ikhmindi, Maharraqa,
Kubban and Sabagura, and the University of
Rome at Tamit and Sonqi.
An ensemble of local cultures
Research was concerned less with Egyptian anti¬
quities on Nubian soil (although this was an
aspect of the work at Dehmit and Kubban) than
with remains and vestiges that enabled typical
local cultures to be identified. These were often
ensembles of cultures that had no writing and
could speak to us only through their artefacts. In
a cemetery at Tamit, for example, we came
across vestiges of the oldest period, contem¬
porary with the Egyptian predynastic and early
dynastic period; and the rock drawings and pot¬
tery found at Sabagura and Kubban tell us of the
pastoral populations of the Middle Kingdom
period.
An independent Nubia
But the most successful research was perhaps
that relating to a later period. The identification at
Maharraqa of a Meroitic necropolis, right on the
frontier between the Roman world and the ter¬
ritories of the Nubian kings whose capital was in
far distant Meroe, indicates how far to the north
this African culture imposed the stamp of its per¬
sonality.
At Ikhmindi we had the good fortune to discover
an inscription which was virtually contemporary
with the introduction of Christianity into the
region on the basis of which it was possible to
identify a certain form of Christian urbanism at
Ikhmindi, Sabagura and Kalabsha.
We found other important Christian monuments
dating from the zenith of independent Nubia,
when for the first time inscriptions were written in
the language of the country rather than in the
languages of neighbouring countries: a sanctuary
complex at Tamit and a small cemetery church at
Sonqi have provided a series of paintings, inscrip¬
tions and other evidence of a social and cultural
life linked with and just as richly varied as that of
the nearby metropolis of Faras.
Sudanese workers at Argin
Photo © M. Llongueras-Campana
40

EXPEDITION: INSTITUTE FOR
EGYPTOLOGY OF
HUMBOLDT
UNIVERSITY, EAST
BERLIN, GERMAN
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC
SITES: FARAS TO DAL
(WEST BANK), 2nd
CATARACT TO DAL
(EAST BANK)
REPORTER.' FRITZ HINTZE
600 rock inscriptions
and 750 groups of rock drawings
TWO working groups from the expedition under¬
took the huge task of collecting all the rock in¬
scriptions and rock drawings in Sudanese Nubia
from the Second Cataract to Dal, on the east
bank of the Nile, and from Faras to Dal, on the
west bank, excluding, of course, those on the
concessions of other expeditions.
All the drawings and inscriptions discovered were
copied and photographed and latex squeezes
were made of the more important ones. For this
purpose a new technique of coloured latex
squeezes was developed. Work continued over
three seasons and the material collected and
documented included almost 600 rock inscrip¬
tions and over 100 rock picture sites with 750
groups of pictures.
The distribution of the rock inscriptions is signifi¬
cant. North of Semna, which was once the
southern boundary of the Middle Kingdom of an¬
cient Egypt, most of the inscriptions date from
the Middle Kingdom period; but south of Semna
all the inscriptions, with the exception of three
Old Kingdom inscriptions from a site near the Dal
Cataract, are from the New Kingdom period. The
three exceptions are the most southerly Old
Kingdom rock inscriptions discovered in situ up to
now. They were made by scribes and overseers of
prospectors searching for minerals and gold in the
mountains. The expedition also recorded the
' famous Nile level marks at Semna and Kumma.
The rock drawings cover the time span from
prehistory to the Middle Ages of our era. Approx¬
imately ten per cent are pictures of wild animals
such as elephants, giraffes, antelopes, gazelles
and ostriches. Sixty per cent show domestic
animals and the majority of these are cattle, but
horses, camels, sheep, goats and dogs are also
depicted; the remaining thirty per cent portray
varied scenes such as men hunting, riding horses
or camels, women dancing, and boats. There are
many symbolic signs whose meaning is not easy
to determine.
The stela of Prince Amenemhet.
Photo © T. Säve-Söderbergh, Uppsala
EXPEDITION: SCANDINAVIAN
JOINT EXPEDITION
TO SUDANESE NUBIA
SITES: EAST BANK OF THE
NILE FROM FARAS
TO GEMAI
REPORTER: TORGNY
SÄVE-SÖDERBERG
THE expedition, a joint effort of the four Scandina¬
vian countries, Denmark, Finland, Norway and
Sweden, worked in the northernmost part of the
Sudan during the four winters of 1961-1964 and
made a complete archaeological investigation of
the east bank of the Nile from Faras on the Egyp¬
tian border to Gemai in the region of the 2nd
Cataract, a distance of some sixty kilometres. The
number of registered sites totalled about 490 and
they represented the whole development from the
earliest Stone Age to the Middle Ages. Practically
all these sites were previously unknown. Some
4,200 tombs were excavated, five churches and
some fortified areas. Approximately 2,600 rock
drawings were photographed, mapped in detail
and documented. The expedition recovered some
3,000 more or less complete New Kingdom
vessels, 6,000 fragments of textiles and
osteological material from 1,500 individuals.
The stela of prince Amenemhet
A rich cemetery of 692 tombs was found at
Fadrus in the district of Debeira. The assumption
that these tombs belonged to Egyptianized Nu¬
bians is supported by the fact that nearby is the
tomb of Djehuti-hotep, Prince of Teh-khet
(Debeira) who also had the Nubian name of Pait-
sy. From his titles it is clear that Djehuti-hotep had
been educated at the Egyptian court.
The expedition excavated the tomb of his brother
Amenemhet which lay on the west bank of the
Nile. Amenemhet was first an official in the Egyp¬
tian administration and then succeeded his
brother as Prince of Teh-khet. In the cult chamber
of his tomb the expedition found a magnificent
stela with a long hieroglyphic text and pictures of
Amenemhet, his wife and his parents.
Human remains
A large collection of skeletal remains, represen¬
ting 1,546 individuals, ranging in date from the
A-Group to the end of the Christian period (1500
AD), was submitted to computer analysis. The
age distribution shows that the Nubian population
as a rule died at an early age. In the A-Group and
the X-Group mortality frequency is highest in the
20 to 25 age group, while in the other groups it is
highest in the 35 to 50 age group. An analysis of
various anthropometric and non-metric data
seems to indicate that a change of population
took place in the Late Nubian period in the transi¬
tion from the Meroitic culture to the X-Group
culture. The immigrating X-Group was not ex¬
ceedingly different from the Meroitic series but
had distinct differences from the earlier C-Group.
EXPEDITION: THE EGYPT
EXPLORATION
SOCIETY OF LONDON
SITE: QASR IBRIM
REPORTERS: J.M. PLUMLEY AND
R.D. ANDERSON
The fortress site of Qasr Ibrim
THE project that proved rewarding beyond all ex¬
pectations was the excavation of the fortress hill
site of Qasr Ibrim. Excavations have shown that
the site has a long history of human occupation,
reaching back at least to the early New Kingdom,
if not earlier, and continuing in almost unbroken
sequence until 1812 AD, when the place was
finally abandoned. Since the rising of the waters
of the lake the site has become an island, and suf¬
ficient areas remain to warrant further excava¬
tions.
The fortifications that were once so impressive a
feature of the site have been rebuilt many times.
The date of the mud-brick bastion, discovered in
1978, is not yet known, but the earliest con¬
tinuous girdle wall may well have been built in
Meroitic or Ptolemaic times, and was rebuilt and
strengthened probably by the Roman governor
Petronius in about 22 BC.
The temple of Taharqa
The finding of a considerable number of blocks
containing the titles of Taharqa, a Pharaoh of the
"Ethiopian" Dynasty (7th century BC), suggested
that a building from his period had once existed
at Ibrim, and during the 1972 season considerable
remains of a temple erected by Taharqa were un¬
covered. Of special interest was the finding of a
wall painting containing the face of Taharqa, the
only example of a portrait of Taharqa in this form
yet known.
A tavern in the (X-Group) town
Excavations in the fortress area revealed a large
X-Group town built over earlier Meroitic struc¬
tures. It is possible that Ibrim may have been a
royal residence and the artefacts of the period
reveal a hitherto unsuspected degree of cultural
achievement.
The largest secular building in use during the
X-Group period at Ibrim appears to have been a
tavern. It was originally built about the middle of
the 4th century AD, in late Meroitic times. Carv¬
ings on the outside, showing an amphora resting
on a tripod and a bunch of grapes, suggest the
purpose of the building. This was confirmed by
the discovery in adjoining rooms of broken wine
jars and goblets by the thousand.
The cathedral of the Virgin Mary
Qasr Ibrim is dominated by the remains of a splen¬
did, stone-built cathedral, itself a rebuilding of an
earlier structure. The arcades of the cathedral are
decorated with carved stone rosettes and other
motifs. A double-aisled building with monolithic
granite columns, a semicircular apse to the east
and two deep crypts with tomb shafts, it was ap¬
proached by a magnificent flight of ornamental
steps.
The Nubian bishop Timothy
In 1964 the burial of a bishop was found under the
entrance to the north crypt of the cathedral. Com¬
missary letters in the form of two scrolls four and
a half metres long, from the Patriarch of the Cop¬
tic Church, found in the grave, reveal that his
name was Timothy, that he was Nubian and that
41

down for the first time towards the end of the 8th
century AD. To add to the extensive finds of
literary and non-literary documents, the last
season at Ibrim produced five bilingual psalms
written in Greek and Nubian which are now being
carefully studied. H
Wmf SAH V
The body of Bishop Timothy, showing the two
commissary letters found in his grave.
Photo © J.M. Plumley, U.K.
he was consecrated bishop in 1372 AD. It was at
one time thought that Timothy was the last
bishop of Nubia, but that this was not the case
was proved by one of nine leather scrolls found at
Ibrim in 1964. Written in medieval Nubian and
dated 1464, the scroll indicates that a Nubian
king, Joel, was then reigning at Gebel Adda and
that a bishop Merki was resident at Ibrim.
The baqt
The undisturbed nature of the site and its dryness
meant that discarded material was often wonder¬
fully preserved. In 1972 a magnificent Arabic
scroll was found which dealt with the functioning
of the baqt or treaty between Christian Nubia and
Moslem Egypt. In the past some scholars believed
the whole question of the baqt to have been an in¬
vention of later Arabic writers. The scroll puts its
historical reality beyond all doubt. In it the gover¬
nor of Egypt writes in the autumn of 758 AD to
the king of Nubia complaining that the terms of
the treaty were not being adhered to. Runaway
slaves from Egypt were not being returned,
Moslem merchants were not being granted safe
passage in Nubia, messengers were being un¬
necessarily detained.
Cornelius Gallus the governor-poet
The most exciting find of the 1978 season was a
papyrus containing ten lines, some very fragmen¬
tary, of elegiac verse by Cornelius Gallus, the first
governor of Roman Egypt, known to the ancient
world as the captor of Cleopatra, friend of Virgil
and a passionate poet later admired by Ovid.
Before the Ibrim discovery the modern world
knew only one pentameter by Gallus. The text is
written in small formal book hand and is probably
the nearest we yet have to a contemporary copy
of a well known Latin poet.
Clues to two unknown languages
At the core of Ibrim's fascination lie the two large¬
ly unknown languages which may in time be inter¬
preted through discoveries made there in suc¬
cessive seasons. The earlier is Meroitic, the
language of the southern city that dominated
Ibrim for much of its history, and of which the
script is derived from Egyptian demotic signs.
Words can be read but their meaning is largely
elusive. The wooden tablets and potsherds turned
up at Ibrim will assist the task of decipherment.
The other language imperfectly known is
medieval Nubian, apparently already written
Rock drawing from Sayala.
Photo © Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna
EXPEDITION: AUSTRIAN
EXPEDITION IN NUBIA
SITES: SAYALA REGION
REPORTER: WILHELM
ENGARTNER
THE task allotted to the Austrian expedition
included the exploration of tombs and the
collection and scientific study of skeletons found,
and the recording of rock engravings and
paintings. The area investigated covered the
whole district of Sayala on both banks of the Nile.
Ships of all ages
Along with a large number of rock drawings of
cattle, giraffes, elephants, ostriches and human
beings, 140 representations of ships were found.
Dating and classification were aided by examina¬
tion of the type of construction depicted. They in¬
cluded representations of Nagada II type ships,
ships of the dynastic periods, with cabins amid¬
ships, Roman ships with high freeboards, multi-
oared vessels of later times as well as more recent
feluccas.
History from bones
Modern physical anthropology goes beyond the
measurement of such indicators as skull size or
body height. It attempts the more ambitious task
of reconstructing the entire biological structure of
a population or a segment of a population. This
includes such factors as the proportion of sexes,
infantile mortality, the process of child growth,
overall life duration.
The expedition examined a total of 107 human
skeletons; 30 were from the late C-Group, 13 from
the Roman-Nubian period and 64 from the early
Byzantine period. Among the C-Group skeletons
not a single woman was found and of the children
most were in the 1 to 6 age group. Where were
the women buried? And why did some of the
children receive the same burial distinctions as
grown men? Several males were found to have
unusually large teeth. Among the Byzantine
period skeletons a surprisingly large number were
found to have lost their teeth at a comparatively
early age (25 to 35). Children and juveniles,
however, appeared to have been unaffected.
What can have brought on this sudden change at
the age of maturity? These are some of the ques¬
tions which remain to be solved.
EXPEDITION: INSTITUTE OF
EGYPTOLOGY OF
PRAGUE UNIVERSITY
SITES: TAFFA, KERTASSI,
WADI QITNA,
SOUTH KALABSHA
REPORTER: MIROSLAV VERNER
The lost temple of Taffa
ONE of the most exciting achievements of the ex¬
pedition was the finding of the lost Southern
Temple, in the Taffa area. Built in the Roman
period and re-used later by Christians, this temple
was still known at the beginning of the last cen¬
tury, but by our times no trace of it was to be
seen. The temple was located somewhere on a
plain one kilometre long and half a kilometre wide
and covered with five metres of mud brought
down by the Nile after the construction of the first
Aswan Dam.
By studying two daguerreotypes made in
1850-1851 by two French travellers, Maxime du
Camp and Félix Teynard, the team succeeded in
calculating the photographer's position from the
perspective of the cliff behind the temple and thus
established its exact location.
The fortress of Kertassi
Simultaneously with the excavations at Taffa
work was going ahead with the mapping out of a
large ancient fortress at Kertassi. Nearby was the
huge Kertassi quarry which at one time provided
stone for the temples of Philae. It is carved in the
form of a vast amphitheatre. A niche, flanked by
two half statues, carved on part of the quarry face
gives the quarry the appearance of an ancient
ruined temple.
550 X-Group graves
Excavations at Wadi Qitna and south Kalabsha
led to the discovery of some 550 X-Group graves
of the 4th and 5th centuries. The rich funeral trap¬
pings included collections of pottery, glass, metal
objects, jewellery, fragments of wooden cots,
remnants of food and abundant anthropological
material.
Epigraphic research
In two fifty-kilometre-long areas stretching from
Naga el Dom el Dakar to Naga el Qurud and from
Naga el Birba to Gerf Hussein the expedition car¬
ried out epigraphic research which yielded some
240 Egyptian, Meroitic, Carian, Aramaic, Greek,
Latin and Coptic inscriptions.
The quarry at Kertassi. Photo Manara, Unesco
42

EXPEDITION:
SITES:
Noah's Ark fresco, Debeira West.
Photo © Rex Keating
EXPEDITION: UNIVERSITY OF
GHANA
SITE: DEBEIRA WEST
REPORTER: PETER SHINNIE
Domestic life in medieval Nubia
THE investigation of the medieval town Debeira,
on the west bank of the Nile between the modern
villages of Serra and Argin, was deliberately plan¬
ned to get the maximum amount of information
on domestic aspects of medieval Nubian life. The
objects found and the nature of some of the
buildings, were more elaborate than had been an¬
ticipated and Debeira was shown to be something
more than just a settlement of poor peasants.
It consisted not only of the main town, but also of
two churches, and a monastery!?). The main
town was occupied at two quite separate periods,
the first dating to the seventh century AD and the
second from c. 750 AD to c. 1100 AD. Between
these two periods the site was abandoned and
was covered with wind-blown sand. The chur¬
ches are associated with the main, richer, second
period of occupation, whilst the monastery ap¬
pears to have been occupied at the same time as
the first town, that is in the sixth century or even
somewhat earlier.
The early settlement
The early (seventh century AD) settlement had
been largely built over by the later town but a few
dwellings had not been built over. These
buildings, of light construction, appear to be
storage rooms and kitchens, perhaps part of a
more elaborate structure underlying later
buildings further south.
Nubian houses of the second period
The second period of occupation was more in¬
tense. Most of the buildings appear to have been
dwellings, and though none of them are identical
it is possible to see regularity in the pattern of Nu¬
bian houses of the period. They are small, fre¬
quently of two rooms, roofed with the Nubian
vault and sometimes with a staircase leading to
the roof. All the buildings are of mud brick with
the exception of a unique stone house in the
southern extension of the site. It seems that this
area represents the latest occupation in the town
and the stone house is probably to be dated to
somewhere about AD 1100.
An age-old way of life
Domestic life probably did not differ very much
from the life of the recent past. One of the main
differences is to be seen in the lay-out of the
villages over at least the last 150 years the Nu¬
bian village has consisted of large courtyard
houses, standing free, and arranged in a line fac¬
ing the river. The medieval village was quite dif¬
ferent; the houses were very much smaller, they
were packed tightly together, and there was ap¬
parently no logical arrangement.
Agriculture and diet
Agriculture must have been much the same as to¬
day, with a dependence on the saqia wheel for ir¬
rigation. Debeira produced one structure which
may have been part of a sesame oil press. Crops
can be assumed to have been much the same as
today, wheat and sorghum, and diet cannot have
been very different.
THE ORIENTAL
INSTITUTE,
UNIVERSITY OF
CHICAGO, U.S.A.
BEIT EL WAD TO
KALABSHA
REPORTER: BRUCE WILLIAMS
The tombs of the Blemmye chieftains
FIELD operations began in 1960-61 when a joint ex¬
pedition with the Schweizerisches Institut für
Bauforschung und Altertumskunde conducted an
expedition just south of Aswan to record the part¬
ly rock-cut temple of Beit el Wali constructed by
Ramses II of the Nineteenth Dynasty and ex¬
cavate sites between there and Bab Kalabsha.
Most interesting was the excavation of several
sites with pottery and objects of a previously
unknown and distinctive material culture,
especially large circular stone tombs that contain¬
ed a beautiful red-burnished pottery decorated
with linear designs along with objects and coins
of late Roman times. It is now believed that these
were tombs of kinglets or chieftains of the so-
called Blemmyes, a powerful tribe known to have
occupied this part of Nubia in the dying days of
the Roman Empire. The new objects and pottery
of these tombs appear to give a cultural
substance to the Blemmyes, a people well known
in classical sources but hitherto unknown in ar¬
chaeology.
The largest A-Group tombs ever found
In January of 1964, members of the expedition
working at Qustul, just north of the Sudan fron¬
tier discovered a cemetery of A-Group tombs of
far greater size than ever before found in Nubia.
Although the tombs had been plundered and
burnt, the fragments of pottery and objects are so
numerous, varied and of such high quality, in¬
cluding some that are entirely unique, that had
these tombs been found in a Predynastic
cemetery north of the First Cataract or had they
been of much later date, they would have been
considered royal at once.
The testimony of an incense burner
However, there was additional evidence of
Egyptian-type kingship in the specific symbols
and regalia. Previously, contemporary evidence
of kings in Egypt extended back only two or three
generations before the start of the First Dynasty
about 3100 BC and a number of palace façades in¬
cised on pottery extended our knowledge a
generation or two further. This evidence has been
combined with later lists, annals, and legends to
make a speculative reconstruction of prehistoric
Egypt. Never before, however, had actual clear
remains of kings been found that corresponded to
these disconnected fragments.
In the tombs of Cemetery L at Qustul were found
two groups of evidence that confirm their royal
character and offer new clues to connect many of
these previously disconnected fragments. The
first group is a number of decorated incense
burners, cylindrical objects of sandstone or a
curious mixture of clay minerals that were
sometimes carved with representations. Mostly
these were incised, but one, the Qustul Incense
Burner, a particularly large example, was
elaborately carved in a sunk decoration related to
rock drawing in the Nile Valley and adjacent
deserts.
The piece had been seriously damaged by those
who destroyed the tombs and, though a proces¬
sion of three ships ending at a palace façade
could easily be seen, two of the three main
passengers on the ships had been badly damag¬
ed. However, when the piece was reexamined in
the light of the obviously royal character of the
cemetery, the restoration was immediately clear.
The first ship was taking a bound prisoner and his
guard to the sacrifice before the palace façade. In
the second ship was a king, shown by the White
Crown of Upper Egypt and the Horus falcon,
almost certainly on a serekh or palace façade; the
king seated on a block throne with a falcon perch¬
ed on a palace façade that contains his name in
front of him is a typical representation in Early
Dynastic Egypt.
The earliest recorded historical event
The second group of materials to give a historical
substance to the kings who had been buried in
Cemetery L is a series of painted pottery vessels
that show actual or claimed events. On one piece,
a bird attacks an oval that contains two diagonal
strokes, the symbol for Hierakonpolis, most
venerated of the ancient capitals of Upper Egypt.
This reference to a conflict is in fact the earliest
mention of this city, the earliest reference to a
political entity in Egypt and very probably the
earliest recorded historical event.
The most important of these vessels is a bowl,
originally with four groups of giraffes flanking
palm trees. Only two scenes have survived in one
of which can be seen a plant, which, though
somewhat oddly shaped, is clearly the symbol for
Upper Egypt. Again this is the first mention of Up¬
per Egypt as a political entity.
This new material will help define the date of the
few monumental objects from Egypt that refer to
events in this "prehistoric" age and they will also
help, along with the Qustul Incense Burner, to
identify other objects and a monument already
known in Nubia as belonging to the Pharaohs that
first led Nubia to political unity and cultural
distinction.
The Qustul incense burner
Photo © Oriental Institute
of the University of Chicago
Scenes depicted on the Qustul incense burner
Drawing © Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago
43

A-Group Nubia a unified state
The evidence derived from Cemetery L makes the
period just before the First Dynasty accessible as
a historic age for the first time. One point stands
out, completely unexpected, completely contrary
to previous thought or opinion. For nine genera¬
tions or more, between 3500/3400 and 3200/3100
BC, A-Group Nubia was a unified State, with the
full equipment of civilization, a government, a
Pharaoh, officials, State cult, writing and monu¬
ments, a State which succeeded in uniting people
who were not blood relations for a common pur¬
pose. Thus the inhabitants of Ta-Seti, the "Land
of the Bow" as Nubia was called by the ancient
Egyptians, participated fully and more equally
than anyone has ever supposed in the fateful
achievement of civilization on the Nile.
Tomas during the Christian era
When Nubia was converted to Christianity,
Tomas retained its importance. At Sheikh Daud
the expedition recorded several graffiti from the
Coptic era and excavated a tomb in which were
found the remains of four burials and a fragment
of pink sandstone cut in the shape of a camel.
EXPEDITION: UNIVERSITY OF
STRASBOURG
SITE: TOMAS
REPORTER: JEAN LECLANT
A number of Old Kingdom inscriptions found by
the expedition indicate that Tomas was an impor¬
tant trading centre of ancient Nubia and a depar¬
ture point for routes leading to various oases and
the desert route to Aswan. A careful survey of the
river bank on either side of Tomas revealed a
hitherto unsuspected abundance of north
Saharan rock art.
The stela of Bertoye
During the late Meroitic period Tomas and the
district around it formed part of one of the frontier
provinces of the Meroitic kingdom. At the site of
Karanog just upstream from Tomas, the expedi¬
tion discovered two extremely important texts,
one on a stela and the other on an offertory table.
Both were written in cursive Meroitic script and
both mentioned the name of Bertoye, a high of¬
ficial and priest of several religious cults of the
region and in particular of Amon. Bertoye figures .
in several other inscriptions in Meroitic, demotic
and also Greek, some of which are dated between
253 and 260 AD. He was therefore a contem¬
porary of the Meroitic king Tequerideamani. The
two texts from Karanog will be of great impor¬
tance in the studies of the Meroitic language now
being carried out (see inside back cover).
Previously only 800 Meroitic inscriptions, many of
them short, were available. The discovery of two
exceptionally well-preserved, long texts will be of
great value to the computer-aided study of the
Meroitic language.
Tha Mala of Bertoye.
Photo © J. Leclant, France
EXPEDITION: PENNSYLVANIA-YALE
EXPEDITION, U.S.A.
SITES: TOSHKA, ARMINNA
REPORTER: WILLIAM KELLY
SIMPSON
The prince of Miam
ONE of the more interesting of the expeditions'
achievements during the Nubian campaign was
the identification by the Pennyslvania-Yale Ex¬
pedition of one of three tombs at Toshka East,
just north of Abu Simbel, as the tomb of Heka-
nefer, prince of Miam (Miam being the ancient
name of a district of Nubia).
As early as 1905, Arthur Weigall, then Chief In¬
spector for the Antiquities Service, had found an
inscription near the tomb which he translated as
reading "chieftain of Miam, prince (heka) of
Nefer", not realizing that the last part of the in¬
scription was a proper name and that the transla¬
tion should have been "the chieftain of Miam,
Heka-nefer". Now, far to the north at Thebes, in
Egypt proper, a prince of Miam named Heka-
nefer is represented in the tomb of Huy, the
Viceroy of Nubia under King Tutankhamun
(about 1352-1343 BC). Tutankhamun, Huy and
Heka-nefer are all represented on the same wall of
the tomb, with the latter being shown in a proces¬
sion of tribute from the southlands. Of the figures
represented Heka-nefer alone is singled out by
name.
Although later investigators made the connexion
between the Heka-nefers of the Toshka inscrip¬
tion and of the Theban tomb, realizing that they
were the same individual, they failed to recognize
that the tomb at Toshka was that of the same
Heka-nefer. This is not so surprising as it might at
first seem, since there is a striking contrast bet¬
ween his representation at Thebes, where he is
shown as a typical Nubian with dark skin and
southern costume, and the impression made by
the tomb at Toshka, modelled on the Theban
tombs, from which one would surmise that he
was an Egyptian official.
Child of the nursery
Not only did the expedition locate the inscription
concerning Heka-nefer described by Weigall, it
also discovered four other previously unknown in¬
scriptions some distance to the south of the
tombs. One of these indicates that Heka-nefer
was the chief river transport agent, with control
over all river traffic in his principality. Three other
titles give a good indication of his relation to the
royal court at Thebes. Foremost of these is "child
of the nursery", a designation borne by the sons
of nobles and foreign princes who were sent to
the Egyptian court to be brought up with the
children of the Pharaoh. These classmates of the
Pharaoh proudly bore this title into their old age
as an indication of their childhood association
with the great court at Thebes. Second, he was
"bearer of the folding chair of the lord of the two
lands", a designation relating to his ceremonial
position in the royal service. Third, he is called
"king's sandal" or "king's sandalmaker", a title
which either stresses his subservience to the ruler
or else suggests that Miam was a region in which
a leather industry of note flourished.
Funerary statuette of Heka-nefer.
Photo © W,K. Simpson, Pennsylvania-Yale Egyptian expedition
Servants for the life hereafter
The most exciting discoveries in the tomb were
the five funerary statuettes of the prince which
were found in the pit leading to the burial
chamber. Cast aside by the grave robbers who
had removed all the finery and treasure buried
with the body, these statuettes were the prince's
shawabtis statuettes inscribed with a text ex¬
plaining that they would take the owner's place in
the after-life every time he was called upon to per¬
form manual labour. They are among the finest
shawabtis ever found in Nubia.
A Coptic stela
At Arminna West the expedition turned its atten¬
tion to a site previously thought to be that of a
monastery complex but which is perhaps better
described as a settlement inhabited successively
in the Meroitic, X-Group and Christian periods.
The most unexpected feature was a Coptic
church similar to several of the small churches
found further to the south. In the small apse a
Coptic tomb stela of terracotta showed that the
church was probably in use in the 10th century.
EXPEDITION: DUTCH
ARCHAEOLOGICAL
MISSION TO NUBIA
SITES: SHOKAN,
ABDALLAH NIRQI
REPORTER: H.D. SCHNEIDER
Late Meroitic settlement at Shokan
FROM 1962 to 1964 the Dutch mission excavated a
late Meroitic period (1st to 4th century AD) settle¬
ment, consisting of more than thirty houses, at
Shokan, some two to three kilometres north of
the Abu Simbel temples. The settlement was
notable for a three-room unit house system. The
houses had vaulted roofs, the doors were lined
with stone elements and the walls had niches and
sometimes red painted band decorations. A fine
eggshell ware beaker was found. It was decorated
with black line drawings of two prisoners tied to a
stake in the presence of a panther.
The church of Abdallah Nirqi
The mission discovered and excavated an 8th
century church at Abdallah Nirqi, four kilometres
north of Abu Simbel. The mud brick church
measured 15 by 12 metres and the walls were
preserved to a height of 3.5 metres. In the central
part of the church a staircase of seven steps led to
the pulpit. Walls and ceilings were covered with
painted scenes of the Holy Family and important
historical figures of the Nubian Church. Many of
these paintings were saved by the efforts of an
Egyptian/Yugoslav restoration mission.
44

Man in the jar.
Photo © H.D. Schneider, Netherlands
Christ and the Four Holy Beings
On the east wall of the right wing of the church
was a mandorla containing a bust of Christ sur¬
rounded by the Four Holy Beings of the Revela¬
tions, a man, an eagle, a calf and a lion. To this
motif a rich Greek cross, in Christian Nubia a sym¬
bol of new life, has been added. To the left of the
mandorla is the figure of a priest with a palm
branch in his hand.
Prisoner in the jar
A unique mural painting at Abdallah Nirqi depicts
a saint riding a white horse. Between the legs of
his mount is seen a naked, bearded man, im¬
prisoned in a storage jar, who cries out "Kyrie
eleison". Lord have mercy. This is thought to be
the representation of the climax of a lost legend,
when a Christian shut up by heathens in a vessel-
prison prays to a saint for help and deliverance.
The theme of imprisonment in a vessel is known
in Greek mythology and it is believed that in the
ancient East slaves were sometimes punished by
being enclosed in a "pythos", the grain storage
vessel of the granary.
EXPEDITION:
SITE:
REPORTER:
HUNGARIAN
ACADEMY OF
SCIENCES
ABDALLAH NIRQI
L. TÖRÖK
THE mission of the Hungarian Academy of
Sciences started work in Lower Nubia in summer
1964, at a time when only a few weeks remained
available for excavation. The site was on the west
bank of the Nile four kilometres north of the
famous rock temples of Abu Simbel.
Although the significance of the remains of Ab¬
dallah Nirqi (the name derives from the name of a
local farmer who lived near the site in the 1930s)
had already been recognized by the First Ar¬
chaeological Survey, it was still a surprise when,
in a church on the desert side of the site, the
Dutch Mission discovered wall-paintings of the
8th-12th centuries representing an artistic wealth
rivalling that of the Faras cathedral. After clearing
the church and detaching the wall-paintings, the
Dutch Mission had been obliged to leave Abdallah
Nirqi and, when the Hungarian Mission accepted
the proposal of the Antiquities Service of Egypt to
take over the concession, it decided to concen¬
trate its activity on the settlement and the Chris¬
tian cemetery belonging to it.
The bishop, the archangel
and the saint on horseback
The central part of the settlement, including the
church excavated by the Dutch Mission, was sur¬
rounded by a citadel wall. Two other churches
were discovered outside the wall. One of them,
the Western Church, was built shortly after the
citadel church was completed in the 8th century.
The other one, the Eastern Church, at the village
cemetery, was built some decades later. The
Western Church was decorated with wall-
paintings in the 11th century. The decoration of
the Western Church was, however, destroyed
fairly early on by the collapse of the vault.
Scraped-off pieces of the painting were found
scattered around in the filling of the new floor laid
after the vault was rebuilt. From the fragments we
were able to reconstruct three figures: those of a
bishop, of an archangel and of a saint on
horseback.
EXPEDITION: THE SPANISH
MISSION TO NUBIA
SITES: SHEIKH DAUD,
MASMAS, ARGIN,
QASR I KO,
ABKANARTI
REPORTER: E. RIPOLL-PERELLO
AND M.
LLONGUERAS-
CAMPANA
THE Spanish mission began work in Nubia in 1961.
It was divided into two teams, one operating at
Sheikh Daud and Masmas, in Egyptian Nubia,
and the other at Argin, Qasr Iko and the island of
Abkanarti, in Sudanese Nubia.
A fortress with a Roman-style street plan
In the fortress of Sheikh Daud, built in the second
half of the 6th century, thirty-eight dwellings and
a church were excavated. The streets were found
to be laid out on the model of a Roman encamp¬
ment. Abundant finds were made of pottery,
metal objects, seals and sandstone plaques,
weights, fragments of necklaces and some
sculptures, as well as some architectural items.
However, no inscriptions were found.
Excavations at Masmas
A large quantity of. prehistoric and historic rock
carvings and inscriptions were found and several
cemeteries, including C-Group, New Kingdom,
Meroitic and Christian burials were excavated.
The Meroitic cemeteries provided the richest fin¬
dings of any site examined by the Spanish expedi¬
tion in Nubia. They included a number of
sculptures very characteristic of the art style of
the period, inscriptions, interesting decorated of¬
fertory tables and, of particular interest, some fine
decorated vessels and an outstanding vase or¬
namented with floral and anthropomorphic
designs.
In Sudanese Nubia
The extensive Argin region, on the west bank of
the Nile, proved to be rich in tombs from the
C-Group and Pharaonic periods to the Christian
era. These provided a wealth of finds from every
epoch. An outstanding item from the Pharaonic
period was a fragment of a painted sarcophagus
dating from the 19th Dynasty. The Meroitic
period burials yielded some silver and silver-gilt
vases, a great variety of jewellery and a number of
weapons.
Two island sites
Further south, the expedition investigated sites
on the islands of Qasr Iko and Abkanarti. On Qasr
Iko two small Christian churches were excavated
and in one of them the remains of some murals
were discovered. On Abkanarti a village with a
fortified wall and a small fortress perched on a
rocky hill were examined. An interesting find in
this village was a metal foundry furnace and pot¬
tery kiln.
EXPEDITION: YUGOSLAV
INSTITUTE FOR THE
PROTECTION OF
HISTORIC
MONUMENTS
SITES: WADI ES SEBUA,
ABU ODA, SHEIKH
ABD EL GADIR,
ABDALLAH NIRQI
REPORTER: MILORAD MEDIC
THE Institute's contribution to the Nubian cam¬
paign consisted primarily of the difficult and
delicate task of removing, transferring and preser¬
ving mural paintings from temples and churches
at a number of sites.
Artists from every age left their mark on the Valley
of the Lions (Wadi es Sebua). Prehistoric rock
drawings were found not far from the Egyptian
reliefs and Christian paintings that adorned a tem¬
ple built by Ramses II and subsequently converted
into a Coptic church. Artists who accompanied
the first Christian missionaries painted fine por¬
traits of St. Peter and St. George, crosses and
other Christian symbols over the Egyptian reliefs.
Today more than thirty mural paintings from the
temples of Wadi es Sebua can be seen in the
museums of Cairo.
Coptic art
from Abu Oda and Abdallah Nirqi
At Abu Oda the mission removed from the temple
of Horemheb some of the oldest and finest Chris¬
tian mural paintings found in Nubia, including a
representation of Christ and a holy martyr. Mean¬
while, a team of Dutch archaeologists had
discovered a small Christian church at Abdallah
Nirqi which contained a number of well preserved
murals including a fine mandorla. These, too,
were removed by the mission and sent to the
Coptic Museum in Cairo.
Sheikh Abd el Gadir
The final task of the mission was the removal
from the 9th century church of Sheikh Abd el
Gadir of some fine murals including one of a Nu¬
bian eparch holding a model of the church in his
hand, a nativity scene and a portrayal of the Holy
Trinity.
A technical feat
The removal and preservation of these murals by
the Yugoslav mission was a very considerable
technical feat. In many cases the murals were
liable to fall to pieces at a touch. Before undertak¬
ing the work the Yugoslav Institute carried out a
series of preliminary experiments which resulted
in the development of the techniques successfully
employed under the difficult conditions of the Nu¬
bian campaign.
The mandorla mural at Abdallah Nirqi.
Photo © M. Medic, Yugoslavia .
45
