FEW nations, in the course of their re¬
cent history, have endured so much
physical and psychological suffering,
or been so gravely afflicted materially, as the
people of Nicaragua. Besides the great
poverty of most of its inhabitants, there
have been the disasters caused by the earth¬
quake in 1972 and the destruction suffered
during the liberation struggle. The treasures
of the country have been pillaged; its
resources destroyed, its towns and villages
severely damaged and its infrastructures
dislocated. But it is the toll taken among its
people which is the heaviest: 35,000 dead,
100,000 injured, most of them adolescents,
and 40,000 orphaned, out of a total popula¬
tion of 2,200,000.
At its 108th session, the Executive Board
of Unesco expressed "its total solidarity
with the people and Government of
Nicaragua in their arduous task of national
reconstruction, and its determination to co¬
operate in that task within the fields of com¬
petence of Unesco", and requested me to
take the necessary steps to achieve those
ends.
I visited Nicaragua from 16 to 19
December 1979, and was able to judge for
myself the extent of the work that had to be
done to rebuild the country.
What is required is to mobilize all the
country's manpower, to reorganize and ex¬
pand its educational, cultural and scientific
institutions and to redeploy its means of pro¬
duction, in line with a coherent, overall pro¬
gramme. The country's new authorities
have committed themselves to achieving
these goals, and in order to do so have
drawn up a national reconstruction plan
which deserves both our sympathy and our
support.
A key objective in this plan is the achieve¬
ment of general literacy throughout the
country, because illiteracy is a major
obstacle to conscious participation by all
citizens in the task of national revival and
because such participation is the first pre¬
requisite to enable the people of Nicaragua
to follow their own path of development,
with due regard for their cultural identity
and in keeping with their own aspirations.
At the present time, 35.2 per cent of
children between the ages of 7 and 12 have
no opportunity of undergoing primary
education and 50.2 per cent of the popula¬
tion aged 10 and over some 850,000
people are illiterate, the rural areas being
the worst affected in this respect.
The campaign for the eradication of il¬
literacy has therefore been planned to serve
as the lever for an educational and social ad¬
vancement movement which is to be ex¬
tended to all categories of the population.
Far from being confined to the younger
generation, it is to cater for all illiterates,
without any restriction or discrimination.




10
Nicaragua's
nation-wide
literacy
campaign
An appeal
by the
Director-General
of Unesco
The campaign, which began on 24 March
1980, will enlist the services of 200,000
literacy teachers who will devote themselves
to teaching 850,000 illiterates. For six
months, they will live together and share
the same living conditions. This is a stirring
experiment, the aims of which go beyond
the sphere of education alone, seeking to
bring about a profound change in the rela¬
tions between the various social strata in
the country.
The scope of this campaign and the spirit
informing it both reflect the determination to
reconcile all the country's citizens by bring¬
ing them together in a great effort of na¬
tional solidarity. It should enable them all,
individually, to develop their full potential
while helping to improve the well-being of all
and, in particular, should assist the young,
who had to break off their studies in order to
take part in the national struggle, in finding
their place again, without delay, in working
life.
Nicaragua will not, however, be able to
achieve these objectives unless it receives
moral and material support from the world
community. At a time when the country is
only just beginning to lift itself out of its
ruins, this support should make it easier for
it to rely on its own efforts in the future. The
total financial contribution which it hopes.
today, to receive from international solidari¬
ty amounts to 20 million dollars.
Contributions in kind will also be
welcome, particularly school supplies and
equipment paper, pencils, exercise books,
blackboards, audio-visual aids, radios as
well as motor vehicles, camping equipment,
clothing, blankets, oil-lamps, powdered or
tinned foodstuffs.
Moreover, since illiteracy cannot be over¬
come unless it is, so to speak, cut off at the
very source, a large number of new schools
will have to be opened for children reaching
school age. There will therefore be scope for
international solidarity to be shown firstly,
by providing Nicaragua with the means to
build these schools and, secondly, by
assisting in training and refresher pro¬
grammes for those who are called upon to
teach in them.
Nicaragua has made heavy sacrifices for
its liberationwhich is also, in some
measure, the liberation of each one of
usand it is embarking on an experiment
of the greatest interest from the ethical
and educational points of view which
may be useful to many other peoples.
We are therefore in duty bound to meet its
expectations.
On behalf of the United Nations Educa¬
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
and with the unanimous support of its Ex¬
ecutive Board, I accordingly invite all
governments. National Commissions for
Unesco, public and private institutions in all
Member States, and international founda¬
tions and organizations, both governmental
and non-governmental, to give proof of their
active solidarity with liberated Nicaragua.
I invite the Churches of various denomina¬
tions, trade union organizations and profes¬
sional associations, women's organizations
and youth movements, to make available to
the Nicaraguan authorities financial and
material resources that will enable them to
achieve the objectives they have in view.
I make this appeal to all those who have
responsibilities in the field of education: to
public services and private programmes con¬
cerned with education and literacy work, to
universities, to teachers' associations, and
to research centres, in the hope that they
will offer the Nicaraguan Government all the
technical assistance within their power in
this undertaking.
Lastly, I appeal to all those who enjoy the
benefits of education, to the adults, the
children and the young people who are to¬
day receiving education and realize how
much it is enriching them. I am confident
that they will be able to organize them¬
selves, to collect resources, on however
modest a scale, and to arrange for them to
be sent to those in Nicaragua who are en¬
deavouring to take their future in hand.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
