Nubia's corridor
of time
From the Kingdom of Kush
to the triumph of Islam
William Y. Adams
OR more than five centuries, from
1580 until around 1000 BC, the region
between the First and Fourth Cata¬
racts of the Nile was ruled by Egyptian gar¬
risons and governors, and its revenues went
to support the Pharaonic regime in Egypt.
When at last the occupiers went home, it
was an Egyptianized Nubia (or Kush, as it
was then known) that they left behind them.
For millennia thereafter the people of Kush
were able to sustain a high civilization of
their own, and intermittently to play a part
on the world stage as well.
Neither history nor archaeology provides
a very clear picture of events in Nubia during
the centuries immediately following the
Egyptian departure. It seems however that
the worship of Amon and other Egyptian
Egyptian rule of Nubia, then known as "Kush", ended sometime around 1000 BC but Egyptian traditions were maintained there for
centuries by Nubian rulers who when they died were buried under pyramids. These two pyramids in the royal necropolis of the
kingdom of Kush, at Meroë, were built so close together that their bases touch.

Photo © National Archaeological Museum, Athens
Finely worked gold ram's head earring (6th
century BC) is from a necropolis at Meroë.
On the forehead are two crowned uraei,
and a sun disc is on the head. Ram's head
pendants forming part of the regalia of
Kushite kings may be connected with the
age-old veneration for the ram in Nubia.
> deities was maintained at the temple cities of
Napata and Kawa, either by Egyptians or by
a native priesthood that kept up Egyptian
traditions.
By 800 BC we see evidence for the rise of
a local dynasty which may have allied itself
with the priests of Amon at Napata. Only a
short time later one of the Nubian princes, a
certain Kashta, was invited by the priests of
Amon to assume the ancient crown of the
Pharaohs in Egypt itself.
Kashta duly travelled to Thebes, the an¬
cient Egyptian capital, and was there in¬
vested with the titles and authority of the
Pharaoh. Except for this one journey there is
no evidence that he ever made any con¬
certed effort to rule in Egypt. In the follow¬
ing generation however another Nubian
ruler, Piye or Piankhi, was again summoned
to the aid of the beleaguered 'domains of
Amon in Egypt. Unlike his predecessor,
Piankhi was not content merely to relieve
the threat to Thebes; he chased the invaders
back into the north of Egypt, subdued them
one by one, and reunited the country under
his personal rule. For the next 88 years, from
751 to 663 BC, the Nubians ruled over both
Egypt and Kush as the Pharaohs of the
25th or "Ethiopian" Dynasty.
Nubian rule in Egypt was terminated by an
Assyrian invasion in 663 BC. Back in their
own country, however, the erstwhile
WILLIAM Y. ADAMS, of the United States, is
professor of anthropology at the University of
Kentucky. During the late 1950s he was director
of archaeological salvage excavations in Glen
Canyon on the Colorado River. Invited by Unesco
and the Sudanese Government to assist in the
salvage operations in Nubia, he planned and
carried out excavations for the Sudanese
Antiquities Service from 1959 to 1966 and co¬
ordinated the activities of fourteen other
expeditions. He is the author of an important
book entitled Nubia, Corridor to Africa, Allen
Lane, London, 1977.
Bronze head, left, is a likeness of
Shabaqa, one of the Nubian Kings who
from 751 to 663 BC ruled over both
Nubia and Egypt as Pharaohs of the
25th or "Ethiopian" Dynasty. Two uraei,
stylized representations of the sacred
asp, an emblem of Egyptian
sovereignty, are combined with a
typically Nubian royal attribute, the
skullcap, to symbolize the unification
of Nubia and Egypt under one king.
Pharaohs from the south continued to main¬
tain the political, religious, and artistic tradi¬
tions of ancient Egypt for another
1,000 years, until sometime in the fourth
century AD. They built temples in the Egyp¬
tian style to the Egyptian gods (as well as
some of their own), proclaimed their deeds
(at least in the earlier centuries) in
hieroglyphic texts, and when they died were
buried under pyramids.
Their royal capital was at first established
in the old Egyptian temple-city of Napata,
near the Fourth Cataract of the Nile. Later it
was transferred to the city of Meroe, at a
point considerably farther up the Nile.
The conquest of Egypt by Alexander the
Great in 332 BC brought both Egypt and
Kush (or Aethiopia as it was usually termed
by Classical writers) to the immediate atten¬
tion of the Classical world. Diplomatic rela¬
tions were established between the Nubian
kingdom and the newly enthroned
Ptolemaic (that is, Greek) rulers of Egypt,
and over the next centuries many Greek and
Roman diplomats and merchants travelled
to the almost legendary city of Meroe, deep
in the African interior.
Archaeology has revealed that Meroe in
its heyday was indeed an impressive place.
Among its buildings of stone and brick it
numbered more than half a dozen temples,
at least two major palaces, and a Roman-
style bathing establishment. The great Tem¬
ple of Amon was second in size only to the
Temple of Amon at Thebes, in Egypt. Two
miles away to the east, a serried rank of
stone pyramids marked the final resting
place of the rulers of Kush. In the hinterland
to the south and east of the capital, the
steppeland cities of Musawwarat, Naqa and
Wad ben Naqa were almost as impressive as
Meroe itself.
The establishment of Roman rule in Egypt
in 30 BC was marked initially by hostilities
along the Roman-Nubian frontier. However,
The Kushite King of Egypt, Taharqa
(25th Dynasty, 690-664 BC) has been
described by a modern scholar as "a
great personality and a great builder
approaching the scale of Ramses II".
The black diorite portrait of Taharqa,
above, has Kushite characteristics but
his features have been idealized to
conform to the canons of Egyptian
royal portraiture. Right, frontal view of
a 75-cm-long granite sphinx of Taharqa
in which his Sudanese features are far
more strongly expressed.
a treaty signed in 21 BC ushered in a period
of amicable relations between the two
powers which lasted nearly three centuries.
The last centuries of the Roman Empire
were a time of upheaval and migration in
north Africa no less than in Europe and Asia.
The Empire of Kush, now more than a thou¬
sand years old, was menaced by barbarian
nomads Blemmyes and Noba both
in the east and in the west. An equally
serious threat was posed by the newly
emergent power of Axum in the Abyssinian
highlands, which vied with Meroe in the
long-distance trade of gold, ivory, and
slaves to the Mediterranean lands. In
350 AD one of the rulers of Axum, Aezanas,
marched to the Nile with the intention of
subduing the crumbling empire of Kush. He
found however that he had been forestalled
by the barbarian Noba, who had already
overrun the city and hinterland of Meroe and
brought its ancient dynasty to an end.
The traditions of the Pharaohs seem to
have died with the last of the Meroitic rulers
in the more southerly parts of Kush. The
next two centuries comprise a dark age from
which we have neither archaeological nor
historical evidence of any consequence. But
in the northern districts, on the frontiers of
Roman Egypt, Pharaonic traditions per¬
sisted a little longer in the successor
kingdom of Ballana, or Nobatia as it was
later to be called.
Our principal knowledge of this kingdom
comes from the opulent mound-tombs of its
rulers, in the great twin cemeteries of
Ballana and Qustul close to the present
Egyptian-Sudanese border. Here we can
find evidence for the continued worship of
the Egyptian deity Isis, and for the con¬
tinued use of some of the traditional
Pharaonic insignia by the Ballana rulers. A
short distance further north, at the fortified
citadel of Qasr Ibrim, there is also evidence
for the continued use of the Meroitic system
26

Photo Alexis Vorontzoff, Unesco'© British Museum, London
of alphabetic writing, which had been
developed in the later centuries of the em¬
pire of Kush (see inside back cover).
A new beginning in Nubian history is
marked by the introduction of Christianity in
the middle of the 6th century. Ecclesiastical
historians suggest that at this time there
were three independent Nubian kingdoms:
Nobatia in the north, Makouria in the region
between the Third and Fourth Cataracts of
the Nile, and Aiwa around the junction of
the Blue and White Niles. The conversion of
all three kingdoms was effected before the
end of the 6th century, a fact which is at¬
tested archaeologically not only by the ap¬
pearance of many churches but by an abrupt
change in burial ritual all over Nubia at the
same time.
About a century later the two northern
Nubian kingdoms of Makouria and Nobatia
were consolidated under one ruler. The
royal residence was at Old Dongola, in the
territory of Makouria, but the old territory of
Nobatia retained a separate name and identi¬
ty. It was governed by a viceroy called the
Eparch of Nobatia.
Less than a century after the Christianiza-
tion of Nubia, Egypt fell to the armies of
Islam. For a long time afterward however
the bulk of the Egyptian population remain¬
ed Christian, and the indigenous Coptic
Church continued to prosper even under
Arab rulers. It was with this native Egyptian
church that the Christians of Nubia were af¬
filiated. Their bishops were appointed by the
Patriarch of Alexandria, and many of them
were of Egyptian nationality.
Almost immediately after their conquest
of Egypt the Arabs tried to add Nubia to
their domains, but two separate invasions in
642 and in 652 were successfully repulsed.
The Nubians and the rulers of Egypt then
concluded a treaty, called the Baqt, which w
guaranteed the territorial integrity and the Y
Rare sandstone head,
right, with its small
mouth, pointed face
and curly hair, is a
funerary object
produced in Nubia
during the so-called
"Meroitic" period
which takes its name
from Meroë, the
capital of the Nubian
Kushite kingdom for
some six centuries
until the 4th century
AD. Almost life size,
it was discovered in a
child's grave at Amir
Abdallah by a
Franco-Sudanese
archaeological
expedition.
The production of highly distinctive
forms of decorated pottery was
among the remarkable
achievements of Nubia during the
Meroitic period. This red brown
earthenware pot with black and
white decoration (2nd to 3rd
century AD) was unearthed at
Karanog (Egyptian Nubia). The
stylized leafy vine branches
encircling its shoulder indicate that
it was produced by a school of
artists whose trade-mark was the
vine motif. Its body is adorned with
antelopes, plants and birds. Other
works by the same artist, dubbed
the "Antelope Painter", have been
identified.
Photo © Egyptian Antiquities Service, Cairo
The sides of this delicate glass
vessel (1st-2nd century AD) are
less than a millimetre thick.
Glass bottles, flasks and beakers
found in the graves of
Meroitic Nubians are thought
to have been largely imported from
Egypt or even further afield.
27

Bronze oil lamp with horse's
head handle, below, was found
in a grave at the fortress of Qasr
Ibrim during the excavation
campaign of 1961-1962. Probably
dating from the 2nd or 3rd
century AD, it reflects
Hellenistic influences but
is thought to have been
produced in Nubia.
Photo A. Vorontzoff, Unesco © British Museum, London
Photo © Egyptian Antiquities Service, Cairo Photo © Egyptian Museum, Cairo.
Silver crown and bronze oil lamp in the form of a man's head (above) together with
the remarkable wooden chest with ivory inlays (below) are part of a sensationally rich
find made over forty years ago in a Nile-side royal cemetery at Ballana. They date from
the 4th-5th century when Ballana was the centre of a kingdom which flourished in
northern Nubia on the frontier of Roman Egypt. Fastened to the circlet of the crown,
which is richly encrusted with semi-precious stones and glass, are five winged uraei
which show how ancient Pharaonic traditions had survived into a period when
Hellenistic and Byzantine influence was very strong in Nubia. The chest (late 4th
century) has the shape of a multi-storied house. Its ivory panels are incised with Greek
and Egyptian gods including Pan, Zeus, and the Egyptian god Bes.
independent sovereignty of Nubia for cen¬
turies to come.
Protected by the Baqt treaty, and revitaliz¬
ed by zeal for its new Christian faith. Nubia
in the Middle Ages entered a second golden
age of peace and prosperity. Religious art,
architecture, and literature flourished, ex¬
hibiting a combination of Coptic and Byzan¬
tine influences as well as some strictly in¬
digenous elements. The court at Dongola
was organized along Byzantine lines, as
were the legal institutions of the northern
Nubian kingdom.
Both Makouria and Aiwa evidently pro¬
spered from the supply of African goods to
the Islamic empires along the Mediterranean
littoral.
The 200-year episode of the Crusades
gave rise to a new species of military
feudalism whose effects were felt alike in
Europe, in the Near East, and in north
Africa. In Egypt this tendency culminated in
1250 in the establishment of the dynastic
quarrels which weakened and undermined
the Christian kingdoms, and provided a fer¬
tile field for Mameluke intervention.
A final blow was dealt to the medieval
monarchies by the migration into the Sudan
of a great many Arab nomads who had been
displaced from Egypt by the harshly
repressive measures of the Mamelukes. At
first they moved southward through the Red
Sea hills, but gradually they spread
westward to the Nile Valley and beyond,
overrunning and destroying the already
weakened Christian monarchies. In
Makouria and in Aiwa the last vestiges both
of central authority and of the organized
practice of Christianity died out around 1500
AD.
We know little about events in Nubia dur¬
ing the centuries following the destruction
of the medieval kingdoms. It is evident
however that the disappearance of an
organized faith left a fertile ground of activi¬
ty for wandering Islamic teachers and
mystics, for within a matter of two or three
centuries the whole of the northern Sudan
was converted to the faith of Islam.
When the Pasha Mohammed Ali, founder
of the modern Egyptian state, conquered
the Sudan in 1821, he found the whole
country united in the Islamic faith although
politically it was divided into more than a
dozen petty principalities.
William Y. Adams.
