RESEARCH:
A VITAL
HUMAN
ACTIVITY
"Not so long ago, those engaged in research
were the 'odd' and the unusual; few in
number, they were generally considered ex¬
ceptional individuals, in short, 'eccentrics'. To¬
day, research workers number millions and
these 'organized millions' cover almost every
conceivable sphere of activity. In terms of
numbers employed, in terms of money in¬
vested, in terms of energy expended, research
is tending increasingly to become the major
concern of the world. From being a luxury or a
diversion, it has moved to the noble status of
a vital human activ'rty-just as vital, in fact, as
nutrition and reproduction! Our epoch is often
described in terms of the rise of the masses. It
could just as easily (and, in effect, the two
events are basically compatible) be characteriz¬
ed in terms of the rise of research...
"If research occupies an increasingly large
place in human activity, it is not the result of a
whim, fashion, or chance, but simply because
man, in becoming adult, is irresistibly driven to
take responsibility for the evolution of life on
earth and because research is the very expres¬
sion (in a considered state) of this evolutionary
effort not only to subsist, but to 'be' more ful¬
ly, not only to survive, but to go beyond mere
survival towards 'higher' life in an irreversible
way."
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
(Extract from Science and Christ, 1965)
Photo © Citroen Archives, Paris
History under the geologist's hammer
Early in his career, Teilhard realised that a far-reaching geological
investigation was indispensable to any inquiry Into the origins of man.
He rarely travelled without his geologist's hammer (above, Teilhard in
northern China in 1932). As an adviser to the Chinese National Geological
Service, he for many years took an active part in the excavations at
Chou-K'ou-tlen near Peking (photo far right, taken in 1929), which led to
the major discovery of Sinanthropus (Peking Man). Right, Teilhard with
some of his colleagues, the Chinese geologists Pei Wen Chung and C.C.
Young, Davidson Black of Canada, and George Barbour of the U.K.
"Whenever we visit sites where Teilhard de Chardin worked, we refer to
his studies and we cannot fail to be impressed by his spirit of
abnegation, his sense of anticipation and the quality of his contributions
to Chinese studies." This tribute to Teilhard de Chardin was made at the
Unesco symposium in September 1981 by Zhu Ming Zhen and Li Yan
Xian of the Peking Institute of vertebrate palaeontology and
paleoanthropology.
30

o
THE TEILHARD PHENOMENON
by Yves Coppens
IN the present state of our knowledge of
general palaeontology it seems surpris¬
ing that Africa was not at once iden¬
tified as the only part of the world where
there was a prospect of finding the first
traces of the human species."
These were the extraordinarily prescient
words used by Pierre Teilhard de Chardin in
New York in September 1954.
Less than five years later the greatest
palaeontological adventure of all time was to
start in East Africa: along a 2,000-kilometre-
long fault, where sediment had been trap¬
ped and built up, eight major international
expeditions or more than 500 people were
over fifteen years to collect hundreds of
thousands of fossil bones, including hun¬
dreds of hominid remains. The history of the
human species was thus pushed far back in
time: we now speak in terms of four million
years for man, three million for the first
stone tools, nearly two million for the first
building and 1.5 million years for the first
rites.
I cannot help thinking what intense
pleasure it would have given Pierre Teilhard
de Chardin to have lived through this quite
recent period.
The reason why I begin with this pro¬
phetic quotation, and a brief summary of
what we have discovered and learnt since
Father Teilhard de Chardin's death, is to link
the world of learning of the 1950s with that
of today. But it is also by way of a reminder
that Pierre Teilhard de Chardin was first and
foremost a palaeontologist.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin's passion for
palaeontology was sparked on the day when
he first met Marcellin Boule, Professor of
Palaeontology at the Museum of Natural
History in Paris.
"Do you remember our first interview,
some time around the middle of July,
1912?" he once wrote to Marcellin Boule.
"On that day, about two o'clock I knocked
timidly on the door of the laboratory on the
Place Valhubert which I have so often walk¬
ed through since. It was your last precious
evening before you went on holiday, and
you were very busy. But you saw me all the
same and suggested that I should come and
work with you at your school, the Ecole de
Gaudry. That was how, in a matter of five
minutes, I embarked on what has been my
life ever since, namely research and adven¬
ture in human palaeontology. Never, I
believe, did Providence play such a key role
in my life..."
For eleven years, Pierre Teilhard de Char-
din assiduously haunted the famous collec¬
tions of the Institute of Palaeontology at the
Museum.
Although his departure for China in 1923
marked the beginning of long spells abroad
and of much travelling all over the world,
this very active life never prevented him,
every time he was in Paris, coming back to
work in this great institution at the Jardin
des Plantes where, at the age of thirty-one,
he had been "bowled over by fossils".
Thus in addition to his life as a thinker and
writer, and as a priest, Pierre Teilhard de
Chardin led a full life as a palaeontologist.
His output of scientific work was that of an
excellent research worker, as if he had done
nothing else in his life: from five or six to
twelve or thirteen articles or papers a year,
or a total of over 250 titles in some forty
years of research.
This scientific work illustrates the way in
which palaeontology commonly runs into
geology at one end (since you must start
with the matrix in order to understand where
fossils come from) and into prehistory at the
other (since all through time and its deposits
the quest, consciously or otherwise, is for
Man).
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin was so well
aware of this that the first research institute
he founded in Peking in 1940 with Father
Leroy, was the one he called the Institute of
Geobiology (Earth and Life).
From 1929 onward he closely followed
most major work in human palaeontology.
During his long stays in China, for instance,
he took part with Davidson Black, George
Barbour, C.C. Young and Pei Wen Chung in
the excavation of the famous Chou Kou
Tien deposit near Peking, and also with
Franz Weidenreich in the study of Sinan¬
thropus remains. He also went to Java in
1935 and 1938 to visit the famous Pithecan¬
thropus sites at Trinil and Sangiran with
Ralph von Koenigswald. Then he went, also,
on two occasions, in 1951 and 1953, to
study the Australopithecus caves in South
YVES COPPENS, French specialist in pre¬
history, is a professor at the Muséum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris. He is a member of the
executive committee of the International Union of
Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences and
chairman of the commission on the oldest
hominids of the International Union of Prehistoric
and Protohistoric Sciences. He has led major an¬
thropological expeditions to Chad (1960-1966)
and Ethiopia in the Omo river basin (1967-1976)
and Afar (1972-1981). He is the author of many
works on the origin of mankind including a con¬
tribution to volume 1 of the Unesco General
History of Africa (Unesco, Heinemann, University
of California Press, 1981).
31

THE TEILHARD PHENOMENON
Africa under the leadership of Revil Mason,
Van Riet Lowe and John Robinson.
Prehistoric industries were also part of
Father Teilhard's field of interest. When
prospecting for fossils, he was also looking
for traces of Man: in this way he came to
discover many Palaeolithic and Neolithic
sites in China, India, Burma, at Djibouti and
in Ethiopia, to visit many others and to make
attempts at synthesis.
In geology he produced many very impor¬
tant pieces of work. It is very evident that
Teilhard insisted on making a fundamental
study of the structure of a deposit before
starting to collect. I think he must have writ¬
ten on the geology of all the sites he had oc¬
casion to study or visit from Jersey to Java,
and of course throughout China.
What emerges from this considerable
volume of scientific work, which never¬
theless represents only .part of Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin's output and thought?
First, it is obviously work in subjects dealing
with the past palaeontology, geology and
prehistory.
It is also field work. Teilhard travelled the
world with his geological hammer in his
hand, rushing off the moment an outcrop
appeared which revealed the deep structure
of the earth, undismayed by distances,
32
climates or people. Struck down by a
myocardial infarction in 1947, he wrote, "On
the morning... of 1 June, heart attack...
Then a spell in hospital... And a turning-
point in my life. Compulsory abandonment
of the great life in the field. Today, at this
very moment, I should be in the plane to
Johannesburg..."
Next, it is synthetical in approach, at
every level. Each chance find, each analysis
of a phenomenon, a fossil or a prehistoric
object, was an excuse to write a comprehen¬
sive study on the problem in question.
Moreover at another level Pierre Teilhard de
Chardin was obviously a past master at link¬
ing his geological studies with his work on
the content of the strata studied, the fossils
and the flints. At yet another level one of the
original features of Teilhard's thought was
that he saw Man and Life in their earthly and
cosmic contexts, and hence could relate ap¬
parently isolated phenomena to the general
evolution of the Universe.
Then again it is international, or perhaps
cosmopolitan, in character. Not so much in
its subject-matter (which is nothing if not
universal) as in the way it was approached
and carried out. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
worked in Europe, Asia, Africa and America.
He lived for nearly twenty years in China,
and collaborated a great deal with C.C.
Young, Pei Wen Chung, Yang Kieh and
H.C. Chang. He lived in the United States
and was a research associate at the Wenner-
Gren Foundation for Anthropological
Research.
Lastly, allow me to recall another feature
of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin's work which is
unusual and yet not negligible, namely his
scientific poetry.
"Some thousands of millions of years
ago, not, it would appear, by regular pro¬
cess of astral evolution, but as the result of
some unbelievable accident (a brush with
another star? an internal upheaval?) a frag¬
ment of matter composed of particularly
stable atoms was detached from the surface
of the sun. Without breaking the bonds at¬
taching it to the rest, and just at the right
distance from the mother-star to receive a
moderate radiation, this fragment began to
condense, to roll itself up, to take shape..."
And on the origin of Man, "With
hominization, in spite of the insignificance
of the anatomical leap, we have the beginn¬
ing of a new age. The earth 'gets a new
skin'... Man came silently into the world".
H Yves Coppens
