Disability
and the developing world
by Norman Acton
Asurvey conducted in 1963 by Rehabi¬
litation International, an interna¬
tional agency with 105 member
organizations which serves disabled persons
in sixty-five countries, produced the now
familiar estimates that there were some
450 million people in the world with signifi¬
cant disabilities, and that the number was
increasing by approximately three million per
year. Subsequent calculations by other in¬
stitutions, including the World Health
Organization, substantiate that the total is
probably in the range of the original
estimate. If the increase has been at the rate
estimated, then the total today is nearly
500 million. It can be assumed; therefore,
that at least ten per cent of any population is
likely to have been born with or to have ac¬
quired a physical, sensory or mental disabili¬
ty of sufficient impact to prevent their func¬
tioning as fully as persons of their age and
sex are expected to do in their societies.
Information about the situation in the
developing areas is the least accurate. It is
probable that the incidence is higher. While
progress in the more advanced areas has
reduced the amount of impairment caused
by diseases such as poliomyelitis and
trachoma, by malnutrition and by faulty pre¬
natal care, it has provided equivalent in¬
creases through the automobile, in¬
dustrialization, pollution, increased longevi¬
ty, diets laden with sugars and fats and
other blessings. Nevertheless, it is probable
that the conditions in the less developed
areas malnutrition, poor sanitation,
endemic and epidemic crippling diseases,
faulty practices surrounding birth, inade¬
quate treatment of infection are producing
even larger proportions of disability than in
the industrialized countries.
If the assumption that at least one in ten
of every population is likely to be born with
or acquire a significant disability, is applied
to the developing areas of the world, this
means that we find in those countries at
least 300 million, and probably more, people
with disabilities. These are the places where
we find the world's least advantaged
people those for whom poverty, hunger,
ignorance, disease, misery and
hopelessness are the only conditions of life.
Most of these people live either in one of
some two million rural villages where the
population ekes out a traditional existence
with little or no benefit from the resources
and capabilities of modern society, or they
live in one of the vast and squalid slums
which aregrowing and festering in and
around many major metropolises.
For the most part, the people of these
hungry villages and these suffering slums
are without access to or knowledge of the
most basic health and social services,
without primary education and without op¬
portunities for vocational preparation. Food
is not available to meet minimal nutrition
needs, the most elementary requirements of
sanitation are neither known nor practiced.
Exposure to all of the main causes of im¬
pairment of mothers and
children, birth defects, diseases and ac¬
cidents universal, and none of the
knowledge, skill or resources needed to
assist those who are impaired is effectively
present.
Even when rehabilitation programmes are
in operation, as they are in many cities in the
developing countries, their services do not
reach these people the residents of the
rural areas and the urban slums. Distances
to be travelled and the costs of transporta¬
tion, the costs of rehabilitation and related
care, traditions, social and cultural barriers
are all obstacles. Even if they were not, the
basic fact is that whatever services exist are
incapable of dealing with more than a few of
the people with disabilities.
Thanks to a study of the situation of han¬
dicapped children being carried out by
Rehabilitation International with assistance
from the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), I am able to offer some
generalizations that I am certain are valid for
the great majority of the people living in
such areas.
The first has to do with the dreadful im¬
plications of the combination of disability
and poverty. Either one may cause the
other, and their presence in combination has
a tremendous capacity to destroy the lives of
people with impairments and to impose on
families burdens that are too crushing to
bear.
We have not come to grips with the in¬
teractions between these two forces the
frequency with which untreated impairment
starts or accelerates the collapse of a
family's already fragile economic base, the
degree to which social and economic
deprivation are fundamental causes of im¬
pairment, and of the escalation of impair¬
ment into permanent disability. We do not
yet think of services to prevent impairment
and to rehabilitate disabled persons as being
basic components of economic and social
development because we have not yet faced
the evidence to be found out there in the
villages and barrios and favelas that they
are.
Second, we are finding that, when pro¬
grammes to assist in the development of the
community reach it, the benefits go last and
least to those families that are burdened
with both poverty and disability, usually
because the family with a disabled member
has been to some degree rejected from the
mainstream of community life and
resources. Within the family, it is too often
the child with the impairment who is denied
the chance for better food, for education,
for medical care, for social and intellectual
stimulation, even when these benefits do
become available to his or her sisters and |
brothers. I
NORMAN ACTON is Secretary-General of
Rehabilitation International, the world's largest
federation of organizations providing services for
the disabled. He is also chairman of the Council of
World Organizations Interested in the Handicap¬
ped, a co-ordinating group of major international
non-governmental organizations. Founding Presi¬
dent of the International Sports Organization for
the Disabled, he has been a consultant on prob¬
lems of the handicapped to the United Nations,
Unesco and UNICEF.
29

The double profile of disability
IN the world's industrially developed
countries the scale of the disability
situation is just the same as in the
developing world, but the nature of the
problem is different. There is no
trachoma, no onchocerciasis, no severe
quantitative malnutrition, but alcoholism
and drug-addiction are on the increase,
and road accidents and accidents at
work those characteristic features of
industrial society are claiming a rising
toll of victims.
It is estimated that some 40 million
persons are handicapped as a result of
alcohol or drug abuse. In 14 of the 16
countries where WHO has carried out
surveys, over 2 per cent of the popula¬
tion are alcoholics. In France, for exam¬
ple, alcoholics constitute 4 per cent of
the population, while 9 per cent drink ex¬
cessively. It should be noted that
alcoholism is a cause ofmanypsychiatric
disorders, as well as accidents on the
roads and at work.
Cardiovascular and cerebrovascular ill¬
nesses, which have major disabling ef¬
fects, are particularly widespread among
those who live at the hectic pace of the
industrially developed world. Every year,
in Europe alone, 2.2 persons in every
thousand, that is 900,000 persons under
the age of 65, have a heart attack
(myocardial infarct). An estimated third
of these may live on for at least another
ten years, but theirparticipation in active
life will be reduced. This means that
some 3 million persons will be handicap¬
ped to a greater or lesser degree. This
cause of handicap is far less widespread
in the developing countries.
The various afflictions resulting from
peri-natal accidents (some 110 million
births take place each year) are found in
all countries, but they are mostprevalent
in the developing world. This is not only
because of insufficient medical attention
during pregnancy and confinement but
because some 75 per cent of all births
take place in the developing countries
where, moreover, peri-natal risk is
several times higher than in the more
developed countries. Besides, in India
and Sri Lanka, for example, 35 per cent
of new-born babies weigh less than
2,500 grammes, whereas in Europe the
figure is between 6 and 8 per cent.
Nutrition during pregnancy and the
first months of life is vitally important,
yet some 800 million persons today go
hungry and 800 more suffer from dietary
deficiencies. In 1978 at least 20 million
children under five perished because
they were deprived of the minimum con¬
ditions necessary for survival.
Even in the most developed countries,
at least 40 per cent of those considered

to be mentally backward and) or to suf¬
fer from motor deficiencies, owe their
disability to peri-natal defect. The most
common cause is anoxia (oxygen lack or
deficiency).
The age of the mother is another key
factor in determining the incidence of
various genetic defects. Over the age of
36, for example, the risk of giving birth
to a mongol child increases exponential¬
ly. The avoidance of premature births
will also help reduce the number of
handicapped persons.
Everyone in the world must feel con¬
cerned by these problems, and current
knowledge must be made widely known,
for in every country the disparity bet¬
ween what can be done and what is
done is glaring and intolerable. All too
often the benefits are being reaped only
by an elite.
Federico Mayor
The understanding and
support of the family are of
vital importance to the
handicapped. For the past
ten years the Family Centre
at Kaele, in north
Cameroon, has been giving
courses which teach the
parents of handicapped
children how best to help
them adapt to their
handicap and to live a
normal life participating
fully in the life of their
community. Opposite page,
a father and mother
teaching their handicapped
child how to stand and
walk. Right, learning to
walk with crutches.
. Third, and directly connected with
everything I am saying, there is an abysmal
lack of accurate information about disability,
its causes and consequences, and about
what we can do about these things; and an
equally appalling wealth of misinformation,
prejudice, superstition and fear. This is a
major factor in the family's inadequate reac¬
tion to the problem when it arises; it is a fun¬
damental reason for the community's
ostracizing individuals and families that are
affected with disability; ¡t exists in the in¬
stitutions that might be helping, but
aren't the health centre, the school, the
religious grouping; it permeates all echelons
of government from the village chief to the
ministers of health, education, welfare,
labour, community development, planning
and whatever else may exist; and it is
endemic in the representatives of interna¬
tional and other organizations who are ad¬
vising on the procedures and priorities of
development, and administering interna¬
tional assistance. This absence of informa¬
tion and understanding, and the manner in
which it reinforces the traditional distorted
concepts of disability which flourish
throughout the world, does much to con¬
ceal the real magnitude of the problem and
to confuse everyone's thinking about the
solutions.
Fourth, these factors combine to produce
attitudes and patterns of individual and
social behaviour that are themselves impor¬
tant causes of disability and of handicapped
lives. Children with even minor impairments
are often stigmatized as crippled or blind or
deaf or retarded and shut off from the very
support and stimulation that would enable
them to develop and function in society.
Adults with certain categories of disability,
varying with traditions and culture, are
denied participation in the basic forms of
social life the productive activities of the
community, its institutions of government,
marriage and parenthood more because of
the stigma attached to disability than
because it practically limits the capacity for
action.
These social forces are not unique to the
developing areas; they are well known in
every part of the world. In general, however,
in the developing world, the individual's role
in the community is much more rigidly defin¬
ed by the circumstances of the family and its
traditional relationships and his or her self-
image and confidence are derived from the
capacity to fulfil that role in the social con¬
text in which it has been evolved. Thus
when, because of the functional limitations
associated with an impairment or because of
the stigmatization of the disabled person, he
or she is not permitted to grow into and fulfil
the traditional role, the individual is very like¬
ly to become a non-person, an outcast
without value to self, to the family or to the
community.
Fifth, at least 90 per cent and probably
more of whatever rehabilitation services ex¬
ist in the developing areas have been design¬
ed and activated on the basis of models
found in the industrialized West, and have
been assisted and staffed by people trained
in those models. This international co¬
operation and assistance has taken place
almost entirely in the past 30 years. It has
produced some islands of excellence cen¬
tres, schools and programmes that are per¬
forming as well as the models from which i
they have been derived and workers of I
31

. great dedication and skill. Two crucial prob¬
lems remain. First, the totality of the existing
services reach at best a few thousand people
in the areas where we estimate there are at
least 300 million with disabilities and an ad¬
ditional two million each year. And
second, we may question whether the con¬
cepts of rehabilitation services which have
evolved in the industrialized West are
necessarily appropriate for areas with quite
different economic and social situations.
The rehabilitation model which has
dominated the scene both in the industrializ¬
ed West and in our international assistance
activity has three working parts: fancy
buildings, elaborate equipment and highly
specialized professional personnel. We have
evolved standards for each of these com¬
ponents in the most sophisticated setting
with unlimited research and development
funds, and have cloaked these standards in
an aura so sacred that our friends in the
developing world are led to believe that
anything different is unacceptable.
Our emphasis has been on services that the
professional will give to the disabled person
and, to a lesser extent, to the family. Initially,
because the fashions of our epoch have led
us to believe that we can solve anything by an
operation, a pill, a pad, an exercise, or a diet,
we have projected rehabilitation as an essen¬
tially medical exercise. Educational and voca¬
tional rehabilitation have been close behind
and, in the cities of the developing areas, the
numbers of centres specializing in the
medical rehabilitation of a few people are
followed closely by other centres dealing in
what is called special education and voca¬
tional training and sheltered employment, but
which too often carry out primarily custodial
functions.
We have said, "Bring your disabled per¬
son to our magic house, with our charmed
equipment and our inspired specialists and
we will change him or her and send him or
her back to you, less disabled and better
able to cope in your community." But we
have also had to say, depending on the cir¬
cumstances, "We can take only those of
you who can pay our charges, or who are
within the neighbourhood of the magic
house, or who can come back three times a
week for six months, or who have transpor¬
tation, or who are willing to accept our
definition of your future".
It has been our practice, and the burden
of the example we export, to lift both the
problem and the person with the problem
out of the social context in which they exist
and to attempt to find a solution in a new
context of our making. We have only slowly
learned that a person with a disability is also
a person with a lot of other things: with a
family, with traditions, with customs, with
tastes and appetites, with fears and ap¬
prehensions, with pride and ambition, and
with a culture through which these elements
are integrated. The foundation of the think¬
ing we have exported has been to remove
the individual from everything in his or her
life except the impairment and to concen¬
trate on that. We have, to all practical pur¬
poses, ignored the rich array of support that
is ready to be activated in the community, in
the family, and in the individual with the
impairment.
Numbers six and seven are ideas that
apply to all international aid for develop¬
ment, and are directly relevant to our con¬
cerns. Number six is the principle of social
magnetism. It says that, by and large, when
we venture into the developing world, we
32
find our greatest empathy with the people
who can speak our language, who share
some of our ideas about how society should
be organized and with whom we feel com¬
fortable. People who meet these criteria are
of course usually people who, for one
reason or another, have had a Western
education and acculturation, who under¬
stand the conceptual basis on which our
human assistance programmes are based,
and who aspire to a similar, albeit inap¬
propriate, set of services in their countries.
Please understand me, some of my dearest
friends in the world are in the category I
have just described, and I fully understand
the roles they have played in motivating
developing activity, but the hard reality is
that they do not always comprehend the real
dimensions of the disability problem as it af¬
fects all the people of their countries, and
their reinforcement of our parochial con¬
cepts does not necessarily mean that they
are relevant. Our most important challenge
is to understand what disability means to the
person and the family in the village, and the
urban slum.
Number seven, also applicable to all
development activity, is the collapse of the
"trickle-down" theory. We have assumed
that, by stimulating and assisting the
establishment of showplace institutions in
capital cities, we would start a trickling-
down process that would eventually diffuse
appropriate levels of service to the smaller
communities. When we have talked about
national programmes, we have referred to
networks of show place centres which
would trickle down. It hasn't happened, and
we should now know that it won't happen
unless there is a very hard-headed plan,
based on the realities of both resources and
culture to activate it.
What can we do to get a better result
from the resources we expect to put into the
improvement of the life of disabled persons
in areas in the earlier stages of development?
Let me suggest some principles that I think
you should consider.
I haven't said much about prevention, but
this should not imply that I do not think it
important. It is completely obvious that we
will never effectively reduce the problem of
disability until we do something intelligent
about reducing the incidence of impairment.
Look at the major causes malnutrition,
birth defects, disease and accidents and at
the multi-faceted action necessary to reduce
their tragic consequences.
We can prevent the impairment by
preventing the malnutrition, the birth
defect, the disease or the accident; if it hap¬
pens, we can prevent the permanent
disability by effective care and treatment;
and we can prevent so many of the real
social consequences, the handicap, by in¬
telligent social action and public education
programmes.
We have made a major mistake in
separating prevention and rehabilitation.
The human experience is a progressive
development which starts before concep¬
tion, when the characteristics of the mating
partners may or may not produce impair¬
ment, and terminates at death which too
often is the culmination of a progressive
reduction of capacities, a process which in
other contexts we call disability. Everyone is
faced, at the moment his potential parents
meet, with the prospect of impairment;
everyone is likely to suffer a diminution of
capacity during his or her lifetime and
whether it will be called a disability depends
on the culture more than on the incapacity.
Our programmes, and the programmes we
have urged upon the developing countries,
are not based on these realities. They are
based on the idea that an impairment is a
special event, and that it requires that the
recipient be immediately removed from the
normal stream of development and perfor¬
mance, and introduced to the blessings of
our buildings, equipment and professional
personnel.
I would like to suggest that the whole pro¬
cess should be a continuum of prevention,
rehabilitation and social action. These are
not separate crusades, they are interlocking
and interacting components of a system
whose only purpose is to support the op¬
timum development of each individual's
capacity and personality. Our planning, and
the planning we discuss with the developing
countries, should be an extension of that
concept.
A high priority must be given to cor£]í>/
ing everyone who deals in policy ai-<Gt
these things that disability is an important
cause and consequence of under¬
development, and that dealing with it must
be a priority item in any >nelligent develop¬
ment plan.
Another concern is with what we gran¬
diosely call the infrastructure. Because of
our involvement with the "magic house, the
charmed equipment, and the inspired
specialists," we have generally overlooked
the potential contribution of the people and
institutions which, having more general ob¬
jectives, nevertheless can and should be
helping us. Rehabilitation International has
talked with a great many village health
workers, teachers, social security agents,
political and religious leaders, community
development motivators and others who
should be ready to assist in this area. The
pervasive lack of information I mentioned
earlier applies, and also there is an absence
of understanding and spirit and motivation
that must be corrected if we are to change
the situation.
The most important asset for any pro¬
gramme for disability prevention and
rehabilitation is the family, and in most
developing areas the ties and functions of
the family are strong components of the
social context of the individual. We should
give a much higher priority to activities that
will overcome the superstitions and fears of
the members of the families of disabled per¬
sons, instruct them in procedures they can
follow to prevent disability or assist the
rehabilitation process, and acquaint them
with the sources of help that may be or
become available. Successful work at this
level, by remaining within the existing social
framework of the individual's life, can do
much to maintain normal human develop¬
ment and performance whether or not the
impairment can be eliminated or reduced.
I am aware that I have both over¬
simplified and over-generalized the situa¬
tion, and that there are examples of pro¬
gress supported by international assistance
that are more positive than I have described.
I will continue, however, to defend the
thesis that the situations I have described
are those in which the great majority of
disabled people ¡n the developing world are
living, and that the characteristics I have
ascribed to most of our efforts to assist
them are accurate the evidence is out
there to prove it.
Norman Acton
