SOS parents
Photo © Gilles Cohen, Paris

The decisive role of the family
in rehabilitating
handicapped children
by Leo F. Buscaglia PARENTS are the most important and
vital resource in the process of
evaluating, educating, and rehabili¬
tating a child with a handicap. Yet, for some
mysterious reason, the child's parents are
often seen as "the enemy". They are con¬
sidered by many professionals as uninform¬
ed meddlers who are much too emotionally
involved in their child's problems to offer
even the simplest objective insight or
positive action. They are, therefore, treated
as secondary citizens in the diagnostic and
re-educational processes, if not excluded
altogether.
This is true, even though research find¬
ings consistently indicate that well inform¬
ed, optimistic, accepting parents have a
most positive and significant effect upon the
education, well-being, and adjustment of
their handicapped child. In the long run,
their influence is far more productive and
long-lasting than that of physicians, nurses,
therapists, psychologists, or any of the
many other helpers who will encounter the
child in his lifetime.
It is, therefore, of monumental impor¬
tance that parents and professionals strive
to form a mutually beneficial partnership
dedicated to the social, physical,
psychological, and educational growth of
the child.
The following four principles are offered
as a possible guide to action designed to
achieve this end.
To begin with, the parents must be helped
to understand their emotional and intellec¬
tual responses relating to their handi¬
capped child, for these feelings may be
preventing them from understanding
clearly, and co-operating fully, in any
therapeutic process.
Parents must be offered an honest, mean¬
ingful, and accurate medical, social,
psychological, and educational evaluation
of their child's physical and emotional
condition, and intellectual abilities.
The parents must be given a thorough
understanding of educational or rehabilita¬
tions! programmes designed and recom¬
mended for their child.
The parents must be encouraged to
assume an active role in the re-education
of their child and be offered a means for
evaluating the effectiveness of the pro¬
gramme at every stage of its progress.
At best, it is not easy to be a parent. In
fact, it is perhaps the greatest and most
LEO F. BUSCAGLIA, of the United States of
America, is professor of education at the Univer¬
sity of Southern California, Los Angeles. He is the
author of many articles and of seven books in¬
cluding: Love; The Disabled and their Parents: a
Counselling Challenge; The Way of the Bull;
Human Advocacy; and Personhood. A world
traveller, he has taught and lectured in many
countries. His programmes broadcast on United
States National Public Television have been wide¬
ly acclaimed.
complex of human responsibilities. Yet,
most of us are tragically unprepared for this
demanding task. It is even more difficult to
be trie parent of a handicapped child, for
birth is, in a very real sense, a gift. It is an
awesome discovery to learn that one has
produced an imperfect gift.
This realization often brings with it natural
feelings of fear, pain, disappointment, loss,
guilt, confusion, and general feelings of
helplessness and inadequacy. Most parents
have little knowledge of the conditions that
provoke handicaps and few resources
necessary to understand them. This lack of
understanding can produce feelings which
freeze them into inactivity, depression and
self-recrimination, and prevent them from
dealing adequately and productively with
their handicapped child.
It is, therefore, inconceivable to expect
that parents can immediately accept the
birth of their handicapped child and be ready
to help in the educational process. They
must first be encouraged to understand that
their feelings are appropriate, that it is
understandable that they should be feeling a
sense of disbelief and depression; that it is
acceptable that they are in emotional pain,
questioning and fearful; that they would
like to wish it all away; that they should
curse the fates that brought them this
"misfortune".
At this point it may be impossible for
parents to imagine that there is anything
positive about a handicap. It is only with
time, insight and re-education that the
parent can be shown that whatever is
positive is to be found not in the han¬
dicap in the child who is handicapped.
Their child is a child like other children. But
he or she is also a unique creation, a com¬
bination of not only what there is, but also a
limitless possibility of what, with their active
participation, can be. So, the first step in the
rehabilitation process lies in emotionally
aiding parents through their incapacitating
feelings, on to acceptance and active
participation.
Professionals often feel that it is a waste
of their time and energies to give medical,
psychological and educational information
to parents. After all, they state, it takes
years of training to prepare a professional.
Their argument is usually that parents would
not understand the problem anyway, and a
little knowledge is a dangerous thing. To
know "the facts" would only confuse and
frighten them more.
Nothing could be further from the truth!
Knowledge and understanding are great
eradicators of fear providing that the infor¬
mation given is not shrouded in mysterious
medical jargon or half truths or uncomfor¬
table pronouncements. What information is
given must be honest, gentle, straight- 1
forward, and clear. In addition, diagnosis I

often is nothing more than a statement of
what is wrong with the child, what the prob¬
lems are, the skills that cannot be perform¬
ed, the abilities the child does not have. It is
no wonder that parents leave such an ex¬
perience in pain, bitterness and pessimism.
A real diagnostic presentation must be
equally concerned with what the child can
do, at what levels he is able to function,
those aspects which show promise and
where the strengths lie for it ¡s with these
positive aspects that the therapeutic pro¬
gramme can be actualized. In her book, The
Siege, Clara Clarborne Clark describes the
results of such a diagnostic interview follow¬
ing months of tests and examinations of her
autistic child. She says she needed informa¬
tion and techniques and the professionals
gave her none. "I needed references," she
continues, "I needed to know all about my
daughter Elly, because whoever else may or
may not work with her, her main therapist is
me."
Too many professionals, because they
often feel a general discomfort and inade¬
quacy when faced with the human problem
A young handicapped girl learning to walk at a centre for the disabled
in Lesotho, southern Africa.
Photo Martine Frank © Magnum, Paris
of talking to parents about their children's
handicaps, hide these inadequacies in test
results, complicated medical case histories,
mysterious labels and high-sounding jargon
which only serve to leave parents feeling
abandoned, confused, and more fearful and
despairing than ever.
Parents must be given the facts, for the
facts will free them and bring them the
necessary sensitivity and wisdom which will
lead them to acquire the realistic skills
necessary for their participation in their
child's education and growth. The facts will
offer them the resources to see and under¬
stand their child in a realistic fashion and
make them a more knowledgeable and com¬
fortable part of the rehabilitation team. Pro¬
fessionals must realize that no matter how
many trained individuals work with the han¬
dicapped person in his or her lifetime, none
will have more consistent contact, or a more
significant and lasting effect than the
parents.
The rehabilitation and education pro¬
grammes for the disabled require the best
possible interaction between and the parti¬
cipation of many individuals. Depending
upon the disability, expertise may be needed
from general physicians, neurologists,
psychologists, occupational and physical
therapists, educators, language and speech
pathologists, and a variety of others. But the
individuals who give significance and pur¬
pose to this process, and are at the core of
it, will always be the handicapped Individual
and the parents.
It is therefore imperative that the parents
thoroughly understand whatever remedial
plans are designed for their child. Yet when
parents bring their handicapped child to
hospital for consultations or therapy ses¬
sions, which could be great educational ex¬
periences for them, they are more often than
not asked to "wait outside". If they ask
questions they are often put off or embar¬
rassingly talked down to. The inference is
that information on their own child is private
and none of their concern, that they are too
ignorant to understand it even if it were ex¬
plained. It is no wonder, therefore, that
parents of the handicapped so often ex¬
press feelings of isolation, inadequacy and
impotence.
To exclude parents from the educational
planning for their child, as is so often the
case, is both ludicrous and counter¬
productive, for no one has a greater need to
understand the child than its parents. It is
they who will experience the dally progress
or lack thereof. It is they who will observe
and aid their child through pain and tears as
the child battles his or her way through the
therapeutic programme. Professionals must
understand that parents may not be perfect,
they may not always know or do "what they
should know or do", but nonetheless, they
will still have to understand and do more
than anyone else. For who else will be
spending more time and energy in perma¬
nent, everyday contact with the child?
Parents are more than willing to take an
active part in their child's remedial pro¬
gramme and will carry out their charge with
the tender loving care and consistency that
most professionals do not have time for. It is
logical that since they will be doing
something anyway, they may as well be do¬
ing the right thing.
It is important not simply that parents be
given time to work through their feelings.

that they be given accurate information and
made integral partners in the planning of the
programme for their child, they must also be
encouraged to do something tangible and
positive with the strength and Information
they have acquired. Knowing is a beginning,
but the true value of knowledge lies in its
daily application.
The rehabilitation process is a long, ar¬
duous, demanding journey through which
the parents must be supported and advised.
They will be required to learn how to
schedule their time so as to be able to meet
their child's needs, without giving up their
own personal physical, psychological and
intellectual requirements for growth. I have
known parents who have not had time for
themselves in all the years since the birth of
their handicapped child. They cannot even
obtain the help of baby-sitters who often,
due to their fears or lack of information, are
reluctant to take responsibility for handicap¬
ped children.
Parents will have special motivational
problems, for the rehabilitation process is
often slow. So much expended energy on
their part often seems to produce so few
tangible results and so little progress. They
will have to be given the courage to con¬
tinue. In addition, they will have to learn
how to cope with the problem of rejection
by society.
As part of the team they will need to know
precisely what they can do for their child,
what realistic demands can be set, and what
possible limitations there are. They must be
helped over feelings of inadequacy and Im¬
perfection as they involve themselves in the
learning process. They must be made to
understand the fact that they are not ex¬
pected to be perfect but rather, only
human that, perhaps, their love, concern
and humanity are their greatest assets.
If these conditions are adhered to, a
bridge between parents and professionals
can be constructed over which the han¬
dicapped child may be guided to in¬
dependence, growth, security and self-
esteem.
What is needed is a bill of parental rights
regarding parents' partnership with pro¬
fessionals ¡n helping the handicapped child.
It may be stated as follows:
Parents have a right to take the necessary
time to deal with the myriad confused and
painful feelings associated with giving
birth to an exceptional child.
Parents have a right to sound medical,
psychological and educational knowledge
regarding their child's present condition
and future possibilities.
Parents have a right to a clear under¬
standing of their specific role in meeting
their child's unique needs.
Parents have a right to participate in the
programme of remediation and re¬
education of their child.
Parents have a right to periodic ré¬
évaluation and involvement in the con¬
tinual planning for new goals which may
be required as a result of time, maturation
and new findings.
Parents have a right to information re¬
garding available community support
systems to meet their financial. Intellectual
and emotional needs.
Parents have a right to some interaction
with other parents who have handicapped
children so that they may share feelings,
hopes, and general human considerations
as they meet the challenge of raising their
handicapped child.
Parents have a right to develop in their
roles as persons, apart from their role as
parents of a handicapped child.
Given these rights, parents grow to
become real assets in the rehabilitation and
education of their handicapped child.
As one parent of a handicapped child
wrote, "You wake one day to realize that all
the trials, the turmoil, the anxiety, the fear
have given you a modicum of that which
you sought understanding. You find,
somewhat to your surprise, that the lessons
you have learned are priceless. Although
you have sometimes rebelled against it all,
questioned it, resented it, you would not
relinquish these lessons. For you have
begun to acquire that depth you have long
sought. Your experiences have brought you
into closer touch with others. Therein lies
the victory for you. Therein lies your ability
to appreciate your child. If the child can
understand that you have grown to this con¬
viction he or she will feel freer, not a burden
to you or anyone, not a pulllng-down ele¬
ment in your life but an uplifting one. If the
child can understand that, then he will know
he has given you the opportunity to grow
with him. And the growing process will con¬
tinue onward. The possibilities are endless.
Isn't that what It's all about?"
To this, I can only add, "Yes that is truly
what it is all about!" , Leo F Buscag|¡a

