Solar energy Solar power
for the Sahel:
A Unesco feasibility study

Adramatic reduction in the cost of photovoltaic cells (solar cells
which convert sunlight directly into electricity) by 1985,
comparable to that which occurred in the price of transistors
during the 1960s, is forecast in a Feasibility Study carried out recently
by Unesco for the Regional Solar Centre to be established in
Bamako, Mali.
The decision to set up the Regional Centre was taken in October
1978 at a meeting of the Heads of State of the six countries that make
up the West African Economic Community (CEAO) Ivory Coast,
Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal and Upper Volta. It illustrates the
determination of the countries of the Sahel to solve their energy
problems and move towards greater technological independence.
The purpose of the Unesco Study was to provide guidelines for the
organization, financing and work plan of the Regional Centre which
was conceived of as a large pilot unit for solar training and research
and the production of solar equipment. The Study includes an in-
depth analysis of the energy situation and needs of the six CEAO
countries covering conventional as well as new and renewable
sources of energy. Particular consideration was given to solar and
wind energy.
Of all the renewable energies hydroelectricity is the cheapest, and,
wherever consumption is high and the distances involved justify the
installation of transformers and power lines, this solution is to be
preferred to local energy production.
Where energy consumption is low and distances are too great to
justify the cost of installing power lines, local solar or wind installa¬
tions offer the best solution. The Unesco Study shows that small
diesel-operated power stations of up to 100 kW are more costly to run
than solar or wind installations.
Calculations made for the Unesco Study on the basis of costs as at
May 1979 show that, for pumping water for irrigation in arid areas, for
up to 30 kW of installed capacity, solar pumps are cheaper per cubic
metre of water pumped than diesel-operated pumps. Since then the
cost of oil has almost doubled whilst the cost of photovoltaic cells
has dropped rapidly and the solar pump solution is now probably
cheaper per cubic metre of water pumped for up to as much as 50 kW
of installed capacity. Under average conditions an installation of this
size could handle the irrigation needs of between 50 and 100 hectares
of land.
But energy cost is not the only criterion of choice. Other factors
have to be taken into account such as the reliability and life of the
equipment selected, the qualified personnel needed to produce,
operate and maintain it, the ease with which it is possible to increase
or decrease operating capacity, the possibility of producing all or part
of the equipment in the user country. On all these counts photo¬
voltaic solar installations have a clear advantage over alternative
systems such as diesel, solar thermodynamic or wind installations.
Photovoltaic solar installations require virtually no maintenance,
spare parts or supervision by qualified personnel. They work unat¬
tended and need only a simple monthly check. Their capacity can
easily be enlarged by the addition of further cell panels. Furthermore,
they can already be partially produced in developing countries using
imported solar cells and it is anticipated that in the near future even
these will be produced in the user countries.
A big effort is now being made in a number of industrialized coun¬
tries to perfect new and simpler techniques for the production of
photovoltaic cells. It is forecast that the price of a solar cell module
. will drop from 13 dollars (the price in February 1970) to about 50 cents
by 1985 and to 15 cents in 1988. A drop in price of this scale will make
photovoltaic solar energy an even more attractive proposition for
developing countries.
Although the Unesco Feasibility Study was based on the situation
in the six countries of the West African Economic Community, its
general conclusions are valid for all developing countries in the world
sun belt. It is hoped that the basic technical orientations and
priorities proposed in the Unesco Study will be adopted and that
wide application of its findings will represent a considerable step for¬
ward towards the achievement of a viable new energy strategy.
Source : Koenigsberger er ai, Manual of Tropical Housing and Building,
Pan I, Climatic Design, 1973, Longman 29
