The logo of CANA, the independent news agency launched by the
English-speaking Caribbean countries in 1975, with Unesco support.

Unesco
and the Caribbean
Ranging from the introduction of educational innovations in
the Dominican Republic and co-operation with the Caribbean
News Agency (CANA) to support for scientific institutes for
biological research and the study and monitoring of marine oil
pollution in the region, Unesco's activities touch on almost all
aspects of life in the Caribbean.
In the field of education, Unesco, in co-operation with the
countries concerned, has launched a major regional project
whose main objectives are: the provision of eight to ten years'
schooling for all children in the region; the eradication of il¬
literacy and the development of adult education; the reform
and improvement in the general quality and efficiency of
educational systems. Adopted at an intergovernmental
regional meeting, held in Quito, Ecuador, in April 1981, these
objectives emphasize the political will of Member States
of the Caribbean region to initiate a process of economic
and social development centred on man and his all-round
education.
In the natural sciences, within the framework of its Man
and the Biosphere Programme, Unesco is involved in a major
project of research, training and demonstration aimed at in¬
tegrated management of humid tropical zones. Pilot projects
in Latin America and the Caribbean region are concerned with
land-use problems in humid tropical zones such as selective
land clearing, reafforestation and shifting cultivation, as well
as migration of mountain populations to the tropical
lowlands. In marine science the emphasis is on strengthening
scientific infrastructures in accordance with Member States'
requirements.
In the social sciences, studies are being carried out on en¬
dogenous socio-cultural factors in order to identify original
forms of development which would respond to regional re¬
quirements while respecting each country's cultural identity.
Unesco is also collaborating closely with a number of
organizations concerned with the development of the social
sciences in the region, particularly in the fields of research
and training.
Unesco is also undertaking a major research project on
cultural contacts in the Caribbean and their evolution.
Translations from and into Creole are being encouraged and
plans are in hand for production of a General History of the
Caribbean. In addition, the International Simón Bolívar Prize,
which honours persons or institutions that have made a
meritorious contribution to the freedom, independence and
dignity of peoples and to the strengthening of solidarity
among nations, is to be awarded for the first time on 24 July
1983, the bicentenary of the birth of the "Liberator".
