Perspectives and prospects
by Ralph Slatyer
IT is ten years since the Man and Biosphere
(MAB) Programme was launched by
Unesco, with the aim of providing
improved scientific knowledge and trained
personnel needed to manage natural
resources.
The Programme has passed through a
lengthy period of planning and testing out
new approaches to co-operative research,
into its present stage of active operational
projects in real field situations. In each of the
major themes of MAB there are now a
number of comprehensive well-funded pro¬
jects producing vital management-related in¬
formation, and many more are emerging.
The ingredients which have been essential
to the success of the Programme can now
be seen more clearly than when it was first
commenced.
A first ingredient is participation in a MAB
project of the range of individuals and
organizations that are affected by, or can
help solve, the problems which the project
contains. Thus a comprehensive MAB field
project involves scientists from various areas
of the natural and social sciences, often
from various institutions and sometimes
from several countries or international
organizations. It also involves decision¬
makers and representatives of local popula¬
tions which are affected by land-
management policies and decisions. The
development of such interdisciplinary
groups has meant that basic information
which is collected or made available,
whether in the natural or social sciences, is
co-ordinated and brought to bear on the
practical problems of land management.
A second ingredient is that MAB is a
"from-the-bottom-up" programme, in
which individual countries decide their own
priorities for research, and undertake that
34
research within broad agreed frameworks
for international co-operation. This helps ex¬
plain the wide support that MAB has
generated in countries spanning the whole
range of ecological and geopolitical con¬
ditions found in the world. MAB is their
programme. At the same time, this
characteristic of MAB puts a special respon¬
sibility on countries. Until a particular coun¬
try the government, or an institution
in the country, or even an individual starts
a project, so far as MAB is concerned,
nothing happens. There is no MAB project.
So, there has to be a firm national commit¬
ment before a project gets off the ground.
This helps ensure that the project is dealing
with a problem having some ranking in na¬
tional priorities.
A third ingredient has been the degree to
which individual projects have attracted ad¬
ditional financial support once they have
become established. The initial input of
funds associated with the national commit¬
ment to each project has, in many cases,
been catalysed by modest financial support
from Unesco's regular budget to generate
substantial additional support from both
bilateral and multilateral sources. This
substantial multiplier effect of MAB funds
has been of critical importance to many
projects.
A final ingredient has been the perfor¬
mance of the Paris-based international MAB
Secretariat, a team of less than ten
specialists assisted by a small number of
scientists seconded periodically from
Member States. Although each member of
the team has specific responsibilities for a
part of the programme, the degree of in¬
terpersonal interaction is such that the col¬
lective contribution is much greater than the
sum of the individual efforts. In my view it
would be difficult to overstress the role of
the Secretariat in the present success of
MAB.
In late 1981, MAB will be 10 years old. To
mark the Programme's tenth anniversary, a
conference will be held in "September in
Paris to review the progress that has been
made, to evaluate shortcomings as well as
achievements, and to point the way for the
further evolution of the Programme.
It is, of course, too early to say what will
be the result of this important exercise.
However, it seems likely that MAB will con¬
tinue to be based on an interdisciplinary,
problem-oriented approach; that the Pro¬
gramme will resist the temptation of em¬
bracing everything and will remain concen¬
trated on a few themes of priority impor¬
tance; and that increased attention will be
given to demonstrating the practical implica¬
tions of the results of research, and to
presenting these results in a form useful for
decision-making and environmental educa¬
tion. I also expect that the international
scientific community will play an increasing
role in the Programme as important general,
principles concerned with land utilization;
emerge.
At the same time the Programme is likely
to maintain its characteristics of a nationally-
based international programme of research
and training, rooted in the reality of priority
problems as perceived at local and national
ievels. As such, I hope it will continue to
play a distinctive part in the overall world¬
wide effort to tackle environmental and
natural resources problems.
RALPH SLATYER, Australia's ambassador and
permanent delegate to Unesco, is president of the
International Co-ordinating Council of Unesco's
Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme. An
expert on resource ecology, he retains his ap¬
pointment as professor of environmental biology
at the Australian National University, Canberra.
