-*<*
Photo© Archives Photographiques Paris/SPADEM.
Above, general view of the Hall of Bulls, and, opposite
page, the reconstruction presented at a recent exhibition
at the Galeries Nationales of the Grand Palais, Paris.
Below, a plan of the Hall of Bulls.



The hall of bulls
THE Hall of Bulls forms the heart of the
Lascaux cave complex. Its form and
prolific painted decoration make it a
masterpiece of prehistoric art. From 1963 to
1975, twenty-five French laboratories work¬
ed together with the historic monuments
authority and prehistorians to save the site.
Their efforts constitute an outstanding ex¬
ample of how science can serve art.
Although the grotto was saved, its condi¬
tion remained fragile. A balance had to be
carefully maintained between the tempe¬
rature, humidity and carbon dioxide con¬
tent. This balance was precarious, and visits
now have to be strictly limited.
To enable a wide public to appreciate the
beauty of Lascaux, a life-size facsimile of the
Hall of Bulls was constructed for the
Science au Service de l'Art exhibition held
last year at the Grand Palais, Paris. The fac¬
simile was produced with the collaboration
of the French National Geographic Institute
which had previously made a photogram¬
metric survey of the cave. This made it
possible to reconstitute the contours of the
Hall of Bulls to an accuracy of a quarter of a
centimetre.
8

Photo J. Rochaix © Kodak-Pathé, Paris



Reconstituted masterpieces of early man
Using the data from the Institute's survey,
a firm specializing in the construction of
theatre sets began the difficult task of
building an artificial cave. A team of
specialists made twenty-six unit modules,
each module comprising a frame with five
vertical and seven horizontal sections in
plywood at intervals of twenty-five cen¬
timetres.
The modules were then filled in with ex¬
panded polystyrene blocks to reconstitute
the cave's macrorelief. Each block was then
modelled to obtain the microrelief of the
rocky sides of the cave. The polystyrene sur¬
face of the blocks was protected by a layer
of latex and then a mixture of polyester resin
and fibre glass was sprayed on, forming a
resistant, fireproof layer about five
millimetres thick. This plastic structure
faithfully moulds the underlying cast, but
without adhering to it.
This polyester structure held by the
wooden frame was then removed from the
polystyrene blocks and covered with an
ochre and red coating mixed with sand,
gravel and resin to give the overall impres¬
sion of a limestone and calcite surface. The
areas which were to receive the reproduc¬
tions of the frescoes were painted white.
The twenty-six fireproof modules were then
assembled by screwing them on to a raised
platform which resembled the sloping floor
of the cave.
So far so good! A replica of the Hall of
Bulls now existed. But how could
photographic enlargements of the wall pain¬
tings be placed on the uneven surface of the
walls? To attempt a photographic
reconstitution in relief of the Lascaux pain¬
tings seemed to be to defy the laws of
photography and physics. A team of experts
from the Kodak-Pathé research laboratories
at Vincennes, near Paris, came up with the
following ingenious solution to the problem.
The technique they evolved is new and
consists of transferring by a decalcomania
process a photographic image, previously
stripped of its original paper base, on to any
type of surface (wood, stone, metal, fabric,
plastic, plaster, etc.). Transfer is achieved
after a treatment which makes the stripped
film elastic. The resulting gelatin layer is only
a few microns thick and features the amaz
ing property of not distorting laterally when
stretched.
Strange as it may seem, when this layer of
film containing the photographic informa¬
tion is transferred it faithfully moulds onto
the boldest relief without changing the true
density of the original colours. Added to the
exact reproduction of colours and the details
of the photographic technique is the realism
of the underlying relief.
The photographic enlargements to be
transferred to the walls were printed from
twenty-five colour negatives provided by the
French National Geographic Institute, keep¬
ing to the original dimensions of the Lascaux
paintings. This required fine optical ad¬
justments. Allowances also had to be made
for any variances in density and colour from
one image to another after processing.
One of the problems was to calculate and
assemble the photographic prints as a flat
mosaic. The prints had to fit together
perfectly despite the inevitable distortions
due to picture-taking angles which were ag¬
gravated by the overhanging concave sides
of the cave. I

The Hall of Bulls (continued)

> Once printing had been completed on col¬
our paper the actual transfer of the images
to the cave face had to be prepared. The
first operation consisted of calculating the
colour photo assembly on a 1:6 model. Us¬
ing this "puzzle" the original mosaic was cut
up into about 200 quadrangular prints. Each
print position was carefully identified on the
final layout and a standard 60x80 cm size
adopted to facilitate subsequent automation
of operations.
The cut-out prints were pasted emulsion
face down onto decalcomania paper or¬
dinary paper comprising a layer of water-
soluble gelatin. The photographic ¡mage
was then peeled off its original base in a
special machine which dissolves the resin
underlayer, isolating the photographic emul¬
sion from its paper base. After drying, the
layer which holds the picture is thus affixed>
to the decalcomania paper which is easily
removed by wetting.
Each print was then pasted with an
adhesive on to the area marked out for it.
The paper was easily removed with wet
sponges and brushes so that only the
photographic image remained pasted to the
artificial rock face and its myriad indenta¬
tions.
Once the enlargements had been trans¬
ferred, retouching had to be carried out to
compensate for any imperfections during
the decalcomania process, particularly at the
junction of the modules. Lastly, the tints of
the paintings had to be harmonized with the
adjacent rocks.
The realism of this three-dimensional
photographic reproduction of the Hall of
Bulls was heightened by low-temperature
air-conditioning and music evoking the
sound of dripping water.
1) Assembling the plywood framework of
the artificial cave.
2) A section of the artificial cave is eased
into position.
3) The photographic prints of the wall
paintings being assembled as a flat mosaic.
4) Assembling the llfesize enlargements.
5) and 6) The delicate process of
transferring the photographs to the
modules of the artificial cave walls.
Photos 1 , 3, 4, 6. Pertuisot © Kodak-Pathé, Paris
Photo 2: J Rochaix © Kodak-Pathé, Paris
Photo 5 Courtoix © Kodak-Pathé, Pans
Pages 9-11: photographic reconstitution of the wall paintings of
the Hall of Bulls, Lascaux, produced by means of a process of
photographic transfer in relief perfected by the Kodak-Pathé
Research Centre for the 'Musées de France for the exhibition Ls
Vie Mystérieuse des Chefs-d'Oeuvre, la Science au Service de l'Art
(Secrets of the Great Masterpieces, Science in the Service of Art),
organized by Madame Magdeleme Hours
