1 . The poorest countries
of an oil-rich region
by Mohamed Said al-Attar
t i
I I !
fill
III ^ ñ
: " '
lie
i>ii
* » »
iiii
à
¡i
í i
1 1
iJr
m' l ' '
**'**mWW
\
t i
111
II"
i i «
I

DESPITE the prosperity brought about
by the recent increase in oil prices,
the income of most people living in
States that are members of the Economic
Commission for Western Asia (ECWA) is
not much higher than the average income in
developing countries taken as a whole. In
fact, about half the population of the
Western Asian region lives in countries that
are not oil producers. The two least
developed countriesThe Democratic
Republic of Yemen and the Yemen Arab
Republic which account for 15 per cent of
the region's population and form a
geographically homogeneous sub-region,
are among the poorest in the world.
The extent of poverty and underdevelop¬
ment in these two countries cannot be fully
gauged from their per capita Gross National
Product, which is only one of several criteria
used to identify the Least Developed Coun¬
tries. Other indicators in fact show a far
worse situation. Life expectancy in the two
Yemens is among the lowest in the world,
even for that part of the population with an
adequate calorie intake and access to clean
water supplies. The literacy rate and the
number of doctors are also among the
lowest in the world, while, not unnaturally,
the number of cases of illness is among the
highest. As for the social services and
means of transport, they are below accep¬
table standards.
The economic structure of both countries
is decrepit. Agriculture, their chief activity,
is crippled by lack of investment, shortage L
MOHAMED SAID AL-ATTAR, of the Yemen
Arab Republic, is an Assistant Secretary-General
of the United Nations and has been secretary of
the Economic Commission for Western Asia since
its establishment in 1974. An economist, he is the
author of several publications on development
and economic affairs.
Women at the
well. Left, Aden,
the People's
Democratic
Republic of the
Yemen; right,
Sudah, the
Yemen Arab
Republic.

CASE STUDIES
> of water, the deterioration of the environ¬
ment and the emigration of workers.
Industry is almost non-existent and the
amount of income and number of jobs it
provides are insignificant. Efforts to pro¬
mote industrialization are hampered by lack
of capital and skills, as well as by the high
cost of raw materials, the absence of in¬
frastructures and appropriate technologies
and a very restricted market. The two coun¬
tries therefore depend to a great extent on
imports, particularly of food and other
essential goods. Exports, which barely exist,
cover only 5 per cent of imports.
The Least Developed Countries of the
ECWA region are also poor in natural
resources. Clearly, this is a grave handicap
to development, especially in view of the
overall rise in the price of raw materials, par¬
ticularly oil. But the two Yemens are in
desperate need of energy resources to com¬
pensate for the shortage of qualified man¬
power. This is now more acute than ever
because of the number of skilled workers
who have emigrated over the last few years.
One of the gravest obstacles to the
development of the poorest countries in the
ECWA region is geographical, for the nature
of the terrain desert or sparsely cultivated
areas with a scattered population makes
the provision of infrastructures a highly
costly operation.
Despite these handicaps, the two least
privileged countries of ECWA have made
laudable efforts to develop their economies.
Though they have chosen different paths to
development, they share common aims:
economic growth, a fairer distribution of
wealth and a higher standard of living. To
achieve these aims both have embarked on
ambitious development schemes which
should help to accelerate the low GNP per
capita growth rate of the 1960s and 1970s.
Neither of the two countries has sufficient
resources of its own to finance the increased
expenditure required by development. The
Arab Republic of Yemen's Second Five-Year
Plan for the period 1982-1986 envisages an
expenditure of 10 to 15 billion dollars. It is
calculated, however, that only 2.9 billion can
be expected from national resources and
outside contributions. In the Democratic
Republic of Yemen, the investment needed
in the 1980s is estimated at 3.77 billion
dollars. Despite increased efforts to muster
national savings, a large part of the invest-
12
ment needed nearly one-thirdwill have
to be financed by outside aid. This foreign
aid has been estimated at a billion dollars for
the present five-year plan, rising to 1.27
billion during the second half of the decade.
The gap between expenditure and na¬
tional resources would be even greater if the
prosperity of the neighbouring Gulf States
did not spill over to some extent into the two
Yemens through the funds sent home by
emigrant Yemeni workers. Since 1973, the
beginning of an era of rapid growth for the
oil-producing countries of the region, these
transfers, which amount at present to 2
billion dollars for the Yemen sub-region,
have provided considerable finance both for
imports and for development expenditure.
Such transfers, however, are not likely to
continue at the same rate as in the past, for
the Yemeni workers are gradually being
replaced by more highly-qualified and
better-organized workers from South-East
Asia. The socio-economic costs of expor¬
ting labour must also be taken into account,
as, for example, the impact on the home
labour market. In the Arab Republic of
Yemen, about 20 per cent of the labour
force is reported to be working abroad.
Since many of these workers come from
rural areas, agricultural production and pro¬
ductivity is considerably affected, and this
adds to the uncertainty concerning food
supplies. Moreover, by draining skilled and
semi-skilled workers away from the country
continuous emigration has created staffing
and training problems for the national
development schemes.
Using funds sent home by emigrant
workers to expand national production,
which is a way of putting this money to the
most profitable use and even of creating
jobs for the workers themselves should they
later wish to return home, is a difficult
problem of economic management that few
developing countries have succeeded in
solving satisfactorily. The LDCs, especially,
lack adequate savings schemes that would
enable the State to borrow and use for
development funds sent home from abroad.
The result is that the money, instead of be¬
ing saved, is spent on consumer products
and this, in turn, creates inflationary
pressure and discourages investment.
Clearly, the lack of resources in the Least
Developed Countries of the ECWA area
must be made good by outside aid. Hitherto
the amount of financial assistance received
by these countries has fallen short of the re¬
quirements of possible development pro¬
grammes. Most of the earlier aid schemes
were designed to support the budget and
the balance of payments, as well as con¬
tributing to defence expenditure. The pro¬
ductive sectors received insufficient aid and
most of this was used to maintain consump¬
tion of essential goods such as foodstuffs,
pharmaceutical products and fuels and to
build schools, hospitals and roads.
The oil-producing countries of the ECWA
region have been in the front rank of sup¬
pliers of aid to the poorest countries of the
area, as well as the Third World as a whole.
Their assistance has either been given
direct, under bilateral agreements, or chan¬
nelled through multilateral operations. Over
the period 1973-1978, the OPEC countries of
the region devoted on average 5 per cent of
their GNP to the developing countries, out
of a total of 6 per cent of their GNP spent on
foreign aid. It should also be noted that 5 per
cent of the aid received by the least privileg¬
ed countries of ECWA comes from the oil-
producing States of the region.
Quite apart from the amount of aid receiv¬
ed, the form it takes and the way it is financ¬
ed are of vital importance to the LDCs.. They
cannot be expected to bear the high interest
costs of loans made to assist development.
The aid they receive should be essentially in
the form of gifts. Another difficulty arises
for the receiving countries when the donor
wishes to finance only part of a project,
leaving the recipient to search for a co¬
financer. Even if one is found, the execution
of the project still presents serious problems
of co-ordination. The LDCs also need in¬
creased aid in the form of food supplies to
enable them to meet minimum needs and
build up essential reserves.
The poorest countries of the ECWA
region, like those of the other regions, also
require effective technical assistance pro¬
grammes, particularly in connexion with the
training of executives and skilled workers,
the development of energy resources, the
establishment of technical components of
infrastructures and the identification and
selection of projects. Providing technical
assistance is an ideal way for the more
technically advanced developing countries
to prove their solidarity with the Least
Developed Countries.
Mohamed Said al-Attar
