Creative contradictions
The Caribbean genius has given
birth to a new civilization
32

by Edouard Glissant
IT seems at first impossible to draw the
boundaries and define the internal
composition of the cultural and geo¬
graphic area known as the "Caribbean".
Does it consist purely and simply of the
Islands? Or should it be conceived of as a
broader expanse, including the three
Guyanas, which are continental, and
Panama, whose population is in part An¬
tillean? Venezuela looks out to the Carib¬
bean. Mexico has regularly joined in the now
traditional festivities of Carifesta, held in
Guyana in 1972, Jamaica in 1976, Cuba in
1979, and Barbados in 1981. The Creole
tradition still sets off many nostalgic echoes
in Louisiana. On the other hand, some of the
islands, such as the Dominican Republic and
Cuba, have until now appeared to show pro¬
pensities for an exclusively Latin-American
dimension. Four European languages
(English, Spanish, French and Dutch) are
officially used in the region, and at least five
varieties of Creole are spoken there. What
then is this reality which mushrooms out
over the Americas, North and South, and
which fits into no specific linguistic,
political, or ethnic framework?
The answer which gradually emerges is
that this element of indeterminacy is the
very hallmark of the profound richness of
the Caribbean. Or rather, that the indeter¬
minacy lies in the minds of those who still
envisage the Caribbean in terms of models
that have had their day, in terms of outmod¬
ed patterns which made sense of the
emergence of nations during earlier cen¬
turies in the West and elsewhere. The entire
region has been agitated by fruitful con¬
tradictions, the work and results of which
are worth pondering.
For example, it is naive to proclaim
without qualification that here everything
began with Christopher Columbus. The so-
called "discovery" left a substratum in
which Arawaks and Caribs, the original in¬
habitants of the region, exterminated by the
colonizers, implanted in Antilleans modes of
being of which they are often unaware.
It would be just as absurd to misap¬
prehend the historical conditions of the new
cultural area' thus constituted from the
period of colonization onwards, inherent in
which are the intermingling of cultural
elements and of peoples, tension leading
toward a shared dimension of human ex¬
perience. This intermingling, however, was w
not passive assent to the values imposed. F
EDOUARD GLISSANT, of Martinique, is the
author of many volumes of poems, novels and
essays, including Le Sel Noir, La Lézarde, La
Case du Commandeur, L'Intention Poétique and
Le Discours Antillais. He has also published a
play: Monsieur Toussaint. In 1967 he founded the
Institut Martiniquais d'Etudes af Fort-de-France.
He is currently a member of the Unesco
secretariat.
I awake, musing on the black fruit of the Aniba in
its warty and truncated husk... Ah! The crabs have
devoured a whole tree of soft fruit. Another is full
of scars; its flowers were growing, succulent, on
its trunk. And another one cannot touch with the
hand, as when calling someone to witness,
without a sudden shower of those flies, and colours!
Saint-John Perse
Éloges IV
<
o
<
Animal life and the plant world are virtually
indistinguishable in the French painter André
Masson's vision of the Antilles. In the mysterious
beyond of the imagination, dense curtains of plunging
lianas luxuriate in an impenetrable forest teeming
with wonderful creatures. "The Crab and Its Fortress"
drawn by Masson, above, seem to have emerged
from the primordial mud, girded with a wooden
cuirasse. Woody yet members of the mineral world,
they are nailed down by dry roots which climb to the
horizon where they suddenly become waving coconut
palms. For the people of the Antilles, however,
fortress crab can be, literally, shelled: at feasts on the
banks of remote streams it makes a succulent sacrifice.
33

It is equally mistaken either to under¬
estimate the overriding impact of the
peopling of the Antilles with Africans (star¬
ting with the Slave-Trade) or to harbour the
illusion that the Antilles became a faithful
copy of Africa. Not only because of the in¬
flux of Indians to work the land abandoned
by the emancipated' African slaves; not only
because of the imprint left by the West; but
because the ferment born of the component
peoples has produced something else
new cultures, a new civilization.
Finally, it is not valid to conclude from the
variety of languages imposed upon the
region in the past or born of its ferment that
the people who live there are
heterogeneous. The Antilles today provide
an example of a civilization in full flood of
creativity, developing on a high tide of
multilingualism; the languages are national
(such as Spanish in Cuba or English in
Trinidad), but their use, and soon their shar¬
ing, is Antillean.
These "elemental" contradictions feed
many conflicts just as they have given birth
to many illusions and ideological assump¬
tions. The needs of nation-building in each
country on the one hand and virulent op¬
position among social classes on the other
seem to open up conflicting prospects in a
situation rendered more complex by the
necessity to affirm or defend cultural values
which are often inseparable from their
ethnic origins, and the elaboration of
generalized theories (indigenism in Haiti in
the 1930s, Négritude, Antillean outbreaks of
Black Power, Rastafari).
Yet it is contradiction itself which con¬
stitutes the value of this civilization. It can¬
not be appreciated by sticking to hard-and-
fast categories which make no allowances
for the unusual. Perhaps the lesson to be
drawn from the converging histories of the
Antillean peoples is that nation-building can
take place today without sterile confronta¬
tions, just as cultural values do not perish by
being shared. The Antillean countries,
which have known slavery and sometimes
"local" tyrannies, have paid a heavy price
for this privilege of cultural discovery and
contact.
The Caribbean Sea is the setting for such
a communion. The Saint Lucian playwright
Derek Walcott has encapsulated this in a
phrase, "History is Sea," and this is the
meaning of Barbadian historian Edward
Kamau Brathwaite's assertion that "The uni¬
ty is submarine." Both these writers are
poets intent on feeling and expressing the
long ordeal of the Caribbean's emergence.
The sea of the Antilles is an open sea. The
Arawaks and the Caribs roamed over it:
nomads of the sea, they periodically return¬
ed to places they had previously settled dur¬
ing their wanderings. It was colonization
which attempted, sometimes successfully,
to "balkanize" the region, to fragment it into
isolated lands locked in the conflicts which,
here as elsewhere, broke out among the
Western Great Powers. However, in 1794,
alarmed by rumours, the origin of which are
disputed, the slaves of the Lesser Antilles
tried to reach the country of Toussaint
Louverture, the future Republic of Haiti.
Many examples could be cited to
demonstrate that the histories of the Carib¬
bean peoples have always been intertwined
despite the barriers erected by colonization.
The Caribbean Sea, however, is not ringed
by lands and peoples which would seek to
34
concentrate in a constricting unit. It is not,
as the Mediterranean once was, an "inland
sea." Its propensity is to burst outwards,
whence the difficulty in charting the outlines
of such a socio-cultural phenomenon. The
offshoots of this civilization, from Louisiana
to Tobago and the Guyanas, overlie realities
which otherwise belong to other spheres of
influence.
But the cultural foundations of Antillean
reality were by no means indeterminate.
Wherever the slaves landed, on every island
and at various points up and down the
American coast, from northern Brazil and to
the south of the United States, the same
system was established for the exploitation
of various exotic products: spices, tobacco,
indigo, cotton, sugar cane. This was the
Plantation system. It was not only an
economic system based on slavery, but also
a way of life, a cultural framework, which in¬
spired many Antillean tales, as well as the
dance known as the calinda, and the blues.
The Plantation was an enclosure which
the slave or labourer did not leave. These
enclosures were ubiquitous. Casa Grande e
Senzalam. With the establishment of the
Plantation, two political and cultural institu¬
tions for escaping from the enclosure
emerged: running away and the carnival,
both widely practiced in the region.
Escape is not merely an episode in the
struggle of the oppressed against the op¬
pressors. It may have determined in large
part the attitudes and the reflexes of the
peoples of the Antilles: it meant escaping to
another enclosure, that of the intellectual
and cultural compartments within which
each people of the region was kept. The
historical consequence of this phenomenon
was the impassioned search for Caribbean
solidarity.
The carnival was not merely the overflow¬
ing of liberated instincts beyond the limits of
the Plantation. Little by little it reinforced the
tendency to make every cultural manifesta¬
tion simultaneously an act of consciousness
and a festival (Carifesta), an act of sharing
one's reasons for giving voice to the world
and one's conception of it.
From the Plantation came the tale, the
ballad, and the cadence of the drum, soon
to be replaced by the fulguration of poets
such as Nicolas Guillen or Aimé Césaire, the
fullness of folk artists (Haitian painting), the
exuberance and the syntheses of modern
arts (Wifredo Lam or Cardenas), and the
analyses and profundities of novelists
(Carpentier and Naipaul).
It is, perhaps, the memory of the Planta¬
tion that pushes so many Antillean intellec¬
tuals to expose themselves to the world of
les damnés de la terre, and to identify with
their cause: the Jamaican Marcus Garvey
with the blacks in the United States, the
Trinidadian George Padmore in Ghana, and
the Martiniquais Frantz Fanon in Algeria.
This kind of exile or noble expatriation is so
widespread that one wonders about its fun¬
damental causes an urge to understand
the Other which lies at the basis of the An¬
tillean experience, and a desire to break
bounds which still causes men to flee far
from the Plantation.
Thus, if the Antillean countries whose
cultural variety is so profuse, united and lux¬
uriant, still appear to be seeking their identi
ty, it is because of this very abundance
which is often not given its due. And also
because the collapse of the Plantation
system has left behind it, here and there, ex¬
treme varieties of political and economic
systems, the distortions of which explain
why the reality of the Antilles is so hard to
understand or accept. There is no indeter¬
minacy in life as it is lived, but it paralyses
those who analyse the cultures of the
Antilles.
In the present state of affairs, no possibili¬
ty of a federation or a confederation of the
Caribbean countries exists, however em¬
bryonic. CARICOM (The Common Market
of the Caribbean) mainly concerns the
English-speaking Antilles. In political terms.
111 Title of a work by the Brazilian writer Gilberto Freyre.
It means "The big house and the slave's cabin. "

Striding barefoot on the
bare earth, this woman of
Martinique instinctively
adjusts her movements to
maintain the poise of her
head. On the cloth pad
above her brow, for all the
world to see, is the daily
fare; her baskets are laden
with modest treasures of
poverty and dignity. Women
have borne many things
across the Caribbean:
stones for the roads, coal
from mysterious cargo
boats, fruit and vegetables,
the trials of everyday life, and
the future of their children.
This work in ebony by the
great Cuban sculptor
Agustín Cárdenas is entitled
El Quarto Famba 1 (1973),
the name of the secluded
place where new members,
chosen for their fidelity to
the traditions of the
continent from which they
had been taken, were
initiated into a secret
society for Cubans of
African origin. Cárdenas has
produced such tall wooden
totems, like black flames
leaping from the African fire
which glows in the Antillean
consciousness, since his
early days as a sculptor.
Their form, expressive of
both serenity and torment,
marks the eruption into
modern art of sensibilities
which have not found
artistic expression since the
heyday of African sculpture.
These airy, smoothly-
finished works typify the
contact between cultures
that has inspired Cardenas'
work in wood and marble,
and show how an artist can
draw profound inspiration
from his roots yet also
practise the boldest
experimentation, in an art
that is both affirmation and
discovery.
the structures of the Caribbean countries
cover the whole spectrum. And yet Antillean
cultures have never gone so far in pooling
their specific features nor communicated so
much in terms of a single diversified concr p-
tion of man.
This conception has culminated in
Creolization, which is, as its etymology at¬
tests, an ambiguous phenomenon. Is the
Creole a White who lives in the Antilles, a
White born in the Antilles, or the descen¬
dant of an African? A long history of hesita¬
tion surrounds this question. Creolization is
not a simple process of acculturation: it in¬
volves original features, in some cases the
product of barely reconcilable contradic¬
tions, the chief of which, apart from ways of
life and cultural syncretism, may lie in
variants of language.
This phenomenon affects the languages
which have been imported into the region,
and which, as I have said, are sometimes us¬
ed in very special way. But its most extreme
expression lies in the diversity of pidgins and
especially in the existence of the Creole
language, a language of compromise, a
language forged within the Plantation,
which the Antillean people adopted in Haiti,
in Martinique and Guadeloupe, in Cayenne,
Saint Lucia, and Dominica.
Today this folk language is disappearing
in Trinidad and Jamaica, and it has never
been spoken in the Spanish-speaking An¬
tilles. Nonetheless, the world's tens of
millions of Creole speakers (including, as the
result of a strange and significant socio-
historical phenomenon, the inhabitants of
Réunion and Mauritius in the Indian Ocean)
can now envisage a renaissance for their
mother tongue, a renaissance admittedly
threatened by the technological weight of
the world's dominant languages.
The fact that the same Creole language is
spoken by the English-speaking peoples of
the Lesser Antilles is sufficient proof that it
has nothing to do with the patois formed
from the major languages, to which there
have often been attempts to reduce the
compromise languages which emerged in
the context of colonization. Creole is not a
deformation of French, from which its syn¬
tax, reputedly of African origin, is totally
alien.
Thus, in the present world configuration,
the Caribbean stands forth as a special set¬
ting in which nations and communities inter¬
relate, each with its own originality, sharing
nevertheless a common future. This area of
civilization opens onto the Americas; it is
gradually surmounting the barriers of a
paralyzing monolingualism and becoming
conscious of its singular talent for symbiosis
and for embracing, in all their overwhelming
exuberance, the often contradictory
elements which meet in the converging
histories of the Caribbean basin. In today's
threatened world this is a noble calling, at
once fragile and ineradicable.
M Edouard Glissant
35
