Fernando Ortiz "The father of Caribbean studies' by Lisandro Otero
THE hundredth anniversary of the birth
of Fernando Ortiz was celebrated on
16 July this year. Ortiz-has rightly been
called the third discoverer of Cuba (after Col¬
umbus and Alexander Humboldt), for his
writings, so scholarly and rigorously scien¬
tific, have been one of the principal factors in
shaping Cuba's national identity.
Ortiz was among the very first people to
observe the mestizo (intermixed) character
of our culture and to point to our fragmented
and dissimilar origins and to the syncretic
nature of some of our popular beliefs.
He confessed in 1942 that, some forty
years earlier, he had become interested in
sociological questions, then a comparatively
new branch of studies, and had started look¬
ing into Cuban problems. "Immediately, the
figure of the Negro loomed large before me.
And this was only natural, for without the
Negro Cuba would not be Cuba." He began
to study the Negro as an integral factor in the
national identity and immediately came up
against a host of obstacles and prejudices.
There were very few studies and even less in¬
terest. For some people, it amounted to rak¬
ing up consciousness of or laying bare the
guilt of the past. Furthermore, it was
something that was not worth the trouble
and was not profitable.
In one of his lectures, Fernando Ortiz once
said: "It was dangerous to talk of the Negro
and it could only be done by adopting a
devious approach. Even the Negroes, and
especially the mulattos, seemed to want to
forget about themselves and to deny their
race so that they would not have to recall
their martyrdom and frustrations, just as
lepers sometimes try to conceal the shame
of their sores...".
At that time, at the beginning of the cen¬
tury, when the Cuban Republic had just
come into being, there existed a middle class
which was dedicated to producing an idealiz¬
ed image of itself and to aping foreign think¬
ing and behaviour patterns. Ortiz was the
first person to display the rigorous scientific
attitude needed to seek out the true roots of
this phenomenon, and to have the audacity
to proclaim their nature. His main contribu¬
tion to Cuban culture was his understanding
of the hybrid nature of our national origins.
In his researches, he left his mark on a very
wide variety of cultural fields. After embark¬
ing on a legal and criminological career, he
switched to sociology and then went on to
archaeology, history, philology and an¬
thropology, musicology and ethnography.
Ortiz showed us the dynamic interrelation¬
ships existing between the different
elements of the social life of Cuba. For seven
decades, he explored, analysed and
classified the new flowering of Negro
cultures in Cuba, after their former African
spendours.
One of the first problems with which Ortiz
had to contend was the lack of suitable tools
for his new task: there were no precedents
and there was not even an adequate scien¬
tific vocabulary to describe the phenomena
he was investigating. Ortiz coined such new
terms as Afro-Cuban, which has now
become so familiar, and transculturation,
which is used to designate the symbiosis of
cultures. The work he did in delving into the
specific features of things Cuban led him in¬
to the field of linguistics. In 1923, he publish¬
ed his Catauro de cubanismos (Dictionary of
Cubanisms), in which he listed 1,500 typical¬
ly Cuban words and expressions.
His best-known work is perhaps his Con¬
trapunto Cubano del Tabaco y el Azúcar
(Tobacco and Sugar: a Cuban Counterpoint),
in which he not only formulated a
penetrating analysis of economic history but
also wrote some of the finest pages in our
literature, subjecting the spirit of sugar and
of tobacco, as abstract entities, to a dialec¬
tical confrontation, contrasting white sugar
and brown tobacco, the sweet and the sour,
food and poison, energy and dreaming, the
flesh and the spirit, rain and earth, the sun
and the moon, day and night, water and fire.
The combination in this work of a wealth of
imagination and a mass of scientific
documentation makes it one of the land¬
marks of Cuban culture.
Ortiz the ethnographer wrote El Engaño de
las Razas (The Fraud of Races), which was
published in 1946, when the world had only
just emerged from the Fascist nightmare and
its pseudo-theories regarding the purported
superiority of the Aryan race and the in¬
feriority of the Semitic races: the former
destined to dominate and the latter to be
enslaved. The work of Ortiz constitutes a
fundamental refutation of those theses.
Yet Fernando Ortiz was more than a
scholar; he was an organizer and promoter
of culture. He created several institutions,
reviews and publishing houses even though
the times were not propitious for such
ventures.
His interest in the African influence on
Latin America led Ortiz to undertake a pro¬
found analysis of the main area in which
cultural elements of African origin were to
be found in a concentrated grouping the
Caribbean. In this Fernando Ortiz was a
precursor of Caribbean studies, and not only
in Cuba.
Throughout this centenary year Cubans
have been paying tribute to the vast, lucid
and penetrating work of Fernando Ortiz. For
Latin America, and in particular for that part
of Latin America that was subject to in¬
fluences from Africa, his work is essential
for the light it sheds and the profound
understanding it affords of the patterns and
process of transculturation.
LISANDRO OTERO, Cuban novelist and
essayist, is director of the Centre of Caribbean
Studies of the Casa de las Americas, Havana.
Among his novels, which have been translated in¬
to several languages, are La Situación (The Situa¬
tion) and General a Caballo (General on
Horseback).
31
