Brazil's
Museum
of
the Unconscious
A bold experiment
in psychotherapy and art
by Fernanda de Camargo e Almeida
Raphael was an academic painter before he became an inmate of
Brazil's National Psychiatric Centre in Rio de Janeiro. For twelve
years he was inactive as an artist. Then one day someone gave
him paper, pencils and tubes of paint, and he began to paint
again. "Since he has forgotten the rules of academic painting",
writes the Brazilian critic Sergio Milliet, "he gives free rein to his
imagination. He expresses his true self. His paintings may be
compared with what is most beautiful and sensitive in the works
of the moderns, the Matisses, the Picassos, the Dufys...."
BRAZIL'S Museum of Images of the
Unconscious occupies the ground
floor of one of the pavilions of the
National Psychiatric Centre, in the northern
part of Rio de Janeiro. Created to house the
artistic works of patients who frequent the
Centre's occupational therapy workshops,
the Museum contains some 90,000 drawings,
paintings and models in plaster, ceramics and
other materials, selected over the past
twenty-four years by Dr. Nise da Silveira, the
psychiatrist responsible for the occupational
therapy activities that have long been a
feature of the work of the Centre.
The Museum of the Unconscious differs
from other museums not only in the nature of
the works of art it houses, but also in its en¬
tire organizational set-up. Its collections are
constantly being enriched by the daily arrival
of new works of art from the workshops of
the Psychiatric Centre which are in operation,
every morning from Monday to Friday
throughout the year.
The drawing and painting workshop is a
vast, well-lit room situated at one end of the
museum. In addition to working tables it is
equipped with a piano and an organ; quite
often someone plays or sings, thus
associating ¡mage with sound. Modelling is
usually carried out in another room or in the
garden.
In this excellent atmosphere the patients
work with the aid of occupational therapists,
coming frequently into contact with artists
and personnel from the Carl Jung Study
Group (the Museum's scientific research sec¬
tion), yet never losing their creative freedom.
After leaving the workshops, the works are
listed and catalogued and become the pro¬
perty of the Museum. The cataloguing is car¬
ried out in accordance with the ARAS (Ar¬
chive for Research on Archetypical Sym¬
bolism) system adopted by the Jung Centre
of Zurich, thus forming a complete dossier on
each patient. This enables psychiatrists and
research workers to follow each case and
provides a source of material for studies on
the unconscious. The works are stored until
the opportunity arises to exhibit them, but
they are always available for reference and
examination.
Up until 1973, the Museum suffered from a
number of museological and museographical
deficiencies. Two museologists from the con¬
sultation unit of the Association of Members
of the International Council of Museums
(AM-ICOM) were invited by Dr. Nise da
Silveira to make a thorough study of the im¬
provements which could be carried out
without jeopardizing the Museum's basic
structure.
They came to the conclusion that it would
be necessary to enlarge the temporary exhibi¬
tion rooms, create a permanent exhibition
room which would adjoin the gallery, and
reappraise the display materials such as sup¬
ports, pedestals and lighting.
All this had to be done without losing sight
of the fact that the patient who frequents the
workshop also frequents the Museum, both
of which are indispensable meeting points at
which he or she can make contact with the
outside world. That is why certain display
methods cannot be adopted and why
modifications which might confuse the pa¬
tients cannot suddenly be introduced.
It was decided to proceed slowly, using
methods that would not shock the patients
by their novelty. The rooms were therefore
20

1
>
m M
Photo Humberto Franceschi <Q Museum of Images of the Unconscious. Rio de Janeiro
Photo Luis Alberto Peregrino © Museum of Images of the Unconscious, Rio de Janeiro
Above, The Planetarium of God, an oil painting by Carlos.
Produced in 1948, it seems to depict a vision the artist had
had nine years before. Brazilian critic Mario Pedrosa has
described how, one September morning In 1939, Carlos
"saw the sun's reflection in the little mirror in his room....
And there appeared before him a cosmic vision which he
described as 'the planetary of God'. He shouted for his
family to come, for he wanted everyone to see the
wonderful sight before his eyes. On the same day, he was
committed to an institution." Left, Mándala, by Fernando
Diniz, who has painted some of the most exuberant still-
lifes in the history of Brazilian art. The work won an
award when it was exhibited in Paris in 1957. The Swiss
psychologist and psychoanalyst Carl Gustav Jung
believed that the mentally afflicted intuitively produce
depictions of mándalas (magic circles used in some
cosmogonies to represent the universe), these archetypes
of the unchanging basis of human thought occurring in
different historical periods, races and civilizations.
modified during the daytime in full view of
the visitors from the workshops. The
hospital staff helped to cover the walls with
hemp cloth, as in the other rooms, and the
patients themselves helped to arrange the
plants and the lighting. In addition to the
wooden boxes already in use as supports,
bricks covered in hemp cloth and upturned
glass bowls were used as supports for small
ceramic objects. Considerable attention was
paid to this question of supports because
the use of an unfamiliar material might be
considered by the artist as an interference in
his work and create in him a feeling of
rejection.
The Museum's technical personnel posed
another problem how could people unac¬
customed to contact with sick people be in
troduced into this museum with its own very
special characteristics without serious
misunderstandings arising? It was not the
problem of adaptation that worried us or led
us to envisage the need to take extra precau¬
tions. After all, perfectly satisfactory rela¬
tions existed between the patients and the
members of the study group from the Carl k
Jung Research Centre as well as between f
21

Intrigued, like many visitors to the museum, by the
symbolism of the archetypes (photo previous page), this
young Brazilian girl is studying a large album of coloured
drawings. Ranged nearby are sculptures on mythological
themes. Below, an upturned glass bowl serves as a support
for a ceramic earth divinity ringed by snakes.
>the patients and visitors to the Museum.
The fear was that if museologists and other
professional museum personnel were to in¬
troduce orthodox museological standards
they might destroy the special character and
authenticity of the Museum of the Un¬
conscious. For it is clear that, however high
their technical level, certain professional
standards and practices cannot be applied in
this Museum.
Encouraged by the close contacts we had
always had with the Museum staff and the
interest they had always shown in helping to
find solutions to problems, we decided to at¬
tempt an experiment. Instead of training
museologists to meet the needs of the
Museum and its setting, we decided to try to
train the personnel actually working in the
Museum and workshops, that is, the
employees of the National Psychiatric
Centre.
- The first step was to give them elementary
instruction on the cultural heritage, on
museology and museography. They were
taken to visit other museums and asked to
give their impressions, to make comparisons
and to undertake projects and research
tasks. Intensive training groups were
established and given increasingly specific
objectives to attain.
Today we continue to collaborate with
museologist Lourdes do Rego Novaes and
with a training unit of AM-ICOM and a con¬
sultation unit; whilst the latter is engaged in
presenting new exhibitions and improving
the Museum, the training unit is working out
a training programme adapted to present
needs which gives a sound general founda'-'
tion to the trainees.
The demand for these courses has been
so heavy that we have had to admit to them
people from other sections of the hospital
who work in related areas. Candidates for
the courses include doctors, psychiatrists,
psychologists, educators, occupational
therapists, administrative staff, nurses and
technical personnel. The rate of attendance
has been between 97 and 98 per cent and
the students have completed all the work
assigned to them.
Each student has been brought to a level
at which he can envisage the themes dealt
with from the viewpoint of his own speciali¬
ty. At first it was thought that once instruc¬
tion on general principles had been com¬
pleted the group would have to be divided
into specialized sections. But this proved
not to be the case since all the students
wanted to gain more knowledge in all fields.
Only later, therefore, will it be possible to
organize smaller groups which will receive
more specialized training.
Since 1974, when the Museum entered
this new phase, some thirty temporary ex¬
hibitions have been organized. These exhibi¬
tions are usually held in the temporary ex¬
hibition room in which the Carl Jung Study
Group meets once a week. The group
studies a theme which is also that of the ex¬
hibition, such as "Affectivity-Contact",
"Metamorphoses of the Feminine
Principle", etc. The presentation of these
exhibitions is very simple; the labels on the
exhibits bear only iconographical details, the
date and the artist's name. No mention is
made of the patient's psychiatric or
psychological condition. Thus, these exhibi¬
tions can be visited by everyone. The theme
of the "Mother Goddess" constantly recurs
in the works of patients and the Museum
22

has made a special selection of the most in¬
teresting representations of the mother god¬
dess figure. The exhibitions include an ever
increasing number of models and sculptures
including works by the students following
the museological courses.
Another question, that of the social,
cultural and educational activities of the
museum, is currently being studied. Clearly
the Museum's first objective, apart from the
preservation of the works of art, must be to
fulfil a social function within its own com¬
munity, that is, among those who are in
direct contact with and participate in its ac¬
tivities. The National Psychiatric Centre,
which is the Museum's immediate setting, is
therefore the object of the particular atten¬
tion of the Museum. Next comes the old in¬
dustrial quarter in the northern part of Rio de
Janeiro which faces the special problems of
a working class area. The people still have
fears about living close to one of the coun¬
try's principal psychiatric centres. As
elsewhere in the world, the proximity of a
big hospital for mentally sick people arouses
fears of patients escaping and attacking
people.
The Museum is tackling this problem not
only by attempting to explain its purpose,
gathering information locally and integrating
itself into the community, but also by work¬
ing with local people, opening up to them
new horizons and making them understand
what the Psychiatric Centre really is, what
mental illness and its treatment is all about.
Through the city the Museum hopes to
reach out to the entire country.
Already visitors come to the Museum
from other parts of the city, from the coun¬
tryside and from abroad, and all show a live¬
ly interest. The Museum is open every day.
Small groups are asked to notify the
caretaker in advance but large groups have
to obtain special permission to make a visit;
the well-being of the patients cannot be
forgotten. The patients themselves walk
freely in the galleries, often accompanied by
cats or dogs. Dr. Nise da Silveira calls them
"my guests", and in her studies and work¬
ing techniques the animals play a "co-
therapeutic" role, indispensable to the
equilibrium of the patients. The excellent
results achieved are confirmed by daily life in
the Museum and the works held in its ar¬
chives. The presence of animals in a
museum of painting and sculpture may
seem incongruous, but it is one of the
features which enable us to grasp the
special techniques used at the Museum of
the Unconscious.
FERNANDA DE CAMARGO E ALMEIDA,
Brazilian museologist and archaeologist, has
responsibility for museology and staff training in
museology at the Museum of Images of the Un¬
conscious in Rio de Janeiro. A longer version of
this article has also appeared in Unesco's interna¬
tional quarterly Museum (Vol. XXVIII, No. I).
Below, the Museum's central gallery. Beyond it is the
painting workshop. The patients' cats and dogs wander
freely through the exhibition rooms, and their presence
seems so beneficial that the therapists look upon them
almost as "colleagues".
MUSEU DE IMAGENS DO INCONSCIENT!
