Communities
that care
by Mahfoud Boucebci
SPECIAL education is not, whatever
the term may suggest to the con¬
trary, a distinct, separate form of
education designed to produce social "out¬
siders". Nor is it a single, monolithic activi¬
ty, for the notion of "mental handicap"
covers a wide variety of conditions.
Special education must give permanent
consideration to the place of the mentally
handicapped in society today and tomor¬
row. When choosing an educational system
for the handicapped, preference should be
given to the one which is least likely to
relegate them to a social backwater. As it
happens, this type of system is best suited
to the conditions and resources of the
developing countries.
Furthermore, it would be very dangerous
to establish a system of special education
that excludes the family, for unless the fami¬
ly is made fully aware of the problems and
allowed to participate in the care and train¬
ing process, the disabled will rapidly become
a marginal group completely alienated from
and rejected by the community.
On the basis of these principles, various
models of special education may be drawn
up for the different age-groups. For very
young children, the largest and most
neglected group in the Third World, any
break with traditional ways of stimulating
and caring for infants must be avoided. The
fact that specialists are available should not
cut the child off from its mother or family.
Educators working with disabled children
must thus be thoroughly familiar with the
most widely used traditional methods of
child care, as well as the place of the han-'
dicapped in the traditional culture. The first
risk to be parried is that when an infant is
found to be handicapped it will be rejected
by its family.
Motor-sensory stimulation sessions in
which several mothers and children take part
have proved a practical and useful method,
for they develop a relationship based directly
on traditional community relations which is
a source of encouragement and mutual
assistance.
Two lines of approach have been
developed in work with young handicapped
children in the Algiers area.
The first involves groups of children of the
same size or at the same level of intellectual
development. Initially, children with serious
human relations problems or those deprived
of autonomy of movement are excluded
from these groups. But as a general rule
every effort is made to provide care and
training for disabled children in nursery
schools for "normal" children.

Information campaigns have helped to
make the staff of these institutions aware of
the plight of handicapped children, and it
has been possible to place them alongside
normal children. We have been able to do
this with certain children suffering from
Down's syndrome, certain deaf children,
children suffering from motor cerebral defi¬
ciency, epileptic children whose fits have
been brought under control,' and epileptics
with or without slight mental de¬
ficiency or a motor-neurological deficiency.
Placing these children in a "normal" en¬
vironment was not easy in the early days.
There were very few nursery schools and re¬
quests for admission were many. At the
same time, failure to recognize the problems
raised by handicaps, as well as false ideas
and prejudices reinforced the often negative
ideas of some of the teachers. However, in¬
formation sessions organized during the pre¬
school teachers' training courses helped to
make the staff aware of these problems and
to dedramatize the situation.
But the fact remains that the admission of
disabled children to ordinary nursery schools
is only successful with certain categories of
disability, for there is always a risk that
disabled children will be left out of things. If
they are too abnormal or raise too many
problems they will be rejected, with
traumatic consequences both for them and
for their families.
For the other categories of pre-school
children we have adopted a second ap¬
proach in the form of experimental "district
centres". These centres do not have
elaborate facilities, they are near the
children's homes, and they call for participa¬
tion on the part of the parents. The key to
this type of education ¡s continuity as the
child grows older, either in the same institu¬
tion or in another school where the basic
principles of the district centre continue to
be applied.
The parents must be involved in
educating their child, and there must be an
incentive for them to join in the activities of
the various associations and societies for the
handicapped. Where these possibilities do
not exist, parents should be kept informed
of the many ways in which they can, help
their child, for paradoxically such oppor¬
tunities are often neglected. The family can
be told what progress to expect in the short,
medium and long term, and informed about
the possible advantages of certain types of
specialized training, or about whether
medication is required. One vital point that
needs to be stressed to the parents is that
progress may take time, perhaps even a very
long time.
Finally, we believe that some types of
handicap should always be accommodated
within the normal educational system for
example, a class for blind children in an or¬
dinary school.
The role of institutions such as district
centres is decisive for young children and
adolescents who are "not capable of
benefiting from a scholastic education".
These children can only be treated if the
family and community are prepared to ac¬
cept the handicap and recognize that it is
impossible for them to attend school. The
day centres, with relatively small premises
and simple but functional equipment, can
each accommodate between thirty and forty
Jocal children aged four to thirteen. Children
with multiple handicaps are admitted provid¬
ed that they are affected with minor motor
or sensory handicaps connected with men¬
tal deficiency. Bedridden children and those
with serious personality disorders are not ac¬
cepted. Each centre has between eight and
twelve teachers.
The centres do not aim to provide an
academic type of education. Their activities
are directed towards educating the child in
the broadest sense, and all their activities are
in some way educative. They include:
training for dally life, such as washing
and dressing oneself; household chores
such as laundry, cooking or gardening; .
activities designed to promote better
knowledge of the environment including the
discovery of nature: walks in the district,
visits to the local market, to a public garden,
a festival or cultural event, a swimming
pool, pony club, the beach and the moun¬
tains. Through experiences like these the
child is helped to make progress and ac¬
quires greater independence and ease in
social relationships;
educational games, weaving, carpentry,
sewing and odd jobs about the house which
are designed to develop sensory and manual
skills;
self-expression activities such as playing
with water, sand, clay, paints and puppets,
as well as music (singing and playing in¬
struments) and psycho-motor activities;
the rest of the child's life at the centre
breaks, meals, rest periods, etc.
This broad range of activities gradually
leads to improvements in the child's speech,
in the level of his practical and motor-
sensory intelligence, and the integration of
his bodily functions, and helps to develop
his capacity for observation and expression
so that he can participate more actively in
the life of the community.
Pre-school and school activities that re¬
quire abstract thought are only introduced
for children who possess this capacity. The
methods used are always based on concrete
experience and take account of each child's
individual learning rhythms and capabilities
as well as his staying power.
Each pupil's progress is recorded in detail
on special attainment and observation
cards. This enables the teacher to pinpoint
each child's specific problems and needs
and to adjust his tuition accordingly.
The parents have an opportunity to meet
the educational team every morning and
evening and are often in contact with the
psychologists. Regular parents' meetings
are also organized, and as members of the
parents' association the parents are en¬
couraged to play an active role.
The atmosphere in the centres is generally
very relaxed. Children, teachers and other
staff members form one big family within
which the child can develop in a secure en¬
vironment and gradually become capable of
more sustained effort. The centre may offer
advantages over the home environment in
particular nourishing meals provided
freewhich help to promote the child's
overall development.
Whatever the stage at which responsibili¬
ty is assumed for a child, the objective is
that he should be integrated into the com¬
munity. And so, to avoid any break in the
training process, vocational training centres
and workshops should be planned right
from the start.
The social situation in the developing
countries and the vast number of children
and young people in relation to the popula¬
tion as a whole make it imperative to provide
care and training for these age groups.
But the structures outlined here and the
approaches on which they are based should
not be exclusive: other approaches should
also be fostered. Craft work seems to be one
of the most promising types of activity
its possibilities for developing human
relations open to certain categories of the
mentally handicapped.
The handicapped are still excluded from
many cultural and leisure activities, especial¬
ly in sport, where much remains to be done
to make people aware of the needs of the
handicapped. Swimming, for example, is
one of the most beneficial activities for some
handicapped persons, but paradoxically a
handicap often rules out admittance to
swimming pools.
Generally speaking, the independent
African States have retained the main bulk
of earlier legislation concerning the han¬
dicapped, and this is now outmoded. If
jurists and sociologists could collaborate
with educators and medical and health of¬
ficials in the study of these problems, then it
would be possible to review existing legisla¬
tion and make further provisions for preven¬
tion, care and treatment of the mentally han¬
dicapped and the furtherance of their rights
to special education and to their rightful
place in the community.
MAHFOUD BOUCEBCI, ofAlgeria, is professor
of psychiatry at the university of Algiers and
department head at the university psychiatric
clinic. He has published many articles related to
problems of mental deficiency and, more
specifically, to the question of mental health in
developing countries. A synthesis of his work ap¬
peared in Psychiatrie, Société et Développement
("Psychiatry, Society and Development")
Algiers, 1979.
25
