Art, archaeology
and the atom
Nuclear dating techniques
and how they work
by Bernard Keisch
ONE cannot possibly overemphasize the importance of
carbon-14 dating in the fields of art and archaeology since
its discovery shortly after World War II.
The importance of the method was recognized immediately and,
in 1960, earned for its discoverer, Willard F. Libby, the Nobel Prize.
The reasoning behind the method is this. The earth is being con¬
tinually bathed in cosmic radiation. One product of that radiation, a
quantity of neutrons, reacts with nitrogen in the upper atmosphere
to produce carbon-14.
Since the flux of neutrons has been nearly cohstant for the last
several thousand years, the rate at which carbon-14 has been
produced by this means has been just as constant.
The carbon-14 atoms react chemically with oxygen to form car¬
bon dioxide, which eventually mixes, throughout the atmosphere,
with ordinary carbon dioxide. (Ordinary carbon atoms contain
6 protons and 6 neutrons and are not radioactive.) Carbon dioxide in
our atmosphere is incorporated into living tissue by growing vegeta¬
tion. Animals that eat vegetation, and the animals that eat
vegetarians, etc., also eventually contain carbon-14.
The end result is that all living things must contain carbon-14 in
the same concentration that occurs in the atmosphere during their
lifetime. But carbon-14 has a half-life of about 6,000 years, and
when an organism dies and ceases to participate in the biosphere, its
carbon-14 supply is no longer being replenished by freshly produced
carbon-14 through' the food chain. The concentration of carbon-14
in its tissues thus begins to decrease.
The nature of radioactivity is such that we may express the rate at
which a radioactive substance disappears in terms of its half-life. In
this case, it means that after 6,000 years, one-half of the carbon-14
atoms will have disappeared. After a second 6,000 years, half of that
remaining after the first 6,000 will have disappeared, or three-
quarters of the original number will be gone.
Up to about 1900 the concentration of carbon-14 in our at¬
mosphere and biosphere was such that the radioactivity of each
gramme of carbon was about 15 disintegrations per minute (dpm).
This way of expressing radioactivity, dpm per gramme, is called
"specific activity". Put another way, for our present case, 15 dpm
per gramme means that in among the 50 thousand million million
million atoms of carbon-12 in 1 gramme, there are about 650 thou¬
sand million atoms of carbon-14 of which 15 "disappear" by radioac¬
tive decay each minute.
Thus, 6,000 years after an organism dies, the carbon-14 specific
activity will be 7.5 dpm per gramme; in 12,000 years, it will be 3.75
dpm per gramme, and so on. By using large samples (if they are
available) and efficient instruments for measuring the radioactivity, it
has been possible to date objects made of wood, for example, that
are as much as 50,000 years old. Most carbon-14 dating, however, is
done on objects that are no more than 10,000 to 15,000 years old.
Most of the objects dated by this method are made of wood. It is
also possible to date objects of bone, textiles, ivory, and iron. (It is
possible to date iron because iron contains a few per cent of carbon
which, in old samples, came from wood charcoal.)
Another method for the dating of ceramics, radiation-induced j
thermoluminescence, was first used by George C. Kennedy in 1960. I
BERNARD KEISCH, U.S. radiochemist, has specialized in the applications
of nuclear technology to the identification of works of art. This article has
been adapted from material appearing in his study Secrets of the Past :
Nuclear Energy Applications in Art and Archaeology, published by the Office
of Information Services of the U. S. Atomic Energy Commission.
21

y This method was eventually refined by workers at Oxford University
at the University of Pennsylvania and has become an extremely
valuable tool. One reason why it is so valuable is that bits of pottery
(called potsherds), which are quite durable, are almost always found
at "digs", or archaeological sites.
The method itself is based on the principle that radiation distorts
the electronic structure of insulating materials and so stores energy
within the material. This process may be likened to the stretching of
a spring. When the material is heated to a certain temperature the
forces holding the electrons "out of place" begin to "loosen", the
structure relaxes as a stretched spring would, and the stored energy
is released. This released energy is emitted in the form of light.
The radiation that produces this deformation comes mainly from
naturally radioactive materials like uranium, thorium, and potassium,
which are present in the pottery in low concentrations. The soil in
which the pottery was buried also contains naturally radioactive
material that affects the pottery in the same way. Cosmic radiation
also contributes to the radiation "damage".
As time passes, more and more energy is stored in the material
and thus the system acts like a clock. The clock is started at "zero",
which is the last time the material was heated to the temperature at
which the system "relaxes" (a process called annealing). In the case
of pottery, this is the time when the pottery was baked as the final
step in the manufacturing process.
To read the clock for a potsherd years after it was started, one
must know or measure at least three important things.
1. How much radiation "ran the clock" since it was started. This
information is obtained by measuring the radioactive constituents of
a sample of the potsherd and the soil in which it was buried,
estimating the small contribution of cosmic radiation, and
calculating an annual radiation dose.
2. The amount of energy stored in the sample must be measured.
To measure this, a small amount of very fine powder taken from the
sample is spread in a very thin layer and attached to a block of metal.
A light-measuring device (called a photomultiplier) is set up so that it
faces the samples. The metal block is then electrically heated so that
its temperature (and that of the sample) rises slowly and steadily.
The temperature and the light emitted are continuously measured
and recorded to give a thermoluminescence curve. Any material that
is heated begins to emit light, or glow, when it gets hot enough. The
trick here is to measure the extra light emitted by the pottery.
3. The susceptibility of the sample for radiation induced ther¬
moluminescence. This is determined by measuring the artificially in¬
duced thermoluminescence produced by irradiating the sample with
a known quantity of radiation after the original measurement is
complete.
Relating these three factors in an equation gives the age of the
piece.
It takes careful work and attention to detail to obtain an accurate
date by this method. For example, the sample must be powdered
carefully because grinding it too hard and fast may heat it enough to
emit light prematurely. Nevertheless, the techniques have been
worked out, and quite a number of dating problems have been solv¬
ed in this way.
Other ceramic items besides potsherds can and have been dated.
Terra-cotta statuary and ceramic figures have also 6een analysed,
and forgeries have sometimes turned up.
H Bernard Keisch
Cosmic rays
yield
neutrons
which react
with nitrogen
atoms
to make
carbon-14
which shows up
as carbon dioxide
throughout the
atmosphere, the
hydrosphere.
CARBON-14 DATING
but when
an organism dies no
fresh carbon-14 replaces
the carbon-14 decaying ir
its tissues and the
carbon-14 radioactivity
decreases by half every
5,700 years.
22
