The handicap
Wá Mr F
\
i -'# i i * V
1
À
m
I
¡Li
|
«%
^ua
*
A
^
r Fr / i^r
V f v*
f
A group of enthusiastic pupils at a centre for deaf children in Yaounde, Cameroon.
NO amount of straining the imagina¬
tion can adequately convey to the
normal hearing person what it feels
like to be deaf from birth or in early
childhood. Deafness deprives the deaf in¬
dividual of the ability to enjoy, not only
music, but even more important, en¬
vironmental sounds such as those made by
singing birds, rustling wind, croaking frogs
and running streams.
Great as these deprivations are, they are
nothing to compare with language retarda¬
tion which early profound deafness imposes
upon its victim. Edna Levine, a notable
psychologist who had studied extensively
the problems of deafness, once lamented:
"Not to hear the voice is not to hear spoken
language. Not to hear spoken language
means that the proverbial child remains
in complete ignorance of this basic verbal
tool for human communication and
communion".
Lack of hearing subjects the deaf child to
learning language visually and artificially,
without first having heard it spoken. This
explains why many who were born deaf or
who became deaf early in life, are bedevilled
by language difficulties all through life.
PETER O. MBA is head of the department of
special education at the university of Ibadan,
Nigeria. He lost his hearing in an accident at the
age of twenty-five.
14
Communication problems apart, personal
experience, supported by the literature, in¬
dicates that deafness has a pervasive effect
on the total personality of the deaf person,
including his social adjustment, perception
and general motor activity. He is severely
limited in understanding the world around
him, in making himself understood, and in
making the most of his learning experiences.
Be this as it may, quite a few deaf people
have surmounted the difficulties inherent in
deafness, and have gone on to achieve
world recognition. Our world is richer today
because of the lives of deaf persons like
Beethoven, the composer, the Spanish
painter Goya, the French educator Laurent
Clerc, and Thomas Edison the inventor.
Apart from these great stars, many other
lesser lights have contributed in their various
fields of endeavour to the general enlight¬
enment and progress of humanity.
By and large, however, the number of
deaf people who have achieved renown is
infinitesimal in comparison with the millions
of illiterate unemployed and under¬
employed hearing-impaired people all over
the world especially in the developing
countries. I recently carried out a survey
which showed that less than 10 per cent of
school-age deaf children are receiving
education in the so-called "Third World",
due to widespread prejudice by the general
public, not only against the deaf, but against
disabled people in general.
There is much in the literature about the
attitude of society towards those perceived
as handicapped or different from others.
One researcher, for instance, found that a
negative attitude towards handicapped per¬
sons is widespread, even in the United
States a country widely acclaimed as one
of the most advanced in the world, in terms
of services which it provides for its disabled
citizens.
Die-hard myths and superstitious beliefs
about causes of disabilities buttress negative
attitudes and determine the way a handicap¬
ped person is perceived and treated, even in
his own family circle. In a recent study of at¬
titudes towards the deaf, I noted that in
parts of East Africa, a congenitally deaf child
is believed to be obeying an injunction by a
god who had warned him not to divulge
some secrets confided to him. To avoid
possible risks, the child opted to be born
"deaf and dumb". This, in turn, provided a
good cause why other people should have
little to do with him. A similar belief in some
parts of Nigeria explains deafness in terms
of adherence to the adage : "Once bitten,
twice shy". A child's soul coming back to in¬
carnation chooses to be deaf because in the
preceding life he had listened to everyone

of prejudice
by Peter O. Mba
Dance can play a role in the education of the deaf and in their
integration into society. As well as providing a means of self-
expression, it may help them to develop physical balance and
communication skills, and contribute to their intellectual and
psychological fulfilment. Photo shows a young deaf dancer
communicating in sign language while warming up. She is a
student at Gallaudet College (USA), an institution for the deaf
whose dance group has a world-wide reputation.
Photo © Gallaudet College, Washington, D.C.
who appealed to him, and thereby met his
untimely death.
Although education and general
enlightenment are fast changing negative at¬
titudes, one still frequently encounters acts
of cruelty to deaf persons. There have been
cases of forcing deaf youngsters to submit
to "treatment" by faith healers who very
often prescribe days of fasting. Some of
these healers even recommend corporal
punishment and self-mutilation as a form of
penance all for being "deaf and dumb".
A few years ago, a deaf girl was left to
waste away in a psychiatric ward where she
remained for four years without any ailment,
except deafness. She was later discovered
by a state rehabilitation counsellor.
In many under-developed communities
people frequently become very emotional
when confronted with deafness. Thus, they
embarrass the deaf individual and compel
him to see himself as a person of no worth,
an object of ridicule.
A couple of years ago, an expectant deaf
girl was among a group of other expectant
mothers who were waiting to see their doc¬
tor in a prenatal clinic. The deaf girl sat
quietly in a corner while the other women
carried on a lively discussion. A few minutes
later a young teacher who had taught in the
last school attended by the deaf girl,
recognized her and walked across the room
to say "Hello" to her. Soon, both were con¬
versing in the language of signs. There was
a hush in the room as the other women
stared at the two people making signs and
laughing. A minute later the women were
sobbing and dabbing their wet eyes with
handkerchiefs. One of them had explained
to the others that the girl making signs was
deaf. They could not believe it. They did not
think that a deaf girl could also be an expec¬
tant mother! Naturally, the poor girl was
greatly embarrassed at this unwarranted
display of sympathy. Incidents like this
occur in various situations in rural com¬
munities.
To conclude, my thirty years experience
as a deaf man who lost his hearing at the
age of twenty-five has taught me so much
about the humiliations, misunderstandings,
denial of human rights and lack of empathy
which deafness frequently brings upon the
deaf, that I have come to believe that the
crucial factors in deciding whether or not a
deaf person will live a successful life are
the prevaliling attitudes at home and in the
society in which the lives.
15
