
Ummat ul-ilm
Towards
a Commonwealth of Science
by Abdus Salam
"Allah is He who made (it possible) for you
(to acquire) mastery over the ocean; thus
(your) craft can ply thereon, with Allah's
command. . . Allah is He, who gives you sub¬
jection over all that is in Heaven and on
Earth: Herein are Allah's signs for peoples
given to reflection. "
(The Qur'an, XLV: 12,13)
Built by the Indian Prince Jai Singh in
the Xll/18th century, the observatory at
Delhi, left, though it incorporated
elements of Hindu astronomy, basically
continued the Islamic tradition of
observatory building as represented by
the great observatories at Maragha
(Vll/13th century), Samarkand (IX/15th
century) and Istanbul (X/16th century).
The Maragha observatory, with a staff
of twenty astronomers drawn from all
over the Islamic world directed by the
great scientist Nasir ad-Din at-Tusi, was
probably the world's first observatory in
the full sense of the word.
ABU AHMAD MOHAMMAD ABDUS
SALAM BIN HUSSAIN, FRS, of Pakistan, was
awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1979 for
work in electromagnetic interaction between ele¬
mentary particles. He has been professor of theo¬
retical physics at the Imperial College of Science
and Technology in the University of London since
1957, and is founder and director of the Unesco-
sponsored International Centre for Theoretical
Physics, Trieste. In the article above, quotations
from the Qur'an are from the translation by A.J.
Arberry.
THROUGHOUT the ages, man has
reflected on nature, attempted to
discover its laws, and sought to
subdue it. The Holy Qur'an, by repeated in¬
junction and illustration from natural
phenomena, enjoins the twin pursuits of
reflection on (taffaqur) and mastery over
nature (taskheer) as bounden obligations of
the Muslim community. Following these in¬
junctions, barely a hundred years after the
Holy Prophet's death, the Muslims made it
their task not only to master the then known
sciences; they also acquired an ascendancy,
in the creation of the sciences, which lasted
over the next six hundred years.
In his monumental Introduction to the
History of Science, George Sarton divides
his story of achievement into ages, each age
lasting half a century. With each half cen¬
tury he associates one central figure. The
period 450-400 BC he calls the Age of Plato;
this is followed by the half centuries of
Aristotle, of Euclid, of Archimedes. From
600 AD to 700 AD is the Chinese century of
Hsiian Tsang and the I Ching and then from
750 AD to 1100 AD -350 years con¬
tinuously is an unbroken succession of
the Ages of men belonging to the culture
and the Commonwealth of Islam: Jabir,
Khwarizmi, Razi, Masudi, Wafa, Biruni and
Omar Khayyam Arabs, Turks, Afghans
and Persians chemists, algebraists, clini¬
cians, geographers, mathematicians,
physicists and astronomers.
Only after 1100 AD in George Sarton's
story of science, appear the first Western
names Gerard of Cremona, Roger Bacon
but the honours are still shared for another
250 years with men like Ibn Rushd, Nasir-ad-
din at-Tusi and Ibn Nafis, the man who an¬
ticipated Harvey's theory of circulation of
the blood.
Of the high level of achievement, the
following, taken from my own subject of
physics, may serve as examples.
Contrary to the views of the Greeks, "Ibn-
Sina (Avicenna, 370-428 AH/980-1037 AD)
regarded light as an emission by the
luminous sources of particles travelling at
finite speed; he understood the kinetic
nature of heat and of force and motion".
His contemporary, Ibn al Haytham
(Alhazen, 354-430 AH/965-1039 AD), one of
the greatest physicists of all time, besides
making experimental contributions in optics,
"enunciated that a ray of light, in passing
through a medium, takes the path which is
the quicker, anticipating Fermat's Principle
of Least Time. He understood the Law of In¬
ertia, later to become Newton's first law of
motion. He described the process of refrac¬
tion in mechanical terms by considering the
movement of a particle of light as it passed
through the surface of separation of two
media, in accordance with the rectangle of
forces a mode of approach independently
discovered later and elaborated by
Newton".
Al-Biruni (362-439 AH/973-1048 AD), a
great experimenter like his contemporary
Alhazen, was as modern and as post-
medieval in outlook as Galileo with whom he
shares the independent (and prior) discovery
of the Galilean invariance of the laws of
Nature. Al-Biruni's comments on scientific
methodology in his famous review of Indian
science and his correspondence with
Avicenna on the subject of elementarily of
fundamental particles, might have been
written today, such is the freshness of Al-
Biruni's mode of reasoning.
Qutb-al-Din al-Shirazi (633-710 AH/
1236-1311 AD) and his pupil Kamal-ud-Din,
gave the first explanation of the rainbow,
stated that the speed of light is in inverse
ratio to the optical (not material) density of
the medium; and that hyperboloidal lenses
avoid spherical aberration.
It should not be forgotten that these men
were not just physicists; they made equal or
greater contributions to medicine,
mathematics, geology, philosophy and
astronomy.
Three reasons can be given to explain
why, during their Golden Age in the ll/8th,
lll/9th, IWIOth and V/11th centuries, the
Muslims searched for and developed the
sciences to such a high level. First and
foremost the Muslims were following the
repeated injunctions of the Holy Book and
the Holy Prophet. According to Dr. Moham¬
mad Aijazul Khatib of Damascus University:
"In contrast to 250 verses which are
legislative, some 750 verses of the Holy
Qur'an exhort the believers to study Nature,
to reflect, to make the best use of reason
and to make the scientific enterprise an in¬
tegral part of the Community's life".
The second reason, connected with the
first, was the status accorded in Islam to
men of knowledge and science (A/ims). The
Qur'an emphasizes the superiority of the 3
51

Left, Persian brass astrolabe
dating from the Xl/17th
century. Astrolabes were
used in computing the
position of the stars and the
movement of the planets, as
a means of telling time, and
as navigational instruments.
They date back to before
Islam, but were vastly
improved by Muslim
astronomers. Right, diagram
from an Arabic manuscript,
dated 602 AH/1205 AD and
now in the Topkapi
Museum, Istanbul, which
explains the working of the
astrolabe.
one possessing knowledge and
science by asking how those without such
attributes could ever be the equals of those
who do? The Holy Prophet of Islam gave the
proud title of "Inheritors of Prophets" to
believing men of knowledge and science for
they were the ones who could recognize
Allah's design and its sublimity. Absolutely
explicitly he said: "The quest for knowledge
and science is obligatory upon every Muslim
man and woman". He further enjoined his
followers to seek scientific knowledge even
if it be in far Cathay.
An aspect of this veneration for sciences
was the patronage extended to their crea¬
tion in the Islamic-Arabic Commonwealth.
To paraphrase what the orientalist H.A.R.
Gibb has written about Arabic literature to
the parallel situation for Sciences: "To a
greater extent than elsewhere, the flowering
of Sciences in Islam was conditional... on.
the liberality and patronage of those in high
positions. Where Muslim society was in
decay, science lost vitality and force. But so
long as in one capital or another princes and
ministers found pleasure, profit or reputa¬
tion in patronizing sciences, the torch was
kept burning".
A third reason for the success of the
scientific enterprise in Islam was its interna¬
tional character. Not only did the Islamic
Commonwealth itself cut across nation and
colour, the early Muslim society was also the
most tolerant of those from outside of it and
their ideas. As al-Kindi wrote eleven hundred
years ago: "It is fitting then for us not to be
ashamed to acknowledge truth and to assimi¬
late it from whatever source it comes to us.
For him who scales the truth there is nothing
of higher value than truth itself; it never chea¬
pens nor abases him who seeks".
After the beginning of the VI/ 12th century,
science in Islam started to decline; by 750
AH/1350 AD the decline was complete. Why
did we in Islamic lands lose out? No one
knows for certain. There were indeed exter¬
nal causes, like the devastation caused by
the Mongols, but, grievous though it was, it
was perhaps more in the nature of a tempo¬
rary interruption. Sixty years after Ghengiz,
his grandson Halagu was founding an obser¬
vatory at Maragha. In my view, the demise of
living science within the Islamic Common¬
wealth was more due to internal causes.
To illustrate this let me quote from Ibn
Khaldun (732-808 AH/1332-1406 AD) one of
the greatest social historians and one of the
brightest intellects of all times in his field. Ibn
Khaldun writes in His Muquddimah (Intro¬
duction to History):
"We have heard, of late, that in the land of
the Franks, and on the northern shores of
the Mediterranean, there is a great cultivation
of philosophical sciences. They are said to
be studied there again and to be taught in
numerous classes. Existing systematic expo¬
sitions of them are said to be comprehen¬
sive, the people who know them numerous
and the students of them very many... Allah
knows better, what exists there... But it is
clear that the problems of physics are of no
importance for us in our religious affairs.
Therefore, we must leave them alone" (1).
Ibn Khaldun displays no curiosity, no
wistfulness, just apathy, bordering on hosti¬
lity. This apathy led to isolation. The tradi¬
tion of al-Kindi, of acquiring knowledge
from wherever it could be obtained and
improving on it, was forgotten. The Muslim
world of science sought no contacts with
the West where sciences had now begun to
be created.
Five centuries before, Muslims had avidly
sought knowledge first from the Hellenic
and Nestorian colonies of scholars at Hun-
dishapur and Harran, where translations
were made from Greek and Syriac. They had
then founded in Baghdad, Cairo and elsw-
here international institutes of advanced
study, Bait-ul-Hikmas, and international
observatories, the Shamsiyyas, at which
ft) See translation by F. Rosenthal Vol .III, pages 111-
112, 116-118, 153-155 and246-253. Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1958.
52

¿g¿ » i>^> è^*^^'Hlí>v>¿ '¿«f[¿
Wt
JßW
ÀBï
9~#yr-&*p
congregated scientists from all lands,
creating new knowledge.
Such international concourses had begun
to be assembled from around the beginning
of the Vll/13th century in the West, starting
with Toledo and Palermo where translations
were feverishly made from the then
prestigious language of science, Arabic.
Thus a candle was lighted in the West from
a candle then burning brightly in the lands of
Islam. But there was no converse movement
in Islamic lands, which maintained the most
superficial scientific contacts with science
elsewhere.
To complete the story, from Ibn
Khaldun's day this intellectual isolation con¬
tinued, even during the great Empires of
Islam, the Empires of the Osmanlis, of the
Safvis, and of the Moghuls. The very en¬
cyclopaedic nature of knowledge and
science in Islam was now a hindrance, for
any science that was cultivated was concen¬
trated in religious seminaries, where tradi¬
tion was valued more than innovation.
It was not that the Sultans and the Shah-
in-Shahs did not know of the technological
advances being made by the Europeans.
They could hardly be unaware of the in¬
trusive superiority of the Venetians or the
Genoese in the arts of gun-founding or of
the navigational and ship-building skills of
the Portuguese who controlled the oceans
of the world, including all oceans bordering
on Islamic lands, and even the Hajj sea
routes. But they do not seem to have realiz¬
ed that the navigational skills of the Por¬
tuguese were not accidental but had been
scientifically developed and sedulously
cultivated starting with the research
establishment of Sagres set up in 822
AH/1419 AD by Prince Henry the Navigator.
And even while envying and trying to ac¬
quire the technologies involved, they failed
to understand the basic inter-relation bet¬
ween Science and Technology. As late as
1213 AH/1799 AD, when Selim III did in¬
troduce modern studies of algebra,
trigonometry, mechanics, ballistics and
metallurgy into Turkey, importing French
and Swedish teachers, so as to rival the
European arts of gunfounding, he failed to
place emphasis on basic scientific research
in these subjects, so that Turkey never
caught up with Europe. And even today,
when we have come to recognize that
technology is the sustenance and the
power, we have not appreciated that there
are no short cuts to it; that basic science and
its creation must become part of our civiliza¬
tion, as a pre-condition of the mastery of
science in application.
How can we turn the pages of history
back and excel in science once again? Most
of my remarks apply to the developing world
in general, but I shall speak with special
reference to the situation in Islamic
countries.
In keeping with our own experience of
earlier centuries, in keeping with the ex¬
perience of others and in keeping with the
obligations laid on us by the Holy Book and
the Prophet, our society as a whole, and our
youth in particular, must develop a pas¬
sionate commitment towards bringing about
a renaissance of sciences. We must impart
hard scientific training to more than half of
our manpower; we must pursue pure and
applied sciences with 1-2 per cent of GNP
being spent on research and development
and at least one fifth of this on pure sciences
alone.
This was done in Japan with the Meiji
revolution and is being undertaken today in
a planned manner, for example, by the Peo¬
ple's Republic of China the far Cathay of
the Holy Prophet's Hadith with defined
targets, in space sciences, in genetics and
biotechnology, in microelectronics, in high
energy physics, in agriculture, in the control
of thermo-nuclear energy. There is a clear
recognition that all basic science is relevant
science; that the frontier of today is tomor¬
row's application and that it is crucial to re¬
main at the frontier. In this context one may 3
53

-recall that the GNP of the Islamic-Arabic
nations exceeds that of China, while the
human resources are not significantly
smaller.
I have spoken of patronage for sciences.
One vital aspect of this is the sense of
security and continuity which a scientist-
scholar must be accorded for his work. Like
all humans, a scientist or technologist can
only give of his best if he koows he will have
security, respect and equality of opportunity
for his work and advancement, and is shield¬
ed from all forms of discrimination.
I have referred to a Commonwealth of
Science for the Islamic and the Arab coun¬
tries. Such a Commonwealth of Science
was a true reality in the great days of Islamic
Science, when Central Asians like Ibn Sina
and al-Biruni would naturally write in Arabic,
or their contemporary and my brother in
physics, Ibn al Haytham, could migrate from
his native Basra in the dominions of the Ab-
basid Caliph to the court of his rival, the
Fatimid Caliph al-Hakim, sure of receiving
respect and homage, notwithstanding the
political and sectarian differences which
were no less acute then than they are now.
This Commonwealth of Science needs
conscious articulation, and recognition once
again, both spiritually and physically, by us
the scientists, as well as our countries. To¬
day we, the scientists from the Islamic coun¬
tries, constitute a very small com¬
munity hundredth to one tenth in size,
in scientific resources, and in scientific
creativity compared to the international
norms. We need to band together, to pool
our scientific resources. We need the ar
ticulation of a compact conferring immuni¬
ty, for, say, the next twenty-five years, dur¬
ing which those within this Commonwealth
of Sciences, this Ummat-ul-llm would not
be discriminated against on national or other
grounds.
And finally, there is the isolation of our
scientific effort from international science. It
is not just the physical isolation of the in¬
dividual scientist from his scientific peers
elsewhere that we suffer from. There is also
the isolation from the norms of international
science, the gulf between the way we run
the scientific enterprise in our countries and
the self-governing manner in which it is run
in the developed countries.
The renaissance of Sciences within an
Islamic Commonwealth of Sciences is con¬
tingent therefore upon five cardinal precon¬
ditions: passionate commitment, generous
patronage, provision of security, absence of
sectarian or national discrimination, self-
governance and internationalization of our
scientific enterprise.
Why am I so passionately advocating our
engaging in this enterprise of creating
knowledge? This is not just because Allah
has endowed us with the urge to know, this
is not just because in the conditions of today
knowledge is power and science in applica¬
tion the major instrument of material pro¬
gress; it is also that as members of the inter¬
national world community, one feels that
lash of contempt for us unspoken, but still
there of those who create knowledge.
My self-respect suffers a terrible hurt
whenever I enter a hospital and find that
almost every potent life-saving medicament
of today, from penicillin to interferon has
been created without a share of inputs from
any of us from Arab and Islamic lands, or in¬
deed from any in the Third World.
To turn from science to technology, the
Holy Book of Islam places equal emphasis
on Taskheer (Technology) as on Taffaqur
(Science); it emphasizes acquiring mastery
of Nature, through scientific knowledge, as
much as the creation of new knowledge.
Besides lacking a base in Sciences, what
are the present obstacles in our societies to
our acquiring the highest proficiency in
technology? After all, never before in human
history has so much effort and such
magnitude of funds gone into creating
technical facilities in such a short duration of
time as in our lands during the last decade.
Unfortunately, most of these projects have
been executed in the turnkey mode; their ex¬
ecution has had little association with and
little employment of the incipient research
and development community of our men of
technology and engineering. Our societies
have become consumers of technology, not
technology-minded.
At least in part this is due to the fact that
the decision-maker is, as a rule, a non¬
technical person. Our countries are the
paradise of the planner, the administrator;
the technologist has had no part in decision
making. And yet experience shows that the
long term goal of technology acquisition
depends on complete accord, participation
and involvement between the scientist, the
technologist, and those who run the
development machinery of Statewith full

-» $¿> *9-
A daring challenge to the usual architectural drabness of utility
buildings, these striking water towers stand out on the skyline of
the city of Kuwait, a symbol of the search for new ways of
assimilating modern technology into existing traditions. Supplied
by two seawater distillation plants, a total of thirty-one of the
mushroom-design towers ensure a constant supply of fresh
water to the growing city. Opposite page, these three towers.
situated prominently on Kuwait Bay, offer a contrasting design.
The main tower is a 185-metre concrete column supporting two
spheres which contain, in addition to a reservoir, a restaurant, a
banquet hall, an indoor garden and an observatory. A second
tower supports a single spherical reservoir. The third structure, a
concrete needle, completes the composition.
trust in each other's sphere of work. And
the same rule applies, besides industrial and
science-based technology, to the whole area
of science in application, in agriculture, in
public health, in energy systems, and in
defence.
I wish to conclude with three appeals.
First, to my brothers in Sciences: We, the
scientists, have rights, as well as obliga¬
tions. We are few in numbers, the sizes of
our communities are individually sub-
critical. This, however, would not be so if
we were to band together in an Ummat-ul-
llm (a Community of Sciences). The
building up of such a Commonwealth of
Science depends, in the last analysis, on us.
I have personally been engaged in a quest
for a unity among the seemingly disparate
fundamental forces of nature. This is part of
our faith as physicists and of mine as a
Muslim, in the ultimate unity and symmetry
of Nature. At the Nobel Banquet in 1979 I
had the privilege to remind the audience of
this:
"The creation of physics is the shared
heritage of all mankind. East and West,
North and South have equally participated
in it. In the Holy Book of Islam, Allah says :
'Thou seest not, in the creation of the All-
Merciful any imperfection, Return thy gaze,
seest thou any flaw. Then return thy gaze,
again and again. Thy gaze comes back to
thee dazzled, aweary'. (LXVII: 3,4).
"This, in effect, is the faith of all
physicists, the faith which fires and sustains
us; the deeper we seek, the more is our
wonder excited, the more is the dazzlement
for our gaze."
Following this sentiment, my second ap¬
peal is to those among us who are shaping
our societies through their teachings; do not
forget these words from the Holy Book, nor
what their implications are for the goals of
our society. Let me humbly suggest that one
implication of this is that seminaries in
Islamic lands must include in their curricula
studies of the concepts of modern sciences
and not just sciences as at the time of Ibn
Sina (Avicenna).
And finally, my third appeal is to those
responsible for our affairs. Science is impor
tant because of the underlying understan¬
ding it provides of the world around us and
of Allah's design; it is important because of
the material benefits its discoveries can give
us. We, in Islam, owe a debt to international
science, which in all self-respect, we must
discharge. However, the scientific enterprise
cannot flourish without the generous
patronage of our rulers, just as in the past
enturies of Islam. The international norms
of one to two per cent of GNP, would mean
expenditures of the order of four to eight
billion dollars annually for the Islamic world
on research and development, one fifth of
this spent on pure science. We desperately
need such funds.
We need science foundations in our coun¬
tries, run by the scientists. We need interna¬
tional centres of higher learning within and
without our universities, providing liberal
support, security and continuity. Let no
future historian record that in the fifteenth
century of the Hijra the scientists were there
but there was a dearth of "princes and
ministers" with their generous patronage.
Abdus Salam
55
