A new architecture
by Dogan Kuban
DOGAN KUBAN, noted Turkish architect, edu¬
cator and historian of architecture, has been
director of his country's Institute of the History of
Architecture and Restoration since 1974. He has
been a visiting scholar orprofessor at several U. S.
universities, most recently in 1980- 1981 when he
was Aga Khan Visiting Professor of Islamic Archi¬
tecture and Urban Design at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. He is a member of the
Steering Committee of the Aga Khan Award for
Architecture.
WHEN Granada, the last Moorish
stronghold in Spain, fell to the
armies of Ferdinand and Isabella
in 1492, its Spanish conquerors were so im¬
pressed by the beauty of the Alhambra, the
palace of the Moorish monarchs, that they
decided not to destroy it. Later, apparently,
the Emperor Charles V found it unsuitable
for an imperial residence. Alongside it his
architect erected a palace which is accepted
as one of the purest examples of Spanish
Renaissance architecture.
The Alhambra and Charles's palace, stan¬
ding side by side, allow us to make in¬
teresting comparisons. It is evident, for ex¬
ample, that certain architectural qualities
which were so perfectly expressed in the
Alhambra and which still retain their fascina¬
tion today, were far outside the frame of
mind of Renaissance Europe. Today
however it would be impossible to imagine
the land of Spain without the Alhambra or
the Great Mosque at Cordoba, and the
vision embodied in them, which totally
eclipses that of Charles's palace.
The Alhambra holds more than an exotic
appeal. Extremely well adapted to the
climatic and topographical conditions of the
hills of Granada, it appears to the visitor as
an organism of masterfully arranged, inter¬
connected spaces of rare elegance. An
original feeling for the organization of space
and for dimensional relationships, and an
exquisite use of decoration, bear witness to
the refined taste of a cultural milieu which is
formally in open contrast with that of
IX/15th and X/16th century Europe. Long
disdained by European art history and labell¬
ed "decorative", this architecture in which
the most profuse decoration scarcely in¬
terferes with the purity of architectural
design has a strong appeal for modern taste.
68

Left, ribbed domes of the great mosque of Qayrawan (Tunisia). The blind arcade in
foreground displays typical Arab features, notably the horseshoe arches which
reappear in the illustration (below) to Beatus' Commentary on the Apocalypse, a
brilliant example of what is known as Mozarablc art. The Mozarabic style was created
by the Christian population which continued to practise their religion under Muslim
rule in Spain and combines elements from the two civilizations.

rooted in tradition
What can be seen at the Alhambra can
also be perceived in the products of many
architectural traditions in Islamic countries.
But so slight and superficial is the
knowledge of Islamic architecture that has
reached modern intellectuals, including
Muslims, that for today's generation of
Muslim architects the exploration of their ar¬
chitectural past is a veritable revelation.
Most of today's architectural thinking,
education and practice, basically formulated
after World War I, takes place under the
spell of the industrial ideology of the
Western world. This ideology has also been
overwhelmingly adopted by the ruling
classes of the non-Western world. As a
result it is often difficult to discuss the
values of traditional architecture and the
traditional environment without being labell¬
ed a historicist, a traditionalist, and a lover
of the picturesque, if not a reactionary.
Although the traditional outlook may sub¬
sist and colour many political attitudes, a
strong dichotomy prevails between the ac¬
ceptance of a general set of spiritual values
and the acceptance of specific values
governing our appreciation of the material
culture of the past. Nevertheless, nothing
can escape the continuous reshaping power
of history as long as different languages,
beliefs, social systems and national sen¬
timents exist. And this process is bound
eventually to generate a sympathetic
approach to the values of the material
environment.
Thus a new interpretation of the nature of
the traditional Islamic environment is bound
to influence, negatively or positively, the
practical attitudes of Muslim architects. The
realization that an appropriate environment
cannot be created simply by the transfer of
industrial ideology and the importation of
techniques and materials is gradually replac¬
ing the romantic belief in the universalism of
early rationalism. On the other hand,
although theoretically the tenets of the inter¬
national style in architecture have fallen into
disfavour, they still constitute the entrench¬
ed ideology in architectural practice. Muslim
architects are thus caught up in a dilemma
between the demands of a practice based on
Western images and the exigencies of a na¬
tional identity and a cultural heritage of
great power.
There are two imperatives: on the one
hand the wider necessity of reinterpreting
Muslim history, and on the other the need to
search for a different ¡mage of the modern
environment in the Islamic world. The
former is a task for the scholars and intellect
tuals of Islam; the latter for the architects,
designers and planners. A new vision of J
69

1
W "
\
«
T^Ç5""J
- -*- £
ii
m*
-W.ZK
Ct
I
*
J

Light and water play an important role In Islamic architecture.
Caught and reflected on stucco or enamelled tile surfaces, light
dispels heaviness and brings a spiritual, incorporeal quality to
brick and stone. Water is a source of coolness and a symbol of
purity, and a small fountain or pool in a central courtyard is often
the focal point of palaces and other Islamic edifices. The subtle
interplay of light and water is particularly remarkable in the
Court of Lions, left, in the Alhambra Palace (Vlll/14th century) at
Granada in Spain. The court, whose walls are lined with
enamelled tiles and delicate stucco-work, owes its name to the
12 marble lions which support the fountain in its centre. The
garden was also an expressive art form in Islam. In the Moghul
painting, below, Babur (IX-X/15th-16th century) the founder of
India's Moghul dynasty, inspects a garden where water channels
are laid out in a characteristic cruciform pattern.
" history will have major implications in every
field, including that of architecture.
Architects express the material dimen¬
sions of an existing image of the world, but
they do not produce that image themselves.
It is to be hoped that a new consciousness
of the relationship between man and his en¬
vironment, filtered through this new vision
of history, will create the intellectual and
emotional atmosphere to which Muslim ar¬
chitects will eventually respond with ap¬
propriate inventiveness.
It is generally acknowledged by recent
historiography that the modern version of
Islamic history, like that of the history of the
non-Western world in general, has been
written by Westerners as an appendix to
Western history. A radical reinterpretation
of history will not only bring to light the
Islamic world-view in its many regional ex¬
pressions, but also its global relationships,
sometimes in symbiosis, sometimes in con¬
trast, with other, non-Islamic traditions.
This will also change our evaluation of
Muslim artistic traditions. The study and
understanding of the rich variety of tradi¬
tional experience in handling form and
space, be it the monumental styles of Spain,
Egypt, Turkey, Iran, or the Indian sub¬
continent, or the amazing richness of in¬
digenous settlements in an area stretching
from Morocco to the Philippines, might give
modern generations of architects the
possibility of understanding certain formal
relationships which are perhaps still valid,
at least as sources of inspiration for the
creation of a new image of the human
environment.
The development of new concepts and
perspectives with such goals and dimen¬
sions is difficult since it has to take place
against a background of rapidly changing
perceptions of national histories, in the
presence of the strong traditions of Western
scholarship, and under pressure from the
overwhelming output of Western publica¬
tions. If, as has so often been observed,
Muslim intellectuals and architects incor¬
rectly interpret and évalue the material
heritage of their own history, this was and
still is the result of the established attitudes
of Islamic art history, in which Islam is por¬
trayed in its medieval garb, as a museum
piece.
The surviving environment, in accordance
with this view, is seen as a hindrance to a ra¬
tional development, that is development
which adheres to models imported from or
imposed by the West. (This insistence on
the negative influence of the West should
not be interpreted as an overall attack on
everything Western, but as an indication of
a new consciousness of history and a refusal
to imitate blindly everything offered by the
West. The subtle balance between borrow¬
ing and interpretation may only be achieved
through an objective re-evaluation of the
past.)
As far as our environment is concerned,
the Western ¡mage has not necessarily pro¬
duced better living- conditions, and has
disfigured or totally destroyed old cities such
as Cairo, Istanbul, Teheran or Jeddah which
had, as we appreciate more fully today^
sound ecological qualities. ~ Examples of
destruction are alarming and discouraging,
not only because of their extent, but
because- of their brutality and lack of
sensibility. >
71

Photo © Yvette Vincent Alleaume, Paris
The capital of the Ottoman empire, Istan¬
bul, was once an example of exquisite urban
architecture. Today it contains the most
banal examples of modern architecture.
Neither modern technology at the level at
which it is used, nor the culture of the socie¬
ty in question are capable of producing an
architecture of decent aesthetic quality,
because the transition from one culture to
another has been too sudden to allow the
crystallization of a clear set of definitions
and goals.
The cases of Istanbul and other great cen¬
tres of the old Near East such as Cairo,
Damascus and Jerusalem are very instruc¬
tive, because Western taste in architecture
was introduced in these cities as early as the
Xll/18th century if not before.
The destruction and loss of character of
the traditional environment is not intrinsical¬
ly the result of modernization, but rather the
outcome of an inability to realize and recon¬
cile the imposed image of a city, its architec¬
ture and the life-style which goes with them.
72
That this image was not universally ap¬
plicable is another matter. Our societies do
not have the potential, whether economic,
technological, cultural or social, effectively
to produce and maintain this image which
was not theirs. The relationship between the
image and its potential realization cannot be
expressed by a mere equation, as it is often
simplistically claimed.
The environment of the past has, never¬
theless, remarkable powers of survival.
Despite the drastic destruction of recent
decades, the traditional environment,
especially in rural and semi-rural areas, still
has a reasonable chance of remaining with
us for some time to come. There is a grow¬
ing tendency for Muslim architects to
evaluate and use the traditional building
stock, monuments and settlements as part
of a modern environment in which the old
and the new are integrated, in which
changes occur at a perceptible but less rapid
pace, and in which Muslim societies do not
lose the thread of history. It is perhaps the
responsibility of the present generation to
express these aspirations. But in the present
circumstances of rapid change, especially in
countries where the natural resources at the
disposal of governments seem limitless, the
fight for a more controlled development and
a slower rate of change, thus respecting
history and harmonizing with the remnants
of traditional culture, is beset with many
difficulties.
Given the impact of industry, the
monopolizing and levelling effects of world
politics and communication systems, and
the needs of large sections of the world
population, the role of architects and plan¬
ners in defining a new ¡mage may only
emerge from an awareness of the cultural
dimensions of the present situation. We
should continue to emphasize the principle
that the possibility of creating a healthy en¬
vironment depends not on the capacity to
buy Western technology, but on a potential
inherent in the cultural and social structure
of the society.

In Islamic countries from the Atlantic to the Ganges, a distinctive architectural
"language" came into being and developed over the centuries. It was based on
a common faith and civilization and transcended geographic, cultural and
climatic diversity. Far from jettisoning earlier cultural traditions, Islam
assimilated and transformed them, producing works of monumental
architecture prodigious both in quality and number. The extent of this
achievement can be measured not only in mosques but in many other types of
building such as madrasahs, mausoleums, observatories, palaces, citadels and
caravanserais. Islam also made a notable contribution to town planning. On
these pages, roofscapes from three countries. Left, rooftop of the mosque at
Djenne (Mali) an old trading city and centre of Islamic culture founded in the
Vll/13th century. The mosque dates from 1905. Above, housetops of the village
of El-Mahder (Algeria) as they appear from the roof of the village mosque.
Below, undulating rooftop of the bazaar at Yazd (Iran).
Photo © Ch. Bastin and J. Evrard, Belgium
How can all these questions, anxieties
and aspirations be translated into everyday
forms of architecture? How can a feeling for
the traditional environment and forms
perceived by an architect be expressed in a
modern building? Since the terms traditional
culture and modern environment are
susceptible to interpretation and subject to
continuous change, their relationship can
only be defined by practice. Theoretical dis¬
cussions cannot determine universally ap¬
plicable Islamic forms, but they may perhaps
give shape to certain attitudes which may
help to attain such forms in their specific
cultural context, which will most probably
vary from region to region.
Recent debates on modern architecture
and town planning in Islamic countries, such
as the seminars sponsored by the Aga Khan
Award for Islamic Architecture, conferences
on the Islamic city held in many Arab coun¬
tries, and symposia sponsored by interna¬
tional agencies such as Unesco, have shown
that it is extremely difficult, even hazardous, i
73

- to define in physical terms a modern en¬
vironment consonant with the traditional
culture.
Some individual examples may convey
such relationships, but they cannot provide
formulae which may be applied elsewhere.
The works of architects who make con¬
scious efforts to solve these problems
basically refer to formal elements taken from
traditional architecture and the traditional
environment. They emphasize the virtues of
indigenous buildings, the work of
anonymous builders, whose qualities still
capture the imagination. Thismay be called
a search for an architecture in the spirit of
Islam, Islam defined as cultural tradition.
This trend is best represented by the now-
famous Egyptian architect Hassan Fathy and
others sharing the same approach. It is a
belief that a broad but sensitive application
of traditional forms and design principles is
conducive to healthy modern architecture.
Hassan Fathy has put it as follows:
"...people do recognize and wish to
remedy the cultural confusion in our ar¬
chitecture... This confusion is seen as a prob¬
lem of style, and style is looked upon as
some sort of surface finish that can be ap-
Left, the Friday Mosque at
Zarla (northern Nigeria).
Founded in the Xl/17th
century, Zaria Is the ancient
capital of the Hausa
kingdom. Right, inside the
prayer hall of the great
Umayyad Mosque at
Damascus, completed
around 97 AH/714-715 AD.
The horseshoe arches rest
on tall slender columns
revealing the influence of
classical antiquity.
plied to any building and even scraped off
and changed if necessary... In the architec¬
tural schools they make no study of the
history of domestic buildings, and learn ar¬
chitectural periods by the accidents of
style... Thus the graduate architect believes
this to be all there is in 'style', and imagines
a building changes its style as a man
changes clothes."
Here style is used synonymously with
monumental style. Hassan Fathy em¬
phasizes the importance of the vernacular
and the organic relationship between style
and culture. As a matter of fact, a compe- )
Detail of a façade of the
Mustansiriya madrasah in
Baghdad built under the
Abbasids (Vll/13th century).
It displays a strong Persian
influence and the decorative
patterns based on octagons,
six- and eight-pointed stars,
and other geometrical
motifs are characteristic of
Islamic art.
74

¡A
Il A >M I
HL v 1
B 5; s
H if
:

-tent and conscious use of traditional forms
with the partial integration of modern
techniques may lead to satisfactory
aesthetic solutions and provide modern
comfort. The Halawa house at Agamy,
Egypt, which recently won an Aga Khan
Award for Architecture, is a case in point.
But one must confess that this building
could easily be labelled "elitist". It is only in
the rural context and with a complete use of
traditional techniques that this approach has
any chance of being adopted. Under today's
economic restraints, to rely on old building
techniques for new purposes ¡s a challenge
for architects, since traditional technology
still prevails in many regions of the Islamic
world and seems economically rewarding.
Here too, the Gourna village experiment of
Hassan Fathy, the subject of his book
Architecture for the Poor, was a pioneering
example.
A large group of architects have found
that a rather free use and interpretation of
tradition without resorting to the original
forms themselves is a satisfactory approach
to design. Both modern and traditional
materials may be used for this purpose. A
still unfinished project, the Great National
Mosque at Islamabad, the work of the
Turkish architect Vedat Dalokay, is a large-
scale example of this trend at its freest. An¬
dré Raveréau's Health Centre at Mopti
(Mali), which has also been awarded an Aga
Khan Prize, is a highly qualified illustration
of the same approach on an everyday scale.
Nevertheless, for most architects, an ar¬
chitecture in spiritual continuity with the
past means incorporating formal echoes of
the past.
Traditional forms have not yet been
satisfactorily used in large-scale buildings,
and it is impossible to maintain that they
ever will be, because there is a fundamental
difference between the application of tradi¬
tional forms to small buildings and their use
in large ones. The monumental "accent" of
our environment has changed. Monumental
architecture has a different symbolic
resonance when it is not related to religious
or political requirements.
A project such as the new Jeddah airport
or a project once proposed for the city cen¬
tre in Tehran, like many new university cam¬
puses all over the Islamic world or large-
scale housing schemes, illustrate the power¬
ful symbolism of the new functions but also
reveal the anarchy of taste prevailing in the
minds of designers, Muslims and non-
Muslims alike. The same confusion is to be
observed in urban renewal projects where
planners insert space concepts of Western
origin into the existing urban fabric, with
fatal results. Such projects include the
renewal of the city core of Mashad around
the shrine of Imam Reza, speculative
destruction of the old city of Istanbul,
destruction of old Jeddah and Mecca.
These should not be interpreted as in¬
dividual failures. They might even, in some
ways, represent competent planning. But
what is missing in all these endeavours is the
basic sureness of an architect or planner in
complete harmony with his society, and a
society which has clearly formulated the
demands it wishes to make on them.
In the continuous flux of life, respect for
the past cannot be a static reverence; it re¬
quires a dynamic interpretation. Thus
modern development in Islamic countries
brings architects more responsibility than
7R
has been customary until now. They are not
only supposed to be sensitive to the struc¬
ture and inclinations of social forces but also
to be equipped with a responsible
understanding of culture and history.
In developing a new ¡mage for a future en¬
vironment, through an enriched vision of
history and within a vision of future cultural
plurality, the link between theoretical think¬
ing and everyday practice cannot be main¬
tained by the efforts of architects, planners
or scholars alone, but through the demands
of a public opinion increasingly aware of its
cultural identity within an unbiased historical
perspective.
M Dogan Kuban
Photo ©Aga Khan Award for Architecture, Geneva
The Agricultural Training Centre at Nianing,
Senegal, a regional training school for
80 students, received one of the 1980 Aga
Khan Awards for Architecture. The
application on a larger scale of a prototype
developed by Unesco, it was constructed
by local craftsmen using a labour-intensive
building system.

In 1976, the Aga Khan announced
the creation of an award to
encourage an architecture in the
spirit of Islam which would honour
projects that met modern needs
whilst remaining in harmony with
local culture and climate. The first
awards were made in 1980, when
fifteen projects were honoured by
a distinguished jury of architects,
planners, sociologists and art
experts. In addition, the Egyptian
architect, artist and poet Hassan
Fathy was honoured by a special
Chairman's Award in
acknowledgement of his life-long
contribution and commitment to
architecture in the Muslim world.
A champion of indigenous building,
he has shown, particularly in the
village of New Gourna, near Luxor,
Egypt, that mud brick structures
can be graceful and economical to
build and are admirably suited to
the climate, as witness the mosque
of New Gourna (above). Left, street
scene at New Gourna.
77
