Ancient
metallurgy
The computer is turning up a mine of information
METALLURGY is a field in which,
more than any other, close co¬
operation has developed between
specialists in the exact and social sciences,
who have built on the multidisciplinar/ foun¬
dations laid by the remarkable work of the
metallurgist Cyril Smith at the Massa¬
chusetts Institute of Technology.
Extractive and chemical metallurgy, which
is linked to the nature and origin of mineral
ores, is one of the new lines of ar¬
chaeological research that have developed
over the last fifteen years thanks to the rapid
evolution of spectrometric, atomic and
nuclear techniques.
Ores of different geographic origins have
a different chemical composition
characterized either by the proportion or by
the nature of the impurities which reflect the
geology of the various rock formations. Ar¬
chaeological research is concerned either
with metallogeny, that is the processes
through which ore is transformed- into
metal, or with the analysis of their trace
elements and the magnitude of the lead
isotopes. The purpose of this research is to
discover indicators which then make it
possible to determine the origin of ar¬
chaeological objects.
Such multi-disciplinary research, in which
analysts, archaeologists and geologists co¬
operate, deals with archaeological prospec¬
tion of ancient copper, silver, gold, tin, lead
and antimony mines. It is being carried out
in many parts of the world, notably by in
stitutes in the United States, Europe, the
Soviet Union and Japan.
The metallurgy of processing and
manufacture, which investigates the actual
making of objects, is a more traditional line
of research. X-ray photography can reveal
assembly and smelting techniques, while in¬
vestigation of thermal, mechanical and
chemical processing, which modify the
crystalline structure, requires elementary
analysis of the metal, or microscopic ex¬
amination of a metallographic section, along
with dilatometric or thermal analysis.
[Dilatometry is the measurement of changes
of volume caused by thermal or chemical
effects.]
Examination through a microscope of the
metallographic structure discloses the
technological past recorded by the metal.
This method, which has been used in
metallurgy for over two centuries, makes it
possible, among other things, to explain the
role of carbon in the crystallization of the
steel in damascene swords, which are
decorated with peculiar markings produced
during manufacture.
Physical metallurgy establishes relations
between the physical properties of a metal
obtained by mechanical, thermal or
chemical effects on the crystalline structure.
Very delicate technology such as the elec¬
tron microscope, electron-, neutron- and
X-ray diffraction, the electron probe
microanalyser or the ionic microprobe is
used to carry out these physical
measurements.
With such ultra-modern equipment
researchers can now understand the
transformation processes of metal; it is
possible to identify an effect of corrosion
and discover its origin. Research on
deterioration in metals, and in particular in
ancient alloys, has increased our under¬
standing of slow corrosion processes and
The "vase à la cachette"
discovered on the citadel of
Susa, Iran, in 1908. Beside it
are the copper and alabaster
objects it contained. The
vase, 51 cm high and 20 cm
in diameter, dates from
approximately 2400 BC.

. contributed to the conservation of metal ob¬
jects. Thus the practical experience acquired
by artisans in Antiquity and the natural age¬
ing of metals are a source of scientific infor¬
mation which applies both to art works and
to the most up-to-date industrial activities.
The technical research applied to art both
for obtaining data and processing them is
helping the exact sciences to interpret the
history of metallurgy itself, together with its
techniques. Thus, for example, extensive
research carried out on finds such as the
"vase à la cachette" ("the treasure-trove
jar") has enabled specialists to draw up a
map of the ancient trade routes for copper
and tin.
The "vase à la cachette" is in fact the
treasure contained in two large jars, one
undecorated, the other painted, together
with its lid, which were discovered on the
site of the Susa citadel in 1908 by the mis¬
sion led by the French archaeologist
Jacques de Morgan. The treasure includes
crude metal the residue from five
crucibles, weapons, and tools for making
copper vessels similar to those found in the
"royal tombs" of Ur as well as alabaster
jars and cylindrical seals. The latter which
are either of local style or imported from
Mesopotamia, confirm not only the date as
being approximately that of the first Ur
dynasty (between 2500 and 2350 BC), but
the links which united Susa, one of the main
cities of Elam (the plain of present-day
Khuzistan in south-west Iran) and the land
of Sumer (see map).
Susa, a city with a culture related to those
of Mesopotamia and the Iranian plateau,
was in fact the meeting point of the routes
crossing the plateau, along which were
dispatched the raw materials and finished
products necessary to the powerful States
of the alluvial plains.	
Highly advanced copper metallurgy is
known to have existed in Elam as early as
the beginning of the fourth millennium. It
spread to Mesopotamia right at the end of
this period and especially during the third
millennium. Yet both these regions are
without any natural mineral resources. The
raw materials necessary to the artisans of
the Mesopotamian cities could have come
from a number of areas, such as Anatolia,
the Iranian plateau, where metallurgy had
been developed as early as the fifth millen¬
nium, or the mountains of Oman, to men¬
tion only the nearest.
How can we establish what really were
their sources of supply?
The use of physical and chemical
parameters as a means of identifying the
mines and the manufactured objects that
originated from these mines has made it
possible to establish the relationship bet¬
ween mineral resources and metal objects.
And, by assigning to each group of ar¬
chaeological objects its original ore, it has
become possible in turn to determine
precisely where the various cities obtained
their copper.
One of the techniques used to analyse the
composition of microsamples of native cop¬
pers and ores collected during prospection
in Iran, Oman and Afghanistan, as well as
the composition of finished objects from
Susa, such as the "vase à la cachette", is
spark source mass spectrometry. This
technique has made it possible to conduct
simultaneous quantitative analysis of more
than 30 different chemical elements in each
sample.
Computer processing of the data thus ob¬
tained has enabled us to reconstitute the
chemical transformations that take place in
the course of the ore's conversion into metal
and to check that the geochemical features
of the original ore are present in the
manufactured object.
Thus despite the changes that occur
when the ore is reduced and the objects are
cast, the correlation of the different
chemical elements and their respective
distribution are seen to correspond before
and after the pyrotechnical transformation.
This use of computers to chart the evolu¬
tion of concentrations of trace elements and
minor elements has enabled us to refine
research on the "ore-object relationship"
and to establish a connexion between cer¬
tain ores and groups of objects which,
otherwise, would have gone unnoticed.
Throughout the study great attention has
been paid to the consistency of the results
both from the technological and historical
viewpoints. Basic information about ancient
mining sites the dates when they were
worked and the mineral resources they
yielded as well as detailed analysis of
various residues and remains of
metallurgical activity (such as casting ducts
and the walls of furnaces), have all been
taken into account. Moreover, precise
methods of identifying elements added to
copper ore to increase its fluidity during
casting or to serve as alloys have been
developed.
The combined use of elementary analysis
and the techniques of data analysis has pro¬
duced new information on the supply
sources of copper and tin in the Middle East
during the fourth and- third millennia before
the Christian era.
In the fourth millennium, most of the cop¬
per came from the Iranian plateau. But an
important change took place at the beginn¬
ing of the third millennium when new trade
links were established along the Gulf and,
from then on, the copper used in Meso¬
potamia came from the mountains of Oman,
the Magan of ancient Sumerian texts.
Map Unesco Courier. Source La Vie Mystérieuse des Chefs-d'OEuvre, Editions de la Réunion des Musées Nationaux, Paris
18
