'Ours'
The West Indies from within
by Marion Patrick Jones
THE sea lashes against the edge of the
cliff as it has done for hundreds of
years. Sauters it is called, Sauters,
Grenada. Sauters the place from which the
Indians jumped when cornered by invading
European forces.
The desperate battles of Caribs, Arawaks
rebaptized Indians remain unsung. Their
rock carvings have crumbled into the sea,
their pottery is only fitfully collected. Names
remain: Jamaica, Chacachare, Naparima.
True, in Trinidad that mixture of Carib or
Arawak and poor Spaniard has maintained
for us corn, cassava dishes, the guitars, the
dancing and the songs of Parang (1), the
whirling of the Cascianne (2). There is little
that marks the mass refusal to be enslaved at
Sauters or the revolt against conquest in
Trinidad. Indeed most Trinidadians still see
the revolt in terms of "martyred" priests and
therefore part of native savagery.
This is not by chance. Historical recording
is always a selection of facts, not necessarily
according to their actual historical weight
but because of the preoccupations of the
present. The difference in the case of the
English-speaking Caribbean is that even
after Independence, this selection is not
made internally but largely externally. Nor is
this simply colonial or neo-colonial selectivi¬
ty. The Caribbean is seen by Left or Right
mainly as the appendage of external black-
white racial politics and ambitions.
The known heroes are those who prin¬
cipally influenced blacks abroad. The only
way to be known culturally is to be published
abroad, reviewed abroad, exhibited abroad.
Yet, for Trinidadians, it is Beryl MacBurnie
and her Little Carib that matters in dance and
Ellie Manette and Spree Simons in music.
Few Jamaicans can escape the influence in
sculpture of an Edna Manley or of Louise
Bennett in song. Bahamians remember Meta
Cumberbatch in music. These stubbornly
fought internally helping to create the Carib¬
bean that is. They were among those who
kept faith with countries that seemed to
have no future in themselves or for
themselves.
The beautiful island houses with their iced
fringed wooden carved work, their tiny
paned windows, their slotted jalousies, fall
in disrepair, replaced by yellow modern con¬
crete, except for the Great Houses of
Jamaica and Guyana. For what does this
patient art of the poor matter next to a black
aristocratic tradition, priestess to chief, that
(1) Parang: Christmas festivities. Parang songs have a
special rhythm and are sung in Spanish to a guitar.
(2) Cascianne: An old Spanish waltz still kept alive in
Trinidad and Venezuela.
must be established for external consump¬
tion in another age plantation owners
built their own mythology of a white
aristocratic past? Nor is this black or white.
Part of "East" Indian tradition in the Carib¬
bean sought for Brahminical princely roots.
Ah, the two Naipaul novelist brothers! It was
the peasant Orinhi that was ours.
Few people know of the existence of J.J.
Thomas although, as early as 1869, he had
established a creóle grammar for a "patois"
already under the pressure of English. His
Froudacity (1889) laid the basis for much of
the slant of Caribbean History, whether that
of Eric Williams, C.L.R. James, E. Brathwaite
or Walter Rodney. J.J. Thomas was born
around 1840two years after the final aboli¬
tion of slavery in the British West Indies.
Froudacity: West Indian Fables Explained
was a reply to an Englishman, James An¬
thony Froude's The English in the West In¬
dies (1888). If Nanny of the Maroons is now
recalled in Jamaica as the woman who led
slaves against British settlers and whom
bullets could not kill, she is yet to be given
the kind of recognition abroad that her
military skills would earn her if she were a
French Joan of Arc.
This preoccupation with abroad permeates
the entire society. Caribbean history is yet to
be given equality with European history, let
alone allowed to play its part in the ac¬
cumulation of knowledge. Part of this stems
from the fragility of countries whose history
is in part that of the myth of the naturalness
of European domination. Opposition to this
was often couched in a co-option but rever¬
sal of the dominant ideology. If the real
centre of superiority was In the high culture
of Europe, then the reply to this was seen as
the equality of high culture in India and
Africa and these continents as the source of
the real opposition to Europe.
This idealization of "abroad", the real and
complex problems of small countries, the
high percentage of emigrants to "white" in¬
dustrialized countries, the fear of the emerg¬
ing middle class that they would be swallow¬
ed by the unrespectable were factors that
continually prevented knowledge of the
past, with few exceptions, from rising above
the level of oral history and folk knowledge.
This history, this cultureours has been
patiently created in a struggle that, for the
most part, took place inside and which was W
principally a popular struggle with its f
MARION PATRICK JONES, of Trinidad and
Tobago, is a writer, novelist and anthropologist.
Among her published works are Pan Beat and
J'ouvert Morning, Columbus Press, Port of
Spain, Trinidad.
29

backbone in slums and barrack yards, plan-
' tations and small farms. It was, as every¬
where else, a struggle complicated not only
by race but by freed or unfreed, by class, by
status. If the maroons emerge, because of
the wars they waged from 1655 to 1880, as
able to impose a treaty with Britain ensuring
their freedom from slavery, they were also
used by Governor Edward Eyre to put down,
in the name of Britain, the revolt of 1865,
associated with George William Gordon and
Paul Bogle, for better parliamentary
representation in Jamaica. Both were ex¬
ecuted by the colonial authorities for
"subversion".
The struggle in the late nineteenth century
was part of the effervescence which was
marked by J.J. Thomas culturally in
Trinidad. It was in popular culture that
history was kept, grievances given political
commentary. It was out of this that what
there was of élite culture emerged. Both
were part of a political battle for autonomy,
for trade union rights, eventually for in¬
dependence. It was never simply a struggle
against racial supremacy or for integration,
although racism was an important part of
the pattern of colonial domination. To forget
the association between popular culture and
politics or the dimensions of the political is
to misunderstand the nature of society in the
English-speaking Caribbean.
The 1920s and 1930s were marked by the
paintings of Alf Cadallo, peopled with myth
as by ordinary people, with the flambeaux,
the crowded old barrack yards. The poverty
that marked colonial rule became the ground
from which beauty emerged. But, at the
same time, Cipriani (3) was resisting colonial
encroachment on the few areas of autonomy
left. Alfred Richards (4) was organizing
dockers into a union, there were yearly peti¬
tions to keep carnival going or to keep the
paper carved temples of the Muslim festival
of Hosea on the St. James street.
(3) Cipriani: Captain Cipriani was a Trinidadian of Cor-
sican descent who fought in the 1914-1918 war and
returned to Trinidad to fight for autonomy and against
white privilege. Many times Mayor of Port of Spain,
he is one of the most important heroes of Trinidad.
(4) Alfred Richards: Closely associated with Cipriani, he
fought to improve the conditions of indentured labour
and for the establishment of trade unions.
None of these were as simple as they now
sound. First of all, they built on a past that
had seen the Central Administrative Building
burned down by the people of Port of Spain
in a revolt against water taxes the famous
Red House riots. They mobilized workers,
unemployed, the property-less against
British rule and they underlined an important
problem: trade union rights.
By the late 1930s working class dissatisfac¬
tion had spilled over in a series of revolts: a
sugar strike in St. Kitts in 1935, a revolt
against customs duties in St. Vincent in the
same year, a coal strike in St. Lucia in 1935, a
sympathy strike in Barbados in 1937 which
became a full-fledged conflict led by Payne,
revolt in the sugar plantations in Guyana in
1937, the dockers' strike in Jamaica in 1938.
Uriah Buzz Butler emerged in Trinidad as the
leader of a labour movement, a woman
single-handed stopped the feared policeman
Charlie King literally dead, while in Jamaica
the strike had thrown up two major leaders:
Norman Manley and Alexander Bustamante
(each later prime minister of his country),
and, let us not forget it, a number of deter¬
mined courageous women who fed the
strikers and without whom the strike would
have failed.
None of these local leaders became heroes
to the outside world. Bourgeois traditions of
revolution have not accepted Gordon,
although his arguments were along the lines
of George Washington and of Jefferson. Left
traditions have not included the attempt at a
socialist group and a First of May labour
parade associated in Trinidad with Richards,
Achong and Jones.
This period also saw the blossoming of
culture. It is parallel to this that emerges dur¬
ing the war years, in the slums "behind the
bridge" in Port of Spain, the steel band.
Created by the poor, steel band music,
beaten at first on stolen dustbin covers to
the horror of middle-class Trinidad
accompanied the pitched gang warfare
that had in the past marked stick fighting,
and was to become in post-war years the
national music.
This process is also part of the history of
"culture" in the English-speaking Caribbean.
The national cultural elements elaborated by
the poor are first fought against, then are
adopted by the élites, whether this is dance,
song, music or food. It is reggae that is
"Jamaican", Rex Nettleford adapts popular
dance, Sylvia Winter writes her finest plays
on the miming of John Cannoe, and who can
forget the sensitive jewel of Errol John's
Moon on a Rainbow Shawl?
Nor is it simply song, music, dance.
Pawan's rabies discovery coincides with the
1920s and 1930s. W. Arthur Lewis in
economics, M.G. Smith in social an¬
thropology cannot be understood outside of
popular problems or the fight to guide our
own future. Both belong to the In¬
dependence struggle of the 1940s and 1950s.
Their greatness and limitations stem from
this.
But what of the men that led us to In¬
dependence? For they too fought against
enormous odds. Take Eric Williams (5).
Author of a seminal work in history
Capitalism and Slavery, Eric Williams filled
the Trinidad Public Library to hear his history
lectures in 1949 and 1950. Fired from the then
Caribbean Commission because of his "bias¬
ed" views on the "Negro in the Caribbean",
Eric "let his bucket down" in a series of lec¬
tures in Woodford Square. It is out of this
that the people of Trinidad and Tobago
argued that the only solution for the prob¬
lems and conflicts that marked every institu¬
tion was Independence. True, we had a
bankrupt treasury, true we were at the time
many fewer than today's million people, yet
most of us had had enough.
This movement for Independence as well
as the question of American bases which ac¬
companied it was in itself complex. Certain
well-defined segments of the population op¬
posed Independence which they saw as like¬
ly to end certain privileges. This push to In¬
dependence was true in Jamaica under the
leadership of Manley and Bustamante where
it grew more directly out of the trade union
movement and out of the strikes in 1930, in
Guyana with Forbes Burnham and Cheddi
Jagan, Grantley Adams in Barbados. It was
the push that collapsed the "Bay Street
Boys" (6) in the Bahamas.
It would be optimistic to see the fight for
Independence as finished. Rather the strug¬
gle to make our own history according to our
own realities and to have this recognized as
having a right of existence goes on. The ac¬
clamation of Independence, which began in
the 1960s and which continues to sweep the
region, is neither the beginning of a process
nor the end of it.
We would make our own history. For we
are Caribbeans. The golden poul flowers for
one dayours. We have saved with our su-
sus, danced the limbo, drunk black coffee at
a wake, munched pattiesou«. We have
created a language, hill Jamaican, Bajan
Burr (7), West Indian standard ours. This is,
as one calypsonian put it, "our land and our
grandfathers' land and our children to come
land too"ours.
Bury us, bury those to come unto the end
of time, under the blue hills, the still stars of
Caribbean night. For the hills, the stars, the
sea hold the souls of ancestors who
fought ours.
H Marion Patrick Jones
(5) Eric Williams : Dr. Eric Eustace Williams was an
economic historian who analysed the relationship bet¬
ween free trade and the abolition of slavery. The
youngest professor at Howard University in
Washington, D.C, he joined the then Caribbean
Commission whose headquarters were in Port of
Spain. After losing his job there he founded the Peo¬
ple's National Movement and led Trinidad and
Tobago to independence. He died in 1981.
(6) Bay Street Boys: Of British descent, the Bay Street
Boys, so called because they controlled the com¬
merce located in Bay Street, for a long time
dominated politics in the Bahamas to the exclusion of
most blacks.
(7) Bajan Burr: Bajan is a local appellation of a Barbadian.
Barbadians speak with a distinctive accent, or burr.
30
