The principles
of conservation
by Bernard M. Feiiden
THE conservation of cultural property
demands wise management of re¬
sources and a good sense of propor¬
tion. Perhaps above all, it demands the
desire and dedication to see that cultural
property is preserved. In this sense, two
familiar maxims are pertinent: "Prevention is
better than cure" and "A stitch in time saves
nine".
Modern long-term conservation policy
concentrates on fighting the causes of
decay. Natural disasters such as floods and
earthquakes cannot be prevented, but by
forethought the damage can be greatly
reduced. Industrial development cannot and
should not be halted, but damage can be
minimized by combatting waste, uncontroll¬
ed expansion, economic exploitation and
pollution.
Despite the difference in scale and extent,
the underlying principles and methods of
conservation are the same both for movable
and immovable cultural property.
, There are, however, important logistical
differences. First, architectural work entails
treatment of materials in an open and vir¬
tually uncontrollable environment. Whereas
the museum conservator-restorer can
generally rely on good environmental con¬
trol to minimize further deterioration, the ar¬
chitectural conservator cannot. He must
allow for the effects of time and weather.
Secondly, the scale of architectural opera¬
tions is much larger, and in many cases
methods used by museum conservator-
restorers may be found impracticable due to
the size and complexity of the architectural
fabric.
Thirdly, and again due to the size and
complexity of architectural conservation,
the various measures of conservation must
be carried out by contractors, technicians
and craftsmen, while the museum
conservator-restorer may do most of the
treatment with his own hands. Communica¬
tion and supervision, therefore, are impor¬
tant considerations for the architectural
conservator.
Lastly, architectural conservation must
take place within the context of a historic
structure, and take account of its site, set¬
ting and physical environment.
For both movable and immovable cultural
property, the objects chosen for treatment
and the extent and nature of the treatment
are based on values and priorities which in¬
evitably reflect each different cultural con¬
text. For example, a small wooden domestic
structure from the beginning of the 19th
century in Australia would be considered a
national landmark because it dates from the
founding of the nation and because so little
Australian architecture has survived from
this period. In Italy, on the other hand, with
its thousands of ancient monuments, a
comparable structure would have a relatively
low priority in the overall conservation needs
of the community.
Whatever form of conservation treatment
is adopted, the following standards of ethics
must be rigorously followed. First, the con¬
dition of the object, and all methods and
materials used during treatment, must be
clearly documented. Second, historic
evidence should be fully recorded, and must
not be destroyed, falsified or removed.
Third, any intervention must be the
minimum necessary. Fourth, any interven¬
tion must be governed by unswerving
respect for the aesthetic, historical and
physical integrity of cultural property.
Interventions should be reversible, if
technically possible, or at least not prejudice
a future intervention whenever this may
become necessary. They should not hinder
the possibility of later access to all evidence
incorporated in the object, and should allow
the maximum amount of existing material to
be retained. If additions are necessary, they
should be less noticeable than original
material, while at the same time being iden¬
tifiable. Conservator-restorers who are in¬
sufficiently trained or experienced should
not undertake such interventions without
competent advice. However, it must be
recognized that some problems are unique
and have to be solved from first principles
on a trial-and-error basis.
Seven "degrees" of intervention can be
identified, but in any individual conservation
treatment, several degrees may take place
simultaneously in various parts of the
"whole". The seven degrees are:
prevention of deterioration
preservation
consolidation
restoration
rehabilitation
reproduction
reconstruction
Prevention of deterioration (or indirect
conservation). Prevention entails protecting
cultural property by controlling its environ-
BERNARD M. FEILDEN, British architect, is
director of the Rome-based International Centre
for the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural
Property (ICCROM) which was founded by
Unesco. He was previously surveyor to St. Paul's
Cathedral, London, and responsible for consoli¬
dating the foundations of York Minster and
saving the spire of Norwich Cathedral in England.
He is the author of Conservation of Historic Buil¬
dings, fo be published later this year, andan Out¬
line of Conservation, being published by
Unesco.
ment, thus preventing agents of decay and
damage from becoming active.
Prevention thus includes control of
humidity, temperature and light, as well as
measures to prevent fire, arson, theft and
vandalism. In the industrial and urban en¬
vironment it includes measures to reduce at¬
mospheric pollution, traffic vibrations and
ground subsidence due to many causes,
particularly abstraction of water.
Preservation deals directly with cultural
property. The object is to keep such proper¬
ty in its existing state. Damage and destruc¬
tion caused by humidity, chemical agents,
and all types of pests and micro-organisms
must be stopped in order to preserve the ob¬
ject or structure.
Maintenance, cleaning schedules and
good management aid preservation. Repairs
must be carried out when necessary to pre¬
vent further decay. Regular inspections of
cultural property are the basis of prevention.
When the property is subjected to an uncon¬
trollable environment, such inspections are
the first step in preventive maintenance and
repair.
Consolidation (or direct conservation).
Consolidation is the physical addition or ap¬
plication of adhesive or supportive materials
into the actual fabric of cultural property, in
order to ensure its continued durability or
structural integrity. In the case of immovable
cultural property, consolidation may entail,
for example, the injection of adhesives to
secure a detached mural painting to the
wall. Movable cultural property, such as
weakened canvas paintings and works on
paper, are often backed with new suppor¬
tive materials.
In many cases it is wise to buy time with
temporary measures in the hope that some
better technique will evolve, especially if
consolidation may prejudice future conser¬
vation work.
Restoration. The object of restoration is
to revive the original concept or legibility of
the object. Restoration and reintegration of
details and features are based on respect for
original material, archaeological evidence,
original design and authentic documents.
The replacement of missing or decayed
parts must integrate harmoniously with the
"whole", but must be distinguishable on
close inspection from the original so that the
restoration does not falsify artistic or historic
evidence.
Contributions from all periods must be
respected. All later additions that can be
considered as a "historical document"
rather than merely a previous restoration,
must be preserved. When a building in¬
cludes superimposed work of different I
27

.periods, only exceptional circumstances can
'justify revealing the underlying state: when
the part removed is widely agreed to be of
little interest and when it is certain that the
material brought to light will be of great
historical or archaeological value, and when
it is clear that its state of preservation is
good enough to justify the action. Restora¬
tion also entails superficial cleaning, but
with full respect for the patina of age.
Rehabilitation. The best way of preserving
buildings is to keep them in use, a practice
which may involve what the French call
"mise en valeur", or modernization and
adaptive alteration.
Adaptive re-use of buildings, such as
utilizing a medieval convent in Venice to
house a school and laboratory for stone con¬
servation, or turning an eighteenth-century
barn into a domestic dwelling, is often the
only way that historic and aesthetic values
can be made economically viable.
Reproduction entails copying an existing
artefact, often in order to replace some
missing or decayed, generally decorative,
parts to maintain its aesthetic harmony. If
valuable cultural property is being damaged
irretrievably or is threatened by its environ
ment, it may have to be moved to a more
suitable environment. A reproduction is thus
often substituted to maintain the unity of a
site or building. For example, Michel¬
angelo's famous sculpture of David was
removed from the Piazza della Signoria in
Florence to a museum to protect it from the
weather. A good reproduction took its
place.
Reconstruction of historic buildings and
historic town centres using new materials
may be necessitated by disasters such as
fire, earthquake or war, but reconstructions
cannot have the patina of age. As in restora¬
tion, reconstruction must be based on ac¬
curate documentation and evidence, never
on conjecture.
Moving entire buildings to new sites is
another form of reconstruction which is
justified only by overriding national interest.
However, it entails some loss of essential
cultural values and the generation of new
environmental risks. The classic example is
the temple complex of Abu Simbel, which
was moved to prevent its inundation by the
Aswan High Dam (see Unesco Courier,
February-March 1980).
B Bernard M. Feilden
Photo © Kodak-Pathé-National Geographic Institute, Pans. From the exhibition Le Fil des Pierres, Photogrammetry and Conservation of Documents
