18
Photo © Franco Origlia, Rome
Rescuers on the Calabrian coast in southern Italy have a hard job manhandling a heavy bronze
figure (left), the result of a chance discovery on the sea bed by an underwater swimmer. The
figure was one of a pair, each weighing over 150 kilos. Once on dry land and laid on a
stretcher (right), the statues were seen to represent two naked warriors, each over 2 metres
tall. Though they were unarmed, specialists believe that they originally brandished spears and
shields, but these have not been recovered. After some 2,000 years of immersion, the
restoration of these masterpieces of 5th-century-BC Greek art proved a long and painstaking
task. Above, the head of the figure dubbed the "Old Warrior" photographed (left) in 1972
shortly after the discovery, and (right) seven years later after it had been restored. For photos
of the other figure, known as the "Young Warrior", see page 21 and back cover.



THE WARRIORS
OF RIACE
Two masterpieces
of classical Greek sculpture
rise from the waves
by Vilma Abella
ON August 16, 1972, the little town of Riace on
the Calabrian coast of southern Italy was
crowded with holiday-makers attracted by
the fine weather and the transparent waters of the
Ionian Sea.
Among them was Stefano Mariottini, a skin-diving
enthusiast from Rome. Little did he know as he
prepared his equipment for his morning swim that
this would be a memorable day for him and for the
history of art.
The water was warm and inviting as Stefano swam
steadily out to sea. Suddenly, about three hundred
metres from the coast, his attention was drawn by a
large dark mass, seven or eight metres below the sur¬
face. Stefano dived and, as he drew nearer, he was
VILMA ABELLA is a Uruguayan journalist based in Paris. She
writes for the Montevideo daily El Día, and is a regular contributor
to the Latin American service of Radio France Internationale.
surprised to find that the strange form was in fact
two large bronze statues representing human
figures, whose shape was distorted by accretions of
marine life growing on the metal.
The Antiquities Department was immediately in¬
formed of Mariottini's find and four days later the
statues were recovered from the sea bed and
brought back to the mainland. They appeared to be
in a good state of preservation and this was confirm¬
ed when, after preliminary scraping and sanding,
they were seen to represent two standing male
nudes.
One of the figures had long hair encircled by a
head-band; the other was wearing an Athenian
helmet. Experts believe they originally carried shields
and spears.
Both statues were about two metres in height and i
each weighed more than 150 kilos. Metal pins I
Photo © Franco Origlia
19

18
Photo © Franco Origlia, Rome
Rescuers on the Calabrian coast in southern Italy have a hard job manhandling a heavy bronze
figure (left), the result of a chance discovery on the sea bed by an underwater swimmer. The
figure was one of a pair, each weighing over 150 kilos. Once on dry land and laid on a
stretcher (right), the statues were seen to represent two naked warriors, each over 2 metres
tall. Though they were unarmed, specialists believe that they originally brandished spears and
shields, but these have not been recovered. After some 2,000 years of immersion, the
restoration of these masterpieces of 5th-century-BC Greek art proved a long and painstaking
task. Above, the head of the figure dubbed the "Old Warrior" photographed (left) in 1972
shortly after the discovery, and (right) seven years later after it had been restored. For photos
of the other figure, known as the "Young Warrior", see page 21 and back cover.



THE WARRIORS
OF RIACE
Two masterpieces
of classical Greek sculpture
rise from the waves
by Vilma Abella
ON August 16, 1972, the little town of Riace on
the Calabrian coast of southern Italy was
crowded with holiday-makers attracted by
the fine weather and the transparent waters of the
Ionian Sea.
Among them was Stefano Mariottini, a skin-diving
enthusiast from Rome. Little did he know as he
prepared his equipment for his morning swim that
this would be a memorable day for him and for the
history of art.
The water was warm and inviting as Stefano swam
steadily out to sea. Suddenly, about three hundred
metres from the coast, his attention was drawn by a
large dark mass, seven or eight metres below the sur¬
face. Stefano dived and, as he drew nearer, he was
VILMA ABELLA is a Uruguayan journalist based in Paris. She
writes for the Montevideo daily El Día, and is a regular contributor
to the Latin American service of Radio France Internationale.
surprised to find that the strange form was in fact
two large bronze statues representing human
figures, whose shape was distorted by accretions of
marine life growing on the metal.
The Antiquities Department was immediately in¬
formed of Mariottini's find and four days later the
statues were recovered from the sea bed and
brought back to the mainland. They appeared to be
in a good state of preservation and this was confirm¬
ed when, after preliminary scraping and sanding,
they were seen to represent two standing male
nudes.
One of the figures had long hair encircled by a
head-band; the other was wearing an Athenian
helmet. Experts believe they originally carried shields
and spears.
Both statues were about two metres in height and i
each weighed more than 150 kilos. Metal pins I
Photo © Franco Origlia
19

A heroes'
welcome
Despite the marine accretions
that distorted their shape after
centuries spent on the sea bed,
the bronze warriors were given
a rousing reception by the
people of the little coastal town
of Riace. Left, the "Old Warrior"
Is borne triumphantly through
the streets. Today restored to
their pristine splendour, the
Warriors command the
admiration of visitors to the
Magna Graecia Museum In
Reggio di Calabria. Every day
thousands of people throng to
the museum (below) where a
large room has been specially
equipped to provide a
permanent home for the two
heroes of ancient Greece. Right,
the "Young Warrior."
1
L
L
&tr%F&> 1 * -*» "*** w
\J3 *lv-V '*V#¿
rai
il

soldered to their feet had probably served to fix them
to a base.
Despite the fact that they had been immersed in
water for hundreds of years the figures were of ex¬
ceptional interest. Their discovery was to add con¬
siderably to our knowledge of Greek art in the fifth
century BC, for they.belong to a style of which there
are very few known examples apart from the statue
of Zeus or Poseidon in the National Museum in
Athens, the Charioteer of- Delphi, and the
Chatsworth Head in the British Museum in London.
In fact, the Congress of Magna Graecia Studies, held
in Taranto a little more than a month after the
discovery, recognized them as authentic examples of
classical Athenian art.
Later, they were attributed to Phidias, the greatest
sculptor of ancient Greece who lived in Athens bet¬
ween 490 and 431 BC. At the request of the Athenian
statesman Pericles, Phidias sculpted a series of
monuments which are known to us through various
literary documents. And it was Phidias together with
his pupils who carved the frontispiece and friezes of
the Parthenon in Athens.
Specialists believe that the Riace bronzes belong¬
ed to a group of eleven statues of heroes that were
intended to decorate the temple at Delphi. Among
the arguments used to support this theory is the
striking resemblance between the head of the long¬
haired warrior and a relief in frit (soft porcelain) by
Phidias, now in the Heidelberg Museum in the
Federal Republic of Germany. The relief is a portrait
in profile of Codros, one of the very heroes whose
statues were destined for the Delphi temple.
Though no firm conclusion has yet been reached
about the origin of the Riace bronzes, there is no
doubt as to their importance. It is impossible to re¬
main unmoved by their beauty, for they have a
radiance which one only finds in great works of art.
How did these statues come to be stranded on the
sea bed off Riace? Situated in the extreme south of
the Italian Peninsula, Calabria formed part of Magna
Graecia and in the seventh and sixth centuries BC the
whole area was colonized by the Greeks. Rich and
cultured communities developed there, including the
prosperous city-ports of Crotone, Loci and Reggio
on the Ionian Sea.
To which of these ports was the ship carrying the
statues bound? So far, no one has been able to
answer this question. It is thought that the vessel
foundered and sank along with its cargo and that,
later, the wooden wreck broke up and, relieved of
the weight of the bronzes, drifted away in heavy
seas. In 1973, a handle from one of the warriors'
shields was discovered on the sea bed nearby, along
with thirty lead rings used to attach the rigging in
ancient vessels.
After being exhibited at the Archaeological
Museum in Florence where their restoration had
been completed, the statues were installed in their
permanent home at the Magna Graecia Museum of
Reggio di Calabria. Crowds of visitors flock to see
them daily, including thousands of tourists from
Pompeii and the Gulf of Salerno who cross the wild
and beautiful hills of Calabria to catch a glimpse of
the Riace warriors, while television teams from
Europe, America and Japan have travelled to Reggio
to film these masterpieces of ancient art.
Seven years elapsed between the discovery of the
statues by Mariottini and the day they were exhibited ^
in public for the first time, for their restoration had f
21

^ proved a laborious task calling for extreme care and
long and patient efforts.
The early cleaning operations carried out at the
National Museum in Reggio di Calabria had taken
two years. From there, the bronzes were sent to the
Antiquities Restoration Centre of Tuscany in
Florence where they underwent a very thorough ex¬
amination using gamma ray equipment. A complete
X-ray picture of the statues was built up, for it was
important to know their internal structure and the
thickness of the various parts in order to choose ap¬
propriate restoration materials and tools. Defects in
the metal casting had to be discovered, as well as the
state of preservation of the less visible parts.
The X-ray pictures also provided important data on
the alloys used in the fifth century BC, and on
ancient metallurgy in general.
As to the statues themselves, it was established
with certainty that the right arm of the warrior wear¬
ing a helmet was not part of the original cast: it had
been soldered on to the statues at a later date to
replace an arm accidentally destroyed or damaged
possibly during an earthquake.
Following the X-ray examination, the statues
underwent further very meticulous cleaning opera¬
tion. Scalpels, percussion tools, compressed air and
even ultrasonic techniques were all used in turn to
clean the more inaccessible parts, such as the
crevices in the warriors' beards.
The work was handled with such care that it has
been possible on very limited surfaces to expose the
original patina. This opens an important field for ar¬
chaeological research and the exposed parts had to
be carefully protected.
Research has also revealed that metals other than
bronze were used for certain parts of the statues.
The teeth of the long-haired warrior are in silver, and
the eyes of both figures are outlined in silver, while
their lips and hair are of copper. Ivory was used for
the white of the eyes, and frit and amber for the iris.
Other examinations showed that the inside of the
bronzes, which had been inaccessible when they
were first cleaned, contained burrs of castings mixed
with silt and sand that had seeped in during the
statues' long stay under water. These humid
substances were dangerous deteriorating agents and
had to be eliminated. But to do this the lead pins had
first to be removed with extreme care so as to avoid
damaging the feet, not to mention the pins which are
themselves of considerable archaeological interest.
Cleaning the inside of the statues proved to be one
of the most delicate parts of the whole restoration
process. Instruments were specially made for the
purpose, including optical apparatus enabling the ex¬
perts to follow each stage of the operation second by
second, and mechanical and hydraulic instruments
capable of softening hard substances and of extrac¬
ting them.
Two more years of research proved necessary
before every tiny spot of corrosion could be located
and eliminated.. But the Riace warriors have now
been given a clean bill of health and are ready to face
the coming centuries. Restorers, however, advise
against any further travelling: they fear possible ac¬
cidents during transport or damage caused by vari¬
ations in temperature and humidity.
After 2,500 years of wandering, the bronze war¬
riors have at last found a permanent home in
Calabria, not far from Greece where they were born.
Vilma Abella


22
The golden age
of classical Greek art
Every detail of the Riace bronzes reveals the degree of mastery attained by
Greek art in the 5th century BC. Above, the head of the long-haired "Young
Warrior". Below, the feet on which he stands with perfect poise. Right, the
hand that held the spear. Using the latest techniques, Italian restorers spent
seven years bringing the bronzes back to life. Not a square centimetre of
the warriors' bodies, inside as well as out, escaped their meticulous
scrutiny. The research has yielded important data on ancient techniques of
casting and statuary and on the metallurgy of bronze.

mJa.
s.
©
23
