The Declaration
of Athens
Scientists speak out
against racism
THE scientists brought together by Unesco appeal to the
peoples of the world and to all individuals everywhere to
base their attitudes, behaviour and statements on the follow¬
ing conclusions, which represent the present state of scientific
knowledge on the racial question.
1. The latest anthropological discoveries
confirm the unity of the human species.
2. The geographical dispersion of the
human species has favoured its racial
differentiation but has not affected its
basic biological unity.
3. All attempts to classify the human
species so as to give objective content
to the concept of race have been based
on visible physical characteristics. In
fact, the concept of race can only be
based on transmissible characteristics,
that is to say, not on visible physical
features but on the genetic factors that
govern them.
4. Modern biological techniques have
made it possible to study these factors.
They reveal a far greater genetic diversi¬
ty than had been imagined.
5. It has been found that the difference
' between the genetic structures of two
individuals belonging to the same
population group can be far greater than
the differences between the average
genetic structures of two population
groups. This finding makes it impossible
to arrive at any objective and .stable
definition of the different races and con¬
sequently deprives the word "race" of
much of its biological meaning.
6. Whatever the differences observed,
biology can in no way serve as the basis
for a hierarchy between individuals or
population groups, since no human
group possesses a consistent genetic in¬
heritance. In any event, one is never
justified in proceeding from observation
of a difference to the affirmation of a
superiority-inferiority relationship.
7. In fact, each human being possesses a
genetic combination that is unique
among the countless possible combina¬
tions.
8. Man has developed culture, which has
enabled the human race to adapt itself
to different ecological environments and
to transform them according to its
needs.
28
9. The pre-eminence of culture makes the
human species unique and invalidates
any explanations of human behaviour
based solely on the study of animal
behaviour. There are no grounds for ex¬
plaining variations in group behaviour in
terms of genetic differences.
10. Intellectual activity constitutes one of
the most striking characteristics of man.
Certain disciplines have developed
techniques for measuring this activity.
11. These techniques are designed to com¬
pare individuals within a given popula¬
tion group and cannot, by definition, be
used for the purpose of comparing dif¬
ferent population groups.
12. It follows, a fortiori, that any value
judgement on the intellectual capacities
of a given group based on such
measurements is completely without
foundation.
13. Indeed, the complexity of the inter¬
action between biological and cultural
factors makes any attempts to establish
the relative importance of innate and
acquired characteristics completely
meaningless.
14. It is unacceptable and scientifically un-
. justifiable to use the results of
psychological tests and the intelligence
quotient in particular to promote social
ostracism and racial discrimination.
15. The social sciences provide no support
for the view that racism is a collective
form of behaviour that inevitably arises
when certain kinds of social relationship
predominate between different ethnic
groups. On the other hand, the plurality
and coexistence of cultures and races
that characterize many societies con¬
stitute the most felicitous form of
mutual enrichment between peoples.
16. Racism, which takes a number of forms,
is in reality a complex phenomenon in¬
volving a whole range of economic,
political, historical, cultural, social and
psychological factors. Effective action
to combat racism must necessarily ad¬
dress itself to all these factors.
17. Racism is generally a tool used by cer¬
tain groups to reinforce their political
and economic power, the most serious
cases being those involving apartheid
and genocide.
18. Racism also takes the form of denying
that certain peoples have a history and
of underrating their contribution to the
progress of mankind.
19. While the quantitative analysis of social
phenomena can help to elucidate
sociological and economic issues, it can
also be used to promote exclusion and
segregation. The application of quotas,
tolerance thresholds and numerical
stipulations for educational purposes
based on ethnic or racial criteria should
be denounced when it violates the basic
principles of human rights. However,
legitimate measures can be taken to
redress the wrongs inflicted on certain
underprivileged groups.
20. Those engaged in scientific activity bear
a major responsibility for the social
future of their contemporaries. Where
racism is concerned, this responsibility
involves political and ethical choices.
Scientific research, particularly in the
field of the human and social sciences,
should always be based on respect for
human dignity.
, 21. Recognition of the risks to mankind im¬
plicit in certain applications of science
should lead not to a rejection of science
but rather to the fostering among the
public at large of a genuinely scientific
attitude, that is, an attitude based not
on an accumulation of certainties but on
the cultivation of a critical spirit and the
continual challenging of accepted
views. The struggle against racism in all
its forms calls for the extensive involve¬
ment of scientists in the fostering of
these attitudes, making use in particular
of education systems and the media.
22. There is a need therefore for scientists,
whatever their differences or divergen¬
cies of viewpoint, to strive to maintain
the objectivity that will ensure that their
work and conclusions cannot be used as
the basis for falsifications and inter¬
pretations detrimental to mankind.
Signatories
A.C. Bayonas (Greece), historian and philosopher;
T. Ben Jelloun (Morocco), philosopher and writer;
J. Björnebye (Norway), philologist;
A. Bouhdiba (Tunisia), sociologist;
H. Condamine (France), geneticist;
E. Czeizel (Hungary), geneticist;
M. Diabate (Ivory Coast) ethno-sociologist;
CA. Diop (Senegal), anthropologist;
R. Droz (Switzerland), psychologist;
M. Fraginal (Cuba), ethnologist;
S. Genoves (Mexico), anthropologist;
A. Jacquard (France), geneticist and mathematician;
J. Ki-Zerbo (Upper Volta) historian;
C.B. Krimbas (Greece), geneticist;
E. Nevo (Israel), geneticist;
H. Tawa (Lebanon) historian and mathematician,
D. Trichopoulos (Greece), professor of medicine;
T. Tsunoda (Japan), professor of medicine;
P. Vegleris (Greece), lawyer and professor of law;
L.P. Vidyarthi (India), anthropologist;
G. Wald (U.S. A), Nobel Prize for medicine,
A. Yotopoulos Marangopoulos (Greece), President of
the Athens Human Rights Foundation;
I. M. Zolotareva (USSR), anthropologist.
Symposium on a Critical Review of the
Pseudo-scientific Theories Invoked to
Justify Racism and Racial Discrimination
Athens 30 March to 3 April, 1981
