The transition to anew
energy mix
A United Nations Conference
on new and renewable energy sources
by Enrique V. Iglesias
ENERGY is a fundamental issue to all
people. It permeates the fabric of
human society, affecting daily life in
every home as well as world politics, inter¬
national economics and national develop¬
ment strategies. In recent years, energy has
acquired significant importance due to what
has been called, with some ambiguity, the
world energy crisis. Three important
elements characterize this crisis and situate
the problem in its correct perspective.
ENRIQUE V. IGLESIAS, of Uruguay, is
Secretary-General of the United Nations Con¬
ference on New and Renewable Sources of
Energy, which is being held in Nairobi from 10 to
21 August. Since 1972 he has been executive
secretary of the United Nations Economic Com¬
mission for Latin America.
First, at the beginning of the 1970s, it
became apparent that fossil fuels, for so
long the basis of the energy balance of the
modern world, would in the not too distant
future be depleted. For the first time, the
rate of reserve discoveries and the rate of
consumption growth became inverted,
providing mankind with a realistic perspec¬
tive based on scientific assessments that
depletion could take place during the next
generation.
The second element of this crisis comes
from the fact that for the first time in history,
an energy transition will be accompanied by
higher economic cost. Until recently, people
had been living through a period of cheap
energy and depressed oil prices. From now
on, energy will be available only at higher
prices, setting a new challenge of unknown '
prqportions.

Lastly, the energy crisis has affected
humanity in a very uneven manner. The
crisis, affecting both industrialized and
developing nations, has had a very special
impact on the developing countries. These
countries will have to go through their pro¬
cess of economic development and moder¬
nization with much higher energy prices
than those paid by the industrialized coun¬
tries. This undoubtedly presents the interna¬
tional community with a problem of equity
and solidarity which should stimulate inter¬
national co-operation.
The United Nations, whose raison d'être
concerns international co-operation in the
search for solutions to common problems of
humanity, is in a unique position to discuss
and initiate activities in the energy field.
For this reason, in December 1978, the
General Assembly invited all governments to
a Conference to be held in Nairobi from 10
to 21 August 1981, whose main objective
was to be the elaboration of measures for
the concerted action needed to promote the
development and utilization of new and
renewable sources of energy, in order to
meet over-all future energy requirements, in
particular within the context of efforts aim¬
ed at accelerating the development of Third
World nations. These measures will be spell¬
ed out in the Programme of Action, one of
the basic documents of the Conference,
which is currently the subject of continuing
negotiation with all participating Govern¬
ments and Agencies.
One fact of enormous political importance
calls for emphasis. For the first time in
human history, the impending world energy
transition necessitates that the international
community work and debate collectively on
possible options. This paves the way for the
-Conference to initiate activities designed to
lead towards a new world energy mix based
on a pluralistic and diversified framework of
available energy sources that can provide a
horizon of peace and security. It would be
useful to recall here five elements of this
energy transition.
The first element is its inevitability. Oil
consumption in the world energy mix will
continue to play a significant role although
of relatively decreasing significance through
the end of the century. The demand for oil
will be important in the industrialized world
where it is expected that the increment in
demand will be of the order of 50% and will
be 4 to 5 times the present demand of the
developing world which requires energy
sources to accelerate its process of develop¬
ment and growth.
All this will occur regardless of conserva¬
tion or investment policies. At some mo¬
ment in the next century, oil will be even less
significant in the world energy consumption
pattern, making imperative a new energy
mix. This is the inevitable challenge facing
the industrialized and developing countries
collectively.
The second characteristic is that the tran¬
sition is viable. It is not possible to say today
that the world lacks energy resources. That
is not the problem. The problem is the
potential scarcity of certain types of fuels,
mainly the liquid fuels. Experts have told us
on several occasions that energy resources
do exist, and point out that the real problem
is one of investment in technological
resources and in production. There will,
they say, no longer be a single alternative
energy source as in the past, but instead a
mixture of such sources.
A third aspect of this energy transition is
that it will be much more complex than
energy transitions in the past a complexity
due mainly to the fact that humanity has
maintained, over many decades, artificially
low and depressed fossil fuels prices and
that the current adjustment has been pro¬
duced by a process which has complex im¬
plications. Over the short term, the prob¬
lems of balance of payments, imbalances in
the energy bill and imported inflation will af¬
fect particularly the developing countries
which have not even been able to make ad¬
justments by expanding their exports but
which are increasing their indebtedness.
More important than this, however, the
transition will mean that higher and higher
proportions of the sums available for invest¬
ment will have to be devoted to energy. This
means that there will be fierce competition
between investment for energy and other
economic and social investment. Some
developing countries might even be obliged
virtually to stop investing in energy, which
would constitute a very serious threat to
their future development.
The fourth characteristic of the energy
transition is that it implies varying degrees of
urgency. It appears that the world is facing
an energy transition which will manifest
itself in a different manner for the modern
Distribution of World Population and Energy Use in 1975
Industrially developed
countries
Developing countries E0.9
2788
H Per capita energy use in kilowatt years per year
I Population in millions
Based on MASA data
sector of the world economy than for the
traditional sector. To the modern sector, the
energy transition presents a strong
technological challenge to make available a
diversity of energy sources. Yet if we follow
historical optimism and humanity's
achievements over recent decades in the
energy field, there will be no room for
pessimism: the world, particularly the
modern sector, will always find ways to ef¬
fect an adequate energy transition. On the
other hand, a very different situation obtains
for the traditional sector basically located in
the developing countries. The rural areas of
many of these countries are still operating
on fuelwood and charcoal and have not yet
made the first energy transition.
Lastly, I believe that the fifth aspect of the
energy transition involves efficiency in the
use of energy as a fundamental element of
this transition. This has been noted very
clearly by the industrialized countries which
in recent years have made very commen¬
dable efforts to conserve energy. However,
there is still a lot to do to improve the effi¬
ciency of primary energy use. When experts
tell us that only 15 per cent of the primary
energy reaches its end use and that 70 to 80
per cent is lost along the way, this obviously
leaves much room for improvement. This is
true not only for the industrialized countries
but also the developing countries.
The Conference therefore has as its
primary objective to examine the options
available for an energy transition involving
these five characteristics.. Another aim of
equal importance is to examine the energy
transition in the context of the requirements
of developing countries. Here is where the
need to consider a development strategy
provides the energy transition with a new
dimension.
In this context new and renewable
sources of energy can play a substantial
role. However, increased access for
developing countries to energy supplies of
a/1 types is fundamental to the process of ac¬
celerating their development and is consis¬
tent with the goal of a more equitable
distribution of economic opportunities
among nations.
One fact is now certain; the prevailing
development patterns can no longer be sus¬
tained in either the developed or the
developing countries on the basis of the ex¬
isting energy systems. Recent studies have
shown that, while there is generally a strong
positive correlation between the level of
development of a country and its energy
use, it is possible to design development
strategies that would require less energy
than in the past. New energy systems have
to be developed for all countries based on
greater diversification and self-sufficiency
and on a significant increase in the efficient
use of energy sources. This may be easier in
the'developing countries for whom options
are more varied, unhampered as they are by
long-established industrial infrastructures.
It is both a sovereign right of as well as a
unique challenge to each country to find an
answer to this question within the
framework of their development strategies
and energy policies. It is a challenge to the
responsibility and solidarity of the interna¬
tional community to find a way to help
developing countries obtain the basic
energy inputs they need to accelerate their k
economic and social development. f

How then can we create awareness of the
need to prepare and promote this energy
transition in developing countries in a way
which will be innovative and at the same
time ensure the energy required for develop¬
ment? I believe that the first consideration
needed is to emphasize that countries can¬
not consider an energy strategy in isolation.
Energy is most definitely a central compo¬
nent of any nation's general development
strategy.
The other important consideration is that
when energy strategies in the developing
world become part of an overall develop¬
ment policy, they can be used to promote
economic and social development. Great im¬
agination is required to formulate strategies
for the energy transition that will become
not merely simple passive inputs into the
development process, but an engine of
growth based on the use of natural
resources, of labour, and of local
technologies.
The common global interest to increase
the energy available should be based on a
diversified and sustainable mix which can
ensure for humanity a stream of renewable
resources for the future. This effort com¬
plements a development strategy that will
make an active and dynamic contribution to
the economic and social development pro¬
cess during the energy transition.
The energy transition will have to be con¬
sidered at two levels of urgency. In the short
term, high priority must be given to the
problem of energy for the rural poor
and especially the depletion of fuelwood
resources a particularly important part of
the challenge faced in developing countries.
Over the medium term, it will be necessary
to accelerate strongly and vigorously
technological research in order to reduce the
time it takes for new and renewable energy
sources to penetrate into the energy
mix both of developed and developing
countries.
It will be necessary to stimulate interna¬
tional co-operation, especially through the
transfer of financial resources to developing
countries, to support energy research,
technology transfer and investment and to
do away with bottlenecks in our attempts to
increase and diversify the energy supply,
particularly in developing countries.
Finally, the Nairobi Conference should
serve to promote a strong co-operative ef¬
fort within the United Nations system which
will have major responsibility for implemen¬
ting the Programme of Action. I believe that,
if this Conference can really challenge and
stimulate the co-operative and co-ordinating
capacities of the United Nations system, it
will render that system more effective in
responding to the needs of its Member
States.
Enrique V. Iglesias
8
