Special schools
or integrated education?
/. 'The integration
of the handicapped
into society
can be best prepared
in special schools'
by Vladimir I. Lubovski
INTEGRATION is one of the most frequently discussed problems
of special education. The integration of handicapped children
into the normal education system has many supporters both
among workers in the field of special education and (especially)
among the parents of handicapped children, who are attracted by
the thought that their child will not be set apart in a special group
among his normally developing contemporaries.
At the same time, it must be said that an over-simplified concep¬
tion of integration an indiscriminate, superficial approach to the
problem is widespread. In many cases, the practical application of
this approach leads to no more than a mechanical solution of the
problems. The handicapped child is placed in an ordinary class in a
normal school, among normally developing contemporaries, and is
given the opportunity to spend a small amount of extra time with a
specialist in the education of persons with his kind of handicap. For
all the apparent attractiveness of the slogan "integration in educa¬
tion", the superficial approach cannot be considered as a step for¬
ward in special education.
To make this clear, let us look at the concept, and the goals and
problems, of integration.
First, since education in school represents only a small part of a
person's life, and a period during which he is not independent, what
is of greatest importance is his subsequent integration in society
when he is independent. The completeness and success of this in¬
tegration depend on how satisfactory the person's contacts and in¬
teraction turn out to be with those around him, at home and at
work.
For a handicapped person, the chances of establishing sound'rela-
tionshlps with other people and of becoming a successful worker
are, in their turn, governed by the extent to which he has been
prepared for such things by his education. This is a matter where it is
helpful to begin a pre-school education at the earliest possible age,
aimed at remedying the handicap, and where help is given by the
whole system of organization and work in special schools, which
takes account, for each particular kind of handicap, of the
peculiarities of the child's mental and physical development and of
his capabilities. In such a school, the child is one among equals. The
system is designed to develop the personalities of handicapped
children as comprehensively as possible.
When he is integrated into the ordinary education system, in the
sense of being placed in a normal school among normally developing
children, the handicapped child in effect finds himself in a situation
of inequality, in far more difficult circumstances than the other
children. Handicapped children are, as a rule, incapable of
assimilating subject-matter or of completing exercises at the same
rate as other children, and, in the circumstances we have described,
they are deprived of the necessary educational facilities and are
unable to obtain adequate training for employment.
In our opinion, the integration of handicapped children during the
period of their education must, under an advanced system of special
VLADIMIR I. LUBOVSKI, Soviet expert on special education for the han¬
dicapped, is head of the laboratory of children with educational difficulties at
the Institute of Defectology of the USSR A cademy of Pedagogical Sciences.
The author of many articles and several monographs on the problems of
special education, he is editor-in-chief of the Soviet monthly review Defec-
tologia.
16
education, be understood first and foremost as the incorporation of
special education into the ordinary education system. This in turn
implies that the sum of knowledge, habits and skills which the han¬
dicapped children will be asked to acquire must correspond to a par¬
ticular stage in the education of normally developing children. The
mentally handicapped are an exception in this respect, since,
because of their mental characteristics, there is a substantial part of
the curriculum of a normal school which they are incapable of
assimilating, even in specially created optimal circumstances.
The preparation of handicapped young people for integration into
society can be undertaken best in special schools. This is so
because, in a special school, the process of educating and bringing
up the child is carried out in its entirety by specially trained profes¬
sional teachers using special equipment and methods, at the speed
and in the order which are appropriate for each category of han¬
dicap. Where necessary, the curricula of special schools are sup¬
plemented by additional material. The schools have special
workshops with appropriate equipment and skilled instructors to
prepare the children for employment. It is only within the framework
of such schools that it is possible to organize specialized medical
care, including the necessary systematic remedial work.
In the USSR (where education is compulsory for all children, in¬
cluding of course the handicapped, medical care is free, and special
schools and pre-school institutions receive additional funds), ex¬
perience of the development of the special education system, in¬
cluding testing of the feasibility of incorporating individual handicap¬
ped children and individual classes for such children into ordinary
("normal") schools, has confirmed that the most effective means of
preparing handicapped children for their integration in society is to
educate them in a special school.
This does not preclude the possibility of educating in normal
schools individual handicapped children who, thanks to their
abilities, to their level of development, and to the fact that they are
equipped with special aids, are in a position to assimilate the lessons
on an equal footing with their normally developing classmates.
Given those conditions, handicapped young people (with the excep¬
tion of the mentally handicapped) are capable of going on to the
higher levels of the normal education system (specialized secondary
schools and higher educational establishments) once they have
completed their studies at the previous level in a special school
equivalent to the corresponding stage in that system.
While a child is being educated in a special school, the necessary
integration with normally developing children is ensured by means of
extra-curricular activities (games, excursions, club meetings and

various forms of amateur activity, etc.); during vocational training,
integration is ensured through practical work in a general production
unit.
Experience shows that, once they have acquired an adequate level
of general education and vocational training in a special school, han¬
dicapped young people are capable of working successfully on their
own. For example, the mentally handicapped prove capable, in ap¬
proximately 50 per cent of cases, of working successfully in jobs for
which they have received vocational training at school.
From an analysis of the problem, it can be said that genuine (as
opposed to mechanical) integration of the handicapped into the
general educational and social structure is possible, subject to cer¬
tain conditions.
The first of those conditions is the elimination by legislation of all
forms of discrimination that may exist against the handicapped in
society (in the field of law, this concerns particularly the regulations
governing access to employment). Due allowance must, of course,
be made for the limitations which the handicap in question imposes.
Thus, in the USSR secondary education for handicapped children is
prolonged from two to four years. The majority of the schools are
boarding schools, and the teaching and educational equipment are
provided by the State.
The second is the acquisition by the handicapped (with the excep¬
tion of the mentally handicapped) of a sound education (with no
omissions) to a level no lower than the State-wide mandatory stan¬
dard for normally developing young people. The Youth Employment
Commission, which sits on all local government bodies in thé USSR,
is bound to set aside, as a matter of priority, jobs for young han¬
dicapped persons.
The third is vocational training which will give the handicapped
the ability to work in industry today. Soviet specialized schools are
equipped with professional workshops which provide handicapped
young people with a training in various professions.
The fourth is the provision for the handicapped of supplementary
social security benefits which will, for example, give them extra
funds to meet certain needs associated with their handicap. The
Soviet State spends from three to five times more on the education
of a handicapped child in a special school than on a child in an or¬
dinary school.
The fifth condition, obviously, is to educate normally developing
children to have a proper attitude to people with handicaps. The
fulfilment of these conditions gives handicapped young people the
chance to pursue their studies at the higher level, and, when their
studies are completed, to find employment in all the spheres of
economic, cultural and scientific activity.
THE GIMBI SCHOOL FOR
THE BLIND, ETHIOPIA
In the early 1970s, a group of Ethiopian
church leaders, with the assistance of an
organization for the blind of the Federal
Republic of Germany, established a school
for the blind at Gimbi, in eastern Ethiopia.
The purpose of the school was to show
that, far from needing charity or pity, the
blind are fully capable of participating in all
spheres of life. High priority is therefore
given at Gimbi to preparing blind pupils for
life in their communities, teaching them
how to handle social and everyday tasks
and providing them with vocational
training. Top photo, arithmetic is taught
with the aid of special frames and
Japanese abaci, a gift from abroad. Centre
photo, two pupils examine the articles on
the class "discovery board". Bottom photo,
with the aid of a teacher, a pupil measures
part of the school building using a rule with
a slide made in the school workshops.
Photos Unesco. From a slide presentation of a Unesco project
on "Innovative information and examples of good practice in education
of the handicapped".
