Bridging the gap
in training
and information
by James F. McDivitt
Why has technological progress in exploiting
renewable, non-polluting energy sources not
been followed up by their rapid and
widespread application and use? There is no
one answer to this complex problem, but
there is general recognition that many of the
obstacles are not technical in nature. Among
the major non-technical constraints which
emerge from detailed international studies
carried out by Unesco are lack of specialized
information and public information, and lack
of trained personnel for installation and
repair.
In spite of the explosion of interest in new
energy sources, a Unesco study on educa¬
tion and training in this field reveals that no
systematic approach has yet been developed
to meet the urgent need for skilled man¬
power The survey, which covered some
300 institutions in 86 countries, indicates
that while much more needs to be done to
train research scientists, engineers and
technicians in all aspects of new energy
technology, it is just as necessary to provide
courses for policy-makers who must take
decisions on energy matters.
In many cases lack of information is the
block to more effective training and to
greater public awareness of the possibilities
of alternative energy sources. Even in coun¬
tries where modern information systems are
available it is today virtually impossible to
keep up with new developments in this field
because the volume of publications is so im¬
mense and the information sources are so
scattered. This is another area in which ma¬
jor programmes must be developed and here
too Unesco is playing a leading role.
In 1980 Unesco carried out a study on the
need for and the feasibility of an interna¬
tional information system on new and
renewable energy sources. The study reveal¬
ed universal awareness "of the dangers of
unsound investments based on unreliable in¬
formation. All [users) wish to avoid the over-
enthusiasm expressed in certain circles for
some energy alternatives whose results and
performance might later prove disappoin¬
ting. All users are conscious of the fact that
their choice of an alternative energy could be
influenced by direct or indirect pressures ex¬
ercised by those in charge of the marketing
of relevant materials and processes."
Following this study, Unesco's General Con¬
ference in 1980 approved a programme for
the development of such an information net¬
work, to be based wherever possible on ex¬
isting systems and services. The programme
is now going forward and a number of pilot
projects are at the advanced planning stage.
JAMES F. MCDIVITT, Canadian geologist, is
director of Unesco's Division of Technological
Research and Higher Education.
19
