IBN BATTUTA
Around the world in thirty years
Perhaps the greatest traveller who has ever lived, Ibn Battuta was born at Tangiers,
Morocco, in 703 AH1 1304 AD. At the age of twenty-one he started his travels by
undertaking the pilgrimage to Mecca. This was the start of thirty years of wandering
during which he would travel almost 120,000 kilometres and visit all the Muslim
countries.
In the course of this great journey, comparable only to that of Marco Polo, he
visited Mecca four times, became a judge in Delhi and in the Maldive Islands, accom¬
panied a Greek princess to Constantinople, sailed to Sumatra and Java, and
journeyed to China as ambassador of the Sultan of India. Then, in 750 AH1 1349 AD
he returned briefly to his own country ("the best land in the world") before setting off
immediately to the kingdom of Granada and after that on a journey through Africa to
the Niger basin.
The diary which Ibn Battuta dictated to a scribe during his travels is a source of the
first importance for the history of the Muslim world of his time, especially for the
history of India, Asia Minor and West Africa.
If there are historical inaccuracies in Ibn Battuta's writings, they are largely at¬
tributable to the pronounced taste for the bizarre which was characteristic of the age,
and to the loss of his notebooks during a pirate attack in the Indian Ocean.
But errors or exaggerations do not detract from the value of Ibn Battuta's narrative
which is written in a direct, straightforward style punctuated by observations which
are not without humour. His entertaining story has been translated, wholly or in part,
into some 15 languages and ranks among the masterpieces of Arabic literature.
The following brief extracts from The Travels of Ibn Battuta have been translated
from the 4-volume Arabic edition established by C. Defremery and B. R. Sanguinetti.
The first and third extracts are from vol. I and vol. II of the translation by
Sir Hamilton Gibb published for the Hakluyt Society by the Cambridge University
Press in 1958 and 1971.
The bountiful city of Cairo
I arrived at length at the city of Misr
(Cairo), mother of cities and seat of
Pharaoh the tyrant, mistress of broad
provinces and fruitful lands, boundless
in multitude of buildings, peerless in
beauty and splendour, the meeting-
place of comer and goer, the stopping-
place of feeble and strong. Therein is
what you will of learned and simple,
grave and gay, prudent and foolish, base
and noble, of high estate and low estate,
unknown and famous; she surges as the
waves of the sea with her throngs of folk
and can scarce contain them for all the
capacity of her situation and sustaining
power. (1, 67-68)
Portraits in Pekin
As far as painting is concerned, no na¬
tion. Christian or otherwise, can vie with
the Chinese; they have an extraordinary
talent for this art. Among the
astonishing things I have seen among
them in this respect I will say that every
time I entered one of their cities and have
returned thither since, I have always
found my portrait and those of my com¬
panions painted on the walls and on
papers in the markets. Once I entered
the city of the Sultan (Pekin); I crossed
the painters' market and arrived in the
sovereign's palace with my companions;
we were all dressed in the style of Iraq.
In the evening when I left the castle I
passed through the same market; I saw
my portrait and that of my companions
painted on pieces of paper stuck to the
walls. Each of us began to examine the
face of his comrade and we found that
the likeness was perfect. ( IV, 262)
Post haste in India
In India the horse-post, which they
call ulaq, consists of horses belonging to
the Sultan (with relays) every four miles.
The service of couriers on foot has
within the space of each mile three
relays, which they call dawa, the dawa
being a third of a mile, and a mile itself is
called by them kuruh. The manner of its
organization is as follows. At every third
of a mile there is an inhabited village,
outside which there are three pavilions.
In these sit men girded up ready to move
off, each of whom has a rod two cubits
long with copper bells at the top. When
a courier leaves the town he takes the
letter in the fingers of one hand and the
rod with the bells in the other, and runs
with all his might. The men in the
pavilions, on hearing the sound of the
bells, get ready to meet him and when
he reaches them one of them takes the
letter in his hand and passes on, running
with all his might and shaking his rod un¬
til he reaches the next dawa, and so they
continue until the letter reaches its
destination. (Ill, 95-96)
This clay statuette of a carpet-seller of Arab or Persian origin is from
the Chinese city of Kashgar, a fertile oasis at the foot of the Pamir
mountains. It dates from the Tang era (l-IV/7th-10th centuries) when
Kashgar was a thriving trading centre at a meeting point of two
branches of the silk road. As the figurine suggests, Arabs and
Persians travelled to China at the beginning of the Tang dynasty to
trade or to make their home. Around the time of the great Arab -
traveller Ibn Battuta, who arrived in Pekin in 673 AH/1275 AD, four
years before Kublai Khan became emperor of China, the Mongol
conquerors of Sung China encouraged Muslims, Jews and Christians
as well as various peoples of central Asia, to settle in China.
Photo © Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto
23
