The
plight
of
Africa's
five million
refugees
THERE are currently some ten million
refugees in the world, the casualties
of wars and various forms of oppres¬
sion and persecution.
In the aftermath of the Second World
War, it was Europe which faced a massive
refugee problem, setting up transit camps to
house the hundreds of thousands of
uprooted and displaced persons who had
survived the holocaust. There were still
many European refugees in 1951, when the
United Nations established the Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
with headquarters in Geneva. This year, the
thirtieth anniversary of UNHCR's creation
provides an unwelcome reminder that its
work is still as necessary as ever, for year in
year out events continue to swell the ranks
of the world's refugee multitude.
by Maxime-Leopold Zollner
'
AUX ENFÂÎ
. VE SCO
/
I
15

Today the problem has moved away from
Europe and, as United Nations Secretary-
General Kurt Waldheim has urged, world
attention is being focussed on the plight of
refugees in Africa. What is more, the num¬
ber of Africa's uprooted has soared alarm¬
ingly in the last few years: in 1975 there were
a million; in 1977, 3,700,000. Last year the
figure reached a staggering five million.
In response to this crisis, the General
Assembly of the United Nations last Novem¬
ber called for an international conference to
be held in order to mobilize the community
of nations and to appeal for aid, and on 9
and 10 April, the "International Conference
on Assistance to Refugees in Africa", was
held in Geneva. Invited to it were Member
States of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and of the United Nations, as well as
national liberation movements recognized
by the two organizations. The main objec¬
tive of the Conference was to obtain additio¬
nal resources for programmes to aid those in
the greatest need and, perhaps even more
important, to provide assistance for the Afri¬
can host countries which would enable
them to shoulder the heavy burden which
the massive influx of refugees imposes on
their personnel and their economies.
International action in this field is not
new. UNHCR has a long record of efforts to
improve the conditions of African refugees,
and their plight is clearly a matter of the
highest priority for the Organization of Afri¬
can Unity. The Conference on the Legal,
Economic and Social Aspects of African
Refugee Problems, held at Addis Ababa in
1967, was one milestone in the co-operation
between the two institutions. This Confe¬
rence, the first occasion on which matters
exclusively concerning refugees in Africa
were considered in an international forum,
adopted a series of recommendations aimed
at alleviating the burden of asylum coun¬
tries. Another result of the Conference was
the OAU's creation of the Addis Ababa-
based Bureau for the Placement and Educa¬
tion of African Refugees, and the adoption
of the OAU Convention governing the Spe¬
cific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa.
The Convention incorporated the defini¬
tion of a refugee which has been adopted by
most governments, in line with the formula
established by the United Nations, as any
person who, "owing to well-founded fear of
being persecuted for reasons of race, reli¬
gion, nationality, membership of a particular
social group or political opinion, is outside
the country of his nationality..." But the
Convention goes further than this, in stating
that the word refugee also applies to "every
person who, owing to external aggression,
occupation, foreign domination or events
seriously disturbing public order in either
part or the whole of his country of origin or
nationality, is compelled to leave his place of
residence in order to seek refuge in another
place outside his country of origin or natio¬
nality". The African States, in line with
16

This sea of improvised tents stretching far into the distance is an
emergency refugee camp somewhere in Africa. Half the world's
refugees are today in Africa, and their total number exceeds the
population of many African countries. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is collaborating with
the Organization of African Unity and voluntary relief agencies
on a massive effort to help some of the world's poorest countries
provide food, shelter and medical aid for these millions of
refugees and displaced persons. Below, women and children wait
for food to be distributed at a refugee camp.
these provisions, had also recognized that
the granting of asylum to refugees is a
peaceful and humanitarian act and not an
unfriendly act committed by the country of
asylum against the country of origin.
Unfortunately, these texts, despite their
generosity and the efforts they encouraged,
proved inadequate to solve the refugee
problem at a time when there was an inten¬
sification of liberation struggles, especially
in southern Africa, internal conflicts, and
inter-territorial disputes. A single figure
highlights the dimensions of the problem: in
the mid-1970s about 2,000 Africans became
refugees or displaced persons each day.
This was well over twice the world average
of 800 new refugees per day.
Consequently, another conference was
held at Arusha (Tanzania) in 1979 in order to
define a strategy for the repatriation of
refugees to their countries of origin or for
their integration into the economic struc¬
tures of the host countries. The Arusha con
ference, organized by the OAU, the United
Nations Economic Commission for Africa
and the UNHCR, also reaffirmed the prin¬
ciples of solidarity and "burden-sharing",
and outlined a list of existing and forseeable
needs. These needs have been identified
and costed for each country by UNHCR.
African governments have shown extraor¬
dinary hospitality by accepting refugees by
hundreds of thousands. They have set an
example by scrupulously respecting the
principles of the right of asylum and the
non-refoulement of refugees. But it must
not be forgotten that these countries some
of them among the world's poorest are
facing very serious economic difficulties.
Not only are they hardest hit by international
market forces and mounting energy costs,
they are also a prey to natural catastrophes.
Somalia, for instance, is a country virtually
without resources, but in addition to its own
population of 3,600,000 it now has over a
million and a half refugees.
Ensuring the survival of the neediest
refugees in the poorest countries is the
prime target of the aid programmes for
which UNHCR is responsible and which it is
carrying out in co-operation with the World
Food Programme, the World Health
Organization, UNICEF, and other govern¬
mental and non-governmental voluntary
agencies, whose work is absolutely in¬
dispensable. But existing resources are
barely sufficient to prevent men, women
and above all children from dying of hunger
in their hundreds of thousands.
Providing for the future needs and lives of
the refugees, and bringing them into the
African economy, are scarcely less urgent
problems which may turn out to be more
lasting and more costly. Whether they stay
in asylum countries or whether after a few
years they wish and are able to return to
their own lands, displaced populations do
not ask to be helped indefinitely. On the
contrary, they want to work. But before
17

A group of refugee children learn to read in a ruined classroom.
^ can play a full part in economic and
social life, the State which has accepted
them must provide them with land, tools,
seeds and fertilizer, create workshops, dig
wells, build villages, roads, bridges,
hospitals and schools. The cost of in¬
frastructures, materials, equipment and per¬
sonnel required by undertakinps of this kind
is beyond the capacities of the host coun¬
tries. If the remarkably limited welcome
which most rich countries accord to
refugees is anything to go by, it would seem
that these countries consider the cost of
such measures to be extremely high. And
yet no people would refuse to join in a
genuine collective effort.
It is to this spirit of international solidarity
that the United Nations' appeal has been ad¬
dressed. UNHCR announced to the ninety-
nine governments represented at the
Geneva Conference, which was chaired by
Mr. Waldheim, that the urgent measures
which need to be taken in the next eighteen
months will cost $450 million. In other cir¬
cumstances, such a figure might have
alarmed donor countries who are often at
the receiving end of requests for aid. On the
second day of the Geneva conference,
however, the participants pledged to pro¬
vide $560 million, perhaps more than had
been hoped for. Then, on the evening of
10 April, the Assistant Secretary-General of
the Organization of African Unity announc¬
ed that other promises, which it had been
impossible to make formally, had boosted
the sum by at least $100 million.
18
Thus the appeal has not fallen on deaf
ears. It would be hard to find a better note
on which to conclude than these words by
Mr. Poul Hartling, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees: "The suffering
of the refugees has been understood; inter¬
national solidarity exists".
I Maxime-Leopold Zollner
MAXIME-LEOPOLD ZOLLNER, of Benin, is
director of the Assistance Programmes Division
of the Office of the United Nations High Commis¬
sioner for Refugees, in Geneva. A former Vice-
President of the Economic and Social Council of
the United Nations and Secretary-General of the
Union Africaine et Malgache, he has served as his
country's ambassador to the United States and
Canada and as permanent delegate to the United
Nations in New York.
