The Hegira
T'HE great nations of the world that
have made a deep and lasting impres¬
sion on history and civilization have
always established their own calendar
systems by which they fix the beginning,
length, sub-divisions and the important
dates of the year.
The Muslim calendar takes as its starting
point the Hegira {Hijra), the Prophet
Muhammad's journey from Mecca to
Medina. The Arabic word hijra means
"migration", but, because of its association
with the Prophet it has become invested in
Islam with a much wider and more deeply
significant meaning. It has sometimes been
wrongly translated, as "flight" or "refuge",
but primarily it connoted the breaking of the
ties of kinship or association. To this pre-
Islamic meaning, Islam added the sense of
"breaking of the ties of kinship for the sake
of God".
The Prophet started his mission in the
year 610 AD, when he received the first
revelation on Mount Hira, in the vicinity of
Mecca. Soon he won over to his faith a
small but devoted band of followers. As
time went on, the Prophet attracted more
and more adherents to his religion which, in
turn, evoked strong opposition from the
Meccans, especially from the oligarchy that
controlled the economic life of the city.
As the opposition grew, it became fiercer
and after thirteen years of ceaseless
preaching and struggle it became obvious to
the Prophet that his movement had reached
deadlock and there seemed little hope of
any early success against the obdurate
opposition.
It was at this juncture that he decided to
leave his native city, Mecca, and migrate
with his followers to Medina, whose people
promised him their help in carrying out his
mission. The Hijra was now the only hope.
But it was not an easy decision, however.
by Hakim Mohammed Said
For the infant Muslim community, it meant a
great sacrifice in that they had to give up
their homes and properties, their social con¬
tacts and blood relationships, their
economic and commercial base, and all the
privileges they enjoyed as citizens of the
most developed and prestigious city in
North Arabia, and settle in a city which had
hardly any material opportunities to offer.
The motives for this migration were,
therefore, a new and revolutionary concept
of the sublimity of purpose, a noble cause,
and sacrifice for the sake of God to protect
His message and to convey it to mankind
from a safer base.
This spirit of sacrifice as the motive for Hi¬
jra is reflected in many traditions of the Pro¬
phet and his companions. Thus, for exam¬
ple, a companion of the Prophet expresses
his sentiments and those of others in these
words: "I have left my kith and kin and my
property making the Hijra towards God".
Another tradition reads: "We have Hijra
with the Messenger of God seeking the
pleasure of God, The MostBlessed and the
Most High."
When a Muslim leaves his house, and his
kith and kin purely for the sake of God's
pleasure he acquires a great spiritual and
psychological force which enables him to
overcome all his spiritual and material dif¬
ficulties. If a man does not leave evil behind
him, his Hijra is useless, as far as its results
are concerned. Someone asked the Pro¬
phet, "0 Messenger of God, which Hijra is
the most excellent?" The Prophet replied,
"The most excellent Hijra is that you de¬
nounce what your God is not pleased with."
In the light of these traditions Muslim
scholars divide the Hijra into two
aspects the inward and the outward. In¬
ward Hijra means the renunciation of all the
evil temptations of the Self; outward Hijra
means saving the religion from destruction
by moving from one place to another.
Historically, however, the Hijra of the Pro¬
phet from Mecca to Medina in 622 AD,
marked a turning point in his prophetic mis¬
sion and a revolution in Islam. Externally,
the Islamic movement assumed a new shape
and formed a definitive community under a
single chief. In Mecca Muhammad was a
private citizen, in Medina the Prophet-Head
of a community. In Mecca he had to limit
himself to more or less passive opposition to
the existing order, in Medina he organized a
religious society. In short, the Hijra of the
Prophet gave explicit form to what had
hitherto been implicit. It ushered in a new
era in the history of Islam.
It was because of this historical impor¬
tance of the Hijra, along with its conceptual
significance, that when the question of
adopting an independent Muslim Calendar
arose under the second Caliph, Umar Ibn al-
Khattab, the companions unanimously
voted to adopt the date of the Hijra as the
beginning of the Muslim Calendar. They
unanimously dismissed the important event
of the Prophet's birth as the beginning of
the Muslim Lta. They also chose not to mark
its beginning from the day when the Prophet
received his first revelation. Muhammad did
not war.t to preach the faith only, he wanted
to put "Faith in Action". And it was the Hi¬
jra which made this possible. In the entire
history of Islam nothing can be compared
with the event of the Hijra in historical im¬
portance, and in its ideological, social,
political and cultural impacts.
HAKIM MOHAMMED SAID, of Pakistan, is
adviser on traditional Islamic medicine to the
Pakistan Ministry of Health, and President of the
Hamdard National Foundation (Karachi) which is
devoted to scientific and medical research. He is
editor-in-chief of the Foundation's periodical
Hamdard Medicine and Managing Editor of the
Urdu edition of the Unesco Courier.
Colour page, left
Ottoman style illuminated design
(Xll/18th century) representing Medina,
known in Arabic as Madinat al-Nabi
"the city of the Prophet" or simply as
al-Madina. "the city". (See also photo
and caption page 16).
Photo © Museum of Islamic Art, West Berlin
THE ISLAMIC CALENDAR
"It was He that gave the sun his brightness and
the moon her light, ordaining her phases that you
may learn to compute the seasons and the
years. "
(The Qur'an, X:5)
The Islamic Era is calculated from the year of the Hegira
which took place in 622 AD by the Gregorian calendar.
Following the guidance of the Qur'an which expressly makes
the moon the measurer of time, the Islamic year is based on
the moon and consists of 354 days divided into 12 lunar
months which are 30 or 29 days long.
In each thirty-year cycle, years 2, 5, 7, 10, 13, 16, 18, 21, 24,
26, and 29 are leap years with an extra day added to the
month Dhu 'l-Hidjdja.
Since the Islamic year is shorter than the solar year, the
Islamic New Year moves backwards regressing through all
the seasons every 32.5 years.
Days of the week
Yawm al-Ahad (Sunday)
Yawm al-lthnain (Monday)
Yawm al-Thalatha (Tuesday)
Yawm al-Arba'a (Wednesday)
Yawm al-Khamis (Thursday)
Yawm al-Djum'a (Friday)
Yawm al-Sabt (Saturday)
Months of the
year
Muharram
Safar
Rabi' I
Rabi' II
Djumada I
Djumada II
Radjab
Sha'ban
Ramadan
Shawwal
Dhu 'l-Ka'da
Dhu 'l-Hidjdja
Working out accurate correspondence between the dates of
the Islamic and the Gregorian calendars involves fairly
plicated calculations.
The date Friday 30th of October 1981 AD (Anno Domini)
corresponds in the Islamic calendar to Yawm al-Djuma 1
Muharram 1402 AH (Anno Hegirae), the next Islamic Ra's
al Sana (New Year's Day).
43
