Man and the
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco



The first ten years of Unesco's
THIS year marks the tenth anniver¬
sary of the intergovernmental
research Programme on Man and
the Biosphere (MAB) which was
launched by Unesco in November 1971,
and whose purpose is to establish the
scientific basis necessary for land use
planning and for the management of
the resources of the biosphere in
harmony with nature.
By virtue of its scale over a hundred
countries engaged in a common effort
on some thousand applied research and
training projects involving more than
ten thousand scientists and tech¬
nicians Programme, now fully
operational, constitutes a vast natural
laboratory in which several guiding prin¬
ciples developed within Unesco are be¬
ing tested under field conditions.
Thus, confronted with the specific
problems of the environment, MAB has
confirmed a fundamental precept: for
science and technology to serve human

Biosphere
environmental programme
progress more fully, they must be in¬
tegrated into each country's culture,
and the tasks which are undertaken in
their name should be in keeping with
that country's specific characteristics.
It has also become clear that the in¬
terdisciplinary approach which is fun¬
damental to Unesco's action is the one
best qualified to produce solutions to
the highly complex problems of the en¬
vironment. This is why the MAB Pro¬
gramme brings together specialists in
the natural and the exact sciences, as
well as specialists in the social and
human sciences, and planners.
Another factor in the Programme's
success is the participation of local
populations, both in identifying
priorities and in applying the results of
research. Here it has been necessary to
diversify the methods of presenting
scientific information, so as to make it
more accessible to those who will use
it,, as part of an education which
enables man to assume fuller respon¬
sibility for his natural and cultural
heritage.
The experience of the last ten years
has also yielded extremely valuable
results for international co-operation,
which has fostered the collaboration of
scientists, exchanges of information
and experimental data. By stimulating
and co-ordinating these operations,
Unesco has performed the role it has
marked out for itself as a catalyst of
ideas and action.
Another original feature of the Pro¬
gramme is that it has produced
substantial results from relatively
slender resources. Its action, relayed
from the small MAB secretariat to the
hundreds of persons working on MAB
National Committees and the
thousands of specialists engaged on
research and training activities, has had
a multiplier effect. Likewise, Unesco's
regular Programme budget, necessarily
limited in comparison to needs, has
served to generate funds from other
sources to the benefit of Member
States, or to facilitate agreements bet¬
ween countries, thus considerably in¬
creasing the possibilities of action.
Finally, the Man and the Biosphere
Programme is an excellent example of
the decentralization which Unesco is
striving to promote in all its fields of ac¬
tivity. In this case, decentralization is
almost total, since the Programme ac¬
tivities are carried out directly by the
countries themselves. They are gradual¬
ly acquiring an autonomy in this field
which should enable them to continue
the work they have begun, and to main¬
tain the co-operative relations which
have been established at the regional
and inter-regional levels. If, ten years
after its creation, the Man and the
Biosphere Programme has achieved un¬
doubted success and is continually ex¬
panding, it is essentially because the
participant countries have succeeded in
integrating it into their development
process.
