Unesco and the International
Year of Disabled Persons
by Nils-lvar Sundberg
FROM its earliest days. Unesco has worked
to improve education for disabled children
and young people, and in 1966 a compre¬
hensive programme was drawn up to develop co¬
operation with the United Nations and other UN
agencies such as the World Health Organization
(WHO), the International Labour Organisation
(ILO) and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) as well as some 40 non-governmental
organizations working for handicapped people;
carry out worldwide surveys and studies on
special education for the deaf, the blind, the men¬
tally and motor handicapped; and provide
member countries, at their request, with the ser¬
vices of experts and consultants to help plan ac¬
tivities for the disabled and train their teachers.
Unesco also provides fellowships for the training
of personnel in specialized fields, supplies equip¬
ment to schools and centres for the handicapped
and supports meetings and training seminars.
Through special studies and meetings Unesco is
drawing up guidelines for member States for the
development of education for the handicapped.
Since 1968 when its special education programme
was launched, the Organization has supported
more than 200 projects in some 80 countries
around the world, from Algeria to Zaire.
Unesco has also helped organize theatre
workshops and seminars for deaf players,
published a major work on the standardization of
Braille, and established a scheme enabling
schools and institutions for the disabled, especial¬
ly in the developing countries, to buy special
equipment and material abroad.
Action in the field
Unesco plans to launch a regional project in
1981 to stimulate the creation of educational
facilities for the handicapped in the English-
speaking countries of Africa. This project, to be
financed by a $780,000 grant from the Swedish
government, will include a seminar for high-level
decision-makers and for training administrators of
special education programmes in the region, as
well as four national training seminars for
teachers of the handicapped, fellowships for
study abroad and consultancy services for coun¬
tries in the region.
Teacher training will also be stressed at the
Bahrain rehabilitation centre for handicapped
children and young people which started
operating in April 1980. The centre, set up with
Unesco/UNDP (United Nations Development
Programme) assistance, consists of three units
for educating the mentally retarded, the deaf, and
for vocational education and training. It also
receives assistance from ILO and the UN Office of
Technical Co-operation.
NILS-IVAR SUNDBERG, of Sweden, has direc¬
ted Unesco's programme of Special Education for
Handicapped Children and Young People since it
started in 1968. Formerly Director of Special Edu¬
cation in Stockholm and lecturer at the Stock¬
holm School of Education, he was for nine years
Advisory Officerat the Swedish National Board of
Education on questions of special education for
the handicapped, including teacher training and
curriculum planning.
In Syria, the activities of the Aleppo and
Damascus Institutes for the deaf are to be extend¬
ed, and two new institutes will be established at
Horns and Lattakia with Unesco/UNDP
assistance.
During IYDP, consultants in special educa¬
tion will be attached to the four Unesco Regional
Education Offices in Africa, Asia, the Arab States
and Latin America to advise Unesco member
countries on the development of educational
facilities for the disabled, and mobile teams will
carry out training seminars for teachers of the
handicapped in these regions.
Under Unesco's "Research and Human Needs"
programme, a multidisciplinary project on "re¬
quirements for the physical and mental develop¬
ment of the young child" is to be carried out in
Algeria, Italy, Portugal and Spain. The aim is to
identify and assess the nutritional, biological, en¬
vironmental and other needs of infants, young
children and lactating women and promote effec¬
tive measures to offset disease and physical and
mental deficiencies. Research will be conducted
by national teams, including biologists, nutri¬
tionists, chemists, geneticists, neurophysiologists
and sociologists. This work will be co-ordinated
by Unesco in collaboration with UN specialized
agencies such as FAO (the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations) and WHO,
and non-governmental bodies like ICRO (Interna¬
tional Cell Research Organization), IBRO (the In¬
ternational Brain Research Organization) and
IUNS (the International Union of Nutritional
Sciences).
Cultural events
A series of activities planned to encourage
participation of disabled people in cultural life and
develop their creative talents, will include theatre,
dance and music workshops, as well as training
seminars for specialist personnel. Among ideas
being discussed with organizations of the han¬
dicapped and international cultural organizations
are a workshop on music therapy for disabled
people, an exhibition on the art and culture of the
deaf, and a literary contest on the theme: the pro¬
blems faced by the handicapped.
An exhibition of posters for IYDP designed
by European artists will open at Unesco head¬
quarters early in 1981, together with a display of
photos illustrating participation of the handicap¬
ped in the life of the community in countries
around the world.
A series of special activities at the local and
regional levels is also planned by the 2,500
Unesco Clubs operating in 77 countries.
Conferences
A major international conference to be held
in Spain in November, 1981, will examine in a
global interdisciplinary context the contribution
education can make to solving the problems of
the handicapped. To be held under the patronage
of Her Majesty the Queen of Spain, who has
always taken a special interest in all problems
relating to disabled persons, this meeting will also
be attended by Mrs. Zala N'Kanza, Executive
Secretary of the International Year of Disabled
persons. It is being organized in consultation with
UN agencies and international organizations of
the disabled.
A seminar arranged in co-operation with the
United States Department of Education on the
role of parents and pre-school training in the
education of small handicapped children.
An expert meeting on the integration of
multiple and severely handicapped people into or¬
dinary and vocational education, under the joint
sponsorship of Unesco and the Federal Republic
of Germany.
A seminar on the way new attitudes to han¬
dicaps reflected in children's literature can help
the integration of disabled children into everyday
life. This meeting, to be organized with the
Bologna Children's Book Fair in March 1981, will
bring together publishers and specialists in the
education and counselling of the handicapped.
A symposium on ways of eliminating pro¬
blems that may arise from the application of
copyright to materials for the visually and hearing
handicapped. Studies on the production and
dissemination of such materials, prepared by the
World Council for the Welfare of the Blind and
the World Federation of the Deaf, will be examin¬
ed by the administrative bodies of the Universal
Copyright Convention (UCC), for which Unesco
provides the Secretariat, and the other major in¬
ternational convention, the Berne Union.
Co-action programme
Through this programme, groups and in¬
dividuals can purchase special Unum
cheques, a kind of international money order
issued by Unesco, and make a contribu¬
tion a small one to help the handicapped
in developing countries.
In 1978-79, over $130,000 were donated in this
way to special education projects in Ethiopia,
Ghana, Haiti, Lebanon, Madagascar, Malaysia
and Peru, while $46,000 went to the World Coun¬
cil for the Welfare of the Blind to help finance
their prevention programmes and buy much
needed equipment for schools for the blind in the
Third World.
Co-Action is issuing an illustrated booklet
outlining the activities and needs of schools and
centres for the handicapped in Africa, the Arab
countries, Asia and Latin America. Among the
most pressing needs are: funds to provide
medical treatment for the prevention of blindness
and finance training programmes for teachers, as
well as Braille typewriters, hearing aids for the
deaf, education toys, and equipment for pottery
and carpentry workshops.
These are some of Unesco's plans for the Inter¬
national Year of Disabled Persons. As new in¬
itiatives and activities in favour of the education
of the handicapped arise the Organization will
continue to give them its support, both during
IYDP and in the years tocóme.
27
