New and renewable
sources of energy:
costs and constraints
Geothermal
energy

by Boris M. Berkovsky
THE social and economic constraints that hamper wide-scale use of non-
conventional energy sources are not always clearly understood.
Renewable energy sources are highly capital-intensive, mainly because
of the cost of the equipment involved. Analysis of rough estimates of the cost of
electric power generation on the basis of renewable energy sources shows that
only big hydroelectric power stations, under favourable construction and
operating conditions, can compete with the large-capacity power stations using
coal or nuclear fuel. The unique hydroelectric generators installed at Sayano
Shushensk, Ust'-llim, Nourek (see photo page 26) and a number of other sites
were an essential factor in the doubling of electric power production in the 1970s
as compared to the 1960s, and in Syria the El Soura hydroelectric power station,
built with the assistance of the Soviet Union, provides over 70 per cent of the
electric power produced in the country.
In a certain, very limited, number of places geothermal power stations of
medium capacity may be commercially viable suppliers of electric power. Other
renewable sources of energy are less economical than thermal and nuclear
power stations linked together into a common power generation/consumption
system. This is because they are dispersed, they lack continuity and therefore
necessitate the provision of alternative back-up systems, and they involve a cer¬
tain risk factor since they all require the use of technologies and processes that
are not fully proven.
The proposed new large-scale technologies, such as those for the use of solar
energy in outer space or of the temperature gradient of the tropical seas, turn
out, when analysed in depth, to be much more costly than initial estimates sug¬
gested. Calculations show that to produce the power required to light the
homes in an average town of 10,000 inhabitants by one of these methods would
need between 10,000 and 40,000 man-hours annually as compared to 200 to 500
man-hours for a conventional power plant burning hydrocarbons.
High consumption of materials is another constraint hampering the use of
solar and other new and renewable sources of energy. For example, to ensure
the "reaping" of solar energy by special collectors at the rate of 1 Q per year (in
1975 world energy consumption was 0.25 Q) the collectors would have to cover
a surface of 130,000 square kilometres, an area roughly the size of Greece or
Czechoslovakia.
This would involve enormous amounts of material. The manufacture of the
simplest solar energy collector (they are made of blackened sheet metal, usually
aluminium, with tubing inside for the circulation of liquid) requires 10 kilograms
of aluminium per square metre. Thus 10,000 tons of aluminium would be re¬
quired per square kilometre. It would also involve taking out of normal use vast
areas of land.
The alienation of considerable areas of land and sea surface is also a prere¬
quisite for large-scale energy production through direct conversion of solar
energy and the use of the thermal energy of the oceans. Scientists have
calculated, for example, that to produce energy to the value of 1 Q per year us¬
ing the thermal energy of the seas and oceans, the devices needed to capture
and transform this energy would cover practically all the tropical and sub¬
tropical seas, to the detriment of maritime operations and fisheries. In addition,
the one degree centigrade drop in the surface temperature of the tropical seas
that this exploitation might entail could cause a drop in the mean annual
temperature in the tropics and greatly influence the climate on a global scale.
The main constraints impeding development of new and renewable sources
of energy are thus: high initial costs, high consumption of materials, the aliena¬
tion of large land and sea surfaces, lack of sufficient trained personnel, absence
of a specialized information infrastructure, and legal and administrative dif¬
ficulties. The status of non-conventional energy sources is rarely defined in
legislative documents with sufficient clarity and precision and as a result con¬
flicts of interest arise which may take a very long time to resolve.
All the constraints enumerated above are inherent in the development of non-
conventional energy sources and constitute a major obstacle to their large-scale
introduction. The problem calls for an integrated approach at the governmental
level, the elaboration and implementation of long-term plans and programmes
and extensive international co-operation in the promotion of which Unesco will
play an essential role.
BORIS M. BERKOVSKY, a Soviet scientist specializing in the field of thermophysics, is head of
the laboratory for computer methods in thermophysics and energy at the Institute of High
Temperature of the USSR Academy of Sciences in Moscow. From 1973 to 1979 he was a Unesco
staff member responsible for Unesco 's programmes on scientific and technical problems of energy.
He is the author of more than one hundred publications.
23
