Seeing with my hands
by Olga Skorokhodova
Text copyright © reproduction prohibited
Poet and essayist Olga Skorokhodova is both blind and deaf.
She was born in 1914 at a village in southern Ukraine. Before
the age of five she contracted meningitis and completely lost
first her sight and then her hearing, so that her speech
became impaired. At that time she lost both her parents. In
1925, she entered the clinic for deaf, dumb and blind children
set up in Kharkov two years earlier by Professor Ivan
Sokolyansky. There her speech was restored. With the help of
special methods devised by Professor Sokolyansky and with
Braille, she was taught regular school subjects and completed
her secondary education. In 1961, she took a doctorate in
psychology and pedagogical sciences and is now the senior
research assistant at the Institute for the Handicapped of the
USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences in Moscow. Her
book How I Perceive, Imagine and Understand the World
Around Me, from which the extract below is taken, was
published in Moscow in 1972 and has been translated into
many languages.
PEOPLE with normal sight who are not familiar with the blind
frequently ask me questions such as: "Who chooses the style
and colour of your clothes? Who advises you to buy one dress
rather than another? Who sees to the decoration of your room and
decides on the arrangement of the furniture? Why are these objects
placed here rather than there?"
When I reply that I choose almost everything myself, they look
very surprised, so I am told, and often incredulous. Yet it is true.
For example, when I go into a shop to buy a ready-made dress, I
examine it and I am able to tell immediately if I like the style and if the
dress will fall well. I feel all this with my hands and know at once if a
dress suits me. As for the colour, I naturally have to rely on the ad¬
vice of sighted people.
Sometimes the friends who are with me will say that the colour of
a dress or a coat and skirt is attractive and that I look well in it. But if
I feel that it does not suit me as well as they say it does, that it is too
wide or too narrow, too short or too long, I do not buy it.
During my life I have often had to move house and, on each occa¬
sion, I arranged my room according to my taste, relying entirely on
my own judgement. This may sound banal and hardly worth men¬
tioning. And it is true that for people who can see and hear, such
small events are part and parcel of daily life and appear insignificant.
But, for me, moving rooms is a very serious matter.
A sighted person entering a room for the first time will immediate¬
ly be able to gauge its approximate length and width. And even blind
people who can hear are able to fall back on acoustics: they can tell
the approximate size of a room from the sounds and vibrations pro¬
duced by footsteps and voices.
But how does someone like myself who is not only blind but also
deaf, set about it? Since I can neither see nor hear, the only way is to
examine the whole room very carefully with my hands, in order to
discover its length and width and whether it is square or rectangular.
Then I have to find out opposite which wall or window the door is
situated. Only after a thorough examination of this kind do I really
get an idea of the room's shape and size and "see" it in my mind's
eye in relation to my furniture. Then I can decide where to put the
various pieces.
Naturally I do not visualize all the furniture at the same time but,
rather, individual pieces a chair, the table, the cupboard, bed,
sofa, etc. I do not imagine them bigger or smaller than they are in
reality, but in their normal size. And when I think of these objects, I
do not break them up into constituent parts, say, the leg of a chair,
then the seat, the back, I see the whole chair in its real size.
It would be different if I were to examine only one part of an un¬
familiar object. Not knowing what the whole of it is like, I would
have a mental picture of only that part which I had touched with my
hands.
For example, if I were to touch the tip of a stag's antlers and were
then asked: "Can you visualize the animal's general appearance and
the shape of its antlers?", I would certainly reply: "No". On the
other hand, if I touch the edge of my bed-head, I visualize the whole
bed. And once I have studied the peculiarities and distinctive
features of a particular chair, I have an exact image of that chair and
could recognize it anywhere.
So, having examined my new room and discovered its size, width
and length, I can easily arrange my furniture without the help of
sighted friends. I arrange it according to my taste following a plan I
have thought out in advance. Sometimes I do not follow the initial
plan entirely, but that is merely for the sake of convenience: to put a

table in the middle of the room, as many housewives do, would be
very impractical for a blind person like myself.
Since I always maintain the same order in my room and keep
things in the same place, I gradually adapt my movements to the
position of the furniture in a completely unconscious way. For in¬
stance, if I am sitting on the sofa and want to pick up a sheet of
paper or a pencil from the table, I stretch out my hand in the right
direction without a moment's hesitation. And when I need
something from the cupboard, I take exactly the number of steps
required.
Often after moving from a small room to a larger one, or the
reverse, I feel uncomfortable for the first few days. The big room
seems immensely long and I stop instinctively in the middle without
going as far as the table or the cupboard I am searching for in the
empty space around me. When the room is smaller than my old one,
I bang into the furniture at the beginning, because I imagine the
chairs and table to be further away than they actually are. But in
both cases the furniture does not seem to be larger or smaller; I see it
in my imagination in its true dimensions.
This shows, I think, that blind people's perception of the world
around them is true to lifedifferent from but not inferior to the
perception of .sighted people.
A well-meaning woman once tried to convince me that the blind
cannot perceive the true shape and volume of objects. She believed,
I can't imagine why, that they see them as larger or smaller, especial¬
ly smaller, than they are in reality. Then she said:
"If one were to put an apple and a cucumber into your hands, and
then take them away, how would you perceive them? Small or big?
Round or long?"
I told her what I felt:
"I would 'see' the apple, as an apple, not as anything else, true to
size and round, of course, with a little stalk. And I would perceive
the cucumber as a cucumber, long and narrow. Naturally, I would
never confuse it with an apple".
"But when you feel an object and then move away from it, do you
perceive an image of the entire object, or only part of it?" she asked.
"At the moment I feel your hand in mine, but I am not familiar
with your face, for I have not yet examined it. I cannot therefore im¬
agine what it is like. I know, however, that you have eyes, a nose
and a mouth, like every human being. If I touch only the tip of your
nose, I vizualize the tip, but I realize that you have a complete nose.
Let us suppose for a moment that you have masked your face or hid¬
den behind a screen, but through an oversight one eye and part of
your chin are still visible. A sighted person coming into the room by
chance would retain the image of one eye and a bit of chin, though
he would acknowledge, or course, that you have a complete face."
I do not know whether this answer satisfied my friend entirely; she
remembered to thank me for a pleasant chat but seemed a little
disturbed...
After this conversation I analysed the various mental pictures I
formed very carefully. I had to be sure I had given a correct answer
when comparing the images perceived by blind and sighted people.
All day long, I kept trying to remember various examples of percep¬
tion and representation of which I had read or been told.
I am well aware of the power of imagination. Fine, expressive
hands have sometimes led me to believe that the person I am com¬
municating with is endowed with every physical and moral quality.
But when I later discoverwith the aid of my hands that I am
mistaken, the image dissolves and all that is left is a beautiful dream.
The illusions of the imagination are as hurtful to sighted people as
they are to the blind. Sometimes emotions erode our will-power, but
reason and common sense must illuminate reality and help us to
struggle against false perceptions of the world.
Olga Skorokhodova's example has been an inspiration to
countless handicapped people in the Soviet Union and
throughout the world. The three deaf-blind scientists seen
in animated conversation below, from left to right
Georgei Gazenco, Sergei Sirotkin and Natasha Korneeva,
have followed in her footsteps. Sirotkin and Korneeva
graduated with honours from Moscow University in 1977
and are now engaged in research at scientific institutes.
Gazenco ¡s a graduate of the State Historical Archive
Institute, Moscow, and is preparing a thesis on the
history of Italy. In the USSR between 500 and 600 blind
people enter institutes of higher education every year.
