The scientific
investigation
of painting
Painting is a form of creativity
which has developed in a historical
context. It is both the result of an
act putting brush to canvas and the
fruit of reflexion. No factor in this pro¬
cess should be overlooked, for each
step is a contribution to the making
and hence the understanding of
masterpieces. Science can help us
here in three fundamental ways: by
shedding light on history, by revealing
the technology used by artists and
craftsmen, and by helping to ensure
that their works are preserved for
posterity.
The contribution of scientific in¬
vestigation to art history is essential.
This does not mean, however, that the
new approach should be granted
privileged status, to the detriment of
connoisseurship and the traditional
methods of art criticism (the opposi¬
tion between scientist and humanist is
a thing of the past), but simply that
the properties of various kinds of
radiation and the resources of modern
physics are today enriching our
perceptions of works of very different
styles and periods.
Studies to establish the authenticity
of paintings may call for the use of
powerful apparatus such as the elec¬
tron probe microanalyser and
sophisticated techniques such as
X-ray microfluorescence. These tech¬
niques are used to analyse the tech¬
nology of the artist and his period, the
materials he used and the way they
have aged, as well as providing infor¬
mation about dating and artistic
techniques. The proliferation of fakes
and the skilfulness of forgers has put
us on our guard, and in the search for
truth the results being obtained from a
whole range of methods and the infor¬
mation being subsequently stored in
computers, are helping us even more
than heavyweight equipment.
Methods for dating paintings are
currently being studied all over the
world, but they are still at the ex¬
perimental stage and it is too early as
yet to bank on their efficiency.
Finally, scientific analysis is playing
a crucial role in the conservation of
paintings. We can only conserve what
we thoroughly know, and for the
health of a work of art, like that of a
human being, a laboratory diagnosis
must precede treatment.
12
LABORATORY examination of Rem¬
brandt's Portrait of a Young Man
made it possible to rediscover the
picture's basic structure and to compare its
characteristics with those of other works by
Rembrandt.
Two types of investigation, one global,
the other detailed and highly specific, were
conducted from the surface of the painting
down to the deepest layers, in order to
discover the techniques used by the artist.
X-ray photography revealed the original
sketch for the portrait and the overall con¬
struction of the composition, while detailed
analysis of a small cross-section sample
disclosed what materials the artist used, the
layers in which they were applied and the
technology involved.
The X-ray picture (below right) shows an
earlier composition of a woman leaning over
a cradle, which the artist had overpainted. It
Rembrandt's Portrait of a Young Man, dated 1658, Louvre Museum, Paris.

I. X-ray
of a Rembrandt
II. True or false?
also shows that the features of the young
man's face have been broadly outlined in
white lead with the large brush and firm
strokes that. were characteristic of Rem¬
brandt's work at the end of his life.
Microscopic study of a small cross-
section removed from the central part of the
picture during restoration work confirmed
the presence of more than one painting:
eight different layers of paint could be
observed, four belonging to the lower com¬
position and four to the more recent one.
The cross-section also showed that the
underlying painting was completed, for
traces of varnish are visible between the
layer of white depicting the woman's veil
and those depicting the young man's
garment.
Analysis of the cross-section by an elec¬
tron probe microanalyser made it possible to
identify all the elements of which the paint is
composed. With the aid of X-ray
An X-ray image of the painting reveals its underlying structure and the bold
wide brush marks typical of Rembrandt's technique. The X-ray also brought to
WIUU UlUStll llianvo lyi^iv i wi i i*-i n«" m. .«.. « ..w«	^	 	 	-.-
liaht the presence of an earlier painting of a woman seated beside a cradle
photographs, specialists can chart "density
distribution maps" of the various elements.
In this way the distribution of lead, iron,
silicium, aluminium, phosphorus and
calcium can be traced. Exploration of each
microcube of paint with the "electronic
brush" gives a representative picture of the
pigments used, singly or together. This can
be compared with the artist's characteristic
techniques.
Both the quality of the sketch disclosed
by the X-ray and the nature of the painting
materials revealed by the cross-section and
the electron probe microanalyser proved
that this work tallied with pictures by Rem¬
brandt that had already been scientifically
analysed.
X-RAYS and analytic studies have also
proved valuable in distinguishing
fakes from authentic works. One
painting which was authenticated in this
way is the Virgin of the Annunciation, an
early 15th-century work by the Italian artist
Taddeo di Bartolo (photo top left, overleaf).
The X-ray photograph (photo top right,
overleaf) shows a clear image of the com¬
position and of the wood panel on which it is
painted. The poplar panel is in a good state
of preservation, despite a knot in the wood
at the level of the Virgin's chest, which has
been filled in with an opaque substance
which does not let X-rays through. The
panel consists of two separate lengths, join¬
ed together with a substance which is also
opaque.
To make the support smoother and to
level out knots in the wood, a canvas was in¬
corporated into the gesso, the substance
with which the surface was prepared for
painting. A large piece of this canvas covers
the whole of the lower part of the panel
below the Virgin's eyes. The entire surface
of the panel was prepared for painting, in¬
cluding those parts not covered with paint.
The X-ray ¡mage of the painting has a very
low density, for the elements in the painting
materials (earths, lapis lazuli and lacquers)
have a low atomic mass. The details of the
face, the hair and the veil covering it, as well
as folds in the dress, have been painted in
with a soft brush and very fluid paint rapidly
applied. A faint tracery of fine parallel
cracks, perpendicular to the grain of the
wood, has had an effect on the material
used.
An infra-red photograph also showed up
the artist's elegant, flowing style. In places,
the lines of the drawing itself can be seen,
especially in the hair, the face, the hands,
the folds of the garments and the strip of veil
on the bosom. Some deterioration can be
observed in the cloak.
Study of the painting materials shows
that both the substances and the
technology involved correspond to the sug¬
gested period and origin of the picture:
The dressing applied to the panel con¬
sists of a gesso made up of calcium sulphate
and size, applied in two layers and in which
a canvas is included.
The blue of the Virgin's cloak consists
of coarse grains of lapis lazuli crystals.
These are covered by a layer of Prussian
blue, evidence of an early restoration of this
part of the picture.
The red of the robe is a mixture of mad¬
der lacquer and white lead.
The coloured layer has been applied
with an egg tempera.
All these features are consistent with the
tradition of Italian painting at the beginning k
of the fifteenth century, as described f
13

minutely by Cennino Cennini in his Libro
delTArte. The rediscovery of this treatise,
published in Italy in 1821 by Cavalière Tram-
boni and translated into French in 1858 by
the painter Victor Mottez, gave rise to a
series of fake Italian primitives.
The Virgin and Child (photo bottom left),
another painting on wood closely related in
its general style to the Sienese school of the
15th century, has been shown to be a fake.
Several formal details in this painting are
hard to reconcile with its presumed period
and origin.
In a case like this, scientific analysis using
optical and microchemical methods can pro¬
vide data which may confirm or refute
results obtained by the historical and
aesthetic criteria used by the art historian.
X-ray photography is undoubtedly one of
the most useful methods of authenticating
pictures. It reveals the structure of the work
in depth, the sketch outlined by the artist
and any anomalies that may exist, thereby
making it possible to compare the painting
with evidence obtained from fully authen¬
ticated works.
Clearly the X-ray photograph (bottom
right) is very different from those of works
of the 15th century. The X-ray image of the
composition is practically invisible; there is a
vague outline of draped folds on the
shoulder and sleeves which can no longer be
seen in the picture in its present state. The
most interesting information provided by the
X-ray is a large network of premature and
artificially-induced cracks. These are of an
entirely different nature from the tracery of
fine cracks indicative of age which covers
the surface of genuine primitives.
An infra-red-ray photograph (not shown
here) restored the original form of the
cloak's drapery, subsequently hidden by a
layer of repainting. It was also possible to
see damage to the face which had later been
repaired. The photo showed that the picture
had been extensively restored, and this was
confirmed by study of the layers of painting
materials.
Microchemical analysis revealed, in fact,
that there were anachronisms in the com¬
position of the paint. Cross-sections showed
that the application of the paint of the
pseùdo-Sienese Virgin followed the tradi¬
tional pattern with the colours being applied
over a thick white gesso. However there
were several anomalies:
Above, Madonna, by the Sienese
painter Taddeo di Bartolo (1362-1422),
now in the Petit Palais Museum,
Avignon. The X-ray image reveals
features characteristic of the Sienese
school of the early 15th century.
Right, forged Virgin and Child, In the
style of the Siena school. The X-ray
¡mage, with its lack of density, is quite
different from those obtained from
genuine paintings of the period.
Chemical analysis revealed the presence
of lithopone, a white pigment not in
use before 1875.
The white imprimatura overlaying the
gesso on the entire surface of the picture is
made up of a layer with a base of lithopone,
a mixture of zinc sulphide and barium
sulphate which only came into use after
1875.
Lithopone is also present in the flesh-
coloured layers. It should be noted,
however, that these were traditionally made
up of a layer of pink on a layer with a green
earth base.
The red paint has a cadmium base only
used since the 19th century, and the yellow
has an antimony base. Antimony was a pig¬
ment known in Antiquity but which did not
come into use again until the 18th century.
This evidence is sufficient to show that
the picture could not have been painted
earlier than the end of the 19th century.
In addition, cross-sections of the yellow
of the Child's robe and of the red of the
Virgin's robe revealed that the paint had
penetrated into the cracks of the im¬
primatura layer. This suggests that the latter
was artificially dried before the layer of col¬
our was applied.
Finally, the binding agent in the paint is a
distemper with or without the addition of
some oilwhich is chemically quite dif¬
ferent from the egg tempera that one would
expect in a painting of this period.
Thus, although the picture has undergone
considerable restoration and although the
painter was skilful enough to use a tech¬
nique resembling that of primitive painters
of the 15th century, the presence of recently
adopted pigments uniformly and, therefore,
mechanically ground, makes it extremely
easy to identify as a fake.
14
