Their handicap is hunger
IN any consideration of the plight of the
handicapped, one simple truth should
never be forgotten: a large proportion
of the handicaps with which they are af¬
flicted could be prevented if the millions of
starving and malnourished people in the
world were given an adequate, balanced
diet.
In a world in which man is capable of
reaching the moon, hunger is a scandal
which every year causes untold numbers of
deaths among the poor of the Third World
and leaves millions more marked for life by
severe physical and mental impairment. Of
the 450 million handicapped people in the
world, therefore, a large proportion owe
their disability entirely to malnutrition.
In the Preliminary Assessment of the
World Food Situation, Present and Future,
published by the United Nations in 1974, it
was estimated that "in the Far East alone
more than 100,000 children go blind each
year due to vitamin A deficiency... Iron and
folate [a vitamin of the B complex] deficien¬
cy anaemias are widely prevalent in
developed and developing countries and are
the cause of ill-health and result in a
decreased ability to lead an active life... A
comprehensive world review of endemic
goitre revealed that there were 200 million
people suffering from the disease...which is
usually accompanied by endemic
cretinism... Half the children under five in
developing countries are inadequately
nourished, and for many this will inevitably
lead to premature death". The Sixth Report
on the World Health Situation, published by
WHO as recently as last year, confirms the
gravity of the problem.
Vitamin A deficiency is one of the most
elementary forms of malnutrition and one of
the easiest to combat. The 1974 United Na¬
tions World Food Conference, in its second
report, stated that "considering each child
8

World food map: dietary energy supply (per capita), around 1975
Source: World population data sheets, 1975 and 1978, Population Reference Bureau, Inc., reproduced in the Sixth Report
on the World Health Situation, Volume I, World Health Organization, Geneva, 1980. No official data available for China.
has to be given two capsules lof vitamin Al,
the total annual cost of protecting 100
. million one-to-five-year-old children all over
the world against the risk of xerophthalmia
(caused by vitamin A deficiency) would be
around three million dollars." In other
words, with just three dollars, one hundred
children could be insured against the risk of
blindness, an infinitesimal sum when com¬
pared with the enormous amounts spent on
armaments.
One essential aspect of malnutrition as a
source of handicaps is the effect it has on
the brain of the infant both before birth and
during the early years of life. Protein-calorie
deficiency, the cause of maladies such as
Kwashiorkor and Marasmus which decimate
the infant populations of the poor countries,
combined with lack of a stimulating environ¬
ment, is the chief cause of retarded develop¬
ment and brain damage.
The problem begins with the mother. A
malnourished mother is unable to supply the
unborn child with the nutrients essential to
its proper growth. Mothers whose diet dur¬
ing pregnancy has been deficient in protein
and calories often give birth to children of
below average weight and with smaller than
average brains.
Recent medical findings have confirmed
the relationship between low birth weight
and mental retardation. It has been shown
that less than one per cent of newborn
children of normal weight suffer from men¬
tal deficiency as compared with fifty per
cent of those who weigh less than one and a
half kilos at birth. Malnutrition has similar ef¬
fects during the first five years of life, the
most important periods for human brain
growth.
A large proportion of the victims of
malnutrition, and this includes the majority
of the children of the developing world, will
suffer all their lives from irreversible
disabilities problems of sight and hearing.
motor defects, epilepsy, cerebral palsy, etc.
The result is mental retardation and stagna¬
tion of the faculty of comprehension, with
all the dire consequences for later life that
this entails (failure at school, inability to
learn a trade, failure'to adapt normally to
society).
Seen against this background, it becomes
clear that the great effort that has been
made over the last few years by the United
Nations and its specialized agencies, such as
Unesco, to achieve a new world economic
order is also, in effect, the most important
step forward ever made towards the preven¬
tion of handicaps resulting from malnutri¬
tion. M
A Unesco enquiry
on
malnutrition
and
child welfare
Under its Research and Human Needs programmes Unesco has launched a research pro¬
ject aimed at improving our understanding of the effects of malnutrition on young
children. The project is based on four countries of the Mediterranean but there are plans to
extend it later to other regions in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The objectives of the
research project are to identify and evaluate the nutritional, biological, environmental and
other requirements of infants, young children and pregnant and nursing mothers and to
propose and promote effective measures to be taken within a given social and cultural
context. The research will be undertaken by teams of local scientists in collaboration with
Unesco and various scientific organizations and will cover many fields including nutrition,
biology, chemistry, genetics, neurophysiology, sociology and cultural anthropology.
