The tropical forest,
a rich but
fragile resource
by Frank Golley
and Malcolm Hadley
ALMOST half of the earth's population
lives in the tropical forest environ¬
ment which covers an estimated
2,000 million hectares, mostly in the
developing world. The management of
these forests is a matter of overriding impor¬
tance for the countries in which they are
situated, for not only do they provide timber
for lumber and paper, but their unique diver¬
sity of plant life, if wisely harvested, is a
renewable source of food, medicines and
fuel. Forests also help to regulate the quality
and flow of water, an essential factor in
development. They are the home of farmers,
hunters and gatherers, and yield many pro¬
ducts which are both used by these people
and sought by city-dwellers.
But forests are also of concern to the
world community as a whole. They affect
the climate by helping to maintain the
earth's temperature and to control the
amount of carbon dioxide in the at¬
mosphere. The rare trees and plants of
which they consist are a gene pool whose
value has only begun to be tapped in the
search for drugs to cure some of mankind's
worst diseases, including cancer. And so
everyone in the world has an interest in mak¬
ing possible the sustained rational use of
these forests and woodlands in the humid
and sub-humid parts of the tropics.
In the past, the richness of plant and
animal species contained in humid tropical
ecosystems often led scientists and develop¬
ment planners to incorrect conclusions
about the possibilities for development pro¬
grammes in these zones. Impressed by the
mass of vegetation and variety of organisms
of the tropical rain forest, far surpassing
anything known in forests of the temperate
zones, they concluded that the tropics must
be very productive.
In some parts of the tropics this is true, in
others not. In effect, there are two main
sorts of tropical forests; though they may
look alike to the outsider or non-specialist,
they have very different possibilities for
agricultural development. One sort can
usually be successfully converted to inten¬
sive agricultural crops and tree plantations
like rubber and oil palm; these tend to be-
forests growing on nutrient-rich, generally
younger soils developed from alluvial
sediments or volcanic ash.
However, forests growing on nutrient-
poor, generally older soils, do not have the
same potential. Most of the nutrients in
these forests are tied-up in the tree biomass,
and not in the soil. When the forest is
cleared, for large-scale agriculture, most of
the nutrients in the system are lost, and
yields quickly decline. Hence, the key to the
possibilities for development lies in the in¬
herent characteristics of the tropical forests
themselves.
The complexity and structural variability
of the tropical rain forest are legendary; the
German plant geographer Friedrich Hum¬
boldt described it over a century ago as
"forest piled on forest". Within its depths is
to be found a variety of plants, animals and
micro-organisms, all ecologically dependent
on one another. No other kind of communi¬
ty has so many kinds of plants and animals.
A single volcano in the Philippines, for ex¬
ample, has a greater variety of woody plant
species growing on its slopes than are found
in the entire United States. A two hectare
sample of lowland rain forest may contain
more than 200 tree species; perhaps ten to
twenty tree species would be found in a
comparable area in a temperate forest
region.
But although well adapted to persist in the
relatively predictable environment in which
they have evolved, tropical rain forests are
less resistant to the disturbances wrought
by man than are relatively simple and
apparently more robust temperate
ecosystems. This fragility led the Mexican
biologist Arturo Gomez-Pompa to label the
tropical rainforest a "non-renewable
resource". Another comment, often heard
in scientific and development circles, is that
the tropical forest is an overexploited but
under-used resource.
Recognition of these special features of
tropical forests and the need to guide
development has led research workers to
seek a better scientific basis on which
management can be based. An example
within Unesco's Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) Programme is a project at San Carlos
de Rio Negro in the Amazon region of
Venezuela.
It has long been known that the upland
soils of the Amazon Basin have a low
nutrient content, and, therefore, are not
suited to continuous intensive agriculture.
What has been less clear is how relatively
large forests with a biomass of about
400 tons per hectare can maintain
themselves more or less indefinitely in the
Amazon Basin, despite the low fertility of
the soil. The Venezuelan Government is in¬
terested in the capacity of these soils to sus¬
tain productive forests.
The MAB scientists from Venezuela, the
United States and the Federal Republic of
Germany, working at San Carlos, have
shown that the key to the question of forest
productivity is a sophisticated series of
nutrient conserving mechanisms of the
natural forest.
The forest acts as a sort of massive
sponge, absorbing nutrients as they enter
the system in the rainfall or from the at¬
mosphere. The well-developed mat of roots,
fungi, micro-organisms and humus which
occurs on the top of the soil surface appears
to be of special significance in the retention
and recycling of nutrients within the system.
In some places, particularly on mineral soils,
this mat can be up to 30 cm thick, and can
be peeled back from the soil like a carpet.
When leaves or pieces of wood fall and
begin to break down, and when rain falls,
most of the nutrients that are released or
present are not leached away to the under¬
lying soil, but are taken up by root mat and
recycled to the living trees.
The efficiency of this root mat in conserv¬
ing nutrients has been demonstrated at San
Carlos through experiments using radio¬
isotopes. Known amounts of radioactively-
marked calcium and phosphorus were add¬
ed to the root mats, and the water which
drained through the mats was collected and
analysed for radioactivity. Hardly any
radioactivity was recorded, even after
6 months following the application of
radioactive materials. Over 99 per cent of
the tagged nutrients were absorbed by the
root mat, indicating that practically all the
dissolved nutrients from decomposing
organic material or from rainfall move direct¬
ly into roots without passing into the mineral
soil. The root mat of an undisturbed forest
therefore prevents the loss of nutrients from
the system.
The critical point about nutrient conserv¬
ing mechanisms like these is that they are
part of the living organic structure of the un¬
disturbed forest, which is destroyed when
the forests are cleared, for agriculture. This
explains why the productivity of these
systems quickly falls away when the forest is
removed.
But the problems of development and
conservation of the ecosystems of the
humid tropics calls for scientific research not
just on plants, animals, micro-organisms
and soil. Man is also a part of the forest
system, an overwhelming part in many
regions, both as an agent of change and as f
an entity affected by change.
FRANK GOLLEY, of the USA, is professor at the
Institute of Ecology, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia. He is at present on secondment
to the United States National Science Foundation
as director of the Division of Environmental
Biology.
MALCOLM HADLEY is a staff member of
Unesco's Division of Ecological Sciences. A
zoologist, he is responsible for the co-ordination
of activities in the humid tropics within Unesco's
Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme.
13

***
4É=^:
*Jêê*
Traditionally, many peoples of the humid
tropics practice "swidden" or "shift and
burn" cultivation. A small area of forest is
cut and burned and the land thus cleared is
cultivated for one or two crop cycles. The
area is then left fallow for ten or more
years to allow the vegetation to build up its
stock of nutrients ready for another short
burst of cultivation. Provided the fallow
period is long enough, shifting cultivation
is a perfectly sound system of land use in
poor soil areas which cannot support more
intensive use. Above, an area of forest in
East Kalimantan, Indonesia, being cleared
by burning. Left, two young Indonesians
carry cassava, a crop often grown on
swidden clearings.
JUNGLE CYCLE
A tropical forest ecosystem is the habitat of a multitude of animals including
thousands of insect species. Many of them form communities that are mainly
restricted to a particular layer of the forest, some to the jungle floor, for
example, and others to the tree-tops. Some of these creatures are reservoirs or
vectors of diseases that can be passed on to man. Thus, in the tropical forests
of central and South America, monkeys and marmosets inhabiting principally
the tree-top layer of the forest form a reservoir of yellow fever. The virus is
spread between them by blood-sucking mosquitoes such as the Haemagogus
species. Tree-felling exposes man to the bites of these virus-carrying
mosquitoes and infected forest workers then carry the virus to villages and
towns where it is further disseminated by other mosquitoes such as the Aedes
aegypti species.
Drawing from J. 1. Cooper and T.W. Tmsley, Transactions of the International MAB IUFRO Workshop on Tropical
Rainforest Ecosystems Research, 1977, Hamburg-Reinbek
This process of change is taking place in
regions which have a long and rich history of
human activity, as witness the ancient forest
cultures of the Mayas, the people of Angkor
Wat and the Benin of Nigeria.
In several parts of South-East Asia, South
and Central America and West and Central
Africa, forests were long ago successfully
transformed into rice paddies and other
types of productive agricultural land. The
transformation has been particularly suc¬
cessful in areas with nutrient-rich soils
which for centuries have supported dense
human populations, in such areas as Java
and the Mekong Delta.
However, the intensity of human activity
currently taking place and the consequent
ecological impacts are unique in history. -
Forests are being cleared or altered at an un¬
precedented rate. Although scientists are
not certain how fast tropical forest lands are
being cleared or severely altered, estimates
range from one to two per cent of the ex¬
isting area per year. Unless the present trend
is halted, all the primary lowland tropical rain
forest in the world may disappear well
before the end of the century (except in in¬
accessible sites and a few small biological
reserves).
The major causes of tropical forest dep¬
letion are rapid population growth in tropical
countries and the need for agricultural land
to produce food for these multitudes;
resource development to achieve economic
growth; the accelerated search for new
wood supplies by developed temperate
region countries; and the overcutting of
forests as a source of fuelwood for heating
and cooking.
Commercial logging and transmigration
are having a major impact on the tropical
rain forests of Asia. A MAB research team
co-ordinated by the Indonesian Institute of
Sciences (LIPI), has been looking at the in¬
teractions between these human activities
and tropical forest ecosystems in the In¬
donesian province of East Kalimantan. East
Kalimantan is a large, economically booming
province on the island of Borneo. It covers a
territory of 21 million hectares, an area
about twice the size of Iceland, with a
population of only 1 million people. About
17 million hectares, over three-quarters of
the province, are forested. The area
represents an immense reserve of timber,
much of it valuable hardwoods, as well as a
place for resettling people from the densely
populated islands of Indonesia such as Java
and Bali.
Quite naturally, the central government
has considered East Kalimantan to be a
prime economic asset, which should and
must contribute to the national development
goals. Today, there are more than
100 licensed logging companies busily at
work extracting timber from the 13 million
hectares earmarked for selective logging.
Selective in this case means the cutting of
up to 20 trees per hectare, according to
botanist Dr. Kuswata Kartawinata, leader of
the MAB research effort in East Kalimantan
and Head of the Bogor Herbarium of In¬
donesia's National Biological Institute.
Unfortunately, during the removal of
selected logs, 41 per cent of the remaining
trees have been shown to be damaged. Fur¬
thermore, current selective logging practice
results in the creaming off of the best trees
of the commercial species, leaving only
undesirable, smaller trees in the residual |
stands to provide seeds for the next crop I

The taming of a swamp
The 'Chinampa' project Mexico
The Problem: to find inexpensive ways of
increasing food output using systems of pro¬
duction that take advantage of the special
characteristics of the tropical forest environ¬
ment, that can be sustained indefinitely
without the need for large scale additional
resources (such as fertilizers) from outside.
The Project: links scientific understanding
of an age-old, traditional agricultural system
with the need for increased food production in
humid tropical zones of Mexico. The chinam¬
pa is a low-capital, self-sufficient agricultural
system which was used by pre-Columbian
peoples throughout tropical America and is
still practised in Mexico Valley.
The system consists of creating small plots
of land on which crops can be grown from
plant materials and mud dredged up from the
bottom of swamps and lakes, the plots being
separated from each other by water channels
in which fish can be raised. The word chinam¬
pa means "net of branches" and it was pro¬
bably on mats of branches and leaves that the
early cultivators first built their chinampa
fields.
A diversity of crops can be grown on these
small "artificial" plots and production is
unusually high and predictable. By its very
nature, the chinampa is a labour-intensive
method of agriculture since the farmer must
constantly maintain the height of the plots and
keep the water channels open. But this can be
a positive advantage in many tropical coun¬
tries where the supply of labour outstrips the
demand.
A group of Mexican MAB scientists
recognized the special nature and the success
of the chinampa method and decided to ex¬
periment with it in order to create a new
method of meeting food needs. The research
team was made up of some fourteen scientists
including specialists in agronomy, biology,
anthropology, sociology, economics and
pisciculture, based at the Institute for the
Study of Biological Resources (INIREB) at
Jalapa.
They selected four rain forest areas in Mex¬
ico. One of these areas, in Tabasco State,
consisted of a combination of semi-evergreen
rain forest and swamps where the human
population could benefit from increased food
production. Another, very different, site was
chosen in tropical rain forest at Chiapas where
shifting cultivation is widely used. Here
chinampas were built near a river which pro¬
vided the irrigation water. The organic mulch
for the chinampa plots was obtained from the
litter (the fallen, decomposed débris of leaves
and branches) of the adjacent rain forest.
The Results: within a few months after
chinampa construction, a variety of crops
were growing, including beans, corn, spinach
and other vegetables. A crop of over 54 tons
per hectare of celery was achieved within a
period of 150 days.
In 1976, the scientists handed over the ex¬
perimental site to local farmers who not only
continued to cultivate it along chinampa lines
but have since enlarged it using their own
resources.
Here then, a team of natural and social
scientists working with the local populations,
have studied and interpreted a traditional,
local technology and then successfully
translated it into modern terms and transfer¬
red it to a new location. This is a case of
transfer of technology within the same
ecological region and not, like many examples
where transfer has failed, from temperate to
tropical regions. The MAB project has thus
demonstrated that in the Mexican chinampa
there exists an ancient and ecologically sound
system of agriculture that could be applied
elsewhere in tropical lands, particularly in
areas where water is plentiful.
Drawing Etudes et Planification des Communications. Unesco Courier Photo MAB Unesco
Drawing, above, shows how the chinampa system works. Small
raised plots of land are constructed (1) and separated by a
network of water channels (2), which are used for transportation
as well as providing a ready source of fish (3) and of water for
irrigation (4). Trees and stakes (5) hold the sides of the
chinampas firmly in place. The soil of the plot is constantly
replenished with organic débris (plant and animal), aquatic plants
and mud (6). The chinamperos scoop up fresh mud from the
bottom of the channels and load it into their boats (7). They
spread the mud on the chinampa plot before planting a new
crop, thus helping to maintain its fertility. A wide variety of
crops is grown including maize (8). beans (9), and green
vegetables (10). The seed nursery (11) is an essential element of
chinampa farming; seeds are sown in small mud cubes, called
chapines, which are transplanted once the seedlings are
established. The adjacent tropical forest (12) is a source of many
other products used by the chinamperos. Above right, a typical
chinampa plot in Mexico.
15

Nature's chemical factory
There are over one hundred different
chemical elements in the world, arranged in
an infinite number of combinations. If you
were to write a formula for a tree, you would
find you had so many carbons per gramme, so
many calciums, so many zincs, so many
leads, and so on.
Now that chemical formula has developed
through a long process, starting with the
chemical environment in which the tree first
evolved. If the tree originated in a very
calcium-rich environment, it would have lots
of calcium in its original formula.
But in the course of its long evolution the
tree has moved about over the surface of the
earth. In its travels it has encountered whole
new environments and lots of other species,
so its chemistry is constantly evolving. The
chemical formula of a tree is, as it were, the
signature of the species to which it belongs. If
you go into a forest and study the chemistry of
each species you will find that they differ from
one another in fascinating ways.
Scientists working on the MAB project in
San Carlos, Venezuela, have been testing the
effect of location on the chemistry of trees.
They have compared trees which are of dif¬
ferent species but whose roots have the same
soil area with individuals of the same species
whose roots share different soil areas. And
they found that for the essential elements in¬
dividual trees of the same species have the
same chemistrythe signatures are the
same.
Tropical forests have long been known as a
rich source of natural products. Some trees,
like sandalwood, have an aromatic nature and
their oils have been collected for thousands of
years. Some have a beautiful patina when
they are cut, like teak and mahogany. Some
produce materials that have medical value,
like quinine. Other products of tropical forest
trees, like rubber, palm-oil and cocoa have
long played an important role in the world
economy.
But a tree that produces rubber might have
very many other interesting chemical
characteristics that have never been explored.
Literally thousands of chemicals are produced
in trees, in some cases in large quantities. In¬
deed, trees are like factories in that they pro¬
vide major products, sub-products and waste
products. If we adopt this industrial analogy
we begin to get a glimpse of the tremendous
benefits that could result from better
understanding of forest chemistry.
The tropical forest represents a virtually un¬
tapped reservoir of new chemical compounds.
Many show potential as medicines; a tropical
periwinkle plant, for example, is providing a
chemical used to fight leukaemia. One
Brazilian tree holds promise as a source of oil
that can be used directly to power
automobiles.
But the search for new chemical products
has only just begun. Less that a tenth of the
estimated 150,000 species of tropical flower¬
ing trees has been screened for even a single
class of chemical compounds. It can
reasonably be expected that the remaining
plants will ultimately provide numerous new
compounds that will prove useful in medicine
and as sources of industrial products such as
gums, latex, resins, dyes, waxes, oils and
sweeteners, as well as new sources of
energy.
The opportunity is there for imaginative
research. But it is a fleeting opportunity, for,
with our overriding concern to achieve im¬
mediate, short-term benefits and our concen¬
tration on the creation of simplified agri¬
cultural systems, we are condemning many
as yet unexamined species to extinction.
i and this may result in an inferior forest for
future use.
Transmigration of people from densely
populated parts of Indonesia is another ma¬
jor agent of change in East Kalimantan. Ac¬
customed to intensive farming on rich
volcanic soils in Java or Bali which can pro¬
duce two or three crops of rice each year,
the newcomers often found themselves
allocated plots of land too infertile and too
small to provide an adequate livelihood.
Many of these people supplement their liv¬
ing by harvesting the resources of the
forests, particularly the valuable Borneo
ironwood tree. Thus, the transplanted peo¬
ple not only have an impact on the areas of
former forest cleared for agriculture but also
the intact forest reserved for other uses.
Taking part in the MAB project in East
Kalimantan are a group of American human
ecologists. With their Indonesian col¬
leagues, they are looking at questions rele¬
vant to policy-making of the interactions
between people and forests in the province.
Their initial results show that the people of
East Kalimantan are highly responsive to
changing economic opportunity. This is
demonstrated by some of the activities and
processes looked at by the MAB team. For
example, the spontaneous migration of
thousands of Bugis farmers from the island
of Sulawesi in order to convert East
Kalimantan forest land into plantations of
pepper, a crop the people had not grown in
their homeland; the movement of Dayaks
from the interior plateau of Borneo to
lowland areas where they have eagerly taken
to using chain-saws and perahu (canoes)
with outboard motors in their activities as
16
shifting cultivators; the greatly increased
allocation of time and effort to the collection
of incense wood by Dayaks when the price
traders were paying for that commodity
rose.
These examples illustrate the capacity of
local peoples and governments to respond
to a rapidly changing modern world.
However, their ability to change systems of
forestry, agriculture and governmental ser¬
vices to conserve their natural resource
base, their special natural heritage, and pro¬
vide for their needs over an indefinite future
depends upon knowledge applied in
culturally sound ways.
In this modern age of rapid communica¬
tions, the topic of forest transformation has
aroused interest in many parts of the
world not just in the tropical countries
themselves. Different perspectives and
perceptions have emerged, and it must be
recognized that a number of tropical coun¬
tries have felt uncomfortable about the at¬
tention that has been given to tropical
forests by individuals and groups in non¬
tropical countries.
For example, there has been much con¬
troversy over the last ten years or so about
the possible consequences of large scale
vegetation clearance in the Amazonian
Basin. Some scientists and government of¬
ficials, mainly from non-tropical countries,
have argued that the destruction of these
forests could bring, among other conse¬
quences, changes in the composition of the
atmosphere, changes in patterns of rains
within and outside the Basin and disap¬
pearance of animal and plant species whose
potential usefulness for man are unknown.
On the other hand, tropical countries,
such as Brazil, have defended the right to
exploit and utilize for their own benefit the
potential of these regions in the same way
as developed countries.
In middle latitude European countries,
such wholesale transformation of tem¬
perate forests occurred many centuries ago,
and no-one recognized serious deterioration
of the environment. Tropical countries ques¬
tion why a different set of criteria and con¬
siderations should be applied now to them in
the era of change of their national
ecosystems.
Whatever one's views on this question, it
seems clear that interest in, and concern for,
resource development in the humid tropics
will continue to increase in the present
decade. From the scientific and technical
viewpoint, it can be said that transformation
and development of the tropical forests can
be economically successful and ecologically
sound if done in the right place and in the
right way. But great damage will be done,
and is being done, when transformation
takes place in the wrong places or in the
wrong ways. The object of research is to
guide development into sound pathways.
MAB research is aimed at providing new
information about man and natural forests,
derived from field research guided by local
people and their decision-makers, in a form
that can be understood and quickly put to
work. In this endeavour, scientists from all
countries can co-operate. The success of
MAB projects in several tropical forest areas
makes one optimistic that the approach is
viable and that change can be positive.
I Frank Golley and Malcolm Hadley
