Tourism
passport to development?
by Emanuel de Kadt
IN the 1960s, tourism erupted on a grand scale. This was
seen as offering a new opportunity for Third World coun¬
tries to secure foreign exchange and stimulate economic
growth. Their sunny climates, sandy beaches, and exotic
cultures attracted a stream of vacationers, and resorts
multiplied to meet the demand.
With the oil crisis and the recession of 1974-75, there was
a pause in the growth of tourism. The end of the boom gave
new urgency to existing concerns about whether tourism
produced sufficient gains for developing countries to justify
the investments required.
In addition to doubts about whether tourism yielded
economic returns commensurate with its economic costs,
there was a general questioning of some of the basic assump¬
tions about the relation between development and economic
growth. In the case of tourism, these doubts were reinforced
by the belief that it brings larger adverse social and cultural
effects than does development of other sectors.
Tourism is in one important respect different from other
potential export activities: the ultimate consumer of the
goods and services comes to the exporting country rather
than having most goods and services delivered to him at
home. An analysis of the economy of tourism therefore re¬
quires more careful attention to transport and marketing ar¬
rangements than in the case of most other exports.
And the very presence of foreigners in the exporting coun¬
try is widely believed to generate significant social effects by
demonstrating alien and, what is perhaps worse, unat¬
tainable life-styles and values. Furthermore, there is strictly
speaking no such thing as a "tourism industry", analogous
to industries as normally understood (construction, steel,
agriculture).
Instead, tourists purchase goods and services from a
variety of industries, with usually rather less than two-thirds
of their expenditures being in the hotels and restaurants nor-
. mally identified with the tourism sector.
Despite these differences, the problems special to tourism
in developing countries still need to be set in the wider con¬
text of development, and the main questions addressed for
tourism must fit in with the more general considerations of
policymakers.
Dominant development concerns have changed over the
past three decades. With much oversimplification, it may
perhaps be said that an earlier simple faith in the merits of
economic growth as such has given way to questions about
the balance of that growth and the distribution of material
benefits. Also, the very definition of development is being
challenged, not only in its economic interpretation but in its
social, political, and human dimensions as well.
Since 1970 a series of Unesco-sponsored Intergovernmen¬
tal Conferences on Cultural Policies has stressed the impor¬
tance of cultural development as an essential component of
the general development of countries. Even so, the cultural
and non-material aspects of development are still often
neglected by those responsible for making the crucial policy
decisions both nationally and internationally.
Growth alone may not suffice to overcome poverty within
a reasonable time, and the distribution of the material
benefits of development among the poorest countries and
the poorest population groups within individual countries
requires special attention. From arguments about the
general effects of different development strategies on
distribution of income, attention has come to rest on the
staggering number of people, more than 900 million of
them, living in absolute poverty.
More than ever before, the development community is
searching for means that will enable the poor to provide for
their basic needs through more productive work, more wide¬
ly available social services, and increased participation in
political decision-making. It needs to be considered whether
the deliberate and large-scale development of tourism, con¬
ceived as a major net earner of foreign exchange, leads to
results consistent with this newly identified goal of develop¬
ment.
"One-world" arguments question whether the pursuit by
all countries of rapidly rising mass consumption will be
feasible for much longer, given the consequent environmen¬
tal deterioration and looming exhaustion of non-renewable
natural resources. According to this view, further rises in the
consumption of the rich will increasingly conflict with at¬
tempts to improve the living standards of the poor. The con¬
sumption patterns of international tourism are a particularly
conspicuous example of the consumerism that is now being
challenged in the industrialized world, out of reach of the
poor countries' masses but within the reach of their elites.
The study of tourism and its effects has not, on the whole,
taken a great deal of account of these broad issues. The
dangers of this oversight are twofold. First, such tourism as
does take place may not be planned so as to generate a max¬
imum effect on development. Second, a pro- or anti-tourism
stance might be taken up without real evidence to support it.
In the past, sociocultural issues and effects on arts and
crafts have been at best considered as afterthoughts by
tourism planners. They have not usually been equipped to
deal with such questions even if there was a lone non-
economist on the staff.
Virtually never assessed nor predicted beforehand are
possible changes in the social structure of tourism develop¬
ment areas, likely modifications in class relations, and the
more general potential consequences for the local area of at¬
tracting the interest of groups with economic or political
power in the national or transnational sphere. These social
changes, together with important material effects on
employment and income, are of course, precisely the results
that determine whether the process of tourism development
is judged good or bad by the people affected.
I believe that it is worth attempting to analyze the impacts
of tourism in the light of the development issues mentioned
above, and that such an analysis will benefit from reference
to the lessons on social and cultural impacts learned from
other projects or other societies.
EMANUEL DE KADT, Dutch sociologist, is a professorial fellow
of the Institute of Development Studies at the University of Sussex
(U.K.). This article is an abridged version of his introduction to
Tourism Passport to Development?, published by the Oxford
University Press, 1979. This volume, which he edited, is based on
the proceedings of a joint Unesco-World Bank seminar on the
social and cultural impacts of tourism, held in Washington, D.C, in
December 1976.
