BULGARIA
A MODERN NATION
SALUTES
ITS PAST
by Magdalina Stancheva
iny,i!
%
' .+«5.
: 0^
**xr
*> .

I. 'IT GROWS BUT DOES
NOT GROW OLD'
THE motto Inscribed in the coat of arms
of the city of Sofia, capital of
Bulgaria, "It grows but does not
grow old", seems an apt summary of the
history of a vigorous modern State which
this year celebrates the 1300th anniversary
of its foundation by khan Asparukh in the
year 681.
Between the 6th and 9th centuries of our
era, when the mix of populations brought
about by the great migrations from east to
west and north to south was reshaping
Europe (as well as Asia and North Africa),
giving it the ethnic, linguistic and cultural
features it has to this day, the fertile lands
between the Danube and the Aegean and
between the Black Sea and the Adriatic
were undergoing fundamental changes. The
former Roman provinces of Thrace and II-
lyria were breaking away from the Eastern
Roman or Byzantine empire, and thereafter
Byzantium's influence in these lands was to
be mainly cultural.
After successive waves of invasions, Slav
tribes settled in the region in increasing
numbers during the 6th and 7th centuries.
Then came warriors of Turanian origin the
Proto-Bulgarians from the plains of the
Dnieper and the Volga. Bulgaria's cha¬
racteristic personality and culture stem from
In modern Bulgaria the ancient past is
seldom more than a step away. In
Varna, formerly Odessos, a flourishing
port and holiday resort on the Black
Sea, many features of the ancient
Graeco-Roman city have been
integrated into the streets and squares
of the modern city, left. In Sofia,
above, children on their way to school
have living contact with history in this
small exhibition room arranged by the
City of Sofia History Museum in one of
the capital's pedestrian subways, which
is itself part of an old Roman road.
the fusion of these two peoples: the first
gave the country its language, the
second its name.
But though these events played a decisive
role in the history of the country and in the
development of its culture, the modern
Bulgarians do not forget their more distant
Thracian past to which they consider
themselves heirs. This past is so rich and
monuments from all periods are so
numerous more than 31,000 have been
listed and protected in the 110,911 square
kilometres of the national territory that at
the same time as the country builds for the
future it is in daily contact with the relics of
its earliest ancestors. History is part of con¬
temporary life and prehistory is more in
evidence here than in most other parts of
the world.
Cereal cultivation began in these ter¬
ritories more than eight thousand years ago
and the remains of early farming com¬
munities are numerous and conspicuous.
Mounds or tells formed by the remains of
successive building levels testify to the
lasting nature of the settlements. Most
Bulgarian towns are built on superimposed
layers of ruins and archaeological deposits.
One of the most famous of these tells,
discovered near the village of Karanovo in
the southern department of Nova Zagora,
has attracted considerable interest in scien¬
tific circles: it is twelve metres high and its
deepest layer dates from the early Neolithic
period in the sixth millennium before our
era, while the top layer belongs to the Iron
Age. An archaeological cross-section shows
that generation followed generation on this
site one above the other down the ages.
The Karanovo excavations have yielded a
rich crop of relics: tools, weapons and uten¬
sils of various kinds which today fill rooms in
several museums.
Another remarkable find is the Copper
Age or Chalcolithic necropolis of Varna on
the Black Sea coast. There archaeologists
have uncovered a series of tombs built at the
end of the fourth millennium and containing
hundreds of gold objects, from tiny beads to
bracelets weighing 200 to 300 grammes. A
particularly interesting feature is the
presence of gold sceptres in two of the
tombs. These symbols of established power
show that even in those far-off times this
corner of south-eastern Europe already had
a firmly-founded tradition of sovereignty
and a fairly complex social structure.
How this happened is still a mystery. One
possible explanation is that copper, which
was mined in the area at that time, probably
gave rise to extensive exchanges with the
countries of nearby Asia Minor. Trade,
therefore, may well have been a source of
progress and prosperity for these miners
who buried so much gold with their dead
and whom archaeologists today regard as
the ancestors of the Thracians.
The Thracians are the oldest people
whose name is known in south-eastern
Europe. Remnants of their language which
belonged to the same branch of Indo-
European as Greek and Latin are to be
found in inscriptions and the names of
towns, mountains and rivers. The Thracians
occupied an important place in the literature
of neighbouring peoples. During the
classical period, from the 6th century BC on¬
wards, the Greeks often referred to Thracian
influences on their mythology, religion and
arts, especially music. It is only recently,
however, that the general public has
become acquainted with the Thracians,
thanks to a fabulous exhibition of gold
jewels, vessels and weapons which has
toured several countries. Most of these ob¬
jects, some discovered by chance and some
during systematic excavations, were found
in the great tombs that testify to highly
developed beliefs: faith in after-life, and
perhaps the hope of union with the divine
rather than of material survival.
The dead were buried with their most
precious possessions and the funerary
chamber was covered with a mound of earth
the size of which varied according to the
rank and wealth of the deceased. Thus the
Thracian lands were dotted with tumuli,
most of which disappeared down the ages,
though more than ten thousand still remain
and are today protected against unauthoriz¬
ed excavations. They are the most
characteristic features of the landscape in
certain regions, as in the area of Plovdiv, for
example, along the international motorway
leading to Istanbul.
One of these tumuli, in the department of
Stara Zagora, contained the famous
Kazanlak tomb whose wall-paintings dating
from the 4th century before our era are of
paramount importance to the history of art.
The main mural depicts a funeral banquet
and is characterized by the extreme finesse
of the central figures, the prince and his
wife, and especially by the tenderness and
elegance of their parting gesture. No less
remarkable are the figures of the parents and
relatives of the deceased who are shown
leading horses or bearing offerings.
The Kazanlak tomb is among the
monuments of exceptional importance
which Unesco has included in its World
Heritage List (see Unesco Courier, August
1980). To avoid damage a replica of the
tomb has been built nearby for the benefit of
the thousands of tourists who visit the area
every year. For Kazanlak is in the famous
"Rose Valley" where field upon field of
flowers flourishes in an exceptionally
temperate climate, producing the attar or
essential oil used in the manufacture of
perfume.
MAG DALINA STANCH EVA, of Bulgaria, isa
leading research specialist in medieval ar¬
chaeology and head of the archaeological depart¬
ment of the Historical Museum of the City of
Sofia. She has published several scientific studies
on Sofia's archaeological problems and on
Bulgaria's medieval cultural heritage.

Bulgaria
II. 5,000 YEARS
OF TOWN-PLANNING
IN coastal districts underwater research
has brought to light the remains of the
first sea-ports and relics of early naviga¬
tion on the Black Sea, including a number of
stone anchors used in the late Bronze Age
about twelve hundred years before our era.
On their outward journeys, the Thracian
ships carried cargoes of sheet copper; the
goods they brought back enabled the
coastal cities to become the country's
earliest centres of maritime .trade.
So when Greek colonists settled on the
Black Sea coast in the 6th century BC they
found a string of flourishing Thracian cities.
Before long they had imposed their own
language, built theatres and introduced their
own sculptors and potters; the towns in
which they worked long continued to bear
Greek names. The close relations the Greeks
maintained with the Thracians were not only
commercial. The two peoples exchanged
customs and divinities and shared common
festivals. Such cultural exchanges were
often repeated down the centuries and have
given Bulgaria its particular character.
But cultural interchange and the legacy of
antiquity were not limited to the coastal
cities. More than half the Bulgarian towns
are at least five thousand years old. Cities
like Sofia, Plovdiv, Varna, Nessebur and
Stara Zagora are in themselves monuments
to the history of town-planning, and in many
cases it has been possible to explore their ar¬
chaeological heritage deep down in the
earth beneath the modern cities.
In Sofia, for example, several acres of the
city centre are built over cultural layers that
are ten metres deep. This area was severely
damaged by air raids in the Second World
War and its replanning has brought to the
fore the controversial problem of preserving
archaeological remains in an urban setting.
In Bulgaria the question has been settled
once and for all. Every archaeological monu¬
ment that is brought to light is integrated in¬
to the modern environment in the most ap¬
propriate way. In Sofia, an underpass built
between the new headquarters of the State
Council and the Council of Ministers skirts
the ancient city wall before passing through
the eastern gate and following a 6th century
street with marble flagstones bearing
Roman inscriptions some four hundred
years older.
Further up the avenue, in the centre of
another underpass, one can enjoy a cup of
coffee opposite a tiny medieval church.
Elsewhere the tram-lines skirt the corner
tower of the city wall, and remains of
another tower can be seen in the basement
'of a department store. A new bank under
construction has had to relinquish half of its
basement to another section of the city wall,
part of two 4th-century streets and the foun¬
dations of a 14th-century church. Opposite
this bank, a big open space has been made
over to the archaeologists pending the time
when the architects draw up plans for
safeguarding the remains.
All these towns have found original ways
of preserving their archaeological heritage.
In Plovdiv (the Roman Trimontium) an am
phitheatre discovered in an excellent state of
preservation is to be used for dramatic per¬
formances; the ancient forum, naturally, is
reserved for pedestrians and the ramparts
circling the hills serve as supporting walls for
houses of the 19th-century districts. At
Stara Zagora (the ancient Augusta Trajana)
Neolithic dwellings have been enclosed
within the walls of a new museum; and a
section of a district, including an am¬
phitheatre, baths and ancient streets, is to
be preserved in its original state as an open-
air museum, while other parts will be
covered over or indicated by markings on
the floor in the new buildings. Varna
(Odessos) maintains "archaeological sec¬
tions" within its new districts, and many
features of the Graeco-Roman city plan are
to be integrated into the modern streets and
squares.
There is only one way Into Nessebur and
that is through the ancient gate in the ram¬
parts. This small town on the Black Sea
which still bears a Thracian name, Messem-
bria, deserves more than any other the
somewhat misused title of "living museum".
It is built on a tiny peninsula linked to the
coast by a narrow neck of land, and was one
of the main Thracian ports. A Dorian colony
was established there in the 6th century and
grew rich through maritime trade and farm¬
ing the fertile hinterland. Under, Roman
domination Nessebur remained prosperous
and subsequently became one of the Byzan¬
tine empire's chief ports.
For centuries Bulgaria and Byzantium
fought over this tiny strip of land surrounded
by sea on all sides, and every time the penin¬
sula changed hands it was endowed with
new monuments. The Italian republics,
especially Genoa, also asserted their in¬
fluence at Nessebur, even after the Ottoman
invasion. In spite of changing fortunes and
the slow decline of its trade the city main
tained its vitality with the passing centuries
and its inhabitants have kept the customs
and independent spirit of a seafaring people.
Today this ancient city in the heart of
Bulgaria's most famous resort areas draws
tens of thousands of tourists attracted by its
monuments and its picturesque site.
Among the masterpieces left here by
three thousand years of civilization, the
most impressive are the churches. The
dozen that remain represent almost every
stage of Christianity in this area, from the
oldest built in the 5th century to the most re¬
cent at the end of the last century. Most of
them, however, date from the 13th and 14th
centuries and these are also the most in¬
teresting, both for their style and for the
originality of the building techniques used in
their construction. Small blocks of tufa
alternate with rows of bricks to form an
unusual kind of decoration. Details such as
cornices, arches and niches are embellished
with inlaid ceramic circles and four-leaved
clover, so that the façades of the buildings
shine in the sun like so many pieces of
multicoloured embroidery. These vivid
patches of colour contrast with the
plain façades of the houses, whose wooden
facing is weathered by sun and salt.
In Nessebur as elsewhere in Bulgaria,
modern life goes hand in hand both with dis¬
tant antiquity and with the Middle Ages.
Workmen digging the foundations of a
youth centre some years ago discovered the
altar of a church which has long since disap¬
peared. It has been carefully preserved and
incorporated into the new building where it
is protected by a cement column and can be
seen through a glass panel. In summer
tourists attend concerts organized in the
great 6th-century basilica. But the most
persevering visitors are the archaeologists,
historians and restorers whose patient work
continues season after season.

Cities that span
the centuries
Washed over by successive tides of
history, the towns and cities of Bulgaria,
more than half of which are over 5,000
years old, constitute veritable chronicles in
stone. At Plovdiv, for example, the visitor
comes face to face with past Roman
glories, such as the fine amphitheatre and
the ancient stadium (right), as well as the
cobbled streets and 18th-century, timber-
framed houses of the National Revival
period (centre right) all carefully preserved
and displayed within the confines of a
bustling, modern city. Thracians, Greeks,
Romans, Byzantium, the Genoese all left
their mark on the Black Sea port of
Nessebur. Its churches, the earliest dating
from the 5th century, are representative of
almost every stage in the history of
Christianity in this region. Among the most
outstanding examples are the great 6th-
century Basilica and the remarkable 13th
and 14th-century churches built of brick
and tufa, their arches and cornices
decorated with inlaid ceramics (photo
opposite page).
Many Bulgarian towns and villages have
been protected and restored as part of a
nation-wide campaign to safeguard the
country's cultural heritage. One such town
is Koprivchtitza (right). Famed as the scene
of the start of the ill-fated insurrection of
April 1876 against the Ottoman Turks, it is
noted for its well-preserved 19th-century
houses with their richly ornamented fronts
and sculpted wood ceilings. The museum-
village of Etara (above), near Gabrovo, a
town renowned as Bulgaria's "capital of
humour", is now a centre for traditional
crafts where potters, leatherworkers and
wheelwrights can be seen at work in
carefully restored workshops.

Bulgaria
III. A TALE OF THREE CITIES
IN the history of Bulgaria three names of
towns have a special significance
because of their national and cultural
associations. They are those of the capitals
which the Bulgarian princes established dur¬
ing the Middle Ages: first Pliska, metropolis
of the first Bulgarian State from its founda¬
tion in 681, through the periods of its con¬
solidation, its conversion to Christianity and
the introduction of the Cyrillic alphabet.
Then comes Preslav which was the
country's capital during the "Golden Age"
of Bulgarian culture when the arts and let¬
ters flourished at the court of king Simeon.
Finally, Turnovo was the centre of Bulgarian
civilization in the 13th and 14th centuries up
to the time of the Ottoman invasion and
conquest.
Each city still seems imbued with the spirit
of the age in which it flourished. Pliska, con¬
ceived like a huge fortified camp with the
palace of the khan and the temple of his god
in the centre, is massive, austere and ma
jestic. The huge limestone blocks of its sur¬
rounding walls and palaces recall the power
and might of its founding princes. Their
determination to live and last is expressed in
the remains of the fortress and the palace,
and in the inscriptions engraved on columns
by order of the khans. That memory must
conquer death was the message left by khan
Omurtag (814-831): "Man, even if he lives
well, dies, and another sees the light. Let
him who has been born later remember...".
Very different is Preslav, built by young
king Simeon (893-927) among the softly
rounded hills bordering on the Ticha river.
Preslav was also an imposing city, but here,
instead of uncovering fortresses, ar¬
chaeologists are intent on bringing to light a
town of builders, stone-carvers and
sculptors, painters, potters, goldsmiths and
writers, for discoveries have shown that
these artists and craftsmen were extra¬
ordinarily creative and original. It has been
established, for example, that a kind of
Above, ruins of the 9th-century palace of the khan
at Pliska, the first capital of the Bulgarian State.
Founded in 681 by khan Asparukh, Pliska remained
the capital for a little over two centuries and
towards the end of this period two major events
occurred which were to have a profound influence
on the country's future its conversion to
Christianity and the introduction of the Cyrillic
alphabet. Left, ornamental key representing a lute
player and made at Pliska in the 9th or 10th
century. The key doubled as an implement of
some sort but the precise use of the.spike
emerging from the musician's hat is not known.
faience used chiefly in mural decoration but
also for making dishes was probably
manufactured for the first time in Europe at
Preslav in the 10th century. The painters
even made ikons in ceramic, and faience
served as a medium for writing. An earthen¬
ware spindle-whorl decorated with enamel
has been discovered, on which the crafts¬
man or donor has inscribed the name of the
young spinster for whom it was intended.
"Lola's spindle-whorl" indicates the ex¬
tent to which literacy was then developed in
Bulgaria. Preslav is famous in the history of
Slav culture for its literary school,
represented by a constellation of writers
such as Chernorizetz Khrabar, John the Ex¬
arch, Constantine of Preslav and king Si¬
meon himself, who is said to have filled his
palace with books. Most of the books com¬
piled or written in Preslav during this period
were religious works, in particular sermons
and commentaries on the Bible. But they
also contain interesting discourses on lay
subjects and sometimes inspired texts like
Constantine's "alphabetic prayer" extolling
the historical importance of the Bulgarians'
conversion to Christianity.
During the 12th century, after several
decades of Byzantine domination, Turnovo
became the capital of the Second Bulgarian
Kingdom, and so it remained until 1393,
when the city was burnt to the ground after
the Ottoman conquest. In a fantastic site of
steep hills separated by the deep gorges of
the Yantra river, a great city was built in a
highly complex style which was hierarchical
even in its architecture.
Religious and political conflicts were fre¬
quent at that time. But enlightened rulers
protected the arts and encouraged the
development of literature. Among the rare
manuscripts from Turnovo which have
escaped destruction is the Chronicle of Con¬
stantine Manassès now in the Vatican,
which contains 69 magnificent miniatures
including 21 on Bulgarian subjects. Other
masterpieces of illustrative painting are to be
found in a few 14th-century manu¬
scripts famous Tetraevangelicum of
king Ivan-Alexander now in the British
Museum, and the Moscow Psalter.
But hardly any examples of monumental
painting are still extant in Turnovo. For¬
tunately the frescoes of the little church of
Boyana (1259), near Sofia, said to be works
of the Turnovo school, are there to
demonstrate the splendour and refinement
of the art of the time. The unknown artist
who painted portraits full of charm and
dignity of the donors of Boyana, prince
Kaloyan and his wife Dessislava, showed by
the life he injected into the traditional im¬
ages of saints a dramatic sense and a
humanism unsurpassed in 13th century
Europe.
8

Above, ruins of Preslav, the city that became Bulgaria's second capital during the
reign of king Simeon (893-927) and which witnessed the "Golden Age" of medieval
Bulgarian culture. In 971 Preslav was captured and sacked by the Byzantine Emperor
John Tzimisces and Bulgaria languished for several decades under Byzantine
domination. Below, the ramparts of Turnovo, which at the end of the 12th century
became Bulgaria's third capital, a position it held until 1393 when it was destroyed
following the Ottoman conquest. The art of the illuminated book reached its apogee at
Turnovo during the reign of king Ivan Alexander (1331-1371). The king himself is
depicted with his family in this illumination, bottom right, from the magnificent
London Ivan Alexander Gospel which the king himself ordered in 1356.
Gold coin dating from the reign
of Tsar Ivan Asen II (1218-1241).

A national festival of culture
In the second half of the 9th century, Cyril and his brother Methodius
created an alphabet for translating the liturgical texts into Slavonic,
thus bringing learning "to all men through the medium of their native
tongue". For Bulgarians, this achievement by the "apostles of the
Slavs", as Cyril and Methodius are often called, became a symbol of
their cultural identity which wa,s preserved during five centuries of
foreign oppression and domination. The two saints are com¬
memorated each year on 24 May, the day of Bulgaria's national
festival of culture. This annual "festival of the alphabet and culture"
is an occasion for art exhibitions, musical performances, book fairs,
the presentation of literary and scientific prizes, and cultural events
organized by students. Past and present also meet in the ornamental
ceramic tiles which began to be manufactured in Bulgaria around the
time when the Cyrillic alphabet was being adopted in the Slav coun¬
tries. These tiles, so lavishly covered with inscriptions as to be virtual
books, were used to adorn the floors and walls of monasteries and
palaces which were thus transformed into "public libraries" the
ancestors of the book centres and libraries of modern Bulgaria.
CkNfcC

Bulgaria
IV. FROM SAINT CYRIL
TO THE NATIONAL REVIVAL
IN Bulgaria the monastic tradition is as old
as the nation itself. The first monastery
was founded at Pliska by Boris I
(852-889), who retired there at the end of his
life. The disciples of Cyril and Methodius
came to work in this monastery, teaching
and spreading the Slav alphabet invented by
their masters.
Thus the monasteries early became
cultural centres, a tradition which continued
at Preslav and became widespread under Ot¬
toman domination when every monastery
became a centre and refuge for the national
spirit. On the feast days of the great
monasteries pilgrims came from far and
wide travelling across the country on foot or
horseback or by cart. The inhabitants of
towns and villages sent offerings of all kinds
to contribute to the decoration of the
building.
This is still the case at Rila monastery
where the monks celebrate divine service in
the church and chapels maintaining the
tradition of Bulgarian religious chant. This
monastery built in the mountains to the
south of Sofia is also a national museum
with exhibition rooms devoted to a variety
of subjects: history, economic activity,
ethnography and ikon collections.
Seen from the outside, the monastery is
like a powerful fortress. Inside, the huge
courtyard is bordered by façades rising up
for several storeys and ringed with carved
wooden balconies. In the centre stand a big
church and a tower dating from the 14th
century. On the floors above are small
chapels, set between the visitors' dor¬
mitories and the monks' cells, where mass is
celebrated on certain feast days.
After Rila, the most important monastery
is Bachkovo, which was founded in 1083 in
a valley of the Rhodope mountains by a
Opposite page
St. Cyril and St. Methodius as depicted in
a painting by Zahari Zograph, a celebrated
19th-century Bulgarian painter.
May 24 celebrations in Sofia.
The "palace of books" in the town of
Plevene. The mural symbolizes the history
of Bulgarian literature from Cyril and
Methodius until modern times.
Detail of a 10th-century ceramic tablet
(6x6 cm) inscribed with Cyrillic letters. It
is thought to be from Preslav.
high-ranking Georgian officer, Grigori
Bakuriani, who was governor of the area
during the period of Byzantine domination.
The monastery at Bachkovo has had an
eventful history. On several occasions it has
been destroyed, rebuilt, restored and
enlarged.
During one of these alterations, in the
17th century, an unusual masterpiece was
added to Bachkovo. The mural paintings
that decorate the walls and vault of the
refectory form an overall composition in
which Biblical scenes framed by garlands of
foliage stand out against a starlit sky
together with some of the great figures of
Antiquity. Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, for
example, are represented in medieval dress,
which in no way detracts from the solemnity
of their bearing and the nobility of their ex¬
pression.
In the centre of this magnificent hall
stands a long narrow marble table around
which the monks used to gather. The ar¬
chitect's remarkable use of space combines
with the power of the painter's brush to
achieve a remarkably persuasive effect:
under a vault studded with golden stars,
surrounded by the philosophers of antiqui¬
ty, the human spirit seems to soar above
terrestrial life.
Outside in the monastery courtyard one
of the walls is decorated with a much more
recent composition recalling the
monastery's main feast which is celebrated
in August on the name-day of the Virgin
Mary. It is a narrative scene that contains a
wealth of information: the monastery is
depicted surrounded by the foothills of the
mountain. On the hilltops all around are little
churches and chapels dedicated to various
saints. A solemn procession is advancing
through the main entrance headed by pro¬
minent citizens bearing the miraculous ikon
of the Virgin. The procession goes round
each church in turn. After the priests, led by
the bishop of Plovdiv, come the monks and,
finally, the laity, townsfolk and peasants.
The artist has depicted the geographical
details of the site with meticulous accuracy:
the river, the bridges and the path on which
laggards are still lingering. The ethno¬
graphical detail and social characteristics of
the figures, many of which are undoubt¬
edly portraits of real people, are typical of
the art of Zahari Zograph, self-taught author
of this composition and one of the most
gifted painters of the mid-19th century.
Zahari Zograph also decorated the two
monastery churches. All his compositions
show a concern for social criticism. Thus, in
the scene of the Last Judgement, he
painted the portraits of Plovdiv
moneylenders and their haughty wives
bound for the ovens of hell.
However, the art of the painters of this
period is rarely limited to social themes. The
artists delighted in covering the walls of
monasteries and churches with roses and
leafy branches. Their saints are clad in
bright colours and their open faces are lit
with a vitality and cheerful optimism
characteristic of the period which has been
called that of Bulgaria's National Revival.
After the Ottoman invasion at the end of
the 14th century the Bulgarians lost their in¬
dependence and, for more than five hun¬
dred years, experienced ordeals which few
peoples have had to endure. But they
preserved their national consciousness,
traditions, faith and life-styles and were to
show a fierce determination in the liberation
struggle of the 19th century.
But before the successful outcome of the
Russo-Turkish war of 1877-1878 which
brought about their liberation, the
Bulgarians were to live through a very dif¬
ficult period, particularly after the April 1876
uprising. The uprising failed despite the
heroism of the freedom fighters and the
revolt was crushed. The wave of indignation
and sympathy which this cruel repression
caused throughout Europe certainly hasten¬
ed the advent of freedom. But the founda¬
tions of Bulgaria's liberation had been laid
long before by the leaders of the Revival
movement, and the country's aspiration to
freedom was foreshadowed by the architec¬
ture of the same period.
For centuries the Bulgarians had only
been allowed to build humble churches, as
low and as dark as possible. But in the se¬
cond half of the 18th century, as the power
of the Ottoman empire gradually weakened,
spacious, well-lit churches began to be con¬
structed with beautiful decorated façades
and magnificently carved iconostases inside.
The figures of Adam and Eve are often
represented on these big wooden screens
surrounded by birds and acanthus leaves.
Clad in Bulgarian peasant costume, Adam is
tilling the land, while Eve is busy spinning.
And naturally, among the images of the
saints, Cyril and Methodius, inventors of the
Slavonic alphabet, take pride of place.
After the liberation of Bulgaria, for various
social, economic and political reasons, the
towns developed very slowly and without
major upheavals. This stability has made it
possible to preserve the architecture of the
Revival period which, today, is the object of
great attention. In Plovdiv, for example, one
of the hills on which this picturesque city is
built has kept whole districts of Revival
period architecture. Corbelled houses with
ingeniously articulated façades seem to vie
in exhibiting their brilliant colours, but the
general effect is one of harmony and propor¬
tion. The graceful lines, the many windows,
the arches over the doorways, the skilful
combination of wood and metal and the
flowers decorating every window-sill all
express the spirit of hope characteristic of
Bulgaria when they were built.
These ancient streets and dwellings are as
busy and as lively today as the new building
sites, towns and villages in other parts of the
country. The historic legacy is so full of
vitality and enterprise that it can easily be in¬
corporated into the most modern aspects of
the country's culture. The youthful spirit of
modern Bulgaria can draw upon knowledge
and respect for the past.
I Magdalina Stancheva
11
