Marginal lands
Inhospitable 'fringe' regions
ingeniously turned to human advantage
by Mohamed Ayyad
and Gisbert Glaser
ALTHOUGH we refer to the whole
planet as our habitat, the land sur¬
face on which we live constitutes
only about a quarter of the total surface of
the globe, and of this less than a quarter is
well populated and intensively used. A large
part of the remainder is made up of desert,
ice cap and mountain peaks.
Between these two extremes lie the
marginal lands, areas subject to certain
natural constraints which limit the possibility
of intensive cultivation with high crop yields
and which, if they attain a certain threshold,
make cultivation impossible.
These constraints fall into three main
categories: irregular rainfall and lack of
water (the arid and semi-arid zones); ex¬
tremes of cold (high elevations in mountain
areas and the sub-polar tundra regions in
both the northern and southern
hemispheres); and steepness of slope
(mountain areas everywhere).
Surprisingly enough, despite the great dif¬
ficulties involved, close on eight hundred
million people (though this is a very approx¬
imate estimate) inhabit these marginal lands,
showing great ingenuity in adapting to the
constraints they impose and even, in some
cases, turning them to their advantage.
Before the development of modern
transportation, for example, the true
deserts, such as the Sahara and the high
summits of the mountain chains, con¬
stituted barriers between areas of intensive
human activity which could be likened to the
barrier of the seas. The people living at the
boundaries of the deserts and below the
passes crossing the high mountains were
quick to take advantage of this situation. To
supplement the meagre living they obtained
from the land they assumed the function of
the seafarer, transporting goods and people
across the desert and mountain passes.
Nowadays the camel caravans have
almost disappeared from the Sahara and
other deserts and the high mountain farmers
no longer keep horses and mules for
transport purposes.
But the resourcefulness of the inhabitants
of these regions remains. The major con¬
straints of the Alps snow, ice, cold and
steep slopes have been used to form the
basis of a highly profitable industry, winter
tourism, and the high number of sunny,
rainless days that make agricultural activity
so difficult in North Africa now attract tens
of thousands of sun-loving tourists every
year.
18
Ingenuity on the part of the farmers of the
Nochixtlan Valley in southern Mexico in
overcoming a rather different kind of con¬
straint has been revealed in a recent Man
and the Biosphere (MAB) publication. The
side slopes of the Valley are ravaged by ac¬
tive gully erosion, a process which strips off
the surface soil leaving the slopes barren
and bare of vegetation. What a terrible con¬
straint for agriculture I
Yet the farmers of the Valley took advan¬
tage of this erosion and made a resource out
of it. Over the past thousand years, by direc¬
ting the flow of eroded material from the
side slopes, these Mixtee cultivators have
doubled the cultivatable area of the main
valley floors and have filled in the narrow
tributary valley floors with flights of terraces
several kilometres long. Before large-scale
erosion began the agricultural productivity
of the valley area was certainly much lower
than it is today.
The high culture of the Incas in the Andes
is an outstanding example, on a much larger
scale, of adaptation to natural constraints.
One might have expected the Incas to con¬
centrate in the coastal and lowland areas,
but their preferred environment was the
healthier high mountain, the altiplanos, at
altitudes ranging from 2,800 to
4,000 metres, and the large valley systems
of the central and northern Andes.
Here they created an area of relatively
dense population and evolved one of the
most remarkable pre-Columbian cultures in
the New World. They coped in masterly
fashion with the constraints of cold on the
altiplanos and the steepness of the slopes of
the valleys. On the slopes they developed a
very efficient terracing system; on the
altiplanos they combined llama and alpaca
herding with limited agriculture specifically
adapted to the cold and the reduced oxygen
available. The fact that the potato, which
was to become a staple food over much of
northern Europe in later centuries,
originated from the "marginal lands" of the
Incas provides some measure of the success
of their system.
Although essentially based on the
altiplanos, the Incas nevertheless made use
of the opportunities offered by variations in
altitude, including in their landholdings
some areas with a hot and humid tropical
climate in the low-lying foothills of the
eastern escarpments of the Andes as well as
areas of temperate climate at altitudes of
1,500 to 2,500 metres. Thus their economy
provided for tropical fruit and bananas, cot
ton and maize from the more temperate
altitude levels as well as grain, potatoes and
animal products from the colder high
altitude levels.
A comparatively simple example of a quite
different strategy adopted in other marginal
lands is the transhumance system in France
whereby the sheep and goats graze in the
Alps during the summer and in the Mediter¬
ranean maquis or the Camargues during the
winter. In this way the problem is solved of
how to cope with two constraints, namely
to feed the herds when the Alps are covered
with snow and when Mediterranean France
experiences its summer drought.
On a very much larger scale, trans¬
humance in the arid and semi-arid zones of
Africa takes advantage not of opposing con¬
straints (such as extremes of cold and
drought in the example from France above).

but of variations in the rigour of the same
constraint aridity.
In the past, the traditional nomads roam¬
ed with their herds and their families over
hundreds of kilometres in order to make
available to their cattle the fresh grasses and
shrubs that sprang up after the rare days of
rainfall even in the most arid and remote
areas. Today the tendency is more and more
for the herdsmen's families to adopt the
sedentary way of life, settling in villages,
while the herdsmen themselves move their
flocks between three complementary graz¬
ing zones south of the Sahara.
These zones consist of the so-called
Sudanese zone, which has about six or
seven dry months, the Sahelian or semi-arid
zone, with eight or- nine dry months, and
finally the fringes of the Sahara, with ten to
eleven dry months. A system is developing
whereby the Sudanese zone, which has a
strong agricultural element, is beginning
also to specialize in the rearing of young
livestock and the final fattening up of cattle
before they are taken to slaughterhouses for
sale in the major markets in the coastal
zones. The Sahelian zone, where the
nomads are beginning to settle, is devoted
to the reproduction phase, and the fringes
of the desert are only grazed for a few
months after the rare rainy spells in this
area to relieve grazing pressure on the
Sahelian zone.
Mankind has, then, often been very suc¬
cessful in overcoming the varied disadvan¬
tages and constraints that affect marginal
lands, particularly in making use of them for
grazing. Few people realize, for example,
that the arid and semi-arid zones as a whole
support over half the world's stock of cattle.
MOHAMED AYYAD, of Egypt, is professor of
biology at the University of Alexandria. He heads
the MAB project on Regional Environmental
Management of Desert Ecosystems in Northern
Egypt (REMDENE).
GISBERT GLASER is a staff member of
Unesco's Division of Ecological Sciences. A
geographer, he is responsible for the co¬
ordination of the mountain and island ecosystem
project areas of Unesco's Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) Programme.
19

In northern Kenya, one important cause of desert encroachment is the felling of trees and
shrubs by nomadic herdsmen to make bomas, or night enclosures, to keep their livestock
from straying and to protect them from wild animals such as jackals, hyenas, leopards
and lions that hunt at night. The herdsmen move several times a year and for every move
trees are cut and new bomas are built. Scientists in MAB's Integrated Project on Arid
Lands (IPAL) have found that, for the bomas of the Gabra people, about twelve Acacia
trees are used per household per move, or 70 to 100 trees per household per year. Below,
a typical settlement of the Rendille people with its thin outer thorn fence surrounding the
circle of family dwellings with the livestock enclosures in the centre. Separate enclosures
are used for camels and for sheep and goats. Sponsored by the Kenyan National
Committee for MAB and executed by Unesco, IPAL is designed to provide a better
scientific basis for land management in arid lands. The project was financed mainly by the
United Nations Environment Programme from 1976 to 1980, when funding was taken over
by the Federal Republic of Germany. Deforestation is contributing to the spread of deserts
throughout the arid and semi-arid regions of Africa where wood is virtually the sole fuel
available for cooking and heating. Above, these women of Mali often have to walk many
kilometres every day to gather firewood.
more than a third of its sheep and two-thirds
of its goats.
As the examples given above indicate,
one of the keys to these successes lies in the
application of the notion of complementari¬
ty: that is, the combined use of two or more
zones in such a way that their respective
constraints offset or complement each
other. This may involve zones of different
altitudes (as in the case of the altiplanos and
the foothills of the.Andes), or zones of vary¬
ing aridity (as in Africa south of the Sahara),
or zones of different socio-economic nature
(were it not for densely populated, highly in¬
dustrialized lowlands that surround them,
the European Alps would never have ex- .
perienced the astonishing development of
winter sports and summer tourism that has
occurred in recent years).
So far, however, the most important con¬
straint of all and one which affects all
marginal lands has not been men¬
tioned fragility.
Landscapes, vegetation and soil cover
degrade much more quickly in marginal
lands than in more favoured regions, if un¬
suitable land use practices are adopted.
Once the land has become degraded it is
much more difficult than in other regions to
restore fertility and productivity.
Today, under the pressure of increased
human and animal populations and changes
in land use systems, almost all the world's
marginal lands are in danger and it is becom¬
ing increasingly difficult to ensure the
maintenance of their long-term biological
productivity.
The "Dust Bowl" of the 1930s in the
United States was the result of improper ex¬
tension of dry crop cultivation into the dry
belt of the Middle West. Nobody spoke of
desertification at that time. Yet it was exact¬
ly that and a first example in modern times
of large-scale, catastrophic soil degradation.
A large industrialized country such as the
United States can survive if a small percen¬
tage of its surface becomes unproductive,
barren land. What, however, if the same
situation occurs in a Sahelian country?
What if large portions of a poor country
become affected by desertification due to
over-grazing and extension of rainfed
cultivation into areas which are not suited to
it? Then the ecological problem becomes a
pressing human one as millions of people ¡
see the whole basis of their livelihood placed \
in jeopardy.
For the countries south of the Sahara, it is
estimated that an area of some 685 million
hectares is affected by severe desertification
(out of a total land surface for Africa of
3,011 million hectares), and eighty million
people are already directly affected by a fall
in the productivity of the lands from which
they live.
For all these reasons a large part of the
research being carried out under Unesco's
Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme
is concentrated on halting improper land use
while at the same time increasing food pro¬
duction in marginal lands of such distinct
regions as the Sahel and eastern Africa, the
altiplanos of the Andes, the Hindu Kush-
Himalaya mountains or the traditional
rangelands of North Africa (see box
opposite). Nor does MAB neglect the prob¬
lems for the environment and for society
which may derive from uncontrolled use of .
marginal lands in developed countries. In f
20

Holding the desert at bay
MAB- related research in southern Tunisia
The Problem: to improve the productivity of
rangelands and of livestock raising and to
control the extension of rainfed agriculture by
the preparation and introduction of integrated
land management plans in former Tunisian
grazing lands where a combination of human
and livestock population increases, a shrink¬
ing land base, agricultural expansion and
mechanization has led to a serious problem of
land degradation and even desertification.
In central and southern Tunisia annual rain¬
fall varies from 350 mm in the north to less
than 100 mm in the south. Traditionally these
areas were exploited by nomadic herdsmen.
Overgrazing was always a problem, par¬
ticularly in the south, but it was alleviated by
flock reductions in times of longer than usual
drought. Since the beginning of this century,
however, the population has increased con¬
siderably and has become more sedentary.
Large areas of former grazing lands are now
being cultivated with cereal and tree crops
(olives, almonds). At the same time, as the
human population grew so too did the number
of sheep and goats, thereby exerting further
pressure on the land. Finally, the introduction
of disc ploughing during the last twenty-five
years has accelerated the erosion of shallow
soils.
The Projects: as early as 1969, the Tuni¬
sian authorities, realizing the importance for
the country of solving its critical environmen¬
tal and developmental problems, launched a
programme of integrated ecological research.
During the early 1970s, two MAB-related ac¬
tivities were undertaken in this field. In the
first project, Tunisian authorities and
specialists collaborated mainly with French
specialists and institutions with services and
major funding being provided by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and
Unesco. The second project originated under
the International Biological Programme and
brought mainly United States specialists from
the U.S. Desert Biome Project to work
alongside their Tunisian colleagues.
To maintain the continuity of this work, the
Tunisian Government in 1977 established a
National Institute of Arid Regions to which it
entrusted the task of promoting and co¬
ordinating MAB-type research and of training
research workers and technicians. At present
the Institute, with support from the United Na¬
tions Environment Programme (UNEP) and
Unesco's MAB Programme, is carrying out
studies on such problems as reseeding and
camel-raising.
The Results: data acquired in the
UNDP/FAO/Unesco project were used to
develop land management plans which in¬
tegrate rangeland herding, rainfall agriculture
and irrigation agriculture based on oases.
Rangeland maps were prepared showing the
major range units and other features such as
annual and seasonal primary productivity and
optimal period of use, on which rational land
use planning can in part be based. Methods
for increasing animal production were im¬
proved through various forage and animal
husbandry experiments. For the Zougrata
area, simulation models were worked out to
predict trends in productivity. Another exam¬
ple of the results concerns the importance of
the composition of flocks. Studies of mixed
flocks of half sheep and half goats showed
that goats consumed more of the tallest
vegetation group (shrubs) than in an only-
goat flock. Sheep consume larger amounts of
the annual and biennial species when in a
mixed flock than in all-sheep flocks. From a
practical standpoint, this suggests that the
goat is not the nuisance animal that it is
generally considered to be. Man himself, by
associating goats with sheep, has made the
grazing by goats more destructive. Similar
results have been found in other parts of the
world.
Drawing Etudes et Planification des Communications. Unesco Courier
Drawing, above, illustrates an integrated land development plan,
now being adopted in parts of southern Tunisia, which enables
traditionally separate land use systems to complement each
other. A densely populated oasis, with a permanent supply of
water (1) sufficient for irrigation agriculture and to meet the
needs of people and animals, forms the hub around which stock-
raising activities in the surrounding rangelands revolve. Water is
piped out to a watering trough (2) for the animals of the
rangelands where water is a precious resource. Crops (3) such as
cereals, vegetables, and alfalfa for fodder are grown under
irrigation, providing food for the population of the oasis and the
herdsmen of the rangelands. Supplementary forage (4) from
intensive agriculture can be a life-saver for the rangeland herds
during the annual dry season and in times of extended drought.
Supplementary forage may also be provided by growing well-
adapted plants, such as non-spiny cactus (5), which require no
irrigation. The herdsmen once nomadic but now tending to
settle in or on the outskirts of the oasis earn most of their
income from the cattle they graze (6) over an area extending very
many kilometres around the oasis. Combined oasis/rangeland
developments are being integrated into the national economy
and their products (7) sold on regional and national markets.

some parts of the European Alps excessive
1 tourist development has already started to
destroy the very landscapes on which the
tourist industry is based. To deal with these
problems comprehensive, interdisciplinary
research aimed at understanding and im¬
proving the complex man/environment in¬
teraction is required (see box this page).
To add to all their other difficulties, the
marginal lands face a further problem which
they share, but in a much more intense
form, with the rest of the world the prob¬
lem of energy.
For about a third of mankind the energy
crisis means a daily scramble to find the
wood they need to cook their daily meal.
Nine-tenths of the inhabitants of the world's
poorest countries still depend on firewood
as their principal fuel, and at least half of all
the timber felled in the world is used as fuel
for cooking or as a source of heat.
All too often, however, the growth in
human population is outstripping the
growth of new trees, and villagers in the arid
and semi-arid regions of central Africa and
Asia, in many parts of the Andes, and the
Hindu Kush-Himalayas have to search far¬
ther and farther afield to satisfy their needs.
This constant search for firewood can,
furthermore, have serious environmental
consequences. Shrubs and trees play an im¬
portant role in maintaining balanced func¬
tioning of arid and semi-arid ecosystems.
They provide protection for the soil against
the direct impact of rain, they provide shade
for the lower vegetation, animals and peo¬
ple, they reduce evaporation and they en¬
sure better water regulation within the soil.
In addition, the leaves and branches that fall
from them enrich the humus content of the
upper soil and they provide a habitat for
birds which themselves play an important
role in the functioning of the ecosystem.
Over-use of trees and shrubs for firewood
and other human needs such as housing and
fencing sets in motion a process which
leads from soil erosion and degradation to
desertification.
Energy problems in the high mountain
areas are often equally acute, though,
paradoxically, through the development of
hydro-electric schemes, they have, in many
parts of the Andes and the Hindu Kush-
Himalaya ranges for example, become a ma¬
jor source of energy for urban, industrial and
rural development in the densely populated
valley systems, coastal areas and plains
below. In the actual mountain areas
themselves rural electrification has often not
been developed.
In these areas the energy problem is in¬
trinsically the same as that in the rural areas
of the arid and semi-arid zones, and wood is
likely to remain the principal fuel for at least
another two decades. The deforestation of
mountain slopes that this entails also in¬
volves serious environmental conse¬
quences erosion, the silting up of
hydro-electric dams and, eventually, in¬
creasingly severe flooding of the plains
below.
Solutions to the energy problems of
marginal lands are fairly simple to envisage
but extremely difficult to implement. Trees,
after all, are a renewable resource and a
logical response to the fuel shortage is to
plant more fast-growing trees for use as
firewood. Yet not enough tree-planting
schemes have been implemented and when
they have been introduced their effect has
often been wiped out by population growth.
22
Mountain scenarios
The Pays d'Enhaut projectSwitzerland
The Problem: to anticipate and minimize
the possible environmental effects of various
forms of economic development in an alpine
region of Switzerland.
The Project: despite considerable tourist
development over recent years, the Pays
d'Enhaut, a mountain district of the Vaud
Canton of Switzerland, unlike many other
alpine regions, has succeeded in maintaining
a viable upland agriculture and an unspoilt
natural environment. But important changes
are imminent. The lack of suitable employ¬
ment for young people may lead to depopula¬
tion of the area and a subsequent degradation
of the environment, on this occasion due to
lack of human intervention. Alternatively,
large-scale construction of hotels and chalets
for tourists, with the infrastructure of roads,
etc., that this would necessitate, might solve
the employment problem but could result in
serious deterioration of the environment.
The regional development programme
adopted in 1978 aims to find an acceptable
middle way which would maintain the local
population at its present level by the develop¬
ment of tourist facilities. To achieve this ob¬
jective, however, would involve the creation of
some thirty kilometres of ski pistes, the set¬
ting aside of one hundred hectares as a skiing
area, and the provision of about 4,000 addi¬
tional beds for tourists.
The MAB study now under way is an at¬
tempt to forecast the possible effects of
various levels and types of development and
the precautions needed to maintain the
equilibrium of the environment.
The people of the Pays d'Enhaut are active¬
ly involved in the research. A Project MAB,
Pays d'Enhaut Association has been formed
which includes representatives of every social
level of the community.
Fourteen research units have been
established to examine specific aspects of the
problem and to improve understanding of the
Pays d'Enhaut considered as a system.
The Results: research by the MAB team
only began in 1980 so it is too early to an¬
nounce concrete results. Four possible
scenarios for the future are, however, already
emerging and their implications for the en¬
vironment will be presented to the decision¬
makers and the local population. Very roughly
these scenarios may be described as follows :
1 . A traditionalist approach. This tends
towards the maintenance of the status
quo. with somewhat more emphasis being
placed on the development of farming ac¬
tivities, but with mechanization kept to the
strict minimum. Tourism would remain a
modest supplementary, mainly summer¬
time, activity, the tourist being lodged en
pension or in small hotels.
2 . A modernistic approach. This is resolutely
aimed at maximizing income for the local
population by developing to the maximum
all the resources of the region. Tourism
would become the major economic sector
and some agricultural land would be
abandoned.
3 . An "ecological" approach. The thinking
here is dominated by a desire to pass on to
future generations a biologically intact
region in which pollution, erosion, etc.,
are kept to a minimum. The tourist would
be tolerated only in so far as he was
prepared to respect nature. Building and
private transport would be severely
restricted. Agricultural methods would be
aimed at low energy consumption and the
use of "soft" technology.
4 . A "peripheral" approach. This sees the
district serving the larger urban centres
around it in various ways. Above all, the
Pays d'Enhaut would be a sort of country
retreat for the people of these cen¬
tres would involve the building of
a large number of individual secondary
residences and good access roads and the
provision of facilities for leisure activities.
Attempts are also being made to en¬
courage the use of alternative sources of
energy: bio-gas, solar and wind energy, for
example. But a great deal more research
leading to a considerable reduction in cost
and technological simplification is needed
on these alternatives before they can make a
substantial contribution.
The drama of the deterioration of the
world's marginal lands is that if it is allowed
to continue it may well result in the creation
of a vast army of marginal people, living in
totally inacceptable conditions. Deterio¬
rating ecological systems have a logic of
their own; the damage builds up little by
little until the day comes when the system
collapses. A combined international effort
is necessary if the marginal lands of the
world are to avoid this fate.
H Mohamed Ayyad and Gisbert Glaser
