The resurgence of sail
This photo of the Finnish vessel
Moshulu, taken shortly before World
War II, shows sail in all its billowing
splendour.
by Arthur Gillette
IN August 1980, a Japanese shipbuilding
company, one of the world's biggest,
launched a 66-metre-long craft equipped
with a diesel engine and... two rigid rec¬
tangular sails. This odd-looking vessel, the
Shin Aitoku Maru, followed a smaller ex¬
perimental prototype of a sail-assisted
motorized ship, the 77-ton Daioh, which had
been launched by the same firm three years
before.
Why should nautical engineers in one of
the world's most technologically advanced
countries have suddenly become interested
in sail? The answer lies in soaring fuel costs
which, for motorized commercial craft, rose
fourfold between 1967 and 1978. As a result,
hard-headed businessmen who not so long
ago would have scoffed at the idea of wind-
propelled cargo ships and tankers are now
taking a hard look at the possible contribu¬
tion that some form of the sailing ship could
make to solving the energy problem.
Contrary to a widespread popular impres¬
sion today, much of the world's maritime
commerce was still being carried on wholly
or partly by sail even after World War II.
Lighters sailed cargoes up and down the
Ligurian coast of Italy until 1949, and the
28
maone familiarly known are la barca
bestia was still working the Gulf of Lions,
and particularly the Barcelona-Balearics
route, in 1952. The lumber trade along the
east coast of the United States and Canada
was, until World War II, handled in good
part by sailing ships.
The Soviet schoolships Sedov and
Kruzenshtern once brought phosphate back
from Chile. Many other bulk cargoes were
borne along the world's trade wind routes
by sail until relatively recently, and
sometimes quite rapidly. In the annual
"grain races" from Australia to the U.K.,
which ended shortly before the outbreak of
World War II, the first tall ships to arrive
reaped the benefits of a seller's market.
The period following that conflict witness¬
ed the decline and, ultimately, the demise of
sail power on virtually all major sea trade
routes, and most minor ones as well.
Unleashed by the war, a sudden and inten¬
sive burst of technology research and
development (that produced radar, among
other things) could not but benefit
mechanized shipping in the post-war era.
Motorized shipping also responded better
than sail, in a period of increasingly com
plex, voluminous and rapid commerce, to
demands for quick and dependable
transport. Then, too, the mood and move¬
ment for social reform that swept most in¬
dustrialized countries immediately after the
defeat of Fascism made the long hours and
rigorous working conditions on sailing craft
unacceptable in comparison to the relatively
easier lot of crews on motor vessels.
Finally, the shift from labour-intensive to
capital-intensive maritime transport was
made inevitable, in the late 1940s and 1950s,
by the existence of an abundant and ap¬
parently inexhaustible supply of propellant
over whose production and distribution the
industrialized countries had nearly total con¬
trol: fuel oil. The shift to motor power was
inevitable then. But was it definitive?
Even as fuel-propelled vessels came to
dominate maritime trade routes almost ex¬
clusively in the 1950s and 1960s, in several
parts of the world and particularly in
developing countries sail power persisted.
It successfully resisted, and in some cases
even overcame, incursions from fuel propul¬
sion. Although little-known outside their
countries and zones of use, commercial
craft continue today that rely on sail alone.

©
or on sail in tandem with motor, or as an
auxiliary to fuel power.
Feloukas sail the Nile as they have for cen¬
turies, with placid grace; and on the other
side of the world, in the West Indies, gom¬
mier canoes that look like hybrids of Carib
Indian dugouts and Newfoundland dories
still scuttle in and out of the bays of St.
Lucia under sail, being the main means of
locomotion of that island's fishermen. It is
worth noting and the point has validity
well beyond the West Indies that while St.
Lucia's sailing gommiers are occasionally
dangerous and require often backbreaking
laboujT, they have at least not disturbed the
coastal bio-system.
Moving further to sea, indeed out of sight
of land, sailing commercial vessels are still
found in several parts of the Third World.
Although not often now used entirely alone,
sail remains a source of at least auxiliary
power for copra and trading schooners in
the South Pacific, for example. The Tiare
Taporo, one of the oldest and best known of
the trading schooners of the region, boasted
thirty years of sailing service to French
Polynesia, the Cook Islands and New
Hebrides when a cyclone wrecked her in
1968, and the ketch Hawk worked the Belep
Islands, north of New Caledonia, until
recently.
A similar species of inter-island schooner
still accounts for the lion's share of seaborne
freight and passenger transport up and
down the Caribbean's necklace-like archi¬
pelago. These boats are still, stubbornly,
one of the Lesser Antilles' cheapest and
most popular ways of moving goods and
people.
Much the same may be said of Indian
Ocean dhows. Figurative descendants of
the craft with which, according to the Old
Testament, the Queen of Sheba and King
Solomon explored these coasts, the East
African version of the dhow owes less to
myth than to long and solid Arabian sea¬
going experience.
Heritage aside, dhows are still the main
vehicles for ocean-going commerce along
the coasts of Somalia, Kenya and Tanzania,
and farther afield, too, since larger dhows of
many nationalities follow the Indian Ocean
monsoon winds in a generally circular route
from Africa to India and Pakistan and back.
Their cargoes include an almost bewildering
variety of goods, from salt, dates and
mangrove boroti poles to coffee, tea, cop¬
per pots and trays, studded coffers, and tiles
brought from India to Africa.
"Our boats, working under sail, will not
die", Captain Omar Ahmed told me on the
dhow beach near Nyali Bridge at Mombasa.
One reason is, simply, that they are good
business. It takes one and one-half days to
travel from Mombasa northward to the
dhow base at Lamu by bus over bad roads,
and the trip costs 120 Kenyan shillings.
When the monsoon is blowing (admittedly
not year-round) the same trip is made under
sail by Lamu's own jahazi dhows in two days
for 65 shillings.
Other reasons, cultural more than mer¬
cantile, contribute to the dhows' persistence
as a way of life perhaps as much as a mode
of commerce. The boats themselves are lov¬
ingly and ritually decorated, boasting col¬
ourful paintwork and, often, intricate carv¬
ing at the bows and around the poop.
Sailmaking is an honour, sailors and
passersby considering it a favour to be
allowed to assist the master sailmaker. Sing¬
ing traditional chanties and dancing, accom
panied by drums and pipes, are favourite
pastimes of crewmen onboard and ashore,
while the drums also encourage them as
rhythmic music did European seamen not so
long agowhen hauling up anchor or sail.
Probably the most striking example of
modern-day sail- powered maritime commer¬
cial sea-going vessels are the Makassar
schooners found in Indonesia. Numbering
something on the order of 10,000 and ap¬
parently now growing after a period of
relative eclipse, these 15- to 30-metre sailing
vessels carry, each, up to 500 cubic metres
of cargo ranging from the mundane to the
exotic: cattle, soybeans, tamarind, bicycles,
fill dirt, a few passengers, and, mainly,
timber. In 1972, they accounted for approx¬
imately three-quarters of all domestic timber
cargoes arriving in Java.
Like a well-disciplined ballet corps, they
scurry toward Jakarta and other ports of
Western Indonesia when April signals the
onset of five months' east monsoon, only to
flutter back as far as Irian Jaya with the west
monsoon, which whistles out of the Malac¬
ca Straits from December to March. During
the "intermissions", the two annual periods
of slack wind, they shelter "offstage" (in
home port, if they can) to refit. For non¬
urgent cargo, these vessels have undeniable
advantages in a non-industrial country like
Indonesia. For one thing, they rely solely on
locally available resources for construction
and operation.
Summing up the main features of today's
commercial vessels that go partly or wholly
under sail, it is clear that they are not exempt
from drawbacks. First, they are slow. Gone
are the days when, between the World
Wars, the four-masted German barks Priwall
and Padua could hit peak speeds of over 14
CONTINUED PAGE 32
The 66-metre-long Shin Aitoku Maru, claimed to be the world's first
tanker-cargo ship equipped with auxiliary sails to save fuel, being tested
in the Japan Sea during August 1980.
-n.
= ii w
I

ofgid s31' Flexible triangular
sail \
-\-
A windship revolution?
It would have been unimaginable a few years ago, but today
several industrialized countries faced with soaring marine fuel
costs are seriously thinking of reintroducing the commercial
sailing ship, at least in some form. Engineers have studied and
learned from a wide range of sail rigs and configurations, from
those of the high-speed tea clippers of the last century to those
of Asiatic junks (see back cover) and East African dhows. Highly
competitive yacht races in recent years have also spurred the
application of scientific research to the study of wind propulsion,
and as a result the use of sail has become an exact science. The
Clifton Flasher (opposite page below), which held the world
speed record for her sail area class for six years. Is equipped with
rigid sails, whose success in catamaran racing has suggested
that they may rival soft sails in commercial ship propulsion.
But a possible new generation of commercial sailing ships will
look very different from the windjammers of the past and the
thoroughbred racers of the present. Experiments in Japan have
shown that a big cargo ship driven solely by wind would be
uneconomical, and the new craft coming off the drawing board
tend to be engine-sail hybrids with the sails as an auxiliary form
30
of propulsion. The goal is fuel economy rather than speed at any
price, with other "musts" including easy cargo handling and
maintenance, and labour-saving facilities.
Japan is one of the countries in the forefront of windship
research. Photo above shows the Daioh, an experimental "mini-
tanker" which during sea trials In 1979 proved capable of
reducing fuel consumption by a useful 10 per cent. The Daioh is
equipped with three types of sail (shown in drawings above
photo): one rigid, one flexible, one part rigid and part flexible.
Each is devised to be responsive to different wind conditions.
Another idea of the Daioh's designers: a shipboard computer to
regulate engine output in relation to wind speed. Lessons learned
from the Daioh influenced the design of a bigger wind-assisted
tanker, the Shin Aitoku Maru (see photo previous page).
Photo opposite page above shows the Buckau, an experimental
ship of the 1920s fitted with the rotor system invented by the
German engineer Anton Flettner. The rotor is not a pure wind
propulsion system, as the propulsive force is generated by the
powered rotation of vertical cylinders in the airstream. The
system was operated at sea, including an Atlantic crossing.

31

Wind patterns throughout the world, like the requirements of
each maritime trade and cargo, are so different that windship
designs may also vary widely according to the route to be sailed,
the ports to be visited, and the commodities to be carried.
Pyramid-rig catamaran (model above) has been designed for a
short-haul route where economy depends primarily on rapid
stowing and unstowing of the sails. The area of sails is varied by
rotating them around their stays. Model, above right shows one
of three French fishing boats now under construction at Lorlent
in Brittany. The main engine will only be used to enter or leave
port, or in totally windless conditions.
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 29
knots, and maintain them for a 24-hour
period (albeit in ballast), while the best day's
run for their sister ship Pamir, when loaded,
was 321 miles, at an average of 13.4 knots.
The Makassar schooners, Indian Ocean
dhows and West Indian schooners probably
seldom average more than four or five
knots a stiff human walking pace, but
three or four times slower than a motor-
powered freighter or tanker.
Then, too, and although there do not
seem to be comprehensive and reliable
statistics on the question, sailing craft may
well be more dangerous than motorized
vessels. Generally small and of rudimentary
construction, they are vulnerable to tides,
storms and that old sailor's nightmare, the
sudden onshore squall.
Their very vulnerability also makes sailing
vessels less dependable. They cannot be
counted on to arrive or depart according to
strict schedules and sometimes have to skip
temporarily unapproachable ports. At times,
such as the slack seasons between mon¬
soons and trade-winds, their sails are of no
use at all.
Finally, the labour-intensive handling of
sail craft is ultimately unacceptable, in
human terms, for sailors and stevedores
alike.
Each of sail power's disadvantages does,
however, appear to have a reverse, positive
32
side. Are the boats slow? Well, not all
cargoes are urgent and shippers continue to
rely contentedly on sail for certain bulky
loads that need only reach their destination
in a matter of weeks or even months, rather
than days. While sailing craft may also be
more vulnerable to danger than motor
vessels, they are concomitantly, because of
their size and component materials, pro¬
bably more susceptible to jury-rigged do-it-
yourself repairs.
The positive side of sailing vessels'
unreliability is their flexibility. Paragons of
tramp shipping, many do not hesitate to
alter their itineraries at will, calling at
unscheduled ports if a cargo or passengers,
that might otherwise not have travelled, are
found to be waiting there.
Similarly, the labour-intensive nature of
sail transport offers shippers the assurance
that certain fragile cargoes will receive in¬
dividual attention with, as a result, minimal
breakage. Tiles, glassware and even elec¬
tronic parts that, had they been loaded by
modern crane-and-sling might well have
been smashed, have been safely carried by
ocean-going dhows.
It may be said, too, that such craft pro¬
vide more employment per cubic metre of
freight or per head of passenger transported
than their motorized counterparts, although
this argument should never be used to
legitimize all-too-often unacceptable work¬
ing conditions and wages.
On the whole, it must be admitted that
the advantages of traditional forms of sea
transport powered wholly or partly by sail do
not decisively outweigh their drawbacks.
Nevertheless, the stubborn survival of tradi¬
tional sail as a viable commercial proposition
is, in itself, an invitation to rethink modern
shipping an invitation made the more
pressing by the rising costs of motorized
vessels.
These include direct economic costs (fuel,
construction, labour) but also what might be
termed bio-social costs. As anyone who has
crossed the Atlantic in a small sailboat can
testify, the trade-wind route from the
Canary Islands to Barbados is littered with
oil spill, fuel drums, plastics of all sorts and
other kinds of pollution that stretch in an
almost unbroken path of industrial civiliza¬
tion's cast-off trash almost three thousand
miles long. In fact, and without romanticiz¬
ing its potential, sail power may offer some
pointers for the development of an alter¬
native maritime technology that has lower
costs than modern shipping in economic,
social and, perhaps, cultural terms.
A growing number of firms and govern¬
ments are today devoting serious study and
experimentation to the windship alternative.
A Californian concern has prepared a design

for a 4,500 deadweight ton commercial
schooner while groups in Britain are working
on a variety of approaches that range from a
fairly classical square rig and a. semi-rigid
adaptation of catamaran sails (originally us¬
ed by Sri Lankan fishermen, but now
widespread among yachtsmen) to a "rotor
sail" system and even such exotic notions as
using huge kites to drag freighters.
In France, a group of specialists have
come up with a project for building three
19.30 metre multi-purpose ocean-going sail¬
ing fishing boats whose auxiliary engines
would, it is claimed, use between 20 and 25
per cent of the fuel consumed by similar
craftf today that rely solely on motors. The
boats should be launched in the next few
months.
A central concern of experimenters is to
ensure that labour on board possible future
sailing craft would not be as backbreaking
as it was on traditional sailing vessels. At¬
tention is, for instance, being given to the
idea of computerizing sail mansuvres.
A British firm has developed a design for a
137-metre sailing freighter able to carry full
sail in a beam wind of up to 35 knots, thus
obviating the need for difficult and potential¬
ly dangerous deckside work by crewmen.
The design also features heavy-duty win¬
ches to reduce physical labour. In more
general, cultural, terms, some specialists
feel that far from enslaving crewmen, a
return to sail could be much more
stimulating than life at sea is today, when
work on, say, a huge tanker has the same
uninteresting rote character as does labour
on an automobile assembly line.
But possibly the most advanced nation
now in the windship field is Japan. It is
calculated that the Shin Aitoku Maru uses
only half as much fuel as a conventional
ship. However, only 10 per cent of the sav¬
ing is due to the sails; the rest is due to other
features of the design and equipment.
"Spectacular though the reintroduction of
sails may have been", the engineers point
out, "the engine is, and will remain, the
principal means of propulsion". Never¬
theless, partisans and opponents of wind-
ship alike cannot but appreciate the nice
irony of the fact that the wind-assisted Shin
Aitoku Maru is... an oil tanker!
Two graceful eastern
Javanese fishing
boats small cousins
of the "Makassar
schooners" which ply
through the
Indonesian
archipelago carrying
an immense variety of
cargoes.
ARTHUR GILLETTE, of the United States, is a
staff member of Unesco's sector of Social
Sciences and their Applications. He has worked
as a deck-hand on sail-powered fishing boats in
the Bahamas, and in 1969 crossed the Atlantic on
a 7.6-metre cutter.
33
