World energy file
"Thunderbolt", by Roy Lichtenstein.
Photo © Sotheby Parke-Bernet, New York
by Zoran Zaric
THE 4,500 million people on the earth currently use
about 10,000,000,000,000 watts of energy. This is
equivalent to 2.2 kilowatts per head. A single bar
electric fire is usually rated at 1 kilowatt (kW).
To understand the energy problem, it is important to
distinguish between power and energy. Technically, power is
the rate at which work is done or energy used. A 1 kW elec¬
tric fire has a power rating of 1 kW; it uses energy at the rate
of 1 kilowatt-hour (kWh) per hour24 kWh per day, or
24x365 = 8,760 kWh per year. Thus the average rate of
energy use over the whole globe is 19,272 kWh per year per
head, which is the same as 2.2 kW continuous.
When talking of global energy use, figures in watts or even
kilowatts tend to get very large. Scientists use a system of
shorthand to make the numbers seem smaller:
1 kilowatt (kW) = 1,000 orlO3 watts
1 megawatt (MW)= 1,000,000 or 106 watts
1 gigawatt (GW) = 1 ,000,000,000 or 109 watts
1 terawatt (TW) = 1 ,000,000,000,000 or 1012 watts.
Total energy consumption of the whole world is now
10 terawatts (TW).
The same prefixes can be used in front of units other than
watts. Thus 1 gigatonne (GT) is 1,000,000,000 tonnes. While
electrical energy is usually expressed in terms of the watt,
some fossil fuels such as coal and oil are more conveniently
measured in tonnes. The energy contained in one tonne of
hard coal is 8,139 kWh; the energy in one tonne of oil is
11,964 kWh.
However, although the average per capita energy consump¬
tion is 2.2 kW, energy is not used uniformly throughout the
globe. Consumption in North America is about 10 kW per
head. Consumption in the other industrialized countries
varies between 2 and 7 kW. The rest of the world, comprising
three-quarters of mankind, consumes less than 2 kW, on
average about 450 watts. Nearly 400 million people live on
less than 100 watts. Energy consumption, in other words,
follows the global economic order rather closely.
The most reliable forecasts all seem to suggest that by the
year 2000 there will be 6,700 million people, consuming an
average of 3.06 kW per capita. This gives a total energy con¬
sumption of 20.5 TW, slightly more than double that of to¬
day. Fifty years later, by 2050, there will be 10,500 million
people, consuming an average of 5.28 kW. This gives a total
consumption of 55.4 TW, some five and a half times as much
as today.
The "World Energy File" on the following pages is an at-k
tempt to indicate briefly where this energy may come from, f
ZORAN ZARIC, Yugoslav specialist in thermodynamics, is a member of the
Serbian Academy of Science and Arts and president of the Yugoslav
Association for Solar Energy. He has been for many years Secretary-General
of the International Centre for Heat and Mass Transfer, which co-operates
closely with Unesco in the energy field. This article is based on the
manuscript of a book by Zoran Zarió, provisionally entitled Energy for the
Future, fo be published by Unesco in 1982.
17

WORLD ENERGY FILE
Fossil fuels
HE fossil fuels consist of decayed plant matter. Their energy
is contained in chemical bonds, derived originally from the
sun's energy which was fixed by plants millions of years ago
through photosynthesis. Fossil fuels consist mainly of carbon, in
combination with other elements. It is estimated that there are
something like 10'6 (10,000 million million) tonnes of fossil carbon
underneath the earth's rocks. Unfortunately, not all of it can be easi¬
ly or economically recovered. There are four main sources of fossil
fuel.
Coal is found most commonly north of the equator, and in par¬
ticular north of the 30° N latitude line. Some 88 per cent of the
known reserves are found in the Soviet Union, the USA and China.
There are also extensive deposits in central Europe.
So far the world has used up about 130 gigatonnes of coal. The
known recoverable reserves of coal amount to 600 GT (about four
times as much as has been already used). But future estimates are op¬
timistic. There may be as much as 10,000 GT of coal on the earth, of
which it is thought we can expect to recover 2,500 GT.
We are currently using about 2.6 GT of coal a year, worldwide. In
1980 global energy consumption, from all fuels, was the equivalent
of about 10 GT of coal equivalent so coal is now providing about
26 per cent of our global energy needs. Fifty years ago it provided
nearly all our energy, and it may soon have to provide much more of
our energy than it does now. Research is now being done into how to
turn coal into forms of natural gas and oil, and into how to use it
more efficiently.
Oil is undoubtedly the most useful fossil fuel, mainly because it is
so easily transportable. More than half of the proven reserves are
found in the Middle East, and the world has so far consumed about
one-third of what is known to exist and to be recoverable. In some
countries, such as the United States, as much oil has already been
consumed as is known to be left.
Currently we are using about 3 GT of oil a year. Proved reserves
amount to some 88.4 GT but as much as 300 GT may be ultimately
recoverable. At the moment we are discovering new reserves at the
rate of about 5 GT a year, which is faster than we are consuming the
product. However, it is thought that maximum oil production will
occur about 1990, and that thereafter world production (and
therefore consumption) will decrease.
Natural gas is likely to have a longer future than oil. About 40 per
cent of the known reserves are in the member States of the Organiza¬
tion of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and 30 per cent in
the Soviet Union. In fact, the USA and the USSR together consume
70 per cent of world natural gas supply.
So far we have consumed about 40 per cent of the known reserves.
In energy terms, the proved reserves are about two-thirds those of
oil. But estimated recoverable resources are probably as large as
those of oil. As we currently use 2.5 times more oil than natural gas
(again, in energy terms), natura! gas is going to last a good deal
longer than oil. World production is expected to peak in the year
2010, by which time we will be using three times as much natural gas
a year as we are now.
Oi! shales and tar sands are the last source of fossil fuels. The
shales are found 70 per cent in North America and 25 per cent in
Latin America; the tar sands are found mostly in Canada, with other
deposits in South America, Siberia and Nigeria. Reserves are quite
extensive roughly comparable to those of natural gasbut the
problem is how to recover the fuel.
Both deposits must be heat-treated to release their fuel, and the
fuel must be upgraded to rid it of impurities. The result is an expen¬
sive fuel. For example, for each barrel of oil extracted from oil shale,
1.7 tonnes of rock must be separated and then disposed of.
It is expected that fossil fuel use will peak in the year 2010 by
which time we will be using twice as much fossil fuel as we do now.
18

Coal 600x109
Annual energy use
(World) 5x10*
c *?'
Oil
200x109 100x10s
Proven resources total 900 x 109
(or 900 billion) tonnes of coal equivalent
Coal is not a new or renewable source of energy but reserves of coal are huge in
absolute terms and dwarf those of oil, gas and the unconventional
hydrocarbons oil shales and tar sands. In a conventional oil field, the crude oil is
trapped between grains of sand in a stratum capped by other rock which is
impermeable. Drilling a hole through the latter produces a gusher as the weight of
strata above pushes out the fluid below. However the oil may not be fluid but
highly viscous; alternatively it may be trapped among such fine particles that it
cannot flow. The former is calied a tar sand, the latter is an oil shale, but both
terms are imprecise.
A glance at the known reserves, however, is sufficient to stimulate invention. The
amount of heavy oil in the single tar sand deposit along the Orinoco in Venezuela
may exceed that of conventional oil in the entire Middle East. Some oii-importing
developing countries have fields with one to five billion barrels. They include
Colombia, the Ivory Coast, Madagascar and Turkey. The tar sands of Canada
(mostly Alberta) have reserves of 800 billion barrels but are still dwarfed by those of
Venezuela estimated at over 2,000 billion barrels.
Oil shale reserves are even larger. The developed market economy countries
together have 2,247 billion barrels with the lion's share (2,100 billion) in the United
States. Among the developing countries which import oil but also have oil shales
are Argentina, Thailand, and Morocco with 300 million to one billion barrels each
while Brazil has 800 billion barrels. The Soviet Union and Zaire also have substantial
deposits. Current producers include China which gets nine per cent of its oil from
the shales of Manchuria and Kwangsi (45 to 70 million tonnes of shale annual '
production). The Soviet Union processes 35 million tonnes from which 12 million
tonnes of oil is extracted. '
Source: United Nations Development Forum
Oil shales Conventional oil
Heavy crude oils
or tar sands
Source : Energy in a Finite World, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria


Research into the production of energy by nuclear
fusion is carried out in the Soviet thermonuclear
"Tokamak 10" installation, above. To obtain a fusion
reaction the reacting mixture, or plasma, must be
heated to about 100 million degrees centigrade. The
problem is how to insulate the plasma from the walls
of the container. In the tokamak apparatus this is
achieved by holding the plasma in a magnetic field.
The plasma is contained in a doughnut-shaped vesse
right, around which coils are wound to create a
strong magnetic field which stabilizes the plasma,
electric current flowing through the plasma itself
heats the plasma and produces another magnetic
field that holds it away from the container wall.
When young scientists from developing countries return home to pass
on their knowledge after advanced studies abroad, they are likely to
shoulder a heavy teaching load which restricts their opportunities to do
original research. They may feel cut off from the latest developments in
their field. Almost 20 years ago, the International Centre for Theoretical
Physics, at Trieste, was created to offer such men and women a way
out of this intellectual isolation. The Centre, which is financed by Italy,
the International Atomic Energy Agency and Unesco, is a place where
they can update their knowledge, think, work, and above all enjoy the
stimulus of contact with other scientists. It was founded on the
initiative of Professor Abdus Salam who had himself known the
frustrations of isolation in the early 1950s when, after work in high
energy physics at Cambridge and Princeton, he returned home to
Pakistan to teach. He was his country's only theoretical physicist at
that time. "Isolation in my field", he wrote later, "as in most fields of
intellectual work, is death". Today Prof. Salam directs the Centre,
which each year welcomes some 1.500 physicists for visits and
seminars. Above, Prof. Paul Dirac, who won the Nobel Prize for physics
in 1933, delivers a lecture in the Centre's amphitheatre.

WORLD ENERGY FILE (CONTINUED)
Nuclear power
NUCLEAR energy is produced when mass is converted into
energy. There are two possible ways of doing this. In nu¬
clear fission, energy is produced when a nucleus is bom¬
barded by neutrons and splits into two. In nuclear fusionso far on¬
ly seen on earth as the thermonuclear explosion of a hydrogen
bombtwo light nuclei are forced together to form a heavier
nucleus which contains less energy. In the process energy is released.
Thermal reactors
The first chain reaction was produced in a squash court in Chicago in
1942. Since then more than 200 nuclear thermal reactors have been
built, with a total output of about 120,000 megawatts. This is about
6 per cent of the world's electricity production. More than one third
of these reactors are in the United States and they produce 12 per
cent of that country's electricity.
By 1985 there are expected to be 414 reactors in operation 196 in
Europe, 170 in North America, 43 in Asia, and 5 in Latin America.
Together they will produce 307,000 megawatts.
By the end of the century nuclear power production may have
risen by a factor of three. This will require about 500,000 tonnes of
nuclear fuel a year, and some 4 million tonnes of uranium will have
been used since nuclear energy began. This is roughly equal to the
total amount of known uranium reserves which are economically ex¬
ploitable. Without either breeder reactors which produce more fissile
material than they consume, or fusion reactors, nuclear energy
would then come to a dead-end.
cool or melt and vaporize their surroundings. This has been done in
the hydrogen bomb, but never in the laboratory. However, research
into nuclear fusion has been greatly increased since about 1975, and
is now running at about $1,000 million a year. It is expected that the
scientific feasibility of nuclear fusion will be established in the 1980s.
Technical feasibility may not be achieved before 1995 and full-scale
demonstration of fusion power plants may have to wait until the
decade 2005-2015.
mIÉ lai I 1 ' ' "
1Z~\ ' S T^«Í
m .J liH 1 ï Ji ï * f* 'B
ta * i * 1 ' v
a.
« i\i ! \mr
C3 i i .' i ÏM' ï
H " » ¿ -Í .i * i ffr>
LU ^^ F* 1 Tll n > i U «H
9 ' J 1 1 ^Ml tI
3 mt i r . m\ i^H :ic
il «-
*~ Bflnu ' I 1 an
S . i -F ! 1 T
o w - i i m
ji - ~^E 1 C , §^ê i
a. 1 j^H \ 1 \. Il . 1 1 I
S^M _ - m 4i 1 't .	 m m L.
m
LU 1 mui ,>, . hL_^
ofi» m mt* Si i
^ P - \w 5'i .i;:
to J^ : P	al ^^^ ¿t1 :
i A»1Cwl Ti 1H 1 1 \ v^n
m
^M1:^*^^^
o I^HM i *^
o
.c
a.
teli^^
Breeder reactors
A breeder reactor, which will double the amount of fissile material in
6 to 10 years, increases fuel usage by about 60 times. Hence, with the
breeder, the uranium available could be made to last very much
longer. Furthermore, it is technically possible to use not uranium but
thorium as the main fuel. There is much more thorium than uranium
available in the world, and this could extend the life of the fission
reactor for a very long time.
Breeder reactors are still being developed. Several are now being
experimentally operated but none is producing commercial electrici¬
ty. The first operational reactors are expected during the 1980s but
large-scale breeder reactors will not be producing electricity before
1990. Technically, breeder reactors are difficult to operate: they re¬
quire a large inventory of fissile material, normally plutonium ob¬
tained from the spent fuel of a thermal reactor running on uranium.
As this is the material used in the manufacture of nuclear weapons,
there is concern about the prospect of having to produce and store
large quantities of plutonium. By 1985 about 100 tonnes a year of
fissile plutonium will be needed. This will rise to some 500 tonnes by
the year 2000.
Breeder reactors have a much greater power density than thermal
reactors, and they have to be cooled by liquid metals such as sodium
and potassium. Liquid sodium is a highly dangerous material; it
catches fire on exposure to air and explodes in contact with water.
Fusion reactors
Fusion reactors are likely to work by fusing together deuterium and
tritium, producing an isotope of helium (an inert gas) and a great
deal of energy. Deuterium can be obtained in unlimited quantities
from sea water; tritium is obtained by irradiating lithiumwhich is
abundantwith neutrons in the fusion reactor itself. Thus there is
no fuel problem with the fusion reactor. Further, the product is
stable and not fissile, so the process is potentially cleaner than any
fission reactor could ever be.
However, to obtain a fusion reaction means heating a very high
concentration of deuterium and tritium to about 100 million degrees
and containing the fuels long enough for fusion to occur before they
There are grounds for concern about the safety of all nuclear
reactors. None is ever perfectly sealed, with the result that each
reactor adds slightly to the level of background radiation in the
atmosphere. There is a natural level of background radiation which
we have now increased by about one third as a result of such
things as nuclear fall-out from weapons tests, medical use of X-
rays and even watching television. A colour television may impart
a dose of radiation of as much as 2 millirems an hour to the
viewer. By comparison, a nuclear reactor increases the dose to the
population living nearby by only 5 millirems a yearwhich is about
2 or 3 per cent of background radiation. So concern about
radiation levels from nuclear reactors is unfounded.
However, there is always the possibility of an accident which
might release large doses of radiation into the surrounding area.
The records, however, are reassuring. In the United Kingdom
nuclear industry between 1962 and 1975 there were four deaths at
work among the staff (none directly caused by nuclear activity). In
the same period, 66 members of the staff were killed in road
accidents.
Similarly, there is now a one in 4,000 chance of being killed in a
road accident every year. The chance of a major nuclear accident
is calculated at one in 5,000 million per year. A major nuclear
accident is more than 1,000 times less likely than a major
earthquake or the failure of a large dam.
However, the problem of disposal of spent radioactive materials
has not yet been satisfactorily solved. Every 1,000 megawatt
reactor produces about 9 cubic metres of highly radioactive
material a year. It must be stored for tens of thousands of years
before it becomes harmless. Deep burial in sealed containers is the
expected solution but the associated hazards are not yet fully
resolved.
The safety problems of breeder reactors are likely to be the most
severe partly because of the greater amount of fuel that is used,
partly because the fuel is potential nuclear weapons material (and
is also the most toxic material known), and partly because the
liquid metal coolants are themselves highly dangerous. None of
these problems appears to be technically insoluble but they are
much more serious than those of the thermal reactor. Above,
Experimental Breeder Reactor II at Argonne National Laboratory's
Idaho site.
21

. Photo © A. Ten Dam, Paris
Geothermal energy comes from nature's own nuclear reactor. It
arises from the radioactive decay of an isotope of potassium and
other elements which are spread about in the earth's crust.
For every kilometre down this generalized heating raises the
temperature 30 °C. In some areas geological activity accentuates
this effect and temperatures may rise by 80 °C per kilometre.
Where sandstone and other porous rocks allow groundwater to
circulate, heat is transferred to the water which may come to the
surface naturally at springs or geysers, or may be obtained by
drilling. However, since the weight of the rocks makes the crust
impermeable deeper than four kilometres, geothermal steam is
rarely hotter than 300 °C, limiting efficiency. The water and steam
are often corrosive and are difficult to use in conventional
turbines. New designs may overcome this difficulty.
When geothermal energy provides merely hot water it is used for
space heating and agriculture, or to pre-heat water in conventional
steam-generating power plants. Italy pioneered geothermal
exploitation for its electrified rail system. New Zealand, Iceland,
France and Japan apply geothermal energy to space heating. The
African Rift and Pacific Basin rim are other favoured areas.
There are great hopes for hydro-fracturing hot dry rocks which are
far more widely distributed than porous rock geothermal fields.
Water is pumped down one hole, through the fractured rock and
back up another hole. The main problem is how long before the
hot rocks cool (they take a very long time to heat up again).
Current geothermal electricity costs are competitive with nuclear
and oil-powered stations. Above, a geyser field in California. Right,
diagram shows how geothermal steam is obtained.
Source : United Nations Development Forum, 1981
hot dry rock
cgh. water
22
Drawing © p. Charpiot, Paris

WORLD ENERGY FILE (CONTINUED)


EACH square metre of the earth's surface
continuously radiates about 0.06 watts
not enough to be felt by a human being
but enough, over the whole earth, to lose the
planet some 2.8 x 1014 kWh every year. At this
rate the earth would cool down to the
temperature of space in only 200 million years.
The fact that the earth is already 4,500 million
years old means that energy is being supplied
from within the earth. That energy comes from
heating from the radioactive decay of certain
isotopes in rocks in the earth's crust. Thus
geothermal energy is really another form of
nuclear energy.
The heat of the earth has been exploited for
hundreds of years even by the Romans who us¬
ed geothermally heated water for bathing. To¬
day there are about 20 geothermal power plants
in operation, ranging from a few megawatts to
500 MW each. Together they produce some
1.5 GW.
Geothermal energy can only be used where it
is available fairly close to the Earth's surface.
This tends to be in regions where there are
volcanoes or frequent earthquake activity. Some
of the countries in which geothermal energy is
now being used include the USA, the USSR,
New Zealand, Japan, El Salvador, Mexico, the
Philippines, Iceland, Italy, France and
Hungary.
The last two countries use only warm water
for space heating. Most of the others use either
dry steam or very high temperature water under
pressure as an energy source for powering tur¬
bines to produce electricity. These are the easiest
forms of geothermal energy to exploit.
However, a great deal of energy is contained
within hot rocks in the crust. If cold water could
be pumped down to them, energy could be
recovered as steam or very hot pressurized
water. This technique is still being researched. If
successful, it would increase geothermal energy
sources enormously.
There is still enormous scope for geothermal
energy production, particularly in the unknown
area of heat recovery from hot rocks, and in the
use of the truly enormous reserves of
underground warm water which could be used
for space heating and the raising of crops in
greenhouses. Geothermal energy also has the ad¬
vantage of rather few environmental disadvan¬
tages. It is, however, technically a finite resource
because the energy contained in the crust
gradually disappears as it is used up. On average
one well will produce about 5 MW and has a
lifetime of 10 or 20 years.

WORLD ENERGY FILE (CONTINUED)
Tide
ABOUT 3 terawatts of power are locked up in the world's
tides. Only in a few places of the world, however, is it
economic to recover the energy; those are places
where the tidal range is very high as in some parts of the English
Channel, the Irish Sea, and along the North American and
Australian coasts and on some parts of the White Sea and the
Barents Sea. There are in fact some 24 potential tidal power sites in
the world, so this can hardly be described as a global resource.
For technical reasons, tidal power plants only operate at 25 per
cent of their rated capacity so maximum global potential is only
20 GW out of the total possible of 80 GW. Only one large tidal
power station has been built at La Ranee, in France, where capaci¬
ty is 240 MW and about 60 MW is produced, fairly economically.
Studies are in hand for another huge site in France of 12,000 MW
and for a 3,800 MW site on the coast of North America at the Bay of
Fundy.
Wave
Another 3 terawatts of power are stored in ocean waves. The average
wave in the North Sea contains an energy of 40 kW for each metre of
its length for 30 per cent of the time and about 10 kW per metre for
70 per cent of the time. Estimates vary widely as to how much wave
power could be extracted. One estimate puts it at 100 GW global.
Another suggests 120 GW for the UK alone. For the moment,
however, the matter is academic as there are no wave power plants
operating. Several experimental prototypes have been built and are
being tested. The UK and Japan are in the forefront of this type of
research.
Photo © JAMSTEC/lnternational Energy Agency
Invented by Japanese engineer Yoshio Masuda, navigation
marker buoys powered by wave energy have been in use in
Japan since 1965. The motion of the waves is used alternately to
suck and pump air through a low-pressure air turbine which
drives an electric generator. The small electric current thus
produced is sufficient to power the lamps of the marker buoy.
An attempt is being made to use the same principle to generate
power on a larger scale using an experimental sea-going ship-like
buoy, the Kaimei (above) designed by the Japan Marine Science
and Technology Centre. Cockered rafts (below) operate on a
different principle. Named for their inventor Sir Christopher
Cockerell (best known as the inventor of the hovercraft),
Cockerell rafts are articulated platforms which convert into
energy the undulatory motion of waves. The models under test
as shown in our photo are one-hundredth of the size that would
be needed for Atlantic conditions.
Photo ©,United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority
Wind
The winds blowing over the earth contain some 2,700 terawatts, and
windmills have been used for thousands of years to capture a tiny
fraction of this energy. There is now renewed interest in wind energy
but there are two main problems. The first is that the wind blows ir¬
regularly and so the energy captured must be stored in some way,
which greatly increases its cost. Secondly, the energy in the wind is
very dilute. It actually requires a five times greater land area to cap¬
ture wind energy than it does to capture the equivalent amount of
solar energy with solar collectorsalthough admittedly most of the
land on which windmills were erected could also be used for
agriculture.
Wind energy is useful on a small scale for local needs but to make
a significant contribution machines of between 100 kW and several
MW will have to be developed. Several are now being tested, the
largest being in North Carolina.
Of the 2,700 TW of power in the winds, only a quarter is available
in the first 100 metres above the surface. Taking into account only
the land areas and inevitable inefficiencies, a maximum of 40 TW
would be available if wind machines were built all over all the con¬
tinents. However, even ten per cent of this is 4 TW which is greater
than the hydropower potential.
24

iUJÉJM
Above, the tidal power station at La Ranee,
France. Right, a new wind turbine generator on
Block Island, State of Rhode Island, U.S.A. Its
blades measure some 38 metres from tip to tip
and in a 30-kilometre-an-hour wind it can
generate the electricity used in 50 average
American homes. Below, a wind-operated
water pump in the Gezirah district of Sudan.

\ . ^S^Jfe'íi/W?
>rt
Photo P. Malinovsky © APN, Moscow
Hydroelectric power is generated by
water flowing through turbines. The
quantity of electricity generated varies
according to the mass and speed of the
water passing over the turbines.
Capital costs are high but operating and
maintenance costs are lower, and the
production of hydroelectric power
plants, which may have a lifetime of up
to 100 years, can be regarded as
inflation-proof. In recent years there
has been heavy emphasis on economies
of scale. The world has 2.2 million
megawatts potential power of which
only 18 per cent has been exploited.
Norway, Canada, Sweden, Brazil and
Sri Lanka get over three-quarters of
their total power from hydro.
Environmental and social problems with
some of the larger schemes have dulled
hydro's bright image. Good agricultural
land is often flooded, farmers are
displaced, disease may spread and
climate may be changed. Interest has
recently revived in small-scale hydro for
developing countries. Projects can be
implemented in places without an
electricity grid and electricity demand
structure. They can form a focal point
for industrialization in rural areas. The
manufacturer can involve local
materials and skills and encourage the
population to stay. China has already
built over 90,000 small hydro stations,
and even in rich countries like France
and Sweden, exploitation of thousands
of sites is under way. Combined units
in developing countries can provide
mechanical output for milling during
the day and electric power for lighting
and cooking by night. Technological
advance and standardization is
expected to bring down present costs
by 20 to 30 per cent. Above, the
hydroelectric power plant at Ust'-llim,
in eastern Siberia. Right, a small
hydroelectric power station in Yongan
county, east China. Below, the Kariba
Dam across the Zambezi River on the
border between Zambia and Zimbabwe
which provides 8 million kilowatt-hours
of electricity annually.
Source : United Nations Development Forum, 1981
Photo Paolo Koch (S\ RaDho Pa
:*?>
.¿U**

WORLD ENERGY FILE (CONTINUED)
Hydropower
HERE are a million million million (1018) tonnes of water on
the earth. Only 1 /2000th part of this, however takes part in
the annual water cycle, being evaporated and then precipitat¬
ed again as rain or snow. Even this tiny part is equivalent to
500,000 cubic kilometres (km') of water. In fact every year,
430,000 km' are evaporated from the oceans and 70,000 km' from
the continents. When this water is precipitated 390,000 km' falls on
the sea, and 110,000 km' on land. So every year 40,000 km' of water
runs off from the land and into the sea. As the average height of the
continents is 800 metres, it is easy to work out that the total potential
hydropower of the globe is 10 TW (roughly total global energy con¬
sumption).
However, only a fractionperhaps 15 per centof this can be
economically recovered. This leaves a total potential of 1.5 TW. In
1975 total annual hydropower production was about 11 per cent of
this. Thus there is still some way to goparticularly in countries in
Africa and Asia where the potential is largest but the least used.
Fifty years ago some 40 per cent of world electricity came from
hydropower. Today that figure has dropped to 23 per centbut that
is still much higher than the fraction supplied by nuclear power. In
some countries in Latin America as much as 80 per cent of electricity
demand is satisfied via hydropower.
Today there are more than 70 plants in operation of more than
1,000 MW. Some have a capacity of 10,000 MW. And there are
millions of a few kilowatts. Hydropower is useful in that it runs off a
renewable resource, is extremely efficient as it produces electricity
direct from a form of mechanical energy not heat, and can be pro¬
duced in plants of almost any size.
Ocean
thermal energy
Between 5 and 8 terawatts of power are locked up in ocean currents.
Attempts to recover some of this with ocean current turbines still
look somewhat futuristic. However, the temperature difference bet¬
ween cold water a few hundred metres down and warm water near
the ocean surface does offer an enormous potential energy source,
estimated at 20,000 to 40,000 TW, of which some 4 TW might be
recoverable in practice. The system of using this energy, which
depends on operating a turbine from the small temperature dif¬
ferences which exist, is very inefficient. Nevertheless small power
plants called OTECs (Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion) are now
being tested and a 100 MW prototype is being planned for some time
after 1985. OTEC power plants would either transmit their power to
shore or use it at sea to recover minerals and other resources.
The oceans of the world absorb nearly 70 per cent of the
solar energy that reaches the earth. Ocean Thermal
Energy Conversion (OTEC) is a way of tapping this huge
energy store by exploiting the temperature difference
between the sun-warmed surface water and the cold
waters of the ocean depths to drive turbine generators
which produce electricity. Two types of OTEC
systems the "closed cycle" and the "open cycle"
systems are now being experimented with. Diagram
below illustrates the working of a "closed cycle" OTEC.
Ammonia, which has a low boiling point, is pumped
round a closed circuit. First ¡t is heated by the warm
ocean water (top of diagram) so that it turns into vapour.
The vapour passes through a turbine where it expands,
driving a generator. Emerging cooler and at a lower
pressure it flows to a cold-water heat exchanger where it
cools further to become liquid again and the cycle
recommences. In an "open cycle" OTEC. seawater is used
as the operating fluid, its boiling point being reduced by
passing it through a vacuum chamber maintained at 3.5
per cent of normal atmospheric pressure. Above, artist's
impression of a floating "open cycle" ocean thermal
power station now under study by the French Centre
National pour l'Exploitation des Océans (CNEXO).
Liquid ammonia
(T
^ (~
~
Warm
seawater
29 %
G
cu
LU
Gaseous ammonia
Turbine
Cold
seawater
4°C
P
Pump
Liquid ammonia
Drawing © R.A. Meyer, OTEC, Chicago
27

Diagram from United Nations Development Forum, 1981
Discussion of solar energy tends to
concentrate primarily on questions of
technology and cost, but, if solar energy is
to be widely and successfully introduced, a
determined effort will have to be made to
educate the public to understand and
accept this new energy source. Below, at a
school at Tiverton, in England, which has
solar installations for space-heating and
domestic hot water as well as heat
recovery units and rainwater recycling
powered by a wind pump, the services are
exposed internally and colour-coded so
that the workings of the system can be
traced around the school. The children
monitor the system to see how much
energy is being used. Above, diagram
shows the working of a simple,
photovoltaic water pump. Above right, a
Mexican research worker checks solar
photovoltaic panels designed for use in
rural communities. Right, a thermal solar
power station in Senegal.
gpü§g
WORLD ENERGY FILE (CONTINUED)

y I" 1 HE average amount of solar energy hitting the earth's
I atmosphere is enormousabout 1.353 kilowatts per square
JL metre, or 178,000 terawatts. The amount reaching the
earth's surface is much less; and the fraction of that which could be
recovered less still. The global potential, then, is best counted as the
solar energy falling on land which is neither occupied nor farmed.
The yearly average value for that is some 10,000 TW roughly 1,000
times current global energy consumption.
The maximum value which solar insolation reaches is about 1 kW
per square metreand that only for an hour or two at mid-day dur¬
ing high summer. In most areas of the world the average insolation is
of the order of 200 W per square metre. Africa and Asia appear to
be the best continents for the collection of solar energy.
Although very diffuse, solar energy is highly useful in that it can
be used cheaply for a variety of jobs. Domestic hot water heating is
the best known, and in Israel one family in five has a solar collector
on its roof. Solar energy can also be used for crop drying, air condi¬
tioning, space heating, water pumping, desalination and the genera¬
tion of both very high temperatures and electricity. The highest
temperature so far achieved is about 4,000° on the Kelvin
temperature scale in a solar furnace in the Pyrenees, where mirrors
reflect solar energy over a large area onto a furnace.
The generation of electricity from sunlight appears the most pro¬
mising line of attack. One method is to arrange for mirrors to reflect
solar energy onto a boiler in which steam is raised to drive a turbine.
Many small-scale attempts are now being made to produce solar
farms which will provide electrical power in this way in the kilowatt
range. In addition, there are now a dozen or so attempts to provide
large-scale solar energy power stations in the megawatt range, using
a basically similar technique. A 10 MW solar power station would
need some 2,000 reflectors, each of 25 m2 surface area.
The alternative is to use photovoltaic cells which convert solar
energy directly into electricity, typically with an efficiency of some
10-15 per cent. Small power units in the range 250-1,000 kW have
already been set up, but are expensive due to the high cost of the
cells, which can be as much as $10 per watt installed. With mass pro¬
duction and more research, however, it is hoped to reduce this cost
to below $0.5 per watt, at which point the electrification of isolated
villages with photovoltaic units would become feasible.
Passage of radiation through the atmosphere
Total radiation arriving (solar constant) - 100%
Top' of the
atmosphere
a ' " c d
!
e
5%\ 20 %\ 25% 23% 27%
À
V
Ground \ At"\
a = reflected from the ground 5%
b « reflected from the clouds 20%
c absorbed in the atmosphere 25%
d diffuse, on the ground 23%
e direct, on the ground 27%
Total on the ground 50%

Photo (c) Randa BishoD
Energy alternatives
and
development strategies
EVER since the world woke up to the harsh
realities of the energy crisis discussion has
tended to concentrate on the technical and
financial constraints that will have to be over¬
come if a solution is to be found. But the in¬
troduction of new energy sources involves much
more than technology and finance and many
non-technical obstacles stand in the way of a
smooth transition to a viable new energy mix.
It was to examine these problems that twenty-
five specialists from around the world attended
an International Workshop on Non-Technical
Obstacles to the Use of New Energies in
Developing Countries, sponsored by Unesco and
nine organizations working in the energy field
and held at the Rockefeller Foundation Study
and Conference Centre, at Bellagio, Lake Como,
Italy, from 25 to 29 May 1981.
One of the major topics discussed by the par¬
ticipants was the problem of the social and
cultural impact of the introduction of new
sources of energy in developing countries and
the lead time needed to prepare the necessary
social and institutional changes and to make
them acceptable to the societies involved.
In their concluding statement the specialists
noted that the impact of change in the energy
mix on all societies and cultures involving the in¬
troduction of new energy sources was not fully
understood. In less developed countries many
social and cultural constraints were intimately
linked to the problems of poverty. The delicate
balance of survival strategies made risk-taking
on new technologies difficult, a factor which
needed greater emphasis in planning and im¬
plementation procedures. Special care would
have to be taken in development programmes
(afforestation, stove design, alternative cooking
fuels such as biogas) to avoid misunderstan¬
dings and possible negative rather than positive
impact.
It was important to distinguish between the
different groups within a society so that
technologies and institutional arrangements
couid be selected and adapted to the needs of
the people who would use them (men, women,
urban, rural, poor, landlords). The institutional
framework for the application of new sources of
energy in developing countries often tended to
favour the urban and commercial sector,
whereas the major needs might well be in the
rural and traditional sector. Institutional support
for new and renewable sources on a small-scale,
decentralized basis might require special atten¬
tion since it did not fit most existing patterns.
Cultural attitudes which favoured energy-
intensive approaches (e.g. large automobiles or
climate-controlled architecture) also impeded
the adoption of new technologies. Alternative
life styles which were less energy consuming
were needed both in developed and developing
countries.
Cultural and social values should not,
however, be viewed only as constraints; they
should also be built upon in the search for alter¬
native development patterns that offered the
possibility of breaking away from exclusive
reliance on the dominant commercial fuels of to¬
day.
Receiving Antenna'
i9.S>9.6kmi
Sokn
wave Antenna
Control
Smui
Waste Heat
Radiator
Rotary Jome Cootovg Equipment
Flights of fancy
The first solar-powered flight across
the English Channel was made on
7 July by the Solar Challenger,
above, a lightweight plastic aircraft
piloted by Stephen Ptacek (whose
name means "little bird" in Czech!).
The 290-kilometre flight took
5 1/2 hours. The craft, designed and
built in California, has over 16,000
solar cells which capture the sun's
rays and convert them into electric
power to operate a motor which
turns the propeller.
Drawing, left, shows the audacious
design concept for a solar satellite
power station, which would orbit at
a height of 36,000 km in space
where solar energy is available
virtually 24 hours a day. The solar
collector would convert solar
into electricity and feed it to
a microwave antenna. The antenna
would direct a microwave beam to
a vast receiving antenna on earth
where the microwave energy would
be converted back to electricity.
Below, newspapers hot from the
solar press were produced during
an experiment in the Tuileries
Gardens, Paris, as far back as 1882.
30
Photo © Musée des Techniques CNAM, Paris

\	
LEAF [C02+2H20
PHOTONS
I
0,
ICOH
.JL
1+0,1
t
H20
H-
(COH2)n
t
CO,
(COH2)+H20 .
_»C02+2H2
GAÏÏ""
y-
THE HYDROGEN TREE
WORLD ENERGY FILE (CONTINUED)
Solar fuels
SOLAR energy is used by plants via the mechanism of photosyn¬
thesis dioxide in the air and sunlight are in this way
made to produce carbohydrates. All fossil fuels coal, oil,
natural gas and lignitesas well as timber, farm crops and even
animal dung are therefore best regarded as solar fuels. More than 95
per cent of our current energy consumption comes from solar fuels.
About 90 per cent of the energy stored in plants on the earth's sur¬
face is in the form of trees. The total energy stored is about
635 terawatt-years, which is roughly the same as the amount of
energy stored in our coal reserves. Unlike coal, however, this energy
is renewed annually at a high rate. The earth's biomass yield on land
is calculated to be some 28.65 TW three times current global
energy consumption of which half . is produced by forests.
Microscopic plants in the oceans also fix solar energy, producing
about 14.35 TW. These are rather conservative figures, and assume
an efficiency of photosynthesis of 0.2 per cent on land and 0.02 per
cent in the oceans. In fact, photosynthesis tends to be more efficient
than this.
The best known use of solar fuels is burning wood for cooking and
heating. Globally, about 1-2 TW are provided in this way, primarily
in Africa and Asia where in some areas timber provides 80 per cent
of energy requirements. But a consequence of this is that forests are
being used more quickly than they grow.
The burning of dried dung fuel is also common, but removes im¬
portant fertilizer from the land. A more efficient use of dung is to
ferment it anaerobically in a digester to produce methane gas. Small
digesters are now common in India and China, even though they are
rather expensive to build. The dung from one cow should in theory
provide enough methane gas to cook for one person.
A similar technique is to ferment biomass to produce alcohol
which is a good liquid fuel. Brazil leads in this technology and aims
eventually to substitute all petroleum with alcohol fermented from
sugar cane and other specially grown crops. Even under good condi¬
tions, however, 1 km2 of sugar cane is needed to provide sufficient
fuel for 100 cars. Although many other countries are now in¬
vestigating the possibilities of substituting petrol with alcoholeven
industrialized countries there will inevitably be competition for
land with food producing activities.
H Zoran Zaric
A radical new approach to solar energy may come from
biotechnology a broad class of systems that have at their
core photosynthetic and biological energy conversion
processes.
Plants have long "known" how to use the energy of sunlight
to split water, but they do not evolve hydrogen explicitly,
since it is needed only for internal energetic processes within
the plant itself as a means for reducing carbon dioxide.
However, it may be possible to develop new biological
structures that in fact evolve hydrogen. At IIASA, Cesare
Marchetti considered the concept of hydrogen-producing trees.
The concept is essentially one of replacing expensive solar
collectors and solar cells with tree leaves. Swollen plant
tissues, so-called gaits, .located at the tree trunk would be
genetically programmed to use the solar energy captured in
the leaves for generating hydrogen gas as a by-product of
photosynthesis. The hydrogen gas would be collected within
the galls and piped to a central storage system. The essential
features of such a system already exist in nature. Many
insects and bacteria induce the formation of galls in different
types of plants. These various kinds of galls, which number in
the tens of thousands, then provide the shelter or nutrients
needed by the organism that caused them. In at least one
case, that of Rhizobium bacteria in symbiosis with
leguminous plants, substantial hydrogen is produced in the
galls, though currently it simply escapes to the atmosphere. It
has been estimated that in this way U.S. soybean plantations
leak about 30 billion m3 of hydrogen annually. Adapting this
potential so that the plants can be easily integrated with
some sort of collection system will depend on advances in the
techniques of genetic engineering. Left, graphic presentation
of the proposed hydrogen tree with a very schematic
chemistry. The gall actuates a reverse of photosynthesis and
makes hydrogen (or methane) available in an enclosed cavity
that can be tapped by a collector pipe.
More than one-third of the world's population depends on
wood for cooking and heating. Eighty-six per cent of all the
wood consumed annually in the developing countries is used
for fuel, and of this total at least half is used for cooking.
Nearly everywhere, reliance on charcoal as a source of fuel is
increasing. In Tanzania, for example, the charcoal share of
the wood fuel burned, which was 3 per cent in 1970, is
expected to rise to 25 per cent by the year 2000. In principle
this is discouraging, because in preparing the charcoal more
than half the wood's energy is wastefully burned away. But
charcoal makes wood energy easier and cheaper to
transport, and the growing reliance on it is a result of the
increasing distance from harvest site to the user. Also,
charcoal is preferred because of its steady and concentrated
heat, its smokeless burning, and because it can easily be
extinguished when the fire is no longer needed. Charcoal can
also substitute for fossil fuels, which in some places is an
urgent need. Regardless of overall inefficiency, it seems clear
that more meals will be cooked over charcoal in the future.
Above, charcoal manufacturing ovens in Argentina.
31
