Meeting the
ENERGY has always been a factor of fundamental importance
in the life of human societies. All activity entails the expen¬
diture of energy and hence, from the draught animal to
nuclear fission, the history of energy merges with the history of
mankind, in whose pattern it is in many respects one of the guiding
threads. The production of energy down the ages has followed the
development of scientific thought, and the forms of energy available
and the manner of their use have often had a direct influence on the
nature of society. In other words energy must be considered, in a
historical perspective, in the light of culture in its broadest sense.
Thus in the nineteenth century the massive use of coal, coupled
with the invention of the steam engine and progress in chemistry and
steel manufacturing, made possible the first industrial revolution
which transformed the essentially agrarian societies of Europe and
then America. Likewise, the discovery of electricity and its host of
uses, whether for lighting, mechanization, or communication, have
made a deep impact on the lives of men and women of every conti¬
nent and have fostered the creation and growth of the world's great
cities. In the twentieth century the exploitation at an increasingly
rapid rate of the other fossil fuels, oil and natural gas, has, along
with the development of hydro-electric power and nuclear energy,
enabled the industrialized societies to pursue the momentous
changes which have given birth to the modern world, with its hopes
and contradictions.
If energy problems are today so acute at the international level as
to justify the holding of a United Nations Conference on New and
Renewable Energy Sources, this is because it no longer seems possi¬
ble to satisfy the world's constantly mounting energy needs by conti¬
nuing to exploit, exactly as before, too limited a range of energy
resources. The international community is thus confronted with the
challenge of making forthwith those structural changeseconomic,
social and technologicalwhich are required by the transition to
new energy sources.
In fact, as this issue of the Unesco Courier makes clear, given the
circumstances. of production and living conditions which currently
prevail in a number of countries, no single energy source can con¬
tinue to meet all energy needs over a very long period; nor are there
new sources capable of taking over fully from those which now exist.
Such is the outcome of a world situation which has been characteriz¬
ed for too long by the intensive exploitation, for economic reasons
related, for instance, to underpayment for energy, of non-renewable
sources such as oil over which there hangs the threat of eventual ex¬
haustion. The study of alternative solutions should aim to increase
energy production but it must also situate this endeavour within a
wider context. It no longer seems possible to envisage the future
without taking into consideration total world energy consumption,
together with the need for changes in the energy economy as a whole,
with all the consequences which will ensue for the environment and
for society.
Such a project concerns all countries, whether industrialized or
developing. It is true that the problems it raises will differ from one
nation to another, but it is in the interest of them all that the transi¬
tion should take place smoothly, as part of a concerted effort. Par-

energy challenge
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
ticularly important is the tapping of new, less costly energy sources
which can be exploited almost everywhere. For the developing coun¬
tries the problem is of vital importance. The increasingly unequal
situation in which they find themselves today means that their
chances of mobilizing the necessary financial resources are slight.
Consequently they must find new resources, but above all they must
have access, notably through a better flow of information, to the
knowledge and techniques whose mastery is indispensable to their
progress. For this to come about, these countries need to join in
world decision-making as full and rightful partners. The transition
to diversified energy sources is in large measure linked to the setting
up of new rules and new mechanisms designed to alleviate the
tensions of the world economy and to bring into being a more equi¬
table international economic order, in a spirit of solidarity and
concertation.
Unesco is taking part in this process of international reflexion and
action. Apart from the fact that the whole thrust of its activities is to
encourage the emergence of this new order, it is particularly
qualified to contribute to the strengthening of international scientific
co-operation which is indispensable to the advancement of learning
and the free circulation of knowledge. It can also help countries
which are attempting to solve their energy problems to draw up na¬
tional policies which take account of all the factors involved,
whether they are related to science, technology, education, informa¬
tion, or to social and cultural life.
The free flow of scientific and technical information and the ex¬
change of data acquired through experience in different social,
economic and cultural situations can make a decisive contribution to
speeding up the exploitation of new and renewable energy sources,
notably in the developing countries. With this in mind, Unesco is
currently engaged in creating an international information system on
energy sources, the use of which necessitates not only data from
many fieldsthe physical sciences, ecology, the life sciences,
engineering, economics but also access to documentation on pro¬
duction, planning and training at every level, from university
teaching to the education of rural populations. This system will thus
be of interest to a wide range of users, from research workers to
planners, from engineers to educators, not to mention the wider
public whose involvement is essential where energy-saving or the
adoption of new techniques are concerned. The setting up of such an
information network is, of course, indissociable from an intensifica¬
tion of research, teaching, training and popularization, all of which
Unesco's programme seeks to promote.
Unesco is also concerned to put the problems of energy in a con¬
text in which all their complexity can be grasped, and has according¬
ly set out to identify the many non-technical factors (especially those
of a social and cultural nature) which affect the exploitation of the
different energy sources. Social attitudes, differing from country to
country, can have far from negligible effects on the possibilities and
rapidity of change.
The environmental problems resulting from an increased reliance
on coal and nuclear energy should not be neglected, either. Here at¬
tention has tended to focus on certain short-term effects on public
health or working conditions or on direct consequences for the
physical environment, at the expense of the longer-term social,
cultural and ecological consequences for which there are often very
few data available and which, if they are to be tackled comprehen¬
sively, require more concerted international action.
. Through these studies and activities relating to energy problems
Unesco wishes to contribute on the one hand to each country's ef¬
forts to pursue its development along its own specific lines and on
the other to the efforts being made by the international community
in the late twentieth century to achieve a balanced and more
equitable management of the planet's resources, considered as the
heritage of all peoples and of generations present and to come.
But an analysis of energy problems cannot be isolated from a
historical appraisal of the relations between the successive levels of
energy use by mankind and the evolution of the scientific concepts
which make the use of energy possible. Energy produced by human
and animal muscle was, for long ages in the history of mankind, the
most important form of energy, as it still is for many peoples today.
It underlay the earliest development of agriculture and urban
civilization. As a result of the rise of the physical sciences and their
application to the interpretation of natural phenomena, the meaning
of the word energy gradually became wider: to mechanical energy
were added thermodynamic and electrodynamic energy, opening the
way for a first leap in the scale of energy production, from the
; kilowatt to the megawatt, and providing impetus for the first in¬
dustrial revolution. The next theoretical development, the quantum
theory, corresponded to the crossing of a new threshold: the use of
energy from nuclear fission. This discovery, associated with the
development of computers, led in turn to the second industrial
revolution, with energy now being measured not in megawatts but in
gigawatts. Other thresholds will undoubtedly be crossed with the
continuance of fundamental research into the structure of matter
and the development of techniques for effectively eliminating and
recycling radioactive wastes. Nuclear fusion is a promising field
because it releases even greater quantities of energy than those pro¬
duced hitherto, and the fuel required isextremely abundant.
These successive breakthroughs in knowledge, promptly turned to
practical use by human ingenuity, are the fruit of individual
genius the genius of the great scientists of every age whose
achievements are so many milestones in the history of scientific
thought. But just as the quickening tempo of progress in the last few
decades was made possible as a result of the slow accumulation of
universal knowledge and its transmission across time and space, so
scientific and technological innovation, though it may be first and
foremost a matter of individual or collective creation, cannot, given
the complexity of the world today, serve the welfare of all without
close co-operation between all those communities and centres in
which it comes into being and finds application. This intellectual co¬
operation is a cherished field of activity for Unesco^ By encouraging
it, by tightening the bonds between the world's scientists, Unesco, in
the field of energy and elsewhere, is also preparing a future in which
man will possess knowledge to release forces on a par with his im¬
mense needs and will be sufficiently wise to master those forces.
