The ecology
of megalopolis
by Stephen Boyden
and John Celecia
MEXICO City: thirty million inhabitants.
Tokyo and Sao Paulo: over twenty-
six million. These dramatic figures
are taken from the latest United Nations
statistical projections for the year 2000. Ac¬
cording to the same projections, over half the
people on earth are likely to be living in urban
areas by the end of this century (as against
today's 40 per cent), and eighteen cities in
developing countries will each have a popula¬
tion of over ten million. The problems of inner
city decay in the industrialized world pale to
insignificance beside those of the mushroom¬
ing cities in developing countries.
During much of this century urbanization
has been a worldwide phenomenon. Today,
however, under the pressure of the world
population explosion, it is taking place on
such an unprecedented scale that cities are
spreading an ever-widening circle of devasta¬
tion around them as they seek the resources
they need, and courting the risk of virtually
drowning in their own wastes.
The exodus from the countryside to the
towns is particularly dramatic in the develop¬
ing world, where it is taking place much more
rapidly and against a background of much
higher population growth than the urbaniza¬
tion process in the industrialized countries,
which was usually gradual enough to allow
the emergence of institutions capable of cop¬
ing with the problems of transformation.
Why should rural populations be attracted
to cities? It might be thought that rural pover¬
ty, especially when set against the backcloth
of grandiose natural surroundings, is less
brutal than poverty in the slums and shanty-
towns spawned by Third World cities. The
24
fact is that the former is just as deadly,
though less conspicuous, than the latter.
People gravitate to the cities because they ex¬
pect to find there better job opportunities and
social possibilities, availability of food, water,
health and educational facilities. And they are
right to the extent that average income in the
city is usually far higher than it is in the rural
economy. Cities are centres of consumption
on such a large scale that the resourceful may
find a form of sustenance which is a better
alternative than near-starvation in the coun¬
tryside. For the rural masses of the develop¬
ing world, then, migration to towns.and cities
is spurred by the need for survival.
The cruel irony is that this imbalance bet¬
ween town and country, reinforced by the
concentration of public investment in urban
areas, is now contributing to urban growth
on such a scale that it becomes impossible to
maintain the quality of life of city-dwellers.
Another irony: the problem of cities bursting
at the seams is further compounded by
demographic growth within their boundaries
when child mortality rates fall as a result of
the provision of better health care facilities. It
is little wonder that the question is being ask¬
ed in some quarters whether cities are ap¬
proaching, or have already reached, the limits
of expansion.
Although the problems of providing food,
lodging, water and health facilities and jobs
for tomorrow's urban multitudes will be im¬
mense, the signs are that the world is not
yet ready to meet the impact of the urban
explosion. Even when governments do
establish mechanisms and institutions for
dealing with urbanization they often seem
unable to perceive the problem as a whole.
In the last ten years, an ecological approach
to the study of urban settlements has been
evolved within the Man and the Biosphere
Programme. The main objective of these
MAB activities, which have so far led to the
implementation of over 60 field projects, is
to help improve the basis for the rational
planning of human settlements by pro¬
moting research on the complex interrela¬
tionships between man, his urban environ¬
ment, and the interactions between urban
settlements and their hinterland.
Good town and city planners have always
used ecological devices, but in. the past
often tended to deal with problems in isola¬
tion and put forward recommendations
which, though ecologically sound in
themselves, ceased to be so when con¬
sidered within the context of the wider ur¬
ban system. To take one simple example : a
green belt is created to provide a city with
"lungs". This is a desirable thing in itself,
but unless other measures are taken at the
same time, it may simply attract new
settlements and more traffic, so that new
STEPHEN BOYDEN, of Australia, is head of the
Urban Biology Group at the John Curtin School
of Medicine, Australian National University,
Canberra, and leader of the MAB integrative
study on the ecology of Hong Kong.
JOHN CELECIA is a staff member of Unesco's
Division of Ecological Sciences with responsibility
for co-ordinating activities within Unesco's Man
and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme in Latin
America. A biologist, he takes a special interest in
human ecology.

roads have to be built. The hypothetical
green belt thus defeats its own object. In
contrast to this piecemeal approach an
integrated, interdisciplinary "ecosystem ap¬
proach" to urban studies is advocated
within MAB, with special attention being
given to the "flows" of food, energy,
materials, people, information and other
elements through cities.
One of the distinctive characteristics of
cities is that they depend on food surpluses
produced elsewhere. In fact urbanization
first began with the development of
agricultural surpluses made possible by
technical advances such as irrigation and the
use of draught animals. Urban growth was
limited until relatively recently by the capaci¬
ty of the immediate hinterland to provide the
city's basic food needs. But whereas in the
past cities drew on nearby land for their food
supplies, in the modern world they import
from distant countries. Their hinterland is
now worldwide. This reliance on food sup¬
plies from distant sources illustrates the
fragility and the vulnerability of the urban
ecosystem.
For those who live in cities, such
dependence has several implications. The
increasing cost of food production, the cost
of transportation, distribution and process¬
ing, and the consequent high energy
demands make food more expensive for the
city-dweller than for his rural counterpart.
The urban poor are hardest hit. They are
potentially vulnerable to serious malnutrition
because not only are they unable to pay
spiralling market prices for food, but
because in urban conditions they are often
deprived of the opportunity to grow their
own.
One answer to this problem, particularly
in developing countries, might be to give
agriculture prominence in national develop¬
ment plans, so that a flourishing agricultural
base could be built up to support decen¬
tralized, labour-intensive industries that
would process farm products and produce
goods useful to small farmers. This in turn
would bolster agricultural production and
help reduce rural migration. Meanwhile, for
millions of the urban poor, the potential
capacity of the urban system to produce
food may be a factor on which their survival
may hinge. The agricultural skills of the
migrant population can be effectively
harnessed with improved land use and the
establishment of intensive cultivation plots,
roof gardens and other productive units.
Composting, urban forestry, irrigation
systems using alternative energy systems for
pumping, aviculture and fish-farming are
some of the practices meriting greater atten¬
tion. Another step forward would be the
development of accessible techniques for
food storage and preservation in order to
counteract the dramatic losses of food in
areas where it is most wanting. In fact in ur¬
ban slums in many parts of the world people
are already displaying great resourcefulness
in producing food and recycling materials,
and this should be taken into account by
planners.
Although cities began with the develop¬
ment of agricultural surpluses, it was the
harnessing of the energy from fossil fuels as
the basis of modern industry that gave real
impetus to urban growth. This brought
more rapid, complicated and profound
changes to cities than any that had occurred
in their millennia of history.
The study of energy flows, with which the
Man and the Biosphere Programme is par-
This model of an urban system is taken from Urban Systems in Crisis, a publication based
on an important study carried out by the Munich-based Study Group for Biology and
Environment as part of the contribution of the Federal Republic of Germany to MAB
project 11 on human settlements. It illustrates the complexity of the interactions that
occur between the various components of an urban system and between an urban
settlement and its hinterland. Although based on a study of a specific area, the Frankfurt-
am-Main region, the model is applicable also to other environments. It was developed as
a tool for decision-makers and as an aid in understanding and planning human living spaces.
ticularly concerned, is an important yard¬
stick which can help us to understand the
urban ecosystem because 'energy is required
for all activities. The study of the energy pat¬
tern of a society touches on all aspects of its
development and draws attention to
ecologically significant changes that are tak¬
ing place. The pattern of the use of energy
from sources other than human or animal
muscle has particularly profound implica¬
tions, for it reflects the pattern of machine
use. This in turn is related to the quality of
the air people breathe, the levels of noise
they experience, the size of the enterprise
for which they work, and even to the time
they spend travelling to work or with their
families. Such factors may also affect the
structure of their families, the extent to
which they practise skills or exercise respon¬
sibility, or the amount of variety or
monotony in their lives. Many of these
aspects of people's lives are difficult or im¬
possible to measure, because they are in¬
tangible, but a truly comprehensive ap¬
proach to the study or planning of urban
systems, as being encouraged by MAB,
must pay full attention to them.
A MAB study on Hong Kong highlighted
the massive consumption of energy which is
another salient characteristic of the urban
system. The city's energy consumption
doubled in the ten years from 1961 to 1971,
whereas population did not greatly increase.
This phenomenon is part of a global trend
which accompanies industrialization. Before
the industrial era, muscle power was the
main source of energy, and consequently
the rate of energy use paralleled the rate of
increase in population. This is no longer the I
25

The metabolism of a city
With some five million inhabitants squeezed
into an area of 1,046 square kilometres. Hong
Kong (right) is one of the most densely
populated areas in the world. It has recently
been the subject of a MAB study undertaken
by the Human Ecology Unit of the Australian
National University. The Unit examined the
interplay of urban forces within a city
committed to economic growth, increasing
industrialization, increasing consumption of
energy (much of it imported) and increasing
use of resources. The research team found in
Hong Kong all those elements of growth which
usually give rise to "big-city stress" (neuroses,
states of tension and psychosomatic maladies
in general) caused by endless rivers of traffic,
air pollution, vertical buildings dwarfing the
human scale and massive overpopulation. Yet,
to their surprise, in the course of a general
investigation of the patterns of health and
disease in Hong Kong, members of the MAB
team found a level of mental illness no higher
than that of Australia's spacious capital,
Canberra. They concluded that the people of
Hong Kong were shielded from big-city stress
by their cultural background, one of those less
tangible aspects of city life that research
workers, policy-makers and planners tend to
overlook or ignore because they are not
quantifiable. The upbringing of the
predominantly Chinese people of Hong Kong
remains rooted in traditional Chinese culture,
in a way of life that has long accepted as
normal high levels of population density. In
addition, there is a sense of involvement in the
Chinese extended family tradition. Working
together in Hong Kong's many small family
workshops and factories, family members and
friends retain a strong sense of purpose and
unity and these positive factors make a definite
contribution to well-being and good health.
The MAB approach to research on urban
settlements is to look at them as ecosystems,
examining the complex interactions that take
place within them rather than studying specific
problems in isolation. This technique is
illustrated by the diagrammatic representation
(below) of the flow of important materials into
and through Hong Kong, which might be
described as a chart of the metabolism of the
city. All the figures given are expressed in
metric tonnes per day.
CO S02 NO» C, H» lead particulates
I55 308 IIO 29 0.34 42
FRESH WATER 1,068,000
CARGO IN 18.000 *" ~>^^&'
PEOPLE IN 8,827
^ i**J%3fl
EXPORT:
GLASS-65
PLASTICS 324
WOOD140
IRON 6 STEEL 140
PAPER97
CEMENT 11
HUMAN FO0D602
LIQUID FUELS612
SOLID FUELS 140
CARGO OUT 8.154
PEOPLE OUT 8,632
Msm
SEWAGE SOLIDS6.301
SEWAGE LIQUIDS 819,000
' || : rf
HUMAN FOOD 5,985
ANIMAL F000335
LIQUID FUELS 11,030
SOLID FUELS 193
MATERIALS:
GLASS 270
PLASTICS 680
CEMENT 3.572
WOOD 1.889
IRON & STEEL 1,878
PAPER 1,015

.case today when the amount of energy be¬
ing used is doubling about twice as fast as
the population. Extra-somatic energy use in
Hong Kong, although it doubled, was only
about one-tenth of what it is in the United
States and one-fifth of what it is in
Australia.
As demand rises, cities face energy prob¬
lems which are not unlike those of food sup¬
ply: the fuel must either come from the sur¬
rounding countryside or from imports.
In many developing countries the vast ma¬
jority of the urban poor rely on traditional
fuels such as wood and charcoal. To obtain
their supplies they must either bring
devastation to nearby woods and forests, or
else buy fuels such as kerosene or bottled
gas, which they can ill afford. Another alter¬
native, buying their wood and charcoal from
merchants, means that the ecological
damage is done even further away from the
city through the exploitation of distant
forests.
The urban poor use less energy than the
rural poor. There are two reasons for this.
The first is that the need to buy fuel en¬
courages them to use as little as possible;
the second is that a kerosene stove is more
efficient than a countryman's open fire.
However, this energy efficiency is depen¬
dent on increasingly costly imported fuel,
and so there is an urgent need for alternative
energy systems.
The world thus faces a phenomenon of
mushrooming urban growth whose implica¬
tions are colossal. Sectoral approaches have
only brought a limited understanding of the
human system on the one hand and the
natural system on the other. We must ac¬
cept the challenge of interdisciplinarity, of
harmonizing the goals of economic develop
ment with environmental concerns and
human well-being. Within the Man and the
Biosphere Programme a number of coun¬
tries have developed such integrative ap¬
proaches to improve understanding of urban
ecosystems and produce information for
planning and decision-making.
Unfortunately such efforts are still very
dispersed, dependent on limited human and
financial resources, and constrained by
institutions which maintain a sectoral
approach.
In many cases the institutions and scien¬
tists participating in this work have had a
multiplier effect on the , modest resources
available. It is to be hoped that an increased
awareness of the problems of urbanization
at international, national and institutional
level will lead to greater support for these
pioneering efforts.
M Stephen Boyden and John Celecia
The Problem: how to guide urban and
regional planning in ways that help, firstly, to
mitigate the adverse social effects that may
accompany the process of urbanization,
secondly, to conserve energy demand for
which increases dramatically with urbaniza¬
tion and, thirdly, to provide future energy re¬
quirements from renewable resources.
The Project: examines the ecological prob¬
lems associated with the development of Lae,
the major industrial city of Papua New Guinea,
which has grown rapidly in the past decade.
From 1966 to 1971 the urban population in¬
creased by sixteen per cent each year and in
the following six years grew by five per cent
annually. By October 1977 the population had
reached 45,000.
The MAB study, undertaken by a research
team drawn from the Human Ecology Unit of
the Australian National University, started in
1976 and ended its field work in 1979. Par¬
ticular attention was paid to a comparison of
living conditions for a group of highlanders
from the Chimbu province, both in their rural
villages and the urban setting to which many
of them have migrated. Sub-projects examin¬
ed the repercussions of cash-cropping of cof¬
fee and the spread of the market economy;
changes in social behaviour during the pro¬
cess of urbanization; rural and urban food
habits and beliefs; and energy flow for Lae
and Chimbu. The aim was to lay the basis of
an ecologically sound energy future and
create an urban system in Lae compatible
with both the social and biological re¬
quirements of human well-being.
The Results: the comparative food study
shows that attitudes to food are changing
rapidly. Even the most remote hinterland has
felt the effect of the city's market economy
Change without tears
The Lae project Papua New Guinea
through the influence of the village stores
which now import foodstuffs and consumer
goods from Lae. In the village group under
study malnutrition among children was high.
Even though there are enough greens and
other foods available to provide an adequate
diet, cultural preferences for the sweet potato
(which is high in unrefined carbohydrate and
low in proteins) are strong. In the village the
incidence of gastro-intestinal and respiratory
infections was also high, as was childhood
morbidity and mortality. Degenerative
diseases appeared virtually absent.
In the urban environment, however, the
pattern is changing more rapidly. The urban
diet is rich in animal protein, children grow
faster, and malnutrition is half that of the
village. Even so, the diet is more refined,
sweeter, and higher in fat, and tends to in¬
crease susceptibility to degenerative diseases
of the heart, diabetes, and dental caries.
The position of women in society has been
affected. The movement of men from village to
city to work as labourers forced the women
left behind to fill traditional male roles as well
as their own. However the resultant stress
was cushioned by the close-knit social group¬
ings of village life. Less fortunate were those
women who accompanied their husbands.
Dependent on the husbands' earnings for food
they could no longer use their skills in food
gardening and animal husbandry and fre¬
quently suffered alienation. Indeed many of
the social problems identified by the study
team have stemmed from the change to a cash
economy which has cut across traditional
village patterns of wealth and power.
Studies on energy flow and waste disposal
have led to practical measures for conserving
energy. One example is the use of sawdust,
market residues and other resources of
"waste energy'' for producing compost. In
1978 the Lae City Council established the first
120 of a planned 1,500 intensively composted
allotment gardens. Subsequently a design of
a city-wide composting programme to pro¬
duce 11,000 tons per annum was prepared
and construction is now proceeding. A
60,000 gallon bioconversion system was
commissioned in November 1979 as a pilot
project for the recovery of sewage as sludge
for composting, as liquid fertilizer for broad-
acre agriculture, and as methane-rich gas for
industry and transportation.
Allotment gardens kept fertile by compost
from domestic and industrial refuse and
sewage sludge will relieve the burden of in¬
discriminate gardening on the adjacent hills,
which has resulted in devastating erosion. A
project has been designed to re-plant the
hillsides, for conservation and rehabilitation,
tor firewood, and for subsistence agro-
forestry using nitrogen-fixing trees and
vegetables in areas zoned for each purpose.
Another practical follow-up is that the MAB
project triggered the formulation of the
Government's national energy-policy, and a
strategy of implementation, which was
adopted by the National Cabinet in February
1979. National Alcohol Fuel and Wood Fuel
Programmes, plus wind energy, direct solar
heating, cooling and electricity, and large-
scale biogas projects are planned.
The Lae project is therefore an example of a
MAB field project which has produced ap¬
plicable scientific results which have subse¬
quently been applied. One key to the success
of the project was the focus of the research
project on problems of priority concern to local
and central government. In effect local and
regional policy-makers and administrators
were involved at all stages of the research,
from project formulation to transfer of results.
