O
In the avant-garde of literature
ANEW
GENERATION
OF TURKISH WOMEN
by Guzin Dino
Photo © Mary Ellen Mark, Archive Pictures, Inc., New York
The Constitution of the Turkish Republic made primary education compulsory for
girls ás well as for boys. This schoolgirl seems to have taken to heart the advice
given to Turkish women by Atatürk in 1925: "Let them show their face to the world
and observe it attentively with their own eyes...".
OVER the past fifteen years,
women writers have come to
play a significant role in the lit¬
erary avant-garde in Turkey. With their
special sensibility they have brought a
breath of fresh air to Turkish literature.
This phenomenon is of particular
significance because it calls into ques¬
tion the many prohibitions and aliena¬
tions that have long been a constraint
on the social and private life of women
in Turkey, a problem they share with
women in the rest of the Third World
(not to mention Western women, who
also have problems of their own).
When they took up arms in the war of
independence, Turkish women were
among the first women in the Muslim
world to fight for the liberation of their
country. Today, expressing themselves
with amazing freedom and daring, they
bring the same courage to bear in their
attack on conservative social attitudes.
This does not mean, however, that
Turkish women writers are "feminists".
In their view, to make a special case of
women, even in their own defence,
would amount to a concession, an ac¬
ceptance of the segregation of the
sexes.
The position of women writers in
contemporary Turkish letters can be
better understood if it is remembered
that in the 1950s a strong current of
writing of peasant origin had emerged
in parallel with the literary output of
urban intellectuals. These writers spoke
for the first generation of Turkish
peasants who, after centuries of il¬
literacy and hardship, thanks to school
reform and the good work of rural in¬
stitutes, were at last able to draw public i
attention to their often formidable I
GUZIN DINO is a Turkish writer. A lecturer at the
Arts faculty of Ankara University until 1954, and
then until 1979 at the Paris Institute of Oriental
Languages and Civilizations, she now works as a
producer for Radio France Internationale. She has
translated a number of important Turkish literary
works into French and presented them to the
French-speaking public.
13

Four
leading
lights
Portraits of four prominent figures in modern Turkish literature. Halidé Edip Adivar (1884-1964) was
a leading member of the first generation of Turkish women writers. Nezihe Meric broke away
from conventional narrative style with her earliest short stories published in 1951. In her writings,
as in later work by Furuzan and Adalet Agaoglu written in the 1970s, the harshness of social
reality can be glimpsed through a poetic and at times minutely detailed evocation of experience.
y problems. This they did in a language
that revealed the richness of their
popular culture and their acute sensibili¬
ty, heightened by centuries of social
constraints. When peasant writers
found their voice it was as if a time-
bomb had exploded. In just the same
way, the vigour of present-day
women's writing can be explained by all
those centuries of enforced silence. In
fact, the voices of these two social
groups, the last to make themselves
heard, constitute the two most striking
and original developments of the last
twenty years.
It must be remembered that, for five
hundred years, Turkish women had
borne the heavy burden of the wars of
the Ottoman Empire and, from the nine¬
teenth century until 1923, that of semi-
colonization. Perhaps that is why there
has always been a popular tradition that
portrays woman as the singer of death,
the keening mourner not only at
funerals but whenever great disasters
strike the community.
Society and popular oral traditions
have reserved for women the melan¬
choly task of improvising agit, or
elegiac poetry. Some of these works
have been written down and published.
Many of them are masterpieces.
The numerous modern women
writers I wish to refer to here have
benefited from the first social advances
brought about by the Republic. Borne
on this current they have been able
since 1954 to make a stand against a
social hierarchy and a strict morality
based on values that were challenged in
the general disturbance that followed
14
the war. But whereas men writers
sought to situate themselves among
modern, mainly Western, currents of
writing and thought, female Turkish
novelists and story-writers, braving the
uncertain climate of a real transform¬
ation, have opened up a new universe,
describing it in an original language nur¬
tured by the frustration of their own ex¬
istence. A new facet of the Turkish soul
has come to light, an awareness of the
strangeness of ordinary, everyday life,
hitherto unknown or ignored in
literature.
Here again, it is not a matter of
"feminism", or of literature concerned
only with women. But it is thanks to
women that Turkish literature today
shows society a more complete and
truthful picture of itself, at several levels
of writing, from the conscious to the
unconscious, from the most lucid kind
of vision to the wildest of fantasies.
Let us take Leyla Erbil, for example.
Her first stories, published in 1956, aim¬
ed at dispelling the conventional mys¬
tique about the character of "the Orien¬
tal woman". She describes a social
crisis that concerns not only Turkey and
not only women; it has to do with ex¬
istential problems of our time.
The passage I am about to quote is a
new kind of funeral lament the
speaker is a widow. The traditional agit
tell of ineffable grief for the departed,
but here the widow mourns her own
wasted life, with its long succession of
frustrated desires and disappointed
hopes: it is a statement of failure.
"You're dead. So you're really dead.
And what is going to become of me?
It's no joke being the wife of a dead civil
servant... Will a dead man's pay be
The
snake-queen
Shameran, a traditional
character In Turkish fairy¬
tales made a notable come¬
back recently in a short
story by the novelist Nazll
Eray. Half-woman, half-
snake, the beautiful
Shameran, right, was also a
favourite with folk artists,
including painters on glass.

Prvoto* © Ara Guter, Istanbul
ADALET AGAOGLU
enough to live on? Shall I get a thou¬
sand pounds out of your death?" She
props the corpse up in bed and speaks
to it. "Oh, oh o-ohl For thirty years I
used to lie beside him like a block of
wood... For thirty years I didn't know
what to do with you. I could never use
the word 'husband' to you. Come on,
isn't it true? Could I ever say to you,
'I've got a cup, I've got a flower, a
geranium in bloom'? All women say
things like 'my husband' 'my man', 'my
Hon' at any rate on the wedding night
it's a lion that climbs into bed. For thirty
years I kept meaning to deceive you...
You ought to have noticed how
beautiful I was, with a slender burning
femininity overflowing all the time from
centuries ofabstinence..:And for thirty
years you tried to trap me; you put
cockroaches in my rubber gloves, and <
whenever you offered me a rose to 7
Emancipation
"Any man who speaks to a woman In
public or who makes signs to her is liable
to punishment under article 202 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure". This rule was still
in force In the Ottoman empire less than a
century ago, and up to the end of the First
World War men and women travelled
separately in public transport. The new
Civil Code adopted in 1926 eliminated
discrimination in civil law and gave women
the same rights as men. Photo right shows
a peasant woman in an Ankara suburb.
15

Shaping
a people's future
, smell, there was a maggot in it... Oh,
why weren't we like other people?...
Stop dying and have a look' at other
people. They are saying the things they
have always said: 'take some more
sugar and let's have a cup of tea...'
That's what life is about; Turkan was
right: one must live every moment to
the full. "
She is taking stock of an unsatisfac¬
tory life, devoid of real love. One would
really need to quote the whole text to
get the full effect, made up of an ac¬
cumulation of little touches conveying
bitterness and despair. Leyla Erbil's
story has no novelistic plan and remains
ambiguous in both meaning and form.
To achieve this result she uses language
situated somewhere between imagina¬
tion, fantasy, the real and the
remembered.
There are many of these women
novelists and short-story writers, work¬
ing at the frontiers of contemporary
literature: Nezihe Meriç, Adalet
Agaoglu, Furuzan, Sevim Burak, Sevgi
Soysal (who died recently), and Tomris
Uyar, to mention only the best-known.
The dominant feature of Nazli Eray's
work is the strangeness of her subjects.
She renews the spirit of traditional folk¬
tales, making fantasy seem both sur¬
prising and perfectly natural.
One of the stories in / Knew the
Night, a collection published in 1980, is
about Izzet Efendi, who has a snake liv¬
ing inside him, which he feeds on milk:
this is related in a matter-of-fact way,
quite naturally, as it were.
When Marusia falls in love with Izzet
Efendi, the snake gets up to its tricks,
squirming and wriggling inside Izzet
Efendi's entrails whenever it hears
Marusia's voice. One day "they sat
down side by side on the divan. Her
plump white arm was against Izzet
Efendi's shirt. Then he told her
everything. Marusia was horrified.
There was a snake then, as well as her,
inside Izzet Efendi? How was it possi¬
ble? She burst out sobbing. She asked
Izzet Efendi to get rid of the snake, to
put it out. She wanted to be the only
one inside Izzet Efendi..."
The obsessive presence of this snake
in Eray's story has an unexpected con¬
nexion with themes found in folk-tales.
Was not the legendary Queen of the
Snakes (Shameran) half woman, half
serpent? Does not the collective im¬
agination at work in fairy stories, like
the Anatolian paintings on glass, give
her a surpassingly beautiful face and
the body of a reptile?
16

Turkish women, who In traditional society were not even consulted on the choice of their husband, obtained the
right to vote in municipal elections In 1930. Since 1934 they have participated in national elections and can stand for
parliament. The first Turkish woman lawyer was called to the bar in 1928, the year when the first women doctors
graduated from Turkish universities. Today women are represented in all the professions, but by far the greatest
number are in teaching. Below, boys and girls In a~ primary school gather round their teacher for the end of year
class photo. Opposite page, a young woman with her child in a street In old Ankara.
Photos © Ara Güler, Istanbul
The collection contains other comical
and startling phenomena a mermaid
who is raped and then hauled off to the
police station with her attacker, a
grandmother with goat's feet, and an
old maid who finds a husband inside a
sort of Twelfth Night cake wrapped up
in mauve paper. All these elements re¬
mind one of folk-tales and are endowed
by Nazli Eray with a symbolic
psychological or social truth that ac¬
quires a new dimension from its admix¬
ture of strangeness.
Sometimes Nazli Eray grafts a very
personal and modern kind of fantasy on
to the traditional variety. In The Man on
the Plain the woman who tells the story
is walking to Chicago with a black
American. He describes the city, which
he got to know when he was a lift atten¬
dant in a skyscraper. The narrator
becomes slowly immersed in the vast
town and somehow finds herself in the
very lift that was the pride and joy of her
companion in his youth.
"In the lift there are just the black and
me. The black pushes thousands of
buttons. In the middle of Chicago, in
this enormous hotel, we are shooting
up and down like lightning. The black
man says, 'Say, sister, I'm happy. I'm in
control. Look, this lift goes just where I
want it to go.' We're going up and
down the building like lightning. I got,
jealous of the black. 'Yes', I said, 'but
the lift can only go up and down right
here in this building'. "
An ambiguous story. Why do these
two meet? Is it because there is a
parallel between the situation of the
woman who has broken away, or who
wants to break away, from oppressive
constraints, and that of the black, trap¬
ped by the effects of technological or
social automation? At all events, we
have here a proof that women writers
are also crossing geographical frontiers
in the search for answers to their
problems.
Let us also consider Sevim Burak.
Her work surprises, shocks and
disconcerts the reader, as she plunges
us straight into the strangeness of the
ordinary. "When one is living", said
Sartre, "nothing happens. The scenery
changes and people go in and out, that
is all." That is how it is in Sevim Burak's
stories. The most amazing things hap¬
pen unobtrusively.
One short story, published in 1965, is
made up of entries in the private diary
of Bilal, an insignificant individual who
lives beside the Bosphorus. He doesn't
want children, but his mistress is preg¬
nant. From the Diary, with all its trivial
details, there gradually emerges a
question.
"September 3rd, 1930. Zembul got HI
during the night, so I wasn't up until
late this morning. My watch had stop¬
ped. I went down to the quayside to put
it right. Then to the butcher's for a
pound of mince and half a pound of
meat for the kebab. Came home. "
Twenty-six pages of trite entries in
the same vein bring the reader to a
dramatic leap or skid out of the rational
world. So for April 25th we read: "I had
to rest on the bed for an hour or two. A
needle that had got stuck in my left heel
was giving me a lot of pain (...)
CONTINUED PAGE 32 -t -,

A NEW GENERATION OF TURKISH WOMEN
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17
November 19th. Went to the grocer's to
buy a can of paraffin. "
The author then intertwines descrip¬
tions of how this peculiar needle works
its way through Bilal's body with the
triviality of daily events like the eternal
buying of cans of paraffin and the
calculation of the distance between
Bilal's house and those of the people he
knows.
"Today, Monday 30th June, 1931, at
two o'clock, the needle started to move
again, towards my back... At about six
it came to a halt and so did the pain. I
went out and walked to the house of
Anastasia, the midwife. I make the
distance between my front door and the
door ofAnastasia the midwife 63 of my
own paces. . . "
The needle's stealthy progress, the
various pains it causes and the constant
buying of cans of paraffin produce a ris¬
ing frenzy, yet daily life goes on, as flat
as ever. "The needle has started going
towards my heart. Realizing that it
would reach my heart, I began to walk
southward. In this direction, the garden
walls, the garden gates, the distance
along the walls of the houses, the
single-width doors, the pine-trees, the
woodwork, the stretch of houses and
the length of the street totalled
604 feet".
Gradually the end approaches. Under
the inexorable threat of the needle, Bilal
finally sets fire to the four hundred cans
of paraffin he has stored away in the
cellar. Everyone, relatives and
neighbours, goes up in flames with the
house. No-one really knows whether
the fire started in the cellar or not, and
anyway what does it matter? For fire
breaks out where it was not expected:
"The door-bell rang... Zembul rushed
to answer it; in her hands, too, she was
holding flames." An ending in which
nothing is explained but which, with the
almost epic density of its presentation,
exercises an extraordinary fascination.
It can be seen from these quotations
that some women practise a type .of
writing in which escape into the im¬
agination and dream-fantasy compen¬
sates for the dreadful monotony of life,
using a system of mirrors to conjure up
a reversed ¡mage of reality.
But there are other women who
grasp reality with both hands, yet still
display rare poetic sensibility. Social
reality is discreetly but clearly present in
the stories of Furuzan, Adalet Agaoglu,
Sevgi Soysal, Nezihe Meriç, Tomris
Uyar and many others...
Already in 1951 Nezihe Meriç was
breaking away from conventional nar
rative. Her first stories and subse¬
quent ones did not have plots, but
they re-created moods and poetic
moments. She has a gift for capturing
those fleeting instants in which the
essence of life can be experienced with
quivering intensity.
The distinguishing mark of Furuzan,
ever since her first collections of stories
came out in 1971, has been the quality
of her style. Her tales, some of them
verging on melodrama, are about the
lives of rich peasants in the south; she is
interested in the aimless existence of
characters who are looked upon as
"social problems": orphan girls,
deserted wives, soft-hearted pro¬
stitutes, homesick emigrants from
remote parts of the Ottoman Empire,
wretched skivvies, caretakers of
decrepit mansions owned by
unscrupulous masters.
But the writer's sensibility and her
desire to re-create the real, deep life of
her homeland dominate all: "In the
country, the days had grown shorter.
The apricots had been spread out to
dry. Some of the fruit on the mulberry-
tree was as black as sloes. In the kit¬
chen, the smell of food reminded one of
peppery 'tarhana' soups. Now the sleek
red tomatoes and shiny pimentos for
stuffing had lost their flavour. The old


lady of the house, sprightly as a young
girl, but small and wizened, was putting
the bedclothes away in cupboards built
into the walls. She placed muslin
lavender-bags between the sheets. The
house was getting ready for another
summer, with the clean, scoured torpor
of a Turkish bath. Fuchsias, begonias
and stonecrop stood in a row by the
window in the passage. "
This "lady" had been no such thing
when she was merely servant to the rich
landowner whom later, after his wife
died, she finally married. Told in the
first person by the maid turned mistress
on the death of her husband, the story
uncovers the psychology of a woman,
once downtrodden herself, who now
rules her servants with a rod of iron.
She has got what she wanted, but she
is not safe from misfortune. Vedat, the
youngest of her three sons, is a rebel.
"The harm that has befallen my son is
worse than the pain of love. Why didn't
we teach him to be like other people?
My Vedat is going to his ruin for
nothing. For nothing. "
Her eldest son arrives during the
night on the train from Ankara, and tells
her that Vedat, the student, has been
arrested. The mother collapses on to
the divan covered in its white dust-
sheet. She feels a sudden pain in her
stomach. "Shall we go to my son
tonight?, she thought. We could hire
Omer's taxi, though it is as much as
Omer's taxi can do to get as fat as Six
Willows... Suddenly she realized that
they could go nowhere that night. "
In most of Furuzan's stories, as in
those of other Turkish women novelists
today, there is no proper ending. Reali¬
ty acquires its full meaning in bits and
pieces, by the assembling of small in¬
dividual facts.
Lie Down to Die is a novel by Adalet
Agaoglu published in 1973. It describes
different facets of the evolution of
Turkish society between 1938 and 1968.
The author pursues a relentless quest
for the identity of the Turkish female in¬
tellectual. "Atatürk died in 1938",
Adalet Agaoglu wrote in the preface to
her first novel. "Within the limits of his
powers and in a precise situation,
Atatürk showed Turkey how to go
about taking her place among the coun¬
tries of the developed world. He died in
1938. What happened then? What kind
of education was received by the peo¬
ple who finished primary school in the
year of his death? The first or second
generation of recruits in the literacy
campaign! What was the world situa¬
tion, what was Turkey's situation,
when they were at the learning stage?
What did they know about that period
of rapid mutations?"
The principal female character in
Agaoglu's novel breaks cynically
through all the prohibitions that have
oppressed women for centuries, yet she
still retains a feeling of guilt. Adalet
Agaoglu, like Leyla Erbil, wants to
define her position in relation to the old
beliefs and the old taboos, in relation to
men, in fact, within a society where
tradition is in conflict with modernity
and all its challenges.
So it is the transformation of Turkish
society under the impact of progress
and republican reforms that provides
women as well as men with raw
material for the novel. But women have
a direct knowledge of their problems
and can reproduce this knowledge with
all its nuances, speaking as it were for
all those other women who are not
lucky enough to be able to liberate
themselves, even through writing.
In present-day Turkey no one can
escape the burning political and social
problems of the age. Sevgi Soysal, who
died at the height of her powers, came
to fame with a marvellous short novel
entitled Aunt Rosa, the story of an ec¬
centric old lady who lives on two levels,
so that humdrum reality mingles with
the magic of fancy.
Around 1972 Sevgi Soysal set down
in masterly fashion her observations on
the world of prison. With perfect insight
and frankness she describes the abyss
that separates a peasant woman who
has nothing in the world, but who lives
her life, in spite of her crime, in a sort of
innocence, and a political militant, con¬
scious that any communication bet¬
ween them is impossible; each of the
women exists alone in her only discerni¬
ble reality.
The lucidity shown by Turkish
women is proof of their entitlement to
their place in the world of art a world
which is neither masculine nor
feminine and a most convincing re¬
affirmation of an intelligence and a
sensibility that have never faltered.
The 1950-1980 generation of women
writers was preceded by other talented
authors. Among these, the prestigious
name of Halidé Edip Adivar
(1884-1964), who fought beside Atatürk
in the armed struggle, occupies an im¬
portant place in Turkish literary history.
But the real artistic flowering of
women sprang from an ideological and
practical determination that originated
with Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. The laws
giving women the right to vote (much
earlier than in many other countries),
the modern civil code and the
numerous educational reforms design¬
ed to help women to catch up with men
in the field of cultureall these made
the feminine renaissance possible.
But Atatürk's campaign in this sphere
was essentially a defence of Turkish
women's fundamental role, a radical
change of attitude away from the old
patriarchal tradition.
As soon as the country had been
liberated and the Republic proclaimed
in 1923, the problem was brought out
into the open. "To live is to function",
Atatürk declared; "therefore if one
organ of a society functions while the
other is inert, that society is paralysed.
One of the urgent needs of our time is
to ensure the rehabilitation of women in
all spheres. "(1).
Addressing a crowd in the little
Anatolian town of Kastamonu, on 27
August 1925, Atatürk stressed again
the need to do away with antiquated
customs. "In my travels, not only in the
villages but in the towns and cities too, I
have seen our womenfolk carefully con¬
cealing their face and eyes. Now, my
male comrades, this is partly the result
of our selfishness. "
Still on the subject of Turkish
women. President Atatürk concluded:
"Let them show their faces to the world
and let them contemplate that world
with their own eyes: there is nothing to
fear. "
The new generation of Turkish
women writers are turning his message
into a reality. They are showing their
faces to the world, and they are gazing
on the world "with their own eyes".
	 B Guzin Dino
(1) From Atatürk, published by the Turkish Na¬
tional Commission for Unesco, 1963.
