The Messenger
by Muhammad Hamidullah
In the presence of the Prophet
In the following text, taken from the Universal History
by Tabari Id. Baghdad 310 AH/923 AD), the best-known
description of'the Prophet's physical appearance is
sketched by Ali, his cousin and son-in-law. Islamic tradi¬
tion, reacting against the idolatry which prevailed in the
Arabian peninsula before the coming of Islam, originally
forbade the reproduction of images of living creatures,
especially of man. From the time of the Abbasids this
rule became more flexible, thus opening the way to the
flowering of the miniaturist's art, notably in Persia and
Turkey. Nevertheless, where the Prophet and some of
the most revered figures of Islam are concerned, it is
still scrupulously observed in the Muslim world.
Asked for details of the Prophet's ex¬
ternal appearance, AH said: he was of
medium height, neither very tall nor very
short. His complexion was pinkish
white; his eyes were black; his hair was
thick, glossy, and beautiful. A full beard
framed his face. The hairs of his head
were long, fa/ling to his shoulders. They
were black [...]. His gait was so
energetic that you would have said that
he tore himself from the rock with each
step, and yet at the same time he moved
so lightly that with each stride he seem¬
ed not to touch the ground. But he did
not walk proudly, as princes do. There
was so much gentleness in his face that
once in his presence it was impossible to
leave him; if you were hungry, you were
satisfied by looking at him and thought
no more of food. Any man suffering
from an affliction forgot his troubles
when in his presence, charmed by the
gentleness of his features and his
discourse. All who saw him agreed that
they never met, neither before nor after,
a man whose discourse was so delight¬
ful. His nose was straight; there were
gaps between his teeth. Sometimes he
would let the hair of his head fall natural¬
ly, at others he wore it knotted into
two or four bunches. At sixty- three
years, no more than fifteen hairs on his
whole body had yet become white with
age... U
ONE night in the month of Ramadan in
the year 609 AD, Muhammad Ibn
Abdallah Ibn Abd al-Muttalib Ibn
Hashim, the future Prophet Muhammad,
had a vision in the cave of Hira near Mecca.
A voice said: "I am Gabriel, the angel sent
by God to announce to you that you have
been appointed by God to communicate His
messages, His revelation to humanity."
The first revelation he received was this:
"Recite in the name of your Lord, the
Creator,
Who created man from a clot of blood.
Recite! Your Lord is the most bounteous
One
Who by the pen has taught,
Taught man things which he did not
know."
These words form the first five verses of
the 96th chapter of the .Qur'an, the Holy
Book of Islam, which contains this and the
many other revelations Muhammad would
receive in the course of the next twenty-
three years before his death (see page 8).
Mecca, the birthplace of Islam, was at the
beginning of the seventh century AD a pro¬
sperous trading centre with some 10,000 in¬
habitants. It stood at the cross-roads of
several major trade-routes, which traversed
the Arabian peninsula, which itself stood at
the confines of the two most powerful em¬
pires of that time: The Persian Sassanid em¬
pire to the north-east, and the Byzantine
empire to the north and west (Syria and
Egypt).
Through Mecca passed caravans
transporting the most precious commodities
of the age: silk from China, spices from In¬
dia, and perfumes from the Yemen, en route
for Byzantium and the rest of Europe. It was
a well-organized city-state with a council of
ten hereditary oligarchs and with ministries
responsible for justice, defence, worship,
external relations, consultations with the
citizens and other civic affairs. Each of these
ministries was held by one of the major clans
of the tribe of Quraysh, to which Muham¬
mad belonged.
The people of Mecca had a reputation for
generosity and honesty: when famine struck
they fed the poor; and to protect the in¬
terests of foreigners who had been unjustly
treated in Mecca they had founded an
MUHAMMAD HAMIDULLAH, an Islamo/ogist
from Hyderabad (India), is currently an honorary
research officer at the French National Centre of
Scientific Research in Paris. He taught for
25 years at the University of Istanbul and for shor¬
ter periods at the Universities of Ankara, and
Erzurum (Turkey) and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia).
Among his published works are Le Prophète de
l'Islam (Paris 1950 and 1980), Muslim Conduct of
State (Lahore^ 1977) and a translation of the
Qur'an into French (Beirut 1980, tenth edition).
In the article above quotations from the Qur'an
are in the author's own translation.

of God
"order of chivalry". They believed in one
God but, like most of the sedentary or
nomadic peoples then living in the Arabian
peninsula, they also worshipped idols
which, they hoped, would intercede with
the deity on their behalf. They did not
believe in the resurrection or in an after-life.
Mecca was noted for a temple known as
the Ka'ba which had become a major centre
of pilgrimage. Reputedly built by Adam and
restored by Abraham, the Ka'ba was a
cubical building, adorned all around with
360 idols. The Virgin Mary and the infant
Jesus were among the figures depicted on
frescoes inside. A black stone in one corner
of the Ka'ba was the object of particular
veneration: it marked the spot where the
ritual procession around the temple began,
and on it pilgrims swore fidelity to God. The
annual pilgrimage to the Ka'ba attracted
crowds of worshippers from all over the
Arabian peninsula.
The overwhelming majority of the people
'of Mecca, including Muhammad, were il¬
literate but they were renowned for their elo¬
quence and appreciation of poetry. Indeed,
poets from all over the peninsula came there
to display their talents and earn the approval
of the Meccans.
Such was the setting to which the
message of Islam was first brought by
Muhammad.
When he received the first revelation
Muhammad was forty years old. An Arab
born in Mecca into a family of merchants, he
had become the leader of caravans, like his
father and grandfather before him. His wife
Khadijah was the widow of a merchant, and
on her behalf he had journeyed to Syria, the
Yemen, East Arabia (Bahrain, Oman), and
possibly even as far as Abyssinia which had
highly developed trading links with pre-
Islamic Mecca. As a young man Muhammad
had already revealed exceptional qualities
which distinguished him from his fellows. In
particular he had won a reputation for probi¬
ty in business which earned him the name of
al-Amin (worthy of confidence).
According to historians, Muhammad
once bought a young slave named Zaid Ibn
Harithah, whom he treated very kindly. Zaid
had been captured during a war. After a
long search his father, chief of a big tribe,
found his son in Mecca and asked Muham¬
mad to return the boy in exchange for a ran¬
som. The future Prophet replied that he
would free the young slave for nothing, pro¬
vided that the boy willingly agreed to go
with his father. Faced with this choice, Zaid
at once and unhesitatingly announced that
he preferred to stay with Muhammad. The
latter was deeply moved and immediately
set the boy free, took him to the Ka'ba and
declared that he had decided to adopt his
former slave as his son.
Another incident, which happened some
five years before the first revelation, also
sheds a revealing light on Muhammad's
character. The Ka'ba had been destroyed by
fire and torrential rain, and then rebuilt by
the Meccans. However, just as the Black
Stone was about to be returned to its place,
a quarrel broke out between the different
clans, each of which coveted the honour of
replacing the sacred object. The issue seem¬
ed likely to be settled at swordpoint when an
old man proposed that the decision be left in
God's hands and that whoever came on the
scene first should arbitrate the issue.
The first-comer turned out to be Muham¬
mad, who placed the stone in a wide piece
of cloth and asked a representative of each
clan to lift the cloth by its edge. In this way
every clan participated in the restoration of
the Black Stone to its niche, where it was
placed by Muhammad to the satisfaction of
everyone.
It was around this time that Muhammad
became dissatisfied with the worldly life
around him and began to retire to spend his
days in meditation, his favourite retreat be¬
ing the cave of Hira. For five successive
years he thus went into seclusion during the
whole month of Ramadan, which then fell in
mid-winter. It was during his fifth annual
retreat that he had his first vision of the Ar¬
changel Gabriel.
When the vision was over, Muhammad
returned home, profoundly shaken, and
described his experience to his wife Khadi¬
jah. He was in a state of great agitation and
feared that the angel might have been the
devil in disguise. Khadijah did all she could
to comfort him and the next day they both
visited her cousin, Waraqa Ibn Nawfal, a
blind old man who had been converted to
Christianity and was versed in religious lore.
As soon as Muhammad had finished tell¬
ing his story, Waraqa exclaimed: "If what
you say is true, this is similar to the Nomos
(Torah) of Moses. If God spares me, I shall
defend you when the hour of your persecu¬
tion comes'."
"What!" replied Muhammad. "Shall I be
persecuted for having talked of God and his
blessings?"
"Yes," said Waraqa, "no prophet has
escaped persecution from a part of his
people."
The story of Muhammad's vision spread
throughout the city. The first to proclaim
their faith in his message were Khadijah, the
devoted Zaid, Muhammad's friend Abu
Bakr, and his young cousin Ali whom he had
brought up as an adopted son. Others were
sceptical, if not openly hostile.
Then three years went by without Gabriel
appearing again to the Prophet. Muhammad
was on the verge of despair when his aunt,
Umm Lahab, taunted him saying: "I am sure
that your devil (Gabriel) has abandoned you
and that he detests you."
This insult touched the' prophet to the
quick. He climbed a nearby mountain, and
when he reached the summit Gabriel ap¬
peared before him, calmed him and recited
to him the words of God: "By the morning
hours and by the night when it is stillest.
Your Lord hath not forsaken you nor doth he
hate you... Therefore the orphan oppress
not, the beggar drive not away, and of the
bounty of your Lord be your discourse."
(The Qur'an, XCIII: 1-3 and 9-11). Muham¬
mad immediately grasped the meaning of
this message ordering man to believe in God
and to be charitable.
The message which Muhammad began to
preach to the people of his birthplace had
two main doctrines, the unicity of God and
the resurrection and life after death. The idea
of a single omniscient and omnipresent God,
to which everyone will one day have to give
an account of himself, conflicted with the
idolatrous beliefs and practices of the Mec¬
cans. At first they were amused by Muham¬
mad's teachings. Then they began to pour
scorn on him. Finally they unleashed a wave
of persecution against the Prophet and the
small group of converts who had embraced
the new religion. When it became in¬
tolerable, Muhammad advised his new com¬
panions to seek refuge in Abyssinia where a
Christian king gave them asylum and protec¬
tion. When the Meccans furiously sent a
delegation to demand the extradition of the
Muslim refugees, the Abyssinian king turned
down their request.
The Meccan delegation thus returned
home frustrated, and as a result the persecu¬
tion of those Muslims who had remained in
Mecca was stepped up.
Eventually the pagan Meccans decided to
proclaim a boycott of the Prophet and his
clan. All commercial transactions, including
the sale of food, were forbidden, and many
Muslims died during the boycott.
After three long years the Meccans lifted
the embargo, but this was not the end of
Muhammad's difficulties. His uncle, Abu
Talib, head of the family and his protector,
died, and the new head of the clan, another
uncle, Abu Lahab, declared Muhammad an
outlaw whom anyone could kill. Faced with
no alternative but to leave Mecca, Muham¬
mad sought asylum in the neighbouring
town of Ta'if. However, the people of Ta'if
turned out to be even more hostile than the
Meccans and the Prophet soon returned to
his native city under the protection of a non-
Muslim friend, since he himself was excom¬
municated by his clan.
He now conceived the idea of making con¬
tact with the foreigners who came to Mecca
each year on the annual pilgrimage to the
Ka'ba. After many vain efforts with con¬
tingents from different tribes, a small group
of people from Yathrib, later to be known as
Madinat al-Nabi, "the city of the Prophet",
or simply Medina, "the city" rallied to his
cause and agreed to preach the message in
their town. The following year twelve people)

'from Medina came to Mecca at the time of
the pilgrimage and declared their conversion
to Islam. When they returned home they
were accompanied by a missionary from
Mecca who had been instructed by the Pro¬
phet to preach Islam in Medina.
The missionary was so successful that the
next year dozens of converts came to Mecca
from Medina and invited the Prophet and all
persecuted Muslims to emigrate to their
town. Muhammad accepted, but first he
asked the Muslims in Mecca to go to Medina
in small groups because if they migrated en
masse the people of Mecca would probably
molest them. So secretly, in small groups,
they went.
As more and more Muslims left Mecca,
the Meccans became afraid that if Muham¬
mad too found refuge elsewhere he would
eventually return with his hosts and attack
his native city. And so they decided to
assassinate him. When news of the plot
reached Muhammad, he went to his friend
Abu Bakr and they both decided to leave
Mecca under cover of darkness and go to
Medina. Abu Bakr engaged a man to bring
two camels to their hiding place and to guide
them by unfrequented routes. After many
adventures they arrived safely in Medina, to
the joy of the Muslims who were already
there.
This event, the Hegira (in Arabic, Hijra), is
the starting point of the Islamic calendar
which has now ended fourteen centuries.
Before it, life was full of difficulties for Islam;
after it, in Medina, there came a time of
relative security and progress which permit¬
ted the establishment of an Islamic State.
Muhammad was a practical man. He
wanted to establish how Muslims should act
in every aspect of their existence in their
spiritual and personal lives and also in their
political lives as members of the community.
In Medina he embarked on this great task.
The first problem facing him was that of
the refugees. He suggested that each
wealthy Medina family should fraternize
with a family of Meccan refugees; the two
families should work together, earn
together, and live together as a single fami¬
ly. The Medina Muslims agreed and in this
way the problem of the refugees was soon
solved.
The next problem was that of security. On
the Prophet's arrival, there was a political
vacuum in Medina, which consisted merely
of a number of warring clans who recogniz¬
ed no ruler and no form of state authority.
Muhammad called together representatives
of all the population Muslims, idolatrous
Arabs, Jews and Christians and proposed
the establishment of a city-state whose
strength would deter anyone who might
think of attacking it. The proposal was ac¬
cepted, and Muhammad was himself
selected as head of the new state.
As head of state his first measure was to
draw up a constitution. The text, which has
survived to the present day, is the world's
first known example of a written constitu¬
tion. It defines the rights and duties of the
head of state and his subjects, and makes
provisions for defence, justice, social in¬
surance and other needs. The hallmark of
the constitution is tolerance in the widest
sense. Under it everyone, Muslim and non-
Muslim alike, is to enjoy not only liberty of
conscience but also liberty of law and
justice: Muslim law was applied to non-
Muslims neither in civil nor penal cases.
Muhammad next began to organize the
security of the Muslim state by making a
series of defensive alliances with the tribes
which lived around Medina. Strengthened
by these alliances, he forbade the Meccan
caravans travelling to Syria, Egypt or Iraq to
cross Islamic territory. When the Meccans
tried to force their way through they found
their way blocked by bands of Muslims three
and sometimes ten times fewer than their
own forces. The great victory at the battle of
Badr (year 2 of the Hijra) was won, for]


- example, by some 300 Muslims pitted
against some 950 pagans.
As the years went by, Mecca began to
show signs of economic exhaustion.
Muhammad generously offered a truce but
when it was violated by the Meccans he oc¬
cupied their city without a blow being
struck. His first decision was to proclaim a
general amnesty which affected the Mec¬
cans so profoundly that most of them were
converted to Islam overnight.
With the conquest of Mecca, the
Prophefs hands were freed to deal with the
Byzantine empire which was hesitating
neither to assassinate Muslim ambassadors
nor to put to death those of its subjects who
embraced Islam. He could also pay attention
to the rest of the Arabian peninsula, from
where scores of delegations came to Medina
to declare their conversion.
Two years later he again went to Mecca to
perform the pilgrimage of the House of God,
that culminating and final element of the
edifice of Islam. His mission on earth had
been accomplished: three months later he
breathed his last.
By the time of his death in 11 AH/632 AD
the whole of the Arabian peninsula as well
as the southern parts of Palestine and Iraq
had been converted to Islam. The Islamic
state which had been born in a part of the
town of Medina in year 1 of the Hijra had ex¬
panded to cover three million square
kilometres and was endowed with the finan¬
cial, military, educational, administrative,
judicial and other institutions necessary for
its survival and development.
Before he died he had summed up the
basic duties of Islam: acceptance of the con¬
fession of faith ("There is no God if not God
and Muhammad is the Messenger of God");
saying daily prayers to God; paying tax
(Zakat); the pilgrimage to Mecca; and
fasting during the month of Ramadan.
These five pillars of faith, where material and
spiritual mingle in a single balanced whole,
remain today the foundations of Islam.
M Muhammad Hamidullah
Mecca
10
