José Martí
'Citizen of the Americas'
Self-portrait of José Marti (1853-1895).
ONE of the noblest, purest and most
profound figures of Latin American
history, José Julian Marti holds a
place of honour in the heroic avant-garde
alongside Bolivar and San Martin, Hidalgo
and Morelos, Sucre and Toussaint Louver¬
ture, fathers of the independence of their
peoples and illustrious and tireless com¬
batants in the struggle against colonial
domination.
Marti was born in Havana on 28 January
1853. The son of an honest junior official of
the Spanish government in Cuba, his life as a
child was burdened by necessity and a round
of wearying tasks. The daily spectacle of ar¬
bitrary actions and corruption turned him in¬
to a non-conformist and a rebel before he
had reached adolescence, and on the
publication of his dramatic work Abdala,
which is filled with patriotic fervour and
desire for liberty, the Spanish authorities of
the island brought him to trial for
"disloyalty", and condemned him to hard
labour at the early age of sixteen. In view of
the poor state of his health, his prison
sentence was commuted to confinement on
the island of Pinos, and, in 1871, to exile in
Spain.
From this time on, his life became an
anguished, impulsive pilgrimage in Europe
and America, and although this wandering
existence meant enduring the sufferings of
the expatriate, it enabled him to develop
solid, comprehensive political criteria and a
broad culture. In Spain, Marti was able to ac¬
quire, at first hand, an insight into the cor¬
rupt regime governing Cuba, but he never
theless came to appreciate (and this is a
tribute to his breadth of spirit) the very real
virtues of the people of the peninsula, and he
seized this opportunity to re-examine his
language at its source. From Spain, he went
to Mexico where he plunged into a life of in¬
tense activity as a lecturer and journalist. His
contact with the Mexico of this period led to
a lasting commitment to the problems of
Latin America problems to which he subse¬
quently devoted the major part of his
political and cultural activity.
Marti returned to Cuba in time for the sign¬
ing of the Peace of Zanjón, in 1879, after the
first war of independence, and, while there,
expressed in articles and brilliant speeches
his conviction that the freedom of Cuba
could only be obtained through armed ac¬
tion. Condemned once more to exile, he left
for Spain, moved on to Paris, and then, in
1880, he arrived in New York where he was to
spend the next fourteen years of his life.
Upon his arrival in the United States, Marti
resolved to devote himself body and soul to
the liberation of Cuba. In the process he was
obliged to smooth over the differences and
disputes between the surviving leaders,
determine the ways in which the groups of
Cuban emigrants could best contribute,
outline the character, and the short- and
long-term consequences of the armed strug¬
gle which was being prepared, and convince
everyone concerned that a war of liberation
was both opportune and worthwhile. As a
result he gained the total trust of his com¬
patriots and became the unquestioned
leader of the fight for the emancipation of
his country.
In 1891 Marti founded the Cuban Revolu¬
tionary Party, the fundamental instrument of
the armed movement then beir.j prepared.
From this moment up to the outbreak of the
revolution in 1895 his life was one of con¬
tinuous, frenetic activity, an incessant round
of travel across North America, and also into
Latin America. In agreement with the Cuban
separatist leaders, the Dominican-born Máx¬
imo Gómez and Antonio Maceo, Martí decid¬
ed to begin operations. On the very eve of
the combat he wrote and signed with Gómez
the Manifesto of Montecristi a fundamen¬
tal document which laid down the nature
and the objectives of the revolution.
On 11 April 1895 Marti disembarked in
Cuba and joined the insurgent troops as a
simple soldier. On 19 May a Spanish bullet
put an end to his life in Dos Ríos, in eastern
Cuba.
When he set out for Cuba, knowing that he
was going to give his life for liberty, the
revolutionary leader left in New York a vast
and varied corpus of work which, once col¬
lated, filled twenty-seven large volumes.
These demonstrate clearly that the austere
duty of the revolutionary in no way in¬
terfered with his vocation as a writer.
Although his books of poems (Ismaelillo,
Versos Libres, Versos Sencillos and Flores de
Exilio), in which he expresses his preoccupa¬
tions and premonitions as a man and as a
revulutionary, are distinguished for their
contribution to modernism, it was un¬
doubtedly in journalism that he excelled. His
famous chronicles, published in many coun¬
tries of the continent, provided a universally
accepted source of information for the
peoples of Latin America.
The author of incomparable biographies
(Emerson, Whitman, Thoreau, Longfellow),
diaries, and a correspondence of outstan¬
ding merit, a literary and art critic noted for
his shrewd perceptiveness, he never allowed
his passion for Latin America to desert him
for a single instant. His preoccupation with
the present and the future of the Hispanic
peoples of the hemisphere absorbed him
completely, and it is totally appropriate that
the "Apostle" of the Cubans should also
have been dubbed the "Citizen of the
Americas".
His action was concentrated, to begin
with, in his own country and in the West In¬
dies, of which he wrote in 1894: "The Antilles
are at the focal point of the Americas;
enslaved, they will become no more than a
floating base in the war of an imperial
republic against a jealous and superior world
which is already preparing to negate its
power... if free, they will be a guarantee of
the equilibrium and of the independence,
still under threat, of Latin America, and of
the honour of the Great Republic of the
North, which in thé development of its ter¬
ritory... will find much surer greatness than
in the ignoble conquest of its smaller
neighbours."
But as the poet and essayist Roberto
Fernández Retamar has written: "What in¬
terested Marti in an immediate sense was
Cuba... and in a larger framework the
American continent south of the River
Bravo 'our mestizo America'. While there is
a constant allusion to this idea throughout
his work, it appears with greatest clarity in
his fundamental text Nuestra America, a
document which constitutes a veritable
Magna Carta. In it he affirms the full
originality of these lands. And this affirma¬
tion is of capital importance because it is the
foundation stone of Marti's vision of the
world. This affirmation, this confidence and
this challenge constitute the point of depar¬
ture for everything else in his thought.
77?/s sketch of José Marti is largely based on a
longer, more detailed study by the Cuban essayist
Juan Marinello.
41
