The world of Islam
A universal mis
This huge encampment on the plain of Arafat houses some of the
million or more Muslims from all over the world who each year
come to Mecca to make the hajj, the pilgrimage that every Muslim
who has the means to do so must perform at least once in his
lifetime. As he approaches Mecca the pilgrim dons the seamless
garb of ihram consisting of two pieces of white material. The hajj
takes place in the month of Dhu 'l-Hidjdja and involves the
performance of a number of ritual acts. These include the tawaf,
the sevenfold circumnambulation of the Ka'ba and the sa'y, which
involves going backwards and forwards seven times between the
mounds of al-Safa and al-Marwa, which are within the precincts of
the Haram, or Great Mosque of Mecca. Further rituals are
accomplished in the neighbourhood of Mecca, Including the
throwing of seven stones at three stone columns representing
Satan, at Mina, and the ascension of the sacred Mount of Jabal
al-Rahma, on the plain of Arafat. This is followed by the adha, the
sacrificial slaughter of a sheep, which marks the beginning of the
greatest festival of the Islamic year. Before returning home, most '
pilgrims also visit the Prophet's tomb at Medina.
.*WR'

sion
by Habib Chatty
"Men, have fear of your Lord, who created
you from a single soul. . . "
(The Qur'an, IV: 1)
Photo Abdelaziz Fnkha © Sud Edftions, Tunis
^
r £« ^¡v^Si
* ' -'i i í
«P-J^f
ft*
THE basic characteristic of Islam is the
universality of its message. It has no
place for particularism. The Muslim
religion is, by its very essence, open to all
and does not seek to impose itself upon
anyone. The appeal of the Qur'an is address¬
ed to those who hear it. God said to
Muhammad: "We have sent you forth to all
mankind, so that you may give them good
news and warn them" (XXXIV:28).
Islam is essentially peace-loving and
presupposes the fundamental equality of all
mankind, based on their essential oneness,
their common origin and their common
destiny: "Men, have fear of your Lord who
created you from a single soul. From that
soul He created its mate, and through them
He bestrewed the earth with countless men
and women" (IV:I).
No distinction of race or nation, no
privilege of caste or class, no right of birth
can prevail over obedience to God and devo¬
tion to the cause of humanity. "All
mankind", said the Prophet, "is one family
in the care of God; the man best loved by
God is he who makes himself most useful to
his family". Or again, "The Arab is not
above the non-Arab, nor is the white man
above the black unless he is more pious". It
would be difficult to find a better expression
of the solidarity of mankind or of the fun¬
damental equality of all men.
But these are not the only reasons for the
universality of Islam. Not only is it the last of
the revealed religions, it also claims to be the
ultimate synthesis of all previous divine
messages. For this reason a Muslim is
bound to believe in such of these messages
as were previously transmitted to mankind
by messengers other than Muhammad. This
illustrates the extent to which Islam, by its
very essence, is a religion of concord,
friendship and tolerance; it is a synthesis
which reiterates all that had already been
revealed to Abraham, Moses, Jesus and
others, commenting, correcting, elucidating
and elaborating their message: "The Apos¬
tle believes in what has been revealed to him
by his Lord, and so do the faithful. They all
believe in Allah and His angels, His scrip¬
tures, and His apostles: we discriminate
against none of His apostles..." (11:285).
This is why Islam may be seen as a crucible
in which all the divine truths have been
merged, a source where any willing spirit
may encounter its own truth, inspiration and
serenity.
Such, in my view, is the inner, vital princi¬
ple which has contributed so much to the
rapid expansion of Islam to the four corners
of the earth, rejecting all prejudice based on
race, colour or culture and all geographical
compartmentalization.
Man, God's vice-regent on earth, is not
obliged to remain in any one spot. With the
exception of the three great centres: the
Sacred House in Mecca, the Mosque of
Medina and the al-Aqsa Mosque in
Jerusalem, meeting place of the three
revealed religions, Judaism, Christianity and
Islam, all places on earth are equal. Man's
duty is to inhabit them and enjoy their gifts:
"It is He who has subdued the earth to you.
Walk about its regions and eat of that which
He has given you..." (LXVII:15)
In fact, a Muslim is not supposed to grow
too attached to any particular place. The
whole earth is his country. All points of the
compass are good. It is up to him to explore
them, either to bring something to them or
to find refuge there. Wherever he goes the
Muslim is always at home. He is pre¬
eminently a citizen of the world.
It is not surprising therefore that the map
of Islam should have taken no account of
natural and geographical factors, as the
faith reached out beyond deserts and moun¬
tains, beyond the arid and rainy regions
alike.
For nothing can be greater than the
"domain of Islam". Geographical and con¬
ceptual universality go together. Idea is
embodied and developed in reality.
The present geographical area of Islam ex¬
tends from Asia to. Africa and from Europe
to the continents of America and Australia.
In all climes and in all seasons, without
distinction of race or ethnic group, whether
Muslims have been in the majority or the
minority, Islam has illumined the earth; it
has moved all hearts and penetrated into all
cultures. Nothing can hem it in, for it is as
open as the sky and it breaks through all
barriers.
Our non-Muslim friends often find it hard
to understand the phenomenon of Islamisa¬
tion. Admittedly it runs counter to the form
of reasoning that classifies and sets out
causes and effects in one homogeneous
context. It is perhaps for this reason that
Islam is often regarded in the West as a
religion of war, violence and coercion.
Yet, if one examines the question closely,
it is clear that Islam has never and nowhere
imposed itself by force. This would be con¬
trary to the spirit and the letter of the Qur'an :
HABIB CHATTY, Tunisian diplomatist, has been
Secretary-General of the Organization of the Isla¬
mic Conference since October 1979. He had pre¬
viously served for several years as his country's
Minister of Foreign Affairs and had been Tunisian
ambassador to Lebanon, Syria, Turkey, Iran, the
United Kingdom and Morocco.
15

The world
of Islam
which says in so many words: "There shall
be no compulsion in religion" (11:256).
To make Islam known is indeed a work of
piety, but only if dialogue and gentleness are
used rather than violence and force: "Call
men to the path of your Lord with wisdom
and kindly exhortation. Reason with them in
the most courteous manner." (XVI:125).
The Qur'an is even more strict when it refers
to the "People of the Book", whether they
be Jews or Christians: "Be courteous when
you argue with the People of the Book..."
(XXIX:46). For how can one compel a
human soul to love what it rejects? Any ac¬
ceptance obtained through coercion would
be superficial and temporary.
But the problem has not been entirely
solved and, at a time when we are seeking to
establish a dialogue between men and bet¬
ween civilizations, we must not tryto gloss
over difficulties or put forward simplified
solutions.
Islam's detractors are always quoting a
few verses from the Qur'an which in fact call
for a "holy war". In support of their argu¬
ment they also cite "historical facts" which
are often unfamiliar to them or wrongly
interpreted.
The true meaning of these verses and
these facts cannot be fully understood
unless they are seen in their historical con¬
text. Like all religions, Islam was not a
disembodied event. It came into being in
time and space, in the midst of men and
ideas. The first Muslims who adopted it
were also subject to the vicissitudes of world
history and the contingencies of human ex¬
istence in all its ideological, political,
economic and intellectual aspects. Faced
with a choice between commitment and
aloofness they chose the more difficult solu¬
tion, even though it meant engaging in bat¬
tles that were not of their seeking.
Recourse to war, even to holy war, is sub¬
ject to all kinds of moral and material restric¬
tions and to a series of strict conditions; war
is only a "last resort" to be adopted in cer¬
tain circumstances. A Muslim can react to
aggression when he is the victim, but in no
circumstance must he be the first to attack:
"If any one attacks you, attack him as he at¬
tacked you. Have fear of Allah, and know
that Allah is with the righteous" (11:194).
Legitimate defence is allowed but not un¬
justified attack. This is why, while prescrib¬
ing war to the Muslims, the Qur'an
recognizes that it can only be the object of
aversion. War is really a "last resource",
something resorted to under compulsion:
"Fighting is obligatory for you, much as you
dislike it. But you may hate a thing although
it is good for you, and love it although it is
bad for you..." (11:216). A Muslim has the
right to fight only those who fight him:
"Fight for the sake of Allah those who fight
against you, but do not attack them first.
Allah does not love the aggressors" (11:190).
Islam in fact is the only religion which has
exactly defined the rights of reprisal and the
practice of revenge in time of war. This is all
the more remarkable because, in war-time, a :
16
Photo Abdelaziz Frikha © Sud Editions, Tunis
Above, one of the four minarets of the Mosque of the Prophet at Medina. Capital
of the first Muslim State, founded by the Prophet after his emigration (Hijra) from
Mecca in September 622 (year 1 of the Hijra). Medina is with Mecca and Jerusalem
one of the three most sacred cities of the Islamic world. Muhammad's house at
Medina, where believers gathered to pray, was a prototype for later mosques. The
Prophet was buried in a chamber which forms part of the mosque of Medina, built
in the ll/8th century by the Umayyad caliph al-Walid. Here too are the tombs of his
two companions who followed him as head of the Islamic community, Abu Bakr
and Umar. Rebuilt several times after being damaged by fire, the mosque was
considerably enlarged by the Ottoman Sultan Abdul Majid in the middle of the last
century and further expansion has been carried out by the kings of Saudi Arabia
since 1953. The tombs of the Prophet, his daughter Fatima and his two successors
are virtually all that remains of the Umayyad construction. Right, a view of the
town of Ghardaia, a fortified town in Algeria which is dominated by its mosque.
The town was founded in the IV/10th century by a Berber Ibadiyah Muslim sect.

The Organization of the Islamic Conference
The Organization of the Islamic Con¬
ference (OIC) which has 42 member
states, was created in September 1969
by the first summit meeting of Islamic
heads of state and government, held at
Rabat (Morocco).
The Organization, whose headquarters
are at Jeddah (Saudi Arabia) groups
states from the Arab world, Asia, Africa
and Europe, in which Muslims constitute
the majority of the population.
Its supreme governing body is the Con¬
ference of Heads of State, which has so
far been held three times: at Rabat in
1969, at Lahore (Pakistan) in 1974; and
at Mecca and Taif (Saudi Arabia) in
1981. The Conference of Foreign
Ministers has met annually since 1970 in
different cities of the Islamic world.
Several specialized committees and sub¬
sidiary bodies have been created by the
OIC, notably: the Islamic Development
Bank, the Islamic Solidarity Fund, the In
ternational Islamic News Agency, and
the Islamic States Broadcasting
Organization, all at Jeddah; the Centre
for Statistical, Economic and Social
Research, at Ankara (Turkey); the
Research Centre for Islamic History, Art
and Culture, at Istanbul (Turkey); the
Centre for Technical and Vocational
Training and Research at Dacca
(Bangladesh); and the Centre for the
Promotion of Commerce, at Tangiers
(Morocco).
The OIC, whose activities are financed
by contributions and donations from
member states, has the following aims:
"To promote Islamic solidarity among
member states. To consolidate co¬
operation among member states in the
economic, social, cultural, scientific and
other vital fields and to arrange consulta¬
tions among member states in interna¬
tional organizations. To endeavour to
eliminate racial segregation and
discrimination and to eradicate col¬
onialism in all its forms. To take
necessary measures to support interna¬
tional peace and security founded on
justice. To co-ordinate all efforts for the
safeguard of the Holy Places and sup¬
port for the struggle of the people of
Palestine to regain their "rights and
liberate their land. To strengthen the
struggle of all Muslim people with a view
to safeguarding their dignity, in¬
dependence and national rights. To
create a suitable atmosphere for the pro¬
motion of co-operation and understan¬
ding among member states and other
countries."
In addition to the OIC there are two
other major international Islamic
organizations: the World Muslim League
and the World Muslim Congress whose
headquarters are in Karachi (Pakistan).
They are both non-governmental
organizaíons.
Photo © C. Bastin and J. Evrard, Brussels
. r *- . » r.
f'^te
b%
JBB.
«-

The world
of Islam
-believer is either the persecutor or the
. persecuted, the victor or the vanquished: "If
you punish, let your punishment be propor¬
tionate to the wrong, that has been done
you. But it shall be best for you to endure
your wrongs with patience" (XVI:126). So,
if by good fortune the enemy inclines to
peace, a Muslim must do the same.
What could be more conducive to peace
than a heavenly voice saying: "Believers,
submit all of you to Allah and do not walk in
Satan's footsteps..." (Il:208). Those who
raise the bogy of an Islam steeped in blood
and violence are merely indirectly projecting
the image of their own unexorcized past.
Islam owes its expansion in the first in¬
stance to its universal vocation. When we
examine how it spread through the world,
we get the impression that each group won
over to the new religion behaved as though
it emanated from themselves. In all the bat¬
tles waged by the Muslims against those
who attacked them, it was the Syrians, Per¬
sians or Berbers converted to Islam who
provided the major part of the manpower,
not the Arabs. There is no more effective
means of propagating an idea than the ex¬
emplary behaviour of those who believe in
it. It is instructive to note that several far-off
countries where no fighting took place
adopted Islam of their own free will without
any outside pressure. The warmth of human
contact, the integrity of Muslim traders and
the sincerity of peaceful missionaries were
enough in themselves to overcome
paganism and to give birth to civilization.
Wherever it has been, Islam has left
behind unforgettable traces. Its spiritual
demands make it a civilizing faith. And this
must be remembered when we draw up a
world map of religions. How else can we ex¬
plain the number of urban settlements set
up by a faith which came into being not in
an industrial society, not even in an
agricultural one, but in a community which,
as Ibn Khaldun pointed out, was hostile to
city life.
Before it became a staging post for
caravans trading between distant lands, or a
Ribat (stronghold) defending believers
against enemy assaults, the Islamic city was
the setting for a way of life where everything
was done in common and everything was
decided communally. The preaching
mosque was the first distinguishing sign of
an Islamic town, as distinct from a village.
There was also the market with its separate
guilds, caravanserais and public baths. It
was a microcosm organized in a hierarchical
and concentric pattern, designed to embody
the religious and social ideal of Islam in
which men lived together, prayed together
and shared common aspirations. The object
was to gather together and not to scatter, to
unite and never to divide. Is this not an ¡deal
corresponding to every man's aspirations?
Is it not a model for construction and
civilization?
The Islamic city, a place both of work and
of worship, was also a centre of science and
culture. This, again, is one of the re¬
quirements of the Islamic faith. And in this
CONTINUED PAGE 24
18

The world
of Islam
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 18
age of exact sciences and precision
technology, the objective historian cannot
fail to recall the decisive role played in this
field by Islamic cities such as Kairouan,
Cairo, Fez, Marrakesh, Tlemcem and Alex¬
andria in Africa, Baghdad, Basra, Kufa,
Damascus, Ispahan, Bukhara, Samarkand
and Lahore in Asia, and Istanbul and Cor¬
doba in Europe. Within these medinas, with
their minarets towering above all others in
the sky of human knowledge, the sciences
of the whole world Chinese and Indian,
Greek and Roman, Egyptian and Chaldean,
theoretical, practical, experimental and for¬
mal patiently gathered together, lov¬
ingly preserved, translated, commentated
upon, studied, recreated and rethought by a
succession of inspired scholars. The Islamic
city was an intellectual workshop which
gave rise to an unprecedented development
of knowledge without which the modern
world as we know it would never have been
possible. This is recognized unanimously by
historians of science from Sarton to Crom-
bie in the United States and from Duhème
to Koyré and Taton in France.
The opportunities open to the Islamic
world today seem even richer than those
which produced the glories of its past. The
realm of thought which has given so much
to mankind is still full of promise, eager to
serve and to work for a better international
order.
True, the Crusades, the Mongol inva¬
sions, the Spanish Inquisition and, more
recently, colonialism have left bitter
memories which caused the Islamic world to
adopt for a time a defensive attitude. But to¬
day, despite all obstacles, it is regaining con¬
fidence. The task will not be an easy one.
The Muslim world must first overcome its in¬
ternal contradictions and dissensions. It
must seek cohesion within each country, for
at present this cohesion is threatened by
disputes between movements and sects
which are not really divided by anything ex¬
cept a legitimate desire to be more useful. It
must also strengthen the fraternal and.
neighbourly links between the countries
involved.
There is no denying the fact that the
Islamic world is going through a crisis. But
these are only growing pains. Disputes bet¬
ween religious sects (Sunnites and Shi'ites)
political differences and armed conflicts can

Right, street scene in Skopje,
Yugoslavia, with mosque in
background. Skopje and Sarajevo are
the main centres of the Yugoslav
Islamic community which is estimated
at about three million. Below, the
domes of Istanbul with in the
background, the Golden Horn and the
minarets of the famous "Blue Mosque",
built In the Xl/17th century by Sultan
Ahmed Djami.
only be seen, from a historical point of view,
as passing difficulties.
Over and above incidental conflicts and
temporary inconsistencies, Muslims see
themselves as members of an Umma or
spiritual community which transcends all
differences and resolves all disagreements.
For this reason, I believe that the divine link
uniting them will always prove stronger than
the interests which today oppose some
members of the Islamic family.
Our history, both modern and ancient,
which shows that Muslims disagree with
one another only to come eventually to a
better accord, strengthens me in this con¬
viction; so does the history of other peoples.
The present lack of unity in the Muslim
world is not a unique case in the history of
mankind. Europe, flourishing today, has liv¬
ed through two devastating wars. Yet it has
succeeded in assuaging its passions. The
Muslim world has all the more reason for
believing it can do the same since it sees
itself as an Umma, a community in which
mutual aid, protection and confidence are
the rules of life and the basis of a common
spirituality.
This need for unity is all the more urgent
because the Muslim world is confronted
with a centuries old problem of
underdevelopment. It has done much
already to solve this problem, but must do
more still if it is to take its rightful place in a
modern world which Islam, though tem¬
porarily left behind, contributed so much to
create.
Such are our hopes and preoccupations,
such is the meaning of the task which the
Muslim world has undertaken to achieve.
These are also the objectives of the policy
which the Organization of the Islamic Con¬
ference (O.I.C.) has followed since its incep¬
tion. Grouping a quarter of the Member
States of the United Nations, the O.I.C. is a
major force in international politics which
keeps an equal distance from the super¬
powers in its desire to maintain its autonomy
in decision-making, its freedom of choice
and direction. By creating the O.I.C, the]
25

The world
of Islam
. Muslim countries, conscious of the impor¬
tance of their human and natural resources
and of their economic and political weight,
have set themselves a single goal: to unite,
so as to face the exigencies of modern life
and serve mankind better; to establish a
dialogue between men everywhere without
distinction of race, culture or ideology, so as
to help them know one another better and
recognize both their basic likenesses. and
their legitimate differences.
We believe that this is the way to achieve
the victory of peace over war, brotherhood
over hatred, tolerance over fanaticism, a
better world order and a life of more justice
and dignity. We are convinced that by
holding out our hand to our neighbours in a
spirit of sincerity we shall call forth a
response that will fulfil the aspirations, not
only of the Muslim countries, but of all
mankind. This is the meaning of the
message from Mecca, solemnly proclaimed
in Taif (Saudi Arabia) by thirty-eight heads
of State representing one thousand million
Muslims. May this appeal be heard and a
true dialogue of civilizations be established
between the peoples of the world.
Habib Chatty
Document Courtesy of André Stevens
Below, the Taj Mahal, Agra, India, the summit of Indo-
Islamic architecture, was built in the Xl/17th century by
the Moghul ruler Shah Jahan as a mausoleum for his wife
Mumtaz-i-Mahal. Its ethereal lightness contrasts with the
impressive mass (below right) of the mausoleum of Imam
Reza, at Mashad, one of the holiest cities in Iran. Imam
Reza is revered by the Shi'ite Muslims as the eighth
Imam, or leader, in direct line of descent from the
Prophet. The mausoleum was built during the lll/9th
century and successive Muslim rulers have added to it
over the centuries.
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris

Above. Chinese scroll
showing the layout of a
Muslim compound built
during the II 8th century
under the Tang dynasty. The
compound was located in
the centre of the city of
Chian in the province of
Kiangsi, south central
China. The mosque (photo
right), which is clearly
recognizable in the scroll, is
now being restored.
Photo © Roger Wood, London
« \ ELM
*Wf ¿, V ' inn B"V
£ ? ,~ ''"&£m:. R ¿fh *
i 1 ¡Í
i
/ 'i
f§ fil ï^ f 1#¡
/íí^ (£m% H* , . ;
ill
I»1
" 1
A
II*****
it* * * *,
