Heat treatment
unmasks a sham Zapotee
IN the past few years stylistic studies of
pre-Columbian objects in some of the
world's major museums have brought
to light some puzzling findings.
Thermoluminescence (see article page 21)
and optical microscopy are two scientific
techniques that have been used to solve the
problems arising from these discoveries.
The former revealed that some of the ob¬
jects in question were of recent manufac¬
ture; the latter pinpointed where the objects
had been made.
Photos above and right show two of forty
terra-cotta statues belonging to the Musée
de l'Homme in Paris and to the Royal
Museums in Brussels which were studied in
this way. They are both examples of the
Zapotee style named for the Zapotee Indians
of what is now southern Mexico. One is an
authentic archaeological specimen; the
other was made in relatively recent times.
Photo above shows the head of an old
man which forms part of a large terra-cotta
object symbolizing the cult of an elderly
god. The god is depicted as an old man
whose tall headdress surmounted by plumes
was a brazier in which copal was burned in
his honour.
Photo right shows an anthropomorphic urn
representing the god of corn. The figure
holds an ear of corn in each hand and the
headdress is also decorated with ears of
corn. These great anthropomorphic urns are
characteristic of Zapotee civilization. They
were often found in tombs and sometimes in
temples.
Thermoluminescence makes it possible to
distinguish between ceramics fired several
centuries ago and those produced recently.
Measurements were made with a forty-
milligramme sample of powder to determine
its natural thermoluminescence, on the one
hand, and, on the other, its artificial ther¬
moluminescence after it had been irradiated
in a laboratory.
The results obtained enabled specialists to
calculate the amount of radiation deposited
in the ceramic material since it had been
fired: the old man's head had absorbed
about 300 rads, a dose commensurate with
an "archaeological object"; whereas the
dose absorbed by the corn god was no more
than 17 rads. It was therefore possible to
conclude that the corn god was made
recently, and even to date its manufacture
to the beginning of the 20th century.
Examination of thin strips from ancient
and modern Zapotee objects through a
polarizing microscope revealed the following
facts: several different clays had been used,
but all contained, in varying proportions, a
type of mineral found in a zone of the Oax-
aca valley where the Zapotee civilization
developed, and in particular at Monte
Alban, the main site of this civilization. It
can thus be assumed that both ancient and
recent objects were produced in the same
area.
Microscopic examination has also reveal¬
ed that a number of modern objects, mainly
large anthropomorphic urns, were probably
produced in the same workshop. The
ceramic pastes used in these objects are
remarkably uniform and contain the same
minerals, of identical size and in equivalent
proportions, set in a base of yellowish,
clayey paste.
15
