A museum
in a suitcase
Three-dimensional 'replicas' of works of art,
produced by the astonishing technique of holography
by Ivan G. Yavtushenko
and Vladimir B. Markov
THE technique of producing holographic images was first ad¬
vanced in 1949 by a Hungarian-born British physicist, Dennis
Gabor. However, his method proved unusable for lack of a
suitable light source. Not until the development of the laser as a
source of coherent light was further progress possible.
The breakthrough came in 1962, thanks to the work of American
scientists Emmett Leith and Juris Upatnieks, and a Soviet scientist,
Y.N. Denisyuk. Leith and Upatnieks took the laser as their source of
light and, working with a modified version of Gabors method, proved
it possible to record and reconstruct a three-dimensional image of any
light-reflecting object. Meanwhile, Denisyuk's fundamental work
established the principle of the complete reconstruction of the light
field created by a real object.
What is holography and how does it differ from conventional
methods of recording ¡mages? Non-holographic techniques use a lens
to produce an image of the subject on light-sensitive material, and of
course, the original three dimensions are then converted into two.
Holography consists of recording the light field emitted by the sub¬
ject same field as is normally perceived by the human eye.
The theory of the technique of holography may be described as
follows. As in photography, one needs a light source, a photographic
plate and, of course, an object. The layer of photosensitive emulsion
is comparatively thickabout 10 microns. The object is illuminated by
the light of a laser; the reflected light falls on the plate. However, in
contrast to ordinary photography, the plate is also illuminated by
reference light rays from the same source. These two beams of light
combine, and are registered by the photographic plate, which is called
the hologram.
The image is reconstructed by placing the hologram as before and
directing onto it a similar source of light. The effect of this upon the
structure recorded on the hologram is to produce light beams which
are an exact replica of those reflected by the original subject, so that
the viewer sees a three-dimensional copy of that subject.
(Denisyuk's holograms can even be viewed with a pocket flashlight.)
This description of the recording and reconstruction of the image is
the key to the origin of the word holography, which Gabor coined
from two Greek words: holos, meaning "complete", and graphein
meaning "to write". In other words, it is a method of recording all the
information about the light field emitted by a real object.
It is the hologram's ability to produce an exact optical copy of the
subject which suggested that it might be widely used in museology.
There are many ancient objects which, for a variety of reasons, can¬
not be displayed: perishable items that need special storage, or those
unique antiquities for which unusual security arrangements are re¬
quired. This problem can largely be overcome by exhibiting
holographic replicas of such objects. Again, it is no secret that par¬
ticularly valuable items found in provincial areas usually find their way
to large central museums. Holograms could well be made of them and
placed in provincial museums, providing exact replicas which could
advantageously replace laborious castings. Equally important is the
potential use of holograms in establishing the origin and identity of ob¬
jects and determining their age and state of preservation. Optical
replicas may now be used in this research, rather than perishable or
particularly valuable originals.
30
Holography holds out exciting prospects for museums in the
organization of exhibitions. There are many exhibits which must be
viewed from several angles, or at least from two opposite sides. This
is especially true of coins or medals, since the designs on the
obverse and the reverse sides are different. Such items as chalices
and goblets also fall within this category. Holograms containing
every detail of the structure of such items can be produced by taking
circular reflective holograms. But this is an extremely difficult pro¬
cedure: a simpler method is to take two-sided reflective holograms.
The latter technique employs a single plate to record separate
holograms of the obverse and the reverse of the subject, which must
be done in such a way that when reconstructed the ¡mages exactly
coincide.
The first phase in this process is to take a hologram of the
"obverse" side. The exposed plate is then turned round, and a se¬
cond exposure is taken of the "reverse" side of the same subject. In
order to avoid an overlap between the ¡mages, it is essential that the
exposure be taken with the light striking both the subject and the
plate at obtuse angles. When processed, this hologram is set up and
illuminated from both sides, so reconstructing an ¡mage of both the
"obverse" and the "reverse" of the object.
A further use of holograms in museology arises from their ability
to reconstruct pseudoscopic ¡mages. This method holds particular
advantages in those frequent cases where the mould of a seal or a
die is too ill-preserved to be used for casting, since an image can be
produced of the article which the mould was used to make. The
technique is as follows. The exposed and processed hologram is
rotated through 180 degrees in relation to the light source, and a
beam is directed onto it. The image thus produced is a pseudoscopic
copy of the mould in other words, an image of the real article.
Enlarged or scaled-down three-dimensional ¡mages of real objects
can also be produced, these methods being particularly appropriate
where small objects are to be displayed, or for showing the minor
details of a large exhibit. Lastly, the applications of holography are
not restricted to historical objects, but may include holographic por¬
traits of contemporary figures, or holographic views of interiors.
One highly successful use of holograms is in travelling or perma¬
nent exhibitions, which can quite easily be set up in any locality. This
is confirmed by the fact that such exhibitions have been organized in
Moscow, Kiev, Yalta, Simferopol, Sebastopol and other Soviet,
towns and cities. The international exchange of these exhibitions is K
arousing strong interest. One sign of this is the popularity of an ex- f
IVAN GRIGORYEVICH YAVTUSHENKO is the head of museum science
and methodology at the Ministry of Culture of the Ukrainian SSR. His explo¬
ration of the possibilities of holography in museum work forms part of his
activities in the field of museum research, the design and technical equip¬
ment of museums, preservation techniques, and the display of exhibits.
VLADIMIR BORISOVICH MARKOV is the head of the laboratory of
applied holography at the Physics Institute of the Ukrainian Academy of
Sciences. He has written widely in Soviet and international publications on
questions related to optics, laser technology and holography.

Artist's impression of the arrangement
of components in a holographic set-up
(above) for the production of a
hologram of a vase, and (below left) for
the reconstitution of a three-
dimensional image of the vase from the
hologram. Below, simplified diagram of
a hologram production lay-out.
Mirror
Object
Beam
spreader
Laser
Beam
spreader
Reference
beam
Beam
splitter
Object
illumination
beam
Prism
E
2
31

> hibition of holograms of historical objects from Ukrainian museums,
which has been shown in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, during the twenty-
first session of Unesco's General Conference; at the "OPIEM" inter¬
national conference on holograms in Strasbourg, France; at the
lntercamera-79 exhibition in Prague, Czechoslovakia; and at exhibi¬
tions in Finland, the German Democratic Republic and elsewhere.
Holography provides enormous potential for the establishment of
special thematic exhibitions combining items from several
museums. It is notoriously difficult to bring together, for example,
the objets d'art of antiquity, or collections of Scythian gold, which
are housed in museums scattered throughout the world. Yet a
specialized exhibition of holograms could be arranged on any such
topic, and would prove extremely popular not only among specialist .
historians or art experts, but also with the general public, since it
would bring together articles from a given historical period.
Another possibility would be to arrange for the centralized pro¬
duction and sale of original souvenirs in the shape of holographic
replicas of rare ancient objects. These would find a ready market,
and would be excellent publicity for museums both at home and
among foreign tourists.
In view of the enormous number of exhibits, this list of possible
museological applications is sufficient evidence that research in¬
stitutes alone could not cope with the volume of work involved. This
is why the Ukraine, for example, has taken steps to associate both
physicists and museologists in attempts to provide global answers to
a number of problems. As a first step, holographical laboratories
have been set up at the museums themselves. The Applied
Holography Laboratory of the Institute of Physics of the Ukrainian
Academy of Sciences provides them with scientific and technical
advice, trains their experts, and also develops new holography
techniques. It is intended that these museum laboratories should
produce holograms of all the rarer objects in their collections, and
firstly of their perishable articles or those which require special
storage or security.
The particular way in which the image is produced in holography
gives rise to extensive applications in the field of science and
technology. One such application is holographic microscopy. The
chief fault of existing microscopes is that a sharp ¡mage can only be
obtained of the part of the subject on which the instrument is focus¬
ed, while the rest of the image is out of focus and so lacks definition.
The study of objects which are unstable in time is even more dif¬
ficult, since the microscope must continually be adjusted. The
holographic microscope enables three-dimensional images to be
frozen at any point in time for subsequent study in detail. Such in¬
struments are particularly efficient in the study of small suspended
particles (aerosols) or of transparent objects. For instance, a
holographic microscope has been used to produce a three-
dimensional image of a neuron with a diameter of less than 0.001
millimetres.
Among the most rapidly developing applications is holographic in-
terferometry, a technique which draws upon a single hologram's
ability to record several successive ¡mages. The first exposure
records the ¡mage of the object at rest: the object is then subjected
to an external stimulus, and a second exposure is taken. If a sup¬
plementary beam is directed onto the hologram, both images are
reconstructed simultaneously, and the light beams thus formed are
mono-directional. Since these beams are coherent, interference oc¬
curs, and the resulting image is covered with light and dark patterns.
This interferential structure, which varies according to the nature of
the external stimulus, may be used for such purposes as determining
the topology of the subject, identifying deep-seated defects, or
comparing two subjects.
I Ivan G. Yavtushenko and Vladimir B. Markov
Right, holographic exhibition in the
Ukrainian Museum of History, Kiev.
Itinerant holographic exhibitions
open up immense possibilities for
bringing the treasures of the
world's great museums to the
attention of a worldwide audience,
at very low cost and with no risk to
the treasures themselves. It has
been estimated, for example, that
the entire contents of a major
exhibition in Moscow, "The
treasures of the State Museum of
History", could be recorded full size
on 110 holographic plates
measuring 60 by 80 centimetres
each, all of which could be packed
into a crate of just one and a half
cubic metres.
Below, Shermazan Kakichashvili, head of the optical
research laboratory of the Cybernetics Institute of the
Academy of Sciences of the Georgian SSR (at left of
photo) looks at a circular hologram of himself.
Illuminated by a laser beam, the hologram is mounted on
a turntable which, when turned, shows his head in
profile, from behind and full face.
32
