Blind workers assembling books in Braille in an Indian publishing house.
28

Self-reliance
and the right to work
by Ed. Sackstein
A major purpose of the 1981 Interna¬
tional Year of Disabled Persons is to
turn the spotlight on the handicapp¬
ed and help remove the prejudice and
discrimination which bar their way to "full
participation and equality" the UN theme
for the Year.
In most situations, these two goals can¬
not be achieved unless the disabled get the
opportunity to become self-supporting and
to participate in active economic life.
It means training and jobs. This, of
course, is easier said than done, for the alar¬
ming fact is that despite all efforts and ap¬
peals for aid, the outlook for handicapped
people is as bleak as ever.
The majority of the world's disabled300
million live in developing countries which
also have a backlog of over 300 million
jobless or underemployed citizens.
To contemplate the possibility of placing
many disabled in the open labour market is
for most, therefore, just a pipe dream.
Consequently, the International Labour
Organisation's main efforts have been
directed towards the setting up of produc¬
tion workshops on small-scale industry
lines, small business co-operatives and self-
employment schemes for Third World
disabled.
Nine in every ten of these people live in
isolated rural communities and, for them,
the ILO's efforts are directed to teaching
practical skills for everyday life rather than a
specific trade for which there may be little
demand, if any.
In the industrialized countries, the current
economic slump has thrown some 17 million
people out of work, but no group is having a
tougher time in the tight job market than
disabled men and women who often are the
first fired and last hired.
ED. SACKSTEIN, of the United States of
America, is deputy chief of the Vocational
Rehabilitation Branch of the International Labour
Organisation, Geneva. A specialist in vocational
rehabilitation training and psychotherapy, he has
special responsibility for developing vocational
rehabilitation programmes for the mentally ill and
for drug-dependent persons as well as for work
on the prevention of alcoholism and drug addic¬
tion at the workplace.
In some places, their rate of unemploy¬
ment is twice that of able-bodied persons.
Because of sex bias, the situation is doubly
difficult for disabled females.
Experience has shown that protective
legislation which alms at promoting employ¬
ment of disabled people can help but that it
is no panacea. In the United Kingdom, for
example, the quota system has proved to be
relatively ineffective in a depressed labour
market situation.
Designated employment and reserved
jobs programmes, even if implemented, pro¬
vide little relief. Moreover, the jobs in ques¬
tion are usually menial, low-paid and of low
status.
ILO specialists say that legislation concer¬
ning employment of the disabled would
have a better chance to be effective if, in¬
stead of being coercive, it were more flexible
and formulated in such a way as to stimulate
private and government initiative.
Some countries pay grants and
allowances to employers who offer training
to disabled persons at the workplace. This is
a positive development which should be en¬
couraged further, together with financial in¬
centives to make ergonomie and other job
adaptations that facilitate and increase the
performance of disabled workers.
In Sweden, the so-called "adjustment
groups", sponsored jointly by management
and labour, are helping in many enterprises
to secure alternative employment for dis¬
abled people. Similar programmes are
underway in Poland and Norway.
In other forms of vocational rehabilitation
training, it is essential that the skills being
taught are geared not only to the present-
day needs of the labour market but also to
future requirements resulting from
technological and structural change.
Furthermore, vocational rehabilitation
specialists must Increasingly and directly
plug in to the world of work if they wish to
meet the challenge of preparing disabled
persons in appropriate and realistic ways. It
might be necessary for rehabilitation profes¬
sionals to shed some of their traditionally
"humanitarian" approach in favour of one
which is tempered by the hard realities of
the market place. The disabled are showing
professionals and the non-disabled every
day that they have enormous energy and
potential to accomplish far more than was at
one time thought possible. They therefore
deserve and have the right to more oppor¬
tunities to realize that potential.
There is also a certain danger in over-
reliance on professionals. Over recent years
vocational rehabilitation specialists have
developed their field of work into a highly
specialized discipline and the extensive
research they have undertaken has yielded
positive and often exciting results. This has,
however, had the unfortunate consequence
that the disabled, their families and the
general public have come to believe that on¬
ly the specialists can find solutions to their
social and employment problems
When helping people with disabilities, or
any group in a community with particular
difficulties for that matter, higher priority
should be given to encouraging each com¬
munity to take on part of the challenge itself
and to come up with simple workable solu¬
tions. This means contacting employers'
groups, trade unions, employment ex¬
changes, vocational schools, the press and
private groups (such as, for example, con¬
cerned parents or citizens who have a direct
interest in the problem). But let us by no
means forget to include the direct participa¬
tion of the disabled themselves in planning
and implementing programmes on their own
behalf.
In this context the new concept of voca¬
tional training developed by the ILO, and
known as "Modules of Employable Skills",
holds great promise of improved employ¬
ment opportunity for the disabled.
The key to this system and its unique
feature is creating completely self-contained
training packages or modular
units around each useful function and
limited to the essential skills, knowledge and
aptitudes required to perform a task. The
relevance of this infinitely variable and flexi¬
ble approach to training and employment of
the disabled is obvious; for it allows the
training and reintegration of those severely
handicapped who can only undertake a
limited range of activities.
An important objective of all ILO voca- k
tlonal rehabilitation projects in developing f
29

, countries is to try and ensure that they
become self-sufficient and that they are
profit-oriented right from the start.
An ILO expert, Edward Johnson, who has
wide experience with rehabilitation pro¬
grammes in the Third World, states that one
purpose of rehabilitating a disabled person is
to make a taxpayer out of him.
"This helps to convince governments,
although that is not the main reason", he
explains. "The object is to turn the disabled
person into a self-reliant citizen, standing
shoulder to shoulder with the able-bodied
members of the community. Nothing gives
disabled men and women the confidence
they need as does the knowledge that they
are doing a job of work, paying their
taxes..."
Rehabilitation of the disabled does pay off
in hard cash terms. For example, US Depart¬
ment of Labor statistics show that for every
$1,000 invested in the rehabilitation of a
disabled person $35,000 will be generated by
that person's work during his lifetime, part
of which goes to Federal and State taxes.
Even more impressive, it is estimated that
the employment of 100,000 disabled persons
in the US adds at least $500 million to the
GNP. And disabled persons who are
economically independent do not burden
community public assistance funds.
If present trends continue, and unless
resolute remedial action is taken, the
number of handicapped people seeking help
might swell to some 800 million by the turn
of the century. Among them will be an in¬
creasing number of people whose disability
is an extreme difficulty in adjusting to
existing social norms. In addition to the
mentally ill this number will include drug ad¬
dicts and alcoholics.
"The question of how to tackle the for¬
midable challenge of helping the world's
disabled is not one of policies or ap¬
proaches", says ILO Director-General, Fran¬
cis Blanchard. "These exist, we have
developed them. What is lacking, however,
is the political will to act and putting it
quite bluntly money.
"ILO experts have calculated that in order
to help stem the tide, the world would have
to find a minimum of 25 additional cents to
spend on each disabled person annually or
in total some $100 million a year.
"This at least would help to establish pilot
vocational rehabilitation programmes in
those countries where no such services ex¬
ist; equally important, it would provide the
means to set up some sub-regional and
regional training centres where much-
needed specialized staff could be trained.
"It is a modest, realistic goal", Mr. Blan¬
chard adds. "And if the term human dignity
has any meaning at all, these 25 cents
should certainly be found."
H Ed. Sackstein
KIDS ON THE BLOCK
Renaldo Rodriguez, 10 years old, is almost totally blind; Mark
Reilly, 11 years old, has cerebral palsy and gets around in a
wheelchair, his "cruiser" as he calls it; Melody James, 9 years old,
suffers from nothing more than short-sightedness and is very
curious about her more severely handicapped friends. All three
(inset), together with Ellen Jane, 17 years old, who has Down's
Syndrome and works as an assistant to a veterinarian, and B renda
Dubrowski, 10 years old, a "normal" child with a weight problem
(pictured performing below), plus Mandy Puccini, 12 years old and
deaf (not shown), are members of an amazing troupe of puppets
whose purpose is to help children to develop positive attitudes
towards people with disabilities. Created by Barbara Aiello, a
former teacher of handicapped children and a writer on special
education, the "kids on the block" are three feet tall and wear real
children's clothes and shoes. Mrs. Aiello believes that "children
will talk more readily to puppets than to adults or even to other
children" and that the integration of handicapped children into
regular classrooms fails less often because of their disabilities than
because of the other children's attitudes. "Kids on the Block" has
two important goals. "First", says Mrs. Aiello, "I want to teach
children about handicaps in a non-threatening fashion. Second, I
want to show non-handicapped children how to develop positive
relationships with their handicapped peers. The puppets show
them how they can be friends."
Photo Marcel Salvaro. Unesco
Photo inset © Kids on the Block, Inc., Washington, D.C,
30
