ATATÜRK
o
The birth of a modern nation amid
the ruins of the Ottoman Empire
by Bülent Tanör
BÜLENT TANÖR, is professor at the law faculty
of Istanbul University. He is the author of full-
length works on aspects of constitutional law,
such as freedom of opinion and social rights, and
of studies which have appeared in various
specialized journals.
MUSTAFA Kemal Atatürk first
appeared on the stage of
modern history as the victo¬
rious leader in Turkey's War of In¬
dependence (1919-1922), but later, the
far-reaching changes he brought to his
country over more than a decade
(1922-1935) were to reveal his capacity
as a great reformer. His life and work
are part of the story of one of the great
movements of the twentieth century
the uprising of oppressed peoples
against colonialist and imperialist
domination.
The end of the First World War saw
the dismemberment of that amorphous
amalgam of nations and religions, the
Ottoman Empire, and, when on 19 May
1919, Mustafa Kemal landed at the
Black Sea port of Samsun to organize
national resistance against the foreign
invasion, he described his country's
situation in these words:

Turkey's capitals,
old and new
Two continents, Asia and Europe, meet at Istanbul linked by a bridge 1,074 metres
long (above) that spans the narrow straits of the Bosphorus which stretch
31 kilometres between the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara. Combining boldness
and grace, this ultra-modern structure, opened to traffic in 1973, puts the stamp of the
future on Turkey's ancient capital with its Byzantine and Ottoman past. From Istanbul
the road leads into the heart of Anatolia to Ankara (below) which Mustafa Kemal
Atatürk (opposite page) designated in 1923 as the country's new capital. Ankara's
population was then 30,000; today it has reached the 2 million mark.

j "The group of Powers to which the
Ottoman Empire belonged has been
defeated in the war. Everywhere the Ot¬
toman army is in disarray. A harsh ar¬
mistice has been concluded. The long
years of the Great War have left the na¬
tion exhausted and impoverished. The
men who dragged the people into that
war have abandoned them and fled, to
save their own skins... The Cabinet is
without strength, dignity or courage; it
is entirely subject to the will of the
Sultan and is ready to agree to any ar¬
rangement that will guarantee its own
safety and that of the Sovereign. The
army has been and continues to be
deprived of arms and ammunition. The
Allied Powers have no intention of
observing the terms of the armistice.
Under various pretexts, their fleets and
armies are installed at Istanbul. The
Vilayet of Adana is occupied by the
French; Urfa, Maras and Aintab by the
English. At Adalia and Konya, there are
Italian troops... At Merzifon and Stam-
bul, English troops."
In response to this disastrous situa¬
tion dozens of centres of resistance in
the form of local committees or guerilla
movements soon sprang up throughout
Anatolia and Thrace.
At this point Mustafa Kemal decided
on a course of action suited to the cir¬
cumstances. Unlike the "Unionist"
Young Turks in the second constitu¬
tional period of the Ottoman Empire
(1908-1918), he did not wish to gain
power through armed insurrection. He
knew that a move for independence
could succeed only if it was carried out
with and by the people. National revolu¬
tion could be based only upon
democratic principles. First of all,
therefore, he had to create a political
framework for resistance.
Before taking on a military character,
therefore, the Turkish independence
struggle was first fought on the political
level. The transformation of local
assemblies first into regional bodies,
then into a national one (the Grand Na¬
tional Assembly of Turkey), bears
witness to this political and popular
aspect of the anti-imperialist combat.
What sort of man was Mustafa
Kemal? Born in 1881 into a middle-class
family at Salónica, he received his
education in military schools, which
were virtually the only road to advance¬
ment for the young men of Turkish-
Muslim society. His military career very
soon brought him into contact with the
political realities of a declining empire.
While still at cadet-school he became
involved in the liberal plots against the
despotism of Sultan Abdul Hamid II,
who was to be overthrown by the liberal
revolution of 1908-1909.
When he was posted to Syria he
became convinced that only a Turkish
national state which ceased oppressing
other peoples could benefit the Turks
themselves. His experiences with the
6
leaders of the Young Turk movement
brought home to him the need for the
separation of civil and military power,
with the latter subject to the former.
Though Kemal was opposed to the
pro-German and adventurist policy of
the Young Turk faction when it was in
power before and during the First
World War, this did not mean that he
favoured a policy of submission to the
Allies. His aim was to free his country
from dependence of every kind, and
when he was posted to the Caucasus
front during the Russian revolution of
October 1917, his contact with Russian
prisoners of war gave him a deeper
Mustafa Kemal aged 42 with his wife Latife
Hanim. Photo was taken In 1923, year of
the proclamation of the Turkish Republic.
knowledge of the revolutionary aims of
neighbouring peoples.
With his gifts of observation and
analysis, his intuition and prudence,
Mustafa Kemal was a good strategist,
not only on the battlefield but also in
the political struggles he was to face.
His strategy during the war of liberation
was to unite the various anti-imperialist
elements (reconciling the intellectuals,
for example, with the landowners and
notables) in order to speed the coming
of national independence. Once in¬
dependence had been achieved, he
launched into a programme of reforms
that was to turn military victories into
civil triumphs. For the job facing
Kemal's forces immediately after the
war of independence was essentially
that of creating a national State and a
national society. This meant breaking
completely with the old political and
social systems.
With independence gained and the
concessions made by the Ottomans
rescinded by the Treaty of Lausanne
(1923), the new Turkey was in a posi¬
tion to start out along the road to pro¬
gress and reform, free from all foreign
interference and intrusion. Moreover,
Mustafa Kemal and his comrades, now
in full control of the internal situation,
enjoyed the support of the people who,
for the first time in their history, had the
experience of co-operating with their
rulers. Indeed, with its breadth of scope
and its essentially political nature, the
Anatolian movement, in which all
classes of the population had taken
part, guaranteed at least the peoples'
tacit consent to the planned reforms.
Resistance came only from religious
fanatics and a small backward-looking
section of the elite. For the first time in
Turkish history, the spirit of revolu¬
tionary reform found itself in a
favourable climate.
What were the main achievements of
the Kemalist period in Turkey? First, the
suppression of the Sultanate (1922), the
setting up of the Turkish Republic
(1923) and the abolition of the Caliphate
(1924) three complementary acts bas¬
ed on one principle: national sovereign¬
ty. This principle had been the
Kemalists' watchword ever since the
beginning of the War of Independence,
and it became an ideological and
political instrument for the building
of a democratic national State on the
ruins of an obscurantist, reactionary
monarchy.
By separating the caliphate from the
sultanate, and doing away with the lat¬
ter, the new Turkey was making a
move, unprecedented in the Islamic
world, towards the separation of
spiritual and temporal powers. It was
only a first step. Since the Caliphate
continued to exist as ah institution, the
dualism persisted and was to make
itself particularly felt after the proclama¬
tion of the Republic in 1923.
This equivocal situation ended in
1924 when the Caliphate was abolished,
thus concluding the struggle against
any power, whether Islamic or Chris¬
tian, smacking of Ottoman interna¬
tionalism. The Muslim caliph was
deposed and expelled, as was the Or¬
thodox patriarch who had symbolized
the internationalism of the Eastern
Church by virtue of political powers that
the Treaty of Lausanne had terminated.
These changes in the period 1922 to
1924 showed clearly the Turkish
reformers' determination to bring about
the secularization of the State. The
nature of Turkish public law altered and
the principle of conformity to Qur'anic
law gave way to that of conformity to
the "national will", or "national
sovereignty" principles which were

solemnly recognized and established by
the Constitutions of 1921 and 1924.
This secularization of the machinery
of State was to end in the dissolution of
the Qur'anic courts, the elimination of
Islam as the State religion (1928) and
the inclusion in the Constitution (1937)
of a statement of the principle of
sécula rity.
The need for a similar transformation
was apparent also in the realm of
private law which, in spite of earlier at¬
tempts at reform, still suffered from the
defects of religious legislation and the
conflicts arising from clashes of
religions and cultures. Far from being
eliminated, their difficulties had been
aggravated by the creation of a hybrid
legal "system" in which laws of
religious origin existed side by side with
other laws of lay origin. The new
republican legislation put an end to this
duality by modernizing and secularizing
the entire legal code.
In this connexion, the adaptation to
Turkey's purposes of the Swiss civil
code was an important event, especially
in the fields of economic law and the
rights of women. The adoption of
modern principles concerning property
and contract law facilitated the
development of a capitalist production
system within a semi-feudal society. As
for the status of women, the institution
of monogamie civil marriage and the
recognition of legal equality between
men and women already constituted a
'.'legal liberation" of women, a prelude
to their emancipation. Here again we
see how Mustafa Kemal Atatiirk's vi¬
sion was in accord with the movement
of history.
During the First World War, Turkish
women, forced to fill the place left by
their husbands away at the front, had
made their appearance in society and
the world of work, and this led to the
movement for the abolition of that sym¬
bol of discrimination, the veil.
Later, Turkish women took part in
the War of Independence, either
fighting, dressed like men, or behind
the lines, working to feed the army,
organizing demonstrations, starting
clubs, etc. In fact, just like men, Turkish
women were fully involved in the
struggle. In 1921, a French journalist
asked Mustafa Kemal what would
become of women in a Turkey already
"so profoundly changed". He
answered: "They will have complete
equality... they have won their
freedom.'.' Thus when Turkish women
were at last accorded their rights, these
were not granted as a favour or out of
some political caprice; they had been
established through a process of
historical evolution strongly marked by
Atatürk's influence.
Reforms in culture and education
were no less important. In 1924 the
whole education system was unified .
and laicized under a national ministry, r
From steppe to lecture-room
Immediately the republic was proclaimed, Atatürk set about implementing his programme
of reforms throughout the country. He took it upon himself to involve the humblest folk,
such as the Anatolian camel-drivers and shepherds with whom he is seen in top photo,
and to introduce modern techniques (above) into a rural world where farming practices
had changed little since medieval times. He was the architect of a secular legal system
which redefined the status of the citizen. Below, Atatürk with students at the Law
Faculty of Istanbul University.

, This reform affected not only centres of
Muslim religious teaching but also
foreign schools which disseminated a
cosmopolitan and alienating culture.
From that time on, if they wanted to
survive, they had to conform to modern
lay principles.
Next came a major break with "tradi¬
tional" culture, the adoption of a
Latinized phonetic alphabet, which was
made compulsory in 1928. This reform
made it easier for very wide sections of
the population to learn to read and
write. It also contributed to the enrich¬
ment of the Turkish language, whose
development had been hampered, if not
paralysed, by the use of an alphabet
completely alien to it. "A nation must
have plenty of courage", said the
French writer, Georges Duhamel, in the
1950s, "to carry out a revolution of this
kind in an orderlyfashion and simply by
legal enactment."
"Positivism", in the sense of a
secular philosophy, is the best word to
describe the true nature of republican
education in Kemal's Turkey. And this
once more is inseparable from the
democratic and national character of
the Turkish revolution.
In spite of some resistance and a few
vain attempts to turn back the clock,
the objectives of this revolution have, to
a large extent, been achieved in
present-day Turkey. It is already possi¬
ble to speak of a consensus on this
point among the country's most in¬
fluential political and social forces.
Mustafa Kemal's thought and actions
have left such a deep and durable im¬
print on the history of his country that it
is easy to understand why the Turkish
people, through their representatives in
the Grand National Assembly, bestow¬
ed on hin the name "Atatürk", or,
"Father of the Turks".
H Bülent Tanör
Archaeological
treasure trove
Few countries in the world are as rich in
archaeological remains as Turkey, where
the most diverse civilizations succeeded
one another over a period of some
7,000 years. Vestiges of Neolithic and
Chalcolithic settlements are to be found
there along with relics from the cultures of
the Assyrians, Hittites, Phrygians, Urartu,
Persians, Greeks and Romans, as well as
the monuments of Byzantium and the
Seljuk dynasties. Atatürk Infused new life
into Turkish archaeology and conservation,
for until his time the prospection, study
and restoration of the country's rich
heritage of sites and monuments had been
severely restricted by lack of resources.
Left, Atatürk visits the ruins of an ancient
amphitheatre on the Anatolian coast.
8

In the heart of the Hittite empire
Some 150 kilometres east of Ankara, at Bogazköy in the heart of Anatolia stand the ruins of Hattusa (below). This
ancient city built during the first half of the second millennium BC was the capital of the powerful Hittite empire.
During the last half century thousands of clay tablets from the royal archives of Hattusa (inscribed in seven
hitherto unknown languages) have been deciphered, revealing the economic, political and religious structures of
the Hittite world and the civilization that existed in Anatolia as early as the third millennium BC. Among the art
treasures left by the Hittite empire, which grew to rival the Egypt of the Pharaohs, are rock carvings, ceramics
(see page 2), copper and bronze figurines, depictions of animals, and curious objects such as the solar disc (above)
from Alaca Huyük, which is also the site of the inscrutable head hewn out of the living rock (left).
