O
The Sultan
silenced by
the voice of the people
Ottoman, the tongue of a chosen few,
was a language barrier to development
by Cetin Altan
TURKEY'S unremitting struggle to
pursue its development in the last
half century constitutes a particu¬
larly notable chapter in the history of
the modern world.
The reason for this lies in the cir¬
cumstances of Turkish history. The Ot¬
toman empire is the first and only case
of an Islamic empire which, having sur¬
vived until the early part of the twen¬
tieth century, was transformed into a
modern secular republic.
In 1922, after the fall of the Ottoman
dynasty, Turkey was a vast country
with a population of fifteen million, 80
per cent of whom were illiterate. The
home of an impoverished peasant
society, it was a land without a com¬
munications network, lacking port
CETIN ALTAN, Turkish writer andjournalist, isa
leader writer with the Istanbul daily Milliyet He is
the author of essays, novels and plays some of
which have been widely translated.
facilities, and bereft of water and elec¬
tricity supplies.
The imperial language did not long
outlive the Sultanate, for incredible
though it may seem, the language
which had been that of the Ottoman
empire for six centuries was totally
obliterated within two decades. How
and why did this come about?
In spite of an apparent religious
cohesion and an original system of
government, the Ottoman empire never
fully succeeded in welding together the
masses of which it was composed. This
is why it was known as the Ottoman
and not the Turkish empire. Further¬
more, the Ottomans spoke not Turkish
but Ottoman, an artificial language
which the people did not understand.
Ottoman was used at court and among
the élite, but nowhere else. The people
spoke Turkish.
Unlike Latin and ancient Greek, Ot¬
toman was not an "archaic" tongue.
Nor was it a homogeneous language
like Arabic and Persian, spoken by large
numbers of people and shaped by
popular cultures. It was a curious
hybrid, a mixture of Arabic, Persian
and Turkish which neither Turks nor
Persians nor Arabs could easily
understand.
And so it is not surprising that Ot¬
toman should have died out so quickly
and so completely, to the point where
only a few dozen people, specialists for
the most part, can read and understand
the language in Turkey today.
The fact that the people and their
rulers spoke such radically different
languages perpetuated a split in
Turkey's cultural life. On the one hand
there was a popular Turkish literature
produced by the people, and on the
other an Ottoman literature created by
court and palace poets. The people
took no interest in Ottoman literature,
which they did not understand, while
10

popular literature won few devotees at
court where it was held to be "coarse".
This strange cultural hiatus formed
the background for many an odd
episode in Turkish history. When the
Sunnite Muslim Sultan Selim I set out
to conquer Persia in 1512, for example,
he wrote poems strongly influenced by
the Persian language. His opponent
Shah Ismail I, the Shiite ruler of Persia,
wrote poems in Turkish. The Shah of
Persia who, wrote in Turkish was to be
vanquished by the Ottoman Sultan who
wrote in Persian.
The literary dualism between Turkish
and Ottoman continued for centuries.
Not until the second half of the nine¬
teenth century did Westernizing in¬
fluences begin to appear in literature.
and even then they were too slight to
bring about a rapprochement between
Ottoman literature and the Turkish
language.
All thinking on the subject of social
change was confined to closed Ot¬
toman circles which patterned
themselves on the Western model of
what an intellectual should be, and
were always cut off from the people
since the language in which they for¬
mulated their ideas was Ottoman.
These Ottoman intellectuals were
regarded as "Westernized" and
"snobs" by the people, who used them
as a boundless source of inspiration for
characters who could be satirized in
shadow theatre (karagóz) and popular
drama.
unsuitable vehicle for noble literary ex¬
pression. There ensued a long and
violent series of polemics between the
supporters of the "shepherd's
language" and their opponents.
The ultimate victory of Turkish over
Ottoman only came with the reforms in¬
troduced by Atatürk, notably the
replacement of the Arabic by the Latin
alphabet in 1928 and the creation of the
Turkish Language Society for the
Purification of the Language.
The cultural duality which was so
marked a feature of the Ottoman Em¬
pire goes some way to explaining why
Turkey, in spite of possessing the
necessary resources for a rapid
emergence from under-development,
should have been so handicapped in its
Stylized signature of Sultan Selim III, left,
exemplifies the gap that used to exist
between the written and the spoken
language in Turkey. The court language,
Ottoman, strongly influenced by Arabic and
Persian, was not understood by the people
and was a brake on social and cultural
development. To remedy this situation
Atatürk reformed the educational system,
introduced the Latin alphabet in place of
Arabic characters, changed the system of
weights and measures, the calendar and
the way of writing figures. Right, Atatürk
visits a high school class.
A closed book to the masses, restricted to
a few initiates, scholars and high officials,
Ottoman became the prisoner of Its own
exclusiveness.
Nevertheless, a Turkish literary
movement soon emerged, even among
the élite, to stand out against the Ot¬
toman literary tide. Its task was not an
easy one. Turkish, always excluded
from élite literature, was frowned on as
an insufficiently sophisticated instru¬
ment of expression. It may be true that
Ottoman lent itself to a greater richness
of metaphorical language; the fact re¬
mained that it was an artificial language
which the people did not understand.
The "Young Turks", who champion¬
ed the extension of liberties and called
for the establishment of a constitutional
monarchy, were the originators of this
attempt to introduce Turkish into "high
literature". But their move brought pro¬
tests from certain intellectuals, sup¬
porters of the Young Turks in political
matters, who claimed that Turkish was
a "mere shepherd's language" and an
advance along the road to economic
and social progress.
The linguistic drawback was always
an obstacle to enrichment of thought.
Since Arabic remained the language of
religion and Ottoman the language of
the notables, the Turkish-speaking
masses were inevitably excluded from
cultural exchanges which only took
place within certain social groups and in
certain specific fields.
Religious and secular leaders, en¬
trenched behind an Arabic which they
professed to command completely and
an Ottoman which no one understood,
so intimidated the people that even to¬
day there are those who believe that it is
a sin to translate the Qur'an into
Turkish.
The fact that printing was introduced
into Turkey almost three centuries after k
its invention, that both popular and Ot- r
11

toman literature consisted almost ex¬
clusively of poetry until the middle of
the nineteenth century (the first Turkish
novel was written around 1890), and
that interpretation of the Qur'an had to
conform to certain prescribed norms-
all these factors had a sterilizing effect
on social thought and intellectual
creativity.
A society in which rulers and ruled do
not speak the same language, in which
there is no philosophical speculation,
no fiction, no printing, no theatre and
no painting, is bound to meet obstacles
when breaking free from the fetters of
the past, pursuing its destiny and
building its future.
If we are here emphasizing the
linguistic aspect of the Ottoman
heritage, this is not to deny that
obstacles to development are always
extremely complex and diverse.
Steps to Westernize Turkey had
already been taken as early as 1839
when Sultan Abdulmecit and his vizier
Reshid Pasha decided to carry out a
number of major reforms in law, educa¬
tion and cultural life. But faced with a
mounting foreign debt, the Ottoman
empire's search for renewal ended in an
economic cul-de-sac.
Although the Ottoman reformers set
their eyes on European "modernism",
they never took European systems of
production as their model. Concen¬
trating instead on European-style pat¬
terns of consumption which .then
prevailed in the wealthy quarters of
Istanbul, they fell victim to a colossal
misunderstanding. They did not realize
that if Westernization were to become
an economic fact, then it had to be
expressed above all in new forms of
production.
When Turkey became aware of what
had gone wrong, it was too late. More
and more obstacles had arisen to block
the road to economic development, and
society still lacked the dynamism which
could have overridden such barriers.
There were not enough cadres and the
country's technological potential was
too weak. The opening to the West did
not lead to a real industrial revolution.
Not until the end of the Ottoman em¬
pire did Kemalist Turkey set course for a
veritable renaissance. Under the drive
of Atatürk, rigid dogmas were shat¬
tered, rulers and ruled began to speak
and write the same language,
weaknesses in intellectual and artistic
creativity were remedied, and the
numbers of cadres and technicians
increased.
In spite of demographic growth
(Turkey today has a population of over
45 million) the illiteracy rate has drop¬
ped from 80 per cent to 30 per cent.
Modern Turkey is thus well on the
way to emancipating itself from the
conditions which it once knew, those of
a vast, inward-looking rural society.
Cetin Altan
12
The village bards of Anatolia
sing a new song
FOR centuries travelling minstrels have roved the Anatolian
countryside. Though they are still called by their traditional
name of asik (or lover, pronounced ashik) they are no longer the
timorous poets of old seeking the beloved. "The black earth is my
only true love", sang Veysel (above), one of the most popular asik
of this century, as he went from village to village. Today's asik
see themselves as "lovers of the truth". Theirs is no longer an
improvised art aimed at illiterate audiences, for they themselves
have learned to write. Many of them took part in Atatürk's
national revival and literacy drive ; others were associated with the
famous "village institutes" which produced some of the great
writers of peasant origin who are the pride of modern Turkish
literature.
Many of the asik, keeping up the old tradition, still wander
through the countryside. But today their music is published and,
with the spread of radio and television there is scarcely a village
where one cannot buy asik records and cassettes. Moreover, with
the changes that have swept Turkey in the last half century the
content of their message has changed and so has their style.
Many asik of the present generation take up political and ethical
issues such as nuclear energy, decolonization, disarmament or the
conquest of space; they have become more caustic in their
criticism and more pressing in their demand for social justice.
Another novelty is that women have now joined their ranks. For
example, Sahtuma, a blind poetess from a village in eastern
Anatolia, sings of the plight of the poor peasant woman: "She
divides her loaf into forty portions/she tills the soil for little
return/she rocks her baby's wooden cradle...". Today the most
popular asik, abandoning time-honoured clichés, are concentrating
on more serious themes. They sing of the afflictions of the
contemporary world, describing man's striving, his hopes,
disillusion, joys and doubts. For, as the peasant poet Hasan
Devrani has written, "It would be disgraceful for a poet to show
the world upside down. I, for one, would be ashamed".
