man
who
vanquished
yellow
fever
by Pedro M. Pruna
and Rafael O. Pedraza
A century ago relatively little was
known about the tropical diseases
which brought suffering and death
to the peoples living in the hottest regions of
the globe.
Today, although not all tropical diseases
have been eradicated, some of them are on
the way to being completely wiped out, or
else their incidence has dropped.
Yellow fever was the first tropical disease
to be eradicated from the regions where it
was considered to be endemic. Coastal
cities such as Havana, Veracruz, Rio de
Janeiro and other ports of Central and
South America were the front-line targets of
yellow fever epidemics, as well as relatively
large areas of West Africa. The disease
sometimes affected regions with a more
temperate climate such as the Mississippi
valley, where it caused over 13,000 deaths in
1878, and other parts of North America and
even Europe.
Two big questions emerged from analysis
of the causes of yellow fever. One had to do
with the nature of the pathogenic agent
which caused the disease; the other with the
specific way in which it was transmitted. It
was known that it could be propagated over
relatively large distances without there
necessarily being a carrier in the vicinity of
each new infected centre.
The Cuban physician Carlos Finlay
(1833-1915) knew that the pathogenic agent
responsible for yellow fever could be "an
amorphous virus", an animal or plant germ
or a bacteria, but he was more interested in
discovering how the disease was pro¬
pagated than in isolating the micro¬
organism which caused it. Between 1879
and 1880, Finlay concentrated all his efforts
on discovering in which organs of the
human body the first symptoms of the
disease appeared. His studies convinced him
that the germ which caused the disease was
first of all lodged in the walls of the blood
vessels. It could thus be supposed that it
was introduced into the blood by a medium
of transmission which was still unknown.
In the history of science it sometimes hap¬
pens that a fact which apparently has little
connexion with the matter being investi¬
gated provides the inspiration for a scientific
discovery. Finlay's discovery was one of
these occasions. The inspiration came from
an article describing wheat-rust, a disease
caused by a fungus part of whose life-cycle
is spent as a parasite on an intermediary
plant. Finlay immediately realized that the
epidemiological characteristics of yellow
fever could be explained by,the existence of
an active intermediary agent capable of in¬
oculating healthy persons with diseased
blood and thus with the germ causing the
disease.
In February 1881 Finlay expounded the
hypothesis of the existence of a transmitting
agent in an address to the International
Sanitary Conference at Washington, D.C.
By August of the same year he had made so
much progress that, in a lecture to the
Havana Academy of Medical, Physical and
Natural Sciences, he was able to describe
this agent with amazing precision. The vec¬
tor of yellow fever, Finlay declared, was a
mosquito whose description corresponded
to the species which is today known as
Aedes aegypti. For the first time it was
claimed that a pathogenic micro-organism
was transmitted from one person to another
by a biological vector.
Before Finlay's discovery, the theories put
forward to explain the transmission of
yellow fever from an infected to a healthy
subject had given rise to a confused debate
which brought into confrontation two main
schools: the contagionists, who claimed
that the disease was transmitted through
secretions, through clothing and direct con- 1
29

1965-1968 1969-1972 1973-1976 1977-1979
Maps from WHO Weekly Epidemic Record. No. 46, 1980
	1	
A century ago, when Carlos Finlay discovered that it was transmitted by a mosquito,
yellow fever was an endemic disease in much of tropical America and Africa. Today its
ravages have been greatly reduced. Shaded areas on maps (top) show the incidence of
jungle yellow fever in South America between 1965 and 1979. The four maps showing part
of Africa also illustrate the evolution of yellow fever during the same period. Localized out¬
breaks in three countries spread rapidly before becoming concentrated in two countries by
1979. Generalized vaccination is the main weapon used by national health authorities
against yellow fever.
30
tact, and the miasmatics, who maintained
that foul-smelling marsh gas was the culprit.
Seen from a historical perspective, the
major contribution of Finlay's work was not
only the identification of the transmitting
agent of yellow fever, but his realization that
certain diseases were transmitted not so
much through person-to-person contagion
as through a biological vector.
It is today widely recognized that the
theory of biological vectors has a double
paternity, since it was set forth and demons¬
trated almost simultaneously by Carlos J.
Finlay for yellow fever, and Patrick Manson
forfilariasis. However, Finlay was the first to
put forward the theory in the case of a
micro-organism.
Finlay also distinguished himself by
explaining why the indigenous population of
Cuba suffered less from yellow fever than
foreigners who had recently arrived in the
country. He supposed, correctly, that the
Cubans had developed a certain immunity to
the disease, and that for them the mosquito
acted as a kind of vaccine. This was an
explanation ahead of its time.
In 1898, Finlay put forward the method of
combatting yellow fever which four years
later would be applied to eradicate the
disease from Cuba. This was the destruction
of the larva of the mosquito in the water
where it lived, using chemicals.
Before the year 1900, Finlay carried out
over a hundred inoculations using the mos¬
quito as a vector, and although most of the
results obtained corroborated his theory, the
latter had been confirmed by no other scien¬
tist. An opportunity to carry out an impartial
test arose in 1900 when a commission of
physicians from the United States, led by
Walter Reed, arrived in Cuba. Their aim was
to investigate the causes of yellow fever, but
they were more interested in isolating the
pathogenic micro-organism which caused
the disease (through a process of elimina¬
tion they reached the conclusion that it was
a "filtrable virus") than in studying how the
disease was propagated.
It was only when Finlay took up the mat¬
ter strongly with the supervisory authorities
of the United States in Cuba that the Com-

mission agreed, with considerable scepti¬
cism, to examine the theses he put forward
and to repeat, in controlled conditions, the
experiments he had performed. In so doing
they confirmed the fundamental results he
had obtained. It should be added that the
only member of the Commission who be¬
lieved in Finlay's theory, the young doctor
Jesse Lazear, died in the course of an expe¬
riment designed to test it and carried out on
his own initiative.
Years later, William Gorgas, who headed
the campaign to wipe out yellow fever in
Cuba and Panama, wrote to Finlay:
"If we had followed your advice during
our stay in Cuba, we should have obtained
in 1899 the results we obtained later, in
1901. For myself, I would even go so far as
to assert that it is thanks to your work and to
the way in which you defended your mos¬
quito theory that the American Commission
of which Reed was president was induced to
investigate the theory. Were it not for the
work you had already carried out in 1900,
the American Commission would never have
embarked on research into the mosquito
theory."
The first scientist of international reputa¬
tion to recognize the outstanding merits of
Finlay's work was the British bacteriologist
Sir Ronald Ross, who was noted for his
investigations of malaria and was awarded
the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1902. Two
years later he proposed Finlay for the same
award. But although Finlay never received
this prize which he so richly deserved, he
was privileged to receive in person many
tokens of universal gratitude for his work.
He won the Breant Prize of the French Aca¬
demy of Medicine, of which he became a
member, and the Mary Kingsley Medal be¬
stowed on him by the University of Liver¬
pool. He was also awarded the French
Legion of Honour.
At the Panamerican Medical Congress of
1933 it was decided that Finlay's birthday, 3
December, should be celebrated each year
as American Medicine Day. Several interna¬
tional congresses on the history of medicine
have underlined the importance of Finlay's
discovery, and some years ago Unesco
created a prize bearing his name. But
perhaps the finest tribute that could be paid
to Finlay's work and to Finlay himself would
be for its significance never to be forgotten.
In Cuba there has not been a single case
of yellow fever since the first decade of this
century, and the disease has been wiped out
in many other Latin American countries, in
the United States, and wherever the princi¬
ples established by Finlay have been applied.
Pedro M. Pruna and Rafael O. Pedraza
PEDRO M. PRUNA, Cuban biologist, is scien¬
tific secretary of the Carlos J. Fin/ay Centre for
the Study of the History and Organization of
Science of the Cuban Academy of Sciences.
RAFAEL O. PEDRAZA, Cuban physician, is
president of Cuba's History of Medicine Society.

