MUSLIM thought, which contributed
so greatly in the past to the deve¬
lopment of universal philosophy,
is undergoing today a profound reappraisal
which carries the promise of new dynamism
and creativity. Unlike its counterpart during
the reformist period at the end of the 19th
century, contemporary Islamic philosophy is
not so much concerned with adapting itself
to the modern world as with examining con¬
temporary civilization critically and playing
its part in the universal attempt at revival.
Islam's recognition of earlier religions, its
almost complete acceptance of all scientific
knowledge and the interest it shows in the
various eastern and western cultures are
proof of the open-mindedness and spirit of
synthesis which characterize Muslim
thought. It was because of this attitude that
one of the great problems faced by Muslim
civilization in the past was how to find the
right balance between adaptation to human
evolution and revolution on the one hand
and, on the other, preserving the essentials
of its own philosophy and its own intellec¬
tual and practical achievements.
The task was made more difficult by the
fact that from the start and at the doctrinal
level Islam adopted a unitarian stance, op¬
posing all separation between theological
and social, spiritual and secular. Given such
an approach, it was impossible for Islamic
thought, whether scientific, philosophical or
of any other kind, to adopt a neutral or
transcendental attitude towards human life
or the life of human societies. Any intellec¬
tual innovation, therefore, had either to be
adapted or rejected.
In the context of a public opinion anxious
to preserve its identity and traditions many
intellectuals have been drawn towards either
rigid conservatism or radical reformism.
Thus the universalism of Ibn Sina (Avicen¬
na), who adapted science and philosophy to
Muslim theology, was counterbalanced by
the essentially Islamic spirituality of al-
Ghazali, while the reformism of Ibn
Taymiyya, who rejected any form of adapta¬
tion, reflected the desire of the people and
the community to maintain a purified form
of Islam freed from the encroachments of
medieval cosmopolitanism.
Of course the main movements of Muslim
philosophy during the Middle Ages never
went beyond a not very dynamic alternation
ABDEL MAJID MEZIANE is Rector of the Uni¬
versity of Algiers, where he has taught since
1965. He is the author of several publications (in
French and Arabic) on the sociology of culture
and of many studies (in Arabic) on philosophical
questions.

The dynamic of Islamic thought
by Abdel Majid Meziane
between synthesis and adaptation though
for the period this represented a fairly satis¬
fying view of the world! But despite the
vigour and realism of the socio-political at¬
titudes to which it gave rise, the tendency
towards radicalism produced serious in¬
tellectual difficulties. In the absence of a
religious philosophy strong enough to hold
its own against the Hellenistic, and par¬
ticularly the Aristotelian, heritage, Muslim
thought sought authenticity by developing
such disciplines as post-Mu'tazali theology,
spirituality and the legal and linguistic
sciences, each with its own specific field
and methodology.
By the end of the VI /12th century, the
idea of a comprehensive world universality
had given way to that of an exclusively
Muslim universality and this regression in
self-development was in itself indicative of a
slackening of creative energy. Not only did
theology no longer use philosophy as it had
been able to do during its early days of
greatness, but from the Vlll/14th century
onwards it ignored philosophy completely.
Parallel but compartmentalized development
of the different branches of knowledge, with
"sacred" and "profane" rarely brought
together, gave rise to a traumatic situation
in which the "spirit of theology" was
outstripped by the attainments of science
and often had difficulty in adapting itself to
the situation.
This problem of course was not peculiar
to Islamic culture; from the Renaissance on¬
wards the "theological outlook" in the
Christian West was also outstripped and,
ever since then, religious disciplines have
constantly lost ground. But for the Muslim
community the problem has to be seen and
examined in different terms. The political
decline of Islam, accentuated by the inroads
made by external ideologies, revived suscep¬
tibilities dormant since the great confronta¬
tion of the Crusades and aggravated by the
fact that the worldwide intellectual revival
was led by the Western world, with its tradi¬
tional hostility to Islam. In Islam, the cen¬
turies of decadence were above all a period
of Cultural survival in which little attention
was paid to philosophical debate and scien¬
tific achievement. Some of the reform
movements chose the easy path of conser¬
vatism and "fundamentalism", not so much
because they were incapable of accepting
cultural progress as because it was a means
of self-defence and of preserving Islam's
identity.
Neither the philosophy of "adaptation"
nor conservative and "protectionist"
theology enabled religious thought to
develop its true potential. Today, however,
a new Muslim humanism is developing
along two fundamental lines of thought.
This could provide an intellectual dimension
lacking in the cold reasoning of science and
our increasingly reckless "Promethean"
philosophy.
The first approach is concerned with
developing a system of ethics for science.
For Islam, both the end and the founda¬
tion of any science must be a system of
ethics providing rules by which man may
avoid all excess and deviation. The sole vir¬
tue of the "man who knows" is that he
"serves mankind".
Scientific ethics therefore are not a
separate code specially drawn up for the use
of scientists. For the scientist, far more than
the layman, must be conscious of his
responsibilities, which, from time im¬
memorial and for the whole of mankind,
proceed from an existential covenant bet¬
ween him and the Creator, the created
universe and all his human brothers. Seen in
this context, human progress is part of a
general scheme of things in which morals
and spirituality form a bulwark against the
vagaries of science, capable of destroying
nature and of leading to the domination of
man by man.
For dynamic Muslim thought, the task of
a moral philosophy of knowledge is not to
adapt itself to science or to indulge in ran¬
dom criticism of the scientific spirit, but
rather to shed light on scientific thought in
such a way as to humanize and give it back
the spirituality it lost when it was annexed
by political and economic forces.
The second line of thought that I would
like to describe here briefly is a social
philosophy which aims at being "revolu¬
tionary", not only in the form of protest, but
also in a constructive and co-operative
sense, with the object of rebuilding our
civilization and correcting some of its errors.
Religious philosophies and Muslim
philosophy is no exception have often
been accused of abandoning their original
goal of freeing man from all forms of
despotism whether intellectual or political.
In the Qur'anic texts, the monotheistic
religions represent history in terms of broad
periods and outstanding liberators:
Abraham struggling against the tyranny of
Ur, Moses against Pharaoh's pride, Jesus
against the domination of the priests, and
Islam against imperialism oppressing small
nations. Such symbols are easily grasped by
the popular memory and readily motivate
moral and political behaviour, but they must
be updated constantly and given new life by
a social philosophy sensitive to current
events and highly critical of those political
systems that recall ancient tyrannies.
The first responsibility of any community
is "to work for the triumph of good" and
"the prevention of evil". Of course, this fun¬
damental principle of Islamic moral and
social philosophy has often been misap¬
plied. Under the dynastic and oligarchic
systems deriving from man's so-called
primitive political nature, there were those,
particularly among the "tame" intellectuals,
who either participated in the establishment
as men of law or, as philosophers, justified
the government's misdeeds in the same way
that Aristotle justified Alexander's im¬
perialism. It is too often forgotten that in the
early days of Islam there were guardians of
religious doctrine who exercised an active
and vigilant political responsibility and were
prepared to oppose all despotism at the risk
of their own interests and even their life.
But while it is critical of its own history
and of its own political mistakes, Islam's
social philosophy does not hesitate to
criticize new forms of imperialism. A truly
universal democracy, to be created through
the common efforts of all mankind, can
derive much benefit from a philosophy
which, through the ages, has been sensitive
to the aspirations and struggles of the many
and varied peoples living in the Islamic world
and continuing to draw inspiration from its
ideals of justice and equality.
By instituting and advocating a system
based on economics, contemporary
establishments have increased alienation
and thrown up more and more oppressive
governments. Every principle of Islam's
socio-economic ethic condemns in¬
temperate behaviour, whether individual or
collective, just as it condemns those non-
collective interests that generate conflict
between nations.
Countries possessing economic power
and by the same token all other power, be it
military, political or technological, increase
this power at the expense of small, im¬
poverished peoples who are kept in a cons¬
tant state of inferiority. This division of
mankind, of course, is not a new
phenomenon. It is the legacy of ancient im¬
perialisms whose rich capitals were built
with the blood and sweat of the masses.
Such injustice and inequality are con¬
demned by all monotheistic religions in their
economic ethics. But the vigour with which*»
57

-Islam preaches egalitarianism has never
been equalled.
The historic liberation struggle of small
nations against the great powers is today
reactivated by a new revolutionary Islamic
philosophy that seeks to defeat all forms of
exploitation generating hatred between na¬
tions and to abolish all the discrepancies
which divide mankind in two.
The basic principles of Islam which break
down all racial, national, economic and
cultural barriers, are still sufficiently alive to¬
day to bring hope to the masses in many
countries of the Third World. A world where
there is no discrimination between educated
and illiterate, between the "people of the
Book" and the "Gentiles" and between rich
and poor, remains, according to the basic
texts of Islam, a universal aspiration which is
no mere Utopia.
Islam does not set itself up as the only
model of a universal community, for in prin¬
ciple and in practice it is a "multi-
communal" society. But, despite national
and cultural diversity and differing political
systems, mankind is basically one both in its
anthropological origins and final ends. In a
world where the difficulty of co-existence is
the source of major problems, the social
philosophy of Islam can assert its originality
and creativity by stressing mankind's basic
unity within its diversity.
Recognition of each socio-cultural unit
without hierarchical distinction is the star¬
ting point of a new anthropology in which
separate communities will ultimately merge
into one. For Islam, universality can never be
a weakening factor since the whole of
mankind and each human being taken in¬
dividually have the same existential value
and each recognizes the other. The Qur'an
declares that earthly corruption or the un¬
justified taking of human life is tantamount
to murdering the whole of mankind, while
restoring one man's life is the same as
resuscitating all humanity.
H Abdel Majid Meziane
