Anatomy
of
a harp
X-RAY examination ofmusical instruments is basic to under¬
standing the technology, invisible from the outside, which
has a direct bearing on their acoustic qualities: the shape
and roughness of the holes in a wind instrument, for example, or the
form and structure of the sound board of string instruments.
The structural changes which each instrument has undergone in
the course of its history are also very important since, in addition to
providing historical data, they can make it possible to reconstitute
the sound originally produced by the instrument.
Among Egyptian musical instruments, the harp has always been a
particular favourite; its shape and dimensions have varied con¬
siderably. The instrument shown above dates from sometime during
the first or second millennia BC, and is in a perfect state of conserva¬
tion. The harp, now in the Louvre, consists of a vertical sound box
(1.10 metres high) entirely covered in green leather, and a console
(cross-piece) made from a cylindrical bar of wood set at an angle of
85 degrees to the sound box. Twenty-one strings are wound around
the console, and cords ' with a tassle at the end en¬
abled the player to tune the instrument.
Visual examination does not reveal the various elements of the
sound box the essential part of the instrument but X-ray
photography has enabled specialists better to understand the form
and structure of this type of instrument.
In profile, the sound box is shown to be a massive piece of wood
hollow from the top down to the level of the console. The upper part
is closed by an oval piece of wood set in between the sides of the
sound box. Fixed to the sound box is the suspension rod to which
the strings are attached. It tapers towards its lower end, just above
the console.
The two sides of the sound box are maintained apart by five small,
intricately-worked cross-pieces about 7 cm high. These dovetail-
shaped wedges are set at regular intervals in the sound box, which is
reinforced by two vertical ribs from one to two centimetres thick.
The small piece of wood jutting out from the top of the sound box
on the left may have been a support for a symbolic figure similar to
those found on certain musical instruments.
X-ray photography shows that the base of the sound box hidden
beneaththe leather has an outline slightly different from what is visi¬
ble from the outside. Moreover, a small piece of wood has been add-
20
ed to reinforce the base on which the instrument rests, but this in no
way alters its character.
The different components and their position have enabled
specialists to compare the harp with one formerly preserved in
Berlin. The Berlin harp was in a very bad state of conservation, but
after detailed study a copy of it was made on which it was possible
to play. The copy and the original harp, which have since disap¬
peared, were described in a published study, and it is interesting to
note that there is a close similarity between the harp in the Louvre
and the Berlin instrument. Both reveal a relatively sophisticated
technology, and could even have been produced by the same
instrument-maker.
To understand a musical instrument, all its aspects must be con¬
sidered: how it was made, how it works, its acoustics and its
aesthetic appearance.
The X-ray photographs show that the techniques used in making
this Egyptian harp were advanced. Detailed analysis of its shape
shows that the "aesthetic ideology" of ancient Egyptian harp-
makers was based on proportions similar to those used in architec¬
ture. The harp's outline is that of a specific geometrical figure whose
measurements are absolutely proportionate to the "Royal Cubit"
(52.35 cm), a unit of length used in ancient Egypt.
This type of instrument consists of two parts: an "instigating"
system, represented here by the strings, and a "resonance" system,
represented by the sound box.
The design of the sound box with its dove-tail-shaped cross-
sections and that of the console and their respective positions show
that the mechanical problems had been mastered. The strings could
vibrate once they had been stretched and the sound box was "flex¬
ible" enough to change shape temporarily.
Greater amplitudes of vibration in the lower ranges are required to
make the sound appear homogeneous to the ear. This was done by
making the lowest-pitched string four times longer than the highest
one, for the aim was not to achieve sounds of great intensity but
sounds which were warm and mysterious. This explains why a
leather sound board was used instead of a wooden one. In order to
bring the whole of the board into play, the wooden rod to which the
ends of the strings are attached was placed under the leather.
Acoustically, the system is appropriate and effective.

M
s
]ß*mmm
i r.
Analysis of the sound range by "acoustic spectrography", that is,
,the "response curve" obtained by tapping at each extremity the
longest, medium and shortest string, shows in each case a dif¬
ference in the degree of "freedom" between the two points.
The end nearest the leather has a lower pitch than the console
end. The timbre has therefore two different frequency areas similar
to those of the "human voice".
The harpist used to tune his instrument by stretching the strings
to the point where the sound corresponded with the ideal of the day;
fine-tuning was done later. He changed the pitch according to the
"scale" of the piece he happened to be playing. It seems likely that
the twenty-one strings covered three octaves of seven notes which
could be adjusted at will.
The workmanship that went into making the harp, its physical
characteristics and results of the acoustic studies all point to a high
degree of technical sophistication. The acoustic study, however, is
not entirely conclusive since the instrument is not in a state to be
played; the strings do not have the proper tension, the leather has
lost its elasticity and the handle has probably been altered. The con¬
ditions in which the instrument was tuned and played have in¬
evitably changed.
However, the X-ray photographs and readings from the
"response curve" would make it possible to construct a model on
which a real study could be made.
Réunion des Musées Nationaux, Paris
