Science
in the service
of art
by Magdeleine Hours
ART and Science are two terms which
have been set apart by a long his¬
tory of opposition. The former was
identified with "creation", the product of
human sensibility; the latter was considered
to lead to the "discovery of the laws of
nature".
Twentieth-century man has seen the
growing impact of scientific and
technological development gradually
change the pattern of his daily life. In the
world of the arts, among both students and
artists alike, this phenomenon produced a
defence mechanism and a feeling of ap¬
prehension the importance of the
sciences as a source of inspiration for
twentieth-century art is undeniable.
However, in the last thirty years, the
world conscience has so often been aroused
by the extent of the destruction of works of
art and by the need to preserve the artistic
and cultural heritage, that a new alliance has
emerged between scientists and those
whose task is to study and conserve the ar¬
tistic heritage.
In Europe the close links between science
and art were formed as early as the eigh¬
teenth century: in Paris through the ac¬
tivities of the Encyclopaedists Fontenelle,
Charles, Diderot and others; then in London
through the work of Humphry Davy. During
the nineteenth century, research was more
sporadic, but both the French chemist and
microbiologist Louis Pasteur and the Ger¬
man physicist Wilhelm Roentgen applied
their own scientific methods of analysis to
the study of works of art. On 6 March 1865
Pasteur wrote: "There are circumstances in
which I clearly see that the alliance between
science and art is both possible and
desirable, with the chemist and the physicist
sitting at your elbow and informing you...."
Thirty years later in 1895, Roentgen
discovered X-rays, and, working in Munich,
attempted to take the first X-ray photograph
of a painting.
Half-way through this century the world's
great museums created their own
laboratories, and universities began to use
their facilities and in some cases to enlist
their research workers to discover the
origins of objects and their date, and to
establish the technology with which they
were made. Initially it was thanks to the pro¬
perties of electro-magnetic waves that
historians and curators found themselves
equipped with techniques for studying
works of art which vastly increased the
power of the naked eye. Through ultra¬
violet rays it was possible to detect and
photograph those places, hitherto invisible,
where an artist had made changes in his
work or returned to it after an interval. Infra¬
red rays and X-rays enable us to penetrate
wood and canvas, go back in time, and
rediscover unsuspected steps in the act of
creation.
These methods have shed some light on
the techniques used in creating a work of
art, but they yield less information in this
field than procedures which have been
developed to analyse the materials used by
artists and craftsmen of former times.
Methods of physical and chemical analysis,
which even a few years ago were seriously
handicapped because they required a sam¬
ple of the object to be removed, are now so
highly developed that only a tiny sample (of
the order of a few microgrammes) need be
taken. In the case of the nondestructive
technique of X-ray microfluorescence, no
sample at all is needed. Analytical tech¬
niques are now so accurate that they not
only reveal the secrets of materials but pin¬
point their origin. In this way the mysterious
invisible power of radiation is enabling us to
chart the trade-routes of ancient metallurgy
(see page 17).
While spectrometry and nuclear methods
cast light on the unfolding story of objects
and sites, dating procedures permit us to
situate objects in time. A number of dating
systems are currently in use, carbon-14 be¬
ing increasingly successful since it now re¬
quires the destruction of less and less
organic material. Thermoluminescence has
made it possible to date ceramics, and den¬
drochronology the age of wood, while for
questions of prehistory, the dating of bones
and the system of racemizing amino-acids
are yielding important information. '
The dialogue which has now been
established between the exact and the
human sciences in art and archaeology is
akin to that which exists between pure
science and medicine. It is to be hoped that
the various international initiatives in this
field will lead to a standardization of scien¬
tific methods which would have beneficial
consequences for the exchange of informa¬
tion, the conservation of the artistic heritage
and the campaign against forgers, as well as
providing historians and archaeologists with
new and more accurate criteria for dating
objects and relating them to their environ¬
ment.
In the exploration of the past there is
room for two methods of analysis, two ap¬
proaches which should lead to the same
goal: the unity and the broadening of the
concept of culture. For there is today a real
danger of a split between scientific culture
and the human sciences. If this hypothesis
of a divided universe became widely ac¬
cepted, it would mean the end of "Culture".
And so we should do all we can to promote
ever closer co-operation between the exact
and the human sciences. Such an effort is
bound to meet obstacles and it will call for
efforts on every side, but it is the only way,
in our opinion, towards a new humanism.
MAGDELEINE HOURS, of France, is head
curator of her country's National Museums, and
has directed the French Museums' Research
Laboratory since 1946. Madame Hours was Com¬
missaire Général of a major exhibition, "The
Secrets of the Great Masterpieces Science in
the Service ofArt", which was held in 1980 at the
Grand Palais in Pans. The exhibition presented a
series of outstanding works of art and also
displayed the spectrum of methods of scientific
examination, analysis and dating which are today
being used in the study and conservation of
works of art. Over 60 laboratories and almost a
hundred research workers were involved in the
work of the exhibition, for which a 330-page
catalogue was prepared comprising a description
of the works shown, scientific notes on the
methods used in connexion with them, andan ex¬
planatory list of scientific techniques in current
use. On the following pages we present specially
chosen extracts from this catalogue. We express
our thanks to the authors, the Réunion des
Musées Nationaux, and Madame Hours herself,
for authorizing us to publish them.
