Profiles of change
All paths to a viable world energy system
lead through a gate marked 'global co-operation'
by Wolfgang Sassin
INCREASING interdependence between
nations inevitably gives rise to new prob¬
lems which if they are not tackled and
mastered in good time may become chronic
and form a focus for international tensions.
When things reach that stage nations are
tempted simply to try to adapt as best they
can to the situation on hand, with each
country using available resources to
strengthen its own position. The will to work
together for a long-term solution is lost and
this creates at the very least an additional
obstacle to world as well as national
development. .
The energy problem that became ap¬
parent in the early 1970s seems to be evolv¬
ing along these lines. It arises from the rapid
changeover from national energy supply
systems to a global system based on highly
localized oil reserves.
The swift rise in world energy consump¬
tion that took place at the same time has
been a decisive factor (see diagram this
page).
When the first oil crisis developed, one
small area, the Gulf, was meeting 20 per
cent of the world's energy needs. The major
part of the output of the Member States of
the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) went to the industrialized
countries of Western Europe and to the
United States and Japan.
Today, nearly eight years after the first oil
embargo of 1973 when OPEC took control
of the oil price-fixing mechanism, three facts
are clear: (1) throughout the world, oil con¬
sumption has peaked at about its 1973/74
level; (2) so far no alternative energy source
has been able to take over the role played by
oil up to 1973 as a cheap production factor
promoting economic growth; and (3) the
world economy is going through a phase of
reduced growth and is facing severe struc¬
tural crises and increasing difficulties with
regard to the international division of labour.
In recent years efforts have been inten¬
sified to find national solutions to the energy
problem. Some industrialized countries, fac¬
ed with the prospect of drastically reduced
economic growth and obliged by rising
prices to adopt fuel-saving measures, seem
to have. fairly good hopes of limiting their
dependence on an uncertain supply system.
Other countries, especially in the Third
World, are relying on increased exploration
of their still unprospected territories and on
The deep concern about energy today relates to the fact
that the resources of oil and gas, our most modern and
most important energy forms, are limited. Figure below
summarizes the history of consumption of primary energy
over the past 100 years. Total consumption has grown at
an average rate of 5 % per year, except at times of world¬
wide crises: World War I, the recession of the 1930s,
World War II, and now the oil crisis. It is worth noting
that this high growth rate was supported by coal around
1900. whereas for the last two decades it has been based
on oil and gas, which presently account for 73 % of the
primary energy consumption of the world.
stepping-up technological development in
order to tap resources unavailable up to now
for technical or economic reasons. This is
especially true of biomass, hydropower and
solar energy, through which the rural
populations of the developing countries are
attempting to meet their energy needs using
traditional and at present not very efficient
technologies.
Whether these unco-ordinated efforts can
ever solve the energy problem is an open
question. In any event, for a long time to
come, many countries will still have to rely
on energy imported from abroad.. That is
one of the weak points of national energy
policies, though by no means the most
significant. Energy has been and remains a
decisive factor in industrial development.
Even if it were possible to devise means of
ensuring a fair free 'market distribution,
scarce supplies and high prices are bound to
put a constraint on development and, in a
world based on the international division of
labour, this would be economically damag¬
ing to all countries. There is plenty of
evidence of this. Local and national efforts
in the energy ' sector must therefore be
assessed in a global and long-term context.
History shows that the changeover from
one source of energy to another takes many
decades. The switch from wood to coal, and
then from coal to oil and gas took more than
half a century. The changes to these new
energy forms took place in favourable cir¬
cumstances economic growth and
decreasing production costs of the" new
forms of energy.
In the future it will be more difficult in
many respects to maintain sufficient energy
supplies. In the first place, the world popula-
OIL CRISIS
GAS
WORLD WAR I
WORLD WAR I
1880 1900 1920 1940 1960
PRIMARY GL0GAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION
1980
WOLFGANG SASSIN, of the Federal Republic
of Germany, recently became deputy leader of
the energy systems programme of the Interna¬
tional Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA) at Laxenburg (Austria). A physicist by
training, he has been a member of the programme
since 1975.
IIASA is a non-governmental, multidisciplinar/,
international research institution founded in 1972
by the academies of science and equivalent scien¬
tific organizations of 12 nations. Its goal is to
bring together scientists from around the world to
work on problems of common interest, particular¬
ly those resulting from scientific and
technological development. The Institute now
has 17 national member organizations in: Austria,
Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Finland,
France, the . German Democratic Republic, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary, Italy,
Japan, the Netherlands, Poland, Sweden, the
U.K., U.S.A., andU.S.S.R.

, tion is growing at an unprecedented rate:
some 400 million people have been born and
added to the global population total since
the first oil crisis and their material needs will
soon make themselves felt. Even if there is a
considerable reduction in the average
number of births per family, the world
population will almost double in the next
fifty years.
Projections show that the demographic
growth will be much greater in Third World
countries than elsewhere because of the
large proportion of young people and
children reaching or approaching reproduc¬
tive age. In the next two decades, the in¬
tegration of these new generations into their
country's economy is going to spark off an
explosion in demand for goods and services.
The character
of energy
When people talk about energy, it is not always clear what
kinds of energy they are talking about, and this adds to the
problem. Therefore, in order to understand the physical energy
system, it is important to distinguish between energy at
various stages of conversion and use.
Primary energy is the energy recovered from nature water
flowing over a dam, coal freshly mined, oil, natural gas, natural
uranium. Only rarely can primary energy be used to supply final
energy energy used to supply the consumer with energy ser¬
vices. One of the few forms of primary energy that can be used
as final energy is natural gas, which is why it is a fuel of pre¬
ference whenever it is available.
For the most part, primary energy is converted into secon¬
dary energy. This is defined as an energy form that can be used
over a broad spectrum of applications. Electricity and gasoline
are the major examples. Less convenient (which is why they
are declining in their market shares) forms of secondary energy
include charcoal, sorted and graded coai, and cut and split
fuelwood. In order to apply energy without making undue
demands on the consumer, it must be converted into a form
that may be readily transported, distributed and used in a
variety of devices. The trend has been toward grids, for
obvious reasons specifically toward electricity, gas, and dis¬
trict heating grids For convenience of storage, portability, and
transportability, the trend has also been to liquid fuels, of
which gasoline and diesel oii are the best examples.
Primary energy is converted into secondary energy in several
different ways. For example, central power plants produce
electricity and, sometimes, district heat. Refineries convert
petroleum to more convenient liquid fuels gasoline, jet fuel,
diesel oil, and naphtha. Sometimes the conversion plant is the
end point of a system, as with nuclear fission energy (for which
chemical conversion, isotopic enrichment, and fuel fabrication
all precede the power plant); sometimes, as with a hydroelec¬
tric or a wind generator, it is a simple machine. But regardless,
there are conversion losses in going from primary to secondary
energy and transmission losses in getting that energy to the
consumer. It is wrong to think of these losses as waste. They
represent a trade-off of efficiencies: the use of energy to trans¬
form and transmit energy permits the end user to apply it effi¬
ciently for his purposes.
These final steps are the conversion of secondary energy
into final energy the energy in a motor, a stove, a computer,
or a light bulb and of final energy into useful energy the
energy actually stored in a product or used for a service. It is
important to realize that in providing the service say, a well-lit
room energy is not merely a stored entity, but even more an
input for the efficient use of other resources, of labour, of capi¬
tal, and especially of skill.
Source : Energy in a Finite World, 1981
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria
Establishing the necessary infrastructures is
a highly energy-intensive process, so that,
even given technically improved systems
with higher energy efficiency and reduced
per capita economic growth rates, the
energy supply would have to be increased
substantially in the coming decades.
This prospect shows that it was a mistake
to let the world's energy supply potential
reach near-stagnation, even though as a
consequence certain countries especially
the rich industrialized nations are now
adopting energy conservation measures.
This stagnation has several causes. The
traditional oil-producing countries, pointing
to the finite nature of their reserves, have
been restricting their output; in other coun¬
tries production capacities have fallen; coal
production has not expanded substantially
in spite of the increased oil and gas prices of
1973/74; and, finally, many developing
countries are experiencing a crisis in the
non-commercial energy sector, with large
areas facing a severe firewood shortage.
Against this background the International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA) in Laxenburg (Austria) has carried
out a comprehensive study of the
possibilities of developing the various
energy sources on a global scale and even¬
tually balancing supply and demand (1). The
idea was to view these problems in a world
perspective instead of approaching them
merely at the national level. In this context
the sum total of imports needed by in¬
dividual countries in order to balance their
energy budgets had to be matched by cor¬
responding export surpluses available in
other countries. Such a method of course
excludes consideration of all but the basic
factors determining the "global" system. It
also involves very broad assumptions about
the behaviour of the various countries within
this "closed global economic system".
The grouping of the world's over
160 countries into seven major regions was
an essential step. The industrialized nations
form three groups classified according to
their economic system and the abundance
of their energy reserves: the market
economy countries of North America; the
planned economies of the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe; and the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) countries minus North
America i.e. Western Europe, Japan,
Australia and New Zealand. The developing
countries are divided into four regions :
Latin America; the oil-rich countries of the
Middle East and North Africa; an area en¬
compassing black Africa and South-East
Asia; and, finally, the planned economy
countries of Eastern Asia.
Taking into account the various stages of
development, the IIASA experts evaluated
the economic and social trends in each of
these regions and on this basis calculated
probable energy requirements. They also
111 Energy in a Finite World (Vol. I: Paths to a Sus¬
tainable Future; Vol. 2: A Global Systems Analysis^
report by the Energy Systems Programme Group of
IIASA, Programme Leader: Wolf Häfele. Ballinger
Publishing Company, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1981.
10

Individual consumption
expressed in thousands
of kilocalories per day
Food
Domestic Industry
and and
services (1) agriculture
Transport Total
Primitive man
Hunter
Primitive farmer 12
Developed farmer 12 26
'Industrial" man 32 24 14 77
"Technological" man 10 66 91 63 230
ID The services sector Includes office work, trade, teaching, etc.
calculated each region's potential in fossil
fuel resources and reserves, as well as the
timing and rate for the introduction of new
and renewable energy sources. These pro¬
jections are based on assumptions regarding
the positive outcome of future prospecting,
research and development projects. By ad¬
ding together the figures for all countries
and regions, the global potential in ultimate¬
ly recoverable resources can be obtained,
thus making it possible to quantify the
results of the vigorous efforts required in the
coming decades. In the present state of
technology and at the present level of
energy production costs, only about one
third of the estimated ultimately recoverable
fossil resources is accessible.
Rough calculations already show that
some of the seven regions will not be able to
meet their energy needs entirely from their
own sources, for their traditional non¬
renewable energy reserves oil, natural gas
and economically extractable coal are too
small, and new or renewable sources, such
as oil shales, tar sands and nuclear and solar
energy in all their forms, cannot be
developed fast enough.
All this substantiates the assumption of
the IIASA study, of an open and
production-cost-oriented access to the
world's energy supplies. Apart from certain
limitations with regard to traditional oil
deposits, all seven world regions share the
globe's energy sources and have access to
the new extraction and conversion
technologies.
Despite this optimistic assumption about
universal co-operation in solving the energy
problem, closer studies indicate that insuffi¬
cient power supplies will remain a constraint
.on world economic development for the
next fifty years.
The total energy demand is so great that
questions of preference do not arise: all
sources have to be developed.
On the consumer side, too, energy must
be used more rationally. The unusual and
disturbing discrepancy between the predic¬
tably great efforts required to produce
energy and the limited prospects for
economic growth has led the authors of the
IIASA study to develop a "low-growth"
scenario alongside the initial "high-growth"
one. In the "high-growth" scenario
previously accepted economic targets have
been reduced, especially in the developing
countries, while in the "low-growth" model,
which postulates a reduction in economic
growth, world energy demand is substan- 1
tially decreased. I
PRESENT AND ESTIMATED FUTURE WORLD USE
OF NEW AND RENEWABLE
SOURCES OF ENERGY
Source
Present use
in billion (10=) kWh
m
Utilization
n the year 2000
billion (109> kWh
Solar 2-3 2,000-5,000
Geothermal 55 1,000-5,000
Wind 2 1,000-5,000
Tidal 0.4 30-60
Wave 0 10
Thermal gradient
of the sea
0 1,000
Biomass 550-700 2,000-5,000
Fuelwood 10,000-12,000 15,000-20,000
Charcoal 1,000 2,000-5,000
Peat 20 1,000
Draught animals 30 (in India) 1,000
Oil shale 15 500
Tar sands 130 1,000
Hydropower 1,500 3,000
11

^ No study, however complete, can predict
the future. But carried out with care it can
indicate what kind of political and social
decisions lie before us. The choice will de¬
pend to a large extent on the value system
prevailing at the time, but it will also be in¬
fluenced by the availability of relevant data
on the true situation and on the possible
consequences of having adopted certain
measures and rejected others. In this sense,
NASA's "high" and "low-growth" scenarios
describe future trends that are basically
feasible. Both give an idea of the upper
limits of the global economic development
process. These limits are determined by the
earth's energy resources as provided by
nature and by the efficiency of present
energy production and conservation
technologies. Two key conclusions emerge
from these scenarios:
(1) In both scenarios the construction of a
global energy supply, system calls for
vigorous efforts, but these do not appear
unrealistic given the projected volume of
economic activity in the regions under con¬
sideration. In any case, the relative invest¬
ment burden on the economy is roughly the
same in each scenario. In other words, pro¬
vided the proper preliminary measures are
carried out in good time, it is technically
possible to make available a sufficient
amount of energy to sustain high economic
growth rates. Low growth rates do not help
to overcome energy crises.
(2) If sufficient co-operation for the
development of supply capacities is not
forthcoming, overall costs will exceed the
sum projected in the IIASA scenarios. Ef¬
forts made by individual countries to hus¬
band their own viable energy resources and
develop those that are still unexploited, as
well as to maintain a safety margin for the
future, may be understandable at national
level, but they tend to aggravate the prob¬
lem at world level. They compel other coun¬
tries to make an early changeover to alter¬
native energies that are both scarce and
more expensive.
In practice, political, social and organiza¬
tional difficulties always give rise to
pragmatic energy strategies of this kind.
And this can lead to a vicious circle: the
hasty introduction of insufficiently devel¬
oped alternative energy sources in any part
of the world will strengthen the arguments
of those advocating national and local
solutions.
Then again, energy that proves too costly
is another pitfall to be avoided, for it could
easily foster economic stagnation. The
development of alternative sources requires
more capital and manpower than the tradi¬
tional oil and gas production technologies.
Thus the transition to new and more expen¬
sive forms of energy would be an additional
burden on an already stagnating economy.
Solving the world energy problem is
becoming more and more a race against
time. To win it will take more than scientific
and technical feats. In the first place effi¬
cient use must be made of available
resources, of the possibilities of advanced
technology and of the considerable in
vestments necessary to tap potential energy
sources. This requires close economic and
political co-operation between energy-
producing and energy-consuming countries.
Individual nations must also realize that
ensuring a stable energy supply requires
much more effort than would appear from
short-term local analyses. But even when
these conditions are fulfilled, . the
rewardstability does not in itself pro¬
duce any. immediately consumable benefits.
Rather the rise in costs resulting from the in¬
creased volume of investments needed to
ensure a stable energy supply must be seen
as a share in the global economic develop¬
ment burden.
But here political will, though necessary,
is not enough: suitable technical and institu¬
tional preparations to distribute that burden
are also essential. At the international level
the IIASA studies identify three critical areas
sharing the following characteristics: a
rapidly growing gap between the rising
energy demand and the means of satisfying
it; a very marked dearth of information
about the factors likely to inhibit or en¬
courage the discovery of new technical solu¬
tions; and a lack of vigour in developing
such technical solutions.
These three areas of strategic importance
for the stabilization of the global energy
system are:
(1) The development of appropriate
technological processes and procedures
which in the next twenty to thirty years will
lead to the development of a synthetic liquid
hydrocarbon industry operating on a
worldwide basis. Given the role synthetic
fuels will be called upon to play in the world
energy budget, future production pro¬
grammes will have to outstrip by far the out¬
put of all the nuclear energy programmes of
the last thirty years.
(2) Provision of . energy to the rapidly
growing urban areas of the developing
countries. High energy consumption den¬
sities call for highly efficient conversion and
distribution systems, and the power re¬
quired to operate these cannot usually be
supplied by renewable sources in nearby
areas. Like industrialized countries lacking in
energy reserves, these urban developing
areas are dependent on the existence of an
operational international energy system.
(3) The interaction between the tapping
of the renewable energy potential in the
developing countries' rural, areas and the
ecological and climatic systems. In relation
to yield, the exploitation of renewable
sources such as biomass, hydropower, wind
power and energy from the oceans has in
many cases a greater effect on natural
systems than the tapping of fossil fuel
resources. In order to ensure responsible
land use in many of the world's habitable
areas, studies must be made of the con¬
sequences of extensive farming, changing
hydrological conditions and the use of
"natural" renewable energy sources, as well
as their ecological and climatic effects.
There is an urgent need, therefore, for a
global ecological assessment of the world's
as yet unspoiled natural regions with a
view to controlling future damage to the
environment.
Resolute international efforts to deal with
these problem areas and the list is by no
means complete would help to bring about
a sharper awareness that the energy prob¬
lem represents a common challenge for all
the countries of the world. Such awareness
is essential for the political compromises
that will have to be made if we are to achieve
constructive action instead of being content
with simply managing ever-dwindling
resources.
H Wolfgang Sassin
Two supply scenarios, global primary energy, 1975-2030
(In Terawatt-years per year)
PRIMARY
SOURCE (1)
BASE YEAR
1975
HIGH
SCENARIO
2000 2030
LOW
SCENARIO
2000 2030
OIL 3.62 5.89 6.83 4.75 5.02
GAS 1.51 3.11 5.97 2.53 3.47
COAL 2.26 4.95 11.98 3.93 6.45
LIGHT WATER
REACTOR 0.12 1.70 3.21 1.27 1.89
FAST BREEDER
REACTOR 0.00 0.04 4.88 0.02 3.28
HYDRO ELECTRICITY 0.50 0.83 1.46 0.83 1.46
SOLAR 0.00 0.10 0.49 .0.09 0.30
OTHER 0.21 0.22 0.81 0.17 0.52
TOTAL (2) 8.21 16.84 35.65 U.59 22.39
1. Primary fuels production or primary fuels as inputs to conversion or refining processes.
2. Column totals may not add up exactly owing to rounding off of figures.
Table W. Sassin
12
