Cities
in
crisis
by Valerio Giacomini
WHAT constitutes the "ideal city"? For
medieval European man, the goal
was an earthly reflection of a
heavenly model the City of God. For the
Utopian thinkers of the Renaissance it was a
suitable setting for the realization of their
own grand designs. During the past century
or more, architects and city planners have
applied a great deal of intelligence and, on
occasion, genius to the solution of this age-
old question.
The same period, however, has also seen
the expansion of cities on such a scale that
they now seem to defy all attempts at im¬
provement or control. These great centres
of human settlement, activity and culture
once radiated in all directions sometimes
to the very ends of the earth the light of
science, art, philosophy and technical pro¬
gress. Today, they accumulate, and cast
about them with the same profligacy, the
shadows of disorder, degradation and
waste.
The problems of great cities have thus
become one of the major issues, if not the
issue of our age. The enormity of the dif¬
ficulties faced by decision-makers in their at¬
tempts to contain and control the processes
which threaten the quality of the human
habitat is such that renewed efforts are
urgently required.
As long as human communities formed an
integral part of the natural order, their
physical and biological stability was in great
measure assured by the self-regulatory pro¬
cess of nature itself; their specific unity was
enveloped in the greater whole. But the pro¬
gressive alienation of the natural order,
which has reached its apogee in today's
metropolises, has weakened this relation¬
ship to the point of rupture.
What is called for is not a "return to
nature", but the development of an entirely
new pattern of interrelationships. Once,
man was merely a pupil in nature's school;
now his power over the environment, for
better or for worse, is supreme. There is no
ecosystem which has not to some extent
been subjected to interference by man in his
pursuit of personal gratification or im¬
mediate gain.
The urban ecosystem, the environment
which has been most affected by the in¬
terventions of modern man, offers a unique
opportunity for the pooling of efforts in the
task of humanizing science and mobilizing
its resources in the service of society. The
way in which these ecosystems function is
being studied within a major project of the
Man and the Biosphere Programme.
Scientists investigating urban phenomena
should acknowledge with humility that they
are only scratching the surface of a subject
of extreme complexity. Considered in isola¬
tion, the research findings of, for example, a
botanist concerning the flora of the city, of a
zoologist concerning its bird life or of a
hydrologist concerning its groundwater are
of fragmentary and limited significance; but
if they are linked together in logical fashion
and, more particularly, if these findings are
pooled in an investigation of more general
structures and functions, they acquire an
unexpected and sometimes fundamental
significance for the understanding of the
system in its entirety.
The so-called "systems approach" has
been widely utilized, but attention has until
now all too frequently concentrated on the
sub-systems and sub-sub-systems in which
life processes are organized, while the
macrostructures which constitute the only
setting in which human problems can be
properly appreciated remain neglected.
Within the MAB Programme it is ad¬
vocated that, if the systems approach is to
be truly effective, it should engage respon¬
sibilities on a far larger scale than in the past.
The major problems of the human habitat,
which have become extremely critical in ur¬
ban centres, no longer fall within the ex¬
clusive purview of specific disciplines or
technologies; nor are they a matter for
science and technology alone. Their dimen¬
sions are such that they resist limited,
specialized efforts to solve them. All the
resources of human culture must be brought
together in a vast collective undertaking,
and focussed on these problems in their
entirety.
If there is hope for the future, it can only
lie in a new spirit of solidarity between all the
scientific disciplines, between spokesmen
for culture in all its different forms, between
all the inhabitants of the city itself, and bet¬
ween decision-makers at every level.
Like the world of nature itself, the city
should be put to use in the service of in¬
dividual and collective human needs.
VALERIO GIACOMINI. This article is based on
a longer study written by Professor Giacomini, of
Italy, shortly before his untimely death on
5 January 1981. An eminent botanist, he was pro¬
fessor at the Instituto Botánico, Citta Univer¬
sitaria, Rome, and chairman of the Italian MAB
National Committee. He was the originator and
leader of the MAB Rome Project, a major
ecological study of the Italian capital launched in
1977.
The imposing façade of St. Peter's
Basilica, Rome, forms the
backcloth to this scene of traffic
congestion, one of the symptoms
of the problems facing major cities
today. Rome is the subject of a
large-scale ecological study
launched in 1977 by the Italian MAB
National Committee. The study,
which began as a study of energy
flows in the city, now encompasses
seventeen themes, ranging from
environmental perception to
modelling of the entire urban
system. Many groups, including
university research workers,
government institutions such as the
national electricity corporation, and
the local population are directly
involved. The Municipality of Rome
has decided to create a Centre for
the Study of Urban Problems, to
provide a more permanent
framework for the project and to
ensure the wide participation of all
the cultural and technical segments
of the local population. The
Municipality also envisages that the
Centre will eventually have a wider
international role to play in this
field of research.
