PÖBliMiBOTlffirW
èêvWëft fM itâHô$ ft i\
11 HI1M Mil Mil/ h (l!|i|!ll| í 1 1 lt 1 II
ilMitKîliMil
fí» ft^ttâkât tiUé fc ft ii
Ht |j<MLig
1 | Il P1
*T* *- v *- s .r*
'I II
HP,
il» |'(-'/llt),1 r |V& tabú fc ft *\
Man IS Other men. Bantu proverb.
éiJKltô) r i& li^4 fr Ift f.
MiKIliJI JILLJL. M

A Third World view
of Human Rights
by Radhika Coomaraswamy
IN many ways, the human rights move¬
ment has reached a crossroads. The
success of its endeavours is closely
related to its ability to meet the challenge
posed by developments in the Third World.
Its growth and transformation will greatly
depend on its capacity to capture the im¬
agination of young people in these societies.
The texture and fabric of its development
will be affected by the manner in which it
handles the sensitive issue of women's rights
in diverse cultural settings.
RADHIKA COOMARASWAMY is a Sri Lankan
lawyer who has specialized in human rights
research and education.
To a great extent, the Third World has
not played a creative part in the formulation
and implementation of human rights.
Though human rights embody many tenets
found in all the world's cultures, the
theoretical origin of the human rights
movement are distinctively Western. The
pillar concepts of the movement liberty,
equality, material welfare and self-
determination are formulated in the man¬
ner envisioned by the modern movements of
nationalism, liberalism and socialism. These
movements originated in the West but have
influenced political values throughout the
world.
These historical origins alone have made
many cultural nationalists advocate the re
jection of the human rights movement as a
universal norm. Violations of human rights
are justified in terms of the illegitimacy of
certain human rights values in the Third
World context. This remains a major crisis
for the human rights movement in the latter
half of the twentieth century.
What approach should be adopted to
reconcile the tension between the inherited
tradition of human rights and major
developments in the non-Western world? It
is inevitable that any such reappraisal must
begin with a view of history as a collective
experience, a synthetic process of human
rights learning and growth. At present there
is a need for Third World insights into
human rights protection, but the process
49

^ must be a creative one and not a denial of
the very concept of human rights; a process
of supplementation and not of derogation.
The problem posed by this polemic bet¬
ween North and South has two aspects. The
first is the reconciliation of non-Western
cultural values with the basic concepts of
human rights. The second is the integration
of the "development" experience into the
norms and structures of human rights pro¬
tection. One method of moving towards
resolution of these problems would be to
regard human rights not as ends in
themselves but as a process which implies a
certain approach to law, politics and
economics. It should be seen as an approach
which accentuates the human dilemma
above other considerations.
The human rights movement cannot im¬
mediately be removed from the context of
Should human rights be part
of the school curriculum?
its own history and structures. To do so
would be to deny it content and increase am¬
biguity. Instead, the process of reconcilia¬
tion should be seen as being dialectical. On
the one hand, it should encourage Third
World societies to articulate their values at
this period in their history. This would force
them to come to terms with the norms of the
international tradition of human rights in
the light of their particular historical ex¬
periences. On the other hand, the process of
reconciliation should compel the human
rights movement to reach beyond the con¬
fines of past historical experience, both con¬
ceptually and factually, and to search for
alternative visions and institutions which
may better capture the imagination of all the
world's societies.
The success of the human rights move¬
ment in the future of developing societies is
greatly dependent on its ability to convince
the youth of these nations that human rights
must be an important, if not primary con¬
cern of any political ideology. This becomes
particularly important when we consider
that the world, whether North or South, is
currently experiencing a "crisis of
morality".
Conflicting values and dual systems of
life-style in developing societies have served
to liberate people from fixed stations and
hierarchies. And yet, the marketplace of
values and ideas may in fact have created a
moral vacuum which will inhibit youthful
interest in causes such as human rights. To
escape this moral dilemma created by
modernist impulses, youthful insight may
find realism and materialism superior to the
call for social action required by those
dedicated to human rights protection. Or,
The level of a people's civilization can be
measured by the social position occupied
by its women.
Domingo Faustino Sarmiento
(1811-1888)
India. Photo © Jacques Minassian,
Paris.
they may seek to avoid the moral dilemmas
of the future by clutching on to the struc¬
tures of the past which have been the basis
for their identity and security. Neither of
these reactions will dynamically serve to fur¬
ther the cause of human rights.
It is therefore imperative that teaching
human rights be considered a fundamental
aspect of the school curriculum. Without
such "consciousness-raising", the concerns
of human rights will be lost in the modern
marketplace of competing values and ideas.
And yet, care must be taken to ensure that
the idealistic impulses behind the human
rights movement do not remove the teaching
of its tenets to the level of religion or
metaphysics. The need to protect human
rights in a realistic political and cultural con
text must be the basic thrust of any such
teaching exercise.
Though women's rights have received
much attention in the Western world, it is a
more fundamental but complex dilemma in
developing societies. One the one hand, the
problem is political, legal and economic,
especially in relation to the so-called
"modern" sector. The human rights ap¬
proach to women's rights has most
relevance to this sector where the structure
and style of the industrial establishment are
based on those either in Western Europe or
the Communist countries of Eastern
Europe.
The "techno-rational" principles of
management and policy-making are
especially relevant to the structures of pro- ^
50

Power is a multi-dimensional concept and consists of different components. These, we contend, are offive basic
types. Firstly, there is physical violence such as used by armies, police forces and informal groups or even individual
political extremists and terrorists. The second and third components are of an economic character: power deriving
from coalitions and monopoloid organizations; andpower derivingfrom the possession of scarce resources, whether
natural resources or human qualities (e.g. intelligence, leadership or personal attractiveness). A fourth component is
thepower ofcustom or law, sometimes recognized as a legal basisfor certain types ofbehaviour. Thefifth element we
propose to identify is the power of ideas, rational or ethical.
Jan Tinbergen
Man and his Imprint. Serigraph © Roman Cieslewicz, Paris.
51

tection formulated and implemented by the
human rights movement. As the organiza¬
tions in the modern sector are prototypes of
their European counterparts, the human
rights issues greatly resemble those which
are present in the developed societies. The
issues are, nevertheless, accentuated because
of a limited sharing of resources.
On another level, the problem of
women's rights in developing societies has
enormous social and psychological dimen¬
sions. In many ways, the issues of women's
rights have accentuated the constant tension
between tradition and modernity. Women
have been classically regarded as the bearers
of tradition from one generation to another.
The transformation of their role in society is
seen as an erosion of the foundations of
traditional cultures. When the alternative to
tradition is westernization, there is an in¬
built cultural prejudice which is often the
justification for the denial of equal rights
for women. There is an important and fun¬
damental need to extricate women's rights
from the constraint of traditional ideas and
institutions, while acknowledging the
creative role that such concepts may play in
other areas of social and political life.
These brief remarks cannot, of course,
convey the many dilemmas created by
human rights problems in the context of
Third World development. One cannot even
begin to address the concrete issues of
human rights protection in such areas as
criminal procedure, free speech, race-
relations, women's rights, political and
economic rights etc... In all these areas dif¬
ficult questions continue to persist, ques¬
tions which are qualitatively different from
the issues as they exist in the North Atlantic
States. The resolution of these problems
even within the normative framework of
human rights protection may differ in con¬
tent and procedure from those traditionally
accepted by advocates of human rights who
have been trained in the political-legal
culture of the West.
But the fundamental question is not
whether the resolution of human rights
problems is different in the Third World but
whether the process of resolution will play a
creative or derogative role in the growth and
development of human rights. The essential
quest is not only for the articulation of rele
vant ends but for the creation of means both
at the national and international level which
will ensure a positive and dynamic interac¬
tion between the past and the present, North
and . South, tradition and modernity,
idealism and realpolitik.
Such a dynamic may turn destructive,
disturbing the fragile network of human
rights protection which has been built up
over the years. But, if articulated and en¬
couraged in a rational, and deliberate man¬
ner, it may prove to be a creative and in¬
novative exercise. The first step in this pro¬
cess must be a call to "open-mindedness",
not only on the part of traditional, develop¬
ing societies but also on the part of the inter¬
national human rights movement.
Without evaluating the development ex¬
perience and without coming to terms with
varying cultural viewpoints, the movement
is likely to be delegitimized or
fragmentedneither of which will help for¬
ward the main purpose behind the human
rights movement, ie. the basic amelioration
of the fundamental human condition.
B Radhika Coomaraswamy

