An international plan
of action
AN International Plan of Action
to guide States in dealing with
problems brought about by
rapidly increasing numbers of elderly
persons all over the world was adopted
in Vienna at the conclusion of the two-
week United Nations-sponsored World
Assembly on Aging.
The Plan of Action, adopted by the
approximately 120 countries which at¬
tended the Assembly, emphasized the
need to help the elderly "lead indepen¬
dent lives in their own family and com¬
munity for as long as possible, instead
of being excluded and cut off from all
activities of society".
In the area of health and nutrition,
research and practical experience have
demonstrated that health maintenance
in the elderly is possible and that
diseases do not need to be essential com¬
ponents of aging. Early diagnosis and
appropriate treatment are required, as
well as preventive measures, to reduce
disabilities and diseases of the aging.
It is important to establish a proper
balance between the role of institutions
and that of the family in providing
health care based on recognition that
the family and the immediate communi¬
ty are the key elements in a well-
balanced system of care.
The Plan also states that a very im¬
portant question concerns the
possibilities of preventing or at least
postponing the negative functional con¬
sequences of aging. The health of the
aging is fundamentally conditioned by
their previous health and, therefore,
life-long health care starting in youth is
of paramount importance; this includes
preventive health care, nutrition, exer¬
cise, the avoidance of health-harming
habits and attention to environmental
factors.
The section on health in the Action
Plan also contains a number of other
recommendations, which deal with the
need for good nutrition, adequate com¬
munity services and special attention to
the very elderly. Other provisions also
deal with the need and ability to prevent
or deal with mental health problems
among the aging, and the vulnerability
of the elderly to accidents.
32
In the section on the housing and en¬
vironment ofthe elderly, the Plan notes
that "Housing for the elderly must be
viewed as more than mere shelter".
"In addition to the physical, it has
psychological and social significance,
which should be taken into account."
To release the aged from dependence on
others, national housing policies should
pursue a number of goals, which in¬
clude providing for the restoration and
development and, where feasible and
appropriate, the remodelling and im¬
provement of homes and their adapta¬
tion for the aged.
In the section on the elderly and their
relationship to the family, the Action
Plan states that the family, regardless of
its form or organization, is recognized
as a fundamental unit of society.
The changes in the status of women,
however, have reduced their traditional
role as caretakers of older family
members. It is necessary to enable the
family as a whole, including its male
members, to take over and share the
burden of help in and by the family.
Appropriate support from the wider
community, available when and where
it is needed, can make "a crucial dif¬
ference to the willingness and ability of
families to continue to care for elderly
relatives", the Plan states, so that plan¬
ning and provision of services should
take full account of the needs of those
who provide such care.
Governments and non-governmental
bodies should be encouraged to
establish social services to support the
whole family when there are elderly
people at home and to implement
measures especially for low-income
families who wish to keep elderly people
at home. Also, children should be en¬
couraged to support their parents.
In the area of social welfare for the
elderly, according to the Plan, this
should be community-based and pro¬
vide a broad range of preventive,
remedial and developmental services
for the aging, to enable them to lead as
independent a life as possible in their
own home and in their community, re¬
maining active and useful citizens.
In many countries where resources
are scarce, the Plan goes on, there is a
general lack of organized social welfare
services, particularly in the rural areas.
In traditional societies, old people have
enjoyed a privileged position based on
respect, consideration, status and
authority. But this is "starting to be upset
under the influence ofmodern trends and
that privileged position is now being
questioned". It is therefore "time to
become aware of these changes and on
that basis to define national aging
policies that would avoid some of the
problems concerning the elderly faced by
some developed countries".
Governments should endeavour to
reduce or eliminate fiscal or other con¬
straints on informal and voluntary ac¬
tivities, and eliminate or soften regula¬
tions which hinder or discourage part-
time work, mutual self-help and the use
of volunteers alongside professional
staff in providing social services or in in¬
stitutions for the elderly.
Regarding the question of institu¬
tionalization, the Plan states that
'whenever institutionalization is
necessary or inevitable for elderly per¬
sons, the utmost effort must be made to
ensure a quality of institutional life cor¬
responding to normal conditions in
their communities, with full respect for
their dignity, beliefs, needs, interests
and privacy. States should be encourag¬
ed to define minimum standards to en¬
sure higher quality of institutional care.
On the problems of elderly migrants,
appropriate measures should be taken
to provide social welfare services in ac¬
cordance with their ethnic, cultural,
linguistic and other characteristics.
Also in the section on the social
welfare of the elderly, the Plan states
that in order to facilitate mutual help
among the elderly and "let their voices
be heard", Governments and non¬
governmental bodies should encourage
the establishment and free initiative of
groups and movements of elderly per¬
sons and also give other age groups op¬
portunities for training in, and informa¬
tion on, the support of the elderly.
With regard to the issues of income
securityand employment ofthe elderly,
according to the Plan major differences
exist between the developed and the
developing countries and particularly
between urban, industrialized and^

PROPORTION OF POPULATION AGED 60 YEARS OR OVER 1975
PROPORTION OF POPULATION AGED 60 YEARS OR OVER 2025
The boundaries shown on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations or Unesco.
33

^ agrarian economies with regard to the
achievement of policy goals related to
income security and employment.
Many developed countries have
achieved universal coverage through
generalized social security schemes.
"For the developing countries, where
many, if not the majority of persons,
live at subsistence levels, income securi¬
ty is an issue of concern for all age
groups". In several of these countries,
the social security programmes launch¬
ed tend to offer limited coverage: in the
rural areas, where in many cases most of
the population lives, there is little or no
coverage.
Furthermore, particular attention
should be paid, in social security and
social programmes to "the circum¬
stances of the elderly women whose
income is generally lower than men's
and whose employment has often been
broken up by maternity and family
responsibilities". In the long term,
policies should be directed towards pro¬
viding social insurance for women "in
their own right".
The Plan recommends that Govern¬
ments should work to create or develop
social security schemes based on the
principle of universal coverage for older
people. Where this is not feasible, other
approaches should be tried, such as pay¬
ment of benefits in kind, or direct
assistance to families.
Broadly related to the issues of in¬
come security, the Plan notes, are the
dual issues of the right to work and the
right to retire.
Governments should facilitate the
participation of older persons in the
economic life of the society. Ap¬
propriate measures should be taken to
ensure "to the maximum extent pos¬
sible' ' that older workers ' 'can continue
to work under satisfactory conditions
and enjoy security of employment".
Governments should eliminate
discrimination in the labour market and
ensure equality of treatment in profes¬
sional life.
Negative stereotypes about older
workers exist among some employers,
and Governments should take steps to
educate employers and employment
counsellors about the capabilities of
older workers.
Among other recommendations, the
Plan states that measures should be taken
to help older persons to find or return to
independent employment by creating
new employment possibilities and
facilitating training or retraining. The
right of older workers to employment
should be based on ability to perform the
work rather than on chronological age.
Despite the significant unemployment
problems facing many nations, in par¬
ticular with regard to young people, the
retirement age for employees should not
be lowered except on a voluntary basis.
The section also includes recommen¬
dations on the need for satisfactory
working conditions and environment,
measures to prevent industrial and
agricultural accidents, and protection
from occupational diseases.
Governments should take or en¬
courage measures that will ensure a
smooth and gradual transition from ac¬
tive working life to retirement, the Plan
states, and in addition make the age of
entitlement to a pension more flexible.
Such measures would include "pre¬
retirement courses" and lightening the
work load during the last years of work¬
ing life for example by modifying the
conditions of work and the working en¬
vironment and by promoting a gradual
reduction of work-time.
The section on income security and
employment also contains a provision on
the needs ofelderly migrant workers. Ac¬
cording to the Plan, measures should be
taken to guarantee migrant workers
social coverage in the receiving country
as well as maintenance of social security
rights acquired, especially regarding pen¬
sions, if they return to their country of
origin.
Another provision deals with the
needs of elderly refugees. On this ques¬
tion, the Plan states that as far as possi¬
ble, groups of refugees accepted by a
country should include elderly persons
as well as adults and children, and ef¬
forts should be made to keep family
groups intact and to ensure that ap¬
propriate housing and services are
provided.
Regarding education for and about
the elderly, among other recommenda¬
tions, the Plan states that education is a
basic human right, and must be made
available without discrimination
against the elderly. It further states that
"there is also a need to educate the
general public with regard to the aging
process".
Governments and international
organizations concerned with the prob¬
lems of aging should initiate pro¬
grammes aimed at educating the general
public with regard to the aging process
and the aging.
