The machinery
of cultural power
by Augusto Roa Bastos
WHEN it comes to the philosophy
and practice of cultural power,
the niceties of literary creation
count for little. No question of getting tied
up in superfluous classifications. The
publicity apparatus of cultural power can
raise up mediocrity and creative nullity to
the level of apparent virtues of the first
order.
Within this cosmic vision of profit, a
book is a book. And with each "successful"
book all of literature is originated, born
daily. In certain cases, it is not the intrinsic
merits of a text which matter, but the epic of
its launching, its promotion and dissemina¬
tion in the most complete gamut of possible
combinations. Sometimes nearly always in
fact the promoters and vendors of such
best-sellers show more imagination than
their authors. Indeed, the best-seller in¬
dustry itself could serve as a hypertrophied
example of the manipulation of the pub¬
lishing industry by cultural power an ex¬
ample which, to a greater or lesser extent
dominates the world literary market.
As is the case with the activities of the
multinationals in other fields, cultural
power (a semantic barbarism which points
to its depredatory origins) sets up its
autonomous rules within imperial metrop¬
olises, ignoring or crossing frontiers and
political barriers as if they were so much
smoke or, alternately, making use of them.
Both in this connexion and in the similarity
of their goalsconquest of markets, profit
and economic and political domination
the now classic model of arms-selling gives
an approximate idea of the way in which
multinationals operate as a cultural power.
In the case of the book industry itself,
from the head offices in metropolitan cen¬
tres to the network of subsidiaries located in
the strategic centres of peripheral cultures, it
is cultural power which dictates the rules of
the game.
As a result, the oldest, most solid and
most prestigious publishing concerns
(publishers, publishing and distribution
outlets, the old and noble profession of the
bookseller as guide and mentor of readers,
library systems, the production of educa¬
tional text-books, specialized institutions,
foundations, etc.) are annexed, blocked, or
subjected to its investment dictates. It par¬
ticipates in, controls or takes over all of the
media (cinema, radio, television, written
press) which can contribute to the expansion
of its business, as well as subsidiary con-
CONTINUED PAGE 27

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 22
cerns such as the paper and printing in¬
dustries. It also has at its disposal the
arsenal of modern technology (computers,
data banks, etc.), the main branches of
which form part of its complex industrial
network.
In the so-called peripheral countries,
cultural power has almost totally eliminated
the independent publishing houses which
strove to maintain a balanced exchange bet¬
ween national and foreign literatures.
In such conditions the operative strategy
of cultural power, its philosophy of action,
determines taste on the basis of statistics. In¬
deed, the distinctive mark of a culture can
be made to change to serve its interests. The
best-seller industry already referred to il¬
lustrates the extent of the devastating in¬
fluence which has changed the modes and
values of a conception . and tradition of
book-culture in a number of countries
which rank among the most important in
the world. Nevertheless, it should not be
thought that its privileged monopoly status
has made cultural power something which is
pyramidal in form and importance. Its real
potential is rooted in the idea of competition
between equals, in its capacity to associate
itself with other forces, to elaborate itself in¬
definitely, to infiltrate everywhere.
The objective of these consortia is not
dispersion but ever greater concentration.
This also holds true for their assets in depen¬
dent countries. The increasing bankruptcies
of independent publishing houses, the ap¬
pearance and disappearance of others which
emerge and act as fronts or dissuasive
elements are a sure sign that multinationals
are running the show.
An independent publisherone of the
few who still fights the battle for a just and
harmonious relationship between authors,
publishers and the public in the territory of
book activity occupied by multinationals
was able to confirm the following, well-
founded facts: "The way the current system
works (in terms of its penetration by
multinationals) simply favours the entry in¬
to the market of the large publishing houses
which are themselves subsidiaries of
transnational complexes. These multina¬
tional enterprises find a very large potential
market, a public avid for reading material,
and using their vast experience they produce
an unlimited administrative and financial in¬
frastructure and an international distribu¬
tion network".
In the case of Latin-American cultures
which are to a lesser or greater degree depen¬
dent, what is at stake is more than a certain
statistic concerning taste. It is the very in¬
tegrity of these cultures which is threatened
and, within them, the development of
literatures which are the expression of their
unity and identity in spite of the inequalities,
the lack of synchronization and the absence
of communication which characterizes our
cultural destiny.
The synthesis of these imbalances is ef¬
fected, or has been effected, by the dialec¬
tical process involving culture and society,
tradition and the avant-garde, the local and
the universal. However, if such a synthesis is
to be truly fertile, it must be effected along
the lines of force of a common process, that
is to say, along the lines of force of our unity
and identity, of our Spanish-American
character.
To talk in terms of a process implies
recognition of the existence of a set of cor¬
relations and shared variations in constant
mutation: the interpretation of the vital
rhythms of communities united by a com¬
mon language and subjected to the same or
analogous historical imperatives. So it is
that the well-worn concept of identity ceases
to be an idealistic and "ideologized"
abstraction and comes to express correctly
not the invariables of an unchanging and
inward-looking reality, but the coherence of
this conjuncture of relationships in non-stop
transformation.
Identity is thus unity in continuity of a
characterological complex which defines its
essence in action, the features of its physical
and spiritual personality in its plans, suc¬
cesses and failures, and in its manner of fac¬
ing factors extraneous to its nature, while at
the same time assimilating those which seem
constructive and enriching, whatever their
source. In other words, it refuses a passive
and blind acceptance of dominant cultures.
In this connexion, cultural colonialism is
not only an imposition, it is also a dazzling
fascination, a compulsive need to imitate the
prestigious seigneurial and imperial stan¬
dards and forms. To be dominated cultural¬
ly is to be seduced. At times raped. The old
dispute as to whether the effects of the
dominant influences of central cultures on
surrounding ones are formative or deform¬
ing has been settled by the cultural facts
themselves.
These facts are deforming in the sense
that local cultures see servitude to the forms,
models, procedures and customs of the cen¬
tral cultures as an imposition or a joy. They
are enriching on condition that the local
cultures react critically and convert them in¬
to catalyzers of their own spirit and
character. It is not a question either of the
extreme oppositeof absurdly restoring the
indigenous cultures and of sinking into the

chaos of a local ethnocentricity which would
be ill-advised and artificial. Neither does it
mean blindly and stubbornly rejecting the
norms from outside, which made it possible
for us to construct our Creole cathedrals, to
develop our material civilization and the
most creative aspects of our mixed culture.
But they also help us to recognize our
cultural identity in the process of racial in¬
termingling and to orient our liberation
struggles in all fields.
In the field of fictional literaturepoetry,
novels, theatre these models and foreign
norms, the work of the great poets, novelists
and dramatists of the central cultures, once
the stage of experimental imitation was
passed, that is to say, once the genuine spirit
of our literatures had been recovered, have
contributed in a decisive way to the develop¬
ment of these literatures in closely-defined
periods and epochs.
In this problematic arising out of the ac¬
tive and vital identity of our cultures the
functions and responsibilities of the élites
are obvious. But it is equally clear that iden¬
tity understood in this way is not the ex¬
clusive apanage of these élites.
Such an identity is forged and constructed
in the fire of social energy by the élites, but
also by the untutored masses who lack ex¬
pression. No genuine culture can reduce
itself to the quintessentially, chemically pure
distillation of elitist values nor can it do
without the life-giving breath of popular
culture, the powerful and obscure palpita¬
tion of the submerged masses whose lack of
culture is a specific form of the culture of
marginalization, of backwardness and op¬
pression. This also holds true for indigenous
cultures, which are more coherent (in spite
of their unstructured form and the threat of
extinction hanging over them) in the impure
context of our mestizo culture.
It is precisely this dichotomy between the
"cultivated" and the "uncultivated" and
the variables of its interaction within a given
society and within societies at large which
enriches the real subsoil of Latin-American
identity: the illuminated part and the
shadowy part of its transitional culture link¬
ed to the vicissitudes of its history under the
sign of economic and cultural dependence.
The "massification" of books produced
by the cultural industry does not imply, or
announce, the establishment of a mass
culture. Quite the contrary. The objectives
of the entrepreneurial economy, in the
original sense of an economy of en¬
trepreneurs, are not to create a mass culture,
but to extract massive dividends from
investments.
Such objectives have even less to do with
the abolition of the elitist taste (or at least
the elitist predilections) of bourgeois
culture. In fact, what counts in this context,
which happens to be its principal theatre of
operations, are the more efficient diffusing
nuclei of prestige and sacralization:
academies, institutes, influential per¬
sonalities, writers who are at the same time
critics, etc.
Conscious of the role which the local and
international intelligentsias perform, the
cultural power uses them unscrupulously.
In the case of local élites, the availability
and co-operation of their members tend
naturally to be put at the service of the
dispensers of prestige and material
remuneration as if it were a mark of distinc¬
tion. In general, they are the most willing
and effective guides, intermediaries and
assessors who prepare the ground for the
multinationals to penetrate national ter¬
ritories with a licence to plunder.
As for the élites of the central countries or
those which continue to perform the role of
dispensers of culture and advanced
technology thanks to the competition which
permits and promotes the division into rival
blocs of the so-called First World, the com¬
plicity of the intellectuals and writers with
the factors of power (political power,
economic power, cultural power) is a
notorious and inveterate fact; one could
almost say it has become institutionalized.
As in other fields of power, cultural
power can only unfold its maximal possibil¬
ities of predominance by engrafting its
structures onto the apparatus of an intellec¬
tual bureaucracy which is attached
ideologically to the philosophy and interests
of that power- and which always, or nearly
always, acts in collaboration with the
political power, whatever its political orien¬
tation: from the reactionary right to the sup¬
posed openings to the left in the unchanging
framework of bourgeois democracy.
This apparatus of clercs (which has
replaced the old corporations of elders
which existed in feudal societies) dominates
all the institutions of official cultures:
academies, universities, libraries, cultural
organisms of every kind, foundations,
literary contests, specialized criticism, radio
and television programmes, etc.
In such conditions, it is not the reader
who looks for, and selects his books. The
latter are imposed on him in accordance
with an indiscriminate programming which,
in its consequences, is actually discrimina¬
tory; the reader is chosen by the omniscient
index of the microprocessor in the prospec¬
tive field of the calculation of probabilities.
The abstract image of this average reader
is projected by the computers in virtue of
certain forms tested in the market and in any
event imposed upon it. The author-text-
reader relationship undergoes, as a result, a
profound change under the impact of the
mass-produced, itemized book and its
publicity which presents it not as an offer,
but as an order. No revealing testimony
about this distorsion is available to the
average reader. He accepts it unawares, just
as he accepts each day the "revealed
truths", the propagandizing gospels of the
mass media on underwear, on varieties of
canned goods or balanced foods for cats
and dogs. Even so-called cultivated readers
end up by giving in to this compulsion which
works on the primary instincts of the
consumer.
In contrast with this real situation, "How
many books are not really published but just
churned out!" exclaimed one independent
French publisher who has experienced from
the inside the fight against the giants of
publishing. The latter are a very special
species whom Swift would have castigated
had he been alive today and witnessed our
era in which millions and millions of Lillipu¬
tians are enslaved by the strong-arm-men of
money. Having appropriated the Gutenberg
Galaxy, they have arranged a match or at
least a cross-breeding operation with the
audiovisual galaxy, thereby nullifying
McLuhan's prophecy about the death of the
book.
M Augusto Roa Bastos

LITERACY AND EDUCATION.
From the standpoint of lifelong educa¬
tion itself, considered not as further
vocational training but rather as an
overall process of education, starting
with the earliest stage and continuing
throughout life, the development of in¬
formal and non-formal types of educa¬
tion, and better co-ordination between
them and the formal systems, also seem
to meet the wish to bring about greater
interpénétration between education and
society as a whole. This would makefor
that diversification of the content,
methods, structures and levels of educa¬
tion and training required by the
modem world. New questions arise as
to the choices to be made regarding im¬
ported technology: how to gain access
to the possibilities of immediate pro¬
gress offered by technology without
falling into a new kind of dependence;
28
how and to what extent a society can
rapidly acquire modern science and
technology without losing its central
values and internal cohesion. Even
more than the transfer of technology,
the decisive factor in long-term progress
seems to be the transfer of knowledge.
Full control even of the choice of
technologies appears unattainable
unless an adequate domestic research
capacity and store of knowledge are
there to be drawn on. There is here cer¬
tainly a common challenge that will
have to be faced by most
societieswhether industrialized or
developing in the years ahead: to nar¬
row the margin of incomprehension,
not to say the cleavage, between the
world of technology and the mass of the
people, and to ensure the dynamic in-,
tegration of the achievements of
modern technology into the reality of
the underlying cultures. A major task
confronting specialists in the social and
human sciences is to find points of in¬
teraction and reconciliation between
technology and culture; an equally im¬
portant task for educational systems is
to narrow the gap between "the two
cultures" by blending elements drawn
from the "humanities" into the training
of scientists, engineers and
technologists and raising the level of
scientific and technological knowledge
in so-called general education.
Above, students receive technical in¬
struction in the carpentry workshop at
Conakry Technical High School,
Guinea. (Photo Marc Riboud ©
Magnum, Paris). Below, Tanzanian
children at work in a school garden
make their contribution to the cam¬
paign to improve nutrition. (Photo
Bernard P. Wolff, Unicef).

29
