AN INTERNATIONAL
METROPOLIS
by Dmitry Nalivaiko
HISTORIC Kiev is one of those cities
of the world whose cultural signifi¬
cance goes beyond national bound¬
aries, and assumes international dimen¬
sions. This is in part due to its geographical
situation astride the great waterway that led
"from the Varangians to the Greeks", link¬
ing the northern and southern extremities of
the continent, and its proximity to the limits
of the steppe, where Europe came into con¬
tact with Asia and the civilizations of the
east.
DMITRY SERGEIVICH NALIVAIKO, of the
Ukrainian SSR, is a lecturer at the Gorky In¬
stitute of Pedagogical Science, Kiev, and a
specialist in the literature of western Europe and
international cultural relations.
If the culture of ancient Rus, firmly cen¬
tred on Kiev, was undoubtedly European,
both in origin and in nature, it was also
steeped in oriental influences. During the
tenth-twelfth centuries, the State of Kiev-
Rus maintained a network of relations with
many peoples and lands, both European
and eastern, and this contributed in no small
measure 'to the vigorous development of its
culture.
The most important and fruitful contacts
were undoubtedly those between Kiev-Rus
and Byzantium, then a cultural centre of
worldwide significance. Modern scholars
consider that the Byzantine influence in Rus
gradually led to a comparatively
sophisticated level of spiritual exchange.
10

Within a relatively short space of time,
albeit in great measure through south
Slav that is, Bulgarian and, to a lesser ex¬
tent, Serbianintermediaries, the bookmen
of Kiev became familiar with the immense
treasures of Byzantine literature. The
discovery of the art of Byzantium, and of its
architecture and painting in particular, oc¬
curred with equal rapidity.
As the direct descendant of Hellenism,
the culture of Greek antiquity, Byzantium
bore the heritage on which European
civilization would be founded. Kiev-Rus, by
assimilating the riches of Byzantine
literature and art, thus participated in the
laying of those foundations, as it would par¬
ticipate in the progressive development of
European culture.
But significant though it was, the in¬
fluence of Byzantium did not transform the
culture of ancient Rus into a mere copy of
the original; nor did Kiev become a mere an¬
nex of Constantinople. In the process of
assimilating all that was most progressive in
Byzantine culture, and thus becoming
familiar with cultural experiences and
developments in Europe and to a lesser ex¬
tent the east, Kiev-Rus discovered its own
cultural identity. This is especially apparent
when we consider the originality of its
literature.
The Tale of the Host ofIgor in particular,
is without precedent in Byzantine literature,
and cannot be compared with the epics of
western Europe: contemporary in its theme,
richly lyrical in its treatment, it is rooted in
the imagery and pagan mythology of the
Slavs.
The architecture and other arts of Kiev-
Rus are similarly distinctive. If Kiev's
St. Sophia Cathedral would have been in¬
conceivable without its equivalent in Con¬
stantinople, it speaks of an entirely different
culture. Where Constantinople's cathedral
is in the form of a basilica with a single,
enormous cupola, Kiev's is a cross-shaped
building, the central cupola of which is sur¬
rounded by a number of smaller ones: its
style is typical of ancient Russian architec¬
ture. Other original features of St. Sophia in
Kiev include its open arcades, or galleries,
and an abundance of mosaics, wall-
paintings and frescoes, the subjects of which
are often secular.
The development of world culture,
especially in its earliest stages, is characteriz¬
ed by the emergence in different regions of
"communities of interests" based on the
same cultural and historical characteristics.
Medieval Europe knew two such "com¬
munities": the Latino-Germanic in the
western and the Byzantine-Slavonic in the
eastern parts of the continent. The latter
was reflected in the strong sense of cultural
unity which existed between the countries of
the eastern Slavs (ancient Rus, which later
became Russia, the Ukraine and
Byelorussia) and those of the southern Slavs
(Bulgaria, Serbia, Macedonia). Within this
community of cultures, the dynamics of
history assured pride of place to one or
other of its components at different times.
From the eleventh to the thirteenth century,
for example, the eastern Slav influence was
predominant, and this ensured that Kiev
assumed the leading cultural role in the en¬
tire Orthodox Slav world.
At the same time, and in the eleventh and
twelfth centuries in particular, the capital
city of the State of Rus maintained extreme¬
ly close relations with its eastern neighbours,
as well as the countries of central and
western Europe. Indeed, Kiev-Rus occupied
an important place in the political life of the
entire continent.
One demonstration of this is to be found
in the number of external dynastic marriages
contracted by the great princes of Kiev. Sur¬
viving records show that during the eleventh
century, thirty-eight such alliances were
solemnized, including eight with Germany,
two with France, five with the Scandinavian
countries and England (with which relations
were particularly close at the time), seven
with Poland, six with Hungary, three with
the Polovtsian Khanates and four with
Byzantium.
During the following century,
Byzantium's share increased to eight, but
there was no substantial diminution in the
number of conjugal alliances with ruling
families in central and western Europe. This
state of affairs may be explained by the
power and authority which the princes of
Kiev wielded in European affairs: as a
means of securing their political and
. military support, the rulers of many coun¬
tries were eager to become their kinsmen by
marriage.
The prestige of the ancient Russian State
in European eyes also incited ambassadors,
merchants and soldiers from the west to pay
frequent visits to Kiev, where they were im¬
pressed by the size of the city and the
grandeur of its palaces and religious
buildings. Their reports frequently formed
part of the contents of western chronicles
and cosmographies. Thus, Adam of
Bremen, the celebrated eleventh-century
geographer, commented that Kiev "rivalled
Constantinople" and was "the most
beautiful ornament in the Greek world" (by
which he obviously meant the Byzantine-
Slavonic Orthodox community).
Images of Kiev-Rus and its capital are to
be found in western European epic
literaturein the Scandinavian sagas, Ger¬
man heroic poems and French chansons de
geste and tales of chivalry. It is curious to
note, too, that these works also contained
echoes and images from Russian epic
literature; German and Scandinavian poems
of the eleventh-thirteenth centuries often
mention Prince Vladimir and Ilya
Muromets, who was referred to as "Ilya the
Russian" (Ilias von Riutzen).
The Mongolian and Tatar invasion in the
thirteenth century, the martyrdom of Kiev
at the hands of Batu Khan in 1240 and the
seizure of power by Lithuanian feudal lords
a century later brought about a gradual
decline in the cultural life of the city and in
its international relations. It was not until
the end of the sixteenth century and the
beginning of the seventeenth, when Kiev's
position as the focal point of Ukrainian
culture was firmly established, that a current
of revival began to flow which was to reach
full strength in the second half of the seven¬
teenth and the first half of the eighteenth
centuries, after the reunification of the
Ukraine with Russia.
Kiev's international cultural relations
resumed their former scale and scope;
andmost importantthe city once again
. i
Tfn
lt>At\t\. ^- -
y v r-'..»..,..',-.	 i * r
Phoio © Oleg Safto, Kiev
Above, detail of Antoniy Radivilovsky's illustration for
the title page of a collection of sermons, 77ie Garden
(1671).
11

became a melting-pot where different
cultural traditions were blended. The steadi¬
ly increasing interpénétration of Byzantine-
Slavonic, ancient Russian and modern
European cultures which occurred during
the Renaissance is an outstanding example
of this process.
Viewed against the background of Europe
in its entirety, the Renaissance was not the
only transitional stage in cultural develop¬
ment. In the countries of eastern and south¬
eastern Europe, the passage from the
medieval to the modern period occurred for
the most part during the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, when Baroque culture
was already spreading art over the whole
continent. Because the Renaissance itself
had not found full expression in eastern and
south-eastern Europe, where its appearance
had been of a sporadic nature, it was in
these regions that Baroque culture assumed
a specific character and functions.
More precisely, it assumed the supremely
important roleelsewhere undertaken by
the Renaissance of secularizing and
humanizing culture, i.e. liberating it from
the tutelage of the Church and impregnating
it with earthly, human qualities. Kiev's
significance during this period was above all
due to its primacy as a disseminator of
Baroque culture not only through the
Ukraine but throughout the Orthodox Slav
community as a whole. Indeed, it was in
Kiev that the functions mentioned above
were performed most intensely.
In this connexion, the foundation in 1632
of the Kievo-Mogilyanskaya College
(designated as an Academy in 1694), the
first institution of higher education in the
Orthodox Slav world, was an event of the
highest importance. Whereas earlier centres
of learning had. been rooted in Byzantine-
Slavonic traditions, the Kiev Academy was a
"Latin school" modelled on Polish and
western European universities, and instruc¬
tion was given in Latin. The most distinctive
feature of its founders' activity was that at a
time when the struggle for religious liberty
in the Ukraine had become particularly
acute, they declined the task of defending
the canons of the Orthodox Church, and
concentrated on promoting among their
pupils the assimilation of contemporary
European, in other words Baroque, culture,
which was a blend of antique, classical,
Renaissance' and medieval "Gothic"
elements.
Philosophy occupied an important place
in the teaching of the Kiev Academy.
Students became familiar with the work of
ancient philosophers from Heraclitus to
Boethius, of medieval scholars and mystics,
as well as Bacon, Descartes, Leibniz, Locke
and other outstanding thinkers. Courses in
poetics and rhetoric, essentially based on the
works of Italian Renaissance humanists,
were another important part of the pro¬
gramme. The poets and rhetoricians of Kiev
were well acquainted with the concepts and
principles of European literary theory in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and
with works based on that theory; at the
same time, they were responsible for the
reconstruction of Ukrainian, Russian and
other eastern and southern Slav literatures
according to a new European pattern.
Under their influence, new genres and
styles took shape, and developed along
Baroque and Classical lines. Similar pro¬
cesses occurred at the same time in Ukrai¬
nian art which, under the powerful
Renaissance and Baroque influences of
western Europe, turned away from medieval
These stylized horsemen, painted in vivid
colours, are from the Kiev Psalter (1397),
one of the masterpieces of miniaturist art of
ancient Russia.
conventions and began to portray real men
in the setting of the real world. The artists of
Kiev-Pechersk Monastery (the Monastery of
the Caves), for example, created a distinc¬
tive art form of their own, and at the same
time maintained close contacts with Venice,
Augsburg and other European centres of
book-printing and draughtsmanship.
Research has established that from its
very beginnings, the Kiev-Mogilyanskaya
Academy was an institution of international
dimensions. Its records show that students
came there not only from the Ukraine, but
also from Russia and Byelorussia, Serbia
and Bulgaria, Moldavia and Wallachia. Its
founders and those who succeeded them
sought at the same time to establish schools
in all the countries of the Orthodox Slav
world. To this end they dispatched to


Moscow, Mogilev, Iasi, Belgrade and other
cities what Pyotr Mogila described in a letter
to Tsar Mikhail in 1640 as "seemly ec¬
clesiastics and well-trained teachers".
Graduates of the Academy, who in turn
became teachers, carried abroad with them a
new type of spiritual culture, and helped to
consolidate the new trends in literature and
art. We need only recall in this connexion
the activity of the poet Simeon Polotsky and
his followers in Moscow during the second
half of the seventeenth century, which con¬
tributed in no small measure to the develop¬
ment of a "new" Russian literature, steeped
in Baroque influences; or that of Mikhail
Kozachinsky and other emissaries of the
Kiev Academy in Serbia, during the first
half of the eighteenth century, where they
performed a similar role among the
southern Slavs.
In the early eighteenth century, the poet
and philosopher Theophan Prokopovich,
together with Gavriil Buzhinsky and other
graduates of Kiev, actively supported the
educational and cultural reforms of Peter
the Great and did much to put them into ef¬
fect. All the above examples show that Kiev
and its Academy played an outstandingly
progressive role in cultural development
during the period of transition, not only in
the Ukraine but also in Russia, Byelorussia,
Serbia and other countries of the eastern
and south Slav community.
Kiev was to remain throughout history the
leading centre of Ukrainian culture, and the
chief intermediary for its dissemination to
other parts of the world. Its significance
assumed exceptional dimensions after the
October Revolution, which brought social
and national freedom to the Ukrainian peo¬
ple and opened new perspectives for the
development of their culture and its installa¬
tion among the other cultures of the world.
H Dmitry Nalivaiko
! LABAAyMTrfVW/TK/ADOJ
I «IIA '»*J 'i*
I K àri## f^tlmíj, if i*» Tattajti Wifianlthcf
tri i F : trvtipu t^e>U< lyt
Tnn£ Vvrfut* Tk/olomiiaru ifiiorc
jC^f ¡tLttrt tut JJ^tif^Cmm OrH^Jr,,t
ttcdf Aim! OrrhrJati U^ifch A, tiforii.
Photo © Editions Mistetsvo, Kiev

