Aerial view of the Great Mosque at Cordoba in southern Spain. Founded around 784 AD, it is one of the
oldest mosques in Islam. The harmony and grandeur of the mosque was disturbed in the 16th century
when the Christian kings of Spain built a Renaissance-style cathedral within its walls.
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Pans



THE POETS
OF MUSLIM SPAIN
THE extent to which Muslim civili¬
zation can in substance be regarded
as completely original has long been
a matter of controversy among oriental
scholars. One thing however is certain,
throughout its existence its outward forms
and manifestations have always borne the
indelible, unmistakable stamp of Islam. A
carpet has nothing to do with Islam, and yet
a "Muslim carpet" can be recognized a
thousand miles away. A garden may have
EMILIO GARCIA GÓMEZ, former Spanish
ambassador to a number of Arab countries, is a
member of the Royal Spanish Academy and Pro¬
fessor Emeritus of the University of Madrid.
Director of the celebrated review Al-Andalus for
fifty years, he has written on almost every aspect
ofArab civilization. His major works are devoted
to the history, literature and poetry of Muslim
Spain.
by Emilio García Gómez
nothing in common with Islam, but a
"Muslim garden", like that of the
Generalife in Granada, is in its very essence
Islamic. Nevertheless, poetry, which Islam
inherited not so much from other civiliza¬
tions as from "Arabism", from the times of
"anti-Islamic" darkness (jahiliyya)", must
be considered a special case.
There is a sura in the Qur'an, the "sura of
the poets", which is not exactly complimen¬
tary to them and taxes them with being "im¬
postors". It is true that this can be con¬
strued in rhetorical terms as defining the
"unreality" and "conventions" inherent in
any lyric poetry. In any event, the Prophet
finally admitted the claims of poetry and
even had his own official praise-singers.
Poetry, the "archive of the Arabs" (diwan
al Arab), was adopted by Islam. It is
likewise true that, much later, purely
religious poetry of ascetic or mystical con¬
tent developed, some of it very striking. But
most interesting of all, to my mind, is the
"Muslim stamp" that has indubitably been
left on the most outstanding secular poetry,
even in its most frivolous and indeed at
times spiritually daring aspects. A "Muslim
poem" is Muslim to the core and could not
be anything else.
The most inviting field of research for the
study of the "Islamization" of poetry is that
of the non-Arab countries penetrated by
Islam, setting aside the case of Persia, where
an altogether different phenomenon occur¬
red in that the local language continued to
be used. We can confine ourselves to Mus¬
lim Spain (al-Andalus) where, although bil-
ingualism was current up to the end of the
33

For several centuries after its con¬
quest by the Arabs in 711, Cordoba
was the capital of al-Andalus,
Muslim Spain, and a major centre of
art and culture. It grew to be a city of
250,000 inhabitants, with a university
and a great mosque, and flourishing
political and commercial life. It was
the birthplace of major writers and
philosophers such as Ibn Tufail,
Averroes and Maimonides, and of
the two greatest poets of al-Andalus,
Ibn Hazm, the author of "The
Necklace and the Dove", and Ibn
Quzman. Left, arches and columns
in the great mosque. Below, another
view of the mosque: interlaced
arches in the mihrab antechamber.
century, the local language did not
gain the upper hand and poetry, not¬
withstanding certain regional idiosyncracies,
is undoubtedly Islamic. There was, of
course, specifically religious poetry, from
Al-Ilbiri to Ibn 'Arabi or the mystical zéjeles
of Shushtari, but the main secular current is
so "Muslim" that, together with architec¬
ture, Arab-Andalusian poetry can be
regarded as being one of the main specific
creations of al-Andalus.
Here again, an original and important
feature can be seen in the existence of this
poetry side-by-side with indigenous poetry
in Spanish Romance language. These two
types of poetry Arabic and Romance-
were originally unaware of one another's ex¬
istence, although they eventually came to
blend into new styles. But no sooner had
they done so than they went through a pro¬
cess firstly of "adaptation" and then of "re-
absorption". No matter how cursory the
analysis of these Andalusian developments,
they bear fascinating witness to the deep-
rooted "Islamization" of Arab poetry in all
the countries in which it was introduced.
In every civilization or language,
literature has always begun with poetry
rather than with prose, and this accounts for
the importance of the place occupied by
poetry. In Arabic literature, however, it per¬
forms an even more essential function
because, like the poetry of Homer in
Greece, it was already perfect when it first
came into being and, in a civilization
without any epic tradition, plastic arts or
drama, it had to act as a substitute for all
those forms (inasmuch as they can be liken¬
ed to Western models) and to serve a whole
range of purposes, from political propagan¬
da to love letters.
In Muslim Spain, Arabic poetry in its
34

r / - - Jit /. :
The poetry of "courtly love" composed by the medieval
troubadours of France, Italy and Spain was probably inspired in
part by the music and love poetry of al-Andalus. The great Arab-
Andalusian poets such as Ibn Hazm and Al-Mu'tamid, King of
Seville, presented in their work a "platonic" conception of love,
while the structure of the poems of the troubadours bears a curious
resemblance to that of the Hispano-Arabie zéjel, notably in its four-
lined verses. Above and below left, two scenes from The Story of
Bayad and Riyad, a tale of courtly love originating in eastern Islam,
are depicted in a 13th-century manuscript which may have been
produced in al-Andalus. Below, troubadours are shown playing the
lute, an instrument of Arab origin (al-lud) in a 13th-century
manuscript of the Cantigas de Santa Maria by the Spanish king
Alfonso X the Wise, a noted patron of the troubadours.
Photo © Library of the Monastery of the Escurial, Spam
'¿Ju> ¿lit u j] 3^..¿¿í£2, ixj¿Uj ¡4Ly¿¿sA
Photos © Babey © Ziolo, Paris
most consummate form probably came to
the country with the first military con¬
tingents and was cultivated, for better or for
worse, by all educated men. To cite only a
few names, Gazal, Ramadi, Ibn Hani, Ibn
Abd Rabbih, Ibn Shukhais, Mushafi and
Ibn Darraj all mark different phases in its
development. When the diwan of Mutanab-
bi reached Spain at the beginning of the
tenth century, it became an established form
and subsequently assumed a tone that has
come to be known as "neo-classical".
It may be asked whether this poetry can
be compared with that of Islam in the Near
East. Indeed it can, but not in all respects. It
still continues to be "provincial" in outlook
although distinguished in tone and, more¬
over, it is still too dependent on Baghdad. It
was only towards the end of the Caliphate of
Cordoba, in the latter years of the tenth cen¬
tury, that two leading writers, Ibn Shuhaid
and Ibn Hazm, seemed intent on giving it a
Hispanic flavour and on raising it to a level
comparable with that of the Near East in
both form and intellectual content. But the
civil war (fitna) was to put paid to those
hopes.
The eleventh century, during the reign of
the taifas (princelings who carved up Arab
Spain after the fall of the Caliphate of Cor-
35

doba in 1040), was to be its "Golden Age",
although the standards reached were per¬
haps lower than those maintained by Ibn
Shuhaid and Ibn Hazm, they were, to my
mind, still very high, considering the new
perspectives they opened up and the very
large number of skilful practitioners, of
whom we need mention only two: Ibn Zai-
doun and Al-Mu'tamid, king of Seville.
This new and splendid resurgence went in¬
to decline again with the arrival of the two
African dynasties. In the first half of the
twelfth century under the Almorávides (the
Muslim sect and dynasty that ruled over
Morocco and part of Algeria and Spain
from 1055 to 1 147), Andalusian Arab poetry
lapsed into decadence, except in the region
of Valencia, although, curiously enough,
given the period and what was happening in
other Muslim countries, it was "aware" of
its predicament and grieved over it. This was
the time when the great anthologies were
compiled.
From the mid-twelfth to the mid-
thirteenth centuries under the Almohades
(the dynasty that overthrew the
Almorávides) poetry took on a fresh lease of
life and assumed a solemn and majestic
tone, with the exception of a few admirable
intimate cameos. Finally, towards the end of
the fifteenth century, the collapse was com¬
plete. The technical pattern for lyric poetry
continued to be perfect, but its soul had
fled. At best, it was decorative. Thus it was
that perhaps its last representative genius,
Ibn Zamrak, ended up by decorating the
walls of the Alhambra, in the most lux¬
urious poetry edition history has ever
known. It was to die a noble death gracing
the walls of the palace.
All that has been preserved of Andalusian
Arab poetry are a number of personal
diwans, far fewer than those in the Near
East. We know them through anthologies
and sometimes relatively short fragments.
This fragmentation is due to the rules of
Arabic rhetoric, which seldom allow verses
to run on, so that they each contain a com¬
plete encapsulated thought or at least a
whole grammatical sentence. It is poetry
reduced to a fine multi-coloured dust that
sparkles like diamonds. Since the effect of
the fragmentation was naturally to single
out the best and to discard the dross, we are
left with a set of prodigious verbal Alham-
bras, in which the most striking features are
feeling and passion or, in some instances,
novelty and sensibility, but seldom intellec¬
tual precision.
Virtually all poetic forms were employed.
The most beautiful metaphors gradually
became commonplace, to the point that they
could be said to be stereotyped. They obey
the law of "diminishing gradation": men
compared to animals, animals to flowers,
flowers to precious stones, and so on. A
tulip, for instance, becomes a ruby. As time
went on, the rhetoric became stilted and
fossilized and created a rather ponderous ef¬
fect. However, since this poetry died out
earlier in Spain than in other Muslim coun¬
tries, it did not know the sterile decay of old
age.
In this first example Ibn Hazm speaks in a
modern pre-Freudian vein of the ghostly
spirit of his loved one:
36
/ must needs know what it is and how
it came.
Was it the face of the Sun? Or was
it the Moon?
Was it a pure and rational idea?
Or was it the. image conjured up by
thought?
Was it a ghostly spirit forged of illusions
that seemed to take on. flesh before
my eyes?
Ibn Zaidoun, in his celebrated poem
about absence (nuniyya), evokes his loved
one, the princess Wallada:
None could tell that we lay together
attended only by our love,
accomplices of the complaisant morning
star
with eyelids sealed from prying eyes:
concealed in the bosom of darkness,
like- two secrets
risking
betrayal from the lips of the dawn.
Al-Mu'Tamid, king of Seville, wrote the
following epitaph for himself:
With their endless weeping, the clouds
moisten the soft earth, Oh tomb of exile
enveloping the remains of King Ibn
Abbad.
By his side you station in attendance
three illustrious virtues:
wisdom and grace and mercy.
And fertile plenty, come to root out
famine, and water for times of drought.
But perhaps the culminating point of the
descriptive ease and epicurean elegance
represented by the Valencian school is to be
found in Ibn al-Zaqqaq:
She came in the dead of night, her shade
jet-black like her hair.
Goblets ofpure wine she tendered me,
with their aromatic perfume.
Yet another beverage was pressed upon
me by her eyes and lips.
Three times Ifell inebriate: from the
goblet,
from her mouth and from her
dark eyes.
This being said, it should be added that
Andalusian Arab poetry also displayed a
very surprising feature in that, alongside its
"classical" form, there existed popular
verses that are generally acknowledged as
being a typically Andalusian invention.
In the thirteenth century, the Tunisian en¬
cyclopaedist Tifashi, drawing on very old
traditions, wrote that "In olden times, the
songs of the people of al-Andalus were
either in the Christian style or else in that of
Arab camel-drovers".
Thus, two poetic styles existed side by side
and yet with their backs turned to each
other! However, at the end of the ninth cen¬
tury and the beginning of the tenth, they
were "merged" in a form devised by Mu-
qaddam Ibn Mu'afà Qabri, which was
known as the muwashshaha. Unlike the
qasida, this form consists of stanzas and has
a variety of rhymes. It is not possible to go
into details here, but the main feature is that
the poem was originally "based" on a
Christian couplet in the Romance language
of al-Andalus. Here is an example of one of
those couplets:
Komo sifiliyolo alieno
non más adormes a mew seno
Like another's child,
You no longer sleep at my breast
This short couplet, which was known as
the kharja, meaning ending or "envoi", was
set at the end of the poem. Fifty or more or
these couplets have been preserved in the
Romance language and, in spite of the con¬
troversy surrounding them or indeed
because of itthey are in the process of
revolutionizing studies into the origins of
this poetry.
As was to be expected, as a result of the
hostility voiced by the classicists, the earliest
muwashshaha have disappeared, but some
of them have come down to us from the
eleventh century, while others date from as
late as the end of the twelfth century. In the
course of the same two centuries, and again
on account of the hostility of the classicists,
the kharja eventually came to be written in
Arabic dialect or colloquial Andalusian.
The rest of the poem was in the classical
language, so that we have the two forms ex¬
isting side by side and merging.
The end of the eleventh century and the
early years of the twelfth saw the emergence
in al-Andalus of another important and
novel feature: the invention of the zejel or
zajal, which may have been conceived by the
philosopher and musician Ibn Bajja or
Avempace. The zejel is derived from the
muwashshaha, from which it differs in be¬
ing composed entirely in spoken Andalusian
Arabic, in being sometimes very long, and in
often dispensing with the kharja.
This form was relatively short-lived, for
only a few early and confused examples ex¬
ist, together with a number of not very strik¬
ing sequels in the work of only one great
poet, Ibn Quzman, who lived in the first
half of the twelfth century and from whom,
by chance, we have an almost complete
diwan.
To my mind, Ibn Quzman is the greatest
poet of Andalusian Arab literature,
classicists not excepted. It is a title which I
feel he deserves on the grounds of his in¬
novative sense, breaking as he did with
almost all the conventional subject-matter
of classical poetry, and of his originality, as
reflected in his deliberate use of the popular
language in a great work of art. Breaking
out of the classical mould, he displays in¬
comparable freshness and spontaneity, giv¬
ing free rein to his imagination in handling
themes that are remarkably close to those of
the novel or the theatre. Indebted to no one
and quite unlike anybody else, Ibn Quzman
is an authentic genius.
Emilio García Gómez
If the culture of al-Andalus reached its
zenith at Cordoba, it had a magnificent late
flowering at Granada, especially in the royal
palace of the Alhambra. This roundel of
stucco-work consisting of Arabic script is
one of several in the Sala de las Dos Her¬
manas (Hall of the Two Sisters) at the
Alhambra. The roundels are in fact poems
by Ibn Zamrak, the Granada vizier-poet who
was one of the last representatives of Arab-
Andalusian poetry. The verses here sing of
the beauty of the Alhambra: "The Twins
stretch out a friendly hand to her. And the
celestial moon whispers confidentially."
