TO BE CALLED MEN'
Kupala and Kolas, poets of liberty
by Maksim Tank
THE years between 1905 and 1907
were turbulent, shaking 'the
feudal order to its foundations.
Harbinger of freedom and democracy,
the wind of change swept over
Byelorussia, fanning the hopes of the
millions living in desperate poverty and
backwardness, in what was familiarly
known as "that godforsaken corner' ' of
the Tsar's domains.
It was during the same period, at the
height of the revolutionary storm, that
two voices were heard, shouting into the
wind the pent-up, centuries-old anger of
the peasants against their oppressors, and
proclaiming their demand for a radical
new order of things. The voices belong¬
ed to the young poets Yanka Kupala and
Yakub Kolas, whose centenary is being
celebrated in 1982.
My bread is the fruit of my own toil,
I endure insults, the voices shouting at
me.
Holidays? I hardly know what they
are,
I'm just a peasant, a miserable
muzhik.
But today and tomorrow, andfor the
rest of my days,
Long though my life may be, or
short,
There's one thing, brothers, I'll not
forget.
A peasant I may be, but a man, too.
These lines by Kupala are echoed
by Kolas:
Muzhik, it's true, but no fool, for all
that;
I know my day will come.
Quiet though / may be now, not
daring to answer back,
One of these days I'll
Shout, Brothers! to arms!
With such protests, Kupala and Kolas
broke the silence which had been impos¬
ed for so long on the downtrodden
Byelorussian peasantry, articulating the
conditions of their daily life, their cares
and suffering: the hungry springtimes
when the last crumb of bread had been
eaten; the mare staggering with exhaus¬
tion in the shafts; the wailing children;
the worn-out and emaciated women.
MAKSIM TANK is "People's Poet" of the Bye¬
lorussian Soviet Socialist Republic. His work
has been rewarded by the award of the Lenin
Prize and State prizes of the Byelorussian SSR.
He is a member of the Academy of Sciences
of the Byelorussian SSR, a secretary of the
governing council of the USSR Writers' Union,
and Chairman of the Writers' Union of the Bye¬
lorussian SSR.
"My tongue is as dry as a bone in my
mouth", says one verse, and another:
"Poor devils, we are, our heads in the
noose... work in the fields... tears at
home..."
It is not hard to understand the impor¬
tance of the role played by the verse of
Kupala and Kolas linked as closely as
it was to their people's aspirations and
to the problems of their time in the
renaissance of Byelorussian letters. A
renaissance indeed, because although the
country had a long literary tradition
reaching back to the early sixteenth cen¬
tury, with its origins in the works of the
great humanist and philosopher Frantisk
Skorina, it had also been condemned by
history to a long, dark age of occupation
by the Poles during which all printed mat- '
ter in the Byelorussian language was pro¬
hibited and the feudal overlords impos¬
ed a campaign of assimilation on the
people. And if, at the end of the eigh¬
teenth century, Byelorussia had been
reunited with Russia a country to which
it had been linked from time immemorial
by historical, cultural and linguistic
ties it was not until the beginning of the
twentieth century that what amounted to
little more than descriptive, written-
down folklore began to evolve into a new
national literature. The distinctive con¬
tribution by Kupala and Kolas was to
enrich this new literature with progressive
and revolutionary ideas, which they ex¬
pressed to artistic perfection.
Despite its concern with the sombre
realities of the times, the poetry of
Kupala and Kolas carries a heartening
and thought-provoking message. The
way we live now, it says, is barely an im¬
provement on death; struggle offers the
only chance of escape. This leitmotif of
revolt is nowhere more apparent than in
Kupala's "Who goes there?", which
Maksim Gorki, who translated it into
Russian, described as "an eloquent,
austere piece of verse."
Who goes there, in the marshland
and the forest,
Goes in that enormous crowd?
The Byelorussian people go there!
What are they bearing, on their
skinny shoulders,
Lifting in their skinny hands
Injustice and lies, they bear!
Where are they carrying all the lies
and the injustice,
Taking them to show to whom?
To the whole world, to show!
But who was it who roused these
millions from their sleep,
Who said, Take up your burden
now, and go?
Misery and sorrow taught them so!
But what is it they seek, then, the
oppressed of the ages,
The blind and the deaf, what do they
seek?
To be called men!
In its original language, we seem to
hear in the rhythm of this poem the
heavy, breathless tread of a huge crowd
of people, carrying on their shoulders an
immense load. "To be called men..."
The laconic phrase recalls the insult in¬
flicted on a people far too long subjected
to the most terrible of deprivations and
denied the exercise of the most elemen¬
tary political and social rights. But "To
be calledmen... "is also ademand, stem¬
ming from a new self-awareness.
However it was interpreted, the poem
made a powerful impression on the
people, and found its way to all the cor¬
ners ofTsarist Russia. And if, at the time,
"Who goes there?" was translated into
ten languages, it is worth noting that in
the special centenary edition of the works
of the two poets, it is translated into no
fewer than eighty, including Arabic,
Chinese, English, French, German, Hin¬
di, Japanese and Spanish...
22

Familiar with the folklore of their
country, transforming imagery into sym¬
bols, linking genuine feeling with an im¬
pressive breadth of vision, Kupala and
Kolas opened the eyes of their people to
spiritual horizons which lay far beyond
the frontiers of Byelorussia, without los¬
ing sight of national realities. At the same
time, their innate creativity, nourished by
the oral traditions of the rural popula¬
tion, enabled them to reveal the richness,
the freshness and the inexhaustible
resources of their native language. Small
wonder, then, that great masters of
literature such as Gorki, Sholokhov,
Aragon and many others have paid
tribute to the contribution made by these
two Byelorussian poets to the heritage of
world literature.
Kupala and Kolas were not linked
merely by their work and the gift which
they shared of ' 'conversing with all their
countrymen". The circumstances of
their lives were very similar. Both born
in 1 882, they each learned at a very early
age what it was really like to till the earth,
to work on the land without possessing
the smallest plot of one's own, to travel
Yanka Kupala (left) and
Yakub Kolas photographed
during the 1920s.
Photo © Fotokhronika, Tass, Moscow
from place to place in search of tem¬
porary employment. The fathers of each
of them died young, worn out by the
struggle against poverty.
And it was not by chance that both
poets chose pseudonyms of popular
origin. Ivan Dominikovich Lutsevich
became ' 'Yanka Kupala' ' in evocation of
the festival which bore that name.
Konstantin Mikhailovich Mitskevich
selected "Yakub Kolas", thus com¬
memorating the ear of grain (kolas) pro¬
duced by his native soil.
Both poets fought for the freedom of
their people; and both experienced the
rigours of censorship and Tsarist oppres¬
sion, in their literary work and in their
public activities. In 1908, Yakub Kolas
received a prison sentence of almost three
years, for having taken part in an illegal
congress of teachers.
It is not surprising, therefore, to find
similar themes, and even similar images,
in their writing, although each poet has
his own distinctive personality. Kupala
is the more lyrical of the two. Some of
his poems, such as Kurgan (Burial
Mound) , Mogila I'va (The Lion' s Grave)
Born in the same year a century ago, the two great Byelorussian poets Ivan
Dominikovich Lutsevich (Kupala) and Konstantin Mikhailovich Mitskevich (Kolas)
took their pen names from local fertility myths, thus expressing their love of
their native land and their desire to see their country free and bom again. Kolas,
which means an ear of grain, evokes the legend of the days when the Byelorus¬
sian countryside was no more than an expanse of sand, marsh and untamed
grassland. Dropped by a bird or carried on the wind or by a horse, a grain of
barley took root and flourished in this wasteland, thus providing man with his
daily bread. Even today, in Byelorussia, at harvest-time, the first handful of
corn harvested is ceremonially knotted around the farmer's waist (see draw¬
ing left). Kupala, from the word koupat, meaning to bathe, is the name of a
pagan midsummer festival on which pagan "weddings" were consummated.
On the eve of Kupala unmarried peasant girls would each fashion two circlets
of sweet clover which they threw into a nearby river. If the two circlets floated
side by side, the maidens would soon be wed (drawing opposite page). That
same night the peasants would set out in search of a fern in flower. Tradition
had it that the fern, the symbol of happiness, flowered only once a year, on
the eve of Kupala.
and Ona ija (She and I), have a roman¬
tic tone; others are taut with dramatic
tension. His inventions, images and sym¬
bols are frequently audacious. Kolas, on
the other hand, is a more down-to-earth
poet, with a closer eye for detail:
The villages have a sad look,
Heartbreaking it is, to see them.
In a backyardfirewood, a few
planks
And a heap of rubbish.
A rickety cross at the roadside,
A pile of dry poplar trees. . .
Silence, a sort of boredom as in a
prison
Or in a cemetery somewhere.
As well as a poet, Kolas was also,
throughout his life, a distinguished
prose-writer, noted particularly for his
collection of short stories Skazki Zhizni
(Tales of Life) and for his great trilogy
Na Rostanjakh (At the Crossroads).
During the First World War, both
poets were conscripted into the Tsarist
army and served outside Byelorussia.
Understandably, they greeted the Oc¬
tober Revolution in 1917 with great en¬
thusiasm, and celebrated the event in a
number of poems. But the vicissitudes of
the post-war period were such that part
of Byelorussia remained under Polish oc¬
cupation until 1939. On the other hand,
in 1 9 1 9, Eastern Byelorussia became one
of the fifteen constituent republics of the
USSR. Factories were built; roads were
traced across the landscape; and the
scourge of illiteracy, which had been rife
throughout the population, was
eradicated. The children of the poor were
now to be found in universities and other
educational establishments. Theatres
were created, and crowds flocked, as they
still do today, to see Kupala's Pavlinka,
and other dramatic works by the two
poets. Both were among the first
members of the Byelorussian Academy
of Sciences and Letters, the foundation
ofwhich launched a new era in the coun¬
try's economic, scientific and cultural
life.
In 1941, Nazi Germany attacked the
Soviet Union. Kupala and Kolas issued
passionate calls for popular resistance
against the invader, in stirring poems
such as the former's Belorusskim Par-
tizanam (To the Byelorussian partisans).
Despite the destruction by the enemy of
entire towns and villages, and the suffer¬
ing of the people (one Byelorussian in
four did not survive the war), there was
no surrender. Yanka Kupala, unhappi¬
ly, did not live to see his country's vic¬
tory, but died in 1942. Yakub Kolas
lived until 1956, and thus witnessed the
revival which began with the liberation,
playing an active part in public life and
expressing his creativity up to the very
end.
Today, the works ofKupala and Kolas
are published in impressive quantities.
Poetic gatherings are organized in their
memory. Streets, squares, schools,
libraries, theatres, institutions ofvarious
kinds and even ships bear the two poets'
names. Indeed, the names of Yanka
Kupala and Yakub Kolas will always be
linked with that of their country, to
which they unstintingly devoted their ex¬
ceptional talents.
23
