Lifelines
'Treatment
is a cultural process
and a social act'
Treatment of the individual with a drug problem must
be congruent with the ways of feeling, thinking and
acting normally proposed by the society and culture
from which that individual derives. Treatment and
rehabilitation must aim to restore the drug user to
functioning as a social being within that natural en¬
vironment. Treatment itself is a cultural process and a
social act, and will only succeed if it is sensitively in
tune with all that surrounds it.
THAILAND. A vow to the Buddha: Dr.
V. Poshyachinda gives an account of
the treatment of narcotic addicts at the
Tarn Kraborg temple.
Since Thailand became a united free
country over 700 years ago, Buddhism has
been the national religion. The temple and
the priest stand as dominating influences in
society, serving many public welfare func¬
tions such as education and health care. It
has been a natural evolution for the Bud¬
dhist temple to assume the role of treatment
centre in response to the growth of drug
dependence.
The Tarn Kraborg temple is about 130 km
north of Bangkok. It provides simple treat¬
ment facilities. A few wooden benches and
tables placed on an open verandah serve as
the intake registration unit. The living
quarters for the clients are a single spacious
hall not unlike a military barracks. A low
wooden couch, a reed mattress and a
blanket are provided for each client. When
full, the temple holds 300-400 resident
clients and about 100 priests. About forty of
the priests are former clients who were or¬
dained after treatment.
Treatment is carried out by a priest. The
temple never has to resort to hired staff.
While the treatment is free, the charge for
subsistence is about US 1 dollar per day. In
the last few years, the temple has developed
additional supportive services for vocational
training, including cultivation of crops,
masonry and tailoring of ready-to-wear
clothes.
The goal is complete drug abstinence for
life. To enter the programme, the client
must make a clear statement of determina¬
tion to seek treatment. Then the client
makes his vow to the Buddha. The vow is in
essence a pledge of abstinence for life from
opium, morphine, heroin, ganja and other
drugs that cause dependence.
The daily treatment schedule for the first
five days comprises two principal sessions
which the clients attend in groups. A dose
of herbal medicine is given in the morning,
which induces immediate vomiting for about
10-15 minutes. In the afternoon session the
clients take a herbal steam bath for 10-15
minutes. This cycle of sessions is explained
to the client as the means whereby drugs
can be purged from the body. In the morn¬
ing session, clients who have already par¬
ticipated in the first five days join actively in
the treatment. Some assist by nursing
others through the vomiting session, while
others cheer their fellows with spirited
native tunes and jokes. The atmosphere is
20

-
J T
In Thailand, a new arrival at a treatment centre for drug dependence begins an
attempt to break his drug habit with a morning dose of herbal medicine (see
story below)
not unlike that of a lively competitive game
at a temple festival.
For the remaining five days, there is no
prescribed schedule. The client is left to
recover from his physical exhaustion. The
priest usually encourages those who feel
physically strong enough and are so inclined
to help in the daily chores or assist in the
treatment session for newcomers.
On the tenth and last days of admission,
the clients are assembled again in the shrine
and reminded of their pledge; they are then
free to leave the temple.
HONG KONG. Houses called "Humani¬
ty", "Righteousness", "Fortitude" and
"Wisdom": Dr. J. Chi'en describes the
therapeutic community facility in a
comprehensive community-based reha¬
bilitation scheme for narcotic addicts
which is much In tune with traditional
Chinese values. This rehabilitation net¬
work was set up by the Society for the
Aid and Rehabilitation of Drug Addicts
(SARDA).
In 1946 the long-standing monopoly
system and the legalized sale of opium were
abolished in Hong Kong. In the late 1940s
and early 1950s large numbers of refugees
came from China to escape from the civil
war; many of them were opium smokers
who switched to heroin abuse after arrival.
Therapeutic communities are organized,
for those who are motivated, for fuller
rehabilitation after detoxification. A full
course of rehabilitation runs from twenty to
twenty-five weeks. A detoxified patient is in¬
vited to join any one of eighteen houses,
each of which is a group-living, working and
recreational unit, with its own dormitory, tea
house, workshop and vegetable garden or
animal farm.
The new resident earns his acceptance by
the house-group through helpfulness in the
dormitory and diligence in work, while the
senior residents give him encouragement
and advice. Confrontation techniques and
attack therapy, as practised in North
American therapeutic communities, are
seldom applied because traditional Chinese
culture advocates harmony and co¬
operation.
Each house bears the title of a cultural *
value such as "Humanity", "Righteous- f
21

ness", "Fortitude" and "Wisdom".
Leaders, who are mostly people who have
gone through the programme and suc¬
cessfully completed the after-care period,
are trained to serve as group leaders and
trade instructors under the supervision of
senior professional staff. Inter-group com¬
petition in cleanliness, work production,
arts, and sports is encouraged and fair play
as well as honesty are promoted. There is a
weekly "graduation" ceremony and enter¬
tainment programme to bid farewell to those
completing the full course of rehabilitation.
After leaving the centre the newly
discharged are welcomed by their respective
after-care workers at the head office of the
Alumni Association (AA) of SARDA, which
is a self-help and mutual support organiza¬
tion composed of and managed by ex-
addicts. There are five such chapters for
men and one for women, each with 200 to
300 members. Those who can maintain
drug-free and crime-free living for six
months are accepted by the respective
chapter as associate members, and those
who lead a productive life for two years in
the community qualify for full membership.
Badges bearing the insignia of AA in dif¬
ferent colours to signify different numbers
of years of continued abstinence from nar¬
cotics, are worn proudly by its members.
JAPAN. Dr. H. Suwaki describes the
organization and working ofDanshukai,
the Alcohol Abstinence Society. Wives
and children can become members.
There are some noticeable differences in
the treatment of alcoholism between Japan
and the West. Alcoholics Anonymous (AA),
which is popular in the West, is found in on¬
ly limited areas of Japan such as Yokohama
and Kobe where Westerners live together.
Instead of AA, Danshukai (Alcohol Absti¬
nence Society) is widespread throughout
Japan. A very active Danshukai was orga¬
nized in Kochi Prefecture in 1958. The
founder had himself been admitted to a
mental hospital five times for alcoholism.
By 1977 one was established in every
prefecture in Japan, with 586 chapters and
35,000 registered alcoholic members.
Twenty-five thousand members were atten¬
ding the meetings in 1977, and 16,000 had
abstained from alcohol over one year.
The activities of the Danshukai are family
and experience oriented and rooted in the
local community. Regular ineetings of the
headquarters, chapters and hospital groups
are held from one to four times a month.
Usually one of the experienced members
takes the chair. Psychiatrists, social workers
and psychologists co-operate with the Dan¬
shukai and often attend meetings. A small
meeting, called a block meeting, is held at
the homes of members who live neareach
other and want to come together. In addi¬
tion to the meetings, the members par¬
ticipate in various recreational activities to
develop closer relations among the members
and their families. They also join the other
Danshukai and Alcohol Abstinence schools
in neighbouring prefectures, and read the
Danshukai bulletin.
The Danshukai has affirmed the following
three principles as its basic policy, in the
light of the experience accumulated so far:
a) There is no alternative but for
alcoholics to abstain from drinking, since
they cannot drink moderately.
b) An alcoholic cannot cure the disease
by himself. The way to a successful cure is
Below, members of the Alumni Association
of Hong Kong's Society for the Aid and
Rehabilitation of Addicts (SARDA) gather
to take part in their "Walk for a Million".
This annual event raises funds for the
Community Chest for Hong Kong which
provides many voluntary welfare agencies
with financial support. Above, "drug-free
badges" are awarded at the Association's
annual assembly.
22

open only when those who have suffered
alcoholism encourage each other at a Dan¬
shukai meeting.
c) Co-operation of the family, particularly
of wives, is indispensable for alcoholics to
continue abstaining.
The wives and children of Danshukai
members usually belong to the same Dan¬
shukai as their husbands or fathers,
although some Danshukai have developed
wives' groups as an extended activity.
Almost all the members are male
alcoholics. There are not more than twenty
female alcoholics in the Danshukai through¬
out Japan. Danshukai is not anonymous.
Many Danshukai publish the addresses of
the members, and outside persons can join
the meeting and talk freely in the group.
The treatment of alcoholism will not serve
its purpose well if it deals merely with
physical and psychological needs. It must
contain elements of an individual's beliefs,'
which largely have their roots in his cultural
traditions.
Male alcoholics and their wives attend a weekly meeting
of a branch of Danshukai, Japan's Alcohol Abstinence
Society.
ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS. Dr. D.
Robinson analyses the cultural origins
and international diffusion ofAA, a self-
help group which has shown an extraor¬
dinary ability to reach the needs of the
alcoholic. What have the professionals
to learn?
Of all self-help groups Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA) has perhaps the most well
developed written history. AA originated in
the chance meeting at Akron, Ohio, in the
summer of 1935 between Robert Holbrook
Smith, a local doctor, and William Wilson, a
New York stockbroker. A year earlier,
Wilson had been introduced to the Oxford
Group Movement by a friend who said he
was staying sober by attending their small
discussion-group meetings and following
their precepts: confession, honesty, talking
out of emotional problems, unselfishness,
making reparations and praying to God as
personally conceived.
Impressed by his friend's efforts, Wilson
attended some meetings and after a spiritual
awakening found that he also could remain
sober. However, he failed to convert other
alcoholics because of what his doctor called
"too much preaching". So he decided to try
to convince them that they had some kind of
physical allergy and mental obsession and
only to introduce the spiritual aspects later.
This worked first with "Dr. Bob".
Alcoholics Anonymous did not invent the
idea of addiction, or loss of control, any
more than they invented total abstinence as
the only goal of treatment. Nevertheless
they played a major part in the development
of the new disease conception of alcoholism
in the post-Prohibition period.
Alcoholics Anonymous would not have
developed as rapidly as it has done if it had
not been based on ideas that were compati¬
ble with dominant ideas in the American
culture. The USA in the nineteenth century
was above all a middle-class nation in which
an open capitalist society required in¬
dividuals to regulate their business, family
and personal activities in order to survive
and succeed.
At that time, in both Europe and North
America, madness was increasingly being
defined as a disease, the chief symptom of
which was loss of control. The asylum was
changing from being a place of chains and
physical control to becoming a place to
restore, through moral treatment, the power
of self-discipline to those who had lost it. It
became natural, therefore, to redefine
almost all evil or deviance, including alcohol
problems, as disease of will. And, because
self-reliance had become such an essential
feature of belief and culture, in the USA
anything that undermined self-reliance or
self-control became a matter of great impor¬
tance. Liquor was regarded as important
since it would weaken inhibitions in the
short run and deprive people of the ability to
live restrained, moderate and controlled
lives. In AA terms, it could make their lives
'unmanageable".
Just as AA's ideas about the nature of the
problem had to be compatible with domi¬
nant ideas, thought and culture in the USA,
so did the principles underpinning its pro¬
gramme of action. At a personal level the
programme aims at transforming the depen¬
dent, isolated, drinking alcoholic into an in¬
dependent, integrated, sober alcoholic. At a
group level AA aims at being a self-reliant,
self-sufficient organization, beholden to no
one and dependent on no one. It remains
uninvolved in outside philosophical, politi¬
cal, social or spiritual issues although it co¬
operates with other bodies in order to help
to bring as many alcoholics to sobriety as it
can and help them to "conform to the
norms of a dominant middle-class society"-
It is not surprising therefore that AA
should be so well regarded in North
America. However, the fellowship has now
grown from its meagre beginnings, in Akron
in 1935, into a worldwide organization of
groups. By 1974, the General Service Board
of AA was claiming that world membership
had reached 800,000 and by 1977 well over
1 ,000,000. There are groups now in over 100
different countries from Norway to
Nicaragua and from Trinidad'to Thailand.
On a worldwide scale Alcoholics Anony¬
mous has groups in Catholic and Protestant
countries, in developed and developing
countries, in beer-producing and wine-
producing countries, in countries with
private medical care and those with State
health care systems. But although AA is
widespread, its development has, naturally,
been uneven. It is also thin in Eastern
Europe although there are the well-known
clubs in Yugoslavia and elsewhere which
operate on somewhat similar lines to A.A. In
the Middle East and India very many of the
members are employees of foreign firms,
while in Asia many of the groups were
started by the US forces. But in all areas of
the world the number of groups is growing.
Two major themes run through most of
the accounts of why self-help health groups
are flourishing today. The first is the disillu¬
sionment with existing helping services: the
feeling that expectations have not been
fulfilled or that services are unable to pro¬
vide the kind of care that is needed. The
second is the recognition that in many
societies the traditional support systems
such as the church, the neighbourhood and
the extended family are in decline. As a
result there is a search for community by
people who feel helpless and without con¬
trol over their own lives. For many, the
world has moved too fast, is too big and is
too indifferent to quality, to individual dif¬
ferences and to the basic human needs of
understanding, friendship and support.
Alcoholics Anonymous has never been^
made the subject of an international study, f
23

It is not possible, therefore, to say how the
fellowship has adapted to varying socio-
cultural circumstances. But given the well-
known variation between groups within the
same city it is reasonable to assume that AA
in Thailand is somewhat different from AA
in Nicaragua. This is one of the strengths of
the fellowship: its ability to adapt to the
needs of its members, provided always that
it keeps faith with the surprisingly few core
principles and practices which are the
essence of AA.
There is no doubt that Alcoholics Anony¬
mous, with its basis of mutual concern and
continuing support together with its record
of, and public commitment to, co-operation
with others working in the field, could have
a part to play in an overall response to
alcohol-related problems in any country.
UNITED KINGDOM. Dr. R. Wille ex¬
amines the "natural processes" which
interacted with the drug maintenance
treatment given by a clinic to bring
about the eventual recovery of one
young heroin addict.
Treatment is only one variable in a very
complex field of forces. We need to con¬
sider how people do things for themselves,
how they use friends and families, how their
lives interact with chance and life events,
and then see treatment in this context in¬
sofar as it adds to those natural processes.
Bob 0. started using heroin at the age of
sixteen. He had four criminal convictions
between the ages of eleven and seventeen.
His first clinic attendance was at the age of
eighteen in June 1968. His first prescription
was for 120 mg heroin. By 1969 his prescrip¬
tion had become reduced to 30 mg heroin
and 30 mg methadone. During this period
(1969) his life was becoming more and more
chaotic. He started to inject sleeping pills,
lost his job, and was found unconscious on
the road by the police with an accidental
overdose of barbiturates. He comments on
the first reduction in 1969: "It was a period
when I wasn't ready to come down. And if
the doctors force you down then, ifs just a
waste of time".
At the beginning of 1970 his prescription
was increased to 70 mg heroin and 40 mg
methadone, a dose on which he was kept
until 1972. At this time a gradual stabiliza¬
tion of his drug use and social situation
began. He was worried by his physical
deterioration, his abscesses and overdoses,
the death of his best friend from a bar¬
biturate overdose, the decline of his old drug
scene, and his mother's illness and her com¬
plaints about his way of life. He ceased tak¬
ing sleeping pills and started working
regularly. He stopped his contact with the
drug scene and became, as he expressed it,
a "loner". He undertook a slow reduction of
drugs over the next two years and regarded
this as the best possible way for him to
become abstinent.
Why was this second reduction suc¬
cessful? Bob O. reported that he made the
decision because he met his new girl-friend
who did not want to marry him as long as he
was addicted. After ten years of heroin use
he became abstinent at the age of twenty-
six, married his girl-friend and, a short time
afterwards, completed a course as a
carpenter and started a successful career.
He has his own house and car, and has been
abstinent now for four years.
For Bob O., the development of a new
social role manifested by a stable job and a
significant relationship interacted with
chance and life events. Therapeutic efforts
were successful when they complemented
these social changes.
Dr. V. Poshyachinda is attached to the Institute
of Health Research, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
Mr. J. Chi'en is Superintendent of Social Ser¬
vices, The Society for the Aid and Rehabilitation
of Drug Addicts, Hong Kong.
Dr. H. Suwaki is a member of the Department of
Neuropsychiatry, Kochi Medical School, Japan.
Dr. D. Robinson is a member of the Addiction
Research Unit of the Institute of Psychiatry,
London.
Dr. R. Wille is a member of the Addiction
Research Unit of the Institute of Psychiatry,
London.
24
Alcohol consumption in 25 countries per capita (15
in litres of 100 per cent ethanol.
years and older)
Country*
Consumption
1976
Average annual
percentage change
1970-1976
France 21.3 - 2
Portugal 19.4 + 4
Spain 19.3 + 2
Luxembourg 16.8 + 0.6
Italy 16.8 - 3
Fed. Rep. of Germany 15.8 - 0.2
Austria 14.6 + 2
New Zealand 13.7 + 4
Hungary 13.4 + 0.6
Australia 13.3 + 1
Switzerland 13.2 - 2
Belgium 13.2 0
Ireland 12.6 + 12
Yugoslavia 12.0 + 3
Czechoslovakia 11.9 - 3
Denmark 11.8 + 4
Canada 11.7 + 4
Netherlands 11.1 + 7
United Kingdom 11.0 + 5
Poland 10.8 + 7
USA 10.7 + 2
German Dem. Rep. 10.5 0
Finland 8.1 + 5
Sweden 7.4 - 1
Norway 5.6 + 5
byorder of consumption.
Sources: International Labour Organisation
Gedistilleerde Dranken (1977).
(1977); United Nations (1977). Produktschap voor
