The consequences
of nuclear war
WHEN a nuclear weapon explodes
in thex atmosphere, the first
noticeable effect is a blinding
flash of intense white light strong enough
to blind observers many kilometres away.
The light does not kill, but the heat that
comes with it does. Both light and heat are
emitted by thefireball caused by the explo¬
sion, a mass of air containing the residues
of the weapon, heated to the order of 10
million degrees centigrade. Any un¬
protected person within two kilometres of
the fireball will be killed by the heat alone.
With a weapon of low yield, say 10 to 20
kilotons, roughly the size of the bombs
dropped on the Japanese cities, second-
degree burns will be suffered asfar as three
kilometres from the explosion.
Within seconds, the light and heat are
followed by a blast wave. It arrives like a
thunderclap, pursued by hurricane-force
winds strong enough to uproot telephone
poles and trees, overturn trucks, and sweep
human beings along at a tremendous speed.
The compression ofairpressure brought on
by the wind and the blast wave itself will
crush buildings, killing nearly everyone in¬
side, and loosen bricks and paving stones
which will hurtle in all directions, knocking
over everything in theirpath. Anyone in the
open or in ordinary buildings within 1.5
kilometres of the blast will have virtually no
chance of surviving.
As thefireball rises, it cools and becomes
a cloud, hovering high off the ground.
Beneath it, a column of dust and smoke is
sucked up from below. Looking like an
enormous mushroom, six kilometres high
and four across, the cloud is a mass of
radioactive atoms, some of which are lethal
enough to kill anyone who had managed to
survive the heat and blast effects.
If the explosion occurs close to the
ground, the immediate effects will be
Text © copyright. Reproduction prohibited.
greater, as thousands of tons ofradioactive
soil are sucked into the air in deadly con¬
centrations and deposited over a wide area.
Although its deadliness dissipates rapidly,
harmful radio-active materials from the
blast can be carried thousands of miles and
not reach the ground for weeks. Over the
decades to follow, the risk of cancer and,
possibly, genetic defects will be great.
Neither the unborn nor the unconceived
can escape the effects of nuclear war.
These are only the direct effects of a
nuclear explosion; secondary destruction
will be ubiquitous and intense. Fires will be
the worst hazard, caused both by the heat
of the explosion and by falling debris,
broken gas mains, rupturedfuel tanks, and
the like. Under certain circumstances, the
fires triggered by the blast will coalesce, .
forming a storm ofheat andflame that will
ravage huge areas and be virtually impos¬
sible to extinguish until there are no more
materials to feed on.
Other secondary effects will also be
devastating. The destruction of water
mains and sewers will result in the spread of
infectious diseases in epidemicproportions.
Communications and other electronic
systems will be disrupted severely by the
electromagnetic pulse emitted by the blast.
The damage from blown transformers and
overloaded computing and switching cir¬
cuits will be extensive and difficult to
repair. As a result, the allocation of
emergency equipment, even the identifica¬
tion of the location of injuries and damage,
will be difficult. Andfinally, the deaths of
doctors and other medical personnel, and
the destruction of health care facilities and
other municipal services, will mean that
even minor injuries and common diseases
will result in many more deaths than norm¬
ally would be expected.
The exact consequences of an exchange
ofnuclear weapons would depend on many
factors. Among the most important would
be the weather; winter would be a par¬
ticularly cruel time for those few who
managed to survive. But the overriding in¬
fluence would be the number of bombs
used and the extent of the attacks. A na¬
tion's ability to contain the effects of a
single explosion would depend greatly on
whether or not the central government
could shift people, water, food, and
medical supplies from other regions. If the
war were widespread, its effects could well
be synergistic; that is, the cumulative
results of burns, blast injuries, radiation
disease, and secondary consequences such
as the spread of infectious diseases could be
far greater than the sum of their individual
effects.
At some point, a nuclear exchange could
bring urban civilization to an end. It is dif¬
ficult to imagine the continuance ofsocial
discipline in theface ofthe devastation that
would accompany a war involving hun¬
dreds, much less thousands, of nuclear ex¬
plosions. Wouldpeople be willing to abide
by the authority of a government that had
just led its country to incredible disaster? If
not, the basic services upon which modern
society dependssuch as protection from .
criminal elements, the banking and
monetary system, the generation and
distribution of electric power, the distribu¬
tion of water and food to urban
areas could well come to a halt. Society
could regress to autonomous bands ofpeo¬
ple living largely in the rural areas that had
been spared the worst radiation, each sur¬
viving primitively on its own wits and
resources.
Jonathan Schell has put it well, in his re¬
cent book The Fate of the Earth:
44

/ Deganawidah
And the chiefs of the Five Nations
of the Great Peace
Weshall uproot the tallest pine
Into the cavity thereby made
We shall cast all weapons of war
Into the depths of the earth
Into the deep underneath...
We shall cast all weapons of war
We shall bury them from sight forever...
Then we shall plant again the tree...
Thus shall the Great Peace be established
The Tree of the Great Peace
Iroquois poem
Canadian Iroquois Indian of the
"Sang" tribe. Photo © Boyer-Viollet,
Paris.
[Although nuclear strategists] speak of a
period of "recovery" after a limited attack,
the likelier prospect is a long-term radical
deterioration in the conditions of life... To
restore [these] essentials of life takes time;
but there would be no time. Hunger, ill¬
ness, and possibly cold would press in on
the dazed, bewildered, disorganized, in¬
jured remnant of the population on the
very day of the attack. They would have to
start foraging immediately for their next
meal. Sitting among the debris of the Space
Age, they would find that the pieces of a
shattered modern economy around them...
were mismatched to their elemental needs.
Looking into the future, considering the
potential long-term effects ofmany nuclear
explosions on the human gene pool and the
incidence of cancer, to say nothing of its
likely effects on the ozone layer and result¬
ant destruction ofanimal andplant life and
eventual climatic changes, human life itself
could be in jeopardy. Thus, humanity
would face the ultimate riskits own ex¬
tinction. Within five years of the nuclear
explosion in Hiroshima two hundred thou¬
sand people had died from the effects of
the bomb. Within a similarperiod of time,
fatalities attributable to the nuclear blast in
Nagasaki, where the hilly topography of
the city tended to limit its effects, rose to
140,000. Even today, the death toll is still
rising in both cities, albeit slowly, as such
long-term effects as an increasing cancer
rate continue to manifest themselves.
Every year, the descendants ofthose who
died at Hiroshima light lanterns, each one
inscribed with the names of a deadfamily.
They push the lights off into the river that
runs through the city. For miles, the whole
river appears to be one mass offlame.
And what of the survivors? In De¬
cember 1981, the Commission visited
Hiroshima and spoke with survivors of the
atomic bomb. Consider the testimony of
Mr Yoshiaki Fukahori, a survivor of the
Nagasaki bomb:
Some people say that the survivors are
more fortunate than those who died, but is
that really so? Those of us who have surviv¬
ed these thirty-six years having to fight to
find food, to find clothes, to find a
livelihood... I rather think that we are suf¬
fering from a heavier cross... Because I was
young when I was exposed to radiation, I
have a tremendous uncertainty about the
future of my health. My wife is also a vic¬
tim and is suffering from disease... As
parents we are uncertain about the future
of our children, the second generation vic¬
tims... Would my children be able to father
and mother healthy children? Would the
third generation of my family survive?
Projecting the consequences ofa nuclear
explosion for a modern urban area on the
basis of the bombs exploded over Japanese
cities in 1945 is tricky. Nuclear weapons
have changed tremendously. The bombs
used against Japan are relatively small by
current standards, and the distribution of
the energy released by the explosions
among light, heat, blast, and radioactive
emissions is likely to be different in modern
bombs. The characteristics of cities also
have changed. The Japanese cities of the
1940s, constructed largely of wood, pro¬
bably suffered much more from fire than
would modern cities. On the other hand,
the Japanese cities had relatively small
populations by contemporary standards,
and thus suffered fewer casualties than
might occur today.
Still, fairly reliable estimates can and
have been made. The US Office of
Technology Assessment, for one, has
analysed several hypothetical examples of
single nuclear bombs dropped on modern
cities. Consider, for example, the effects of
a one-megaton weapon, the equivalent of
one million tons of conventional ex¬
plosives, roughly the size of the warhead of
a US Minuteman II or Soviet SS-11 ICBM,
on the cities ofDetroit and Leningrad, each
with populations of about four million.
If the weapon exploded in the air over
Detroit at night, without warning, approx¬
imately 470,000 people would be killed,
and another 630,000 injured. If the same
weapon were exploded during the daytime,
when the downtown part of the city was
crowded with commuters, an additional
130,000 would die. A one-megaton weapon
exploded over Leningrad would be even
more devastating, as thepopulation ofthat ^
45

/ have a dream that one day men will rise up and come to see that they are made to live together as brothers. Istill have a dream this morning
that one day every Negro in this country, every colouredperson in the world, will bejudged on the basis of the content ofhis character rather
than the colour ofhis skin, and every man will respect the dignity and worth ofhuman personality... I still have a dream today that one day
justice will roll down like water, and righteousness like a mighty stream. Istill have a dream today that in all ofour state houses and city halls
men will be elected to go there who will do justly and love mercy and walk humbly with their God. Istill have a dream today that one day war
will come to an end, that men will beat their swords into ploughshares and their spears into pruning hooks, that nations will no longer rise up
against nations, neither will they study war any more.
Martin Luther King
(1929-1968)
Civil rights march in the United States. Martin Luther King fifth from right. Photo Matt Herron © Rapho, Paris.
^ city is less suburban and more closely pack¬
ed. Under the same night-time conditions
specified for the Detroit estimate, 890,000
residents ofLeningrad would be killed, and
another 1,260,000 injured. More than one
half the city's totalpopulation would be the
victims of a single nuclear explosion.
Large warheads like the onejust describ¬
ed, however, are going out offashion. The
nuclear powers have been replacing their
existing weapons with yields in the megaton
range with greater numbers of weapons
with smaller explosive yields. These smaller
weapons are more efficient. Several
kiloton-range weapons can do greater
damage, even though their total yield may
be less than a single-megaton weapon. For
example, the detonation of ten 40-kiloton
weapons over Leningrad, in aggregate only
40 per cent the yield of a single one-
megaton weapon, would likely result in
130,000 additional fatalities.
The physical devastation in either city
would be incredible. Houses would be
demolished or made uninhabitable in an
area ofmore than 300 square kilometres. If
the bomb were exploded on the surface, an
area extending well beyond either city's
municipal boundaries (more than 1,000
square kilometres) would be contaminated
by radiation. Rescue workers and medical
personnel could enter this zone to help the
injured only at the peril of their own lives.
Radiation dangers aside, rescue work
would be extraordinarily difficult. Fires
would rage, water mains would flood,
power lines would be down, bridges,
freeways, and elevated railroads would
have collapsed. Once proud cities would be
reduced to debris.
The effects of a nuclear explosion on the
medical treatment system would be par
ticularly devastating. The Commission met
separately with Drs. Howard Hiatt and
Eugene Chazov, US and Soviet leaders,
respectively, of an international movement
of physicians concerned about the danger
of nuclear war. Their testimony makes
clear that it would be impossible to provide
modern medical assistance, even basic care,
to the victims of a nuclear attack.
John Hersey recorded the effects of the
1945 explosion on the Hiroshima health
care system:
Of 150 doctors in the city, 65 were
already dead and most of the rest were
wounded; of 1,780 nurses, 1,654 were dead
How would nuclear war affect
the earth's climate?
or too badly hurt to work. In .the biggest
hospital, that of the Red Cross, only 6 doc¬
tors out of 30 were able to function, and
only 10 nurses out of more than 200.
Yet numbers and statistical estimates
cannot begin to convey the horror of
nuclear war, nor the grisly consequences of
the destruction of the medical system. Con¬
sider the testimony before the Commission
of Dr. Tatsuichiro Akizuki, a physician
associated with the St. Franciscan Hospital
in Nagasaki:
Our hospital was at a point 1.5
kilometres from hypocentre, therefore the
patients and we suffered from only minor
injuries. But the building was burned down
several hours later. From the burning city,
grotesque looking naked people came in
droves and they moaned in agony and pain.
It took time for me to realize that they were
human beings suffering from severe burns
and bruises... All the major hospitals were
burned down or collapsed, and most of the
victims died without receiving any treat¬
ment. Several hundred people came to me.
They were turning black and purple,
vomiting blood and passing black stools
before they died. These were the symptoms
of acute radiation illness... There was a big
hospital thirty kilometres away, but there
was no means to go there. Tens of
thousands of people died without receiving
any treatment... Patients lay in holes dug in
the ground, and people died one after
another because of radiation illness... I felt
helpless as a doctor. I could not give any
treatment to the survivors... What would
happen if a nuclear war should occur now?
Even if you have doctors, even if you have
medicines, human beings are helpless. No
matter how much medicine has improved,
medicine is helpless in the face of atomic
war. It was a hell, an inferno.
// is clear that the number ofpeople who
might ultimately survive a nuclear attack,
to say nothing of the physical recovery of
the devastated area, would be crucially
dependent upon help from the outside. But
what if the attack were not an isolated one
against a single city? What if tens, or hun¬
dreds of major metropolitan areas were
devastated by nuclear weapons? Ifthis hap¬
pened the chances for rebuilding anything
resembling our present society would be
slim.
The chaos that would accompany such
an attack is almost inconceivable. Even if
only a handful of cities were struck initial¬
ly, it would cause an overwhelming panic.
Every urban dweller would assume that his
city would be the next target, turmoil
would come as people fled to the coun-
46

tryside. In some regions, like the American
West, many refugees could be accom¬
modated. In areas like the American Nor¬
theast, however, or most parts of the Soviet
Union, during winter, the evacuations of
cities would have terrible consequences.
Winds would spread the fall-out over crop
lands and river basins. What would be safe
to eat, or to drink? In some regions the ur¬
ban evacuees would be met by a hostile
rural population. Even the central political
authorities, to the extent that they survived,
would be uncertain about the status or well-
being of other parts of the country.
The reports from Hiroshima and
Nagasaki reveal that the instinctive reaction
of many of the victims was to protect
themselves by leaving the bombed areas as
quickly as possible. Children abandoned
parents, husbands left wives. Only one
bond remained intact mothers would not
be parted from their children. Undoubted-,
ly, amid this disturbance and upheaval,
some would find unknown sources of
Could mankind survive a
nuclear war?
strength and character. But would this be
enough to resist the general chaos, to
counter the terror of those whose lives and
minds had been torn asunder, first by the
explosions themselves, and later by the
after-effects of illness, disfigurement, in¬
security, and the destruction of family,
home, and everything familiar?
There is no satisfactory way to answer
this question. But official US estimates of
American fatalities in the event of a large-
scale nuclear attack, assuming no effective
measures of civil defence, range from 105
to 165 million. Comparable estimates of
Soviet fatalities range between 50 and 100
million. In both cases, it can be assumed
that virtually the entire economic in¬
frastructure would have been destroyed.
Under such conditions, those who op¬
timistically predict a return to ordinary life
within one generation are naïve. More
realistic is the conclusion by the US Office
of Technology Assessment that a nuclear
attack involving thousands of warheads,
"would place in question whether the
United States (or the Soviet Union) would
ever recover its position as an organized,
workable, and powerful country".
A meeting of distinguished doctors from
East and West was more pessimistic. They
concluded that an all-out nuclear exchange
between the United States and the Soviet
Union would immediately kill some 200
million men, women, and children. Sbcty
million more would be injured, of whom 30
million would suffer from radiation
sickness, 20 million would experience
trauma and burns, and another 10 million
would be affected by all three afflictions.
At the same time, 80 per cent of the doc¬
tors would have been killed and a similar
percentage of hospital beds destroyed.
Stores of blood plasma, morphine, anti¬
biotics, and intravenous fluids also would
have been destroyed. The report concluded:
The fabric of society would disintegrate
and the medical care system, deprived of
the facilities developed over the years,
would revert to the level of earlier cen¬
turies. The surviving walking wounded,
physicians and laymen alike, could only
provide what mutual comfort the remnants
of their individual humanity would permit.
The earth will be seared, the skies heavy
with lethal concentrations of radioactive
particles, and no response to medical needs
could be expected from medicine.
Not only would the US and USSR suffer.
For example, climatic changes would be
likely. The vast amount of polluting dust
drawn into the atmosphere would cool the
air by as much as one degree centigrade. A
large proportion of the world's wheat
stocks are kept at high latitudes. If these
stocks were destroyed and the American,
Canadian and Russian farmlands con¬
taminated, many countries would suffer
famine on a wide scale.
More than this, the supply ofagricultural
machinery, pesticides, and fertilizers that
now are exported by the industrialized
countries would cease. The fruits of
agricultural research would no longer be
available. For many Third World coun¬
tries, crop yields would fall dramatically,
turning even those countries that are
presently self-sufficient into nations with a
potential for famine.
The world in the 1980s is far more com¬
plex than it was even a generation ago.
Trade has grown rapidly, interdependence
is intimate and ubiquitous. Without the
ability to sell oil and other raw materials,
textiles and machinery, without being able
to import trucks, tractors, tools, fuel, and
pharmaceuticals, industry and agriculture
in the developing nations would grind to a
halt. In many areas, the developing world is
like Europe a generation ago, with large ur¬
ban populations and complex industrial
needs. Without trade it would sink.
Without the fabric of international finan¬
cial exchange, all nations, both rich and
poor, developed and developing, would
shrink to subsistence.
In a world undergoing such fast,
tumultuous and all-embracing destruction
it would be difficult for any society to
avoid its consequences. One cannot guess
at the degree ofsocial and political disrup¬
tion, and the breakdown of communica¬
tions would only add to rumour, feeding
the seeds of fear, breeding despair and
changing human life in a way and at a
speed that is almost unimaginable.
No past war can help us understand the
impact of a nuclear war. In the Second
World War, despite the astronomical
death-toll and appalling barbarism, there
was no massive breakdown of society or
morale. Air raids on cities and industries
rarely caused damage and disruption that
could not be bypassed in a few days. In¬
dividuals suffered, ofcourse, but for many
"life laughed and moved on unsubdued".
An all-out nuclear war would create a
degree of chaos and confusion for which
humanity is totally unprepared, and for
which it can never prepare. It could mean
the end of life itself.
This article has been extracted from "The Conse¬
quences of War", chapter 3 of The Report of the In¬
dependent Commission on Disarmament and Security
Issues under the Chairmanship of Olof Palme. The
members of the Commission were: Chairman: Olof
Palme (Sweden); Giorgi Arbatov (USSR!; Egon Bahr
(Federal Republic of Germany!; Gro Harlem Brundt/and
(Norway); Josef Cyrankiewicz (Poland); Jean-Marie
Dai/let (France); Robert A. D. Ford (Canada); Alfonso
Garcia-Robles (Mexico); Haruki Mori (Japan); C. B.
Muthamma (India); Olusegun Obasan/o (Nigeria); David
Owen (United Kingdom/; Shridath Ramphal (Guyana);
Salim Salim (Tanzania); Soedjatmoko (Indonesia);
Joop den Uyl (Netherlands); Cyrus Vance (USA). The
Report has been published, in English, under the title
Common Security: A Programme for Disarmament.
Text copyright © ICDSI, publishers Pan Books, Ltd.,
London.
O lord! War is evil and barbaric. War,
I Abhorred by mothers, fills men's hearts with fury.
I While war holds sway, who will sow the seed?
Who will harvest the ears of corn that June has ripened to gold?
Antonio Machado
(1875-1939)
3èr: ' " £S
Bitter harvest.
France.
Drawing © André Paris, Fontenouille,
47
