CULTURAL DIVERSITY
AND
THE MASS MEDIA
In praise
of mother tongues
by Chingiz Aïtmatov
Astriking feature of Daghestan is the
great number of languages to be
found there. With typical humour,
mour, the Soviet poet Rasul Gamzatov,
himself a native of this mountainous coun¬
try in the north-east Caucasus, explains
why. When the Creator was distributing
languages, a snowstorm was blowing in
Daghestan; in a hurry to be on his way, he
emptied a whole sackful over its people!
It is certainly true that until comparatively
recently, the inhabitants of Daghestan, who
all shared much the same way of life in
neighbouring valleys, were separated by
linguistic differences so great that they
might have been living on different con¬
tinents. Every aul, or village, had its own
local tongue; none in any way resembled
the others.
But no alphabet in the world offered
characters that could be used to transcribe
all the languages of Daghestan. And when,
at the beginning of the Soviet period, at¬
tempts were made to adapt the Russian
CULTURAL DIVERSITY
Various cultures can be identified within a graded social structure from the tribal level
through rural life to urban groups and the urban élite. Superimposed on this there can even
exist a multiplicity of cultures within a political structure, from area to area within national
boundaries and from country to country within a region.
Story-time in the Philippines. Photo A.P. Garcia, Unesco.
alphabet for this purpose, ¡t proved neces¬
sary to add new characters and combina¬
tions of characters to transform speech into
writing.
Today, the people of Daghestan, num¬
bering some two million, speak altogether
more than thirty different languages;
newspapers and literary periodicals appear
in five of them; seven may be heard on the
stage of the national theatres; and books
are published in nine. The country's poets
write not only in the Avar language which,
although the Avarians themselves number
no more than 400,000, is the most
widespread tongue, but also in the language
of the Tats, of whom there are only 15,000,
and even in a language spoken by only 2,000
people.
Unless one is directly involved, the prob¬
lems of the so-called "minority peoples",
who may be found in many different corners
of the world, may well appear to be of little
consequence. But the preoccupations of
the tiniest community can in fact be as
serious, as important and even as alarming
to its members as the collective concerns of
multi-million populations.
This is especially true when it comes to
cultural survival, and more particularly the
survival of language, since a people without
a tongue of its own is a people whose self-
esteem is undermined. Language is not only
the keystone of a nation's culture; it is also
the means by which that culture can
develop.
The language of any people is a unique
phenomenon, a product of its own brand of
creativity; the loss of a people's language is
the loss of its life-blood. To preserve those
which have survived is a duty, for they form
part of the heritage of all mankind.
The world lives in an environment of
language, and the linguistic ecosphere is as
complex and fragile as the natural one.
Pragmatism may be a useful attitude to
adopt when dealing with machines, but this
is not the case where nature and culture are
concerned.
It is true, nonetheless, that "major"
languages tend to displace or absorb those
which are only spoken by a few. However
ardently it may be expressed, any argument
in favour of integration which implies a loss
of national values or of cultural identity
must be received with caution, because it
distorts the issue. To unite profitably,
peoples and cultures must be in some way^
35

different from each other, in some way
dissimilar. The absence of originality makes
mutual enrichment impossible; indeed it
removes the need to unite.
I am deeply convinced that there exists a
real possibility of conserving existing minori¬
ty languages and creating the conditions for
their active participation in new patterns of
spiritual and material existence, as well as
an atmosphere in which they themselves
can develop either through their own inner
evolution or through the direct and indirect
influence and example of cultures conveyed
by other languages. The experience of my
own country, Kirghizia, confirms this con¬
viction, as does that of the hundred and
more nations, peoples and ethnic groups
which exactly sixty years ago freely
decided to join in a single State, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics.
At that already distant time, the countries
which lay on the fringe of the former Rus¬
sian Empire were faced with a choice. Were
they to opt for a single, highly-developed
language, i.e. Russian, or to decide on co¬
existence, i.e. the use of Russian as a major
language, but with the parallel development
of their own national tongues?
The easiest and most obvious solution
would have been for them to adopt Russian
and, setting concern with their national
cultures aside, to begin building the future
on the solid literary and scientific founda¬
tions which that language offered.
Such a simple choice must have been
tempting. But did it not imply the atrophy of
their own cultures? Would it not inhibit the
development of those cultures in accor¬
dance with the spirit of the times? And last
but not least, would not such a choice run
counter to the process of creating infinite
complexity and variety which is a welcome
characteristic of human history? In
mankind's storehouse of culture, who
would be bold enough to say, "this must be
kept at all costs, but this can be cast aside"?
The matter was one which required
thought, and the careful weighing of pros
and cons. And if the choice of a language
obviously depends on there being alter¬
natives to choose from, a question of civic
duty is also involved: the duty of the in¬
dividual towards his people the source not
only of his existence but also of his most
precious possession, his language.
A mother tongue is, in its turn, a source
of ceaseless wonder. The language which
we hear and learn in childhood is the only
one which is capable of carrying into our
hearts and minds the poetry of our people's
existence and experience, of igniting in us
the first flame of national pride and of con¬
veying to us the sheer, aesthetic pleasure of
words honed and polished by our ancestors.
At the same time, it should be pointed
out and my own experience confirms
this that a child is capable of acquiring
equal mastery of two languages, and
possibly even more, provided that they are
presented in an identical manner from the
very beginning. In my own case Russian is
no less a mother tongue than Kirghiz; I grew
up with both, and both will remain with me
for the rest of my days.
In the early days of the USSR, it became
clear that the cultural development of the
family of nations which comprised the
Soviet Union could not take place without
reference to cultures which were already
more advanced. After all, more than a third
of those nations had no printed literature of
their own. And this is why the second of the
options mentioned above was preferred.
The challenge was greater, but so was the
prize.
One of the results is that when we speak
today of "Soviet literature", we are in reality
speaking of more than eighty different na¬
tional literatures. The adoption of the princi¬
ple that wherever more than one language is
used for ethnic reasons or for administrative
purposes, those languages shall be accord¬
ed equal treatment, has fully justified itself.
Let me say a word here about the role of
the Russian language which has made it
possible, for the first time in history, to
establish creative links between peoples
who, not so long ago, were unaware of
each other's existence; between peoples
who were on significantly different rungs on
the ladder of civilization; whose cultural and
social histories, like their customs and tradi¬
tions, had little in common; whose
languages were mutually incomprehensible.
If Russian has become the language of
communication between the many peoples
of the USSR, the language of the new
civilization and of cultural co-operation, this
is firstly because it is the language of the
most numerous nation in the Union, and
secondly, because it has adapted and
enriched itself through contact with all the
other languages. Thus, it has become the
second language of non-Russian peoples in
all the national republics and administrative
regions of the USSR; eighty- two per cent of
the entire population speak it fluently.
It is now possible to say that for the first
time in the history of mankind, a single
State has created a multilingual culture,
drawing on all that is best in the cultures of
its majority and minority nations alike and at
the same time conserving their specific na¬
tional characteristics, manner of thinking
and ways of life.
It is a culture which is simultaneously
universal, internationalist and kaleido-
scopically national. Its internationalism does
not imply, as has been mistakenly claimed,
the replacement of national cultures by a
uniform stereotype, but rather the com¬
prehensive development of all the different
national cultures and languages within the
context of a single social ideal.
We may contrast this process with the
levelling and the erosion of national values
which are still to be found, alas, in other
parts of the world and which give rise to
natural concern for the future of world
culture. There is, I believe, an important
humanist and moral lesson to be drawn
CULTURAL DIVERSITY. It is essential that all linguistic, ethnic and
cultural groups be accorded their rightful place in society. Often a
minority group within a country has a great deal to offer by way of
values to the majority groups within the same nation.
Ultima Cena, by the Italian artist Mario Ceroli. Photo © Galleria Na-
zionale d'Arte Moderna, Rome.
36

from the fact that the integration of the
cultures of the socialist peoples leads
neither to a loss of identity nor to the disap¬
pearance of differences, but rather to their
mutual enrichment and further growth. In¬
deed, it permits the disclosure of the poten¬
tial of the peoples concerned, of the untap¬
ped resources which each nation possesses
as a result of the spiritual and historical
experience acquired throughout its long
existence.
Needless to say, the process has not been
a simple one. Our experience has been ac¬
quired at the price of enormous and
sometimes agonizing efforts; the quest for
new patterns of creative thought, and for a
dialectical theory of existence, has involved
a tireless journey along hitherto unmapped
paths; we have had to overcome many
obstacles remaining from the past, and to
endure considerable growing pains.
The development of a huge multinational
State like the USSR has inevitably been ac¬
companied by the successive emergence of
new processes and problems where the
relations between nations are concerned.
Suffice it to say in this connexion that re¬
cent years have seen a significant increase,
in many of the Soviet Republics, in the
number of non-indigenous citizens, who
have specific claims to make where ques¬
tions of language, culture and life-style are
concerned.
At the same time, the frontiers of national
life-styles are . constantly expanding.
Moreover, the conditions of everyday life
are changing so rapidly that it sometimes
happens that what were long considered to
be specifically national concerns disappear
from their original, limited context only to
re-emerge as cultural obstructions to
general progress.
When we speak of the national par¬
ticularities which distinguish us from each
other, we do not always take account of the
many features which draw us together: our
common destiny, our common background
and our common age. The world we live in,
the way we live now and, above all, the way
we think: surely this is what should be set
against our differences?
Where the Soviet peoples are concerned,
the greatest changes have occurred in their
attitudes, psychology and behaviour. To
whatever national entity we belong, there
are now many circumstances in our lives in
which our attitudes, assessments,
judgements and standards are the same;
and this can only be beneficial to our na¬
tional cultures. Provided, of course, that
this new raison d'être can find expression in
our own languages, it is to be welcomed as
a means of extending and enriching our
own cultures and of broadening their
horizons.
And this is indeed what is happening. As
we explore more and more thoroughly the
features of what we call "national
character", as we learn to look at modern
life through modern eyes, the notion of
nationality itself takes on a contemporary
colouring.
But what would happen if we did the op¬
posite, if we withdrew like hermits into our^
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Science and technologyform an integral
part of contemporary culture, even
though the uncontrolled development
of certain techniques (mass media, new
audio-visual techniques, telematics,
nuclear systems) must be seen as involv¬
ing undeniable risks. The dialectical
relation between culture and technique
is a particularly delicate problem since
science and technology carry with them
cultural features that belong to their
societies of origin. This does not in any
way mean that they should be rejected
systematically, as they are absolutely
necessary for economic and social
development. However, their dissem¬
ination and use must be controlled by
the countries using them and developed
in forms that are adapted by the scien¬
tists and technicians of these countries
to the traditions and problems of their
own cultures and to the actual needs of
the people.
A "happening" staged at the nuclear
waste treatment plant at La Hague,
France, to denounce the dangers incur¬
red by technicians working in the
nuclear industry. Photo Michel
Lambert © Gamma, Paris.
37

own shells? The effect would surely be to
reduce our culture to a mere shadow of
itself, to a pseudo-culture which, at best,
would give only a one-sided picture of our
national character.
To shut oneself off from intercourse with
other cultures, especially if the latter are at a
more advanced stage of development, is to
deprive oneself of the means of one's own
development. Reduced to an end in itself,
"originality" can only lead to isolation, to
national narrow-mindedness; it can only
obstruct the passage of national values
beyond national boundaries.
It goes without saying that cultural ex¬
change leads to cultural change. Interaction
between national cultures involves mutual
enrichment and emancipation from in¬
fluences which have outlived their time. For
some strange reason, the term "national
culture" is almost always pronounced with,
so to speak, a backward glance over our
shoulder in the direction of the past,
whereas creative thought has at all times
been a reflection of the current spiritual
state of the society in question. The
originality of a nation is not merely to be
found in the sum total of the characteristics
inherited during its history, in what has sur¬
vived and withstood the passage of time; it
is also to be found here and now, in the
product of its contemporary activities and
concerns.
If I have dwelt at such length on this mat¬
ter, it is because the question of national
cultures has become in recent years the
subject of worldwide controversy. The in¬
dividual characteristics of a nation are what
makes its culture a unique phenomenon.
Close contact with one's native land, with
one's people and with the most vital prob¬
lems of their daily life constitutes the very
life-blood of a nation's culture; at the same
time, it helps to extend the horizons of that
culture beyond national boundaries,
because, in so many ways, all peoples'
perceptions of the world are the same. This
is why, where culture is concerned, "na¬
tional" and "international" should never be
set in opposition to one another.
Of course, it is not surprising that in cer¬
tain intellectual circles, in Asia or in Africa,
for example, there exists a sentiment of pre¬
judice against Eurocentrism, against the
European way of thought and the European
civilization which they associate with col¬
onial domination and the belittlement of
their own national values. Nevertheless,
progressive African and Asian intellectuals
have long been engaged in the effort to use
the European experience for the enrichment
of their own national cultures, seeing that
experience as part of the universal heritage
of mankind.
I agree with the observation by the
Bengali critic Sarvar Murshid that every
culture must now decide whether to see
itself as an integral part of world culture as a
whole, or as a "great" culture, if only within
its own four walls. As I have already remark¬
ed, excessive self-importance leads to isola¬
tion and, eventually, to dogmatism. It is
quite understandable, however, why this
question is a particularly painful one for Asia
and Africa to resolve: the real threat
of ethnocide has only recently begun
to diminish.
Today, the many people of those two
enormous continents have to decide on the
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Successful development does not
depend solely on material means and techniques. It is also important
that the individuals and groups who are the agents of development
should be convinced that they will themselves be the beneficiaries of it.
Economic growth, which is admittedly the key to all development,
then ceases to be an end in itself. It becomes a means whereby the
needs of all may be satisfied, including an opportunity for the full
development of the individual. Thus culturalpolicies and development
policies merge in their reciprocal effects.
Left, Renaissance perspective exercise in how to draw a chalice, and,
right, rotation of the DNA spiral, the molecular basis of inheritance,
from a computer-graphic display. Photo © All rights reserved.
38

means to be employed in resolving the issue
of not only their political and social, but also
their cultural development. The attainment
of political independence poses with con¬
siderable urgency the question of creating
appropriate new forms of economic and
cultural existence, without which in¬
dependence itself will prove to have been a
sterile gain.
"East is East, and West is West..." said
Kipling. But this was poetic licence; history
and culture alike disprove his claim that
"never the twain shall meet". Recent
decades have seen social upheavals on a
scale matched only in biology and geology,
and within an incredibly shorter time span.
The developing countries are still at a stage
when cultural progress will depend above all
on success in their efforts to achieve social
development and to resolve their social
problems.
Thoughts, things and images, as well as
individual destinies and collective histories,
already formed a motley crowd on the
highways of existence when the peoples of
the world lived hidden away in isolation
from each other. Today, whether the strug¬
gle to preserve it intact is conducted in
political or cultural terms, the world is in¬
divisible. International cultural and scientific
collaboration may be seen as part of
the effort to remove tensions between
peoples an effort in which our own share
is second to none.
A new historical period has dawned, and
the first step along the new road has been
accomplished. The peoples of the world
have shown that they are capable of setting
aside the differences between States,
societies and nations in the attempt to find a
common approach to the problems of all
mankind, and, most important of all, the
issue of peace and war.
We are united in our awareness of collec¬
tive responsibility for the fate of human
culture and of civilization in its^entirety, and
for the moral climate of our planet. Does
this not entitle us to proclaim boldly that
now is the moment to choose the directions
in which mankind is to develop? Our respon¬
sibility in this matter is all the more enor¬
mous, in that we cannot leave the decisions
for tomorrow. For tomorrow itself to arrive
will depend in no small measure on what we
can achieve today.
H Chingiz Aïtmatov
