
Human Rights
are universal
The individuality and independence ofa culture
must start uith the equality of man
by Yoshikazu Sakamoto
ALTHOUGH the universal dimension
of the concept of human rights is
today generally accepted without
question the declaration adopted in 1948
by an overwhelming majority of United Na¬
tions Member States was, after all, entitled
the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights it must be recognized that in certain
of its aspects this concept is the product of
Western civilization. When, towards the end
of the nineteenth century, Japan began to
"modernize" and a number of new political
and legislative notions were introduced to
the country, no word existed in Japanese for
"human rights" and a new term had to be
invented. This is just one example of a non-
Western cultural tradition in which no
equivalent of this concept existed.
This startling contrast points immediately
to the problem inherent in the universaliza-
tion of such a concept. Clearly, the penetra-
YOSHIKAZU SAKAMOTO, of Japan, is Pro¬
fessor of International Politics at the Faculty of
Law, University of Tokyo. He is the author of
many articles on problems of international rela¬
tions, disarmament and peace, and of several
books including Peace Its Realities and
Research IMainichi Press, Tokyo, 1976). Since
1979 he has been Secretary General of the Inter¬
national Peace Research Association.
tion of the non-Western world by this
Western concept was brought about under
the influence of Western colonialism. In
other words, the "right of equality", which
is one of the fundamental human rights, was
propagated throughout the non-Western
world within the context of a flagrantly un¬
equal, dominator/dominated relationship.
This paradoxical situation evoked two
kinds of reaction in the non-Western world.
The first of these was to take advantage of
this notion of the "right to equality" and,
using it as a lever, to criticize, indeed to rise
up against the reality of Western domina¬
tion. This was an effective way of showing
up the contradictions in the Western stand¬
point, but it also implied acceptance of
Western values, a situation that involved
other contradictions. Furthermore, even if
this kind of reasoning was more or less ac¬
ceptable to the often Western-educated
élites in the developing countries, it was not
necessarily effective in mobilizing the sup¬
port of the peoples of these countries.
The second form of reaction 'which
became apparent in a number of Third
World countries was more firmly rooted in
the general public. This was an out and out
nationalism which denied the universality of
Western values and, exalting traditional in¬
digenous values, attempted to strengthen
and preserve its own political and cultural
existence.
Although such an affirmation of popular
sentiment has its positive aspects, going
beyond mere rejection of Western cultural
domination, just like the affirmation of the
universality of Western values it also has its
dangers. An extreme example is the ex¬
istence in certain developing countries of
governmental policies that are repressive vis-
à-vis human rights. In face of pressure from
Western countries and from international
organizations anxious to defend the univer¬
sality of human rights, it is to be expected
that a reaction of rejection should set in
against a concept considered to be both
Western and ill-adapted to the realities of
national life. The notions of "in¬
dependence" and "non-interference in in¬
ternal affairs" are distorted and used to
counter outside pressures in defence of
human rights.
Thus, just as the Western notion of
universality was often used for political ends
to rationalize colonial domination, it is quite
common to find the notion of non-Western
specificity being used by those who hold the
reins of power to justify their domination of
the people. In other words, both Western
"universalism" and non-Western "speci¬
ficity" are capable of being distorted in such
52

Three things sustain man in this world: sowing, harvesting, eating.
Wolof proverb
Preparing the ground in Tanzania. Photo International Labour Office, Geneva.
53

^. a way as to prevent international application
of human rights.
Today this problem has become more
acute than ever. Never before has the princi¬
ple of the rights of man been so widely
disseminated. And never before have the
peoples of the non-Western world been so
eager in their search for their own identity or
so positive in their affirmation of their in¬
dependence and their cultural originality.
In stressing their diversity and their
cultural originality, even where human
rights are concerned, non-Western societies
are also underlining the difference that ex¬
ists between their way of thinking and that
of the West. Examination of the place of
women in society, for example, reveals that
many cultures attach great importance to
the distinctions between the social roles of
men and women. In some societies too, true
wisdom is held to be the adjunct of the
gerontocracy, and the young, even those
that show promise, can never attain the
status of decision-makers.
Relationships between the individual and
the group also vary. In many societies loyal¬
ty to the group or the organization takes
precedence over the rights of the individual,
in contrast to the idea prevalent in Western
societies that groups or organizations owe.
their existence to acts of free will on the parti
of the individuals who compose them and I
that they are therefore a means of expressing |
the rights of the individual.
Again, there are many societies with a sort
of dualistic structure in which the laws and
constitution uphold the Western-style no¬
tions of the universality of human rights
whereas social rules and customs keep alive
Does the logic of cultural
relativism imply denial of the
universality of human rights?
traditional indigenous standards of value.
This dualism merits deeper analysis. On the
one hand, many non-Western cultures un¬
doubtedly have specific values which can
neither be assessed nor explained in terms of
Western criteria; on the other hand, there is
the danger that, in the name of these speci¬
fic values, authoritarian oppression and
violation of human rights will become
entrenched.
One approach, which has come to be
known as cultural relativism, involves
recognition of the specific values of each
culture and rejection of the notion of a
hierarchical scale of values. This line of
thought has done much to undermine the
concept of a world centred on Europe, that
is to say the presupposition of the superiori¬
ty of European culture. But if the basic
reasoning of cultural relativism were to be
taken to its logical conclusion, it would, it
might be thought, lead to anarchy in world
value systems. If this were the case, a univer¬
sal system of values based on rejection of
the violation of human rights by the ar¬
bitrary exercise of power, would have no
raison d'être.
This might lead one to think that the logic
of cultural relativism leads inevitably to
denial of the universality of human rights.
But is this really the case? A deeper analysis
of the meaning of cultural relativism gives
quite another picture.
Underlying cultural relativism, with its re¬
jection of cultural imperialism, is the notion
that cultures should be classified not in a
hierarchy with Western culture at the head,
but as separate systems possessing equal
values. Why this affirmation of the equality
of different cultures? Is it not because every
culture is based on man and our starting
point is that all men have equal rights? If we
accept the argument that the equality of
cultures is based on the equality of men, we
can only accept this equality of cultures if it
is based on recognition by the different
cultures of the equality of men. In other
words, cultures, with all their relativity and
specificity, are fundamentally equal.
The subjects of earlier tyrannies recognized
their slavery in the overt controls which
restricted their physical movements, and by
the terror which the minions of authority
inspired in them, whereas the citizens ofthe
future, manipulated at the very sources of
their being, may love their servitude and
call it freedom.
William Leiss
Automatons. Drawing by Guillotin ©
Encre Libre, Paris.
54

When a culture denies the fundamental
equality of men, that is to say the equality of
the rights of men, it lays itself open to inter¬
national criticism. It is, of course, desirable
for this equality to find expression, to take
material shape in the most widely diverse
forms freely chosen by the members of each
society. But this diversity must always be
based on the first premiss of equal rights.
The individuality and independence of a
culture must take as its starting point the
equality of men. And this universal equality
of men, from which spring cultural in¬
dependence and diversity, is one and the
same thing as the universality of the rights
of man. B Yoshikazu Sakamoto
The ideal condition for mankind
is one in which no one is rich, no
one wants to become richer, and
no one is afraid of being left
behind by those who are striving
to advance.
John Stuart Mill
(1806-1873)
Stairway to the stars. Draw¬
ing © Gourmelin, Paris.
55
