A HUNDRED YEARS
OF JAMES JOYCE
by Anthony Burgess
ANTHONY BURGESS is a prolific British writer of novels and non-fiction who is
currently at work on his 45th book. His long-standing interest in James Joyce, who
has strongly influenced his work, led him to write a study which was published in
the United States under the title Re Joyce (Norton, 1965) and in the UK as Here
Comes Everybody (Faber 1965). He is also the editor ofA Shorter Finnegans Wake
(Faber, 1965; Viking, 1967). A composer as well as a writer, his Broadway musical
version of Ulysses, The Blooms of Dublin, was presented on the centenary of
Joyce's birthday, 2 February 1982.
Above, Joyce photograph¬
ed in 1938, three years
before his death.
Right, portrait of the artist
as a young man. Joyce
was 22 years old when this
photo was taken by his
Dublin friend C.P. Curran
in 1904, a crucial year in the
great author's life. It was
16 June 1904 that he chose
as what is known as
"Bloomsday" (the day on
which the events of his
novel Ulysses take place),
and in October of that year
he took the decisive step
of leaving Ireland to settle
in Trieste. - Asked later
what he was thinking
when Curran photograph¬
ed him, Joyce replied: "I
was wondering would he
lend me five shillings."
28

QRAFT0trST.DUBi-l*l.~r03.Vl.t.. t?
Text © Copyright: Reproduction prohibited Photo Lawrence Collection © National Library, Dublin
LET me begin by assuming, or perhaps
merely pretending, that you do not
know anything about James Joyce.
If you already know something, you are
welcome to yawn over the following basic
information. James Joyce was an Irishman
born in Dublin on 2 February 1882. Other
great writers have been born in the Irish
capital, including Oscar Wilde, Bernard
Shaw and Samuel Beckett, to say nothing of
the great poet William Butler Yeats. But it is
usual for a great Dublin writer to be Protes¬
tant, while James Joyce was a Catholic.
Dublin, though the capital of a Catholic
country, had been a British colonial capital
for so long that the religion of the Church of
England was the religion of the educated,
the rulers, the upper class, the Dublin
establishment. Joyce was not of the upper
class, which is another way of saying that he
was a Catholic.
He was educated by Jesuits, who have
always provided the most thorough and
rigorous education of all the Catholic
teaching bodies, and it was intended that he
should become a Catholic priest. But in his
late adolescence he decided to rebel against
everything that he had been taught was
holythe Catholic Church, the holy land of
Ireland, the Irish language, the struggle for
Irish independence from the imperial
British, and even the close bonds of the
family. When his mother was dying he
refused to kneel down and pray for her.
"I do not think any writer has yet
presented Dublin to the world," Joyce
wrote in 1905. Although he never returned
to Ireland after a visit in 1912, the people
and places of his native city remained the
raw material of his art. His portrayals of
Dublin life reveal meticulous attention to
detail. Above, period photo of Grafton
Street which, in Ulysses, "Gay with hous¬
ed awnings lured [Bloom's] senses.
Muslin prints, silk, dames and Dowagers,
jingle of harnesses hoofthuds lowringing
in the baking causeway."
Losing his faith in country, family, and
religion, he sought a new faith a faith in
art. He became one of the first writers in the
English language to regard the making of
literature as a religious activity. The poet or
the novelist was a kind of priest. His task
was to take ordinary everyday experience
and convert it into the shining material of
art. This is very like the priest's taking bread
and turning it into the body and blood of
Jesus Christ the central act of the celebra¬
tion of the Catholic mass.
He left Ireland in 1904, together with an
illiterate girl who had been working as a ser¬
vant in a Dublin hotel, and went to teach
English in Trieste, the Adriatic port which
used to be part of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire but which is now part of Italy. There
Italian became the language of his home and
the first language of his children. These
childrenGiorgio and Luciawere il
legitimate, since Joyce refused to be mar¬
ried. Marriage was a Catholic sacrament,
and he had rejected Catholicism. When the
war of 1914-18 broke out, he removed his
family to Zürich in neutral Switzerland. At
the end of that war he took them to Paris,
where he lived for the rest of his working
life.
In 1940, with all his books written and a
new war raging, he sought refuge in Zürich
again, and in the following year he died. By
this time he was regarded as the most daring
experimental writer in the world. Forty-one
years after his death he is considered to be
one of the great classical writers like
Dante, Shakespeare and Goethe. Why?
Joyce wrote very few books. He produced
two little volumes of undistinguished verse,
a mediocre stage play, and three novels. The
first novel is called A Portrait of the Artist
as a Young Man and is about the author's
own upbringing in Catholic Dublin. It is
remarkable for the brilliance of its writing
and for the frankness with which Joyce
displays the growth of a young mind and
body, with all the sexual and moral prob¬
lems which a sensitive young Irish Catholic
might be expected to suffer. Joyce found it
extremely difficult to have this novel ac¬
cepted by a publisher. No publisher could
understand this new way of writing, and the
candour of its revelations was too much for
that non-permissive age the period of the
First World War. In 1922 Joyce produced
his great masterpiece Ulysses, and it is this
29

When Henri Matisse agreed to illustrate Ulysses in 1934 for a special
American edition, Joyce went to great lengths to make sure that he
got the Irish details right. However, Matisse went his own way.
When asked why his drawings bore so little relation to the book he
frankly admitted that he had not read it. He had based them on
Homer's Odyssey. Above, Matisse's lithograph of the Nausicaa
episode.
I* h*-+i*lt**¿¡-
Joyce drawn by the Rumanian
sculptor Constantin Brancusi.
Photo © Lockwood Memorial Library, State University
of New York at Buffalo, USA
Joyce himself drew this caricature of the hero of Ulysses, Leopold
Bloom, in the 1920s. The Greek text is the opening of Homer's
Odyssey "Tell me. Muse, of the man of many devices..."
book which has ensured his acceptance
as the greatest novelist of the twentieth
century.
We must note one curious fact. When
Joyce left Ireland in 1904 he determined
never to return, and he never did, except for
two very brief visits to Dublin. He lived all
his life as an exile from his native city and
yet he wrote about nothing but the people of
that city. Ulysses is a very long book, and
yet it restricts itself to the activities of a
single day in Dublin16 June 1904. It has a
hero, whose name is Leopold Bloom. He is
half-Jewish and he works as an advertising
canvasser for a newspaper which still exists
called The Freeman's Journal. An advertis¬
ing canvasser is a man who persuades shops
and other business enterprises to place
advertisements in newspapers. Bloom is
married to an Irishwoman brought up in
Gibraltar. Her name is Molly and she is a
well-known Dublin singer, and she is also
unfaithful to her husband. At four o'clock
in the afternoon she commits adultery with
Blazes Boylan, the man who is going to take
charge of her forthcoming tour of Ireland in
a series of song recitals. She and Bloom live
together, but something has gone wrong in
their marriage. They had a little son called
Rudy or Rudolph (after Bloom's father),
and he died a few days after his birth. They
both feel guilty about this, though it is
nobody's fault, and they are shy of sex.
Bloom has a strong desire to be the father of
a son. What happens on 16 June 1904 is that
he finds a son.
This son is James Joyce himself at the age
of twenty-two, under the guise of a young
poet named Stephen Dedalus. Stephen
30

Joyce worked for over 16
years on his last book Fin¬
negans Wake, "a night view
of man's life", which was
published in May 1939. As its
composition went ahead, he
published parts of the new
novel in magazines under
the title "Work in Progress."
Below, page proof, heavily
corrected by Joyce, of part
of* "Work in Progress"
prepared for publication in
the avant-garde literary
review transition. Right,
Aux Fenêtres du Fleuve ("At
the windows of the river",
1972) is a work by the French
artist Jean Lancri inspired
by the letters of "Riverrun",
the first word of Finnegans
Wake.
Photo © Jean Lancri, Meaux
spends the evening getting drunk in the
brothel district of Dublin. Bloom is worried
about him and tries to extricate him from a
fight with two British soldiers. He has, in
other words, a paternal attitude towards
him. He takes him home, gives him a cup of
cocoa, and suggests that he take up lodgings
with the Blooms. We don't know whether
Stephen does or not. The book ends before
anything is decided. All we know is that
contact has been made between an ordinary
Dublin man who, because he is half-Jewish,
feels himself to be a stranger in a Catholic
city, and a young Irish intellectual. Molly
Bloom, of course, dreams of taking Stephen
as a lover. A new pattern of relationships is
being formed in three lives, and that is what
the book is about.
It is not much of a story, you will say.
Nothing much happens. It is not a spy
thriller or a tale of love. But what it certainly
is is a representation of human life as it is
really lived. Joyce has invented a technique
known as the interior monologue, which lets
us into the minds of his characters and
allows us to hear their innermost thoughts
and desires. As some of these desires are sex¬
ual, and are expressed very frankly, Ulysses
got into trouble with the -state censors of
various countries, and there are still coun¬
tries where you can't get hold of the book.
There is no reticence at all in the kind of
language the characters use in their thinking
and feeling, and this frankness still shocks
readers more accustomed to romances and
thrillers than to true literature. After all, it is
the duty of literature to tell the truth about
life, and Joyce took this duty with extreme
seriousness.
of bad Friday. Never l> t hog of Un Ufil trample undi ¡loot yotK.
Uly of kiUarney Si vei play lady'« gain** fur the Lord'« »take. Vv«>r>
lose your heart away till you win rúyíjimnuiid l»a< k. Make a -troni;
int of nevt-r kicking up your rompu* in Mi.' J^m Bfy C.oll t>y
Offro/xjs Rungs at,¿ommrrc¡a! trav. lleiV s:n< I i
^__Ü»« <lj»luml>Ig)K nijjhi« pDt«HatHmrnt9 tl*> lik<. of Whit' limln
Oiry noter stop loiïiug. Antf. bv OmM**-**- +t -ymr"tT«'<
U Hin and I hrnjUnuW» "nVrñfííig in I he boT-tjfrirel tli"
" t-TwIcr tlmu «Thtlt not low. I.usl. tliou ^hal< no! i :,
Mevel parle your "brief slays in the men*!, co
ITTTnoi hiilhiiirihr villi your dirty j.» rX buwr
k \»ix Jirst |H'rv.rN^uiijuJùja^i>w* t'y/ .alt pía-
IM »ihrer key throuJtívour (¡ale of «¡il. n «ge. Never / ,
thin i» in HiMl.t/r .pKMv hrwiie ^Uf^MMM
,ome life, Tlii t
jdrlt Itliidarlmrt
'
(TUA ifM.^1
. s,
\r\A-dh>jè,
tKA*-á- yL^,xJi
rvuue \h
any liemondte
ixoÜeci the peril", dial la
© ,
ufa one they j^jct hobbybonica I |
feshroloured panto» iiisladynVtryinj; In
member fbf bitef*« bill'
*¿S&*£
boH theWrtmTTfl ,
,*i^
>**?, 31

But Ulysses is much more than a truthful
account of the innermost thoughts and
desires of a group of Dubliners. The title
refers to the hero of an epic poem by the an¬
cient Greek poet Homer, the Odyssey,
which tells of the adventures of Odysseus, as
the Greeks call him, or Ulysses, as the rest of
us call him, in his attempts to return to his
native island of Ithaca after the Trojan
wars. Ulysses meets giants and nymphs,
magic, storms, enchantments, but he comes
through intact and unharmed through the
exercise of strong will and cunning. In
Joyce's book Leopold Bloom is a modern
Ulysses, all of whose encounters during his
Dublin day are humorously exact counter¬
parts of the adventures of his heroic
prototype.
Joyce is trying to show us that the or¬
dinary man can be heroic, that modern life
is as strange and dangerous as the life
depicted in the ancient epicsbut he shows
us this very comically. Ulysses is a book that
makes us laugh. If Bloom, the new Ulysses,
has comic adventures, the language in which
the book is written has comic adventures
too. Words behave strangely. Other books
are imitated or parodied. One very long
chapter is presented in the form of a fan¬
tastic play, another is a monologue without
punctuation, yet another tries to imitate a
piece of music. This sounds difficult, but it
is really funny, lively and heartening. Joyce
took big risks, as a great author should, but
he produced a big success the most
original novel of the century.
In 1939, just before the outbreak of the
Second World War, Joyce produced his last
book, on which he had spent seventeen
years of hard labourmade all the harder
by increasing difficulty of sight: his eyes
were diseased, and the disease was probably
the result of privation in his early days. The
book is called Finnegans Wake an un¬
translatable title. The word wake means to
be aroused from sleep, but it also means the
Irish custom of holding a drinking party
ES32ES
itf?.Tyjtii
Asked whether Finnegans Wake were a blending of literature and music,
Joyce replied, "No, it's pure music." "But are there not levels of mean¬
ing to be explored?" "No, no" said Joyce, "it's meant to make you
laugh."
over the corpse of a recently deceased
member of the family. Finnegan is the name
of a mythical Irish giant, but it is also the
name of the hero of a New York Irish
song Tim Finnegan, who falls from his
ladder drunk, who appears to be dead, who
has a wake held over his body, but who
springs back to life when a gallon of whisky
is splashed on to him. What Joyce is doing
here is giving us a story of death and resur¬
rection, but all in the form of a dream.
In Ulysses Joyce had exhausted the
literary possibilities of presenting the human
day. In Finnegans Wake he turns to the
human night. His hero, whose name is Ear-
wicker, is an innkeeper in Dublin who goes
to sleep after a busy Saturday night serving
beer and whisky to his customers. In his
dream he re-enacts the whole of human
history, which is always about human sin.
But human sin presupposes human energy,-
and the great sinners, from Adam and Eve
to Adolf Hitler, have all been concerned
with building new human societies. Man
falls, but man's fall is cyclical, and in a circle
to fall is also to rise again. Human history is
circular, in that the same things. recur over
and over again, and Earwicker's dream, in
which he takes the roles of all the great
figures of history and myth, has no beginn¬
ing and no end. What makes Finnegans
Wake an exceptionally difficult book is the
language in which it is written.
Joyce believed that the language of dream
should be a universal language, because
dreaming man transcends nationality and
the national language he has been taught to
speak. So Joyce fabricated an appropriate
idiom for his universal dream by taking all
the languages of Europe and mixing them
together. His language is appropriate to a
kind of mad Unesco, because you find Ger¬
man, French, Italian and Spanish jostling
with the Slav and Scandinavian tongues but
all united under the banner of English syn¬
tax. It is not surprising that the book has
never been wholly translated, for how do
you translate a universal language? tIt
already contains its own translations. What
sounds impossibly difficult is, in fact, very
funny and often very moving. But you have
to spend a good deal of your life studying
the book. I have been reading it for the last
forty-three years, and I am still puzzled by a
great deal of it. If I live long enough, I shall
perhaps understand it all. We may grumble
at the book, but we cannot deny that it was
written by a brilliant and ingenious writer in
love with language and equally in love with
humanity.
It is Joyce's originality and courage we
celebrate in this centenary year of his birth.
He himself celebrated ordinary people, the
suffering and humorous citizens of a
modern city, and on them he poured the
riches of history and language. He is the
greatest comic writer of the age, and the on¬
ly novelist who has ever brought the art of
words close to the art of music. Though dim
of sight he had a superb ear and, incidental¬
ly, a superb tenor voice. No one who loves
books can ignore him. As for those who,
like myself, write books, we regard him as
our master, the mad Irishman who taught us
to take our art seriously, the sane Irishman
who showed us what human beings are real¬
ly like. H Anthony Burgess
32
