Preparing people for change
A testing time for modern education
Only the educated are free.
Epictetus (AD 55-135)
A school in Zambia. Photo © Abisag Tüllmann, Frankfurt, Fed. Rep. of Germany.
JOensure continuity in each society
and to promote its renewal with¬
out detriment to its inherent
genius would appear to be the essential
purpose ofeducation in its twofoldfunc¬
tions ofsocial reproduction and innova¬
tion: the school is the place above all
others where the cultural heritage ofeach
people can be transmitted and
perpetuated, while it simultaneously
paves the way for social renewal by in¬
culcating the attitudes and aptitudes that
people need in order to take part in
change and to master it.
But the very speed of contemporary
social and economic changes, the grow¬
ing pace of advances in knowledge, par¬
ticularly in science and technology, and
their application to increasingly varied
fields, the growing complexity of the dif¬
ferent societies, and the intensification
of intercultural exchanges and in¬
fluences, all mean that this twofold ob¬
jective presents something of a
challenge.
One of the major features of this se¬
cond half of the twentieth century is un¬
questionably the recognition that educa¬
tion is a fundamental right for in¬
dividuals and a prerequisite for social
progress. This universal recognition ex¬
plains the unprecedented expansion of
education throughout the world over the
last two decades. Between I960 and
1980, the numbers ofpupils and students
at the different levels of education
almost doubled, rising from 327,000,000
to 648,000,000, although admittedly
growth rates varied from region to
region, country to country and level to
level. Growth was particularly marked at
the secondary and higher levels. The
number of students in post-secondary
education almost quadrupled, going up
from under 12,500,000 to over
47,000,000. The number of secondary
pupils rose by a little more than 150 per
cent, from 69,000,000 in 1960 to
180,000,000 in 1980.
Despite the substantial advances
achieved, however, the democratization
of education is still, in many countries,
by no means a reality. In addition to the
persistence of illiteracy, which is among
17

Education is an act of love and therefore an act of courage. If it does not
want to be considered a joke it must fearlessly accept debate, realistic
analysis and creative discussion.
Paulo Freiré
A young Canadian Eskimo girl at school.
Paris.
Photo © Paul Almasy,
To see our neighbour and everyone is now our neighbour does not
mean to know him. Just as the brain interprets the message receivedfrom
the optic nerve, we must, in the same way, equip ourselves to interpret the
messages received from other peoples. It has been said that racism is a
pathological state of mind, a form of irrationality, a kind of epidemic.
These terms imply the existence of a healthy state which can be attained
and maintained in a world where different nations coexist.
Jean-Paul Sartre
(1905-1980)
Intervention au Havre, by the French artist Ernest Pignon Ernest
who exhibits his work in public places associated with violent in¬
cidents. Photo © Ernest Pignon Ernest, Paris.
^ the gravest of the inequalities that afflict
the modern world, there are still con¬
siderable differences in the opportunities
available for access to education.
Inequalities weigh particularly hardly
on the rural areas, even though, sofar as
schooling is concerned, those who live
on the fringes of certain cities, the han¬
dicapped, certain minorities, migrant
workers and refugees are also at a disad¬
vantage. The same is true, in many cases,
of girls and women. Despite the con¬
siderable increase in the numbers ofgirls
and women enrolled which, in higher
education, increased fivefold between
1960 and 1980the percentage of girls
and women attending schools and
universities is still, in many countries,
below that of men. It drops as the level
of education rises, and is in general
markedly below that ofthe male students
following scientific and technological
courses.
By no means all levels and kinds of
education have as yet been made free of
IB

The mother tongue the sine
qua non of education?
charge everywhere and, in some cases,
the expansion ofeducation has been par¬
ticularly advantageous to the most pro¬
sperous sections of the population. In
this respect, the limitations of the kind of
egalitarianism that merely offers equality
ofaccess to all, regardless of inequalities
or differences in background, are begin¬
ning to be more clearly appreciated: it is
now obvious that the democratization of
education cannot be interpreted in pure¬
ly quantitative terms, and that its pur¬
pose must in fact be to secure the best
opportunities for everyone.
This probably implies that special
measures need to be taken to assist those
who, because of their race, sex, origins
or socio-cultural antecedents, are unable
to take full advantage, on a footing of
equality, of the education offered them.
In the same connexion, efforts need to
be made to relax the technical pro¬
cedures for changing from one type of
course or kind of education to another,
thereby making it easier for students to
branch out in new directions as they pro¬
ceed and so ensuring that different
talents can be developed in the best
possible way.
It would also be well to endeavour to
adapt the content and methods ofeduca¬
tion more closely and at the same time
moreflexibly to the natural, cultural and
human environment in which it is pro¬
vided. In the developing countries that
have recently gained their independence,
under the lingering influence of systems
inherited from the colonial period,
education still often fails to some extent
to match the real situations and needs.
In many of those countries, the ques¬
tion of the language of instruction is still
unsettled, even in primary school, and
the use of curricula to maintain and re¬
inforce cultural identity is an acute
problem. But most industrialized or
developing societies find, in varying
degrees, the same difficulties in reconcil¬
ing the additional demands now placed
on education, which is required to open
people's minds to the international en¬
vironment through a better knowledge
of worldproblems and greater insight in¬
to the values of different civilizations,
while at the same time promoting deeper
ties with the fabric of local life, so as to
enable individuals and their communities
to master their own environment and
mobilize its resources.
Education is, in fact, by its very
nature, angled towards the future, i.e.
the uncertain, and the function of
preparing people for change has become
all the more difficult to discharge
because of the extremely rapid
developments taking place in modern
societies and the constantly increasing
complexity and diversification of their
forms of organization, while there are ,
still, for practical purposes, no effective
instruments for evaluating changes and
predicting developments. It is scarcely^
19

^surprising, then, that educational
systems have for several decades past
been severely criticized, partly on the
grounds that education prepares people
to live in an already outdated society.
This is borne out by the fact that con¬
tent and curricula often lag far behind
the advance of knowledge, particularly
as regards science and technology
teaching. In very many countries, greater
emphasis should be placed on general
science teaching, which should begin in
primary school and continue throughout
the various stages of education, so as to
give pupils a thorough grasp of the prin¬
ciples of scientific method and instil an
attitude conducive to active, critical in¬
vestigation of the world around them.
Technical and vocational education
should likewise be developed, since it is
in very many cases still inadequate, while
the branches ofspecialization and course
content offered do not always meet
development needs.
More generally, the way in which
education and vocational training are
matched to employment leaves much to
be desired. A case in point is higher
education, where students are often
distributed among the different course
options with no regard for the develop¬
ment of society and its consequent
employment needs, leading to an over¬
abundance of skilled manpower in cer¬
tain fields and a shortage in others, and
creating both difficulties in obtaining
work and frustrations for individuals.
Moreover, despite the efforts made to
link education more closely with the
world of work, as an essential require¬
ment for a sound training for life,
whether through better careers counsel¬
ling or through a growing interpénétra¬
tion of education and work, calculated
to acquaint pupils, students and teachers
with the realities of the productive sec¬
tor, this linkage has seldom been achiev¬
ed. Thepractical measures taken for this
purpose, such as the introduction ofpro¬
ductive work into the educational pro¬
cess, which is of indisputable educative
value and can make a real contribution
to ending the age-old dichotomy between
intellectual and manual work, are en¬
countering resistance in many countries.
The difficulty experienced in opening
up education to the world of work is
evidence of what some see as a split bet¬
ween schooling and life. It reflects the
fact that, in very many cases, educa¬
tional systems that are still too rigid to
20

respond appropriately to all the increas¬
ingly numerous, increasingly diversified
and constantly changing demands made
upon them by society are lagging behind
what has become an extremely complex
and unsettled social reality.
The need for freer adaptation of
education to social needs, andfor afiner
appreciation of their probable develop¬
ment, is therefore making itself felt in
most parts of the world.
This means developing the educational
sciences and research in that area. It is
still quite widely believed that teaching is
a craft for which there is no need to call
on the aid ofscience. It would seem that,
on the contrary, the linkages and inter¬
relations between education and society
cannot be improved without constant
progress in the educational sciences, as
integral parts of the social sciences, and
the devising ofappropriate arrangements
to enable their findings to be taken more
fully and more swiftly into account in
educational practice.
It further seems to be increasingly
clear that initial teacher training is not in
itself enough. Teachers' knowledge must
be regularly and systematically updated
in order to cope with the development of
knowledge and meet the needs of social
change. Hence lifelong education ap¬
pears to be an essential facet of the
teacher's profession.
From the standpoint oflifelong educa¬
tion itself, considered not as further
vocational training but rather as an
overall process of education, starting
with the earliest stage and continuing
throughout life, the development of in-
Is there a split between school
and society?
formal and non-formal types of educa¬
tion, and better co-ordination between
them and the formal systems, also seem
to meet the wish to bring about greater
interpénétration between education and
society as a whole. This would make for
that diversification of the content,
methods, structures and levels of educa¬
tion and training required by the modern
world.
Another point is that the efforts and
resources of every kind invested in
education are now on such a substantial
scale that it seems difficult to in¬
crease and for some countries, even to
maintain their present level; the finan¬
cial and human cost represented in many
countries by excessive repeating of
grades and dropping out, particularly in
higher education, is a source of keen
anxiety. It therefore appears more than
ever necessary not only to improve
school and university counselling but to
tap for the benefit of all the whole
educational potential of society, if it is
true that in view of the limitations on
natural resources and the slippages of
growth, the future of the nations will in
the coming years depend on how well
they can mobilize and make use of the
human resources at their disposal.
To that end, and having regard to the
uncertainties and difficulties inherent in
any attempt to peer into the future, it is
reasonable to think that the best
preparation for this as yet indeterminate
world to come is a kind ofeducation that
endeavours to marshal all capacities for
initiative and creativity, individual and
collective, so as to prepare the way for
communities themselves to take charge
of their own development. In this
respect, an especially apt approach is to
organize learning as a process whereby
the pupilfollowsfor himself the paths of
the historical and methodological
development ofscientific, technological,
philosophical or artistic creation. Seen
thus, the act of learning becomes an act
ofre-creation and as such the basis ofall
creativity.
But while education must aim for the
all-round development of the individual,
bestowing on him a fuller control over
his environment and helping him to
develop his specific talents and ap¬
titudes, it must alsofoster, from the very
earliest years, attitudes of tolerance,
justice and solidarity. At a time when
much of mankind is experiencing a
renewed and explosive upsurge of
violence in various forms, and while
flagrant violations of human rights con¬
tinue, there is a widely felt need to give
civic and moral education, or give them
back, their rightful place. But such
education poses a problem in a certain
number of countries where a gap has
opened up between morality as taught
and what is actually practised in the
family and in society. Education should
therefore endeavour, in the coming
years, to foster the emergence of at¬
titudes and values corresponding to the
realities, demands and aspirations of a
changing society.
To accomplish great things one must be with men, not above them.
Montesquieu
(1689-1755)
Moving a Dorze style house, Ethiopia. Photo Georg Gerster
© Rapho, Paris.
21
