Darwin and racism
DESPITE the influence of certain thinkers, race pre¬
judice developed into a regular doctrinal system
during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
There was indeed a relatively brief period when it appeared
as though the spread of the principles of the French and
American revolutions and the success of the anti-slavery
campaign in England might lessen or even abolish such pre¬
judice, but both the reaction which followed the Restora¬
tion and the industrial revolution in Europe at the beginn¬
ing of the last century had direct and damaging repercus¬
sions on the racial question. The development of power
spinning and weaving opened ever wider markets to cotton
manufacturers, and "Cotton was king", particularly in the
southern part of the United States. The result was an in¬
creasing demand for servile labour; slavery, which was
breaking down in America and might have vanished of
itself, automatically became a sacrosanct institution on
which the prosperity of the Cotton Belt depended. It was to
defend this so-called "special institution" that southern
thinkers and sociologists developed a complete pseudo-
scientific mythology designed to justify a state of affairs
contrary to the democratic beliefs they professed. For the
quietening of consciences men had to be persuaded that the
Black was not merely an inferior being to the White but
little different from the brutes.
The Darwinian theory of the survival of the fittest was
warmly welcomed by the whites as an argument supporting
and confirming their policy of expansion and aggression at
the expense of the ".inferior" peoples. As Darwin's theory
was made public in the years in which the greater powers
were building their colonial empires, it helped to justify
them in their own eyes and before the rest of mankind: i.e.
slavery or death brought to "inferior" human groups by
European rifles and machine-guns was no more than the
30

implementation of the theory of the replacement of an in¬
ferior by a superior human society. In international politics
racism excuses aggression, for the aggressor no longer feels
himself bound by any consideration for foreigners belong¬
ing to "inferior" races and classifiable little, if at all, above
the beasts.
The notion that the stronger is biologically and scien¬
tifically justified in destroying the weaker has been applied
as much to conflicts within as to those between nations.
It is unfair to level at Darwin as many have done the
reproach that he promoted this hateful and inhuman
theory. The truth is that with coloured societies becoming
potential competitors in the labour market and claiming the
social advantages regarded as exclusively the heritage of the
whites, the latter were obviously in need of some disguise
for the utter economic materialism which led them to deny
the "inferior" peoples any share in the privileges they
themselves enjoyed. For that reason they welcomed with
satisfaction Darwin's biological thesis and then by simplifica¬
tion, distortion and adaptation of it in conformity with their
own particular interests, transformed it into the so-called
"social Darwinism" on which they based their right to their
social and economic privileges; it is a thing which bears no
relationship to Darwin's purely biological principles. Herbert
Spencer (1820-1903) applied to sociology the concept of the
"survival of the fittest" and the same idea was used to de¬
fend Nietzsche's (1844-1900) doctrine of the "superman"
with whom "fittest" was equated.
In this way progress in biology was misused to provide
superficially scientific and simple solutions to allay scruples
on points of human conduct.
Juan Comas, Racial Myths, from The Race Question in
Modern Science, Unesco, 1956
31
