Predicting the unpredictable
Is it possible to identify the variables
that trigger surprise and change?
by Crawford S. Holling
TODAY'S rate and scale of change is perceived by many to be
transcending the adaptive capacity of individuals, govern¬
ments, industry, and nature. Caught in the currents of
turbulence, man searches for a generic cause to give reason to the
unreasonable and hence a basis for action. Like Fourasti's
bewildered bee on a moving train, man appears to have forgotten
where he comes from and has lost the sense of where he is going.
Many in positions of influence and responsibility
share a concern for the world in structural transition,
but are frustrated in their efforts to decide and
govern wisely by the increasing inability of traditional
planning mechanisms to deliver the needed com¬
prehension and options. At the same time, fun¬
damental paradoxes are emerging to challenge tradi¬
tional concepts of science and scholarship. Those
traditions, which have sought typically to increase ef¬
ficiency, ensure constancy, maintain stability, and
improve prediction, have often shown that the very
effectiveness of the pursuit has generated paradoxes
that suggest the need for a deeper understanding of
structural change.
In increasing the efficiency of a system, for exam¬
ple, we have often increased its fragility and
vulnerability. In aiming to achieve constancy, we
have frequently eliminated the role of variability as a
way of testing, renewing, and maintaining a system's
flexibility. Similarly, in seeking stability we have
observed a constructive role for instability in main¬
taining the processes of self-enrichment, self-
monitoring, and self-regulation. And while working
to improve prediction techniques, we have en¬
countered the issues of limits to prediction and the
CRAWFORD S. HOLLING, of Canada, is Director of the
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (HASA)
at Laxenburg (Austria). Since 1967 he has been professor at
the Institute ofAnimal Resource Ecology and in the Depart¬
ment ofZoology at the University of British Columbia. He is
also a consultant in the Office of Biological Services, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, D. C, and was the
first leader of IIASA's Ecology and Environment Project
from 1973 to 1975.
60
need for adaptation that explicitly recognizes the inevitability of
failures and the unexpected.
My colleagues and I at the International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis, Austria, in collaboration with a number of na¬
tional research institutes, have been exploring different concepts
and perceptions of surprise, crisis, and change, in order to identify
categories of surprise generated by the intersection of man,
technology, and nature, and to define the ingredients
for adaptive behaviour and management.
In each case the analysis focused on the links bet¬
ween the "natural" environmental system, the
management institution(s), their policies and
technological solutions, and society. Over twenty ex¬
amples of resource management have been examined.
Here I will emphasize five for illustrative purposes,
analysing those key features that seem important for
adaptive design.
For the cases that follow, we observed that all of
the management policies succeeded over the short
term; all failed over the longer term and produced a
crisis; all owed the failures to success in reducing
variability; some adapted successfully to failure while
others did not.
Suppression of spruce budworm populations in
eastern Canada using insecticides preserved the pulp
and paper industry and employment in the short term
by partially protecting the forest. But that policy has
left the forest and the economy more vulnerable to an
outbreak of an intensity never experienced before.
Effective protection and enhancement of salmon
spawning on the west coast of North America is
leading to more predictable success. But that has trig-
Development means putting man on his feet.
Dom Helder Cámara
Statuette of the Barriles culture, Panama,
Dating from 300-500 A.D. Photo © National In¬
stitute of Culture and Leisure, Panama City.

That which we call modern is that perhaps
which will not endure.
Dante
(1265-1321)
Demolition of the Biltmore Hotel, Okla¬
homa City. Photo John Vowter ©
Rapho, Paris.
We have to overcome the complex of awe
and fear which derives from the idea that
"technology" is something beyond our
grasp. We should know that technological
development is not only that which has
taken man to the moon or made satellite
broadcasting possible; on the contrary,
technological creation does not mean only
making new things, but also finding new
ways of making things which have been
made already. We should realize that
technological creation, innovation and
adaptation can be developed not only by
large industries but also by the medium-
sized and small industries of our countries.
Roberto Salas Capriles
Wind-powered generator, Senegal.
Photo © Christophe Naigeon, Paris.
gered increased fishing and investment pressure, and less produc¬
tive stocks are becoming extinct, leaving the fishing industry
precariously dependent on a few enhanced stocks that are
vulnerable to collapse. . ;
Forest fire suppression has reduced the probability of fire in na¬
tional parks in the United States. But the consequence has been the
accumulation of fuel to produce fires of an unprecedented extent
and cost.
Semi-arid savannah ecosystems have been turned into productive
cattle grazing systems in the Sahel zone of Africa, southern and
east Africa, the southern United States, northern India, and
Australia. But because of changes in grass composition, an irrever¬
sible switch to woody vegetation is common and the systems have
become highly susceptible to collapse, often triggered by drought.
Malarial eradication programmes in Brazil, Egypt, Greece and
Italy are brilliant examples of sophisticated understanding, com¬
bined with a style of implementation that has all the character of a
military campaign. But elsewhere, where malaria was neither
marginal nor at low endemic levels, the transient success has led to
human populations with little immmunity, and mosquito vectors
resistant to DDT. As a consequence, some countries have recently
reported a thirty- to forty-fold increase in cases of malaria com¬
pared to 1969-70, endangering both public health and socio¬
economic development.
Two categories of "solution" appear when we compare our
studies. One class is unforgiving of error; one forgiving. The use of
insecticide to control insect populations in order to protect trees
from defoliation or people from malaria requires a level of
vigilance and efficiency of application that does not match well
with the fallibility of man and his technology. In contrast,
biological control, through the introduction of parasites, predators
or diseases of pests, represents an effort to work through natural
laws to generate dynamic responses to change that are self-
regulating, self-monitoring, and self-correcting. Failure can still
occur but it is typically localized and transient.
All the cases achieved their short-term objectivesmaintain
employment in the face of imminent destruction of the forest from
an insect outbreak; reduce the frequency of forest fires; increase
salmon populations; increase meat production; and decrease the
incidence of malaria. But as a consequence, each system evolved
into a qualitatively different one. That evolution took place in
three areas. The socio-economic environment changed. More pulp
61

mills were built to exploit the protected spruce-balsam forests;
more recreational demand was developed in the parks protected
from fire; more efficient and extensive fisheries were developed to
exploit salmon; more land was moved into cattle ranches on the
savannahs; and more development was possible in malaria pro¬
tected areas.
The management agencies also began to evolve. Operational
agencies were formed to spray insects, fight fires, operate fish
hatcheries, encourage cattle ranching, and reduce mosquito
populations. Their goals shifted from socio-economic ones to
those emphasizing operational efficiency; better and better air¬
craft, navigation and delivery systems to distribute insecticide; bet¬
ter and better ways to detect and control fires.
Evolution also occurred in the biophysical area, the consequence
of which was not generally perceived. Success was achieved by
reducing the variability of a target variablethe forest insect
populations, the fire frequency, the salmon numbers, the cattle
stock density, and the mosquito populations. The features of the
biophysical environment, viewed implicitly as constants, gradually
changed to produce a structurally different system.
Reduction of budworm populations to sustained moderate levels
led to the accumulation and persistence of foliage over larger and
larger areas. Any relaxation of vigilance could lead to an outbreak
sometime, in a place where it could spread over enormous areas.
Reduction of fire frequency led to accumulation of fuel and the
closing of forest crowns, so that what once were modest ground
fires affecting limited areas and causing minor tree mortality
became catastrophic fires covering large areas and causing massive
tree mortality.
Similarly, increased numbers of salmon led to an increase in the
size and efficiency of fishing fleets and the gradual elimination of
many natural stocks, thereby increasing vulnerability to unex¬
pected events; maintenance of moderate numbers of cattle led to
changes in grass composition toward species more vulnerable to
drought and management error; persistent reduction in mosquitoes
led to gradual increases in the number of people susceptible to the
diseases and to mosquitoes resistant to insecticide. In short, the
Can we design for change?
biophysical environment evolved into one that was more fragile, at
a time when greater dependencies had developed in the socio¬
economic and institutional environment for continued success.
I am not arguing in these examples against their original pur¬
poses to maintain employment or reduce the debilitating burden of
disease. Nor am I even arguing for a blanket indictment of solu¬
tions that are unforgiving of error. At times that is all that is
available. At times, they should be used but only to buy time for
developing alternatives. The difficulty is that technological man is
so good at making such techniques successful in the short term.
Consequently, the need and motivation for continued exploration
of alternatives succumbs to the simulacrum of success. When the
inevitable crisis begins to be perceived, there is often no obvious
direction to go except to continue as before, but more rigorously,
more efficiently, and with bigger budgets. Policy changes typically
occur in the face of crises but only when there are clearly
understood options available. Delays in developing those
alternatives shrink the domain of attainable alternatives.
What is true for policy change is true for technological develop¬
ment. Many policies are derived from available technology, as well
as from socio-economic incentives and penalties. If alternative
technologies are not available, policy change is difficult. As control
of budworm using insecticide seemed to be successful, programmes
to develop biological control agents, pheromones, or even dif¬
ferent harvesting methods withered. Currently there is no opera¬
tional alternative to insecticide. The phase of technological
development was frozen in the face of apparent success.
In his book Disturbing the Universe, the physicist Freeman
Dyson makes the same point for the development of nuclear
energy. He points out that effective technological developments
proceed through trial-and-error generation and exploration of
alternatives. He argues that this phase of exploration was foreclos¬
ed in nuclear energy development by a premature application of
the accountants' criterion of cost effectiveness. The very real
possibilities for designs that are more forgiving of error at a more
manageable scale were not realized as the present technology
became entrenched within government and industry. Rather than
have the environmentalist join the accountant in a further smother¬
ing of innovation, it would seem wise to dramatically increase sup¬
port for exploratory technology in critical areas of unforgiving
technology.
Our analysis revealed that ecological systems do not evolve
toward some climax or persistent equilibrium, but are dominated
by a pattern in time and space of growth, quiescence, collapse, and
renewal. Thus time and rates of change are central for understan¬
ding and developing adaptive, self-organizing designs.
The analysis of the biophysical part of our cases included three
sets of biological variables, each operating at different speeds. For
example, in the forest insect pest examples, they were the insect
and its associated natural enemies, the foliage and the trees. Their
speed is roughly related to their generation times one year for the
The evil application of scientific discoveries has
never been more rampant than at the present day. It
is common knowledge, indeed, that a scientist can
hardly make any new move in his research without
having the military attempt to make use of it. The
comparative psycho-physiology of dolphins, for ex¬
ample, is applied to naval warfare; anthropological
studies are appropriated for "counter-insurgency"
purposes; and special-sense physiologists see their
findings used for the intellectual cruelty of techni¬
ques of sensory deprivation.
Joseph Needham
Dolphins. Photo Helen Fischer © Rapho, Paris.
insect, eight years for the foliage, and over sixty years for the trees.
As management began to restrict the variability of the target
variable, parameters typically associated with slower variables
began to change. Foliage in the budworm system accumulated at
fairly high levels spread more homogeneously over space. These
represent changes in variables and supposed parameters that are in¬
termediate between the fastest and slowest. These changes are
mediated by competition or natural selective processes. It is these
changes that led to increased vulnerability of the systems to unex¬
pected events.
Present forest fire policy in the US National Parks has recently
changed radically, reverting to fire as the natural "manager" of
62

the forests. That dramatic adaptation was not made easily, and
rested on the availability of an alternative policy and technologies
to implement it, on a climate of understanding, and costs that were
relatively modest compared to our other examples. But it might be
equally important that the critical variable of fuel and forest tree
composition changed at the slowest rate of all examples. It was
some sixty years before the change became critical. I argue that
twenty to thirty years, the turnover rate of employees, is the rele¬
vant time unit of change for a management institution. By the time
the problem became critical, there was a new generation of experts
and policy advisers who were more willing to recognize the failures
of their predecessors. And of dominant importance, the slowness
of change allowed the accumulation of knowledge of the processes
involved and the communication of that understanding to a wide
range of actors;
In contrast, changes in the budworm forest system proceeded at
a faster rate. Insecticide spraying began on a large scale in the
mid-1950s, with conditions of vulnerability building to a critical
point by the early 1970s. That fifteen to twenty-year period was in¬
sufficient to accumulate and, most important, disseminate an
understanding of the problem. Alternative policies and
technologies were not developed, and the parents of the original
policies were still central actors and defenders of the past. Adaptive
change has been an agonizing process that is only now showing
signs of occurring.
Although there are insufficient examples to generalize with con¬
fidence, our analysis suggests that one can identify key parameters
and variables that trigger surprises. Unexpected events that occur
rapidly require an emphasis on predictive capability. Those in the
intermediate range require emphasis on adaptive capability
(development of alternative policies, exploratory technology, sear¬
ches for forgiving solutions). Those occurring slowly require an
emphasis on monitoring and regulation.
Times of turbulence can be times for creativity and renewal.
Man has always sailed on a sea of the unknown, encountering
waves of technological innovation and stagnation, hope and
despair, stasis and renaissance. Somehow, haltingly, he has thriv¬
ed. Indeed, the brilliant technological developments of this century
testify to man's inherent ability to adapt his tools to change. Since
neither mankind nor nature is predictable, inevitably we will con¬
tinue to be subject to unanticipated shocks from changes and the
conflicts they generate. If we can comprehend the patterns of these
changes, their causes and consequences, we will have the capability
and flexibility to respond adaptively to the unexpected in ways that
exploit the profound developments of science and technology for
man's survival and renewal.
I Crawford S. H oiling

