Pen
of protest
The seminal work
of Lu Xun
by Li Helin
Lu Xun at the age of fifty.
B
ORN in 1881, at Shaoxing in the Zhejiang province of
China, Zhou Shu-ren, better known by his pen name.
Lu Xun, was a major figure of twentieth-century Chinese
literature. From his pen flowed a stream of short stories, prose-
poems, essays, translations and historical studies. Twenty-five of
his short stories on contemporary subjects were published in two
widely translated collections. Call to Arms and Hesitation. Among
them, the most famous is The True Story of Ah Q in which, with
a telling combination of pathos and humour, he highlighted the
shortcomings of the old social order. In another collection of short
stories. Old Tales Retold, this time with an historical setting, he
succeeded in satirizing contemporary life while scrupulously
respecting historical fact.
Lu Xun's inventive spirit revealed itself in Wild Grass, an an¬
thology of twenty-four beautifully concise and subtly allusive
prose-poems, the only anthology of this genre in modern Chinese
literature. Morning Flowers Plucked at Dawn recalled his life as a
youth, but at the same time was a critical exposure of the negative
aspects of the society of the past.
A master essayist. Lu Xun also penned some eight hundred
essays, most of which were political in character. In them he
assailed feudalism, the compradors, bureaucrats, the bourgeoisie,
opportunists of left and right and traitors.
Lu Xun's historical studies included a Brief History of Han
Literature and an Outline History of Chinese Fiction. Based
originally on the lecture notes he used when teaching at Beijing
University in 1 920, his Outline History of Chinese Fiction took ten
years to revise and complete in its definitive form. No one before
him had systematically studied the origins of Chinese fiction and
written, for a wide public, about how it evolved from ancient
myths and from the legends recounted by the public storytellers of
the Song (10th to 13th century) and Yuan (13th to 14th century)
dynasties, reaching a peak with the vernacular novels under the
Ming and the Manchu dynasties (14th to 20th century).
But Lu Xun was not only an accomplished writer, he was also
a great thinker and revolutionary. In 1903, in A Brief Study of
Chinese Geology, he voiced his indignation against the plunder of
the rich mineral resources of China by the imperialist powers. In an
article published in 1907, he criticized those theoreticians who
wanted "to save China through industrialization" and "laid stress
on material things at the expense of things spiritual." For Lu Xun,
only through the education of the people could their conscience be
aroused. He took a dialectical view of the relationship between
LI HELIN is a member of the China Federation of Literary and Art
Circles, and director of the Lu Xun Museum in Beijing. He is the author
of a number of studies on Lu Xun and on various aspects of contem-
potary Chinese literature.
material and spiritual things and called for a China in which man
would take pride of place.
In May 1918, six months after the October Revolution, Lu Xun
published a short story entitled A Madman's Diary in the magazine
New Youth. It is interesting to compare the difference of approach
to the problems of oppressed peoples as expressed in Lu Xun's A
Madman's Diary and in the nineteenth century Russian writer
Gogol's story of the same name. Gogol's hero isa poor devil who has
the audacity to fall in love with a government minister's daughter
and ends up in a lunatic asylum. Although Gogol's story brings out
the darker aspects of Tsarist society, he stops short of demanding
its overthrow. Lu Xun's story, however, shows that throughout its
centuries-long history Chinese society had been a "man-eating"
society which, despite its claim to be based on "virtue and morali¬
ty", ruthlessly exploited the weak and had to be overthrown. Lu
Xun's anti-feudal ideas were entirely different from those of the
bourgeois revolutionaries. He aimed not only to sweep away all
traces of feudal culture, but to destroy completely the "man-
eating" society which fostered this culture.
In 1 923, Lu Xun gave a lecture at the Beijing Women's College en¬
titled What happened after Nora left home? This was shortly after
the period of the reformist protest May Fourth Movement, which
emerged following the riots which broke out on 4 May 1919 and
which called for equality between the sexes and for a free choice of
marriage partners. This was also the time at which the Norwegian
writer Henrik Ibsen's A Doll's House was translated and published
in Chinese, achieving a wide popular success. Loth to remain her
husband's puppet, Nora, Ibsen's heroine, leaves home, an action of
which most Chinese readers approved. In his lecture, however, Lu
Xun examined a deeper and more practical question: "What hap¬
pened after Nora left home?" He pointed out that in the society of
the time only two possibilities were open to her to sink to the
depths or to return to her husband. So long as women were not
economically independent and could not work for their living, they
had either to beg or to remain dependent on men. In a cut-throat
society there was no other means of survival.
Lu Xun pointed out that: "The most important problem in today's
society seems to be the achievement of economic rights. First there
must be a fair sharing out between men and women in the family;
secondly, men and women must have equal rights in society. Unfor¬
tunately, I have no idea how we are to obtain these rights; all I know
is that we have to fight for them, and we may even have to fight
harder for them than for political rights. If you speak about the equal
distribution of wealth you will probably find yourselves faced with
enemies who will fight you bitterly. For in present-day society it is
not just women who are the puppets of men; men control other men
and women control women; and sometimes men are even the pup¬
pets of women. This problem will not be solved by the acquisition
by a handful of women of their economic rights. But people with^
19

empty stomachs cannot sit back and wait for the arrival of an ideal
world; so we need this relatively attainable goal until we can devise
other measures. Of course, if the economic system changes then all
this is empty talk".
Lu Xun returned to the theme expounded in What happened after
Nora left home? in his story Regret for the Past, written two years
later. In this story, in defiance of feudal ethical codes, the hero and
heroine come together in a marriage of love. However, since Zijun,
the heroine, is not economically independent, she becomes merely
a housewife, busy cooking, feeding the chickens and looking after
the dog.
When Juansheng, the hero, loses his job, he realizes that, blinded
by love, he has neglected all the other important things in life. "A
man must make a living before there can be any place for love..."
He begins to see his wife as a burden. "She never opens a book any
more and has forgotten that the most important thing in life is to
make a living. To do this a couple must go forward hand in hand, or
else struggle on alone." Finally, he tells her ruthlessly that he no
longer loves her. They part and Zijun returns to her parents, who had
opposed the idea of her choosing freely her own marriage partner.
In the cold and hostile atmosphere of her parents' home she falls into
a decline and finally departs a loveless world.
Lu Xun's activity as a writer and a social thinker cannot be divorc¬
ed from the practical role he played in the revolutionary struggle. In
1 904, when he was living in Japan, he joined the Liberation Society,
a revolutionary group opposed to the Manchu dynasty then in power
in China. From 1911 to 1 925, while he was teaching in his home
town of Shaoxing, and at the Women's College in Beijing he carried
on the patriotic struggle drawing his own students into it. His
political stance earned for him the hostility of a number of politicians
and bourgeois intellectuals. In 1 926, threatened with arrest, he took
refuge in a hospital.
In 1928, he joined the Revolutionary Mutual Aid Society, to
whose funds he was a regular contributor. In 1 930, in Shanghai, he
participated in the founding of the China League of Left-wing
Writers, but a warrant for his arrest was issued and once again he
was forced to go into hiding. In 1 933, together with Song Qinling,.
the widow of Sun Yat-sen, Cai Yuanpei and Yang Quan, he helped
to organize the China League for the Protection of Civil Rights in pro¬
test against the illegal imprisonment and assassination of revolu¬
tionaries and to provide a basis for the fight for democracy and liber¬
ty . In May of that year, accompanied by Song Qinling and Cai Yuan¬
pei, he went to the German consulate in Shanghai to hand in a pro¬
test against the persecution of writers and the burning of books on
the orders of Hitler. On June 1 8, Yang Quan, the deputy leader of
the China League for the Protection of Civil Rights, was
assassinated. On June 20, against the advice of his friends, and
braving the risk of being himself assassinated, Lu Xun attended
Yang Quan's funeraL
It would not be possible here to list all Lu Xun's activities aimed
at achieving the radical social transformation he so much wanted for
his country. One thing is certain, his works have stood the test of
time, and both in his writings and in his actions he was always to be
found on the side of the common people and the oppressed.
Li Helin
Illustration below shows an incident from one of
Lu Xun's most famous works. The True Story of
Ah Q, which evokes the humiliations of China's
rural poor early in this century. It was drawn by a
noted caricaturist. Ding Cong.
20

