The sport
of sages
by Yan Naihua
ON a vast green carpet, eighty-three-year-old Fu
Maokun is demonstrating how to wield a long
sword. A veteran practitioner of the Chinese
martial arts (wushu) who won fame in his youth when he
killed a buffalo with a blow from the side of his hand, he
twirls the weapon, over a metre long, with great force.
Fu Maokun's performance is followed attentively by a
young boy, Huang Mingjian, who in his turn manipulates
a three-metre-long rod, making it whizz noisily as it hurtles,
through the air.
Their brilliant display, loudly applauded by 5,000 spec¬
tators, was part of a national demonstration of wushu
recently held in the ancient city of Xian. No less than 232
adepts took part, showing their skill with sword, spear
and rod, as well as the various forms of Chinese boxing.
In addition to these exhibitions of the traditional martial
arts, some of the participants also displayed such rarely
seen exercises as the "devil's foot" and the "Buddhist
sword".
Wushu (often called gongfu outside China) is one of the
country's most popular sports. A unique phenomenon, it
has a long history for Chinese workers have always con¬
sidered wushu to be an excellent physical and moral exer¬
cise as well as a form of self-defence. There are four
categories of wushu: boxing with bare fists, contests in¬
volving the use of weapons, and contests between either
two or several adversaries.
There are several forms of wushu boxing, each adapted
to different conditions. Changquan boxing, which
demands astonishing rapidity and great suppleness, is
practised above all by children and adolescents. Taiji box¬
ing, with its gentle, relaxed movements, is particularly
suitable for elderly persons, the sick and those with a
weak constitution. Xingyi boxing calls for energy and
great self-control, and is practised both by young people
and adults. Nanquan (southern boxing) which is popular in
some of China's southern provinces, consists largely of
arm movements, precise leg movements, and shouts
through which the fighters express their force. Shaolin
boxing is very popular in northern China. Its neat figures
and brisk movements are extremely impressive. There are
also the "imitative" forms of boxing, so-called because
they imitate the movements of, for example, the praying
mantis or the drunkard, and are based on meticulous
observation of living creatures and human nature.
YAN NAIHUA is a journalist working with the Beijing sports magazine
Tiyu Bao.
38
Such ancient weapons as long spears, sticks and
longswords are used or so-called "short" weapons such
as swords and hooks, as well as flexible weapons such as
nine-knot whips, articulated sticks and chain hammers
known as "shooting stars".
Combat may take place between two or several per¬
sons who, according to the appropriate figures, with or
without weapons, execute the precise movements which
are required. Wushu consists of rhythmical sets of evolu¬
tions composed of basic movements such as dodging,
turning, leaping, sudden changes of position, and high
and long jumping. Execution of these movements calls for
harmony between manual gestures and movements of
the eyes and legs; the action should take place at
headlong speed, the fighter should be steadfast as a rock,
the movements as fluent as running water and as swift as
an attacking snake. When watching a contest it is always
astonishing to see the rapidity with which blow follows
blow.
Wushu is a sport which is suitable for young and old
alike. It can be practised at any time of the year, and no
complicated equipment is required. In China it has been
popular for centuries. Morning and evening wushu adepts
of all ages can be seen in the streets enjoying their
favourite sport. In the big cities such as Beijing and
Shanghai there are over 100,000 amateurs of wushu.
Some towns have created martial arts schools and clubs
for teenagers, as well as organizing training courses in
taiji.
Wushu is a deeply rooted tradition ¡n rural China. In cer¬
tain parts of Hebei, for example, the sport has long been
popular. The city of Cangzhou (population 200,000) has
a hundred-odd training establishments where over a hun¬
dred experienced boxers teach their art to more than
40,000 youngsters and teenagers. Of the 500 villages in
Yongfeng district, over 300 have a wushu organization. In
the village of Diquan in Boye district, two-thirds of the
families practise the sport, part of a tradition which goes
back hundreds of years. They apply themselves to wushu
before and after work and even during moments of relaxa¬
tion in the fields, where it is often possible to see two
young people taking part in an impromptu contest to
universal delight.
The massive popularity of wushu has led to the
emergence of many gifted young practitioners, and the
great enthusiasm for the sport has encouraged constant

refinements in movements and style.
From the time of the Western Zhou dynasty (11th
century-722 BC) wushu was considered, like shooting
and riding, as a military sport. The existence of xiangpu,
a kind of wrestling which is popular in modern Japan, is
already mentioned during the Han dynasty
(202 BC-220 AD). Towards the end of the Ming dynasty
(1368-1644) a boxer of the monastery of Shaolin named
Chen Yuanfu popularized his art in Japan.
Combined with Japanese jujitsu, it was eventually
transformed into judo, today an Olympic sport. Many
Japanese, Korean, Thai and Philippine schools of boxing
have also been influenced, to a greater or lesser degree,
by Chinese wushu.
In recent years wushu has attracted a wide following
outside China. In Japan, the first country to adopt the
Chinese martial arts, the Union of Shaolin Boxing, found¬
ed by Do Shin So, has 2,600 branches and over a million
members. In Malaysia the Jingwu Club is a national
sporting organization with activities throughout the coun¬
try. In Singapore, wushu comes under the auspices of the
National Federation of Martial Arts; in the Philippines it is
represented by the Guanghan Martial Arts Commission.
National competitions, tournaments and demonstrations
are regularly organized in these countries of southeast
Asia, and five regional competitions have been held since
1969.
Wushu has a growing number of followers in the United
States and Canada. There are some forty wushu clubs in
New York City alone, and other centres where wushu is
popular include San Francisco, Boston and Los Angeles.
Several demonstrations have been organized according to
the Chinese method, i.e. the participants are grouped in
three categories: boxing, weaponry and polyvalent.
A wave of enthusiasm for wushu has also swept
through Europe. In the United Kingdom, 200,000 people
practise the Chinese martial arts, and in France a Chinese
martial arts association groups forty clubs and 4,000
members. In March 1 982, for the first time, the European
gongfu federation meeting in the United Kingdom brought
together representatives from the UK, France, the
Netherlands, the Federal Republic of Germany, Spain and
Switzerland. Since then it appears that other countries
have expressed a wish to join the Federation. It seems
highly probable that wushu will soon be an Olympic sport.

