chéries mmm
1809-1882

THE EVOLUTION
OF A GENIUS
by Magnus Pyke
s
| 5
BYthe time Charles Darwin was twenty-
seven years old, he already had in his
possession, that is to say, in his note¬
books and in his head, all the information
on plants and animals on which, later on, he
constructed the theory of evolution and
based his ideas about the origin of species.
This theory and these ideas upset the world.
It thus came about that all those who lived
after him knew that the universe was a dif¬
ferent place from what those who lived
before had believed it to be.
As Darwin's life strikingly demonstrates,
social and ethical consequences may often
surprisingly arise from the work of people
whose activities seem to be most unpromis¬
ing and even uninteresting. Darwin as a
young man showed little promise. Nor were
his interests such as would have suggested a
potential for great scientific attainment.
In 1876, when he was sixty-seven years
old, he wrote a charming essay for his
children, without any thought that it would
ever be published. This he entitled Recollec¬
tions of the development of my mind and
character. In it he described how, as a little
boy at his first day-school, he was much
slower to learn than his younger sister
Catherine and was, as he believed, in many
ways a naughty child.
At the same time, he always had a taste
for collecting. Even in those early days, he
collected all sorts of things, not only plants,
birds' eggs, shells. and minerals, but coins
and seals as well. He also made an effort to
learn the names of plants. Whether his love
of fishing can be taken as part of his interest
in collecting or not, it undoubtedly led to his
spending long hours on the bank of a river
or a pond watching the float and thus pro¬
vided time for quiet contemplation.
In that period of his life, no one had any
thought of his becoming a scientist. In 1818,
when he was nine years old, he was sent to
"Dr Butler's great school at Shrewsbury",
where he remained for seven years until the
summer of 1825. This school taught him
nothing of value to his later life. The
MAGNUS PYKE, British scientist and
popularizer of science, was Secretary of the
British Association for the Advancement of -
Science and Chairman of its Council from 1973 to
1977. He is the author of many popular works on
science and society including Butter Side Up:
Delights of Science (John Murray, 1976) and Out
Future: Dr. Magnus Pyke Predicts IHamlyn 1980)
as well as specialized studies such as Food
Science and Technology (John Murray, 1970).
This article is adapted from a chapter contributed
by Dr. Pyke to a book being published this month
by Unesco and the Mendelianum of the Moravian
Museum, Czechoslovakia: From Biology to
Biotechnology, edited by Colette Kinnon, Alex¬
ander Kholodilin and Vitezslav Orel.
teaching was confined to Latin, Greek and
ancient geography and history.
He left school neither high nor low in
comparison with his fellows and was con¬
sidered in general a very ordinary boy. His
father, though fond of him, once had occa¬
sion to say to him "You care for nothing
but shooting, dogs and rat catching, and
you will be a disgrace to yourself and all
your family".
Perhaps this was a very harsh judgment.
When he was taught the geometry of Euclid
by a private tutor, he experienced intense
pleasure at the clear and rational proofs. He
felt similar delight when his uncle explained
to him the principle of the vernier of a
barometer. But his main enthusiasm at six¬
teen, an enthusiasm which he retained for
many years, was shooting.
It was, perhaps, a sign of some stirring of
scientific curiosity that impelled him to
volunteer to serve as an assistant to his
brother who was studying chemistry and
who had set up something of a laboratory in
the garden tool-shed of their house. The two
boys often worked here half the night, im¬
mersed in their experiments. When Charles'
schoolmaster, the formidable Dr Butler,
heard what he was doing, he delivered a
public rebuke, accusing him of "wasting his
time on such useless subjects".
In October 1825, his father, seeing that he .
was doing no good at school, sent him to
Edinburgh University with the idea of his
becoming a doctor. The notion of his taking
up medicine as a career was not proposed as
a means for him to develop such scientific
bent as he might possess. Rather, medicine
was considered to be a useful, honourable
and gentlemanly occupation.
But although Charles Darwin gained little
or no benefit from the official course of in¬
struction in medicine, his interest in science
was awakening through his association with
a number of bright young men who were
fond of natural science.
An indication of Darwin's growing at¬
tachment to biological science was his
friendship with a Dr Grant, his senior by
several years, who subsequently became
professor of zoology in University College.
Stimulated by these men, he took part in ex¬
peditions to collect animals in tidal pools by
the sea-shore." These activities had nothing
to do with his medical curriculum. Never¬
theless, they illustrate a fundamental factor
in the development of the thinking of a
young man destined to make one of the ma¬
jor scientific discoveries of his century.
It is interesting to note that in 1826, when
he had only attended Edinburgh University
for a year, Charles Darwin published two
short papers on conclusions arising from the
5

observations he had made when collecting
sea creatures from tidal pools around
Newhaven. Thus, simply and while still a
student, and in spite of the discouragement
of his schoolmaster and the tedium of his of¬
ficial teachers at the university, his life as a
scientist can be seen to have begun.
After Charles Darwin had spent two ses¬
sions at Edinburgh University, his father
formed the opinion, partly from his own
observations and partly from what Charles'
sister had told him, that he did not like the
idea of becoming a doctor. Since he was
strongly averse to his son turning into an
idle sporting man, he proposed to Charles
that he should become a clergyman.
The young man considered his father's
proposition very carefully. He liked the idea
of becoming a country parson. He believed
at that time in the literal truth of every word
in the Bible, it never having entered his head
to do otherwise. After having read one or
two books on theology, he found no dif¬
ficulty in accepting the dogma of the
Church of England and, therefore, in agree¬
ing to his father's suggestion. In view of
some of the implications of the deductions
which arose from his subsequent theory of
the origin of species, his willingness at the
age of nineteen to take Holy Orders is
strangely paradoxical.
In order to become an Anglican
clergyman in 1 828, it was necessary to take a
degree at one of the two English universities
of Oxford or Cambridge. And so once more
we find Charles Darwin at a university,
ostensibly studying a subject in which he
had no interest. On the other hand, casually
attending a public lecture by John Henslow
on botany, he found himself enchanted by
its clarity and by the admirable drawings
with which it was illustrated. More than
this, he enjoyed the field excursions which
Henslow used to organize, on foot, in
coaches, or in a barge down the river. But
there was no pursuit at Cambridge which he
enjoyed so much as collecting beetles.
None of this, of course, had anything to
do with becoming a clergyman. On the other
hand, his invention of two new methods of
collecting beetles (by employing a labourer
to scrape the moss off old trees during the
winter, and by collecting the rubbish at the
bottom of the barges used to transport
rushes) was an indication of what was to
come. And again, as when he was a student
in Edinburgh, so now when he was an
undergraduate at Cambridge, his name ap¬
peared in the scientific literature, this time
as the magic words, "captured by C. Dar¬
win", in Stephen's Illustrations of British
Insects.
Undoubtedly, there was already
something about this idle theological stu¬
dent that attracted the attention of people
such as Professor Henslow and distinguish¬
ed him from the ordinary run of students.
Professor Henslow kept open house once a
week when he invited older members of the
university who were interested in one or
other of the branches of science. He invited
young Darwin and obviously took to him.
They soon dropped into the habit of taking
long walks together when the conversation
ranged over botany, entomology, chemistry,
mineralogy, geology and yes, this was in¬
cluded tooreligion.
Darwin appreciated Henslow's wide
knowledge and his habit of long-continued
observation from which he drew his conclu¬
sions. It is interesting to note that in a later
account of Henslow he described him as one
whose "judgment was excellent, and his
whole mind well balanced; but I do not sup¬
pose that any one would say he possessed
much original genius". The Encyclopedia
Britannica, after noting that he was, with
Sedgwick, responsible for founding the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, lists as his
claim to celebrity that "to him Darwin
largely owed his attachment to natural
history and his introduction to Captain
Fitzroy of H.M.S. Beagle".
Collapsible microscope and the pistol, powder horn and bullet mould Darwin
took with him on H.M.S. Beagle.
Photo © Down House and the Royal College of Surgeons of England

His three years at Cambridge he later
described as among the happiest in his life.
He enjoyed his shooting and hunting. He
got into a sporting set who dined, drank and
played cards together. He also associated
with a musical set of jolly young men. His
summer vacations were given up to his
hobby of collecting beetles. In the autumn
he devoted himself to shooting.
How easily might he have slipped into the
life of a conventional middle-class
gentleman. How easily could he have
become a country clergyman whose side in¬
terest was entomology. But while he was still
at Cambridge, two incidents changed the
whole pattern of his career.
Because of his incompetence in the
classics, Darwin had not been able to begin
his studies in Cambridge on the appropriate
date. The university authorities, therefore,
required that he stay at his college for two
extra terms. To fill in his time usefully, Pro¬
fessor Henslow arranged for him to accom¬
pany his colleague Sedgwick on a geological
expedition which the latter was undertaking
in North Wales. Charles Darwin jumped at
the opportunity and it was while he was col¬
lecting geological specimens on this trip that
he came to realize that such a collection was
not of scientific interest for its own sake but
was rather of value for the way in which it
contributed to a coherent hypothesis
capable of explaining how it was that rocks
of a particular type got where they were.
The second incident came hard on the .
heels of the first. On returning home after
his geological tour with Sedgwick, Darwin
found a letter from Henslow awaiting him.
In this letter Henslow mentioned that a Cap¬
tain Fitzroy, who had been commissioned
by the Government to undertake a round-
the-world survey, had formed the idea of
taking with him a naturalist to survey the
plants and animals encountered during the
voyage. The job was unpaid but would
clearly be of interest to someone with an ap¬
propriate bent. Darwin was attracted by the
idea and was anxious to accept the invita¬
tion. Having obtained his father's permis¬
sion, Darwin set off for Cambridge to see
Henslow and, briefed by him, travelled on
to London to be interviewed by Captain
Fitzroy, the leader of the expedition and
captain of the ship.
How nearly Darwin was rejected he only
learned later on. At the time, Captain Fitz¬
roy was an ardent disciple of the Swiss
divine and mystic, Johann Kaspar Lavater.
Lavater was famous for his work on
physiognomy, a so-called science which pur¬
ported to enable its adherents to read a
man's character from the shape of his
features. Fitzroy believed in this system and
was convinced that he could judge the abili¬
ty of each candidate who came before him
by the shape of his nose. Looking carefully
at Darwin, he was filled with doubt whether
anyone with a nose like his could possess
sufficient energy and determination for the
voyage. Luckily, Fitzroy overcame his
doubts and came later to accept that Dar¬
win's nose had spoken falsely.
Thus, almost by chance, as it would seem,
Darwin set sail as a biologist to collect the
information from which he came to draw
the conclusions which changed the
understanding of future generations. "The
voyage of the Beagle", he wrote later, "has
been by far the most important event in my
life and has determined my whole career".
It kept him away from home for five years,
from December 1831 to October 1836. He
was twenty-two when he left and twenty-
seven when he returned.
The ship sailed from England to the Cape
Verde Islands and other islands in the Atlan¬
tic, then on to the east coast of South
America, to Tierra del Fuego, the west coast
of South America, calling at the Galapagos
Islands in the Pacific. These constitute an
archipelago of twelve large and several hun¬
dred small islands, six hundred miles from
the nearest land, in Ecuador. They were
discovered by the Spaniards early in the six¬
teenth century and owe their name to the
presence in them of large numbers of
characteristic giant tortoises. Galápago is
the Spanish word for a tortoise. These and
other creatures peculiar to the islands were
important to Darwin's thesis because they
had lived undisturbed by outside influences
and, primarily, the influence of man.
Sailing further west, the Beagle visited
Tahiti on the way to New Zealand, Australia
and Tasmania, then on to Keeling Island,
the Maldives in the Indian Ocean,
Mauritius, St. Helena, Ascension Island and
Brazil. Leaving Brazil, they sailed back to
the Verdes and on to the Azores in mid-
Atlantic on their way home.
Whatever reputation Charles Darwin had
acquired as a schoolboy and an under¬
graduate for sports, idleness or dili¬
gence he showed himself during this five-
year expedition to be enormously in¬
dustrious. Not only did he keep a detailed
diary of every item of scientific interest in
the geology, botany and zoology of each
region, but he also set down with delighted
curiosity particulars of the people living in
each place and the incidents that befell
himself and his fellow travellers.
Charles Darwin came home from his
voyage in October 1836. During the period
from then until September 1842, a period of
six years, he lived first in Cambridge and
then in London. These years were devoted
to the codifying and organizing of the mass
of information which he had collected. In
1839, he published a narrative of the survey¬
ing voyages of the Beagle's round-the-world
cruise. In 1840, he published two sections of
Engraving by the ornithologist and artist
John Gould of the Rhea Darwinii, a rare
species of flightless, ostrich-like bird from
2 southern Patagonia, identified by Darwin in
1834 during an expedition near Port Desire.

Das Kapital,
Kritik der politischen Oekonomie.
K a i 1 M:irx.
Erster Batid.
Burlj I: lier PrsélktiMsprsses* de* Editais.
Zweite verbesserte Auflege.
II». Kocht Uii l'.t.ifieuuiitf w.'.l UMSrttHtl
Hamburg
Verlag von Otto Meissner.
1878.
The title page of a copy
of Das Kapital, presented
to Darwin by Karl Marx.
The handwritten
inscription reads: "Mr.
Charles Darwin, on the
part of his sincere
admirer Karl Marx,
London 16 June 1873".
a work on The Zoology of the Voyage ofthe
Beagle. More came out in 1841, 1842 and
1843. Indeed he went on writing and
publishing for much of the rest of his life.
He undoubtedly worked hard and thought
deeply. Nevertheless, his ideas developed
slowly. Furthermore, he was hampered by ill
health.
Before setting sail on the great voyage,
when he was troubled by the thought of
leaving his family and friends, he believed
he had a heart disease and complained of
"palpitation and pain about the heart".
Now, during his time in London, and after
having married his cousin, Emma
Wedgwood, in 1839, he suffered from "fre¬
quently recurring unwellness, and to one
long and serious illness". He was then thirty
(he lived to the age of seventy-three). In
September 1842, he bought a house in the
country, at Downe in the county of Kent,
where he lived for the rest of his life, seeing
few people and taking little or no part in
social life. Throughout this period, he com¬
plained of ill health. Dinner parties, which
"always put me into high spirits", he avoid¬
ed because, he found, "my health almost
always suffered from the excitement, violent
shivering and vomiting attacks being thus
brought on."
In 1842, the year in which Darwin install¬
ed himself at Downe and six years after the
completion of his collections in the Beagle,
he allowed himself to write down only in
pencil an outline of a theory to explain the
origin of new species of creatures from their
predecessors. In fact he had already had this
notion in his head for four years. "In Oc-
Emma Darwin
Photo © Down House and the Royal College of Surgeons of England
In January 1839, some two years after the Beagle returned to
England, Charles Darwin married his cousin Emma Wedgwood,
seen here at the age of 32 in a portrait by Charles Richmond. The
marriage was a happy one. A gay, attractive, intelligent woman,
Emma took a keen interest in music and was devoutly religious.
She nursed Darwin through his long bouts of illness and never
wavered in her support for him as a man of integrity, even though
she suffered greatly to see him gradually losing his religious faith.
This moving letter to Darwin was found among her papers after
her death. On it Darwin had written "When I am dead, know that
many times I have kissed and cried over this. CD."
"...The state of mind that I wish to preserve with respect to you is
to feel that while you are acting conscientiously and sincerely
wishing and trying to learn the truth, you cannot be wrong, but
there are some reasons that force themselves upon me, andprevent
me from being always able to give myself this comfort. I dare say
you have often thought of them before, but I will write down what
has been in my head, knowing that my own dearest will indulge me.
Your mind and time are full of the most interesting subjects and
thoughts of the most absorbing kind, viz. following up your own
discoveries but which make it very difficult for you to avoid
casting out as interruptions other sorts of thoughts which have no
relation to what you are pursuing, or to be able to give your whole
attention to both sides of the question... May not the habit in
scientific pursuits of believing nothing till it is proved, influence
your mind too much in other things which cannot be proved in the
same way, and which if true are likely to be above our comprehen¬
sion ?... Ido not wish for any answer to all this it is a satisfaction
to write it, and when I talk to you about it I cannot say exactly
what I wish to say, and I know you will have patience with your
own dear wife. Don 't think that it is not my affair and that it does
not signify much to me. Everything that concerns you concerns
me, and I should be most unhappy if I thought we did not belong
to each other forever... ".
Here perhaps lies the true answer to the much discussed riddle as to
why Darwin delayed so long in publishing The Origin of Species,
a delay (see caption opposite page) which nearly cost him very
dearhe could not bring himself to affront the deeply-held
religious beliefs of his beloved Emma.

tober 1838", he wrote, "that is fifteen
months after I had begun my systematic en¬
quiry, I happened to read for amusement
Malthus on 'Population', and being well
prepared to appreciate the struggle for ex¬
istence which everywhere goes on from long-
continued observation of the habits of
animals and plants, it at once struck me that
under these circumstances favourable varia¬
tions would tend to be preserved, and un¬
favourable ones to be destroyed. The result
of this would be the formation of new
species. Here, then, I had at least got a
theory by which to work; but I was so anx¬
ious to avoid prejudice, that I determined
not for some time to write even the briefest
sketch of it."
And so he ruminated as the years went by
and gradually refined and improved his
ideas about evolution and the origin of
species. His early conception provided no
explanation of why biological species
descended from the same stock should
diverge in character as they became
modified. His conclusion was that "the
modified offspring of all dominant and in¬
creasing forms tend to become adapted to
many highly diversified places in the
economy of nature." In describing how he
reached this hypothesis, he wrote, "I can
remember the very spot on the road, whilst
in my carriage, when to my joy the solution
occurred to me." This sentence reveals
something about the nature of scientific
discoverythat ideas can come to the
prepared mind; that they may strike as a
sudden flash of intuition, and that, when
they do, they engender a feeling of delight.
The process of reflection and thought, the
consideration and reconsideration of
evidence drawn from his own observations
and from those of others, went on for twen¬
ty years until early in 1856 Sir Charles Lyell,
the leading geologist of the day, advised
Darwin to publish his ideas. Darwin at once
began to prepare an extensive exposition.
Even so, by the summer of 1858 he was only
about half finished. Then one day through
the post came a letter from a Mr Alfred
Wallace. This man was a surveyor and ar¬
chitect with a strong taste for natural history
who was at that time exploring in Malaya.
He enclosed with his letter a paper entitled
On the tendency of varieties to depart in¬
definitely from the original type. Darwin
was thunderstruck to find that Wallace's
essay contained exactly the same theory
about the origin of species as his own.
Here then we find a characteristic of
scientific discovery that repeatedly occurs.
The great men and women who make
outstanding discoveries are undoubtedly
ahead of their times, but often by not very
much. Knowledge grows and it may then
happen that discoveries come to be made,
but only when the time is ripe for making
them. Although there had been some ques¬
tioning here and there, up to the time of
Darwin it was generally assumed that species
were separate and always had been so. Fur¬
thermore, most of the great religions re¬
counted as revealed truth how different
animals had been created different from the
beginning at the creation of the world. But
although there had been changes in the
understanding of geologists who directed
their attention to the fossils of animals
embedded in the rocks (the palaeon¬
tologists), it was only in Darwin's own time
that it became apparent that the length of
time needed for the formation of the diverse
Alfred Rüssel Wallace
This portrait of the naturalist Alfred Rüssel Wallace was painted
over a photograph by Thomas Sims and is now in the National
Portrait Gallery, London. In 1858, Wallace independently
discovered the principle of natural selection and sent Darwin a
short essay, On the Tendency of Varieties to Depart Indefinitely
from the Original Type, in which the principle of natural selection
was expounded. In a brief accompanying note Wallace wrote that
he was hopeful that it "would supply the missing factor to explain
the origin ofspecies" and asked Darwin, if hefound it "sufficient¬
ly important", to forward it to the geologist Charles Lyell. The
manuscript came as a bombshell to Darwin. For some years Lyell
had been urging him to publish his theory, but suddenly it seemed
that Wallace had effectively pre-empted his life work. "Your
words have come true with a vengeance that ¡should beforestall¬
ed", he wrote to Lyell; and he added, "I never saw a more striking
coincidence. If Wallace had my manuscript written out in 1842, he
could not have made a better short abstract! Even his terms now
stand as heads of my chapters". Charles Lyell and the botanist
Joseph Hooker found an elegant solution that was fair to both
men. They arrangedfor ajoint Darwin- Wallace memoir on natural
selection to be read at a meeting of the Linnean Society in July
1858. Both Darwin and Wallace were honourable men. "I would
far rather", Darwin told Lyell, "burn my whole book than that he
[Wallace] or any other man should think that I had behaved in a
paltry spirit". And to the end ofhis life Wallace accorded priority
to Darwin. In an address to a meeting of the Linnean Society held
in 1908 to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the Darwin-
Wallace memoir, Wallace declared: "I should have had no cause
for complaint if the respective share of Darwin and myself... had
been. . . estimated as being roughly proportional to the time we had
each bestowed upon it... as twenty years is to one week. If he had
published his theory after ten years, fifteen years, or even eighteen
years elaboration of it, I should have had no part in it whatever... "

Cartoon of Darwin from The Hornet, 22 March 1871.
Contrary to popular belief, Darwin never claimed that
man was descended from the ape, but only that both
shared a common ancestor.
rocks of which the earth is composed and
the animals whose fossils are found in them
was much longer than holy writ allowed. In
short, although it needed talented men to
perceive the meaning of the evidence, the
time was ripe for that perception to come
about. And so it came to two biologists: to
Darwin, sitting contemplating his specimens
in his country house in England, and to
Wallace in Malaya.
Wallace's essay together with an abstract
of Darwin's conclusions were read conjoint¬
ly at a meeting of the Linnean Society in
London in 1858 and published together the
following year.
Darwin had received a jolt. However, on
the advice of his scientific friends and spur¬
red by his own ambition, he got to work
and, delayed as ever by bouts of ill health,
completed the chief work of his life, the
writing of his book On the Origin of
Species, in thirteen months. It was publish¬
ed in November 1859. The whole of the first
edition was sold on the day of publication.'
Darwin himself explained its immediate and
continuing success as being to some degree
due to the fact that, in spite of his having
allowed twenty-three years to elapse bet¬
ween his return home with the data on
which his hypothesis was based and the
publication of his conclusions as a coherent
narrative, this time could not be taken as en¬
tirely wasted. In fact, it gave the members of
the community, both scientific and lay,
some opportunity to familiarize themselves
with the conception of evolution.
We now come to the time when the new
discoverythis fresh approach to biology
and the origin of species having been made
public, began to exert its social influence on
the community. Its impact was profound.
Looking back after the lapse of more than a
century, the fundamental nature of the
disturbance which the Darwin-Wallace
theory exerted on people's preconceived
ideas about the world and the creatures in- it
is difficult to understand. Today, the theory
seems to us to be self-evident. The first prin¬
ciple of the theory of evolution is, as
Wallace put it in his essay, that "the life of
wild animals is a struggle for existence".
The second principle is that variations that
take place in the typical form of a species
(neither Darwin nor Wallace specified what
it was that caused such variations to occur)
will have an effect, for good or ill, on the
capacity of that species to survive. This prin¬
ciple is summarized in the phrase "the sur¬
vival of the fittest". By this means do
species originate and change by a process of
evolution. As Wallace wrote: "the giraffe
[did not] acquire its long neck by desiring to
reach the foliage of the more lofty shrubs
and constantly stretching its neck for the
purpose, but because any variations which
occurred among its antitypes with a longer
neck than normal at once secured a fresh
range of pasture over the same ground as
10
their short-necked companions, and on the
first scarcity of food were thereby enabled
to outlive them."
This theory exerted the powerful social ef¬
fect it did for three main reasons. First, it
ran counter to the word of holy writ in
which people believed unquestioningly as
describing the different animals and plants
having been created so. Secondly, it was
deeply disturbing for its implication that,
just as each species of animal and plant
evolved from a less successful predecessor,
so also had manthat paragon of animals,
as Shakespeare put it, but an animal never¬
theless from a lower form. Third¬
ly, it took yet one further step along the
road implying that the value-free rationality
of science was the primary means by which a
person views the environment, rather than
the exaltation of revelation.
On the Origin of Species was published in
1859. The following year, the British
Association for the Advancement of Science
held its annual meeting in Oxford. At that
meeting, Thomas Henry Huxley, one of the
foremost lecturers of his time, a Professor at
the Royal College of Surgeons who later was
appointed to a chair at the Royal Institution
and became President of the Royal Society,
was speaking about the implications of Dar¬
win's work. In the discussion that followed,
Samuel Wilberforce, Bishop of Oxford,
violently attacked Darwin's entire
hypothesis and rounded furiously upon
Huxley to ask him whether it was upon his
grandfather's or his grandmother's side that
he was descended from a venerable ape
This confrontation made a deep impression.
Huxley, standing his ground, replied to the
bishop that if he were asked to claim paren¬
tage from a man, great in the affairs of
Church and State, who mocked the earnest
seeker after truth, or with a monkey,
grovelling and chattering in its cage yet
representing the mystery and wonder of
nature, he would have difficulty in deciding
which to choose. A lady on the platform,
who had never heard an Anglican bishop
thus rebuffed in his own see, fainted.
The idea of evolution, supported on the
one hand by observations made by Darwin
of variations in the creatures found in the
Galapagos Islands and by Wallace from
parallel observations in the islands of the
Malay Archipelago, was a potent one. Nor
was Bishop Wilberforce the only leader to
believe that "the principle of natural selec¬
tion is absolutely incompatible with "the
work of God." Cardinal Manning described
it as a "brutal philosophy to wit, there is
no God and the ape is our Adam".
Monseigneur Ségur in France wrote: "These
infamous doctrines have for their only sup¬
port the most abject passions. Their father is
pride, their mother impurity, their offspring
revolutions." In a bitter book called Science
and the Bible, Dr Perry, Bishop of
Melbourne, declared that the object of Dar¬
win and Huxley was not so much to advance
truth and understanding as to "produce in
their readers a disbelief in the Bible".
In 1859, when On the Origin of Species

was published, science was bringing changes
in many directions. The achievements were
welcomed with pride as indications of
human progress. The theory of evolution,
however, was disturbing. Its discoverers,
and the members of the communities to
which they belonged, could, on the one
hand, take pride in the extension of their
understanding of the biological principles by
which species originated. At the same time,
it came to many people as a shock to have to
accept that they themselves, like all other
species of biological life, had evolved too
from lower forms, less than human. The
acrimonious debate, of which the clash of
Wilberforce and Huxley was the beginning,
was long drawn out. Echoes continue here
and there to this very day. For the most
part, however, the basic principles of the
theory of evolution conceived by Darwin
and Wallace have been accepted as true. If
there are those who feel that belief in
biological evolution involves loss or the
weakening of formerly held religious beliefs,
there are others who see gain in a deeper
perception of man's relationship with the
other species of creatures with whom the
human species must share the earth.
Wallace, the man who was the first to put
together coherent evidence to support the
theory of evolution, wrote long afterwards
in 1870, with a generosity not always found
in a scientist, of the way in which Darwin's
thinking, particularly as written in his great
book, changed the world.
"I have felt all my life, and I still feel, the
most sincere satisfaction that Mr Darwin
had been at work long before me, and that it
was not left for me to write On the Origin of
Species. I-have long since measured my own
strength, and know well that it would be
quite unequal to that task. Far abler men
than myself may confess that they .have not
that untiring patience in accumulating and
that wonderful skill in using large masses of
facts of the most varied kind, that wide and
accurate physiological knowledge, that
acuteness in devising and skill in carrying
out experiments, and that admirable style of
composition, at once clear, persuasive, and
judicial qualities which in their har¬
monious combination mark out Mr Darwin
as the man, perhaps of all men now living,
best fitted for the great work he has under¬
taken and accomplished".
H Magnus Pyke
11
