Education and aging
A Unesco study
THE aging population is today
more diverse than in any other
period in the history of the hu¬
man race. The main differences may lie
in the economic situation, the social
and family setting, the health or the
personal and professional history of
This article consists of salient extracts from
Education and Aging, a report prepared as
Unesco's contribution to the United Nations
World Assembly on Aging, held in Vienna from
26 July to 6 August 1982.
the individual, his past and present
relationship to education and culture,
and so on. There are of course vast dif¬
ferences among the aging with respect
to temperament, some of them being
active and others weak or dependent,
as a result of an infinite range of for¬
mative experiences and social factors.
The consequence of this extreme
diversity is that any national policy
and, to an even greater extent, any in¬
ternational policy in this respect must
be designed and implemented with
great flexibility, and that the most
unremitting attention must be paid to
the original features of the situations,
the social groups and the persons
concerned.
It is well known that aging, which
can legitimately be expected to open up
a period of freely available time, well-
being and infinite opportunities for in¬
tellectual and cultural enrichment, is
often a source of deep disappointments
Photo Roland and Sabrina Michaud © Rapho, Paris
"And thy Lord has decreed that you serve none but Him, and do good to Parents. Ifeither or both of them reach old age
with thee, say not 'Fie' to them, nor chide them, and speak to them a generous word. "
(The Qur'an, XVII: 23)
In Muslim countries the teachings of the Qur'an and strong family traditions combine to ensure that older persons
are respected and cherished. This is reinforced by a notion of profound importance in the Islamic ethic summed up
in Arabic in the phrase Rida al-walidain, an expression whose full meaning is difficult to convey but which could
be approximately translated as "Parents' love and affection". For a Muslim, to enjoy Rida al-walidain is one of the
greatest of life's blessings. One of the worst misfortunes that can befall a Muslim youth is to be maghdouban alalhi
mina al-walidain. "Accursed of his parents". Above, reading the Qur'an, bazaar scene at Tashkurgan, Afghanistan,
in 1968.
28

-jrnt
Like most other developing countries, Kenya is going through a rapid process of modernization and
change which is putting considerable strain on the traditional family structure and hence on the
traditional educational role, support and maintenance of the elderly. Family life is disintegrating as
the young move away to the towns in search of jobs, leaving the elderly In the rural areas. Under
these circumstances the time-honoured educational role of the elderly is no longer practicable. The
modern formal education system offers few educational opportunities for the elderly, although they
have been included in the mass literacy campaigns. Among the Masai, where the elders are often
the source of considerable wealth and family ties remain strong, the valuable contributions the ag¬
ing can make to society are still recognized. Above, three generations of a close-knit Masai family.
In the United States of America a number of innovative programmes are being started which enable
low-income older persons to be trained in "helping roles" and then placed in part-time jobs which
pay a small hourly stipend. In 1 977, under the Foster Grandparents Programme, more than 1 5,000
older persons with low incomes received 40 hours training in providing care to disturbed children.
The "grandparents" offer a service to the community and to the young people and at the same time
they gain financially and emotionally from the experience. In many cases the jobs are unpaid, but
the older persons still find them rewarding. Below, a Red Cross volunteer helper in a centre for
disabled children.
and experiences of which deterioration
of health is not always the worst. They
may be due to worsening of the finan¬
cial situation or even to poverty, to in-
frequency of family, professional and
social contacts, and to loss of identity
and justification for existence in the
community.
Where suitable educational and
cultural systems are not available and
where there has been no association
with such resources during youth and
adulthood, the aging are likely to be
condemned to solitude, emptiness and
boredom. The reality of these dangers
should prompt the public authorities to
devise a consistent policy with respect
to aging and to equip themselves with
the means of carrying it out; in draf¬
ting and implementing the policy they
should be able to reckon with the par¬
ticipation of the aging themselves and
with the co-operation of the non¬
governmental sector.
Without claiming that adult educa¬
tion should be considered a panacea, it
would appear that in its various dimen¬
sions it is a prerequisite for preparation
for retirement and entry into the last
stage of life as well as for creation of
the conditions for "a good old age".
Consequently, education should be a
fundamental aspect of any policy
29

^ relating to aging and elderly persons,
and the latter should be closely
associated with specifying the educa¬
tional priorities and the systems to be
established in this connexion.
In countries where oral traditions
prevail it would be most important for
the authorities to ensure that the aging
are enabled to give the community the
fullest possible benefit of their
knowledge, experience and moral
authority, for example, by recording
what they have to say and
disseminating it via the media. Here,
more than anywhere else, education
should not be conceived of as a process
limited to the formal transmission of
knowledge and techniques, still less as
an activity confined to a particular
stratum of the population or age
group, but rather as a fundamental
human right.
In 1981, India's over-60s numbered some
37.6 million (5.5 per cent of total population)
and it is estimated that by the year 2021 they
will number 130.5 million. The vast majority
(60 to 70 per cent) of the elderly belong to the
poorer section of society and their problems
are more the problems of poverty than of ag¬
ing. In spite of this, the elderly in India, grand¬
fathers, grandmothers, great-uncles and
great-aunts, whether in the affluent or the
poorer sectors of society, perform a very im¬
portant educational function in the socializa¬
tion of the children of the family, from the pre¬
school stage to well into adolescent life.
Photo Sunil Janah, Unesco
Many developing countries have yet
to solve the thorny problem of the
"brain drain" of which elderly people
are often the indirect victims.
Younger qualified people, trained at
considerable cost as part of the com¬
mon development effort, find it dif¬
ficult to resist the lure of the high
salaries they can command abroad.
Deprived of this human resource, the
development process stagnates and
their older unqualified compatriots,
who have contributed to the cost of
their training are reduced, like this
Haitian roadside candle-seller (right),
to humble tasks to eke out their pen¬
sions. One country of the Caribbean
basin, Guyana, has adopted a policy
of encouraging the comparatively
few qualified personnel who have
reached retirement age to continue in
their jobs while strategies are devised
to train rapidly large numbers of
young people and to motivate those
who have gone abroad to return and
work for the development of their
own country-
Photo Flip Schulke © Rapho, Paris
It is well known that in the
budgetary arbitration that goes on at
government level, education is rarely in
a privileged position relative to the
other items of expenditure and, within
the area of education, that for adults
and even more so for the aging most
often gives the impression of being a
poor relation. Aggravated by the
economic crisis, this state of affairs is
not only contrary to the interests of the
social categories and persons directly
concerned but it is also in conflict with
the true interest of countries, par
ticularly developing countries, to
whose progress the aging can make a
strong contribution.
Of course, a prerequisite for this
contribution is that the aging should be
literate and that they should receive
education and training suited to the
tasks which they could perform. Over
and above the productive and pace-
setting functions that they can per¬
form, special emphasis should be plac¬
ed on their aptitude for teaching the
young and also the less young; to a
considerable degree, this represents
compensation for the expenditure on
education for the aging.
Furthermore, it is generally
recognized that proper preparation for
retirement, in which education is a fun¬
damental factor, in most cases helps
avoid problems of both mental and
physical health which, besides being
especially poorly tolerated at this stage
of existence, can be extremely expen¬
sive for social security systems that is
to say, for the nation. It may therefore
be hoped that States will really want to
make available the financial resources
30

which are indispensable for implemen¬
ting their political intentions with
respect to the aging and that they will
consider expenditure on the education
of the aging to be a particularly pro¬
fitable investment, while sometimes
seeking supplementary resources from
the non-governmental and voluntary
assistance sectors.
Men and women are usually con¬
sidered together under the heading of
the aging. However, given the greater
longevity of women, the fact that it is
often harder for them to have access to
Among the subjects for possible
research special attention could be paid
to teaching the aging to read and write,
to the effects of prior access to educa¬
tional and cultural resources on the
utilization of free time for creative pur¬
poses and on the adaptation of in¬
dividuals to the status of retirement,
professional and technological readap¬
tation of the aging and so forth.
Research of this kind, in which the
aging should be extensively associated,
would undoubtedly result in innova¬
tions which could have a considerable
represent, especially from the point of
view of economic, social and cultural
development.
Here, by way of illustration, are
some educational aspects of the prob¬
lems of aging that could be included to
advantage in the priorities of the world
plan of action, as regards both recom¬
mendations to States and activities to
be undertaken on an international and
regional level:
Teaching all society's age groups to
read and write;
Expansion of adult education in the
the benefits of literacy and education
in general, and the often subordinate
and laborious nature of the tasks
which are their lot in the household as
well as in production and in the tertiary
sector, they tend to be particularly
disadvantaged, handicapped and lone¬
ly in the face of aging. This situation
warrants special attention on the part
of the persons responsible at the
various decision-making levels to en¬
sure that the difficulties peculiar to the
circumstances of aging women can be
offset by specific and practical
measures.
The studies on education and aging
carried out for Unesco showed that
there are extremely conspicuous short¬
comings with respect to research, in¬
novations and exchanges of ideas and
experience on this subject. This defi¬
ciency is particularly regrettable in that
the matter has been ignored and
neglected for such a long time.
effect on their situation and, probably,
on society as a whole. It would appear
to be very desirable that various
developed and developing countries
should engage in mutually profitable
exchanges in this domain where, by
analogy with the isolation to which the
aging are so often exposed, the action
of States nearly always takes place in
solitude, ignorance, and even indif¬
ference, as compared with what hap¬
pens in other areas.
Since it is understood that education
should occupy a position of choice in
the world plan of action on aging, it
must be pointed out that the fun¬
damental idea that the access of
everybody and of all ages to education
and culture is based on an inalienable
human right should not lead to the
classification of education among so-
called "humanitarian" tasks. On the
contrary, it should be considered as a
means of taking full advantage of the
incalculable asset which the aging
framework of lifelong education;
Preparing the aging for the creative
use of free time;
Preparing adults for a profession
ally and socially productive
retirement;
Recognizing and encouraging the
important role which the aging can
play in society and in the most varied
areas, in particular those of teaching
and group leadership;
Integrating the aging into society
and, in particular, into educational in¬
stitutions alongside members of other
age groups;
Promoting research and studies on
the subject of the aging, covering all
fields of gerontology;
Paying attention, as a matter of
priority, to the problems of aging
women;
Financing education in respect of
the aging, considered both as a
humanitarian obligation and as an
investment.
31
