The emergent peoples
of Latin America
The cultural profile of a continent
by Darcy Ribeiro
WE anthropologists have been so
busily engaged in micro-studies of
acculturation that we have never
got around to elaborating a theory of ethnic
transfiguration that would enable us to
understand how modern peoples are form¬
ed. By concentrating our attention on the
supposedly reciprocal cultural influences at
work between peoples we have learned
something of how tribal cultures are
destroyed and rebuilt but remain almost
totally ignorant about the development of
modern peoples and nations.
This is one of the consequences of reduc¬
ing anthropology to "barbarology", a
science interested only in primitive peoples
seen as living fossils of the human species, a
vision, one might add, which is so narrow
DARCY RIBEIRO, Brazilian writer and an¬
thropologist, is a specialist on the Indian tribes of
Amazonia. He has been rector of the University
of Brasilia, has served as his country's Minister of
Education, and has taught in various Latin
American countries, notably in Peru. He is the
author of Civilization Process (Smithsonian In¬
stitution Press, 1969) and many other published
works including a novel, Maira, inspired by the
life of the Amazonian Indians.
that, even in terms of this limited objective,
little progress has been made. Rarely do any
of the numerous specialists of the question
ever mention, even less denounce, the brutal
character of the colonial relations of tribal
peoples with the frontier zones of civiliza¬
tion. Nor do they make clear the ways in
which those peoples, alienated from the
tribal condition, become victims of
deculturation and candidates for incorpora¬
tion into the mass of national societies.
From an ethnic-cultural point of view,
modern American peoples present certain
distinctive characteristics. The first of these
is the astonishing uniformity of the two
blocksthat of the neo-British in the north
and of the neo-Iberian in the south.
England, which never successfully absorbed
the Scots, the Irish or the Welsh, managed
nonetheless to construct a new and gigantic
Anglo-Saxon world in North America.
Spain, which was obliged to respect the
identity of the Basques, the Catalans and
the Galicians, built up a Hispanic America
ten times ar large and more homogeneous
than its own society. Portugal, finally, has
more variety of regional accent in its small
territory than Brazil with its continental im
mensity and its twenty million inhabitants.
This uniformity brings to light, however,
another characteristic of modern and, in the
largest sense of the word, American peoples,
a characteristic which is common to many
non-European peoples its diversification
in four distinct historical and cultural con¬
figurations:
(1) Witness Peoples, that is, those
resulting from the clash of the European in¬
vader with developed civilizations such as
the Aztecs, the Mayas and the Incas; no real
synthesis took place between a surviving
"Indianness" and the newcomers from
Spain.
(2) The New Peoples, produced by the
coming together of Indians from the tribes,
black slaves, and whites from the Iberian
peninsula, employed on the tropical planta¬
tions, in forest exploitations, or in the mines
from which precious metals were extracted.
They gave rise to a completely new ethnic
group, very different from its three com¬
ponents, which is still in search of its identi¬
ty. These are peoples in the process of
becoming and who, lacking a long past of
which they can be proud, depend on the
future for self-definition.
ÏÔÏÏ I -fct

(3) Transplanted Peoples, such as those
of North America and Canada, who are
simply European transplantations on
American soil (compare also Australia and
New Zealand). Argentina and Uruguay can
also be placed in this category; although
their populations consisted at first of "New
Peoples", they underwent a migratory flux
of such importance as to change them com¬
pletely.
(4) Emerging Peoples corresponding to
indigenous groups issuing from the
"Witness Peoples" and aspiring to national
autonomy.
Each of these groupings corresponds to a
different process in the formation of
population and nationality. We Brazilians,
for example, as a new people, along with the
Venezuelans, the Cubans, etc. came from
the cross-breeds, sons of white fathers and
Indian or black women, anxious to identify
with the father but rejected by him. We
grew up, all of us, as the spiritual killers of
our maternal lineage, wearing down
thousands of Indians and Blacks in the pro¬
cess of bringing ourselves into being. We
survive in the Tropics because we have
learned to live here with the Indians, making
a living from the small plots where we
cultivate the plants inherited from them. We
hunt, we fish, we build our huts exactly as
they did. We even use Indian words to name
the things of the earth and the sky.
For the black slaves coming from Africa,
civilization meant the loss of their
egalitarian tribal community, where each
man lived as an individual, and being chang¬
ed into an object or commodity. In the
quilombos (compounds) they were reduced
to the state of animals. There they learned
to carry out simple tasks of commercial pro¬
duction with the whip as teacher. They
worked from dawn till dusk, seven days a
week, on their small cultivated plots in order
to have something to eat. As the master
never put together Blacks speaking the same
language, in order to reduce the possibility
of mutiny, they were forced to communicate
between one another in the master's
language. Thus, little by little, they became
rehumanized, learning to be, to speak and
to understand; they became new beings,
ethnically transformed.
Due to the high mortality rate, this savage
system was only able to function thanks to
the constant introduction of fresh black
slaves. To assist this process English and
Spanish entrepreneurs raised the capital to
establish the first modern multinational
enterprises, prodigious organizations to pur¬
sue the Blacks in Africa and embark them
on slave-ships for shipment across the
Atlantic and resale in America.
There were always fewer black women
than men one woman for every four men
perhaps. They were impregnated by the old
boss and his young son, then by the
foreman, etc. Thus came to be born a
number of smiling mulattos who increased
the number of slaves in the service of the
master. Products of this land, they quickly
gained a bad reputation as runaways,
pretentious and suspect mulattos who did
not know their true place. Still very badly
regarded, these mestizos born of Indians
and mulattos form the major part of Latin
Americans today.
The process of formation of the "Witness
Peoples", such as the Mexicans,
Guatemalans, Peruvians, Bolivians and
Ecuadorians, was completely different.
Developed civilizations with cities and a
nobility, priests, armies and bureaucracies,
they were quickly subjugated by the Euro¬
peans who captured their cities, destroyed
their temples, beheaded their nobles,
defeated their armies and took over the
bureaucracy the better to dominate the
enslaved Indian people.
As a result, a prodigious mixing of a few
Europeans with a multitude of captured
Indian women took place. But the
mestizoscuriously much more wester¬
nized isolated themselves in the cities and
towns, still differentiated from the Indians
who continued to live in a universe of their
own, a peasantry cut off from contact with
the urban world. They apparently
represented above all else an inexhaustible
source of manpower for all kinds of work.
Until recently, these natives were seen by
researchers as simple peasants still holding
out against what seemed to be an inexorable
assimilation. The feeling was that sensible
agrarian reform and help in the form of
some elements of education, together with
cunning play on certain indigenous customs,
would encourage them to lose their mania to
be Indians and to become simply good Peru¬
vian, Bolivian, Guatemalan or Mexican
citizens.
Lately, however, the perception that they
are not atypical peasants has become more
generalized. They are, in fact, oppressed
people and as such they aspire legitimately
to be masters of their own destiny in throw- r
The press informs us that a bitter worldwide
struggle is on for leadership among the
major languages: English, French, Russian,
Chinese, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, etc.
One of the most serious defeats human
culture could suffer would be for one of
these languages to triumph at the cost of the
others. The three or four thousand
languages spoken by man are one of our
most splendid natural resources, as in¬
dispensable to men as is (or was until recent¬
ly) the "green lung" of virgin forest in the
Amazon. These vernaculars are not just
local speech forms but cultural roots. If we
let them rot or be severed, we will be literally
uprooted ourselvesabandoned to suf¬
focate, to suffer a cultural death with far-
reaching consequences.
Marc Soriano
Pictograph "letter" from a Yukaghir girl
(north-east Siberia, beginning 20th cen¬
tury) to her absent lover: "I am all alone
at home. You have left me and gone far
away. You love a Russian girl (with full
skirt) and you have married her (under
one roof with her), but your marriage is
not happy (crossed lines between
them). You will have children and I shall
remain alone and sad (crossed lines). I
shall always love you, although there is
another man who loves me." Photo ©
Musée de l'Homme, Paris.
Racism is one of the most disturbing phenomena of the great revolution of the modern world. At the very
time when industrial civilization is penetrating to all points of the globe and is uprooting men of every col¬
our from their age-old traditions, a doctrine, treacherously scientific in appearance, is invoked in order to
rob these men of theirfull share in the advantages of the civilization forced upon them. There exists in the
structure of our civilization a fatal contradiction. On the one hand it wishes and insists that certain cultural
values, to which it attributes the highest virtues, be assimilated by other people. But conversely it will not
admit that two-thirds of humanity is capable of attaining this standard which it has set up.
Alfred Métraux
(1902-1963)
The Lanlate satellite ground station which handles Nigeria's international telephone, telex and
television communications. Photo Mike Wells © Parimage, Paris. .

ing off the hegemony of the creóle
minorities, whites in fact, who fought for in¬
dependence, but only to serve their own in¬
terests. Indeed, wherever they took the reins
of government they oppressed the majority
native populations as much, if not more
then the old colonials from the metropolis.
The aggressivity of the Flemings and the
Basques, for example, in their self-affirming
movements, reveals how serious can be the
conflicts that can occur when peoples much
more exploited and oppressed, such as the
Latin American Indians, start to revolt.
Some of them have already begun to do so,
demanding self-determination and the
freedom to be themselves culturally as
"Emerging Peoples" rather than as custo¬
dians of a folklore which enriches the na¬
tional mosaic.
If the Spanish model of unitary States
dominating multi-ethnic societies persists in
the nations where these "Emerging
Peoples" live, violent conflicts will be in¬
evitable and could even degenerate into
ethnic wars. On the other hand, the adop-
white emigrant was generally offered the
possibility of becoming a free farmer, in the
subjected and enslaved zones the work-force
was treated, not in terms of people with
rights, but as animals. In fact, the original
population has always been treated as a
source of energy to be burnt up and used in
much the same way as coal was to be utilized
later on.
For their part, the Latin-American élites
offer a different explanation for this
backwardness. For decades and centuries
they have consoled themselves with the
"erudite" notion that the underdevelop¬
ment of their countries was due to natural,
unalterable factors. Thus the cause was seen
as the intolerable tropical climate and the
uncontrolled mixing of inferior races un-
suited to civilization.
At the same time, without even question¬
ing these explanations, which were both
causal and consolatory, they pointed to
other handicaps, such, for example, as the
live. Others showed that those who work
from sunrise to sunset in our countries
building whatever is constructed there,
cultivating whatever is cultivated and
manufacturing whatever is manufactured,
are, in fact, the Blacks, the mestizos and the
poor whites.
Today there is a growing awareness that,
as in the past, the old social classes run the
country for their own enrichment and pro¬
fit; it is they who supply the managers of the
multinationals and the technocracy that
organize us, ever more effectively, for the
greater benefit of their mother-companies
and the perpetuation of the same sterile
dominant classes.
Over and above the multiple alienations
which are specifically ours, others, still more
serious, come to us from Europe in the form
of ideological contraband. The first of these
was always, and still remains, our ignoble
cultural heritage of racism, the principal
arm of the European ideological arsenal of
A culture of fiesta and siesta?
tion of forms permitting a more active par¬
ticipation as in Switzerland, for ex¬
ample through the organization of
multinational States corresponding to multi¬
ethnic societies could do something to
reduce such conflicts, even if it cannot
eliminate them altogether.
What is unfortunate in this situation is a
tendency to complicate the already very
tense framework of social struggle with
ethnic-cultural factors. The ethnic energies
which are in the process of mobilization may
very well merge with class demands to create
a revolution permitting the building of a
new State, at once more open and
egalitarian at the ethnic level and more
fraternal at the social level. The contrary
could also occur, with the dominant classes
making use of these tensions to perpetuate
their own rule.
Different levels of civilization correspond
to these different historico-cultural con¬
figurations. It is a well known fact, for in¬
stance, that the "Transplanted Peoples"
achieve much higher levels of development
within industrial civilization that any of the
others, especially those transplanted to
North America who, even if they put down
roots a century later and were very much
poorer and had a less illustrious colonial
past, are still very much in advance.
There are good reasons for this. The
"Transplanted Peoples" simply continued
on the other side of the ocean the kind of
life they had led in Europe, fulfilling the
potentialities of the civilization to which
they already belonged within the vast spaces
which they succeeded in conquering. The
"Witness Peoples" and the "New
Peoples", however, developed from the sur¬
vivors of native populations who were vic¬
tims of the terrible massacres that followed
the European invasion. Moreover, they had
been torn from their original culture and in¬
serted in a second class version of the culture
of the colonizers.
Whereas in the settlement colonies the
Criticism of one's own society and culture is also one of the primary functions of culture
which, in our age, has been particularly accentuated. The poète maudit of the romantic era
has today become the committed or revolutionary writer or artist. Refusing injustice, he
demands and exercises his own freedom to further economic, social, moral or cultural revolu¬
tions. Such critical or dissident activity is necessary for the health of peoples, an essential
component of democratic pluralism and an indispensable motor of social progress and
change.
José Luis Martinez
Pen... itentiary! Drawing © André Paris, Fontenouille, France.
Catholic religion which was deemed inimical
to progress.
A still further Latin-American misfortune
was the Iberian heritage which accounts for
the indolence and intolerance of these exotic
peoples, more African than European, from
the confines of the Mediterranean. Many
still regret the expulsion of the French and
the Dutch.
In recent years this consolatory discourse
has been challenged. Some people came to
realize that the Tropics were a good place to
colonial domination.
In attributing to himself the role of civiliz¬
ing agent, the European began by represen¬
ting the outside world as inhabited by sub-
races which he was called upon to
regenerate. The strategem is so terrible and
subtle that .the Blacks, the Indians and the
mestizos acculturated by Europeans, having
profoundly integrated in their consciousness
the idea of their own ugliness and inborn in¬
feriority, suffer terribly for simply being as
they are.
10

Confronted with the overwhelming
evidence of the physical grace, vivacity and
vigour of the mulattos and mestizos, the
theorists who propound the superiority of
the white race have said for centuries that
the latter are nothing more than human
mules and as such not only sterile but in¬
capable of civilization. Despite their beauty
and incomparable grace, black and brown
women were to be despised not only because
of their ancestral servility, but above all
because they were indelibly marked with the
colour and sign of the inferior races.
Latin-American racism is, it can be seen,
an exported European fruit. Transported
here* it grew and prospered. As compared to
the Saxon variety, the only typical
characteristic of our racism is its
"assimilative" and mixing tendency. The
Indian and Black are no more than the raw
material for making more cross-breeds
whose "whitening" progresses each time a
little more until they become complete
whites.
The second form of ideological and
Eurocentric contraband has to do with the
so-called differential quality of Western
civilization, which is its singular creativity.
This vision claims all the latest material ad¬
vances of civilization as being intrinsically
European. In reality, they are cultural and
human creations achieved in the course of
evolution and as the result of the exploita¬
tion of the material world. However,
because they happen to have appeared in
Europe, they are characterized by "Euro-
peanness", which has led to the error of im¬
agining that sources of energy and
mechanical and technical processes are in¬
herent to a particular civilization.
What are the fruits of Latin
America's African connexion?
This misconception is as stupid as believ¬
ing that petrol is Christian or electricity
English, when in fact they are conquests of
human evolution which can be adopted by
any society which has reached a certain level
of civilization. They may even serve to re¬
inforce cultural autonomy and defend
ethnic identity. Such an eventuality is not
limited to the entry of goods as merchandise
into the imperialist system of unequal ex¬
changes organized to exploit and enslave
other peoples. The fact, for example, that
the Chinese productive system is becoming
more and more technical does not make it
more westernized. On the contrary, it brings
about the very conditions in which it can
free itself from European influences to
become more majestically Chinese.
One last comment on our supposed defi¬
ciencies. It is time we taught the rest of the
world to see us as we are and not as mere
stereotypes. The idea of a Latin America
which is all siesta and fiesta, machismo, of
ready-made dictators, frenetic rumbas and
an unhealthy indolence has exactly the same
function as racism: it completely overlooks
the reality of class and colonial domination.
I have noticed people taking longer lunch
breaks in Holland and Italy than in Brazil.
The long European round of summer
MAIS
.OMISTßOSMQ
il ^~, to yjtttuut*. JU K T*t7m»iVíw**¿
I' M
n*fc~J-
This culture considers itselfsuperior,
not wanting to assimilate others or
to allow itself to be assimilated. It is
ready to incorporate the men of the
discovered territories, but only on
condition that they abandon their
own culture. Thus the culture of the
conquistador and the colonizer was
superimposed on the "demonic" In¬
dian culture. Christian temples were
erected on the ancient Aztec teocallis
(mounds), in place of their ancient
idols were raised up a cross, a statue
of the Virgin Mary or of a saint.
Leopoldo Zea
Los Maestros de Coro y de
Escuela (Choirmasters and
Schoolmasters). Drawing by
Felipe Guarnan Poma de Avala
for his book Nueva Crónica y
Buen Gobierno, a lengthy ac¬
count of indigenous South
American cultures and the
Spanish conquest, probably writ¬
ten between 1578 and 1613.
^tlum m»yt K»
holidays does not, unfortunately have any
parallel here. It is not, however, as creative,
vital and beautiful as our festivals.
As for -the legendary Latin American
laziness, it is worth pointing out that a
worker in a car factory in Mexico or Sao
Paulo works just as hard as his German
counterpart, earning in the process five
times less. On the other hand, directors and
bosses in Brazil make ten times more than
their European counterparts. Exactly the
same point can be made with respect to the
boia-fria (day-worker) of Parana State or
the vaqueiro (cowboy) of Bahia who work
much more than a Texan cowboy or a
French peasant, slogging away without a
break under conditions much worse than
theirs, and for ten times less remuneration.
So much for our laziness.
For us, indolence, like affectation, never
characterized the Blacks, the Indians or the
mulattos, nor, for tlliat matter, the poor
Whites. Rather they were the lot of the rich
white man, the most delicious of his
privileges.
Even the few merits which it is grudgingly
agreed the Latin-American peoples may
^possess, are instantly qualified by the
depreciatory tone employed in speaking of
them. Such is the case, for example, with
our popular music, recognized and praised
as beautiful, rhythmic and vibrant thanks to
its African quality. Even this is held against
us when we are dismissed as insatiable
dancers of sambas, rumbas and boleros.
The "boom" currently enjoyed by Latin
American literature is even more irritating,
and here the prejudice is blatant. A boom,
no matter how surprising, does not need to
be explained as a phenomenon. The simple
truth is that the modern world has few bet¬
ter novelists than García Márquez, Borges,
Cortázar, Rulfo and Guimaraes Rosa, and
few better poets than Neruda, Cesar Vallejo
and Drummond.
Some deficiencies, it must be admitted,
have justly been laid at our door. Take
machismo for instance. It is true that we
have often been guilty of it, but our women
are actively engaged in re-educating us so
that, in addition to being warm and loving,
we can be co-operative, cordial and, why
not, faithful.
The Caudillo-style authoritarianism
which is often attributed to us is not, in fact,
ours. In any event, it is not a creation of the
Latin-American people who have suffered
and still suffer in the flesh from the stupidity
of the enslaving colonial or multinational
"petty kings" which European civilization
has imposed on us.
We are, it is clear, peoples who do not yet
exist; but we shall exist. A process of declin¬
ing civilization has destroyed our sources
and melted us into an immense block, of im¬
portance today if only because of the human
mass it represents: 400 million souls.
Another emerging process of civilization
will transfigure us so that tomorrow ours
will be a privileged place on earth, free, pro¬
sperous and fraternal.
H Darcy Ribeiro
11
