Centenarians
of the
high valleys
A 92-year-old mason, José Maria Roa of Vilcabamba (Ecuador)
tramples mud for his bricks.
THE medieval alchemists who quested for the
philosopher's stone which would prolong life
as well as transform base metals into gold
might have been fascinated to meet the inhabitants of
the valley of Vilcabamba in Ecuador.
Clodovea Herrera of Vilcabamba, still a dab hand with the spindle at
mm ^ta i
B v -JÊÊ
mí M M^^WÍ wmr ^âm ^^K^l
1 . Vilcabamba (Ecuador);
Georgia (USSR)
2. Hunza (Pakistan); 3. Abkhasia,
In this beautiful spot about 1,500 metres up in the
Andes, a life-span of 1 00 years Is considered unexcep¬
tional. A census taken there a year or two ago revealed
that no less than nine of the 800 people living in the
valley were centenarians. (The average in an in¬
dustrialized country today is some three or four
centenarians per 100,000 population.) The oldest
Vilcabamban was Miguel Carpió, 123; one of his
daughters was a sprightly 98. Micaela Quezada, born
in 1 870, still spun wool as she had done for over a cen¬
tury. Her older sister had died at age 1 07, and she still
had twelve brothers over 90.
Most of the inhabitants of the valley are descended
from Spaniards who settled there at the time of the
conquest some 400 years ago. They are Roman
Catholics and their claims to longevity can be checked
out against baptismal certificates. A British geron-
tologist, David Davies, who visited Vilcabamba some
years ago noted that "the area has seen little upheaval
since [the Conquest] either politically or geographical-
From a cloud of wool, Vilcabamba centenarian Micaela Quezada
spins threads of time.
ly, for it is in the zone free of earthquakes. The entire
valley is extremely tranquil, and the climate is equable,
with much the same amount of sun each day, and a
steady breeze always from the same direction.
"Indeed," Davies went on, "it is this tranquillity that
is regarded by the Ecuadorian and foreign doctors who
have visited the valley and studied the people, as the
cause of their great age. Hypertension, heart disease,
and cancer are comparatively uncommon. Death is
18

usually the result of an accident, or of catching influen¬
za from the few outsiders who visit the place."
A particularly remarkable feature of the Vilcabam-
bans was that some of them drank "from two to four
cups of rum a day" and smoked "from forty to sixty
cigarettes each day", although the rum was unrefined
and the cigarettes homemade from tobacco grown in
their gardens and therefore, perhaps, less harmful than
the usual manufactured products. Less remarkable is
the low-calorie diet: the average daily adult intake is on¬
ly around 1,700 calories largely from vegetables and
fruit.
Vilcabamba is one of several places scattered around
the world where, for reasons not fully understood, peo¬
ple commonly live to a great age. Other well-known ex¬
amples include the Hunza region of Pakistan, set in the
A veteran stone-breaker of Hunza in the
Karakoram mountain system of central Asia.
lofty Karakoram mountain range, and Soviet Abkhasia
and Azerbaijan in the Caucasus. The oldest inhabitant
of the Hunza a year or two ago was said to be over 1 40
years old, while the 1 970 census indicated that there
were 5,000 centenarians in the Caucasus, or 63 per
100,000. What all these places have in common is in¬
accessibility and high altitude. French researchers
have discovered that in France too people tend to live
longer (73 years on average) in mountainous regions
than they do in the country as a whole (71 .6 years).
Harvesting in the Hunza.
However, the exact relationship (if any) between
high altitude living and longevity remains to be
established. One survey carried out by the Soviet
Union's Social Gerontology Laboratory and covering
over 40,000 people in the Caucasus reached the con¬
clusion that the oldest among them had rarely changed
jobs or been divorced, or followed an exclusively
vegetarian diet. However a 1 965 study on Hungary's
23 centenarians revealed that they had been largely
vegetarian for most of their lives, although unlike the
The 40,000 people of Hunza lead a hard life in
a grandiose setting.
Vilcabambans they drank little alcohol and rarely
smoked. At the same time there have been reports of
abnormal numbers of people living to a great age
in the Siberian tundra on a diet containing great
amounts of animal fats from their reindeer. Such con¬
flicting diets and habits only emphasize the need to
study the centenarian phenomenon wherever in the
world it occurs with great frequency, and suggest
that modern science is as far as medieval alchemy
from discovering that elusive elixir of life.
19
