THE EVOLUTION
OF A CONCEPT
Cultural pluralism
in a changing world
by Otto Klineberg
FOR most people culture suggests high
artistic or intellectual achievement,
the development of art and science,
the humanities, philosophy, the expression
of the genius of a people.
For the social scientist it includes all this
and much more; it may be defined as em¬
bracing everything that a person acquires as
a member of society; all the habits and
capabilities which are learned through tradi¬
tion or experience, as well as the material
objects which are produced by the group. It
may be expressed in works of art or scholar¬
ship, but also in what we eat and the way we
dress, in the nature of our relationship to
members of our family or to others in the
society, in our system of values, in the
education we receive, in our ideas of good
and bad, in the kind of houses we build, in
the expectations and hopes we have for the
future, in our attitude toward strangers.
This list is far from complete, but it
should suffice to indicate the range and
complexity of the content of cultures. It is
not surprising that a number of writers have
described culture as a concept of major im¬
portance in the social sciences because of the
demonstration of the extent to which our
behaviour and our ideas are shaped by the
group to which we belong. In that connex¬
ion it has served as a needed corrective to
the widespread notion that differences in the
way of life of different groups are determin¬
ed mainly if not exclusively by biology or
race. It is this wider concept of culture
which is used in what follows.
It is perhaps not too surprising that in the
history of human contacts most groups have
been much more impressed by their dif¬
ferences from others than by the similarities.
All too frequently this has been associated
with the belief that if they are different from
us they must be inferior. In the language of
many of the pre-Iiterate societies described
by anthropologists the expression "the
people" referred only to one's own group;
other groups were often considered strange,
exotic, inferior, somewhat less than human.
This attitude, although widespread, is not
necessarily universal, but it has certainly
played an important part in the relations
between peoples, not only in the obvious
cases of colonization and other forms of ex¬
ploitation, but even in situations which are
motivated by liberal high-minded pro¬
grammes such as technical assistance or co¬
operation, in which the receiving areas are
expected to adopt the standards and models
of the donors.
In this respect, however, it is possible to
identify certain counter-currents, character¬
ized by a greater willingness to recognize the
rights of others to their own cultural identi¬
ty, and by a greater concern on the part of
those "others" to maintain that identity. In
the USA, for example, the sociologist
Milton M. Gordon has distinguished three
stages in the approach to the complex
American ethnic structure. The first, Anglo-
conformity, demanded "the complete
renunciation of the immigrant's ancestral
heritage in favour of the behaviour and
values of the Anglo-Saxon core group;" the
second, the melting-pot idea, envisaged "a
biological merger of the Anglo-Saxon
peoples with other immigrant groups and a
blending of their respective cultures into a
new indigenous American type;" the third,
characterizing the present situation, is
cultural pluralism, which seeks "the preser¬
vation of the communal life and significant
portions of the culture of the later im¬
migrant groups within the context of
American citizenship and political and
economic integration into American
society." Problems remain as to the extent
to which such a goal is fully possible or
desirable, but certainly the acceptance of a
variety of cultural forms within the nation-
state is much greater now than it was in the
past. The same is true for other countries .
such as Yugoslavia, the Philippines,
Belgium and France, not always to the same
extent, but in the same direction.
On the other side of the picture, various
ethnic groups in a number of different coun¬
tries are now actively seeking the preserva¬
tion of their own cultural identity. One of
the most striking recent instances of an
ethnic group seeking to establish and main¬
tain its cultural identity is that of the Blacks
in the United States. Slavery and its after¬
math of an inferior socio-economic position
within the larger community were clearly
not conducive to the development of a
positive sense of identity.
What happened during the 1960s was
something approaching a psychological
revolution. There was a refusal to accept the
notion of "cultural deprivation", since the

INTERCULTURAL RELATIONS
One of the functions of intercultural activities is to inhibit racism and to promote a better understanding between
cultures. The very fact that young children feel no aversion to what is different and that such aversion is acquired
proves the urgent need to undertake fundamental research which would enable teachers to suggest activities that
respect the evolution and modalities of the relational life of the child.
Make-up artist at work at a children's cultural festival in France. Photo Robert Delpit © Fotogram, Paris.
position of the Blacks was that they had
their own culture. With that went the
development of a whole complex philo¬
sophy (or ideology) of identity. This includ¬
ed the concept of Black Power, the slogans
"Black is beautiful"and "I'm proud to be
Black;" African roots and a Black or
African culture; Black nationalism. Black
psychologists and psychiatrists spoke of a
new Black ethic based upon racial
awareness, high self-esteem, identity and
pride; a sense of adequacy and security.
One aspect of culture which Blacks have
emphasized is that their . self-identity is
always a people-identity; "I am because we
are, and because we are, therefore I am."
This is seen to be in contrast with the
Western emphasis on the self as individually
unique and different. In a recent book by an
American social scientist, Edmund Glenn,
an African ambassador in Washington is
quoted as saying: "The source of the
10
greatest misunderstanding between Ameri¬
cans and Africans is the positive value at¬
tached by the Americans to individualism,
and the negative value attached to it by
Africans."
In France today we are witnessing a strik¬
ing development of concern with ethnic
identity and the preservation of minority
cultures. In Brittany, Corsica, "Occitanie",
etc., this tendency has increased in strength
as it has also among the Catalans and
Basques in Spain, American Indians and
European minorities in the United States
and Canada, the Maori in New Zealand, the
aboriginal population in Australia and
other ethnic groups in many parts of the
world.
All of these developments appear to be in
a direction which we should welcome. The
Unesco Declaration on Race in 1967 in¬
cludes a statement to the effect that "ethnic
groups which suffer discrimination are
sometimes accepted or tolerated by the
dominant group if they totally give up their
cultural identity... Ethnic groups should be
encouraged to preserve their cultural values,
thus contributing to the enrichment of the
total human culture."
Culture, as has already been indicated,
refers to behaviour which is specifically-
human and also to the distinctive ways of
life found in different human populations.
From the point of view of education for in¬
ternational understanding, it has frequently
been suggested that it is important to supply
information as to how others behave;
although such information does not
necessarily lead to friendly attitudes, it does
seem safer to base our relations with other
people on knowledge rather than on ig¬
norance. On the other hand, the
psychologist Gordon Allport suggested a
number of years ago that educators had
gone too far in stressing the differences

among peoples, and presenting others as
strange and even exotic in their behaviour.
He called instead for an "encyclopedia of
human similarities," with greater stress on
the common-human. A more reasonable
position would be to include both the
resemblances and the differences. Our
understanding of culture requires a concern
with both similarities and differences, and
also with the ease and likelihood with which
the differences occur.
A serious difficulty* arises when we at¬
tempt to identify the characteristics of a par¬
ticular culture. Every group is a complex,
with variations in behaviour according to
social class or status, occupation, education
or role; the kind of culture exhibited or ab¬
sorbed by the individual will be somewhat
different for men and women, for young
and old, for each individual; in a nation-
state it may vary considerably from one
region to another. These variations are often
characterized as sub-cultures, but it is not
easy to determine how many sub-cultures
should be distinguished. In addition,
cultures change. How much continuity is
there between Czarist and Communist
Russia, Elizabethan and Victorian England,
or the France of Louis XIV and today?
In connexion with cultural change, there
is an important development in recent years
which is usually defined as the "counter¬
culture," because of the position taken by
its adherents in relation to, and often in op¬
position to the prevailing values of the larger
community. It is mainly confined to the
young in industrial societies; it denies the
relevance of many of the ideals of the
parents; it is not concerned with making
preparations for the future, but insists on
living intensely the experience of the present
(the now generation). Success is seen not in
material terms but as personal development,
self-fulfilment, self-realization.
One aspect of this movement is particular¬
ly striking in connexion with cultural varia¬
tions. For many of the devotees of the
counter-culture, salvation is to be found in
the religions of the Orient. Many parents
and teachers of the young in revolt against
their society find it hard to understand the
attraction of Zen Buddhism or Hinduism,
but the emphasis on contemplation and in¬
ner peace must seem very palatable to those
trying to escape from a society which
stresses hard work and material success. Not
only do the Eastern religions provide an
alternative style; they also reduce or remove
any feelings of guilt that may be felt as the
result of defection from the goals which the
young had been brought up to respect, but
which no longer satisfied them.
CONTINUED PAGE 14

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 11
The whole movement included within the
concept of the counter-culture has lost many
of its adherents, and is frequently con¬
sidered to have abandoned a good part of its
programme. This may be the case, but re¬
cent research on the attitudes of young men
and women with regard to work and their
future, indicates that at least some of its
components continue to have an impact.
We turn now to a number of specific
issues in connexion with culture contact in
the contemporary world which create
problems for institutions like Unesco and
the United Nations and for all those who
agree with them that the variety of human
cultures should as far as possible be preserv¬
ed. These issues take the form of apparent
contradictions or paradoxes which require
careful consideration.
The first of these relates to the general
programme of technical assistance or co¬
operation designed to improve the standard
of living in developing countries, but which
in practice involves the introduction of in¬
dustrial and technological models from the
"modern", usually the Western world.
This, too, reflects the United Nations pro¬
gramme; the question arises as to whether it
is compatible with the survival of traditional
cultures. The American anthropologist Ed¬
ward Hall reminds us that the various facets
of a culture are interrelated; "touch a
culture in one place and everything else is af¬
fected." The Australian psychologist
Stephen Bochner insists that "there are
many examples of societies which have lost
their cultural integrity as the price for
modernization."
Such "modernization" is, however,
precisely what the leaders of the developing
countries are requesting. The Norwegian
sociologist Johan Galtung points out that
Third World representatives are urging the
creation of "a New International Economic
Order (NIEO) to have faster industrializa¬
tion, increasing exports, better raw material
prices, more financial and technological
transfers." The question then arises: can
this be done without destroying, or at least
disrupting, the existing indigenous, tradi¬
tional culture?
It has frequently been pointed out that
there is a tendency in the industrially
developed world to see itself as a universally
valid model to be imitated by others. In this
connexion Galtung analyzes the important
question of human needs, their universal
and variable character, and the necessity of
avoiding cultural ethnocentrism, paying
more direct attention to what the recipient
societies want, and less to what the donors
think they ought to want. What they want
may, however, be difficult to determine
since the political leaders and the évolués in
many developing countries have themselves
adopted a position close to that of the
Western world.
The fact remains that technological
change is not always accompanied by the
disappearance of traditional culture. There
can be no doubt as to the industrial and
technical achievement of the Japanese, but
at the same time they have retained many
distinctively Eastern and national traits. It
has been suggested, for example, that their
life continues to be affected by the notion of
mutual dependence, whereas the West, cen¬
tred on the individual, tends to develop
more self-reliance. In Japan a business
enterprise, no matter how large, is seen in
the image of a household, with the accom¬
panying interdependence and loyalty
characteristic of the family.
There is a second paradox to be con¬
sidered. The United Nations/Unesco posi¬
tion is in favour of contact among the
peoples of the world, and extensive pro¬
grammes of "exchange of persons" have
been developed by both national and inter¬
national agencies. Bochner, however, in
discussing the forces antithetical to cultural
preservation, includes international educa¬
tional exchange "which acts as the main
vehicle for the uncritical diffusion of
Western culture and therefore the erosion of
non-Western life styles."
14

INTERCULTURAL RELATIONS. The
real question we ought to ask ourselves is
whether, among the patterns of universal
character put forward there is one more
likely to respect diversity in the overall
development scheme. For there are many
advantages in diversity and these advan¬
tages are not only cultural but also
economic. Are there, then, patterns and
ideologies which, while necessarily being
presented as they are that is of universal
character are more likely than others to
maintain diversity rather than consider it as
an obstacle to development, and how can
they be applied?
Left, the three Marys at the tomb; detail
from the Maestà, the altarpiece for the
main altar of the Cathedral of Siena, by the
Italian artist Duccio di Buoninsegna
(c.1260-1319). Photo © Editions d'Art
Albert Skira, Geneva. Right, Malanggan
mask from New Ireland, in the Bismarck
Archipelago, north of New Guinea (see
Unesco Courier, October 1979). Photo W.
Schneider-Schutz © Ethnological
Museum, Berlin (West).
With special reference to Africa, the
Kenyan political scientist Ali Mazrui speaks
of the university as "the pinnacle of the
structure of dependency," and particularly
cultural dependency. He considers that this
phenomenon is to be found not only in the
case of those who go abroad to study but
also of those who attended universities
within Africa, since these were so often built
upon a Western or European model, with
little relation to local needs. One has the im¬
pression that this situation has recently
changed in the direction of greater attention
to problems within Africa, but the fact re¬
mains that the tools and the language of
observation and research have been im¬
ported from outside, so that it is difficult to
contradict Mazrui's argument that the
university frequently leads to cultural
dependency. One is reminded of the oft-
quoted statement by Frantz Fanon, "To be
integrated one must become what one is not,
a White."
Bochner attempts to resolve the issue
which he has raised concerning the negative
effect of international university exchanges
by suggesting a change in their orientation.
He writes that "Programmes will have to
shift their goals explicitly and self¬
consciously from the present purpose of
producing cultural exporters to the aim of
training cultural mediators," that is to say,
people who have been trained to interpret
both cultures to both societies, in the coun¬
try of sojourn arid in the country of origin.
This issue is raised in the volume edited by
Ingrid Eide, Students as Links between
Cultures, which reports the results of
research undertaken at the request of
Unesco and which finds that such a
mediating influence occurs with con¬
siderable frequency among students who
have attended a foreign university. Our own
research also indicates that a substantial
proportion of foreign students in a number
of countries reported that they felt more
positive about their own country after their
experience abroad, with only a very small
minority indicating that they felt more
negative. This suggests that negative at¬
titudes toward one's own culture are not the
usual reaction, but the idea that more atten¬
tion be paid to education for mediation bet¬
ween cultures seems eminently reasonable.
The third and final paradox to be men¬
tioned is that those who advocate cultural
pluralism do so for different reasons, and
expect from it very different consequences.
They may favour it because they respect
other cultures. On the other hand, it is il¬
luminating to read what Gluckman, a South
African-born anthropologist, has to say
about his native country in this connexion.
"As a South African anthropologist, I have
always been impressed by the fact that in
some ways the most sympathetic and even
laudatory analyses of indigenous African
cultures in South Africa come from studies
of scholars who believed in the policy of
ethnic segregation. They describe the culture
of each African people in an idealistic
form and therein was contained the im¬
plication that those cultures were good for
the peoples concerned, an essential part of
their being, something to which they were
entitled and which they should be helped to
maintain."
Presumably these cultures were fine if
they could be kept at a distance from the
White population. It is striking to note that
agreement as to the value of maintaining
15

traditional cultures may be expressive of
such different motivations.
It should be clear from what has preceded
that the position adopted here is that if
ethnic groups wish to keep their culture
alive, they should be permitted, even en¬
couraged, to do so. There is, however, one
argument which has occasionally been ex¬
pressed in favour of increasing the
homogeneity of cultures, namely, that
cultural differences may lead to conflict. In
some cases the conflict may be minor, caus¬
ing annoyance rather than real hostility, but
even then acceptance of other groups may
be made more difficult. This is because
cultural differences tend to create an us and
them psychology.
The major difficulty lies in the general at¬
titude to which reference has already been
made, that if they differ from us, they must
be inferior. This is the major impediment to
the acceptance of cultural diversity. As Hall
puts it, we must "stop ranking either people
or talents and accept the fact that there are
many roads to truth and no culture has a
corner on the path or is better equipped than
others to search for it."
There is no easy way to predict future
developments in this complex area. The
situation may be summarized in terms of
two conflicting tendencies. On the one
hand, there is the desire on the part of the
Third World, particularly its leaders, to pro¬
fit from the technological competence of in¬
dustrially advanced countries; the diffusion
of Western culture is a consequence. On the
other hand, there is a growing concern with
keeping cultures alive, marked by the trends
toward cultural pluralism, concern about
group identity, négritude, respect for dif¬
ferences, increased resistance to a cultural
imperialism which runs the risk of destroy¬
ing the variations in ways of life which
enrich the human condition.
Changes in the direction of "moderniza¬
tion" will undoubtedly continue, and they
are needed in the fight against poverty,
illness, infant mortality, illiteracy, the in¬
ferior position of women, and the political
powerlessness of the mass of the population.
The question remains as to how these
changes may be introduced while preserving
the major aspects of the way of life of the
people concerned.
This would involve a better understanding
of the meaning and value of cultural varia¬
tions; knowledge of the needs and aspira¬
tions of other ethnic groups; the ability to
empathize with others, that is, to imagine
ourselves in their position; greater respect
for diversity; more willingness to have
priorities set by the recipients of aid rather
than by the donors; willingness to admit that
the way of life which we prefer is not
necessarily valid universally.
All of this would require an educational
campaign far more extensive than any so far
attempted. One of its aspects which should
have significant implications is the
demonstration of the interdependence of
cultures, with the tremendous amount of
borrowing and diffusion throughout
history.
The American anthropologist Ralph Lin¬
ton once wrote a convincing article entitled
"One Hundred Percent American". He
describes a day in the life of an American
citizen, the covers of whose bed are of silk
(from China), whose breakfast knife is of
steel, (first made in South India), who
drinks coffee (an Abyssinian plant), and so
on. "As he absorbs (in his newspapers) the
accounts of foreign troubles, he will, if he is
a good conservative citizen, thank a Hebrew
deity in an Indo-European language that he
is one hundred percent American." French
history might be written not only to show
what France has contributed to civilization,
but also to indicate what the rest of the
world has contributed to France. If this
variety of interdependence were more widely
recognized, we might all be able to over¬
come the limitations set on our judgment
and our attitudes by our particular culture,
and to learn that other ways of life may have
equal merit and validity.
In any case, it is a safe prediction that
although there will be some convergence in
the behaviour and values of different
societies, cultural variations will persist
throughout the world in the foreseeable
future. One can only hope that there will
also be increased recognition of the value of
cultural diversity, and of its contribution to
the development of a positive social identity.
At the same time there must also be freedom
of choice for the individual to retain as
much of his ethnic group's culture as he
wishes and to take from other cultures what
he finds most palatable. Societies have the
right to develop their own preferred
character, but so does the individual. The
search for positive identity is both individual
and social.
Otto Klineberg
