THE ARTISTIC
INHERITANCE
by Grigory Verves
THE cultural role of Kiev, both natio¬
nally and among the Slav peoples as
a whole, was considerably enhanced
after the reunification of the Ukraine and
Russia in a single state.
During the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, despite the Tsarist repression,
which went so far as to prohibit the use of
the Ukrainian language and dealt a severe
blow to national cultural aspirations, Kiev
lost none of its earlier prestige. It would in¬
deed be difficult to overestimate the value of
the city's contribution to Ukrainian culture,
or the attraction which it exercised on ethnic
Ukrainian communities, wherever they were
to be found.
At the beginning of the nineteenth cen¬
tury, the centre of gravity of Ukrainian
cultural life shifted for a time to Kharkov, ,
whose university was founded in 1805. The
creation of Kiev University in 1834 restored
the city's former pre-eminence in cultural
affairs which was symbolized by the return
in the early 1840s, after graduation from
the Academy of St. Petersburg, of Taras
Shevchenko.
Shevchenko (1814-1861) was a poet, artist
and philosopher of genius whose achieve¬
ment, historically significant both in his own
country and abroad, was to complete the
task begun by his predecessors and to create
a modern, truly Ukrainian literary language.
At the same time, he stimulated public ap¬
preciation of the fine arts, and played a
catalytic role in all other fields of cultural
activity, including the theatre and
dramaturgy, music and social philosophy.
Portraying with a powerful depth of feeling
and reflection the thoughts and aspirations
of his people and the vast range of their
historical experience, Shevchenko may be
considered as the father of a national Ukrai¬
nian culture in the fullest sense of the term,
and his name is associated with all subse¬
quent developments in the quest for an
aesthetic, ethical and social ideal.
GRIGORY VERVES, of the Ukrainian SSR, is a
corresponding member of the Ukrainian
Academy of Sciences and president of the Ukrai¬
nian committee of the International Association
for the study and furtherance of Slav culture.
I will praise to the heavens
The enslaved, the humble, the mute
Keeping vigilant watch in their midst
I will speak out in their name
These lines are by the great Ukrainian poet and painter Taras
Shevchenko (1814-1861) who gave his talents and his life to the
cause of an oppressed people. Freed from serfdom at the age of
24, Shevchenko became a celebrated portrait painter at St.
Petersburg. His first book of poems, The Kobzar, was published
in 1840. Despite his own personal success he never forgot the
humiliations suffered by the people of the Ukraine, and all his
poems are a passionate defence of peasant revolt as the only possi¬
ble means to finish, once and for all, with serfdom and the ab¬
solute power of the Tsar. Poems such as The Dream, Caucasus
and The Testament are steeped in this revolutionary spirit and
ring out with the call for the brotherhood of peoples. After ten
years of enforced exile in central Asia, he returned to St.
Petersburg where he died at the age of forty-seven. His works
have been translated into more than a hundred languages and to¬
day are known throughout the world. Above, Self-Portrait by
Candlelight (1860), aquatint.
14
Engraving (1919) by the Ukrainian artist IMar-
bute, illustrating a famous poem by Shev¬
chenko which relates the story of Katerina,
a young peasant-girl seduced and abandon¬
ed by a nobleman (see also colour p. 22).

As in the case of many other peoples
whose natural development was subjected
not only to social but also to national con¬
straints, the cultural roots of the Ukraine
were constantly watered from a perennial
source the creativity of the people
themselves. This explains the great amount
of time and effort spent by successive
generations of intellectuals in the investiga¬
tions of popular history, the editing of an¬
cient manuscripts and the collection and
publication of folklore.
As far as the Ukraine was concerned, the
wealth of this cultural heritage was
acknowledged not only by such eminent
native-born writers as Shevchenko and
Gogol, but also by leading representatives of
Shevchenko knew from personal ex¬
perience the harsh treatment meted out to
political prisoners under the Tsarist regime.
He wrote about it in his poems and depicted
it in paintings like the one below from his
Prodigal Son series. A stick was forced into
the prisoner's mouth to prevent talking.
other culturesthe Russian Pushkin, the
Poles Mickiewicz and Slowacki and the
Croatian Kharambashich. "Even if I did not
have friends living near Kiev", wrote
Honoré de Balzac in a letter, "its literary
and ethnographic attractions would draw
me there".
The traditions of the peopletheir music,
songs, architecture and applied and
decorative artsnaturally contributed in
very great measure to nineteenth century
Ukrainian culture, but they were not the on¬
ly source of inspiration. The "professional"
art of earlier centuries, and reciprocal in¬
fluences with other cultures, were also of
great significance. The church music of
eighteenth-century Kiev, for example, owed
much to the work of Bach and Palestrina,
just as the baroque masterpieces of the
Ukraine were appreciated in the west. In the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Ukrai¬
nian scholars, artists and intellectuals
were not merely graduates, but also members
of many west European learned institu¬
tions.
Photo © Archives of the Cinematographic Museum, Kiev
" A still from Arsenal, a film made in 1929 by the great Ukrainian film director Dovchenko. The
leading role of Timoche was played by actor S. Svachenko.
Nevertheless, the development of certain
cultural forms in the Ukraine may be seen as
a direct and linear progression from simple
origins in folklore towards more complex
structures. In music, popular melodies,
romances and accompaniments to dramatic
performances serve as sources for
sophisticated "choral works, operas and sym¬
phonies; this may be seen, for example, in
the work of the composer Lysenko. The
same development may be observed in the
Ukrainian theatre, which between the 1880S
and the first decade of the twentieth century
was already being transformed from an ac¬
tivity of amateurs, conducted for the most
part by troupes of actor-serfs, into one of
the country's leading art forms.
The prestige of the Ukrainian theatre at
the turn of the century owed much to the ac¬
tress Maria Zankovetskaya (1860-1934),
whose natural delivery, devoid of any
"theatricality" led critics to compare her
favourably with such outstanding per¬
formers as Ermolova, Sarah Bernhardt and
Eleonora Duse. "Awesomely powerful",
was how Chekhov described her. Like
Krushelnitskaya, another actress whose
celebrity extended to western Europe,
Zankovetskaya portrayed the best
characteristics of Ukrainian women.
Kiev also played an important role in the
development of other art forms. The city's
name is associated, for example, with the
work of a number of outstanding authors of
the late nineteenth and early twentieth cen¬
turies. These include the prose-writer Maria
Vilinskaya (pseudonym, Marko Vovchok),
whose homely stories enjoyed wide
popularity among south Slav and western
European readers in the 1860s; Nechuya-
Levitsky, one of the creators of the socially-
centred and historical novel in the Ukraine;
and Larisa Kosach (1871-1913), who, under
the name of Lesa Ukrainka, was the greatest
woman poet of the Slav world. Setting her
creative activity in the context of the
people's struggle for freedom, she was also
the author of fiery political tracts, lyrical
declarations and a number of dramatic
works in which, taking part in the quest for
new dramatic forms that was being con¬
ducted all over Europe, she used themes
from the history and culture of ancient
peoples as the vehicle for portraying burning
issues of the day, and contrasted the pas¬
sionate human impulse towards freedom
with the narrow-minded passivity of
bourgeois life.
Shevchenko's successor as a humanist
and reformer of the Renaissance type was
Ivan Franko (1856-1916), who lived in the
western Ukrainethen part of the Austro-
Hungarian empirebut who maintained
close contact with the literary and scientific
community of Kiev. Franko's contribution
was a dual one: he created popular
awareness of the leading achievements of
world culture; and at the same time applied
his own wide-ranging talents to the produc¬
tion of literary masterpieces and penetrating
studies in a great variety of intellectual
fields. His works, which found an ap¬
preciative readership both in the Ukraine
and abroad, are currently being prepared in
a fifty-volume edition in Kiev.
After the October Revolution, Kiev was
confirmed as the political and cultural
capital of the Soviet Ukraine. The reunifica¬
tion in a single State of all the Ukrainian
lands released new creative energies, and
permitted a strengthening of the links bet¬
ween the Ukrainian and other national
15

iv cultures, including those of the other Soviet
republics.
Cultural relations with Russia became
particularly close. A new generation of
Ukrainian creators emerged, and the
cultural community of Kiev was enriched by
such personalities as the graphic artists Nor-
but and Kaspyan, the painters Krichevsky
and Yablonsky, the composers Lyatoshin-
sky and Bilash, the philologists Beletsky and
Krymsky, the educationist Sukhomlinsky
(one of the most outstanding theorists of the
time), the film director Dovzhenko, the ar¬
chitect Zabolotny and the sculptor
Kalchenko.
It was, however, in literary channels that
the new cultural current flowed most strong¬
ly. Pavlo Tychina (1891-1967) is rightly con¬
sidered to be the founder of Ukrainian
Soviet literature. This poet of the revolution
was above all an innovator, whose verse
reflected the synthesis of modern twentieth-
century poesy with its insistence on
musicality, emotional content, rhythm and
metaphor and the traditional modes of
popular song. Tychina's lyricism, and his
philosophical speculations, find fullest ex¬
pression in such works as Solnechnye
klarnety (The clarinets of the sun), Plug
(The plough), Veter s Ukrainy (Wind from
the Ukraine), Chuvstvo sem'i edinsi (The
sense of a united family), in poems like
Skovoroda (The frying-pan) and
Pokhorony druga (Burying a friend), and in
a number of tracts and pamphlets. The im¬
agery he uses is rich in colours drawn from
nature, and reflects human experience and
activity in all their variety.
Like Tychina, Maksim Rylsky
(1895-1964) initially worked in the tradi¬
tional "neo-classical" style adopted by Rus¬
sian and European poets during the first
quarter of the present century. This may be
seen in the collection Pod edinymy
zvegdami (Under the lonely stars). His later
verse takes on a more social, "civic" colour¬
ing; the moral, humanitarian and profes¬
sional concerns of people in Soviet society
are reflected in such works as Sbor
vinograda (Picking grapes), Goloseevskaya
osen' (Autumn in Goloseyev) and Zimnie
zapisi (Notes in winter), where fidelity to
classical forms is combined with a genuinely
innovative approach. Familiar with foreign
languages and literature, Rylsky produced a
number of brilliant translations and
penetrating analyses of poetry from other
countries, notably France and Poland.
The writer and film director Aleksandr
Dovchenko (1894-1956), who became inter¬
nationally famous, is rightly considered to
be one of the founders of the modern
cinema. Zemlya (Earth), Arsenal,
Ocharovannaya Desna (The enchanted
Desna), Poema o more (Poem of the sea)
and other films by Dovchenko are among
the world's great cinematographic master¬
pieces.
These are just a few episodes and ex¬
amples from the cultural history of ancient
and modern Kieva city set on gently roll¬
ing hills in a décor of luxuriant greenery; a
city graced, through the efforts of its peo¬
ple, with parks, stadiums, sculptures and
distinctive, unique architecture, laid out on
the banks of the blue-grey, endlessly flowing
Dnieper ... G rigory Verves
16
Above, The Mummers, one of the most famous frescoes of the
Cathedral of St. Sophia, Kiev (see article).

