To try to impose on men an alien way
of life is a serious error, which, far
from enriching the cultural heritage of
mankind, impoverishes it greatly.
Amadou Hampâté Bâ
Detail from The Large Studio, by the
* Spanish artist Aguayo (1926-1977).
Photo Luc Joubert © Galerie Jeanne
Bûcher, Paris.
¿. «

The building blocks
of culture
by Cheikh Anta Diop
CHEIKH ANTA DIOP, Senegalese anthro¬
pologist and physicist, is the founder-director of
the Radiocarbon Laboratory of the Institut Fon¬
damental d'Afrique Noire (IFAN), at the Universi¬
ty of Dakar. In the field of the human sciences, he
has published a number of works on African
questions including Nations Nègres et Culture,
L'Unité Culturelle de l'Afrique Noire, and L'Afri¬
que Noire Précoloniale.
A people's cultural identity is related
to three major factorshistorical,
linguistic and psychological (the
last of which may include the people's
specific forms of religious observance).
These factors vary in importance in dif¬
ferent historical and social situations; when
they are not fully present in a people or an
individual, the cultural identity is flawed.
The harmonious conjunction of these fac¬
tors is an ideal situation, and in practice all
kinds of combinations are possible. When
any one of the factors is influenced, the col¬
lective or individual cultural personality is
modified; these modifications may go so far
as to cause an "identity crisis."
Can these factors be classed in a hierarchy
of importance or does each one play an
equal part in the constitution of the cultural
personality? Any answer to this question
must begin with an analysis of all three.
The historical factor, first of all, is the
cement which gives a people its cohesion
and distinguishes it from a group whose
members may have nothing in common with
one another. Awareness of a common
history is the most solid rampart a people
can build against cultural or any other form
of aggression from outside. Thus in contacts
between civilizationsduring the coloniza¬
tion process, for examplethe colonizer
tries to weaken if not destroy the historical
consciousness of the colonized people.
The loss of national sovereignty and
historical awareness resulting from a pro¬
longed foreign occupation causes stagnation
or decline when it does not actually lead to
collapse or downfall into violence or anar¬
chy. The story of Egypt under the Romans
aptly illustrates this process. Egypt was a
centre of civilization in the Ancient World
but when its people were deprived of their
sovereignty, from the sixth centuiy BC until
the second century AD, they lapsed, into
savagery, according to the Latin poet
Juvenal who described the fierce fighting
between the people of Denderah and Hom-
bos in the second century AD.
The exercise of national sovereignty is
thus by far the best school for a people's
mind and soul, and the only way to keep
alive its greatest virtues. Colonization
always diminishes the colonized who are
treated as infants.
5

There is much glib talk of "peoples with no history",
sometimes with the added rider that these are the happiest
peoples. This elliptic formula merely means that their history is
and remains unknown, not that it does not exist. Among these
peoples too, over tens if not hundreds of thousands of years,
men have loved, hated, suffered, created, fought. In truth,
there is no such thing as an "infant" people; all peoples are
adult, even those who have kept no written record of their
childhood and adolescence.
Claude Lévi-Strauss
The ethnological view of the plurality of fundamentally
heterogeneous cultures seems to contradict the evolutionist view
of a process leading gradually towards a universal rationaliza¬
tion. This opposition seems to me to be undeniable, but it is
based, Ifeel, on judgements of value rather than on judgements
offacts.
Raymond Aron
Motif from a rock engraving in the valley of Valcamonica,
Italy. Photo © Centro Camuno di Studi Preistorici, Capo
di Ponte, Brescia.
It is hard to say. whether or not the
historical factor is more important than
language. For the French philosopher
Montesquieu language was the only com¬
mon denominator, the supreme mark of
cultural identity. "As long as a vanquished
people has not lost its language," he wrote,
"it still has hope."
How does cultural
domination influence
language?
But nowhere in the world does the
phenomenon of linguistic unity exist on a
continental scale. Languages follow the
migratory paths and fortunes of each
people. Fragmentation and diversity prevail
until an official effort is made or a political
decision is taken to extend the use of one
language, if necessary by force. This is what
happened in France where, in a straightfor¬
ward example of acculturation or linguistic
alienation, the form of speech used in the He
de France came to dominate the "dialects"
of Picardy, Provence and Brittany.
This process, nevertheless, at first only af¬
fects the vocabulary of a language, not its
grammar, i.e. its morphology and syntax. It
is surprising that in spite of four centuries of
cultural pressure, no European language
(English, French, Portuguese or Spanish)
has had the slightest impact on the grammar
of any African language, even the most
fragile or the most exposed to deformation.
Vocabulary, however, is a receptive, sen¬
sitive area in which acculturation (or
cultural exchange, depending on one's point
of view) takes place. But however intensive
it may be, the borrowing of words cannot
disintegrate a linguistic system, since the
newly introduced words are "tamed" and
adapted to the phonetics and the genius of
the borrower language.
The work of History is not yet complete,
'Tis a boulder pushed up hill by our hands.
The moment we desist, its weight presses
upon our breasts,
The moment we rest, it crushes our heads.
The work of History is not yet complete,
This globe has not yet been tempered in the
fire of the Spirit.
CK. Norwid
(1821-1883)
Spartan-style bowl on which the suf¬
ferings of Sisyphus (left) and Pro¬
metheus are depicted. Photo ©
Anderson-Viollet, Paris.
6

The civilization with the most advanced
technology usually exercises a one-way in¬
fluence on the civilizations or societies with
which it comes into contact. This explains
the phenomenon of Franglais in France.
Such an ascendancy can only disappear
when the technological imbalance no longer
exists.
Creolisation is a linguistic process which
began in a specific historical situation.
Isolated individuals, deprived of their
freedom, were taken from their original en¬
vironment and cast brutally into another en¬
vironment to which they adapted as best
they could. The illiterate Africans thus
deported to the West Indies deformed the
European languages spoken there, creating
new forms of speech in which specialists
have found distant echoes of the syntactical
and morphological structures of African
languages. The same process occurred in the
French empire when Senegalese sharp¬
shooters in the French army virtually
created their own language. Similarly, in
Does cultural assimilation
spell cultural disintegration?
trading areas where different civilizations
meet, linguae francae always tend to form.
Such processes are without exception almost
totally onesided.
Admittedly there are other, more complex
acculturation processes which are reciprocal
and take place between civilizations on dif¬
ferent levels of technological development.
Thus at a Conference of Black Writers and
Artists the French novelist François Mauriac
once maintained that civilizations influence
each other via their negative aspects, and
that the West had taken from Africa and the
Black African world its most dubious pro¬
ducts (he was referring to jazz!) and vice
versa.
Finally, the psychological factor presup¬
poses a certain permanence within a diversi¬
ty of structures. A thorough analysis of this
factor would call for study of what might be
called cultural invariables, that is the un¬
changing psychological characteristics of the
African, the European, the Asian, etc. as
opposed to those characteristics that are
modified by changing conditions. Far from
defending the idea that human nature is im¬
mutable, the aim should be to perceive the
human profile which remains if not iden¬
tical, at least recognizable across centuries
of incessant change.
The cultural environment may be regard¬
ed as an assimilating structure which ab¬
sorbs material from outside and evolves
while remaining aware of its own identity.
Assimilation enriches it without affecting its
destiny. Only destruction by some external
agency, disintegration (whatever the
reason), or hardening of the arteries because
of excessive autarky can be fatal to it.
And so Mauriac's remark should be taken
as a witticism, for civilizations can influence
each other through their positive aspects.
It is accepted today that African art has
had a lasting influence on twentieth-century
Western art. The Western artist has borrow¬
ed from his anonymous African counterpart
not so much a canon of beauty as the right
to break away from such classical norms as
the Golden Number or anatomical realism,
which in various forms have dominated
Western art from Antiquity until modern
times. The creative freedom of plastic forms
and rhythms, a renewed liberty of inven¬
tion are the great lessons that
the wellspring, the heart of all living culture,
of all civilization. Jean-Paul Sartre defined
it well when he wrote that "the specific
characteristics of a society correspond
precisely to the untranslatable locutions of
its language." The second way or level is
concerned with the universal, with general
ideas that everyone can grasp, with the area
in which one civilization can influence
another.
I am not a man of the Diallo looking at a distinct Western world and judging
coolly what I can take from it and what I must give it in return. I have become
both. It is impossible to remain lucid on the horns of such a dilemma. One
becomes a strange being, distressed not to be two.
Cheikh Hamidou Kane
Anthropomorphic Head Sections, by British sculptor Roy Adzak. Photo
© Gérard Dufresne, Paris. Xavier Jeupitre Collection.
modern art has learned from African art.
This is an excellent example of a positive in¬
fluence arising from contact between two
civilizations pursuing a course which is both
parallel and autonomous.
Each civilization has two ways or levels of
handling concepts. The first is concerned
with all that is specific, with an area that is,
so to speak, protected by the people's uni¬
que psychological barrier, an area which can
only be understood from within. This is also
the level of poetic expression; it is the core,
When the core perishes, the life of
societies and civilizations comes to an end.
Hence the widespread efforts today to
safeguard this productive uniqueness which
is not isolation nor withdrawal but the fun¬
damental condition of universality.
Cheikh Anta Diop
