Night
thoughts,
November
1926
by Lu Xun
r T HIS evening (1), all around me, everything is perfectly
I calm. Behind my dwelling, at the foot of the moun-
M tain, a grass fire burns with little, flickering flames.
Now and then, the sound of drums and gongs reaches me
from the South Putuo Temple (2), where a marionette perfor¬
mance is taking place. When the distant noise ceases, the
silence returns with even greater insistence. My lamp shines
brightly, but a twinge of unhappiness creeps up on me from
goodness knows where, and I have the impression that I am
sorry to have had my essays printed. This sense of regret sur¬
prises me: it is out of keeping with my characters. But before
I can pin it down, it evaporates . Of course, I must press ahead ,
and nave the essays published; but if only to exorcize this
melancholy, I feel that I must add one or two words more.
As I have said before, these essays are no more than a few
traces left by my life, if my past can be called a life. I have
worked hard enough, but my thought is not a gushing spring,
my literary talent is without great brilliance and, since I have
no doctrine to advance, I have no intention of launching a
movement of any kind. But experience has taught me that
disappointment.-whether great or small, has a bitter taste.
This is why, whenever in recent years I have been asked to take
up my pen, I have never refused. Provided that their opinions
were not diametrically opposed to my own, and that I have
had the energy to do so, I have always tried to give a little
satisfaction to others.
Readers who claim me for their favourite writer often say
that I express the truth. This is excessive praise induced, no
doubt, by their very partiality. It is true that I do not seek to
deceive, but neither do I try to recount all that is within me.
What I express is merely a few odds and ends, just enough to
hand in to the printer. It is true that I often try to dissect other
people, but I apply the scalpel even more frequently to myself,
and with far less pity. When I lift only a corner of the veil , sen¬
sitive spirits quail . What if I were to reveal myself entirely, ex¬
actly as I am?
It occurs to me from time to time to use this method to drive
people away, so that those who even then did not abandon
me, "snakes and odious monsters" (3) though they might be,
would show themselves to be my friends, true friends after all.
And if even they left me in the lurch, then too bad, I'd walk
alone. But for the time being I refrain from putting this idea
into practice, partly because I lack the courage to do so, and
partly because I want to go on living in this society. But there
is another little reason, too, which I have mentioned several
times: it gives me a certain satisfaction to create for as long
as I can a feeling of unease among our "respectable and right-
thinking" fellow-citizens. This is why I shall continue to gird

myself with a few pieces of armour and stand before them,
disturbing their orderly world with my presence, until I
become tired of the whole business and take off this armour.
To serve as a guide to others is all the more difficult for me,
since I myself do not know which path to follow. There is cer¬
tainly no lack of "masters" and "guides" in China, but I am
not among them and they do not inspire my confidence. There
is only- one outcome of which I myself am certain, and that
is the tomb. But this is something everybody knows, without
having to consult a guide. The problem is that more than one
way leads to that ultimate destination, and up to now I have
been unable to determine which of them to take. I am still try¬
ing to find out, and I am very much afraid that my still-green
fruit should poison those who appreciate me, while those who
detest me the "respectable and right-thinking", for
example all live to a ripe old age. It is thus inevitable for me
to clothe my words in ambiguity, since it often occurs to me
that the best gift I can offer to readers who are fond of me
might well be "inconsistency."
The first edition of my translations and original works was
printed in a thousand copies; five hundred more were printed
later. My most recent works have appeared in editions of two
thousand and four thousand copies. Of course each increase
is welcome, if only because it means that I shall earn more
money, but I cannot help feeling unhappy that my writings
might be morally harmful to my readers. This is why I now
write with a great deal more circumspection and hesitation.
Some people imagine that I write spontaneously, that the
words pour out in total freedom. Nothing could be further
from the truth: I am inhibited by a host of scruples and uncer¬
tainties, I have known for a long time that I am not of the stuff
that warriors and pioneers are made of. Three or four years
ago, I remember, a student arrived to buy one of my books.
The money which he took out of his pocket and pressed into
my hand was warm with the heat of his body. And that
warmth penetrated me, so much so that ever since then,
whenever I take up my pen, I am afraid of poisoning people
like that student; I hesitate for a long time before putting a
single word on paper. I fear that the time will never come
again when I can speak without such reserve, and although I
sometimes think that in order to respond to the expectations
of the younger generation one should sweep every scruple
aside, I have not, as yet, managed to bring myself to do so.
That is all I intended to say today, and it may be taken as
relatively sincere. But I do wish to add a few final remarks.
I remember that when the idea first emerged of creating a
literature based on our spoken language, it was violently at¬
tacked from every side. Later, when it had gained ground to
the extent that a reversal of the tendency was impossible,
many of its former critics turned their coats and claimed
credit for the change, which they glorified as the "new
culture" (4) movement. Others proposed that the spoken
language be used as the popular language; while still others
recommended a return to the study of the classics as a means
of acquiring perfect mastery of the spoken language. It was
not long before the turncoats made yet another pirouette, and
began to vilify the "new culture". As for the other two
groups, they have reluctantly accepted the new language,
while conserving the hope that the old one will nevertheless be
kept alive as long as possible; there are plenty of such people
still about, and I have denounced them in my essays.
A few days ago, I came across a journal from Shanghai (5),
in which it is also maintained that a study of the classics is
obligatory if one wishes to write well in the spoken language;
the names of a number of writers are cited as examples in this
connexion, including my own. This makes me shudder. I can¬
not speak for the others, but in my own case, it is true that I
have read many classic works, and that I continue to do so for
my own enlightenment. As a result, my eyes and ears are full
of them, and this influences the vocabulary, construction and
style of my bai hua (6), which sometimes contains archaisms.
But it is also true that it is very painful and suffocating for me
to carry these old monsters around on my back, and not be
able to rid myself of them.
As far as the poverty of the present popular language is con¬
cerned, the question of ways and means of enriching it con¬
stitutes another important problem. Perhaps this might be
achieved by the injection of suitable material drawn from anr
cient literature, but this is a matter which lies outside the scope
of my present remarks, and I shall refrain from dealing with
it here.
I do believe, however, that with an effort, I might be able
to correct my own texts by introducing words and expressions
from the spoken language. If I have failed to do so up to now,
this is simply because I am lazy, and have not had the time.
Unfortunately, all this coincides with the publication of
this collection of essays, which are written partly in classical
and partly in spoken Chinese. They may, therefore, still be a
poison to certain readers. But I am unable, for the moment,
to bring myself to destroy them; I might even go further, and
say that I shall make use of them myself, for the glimpse that
they give of myself as I was when they were written. All that
I ask is that the readers who appreciate me consider this col¬
lection as no more than a simple memorial a grave-mound
covering a body from which life has fled. With the passage of
time, the body will turn to dust, and not even the memorial
will remain. And by then, I, too, will have laid down my arms.
This morning, as I was indeed reading a classic wotk, a few
lines from Lu Ji's (7) Lamentation on the Death ofCao Cao
came into my head. Let them serve as my own conclusion
here.
Refusing the ritual burden of the ancients,
You wanted a funeral with less circumstance and pomp.
Where are yourfur coats, then, your finery, your seals?
All that remains is the grumbling of the princes in the
procession.
Alas! Even a wise man like you was unable to resist
Excessive attachment to worldly goods.
Reading the document that betrays your weakness,
I dedicate these lines to you, with regrets.
Lu Xun
On the night of 11 November 1926
/. The postface to The Tomb, from which this text is extracted, was written
in November 1926, about a year after completion of the last of the essays of
which the work consists. Lu Xun had recently left Beijing, where hisfreedom
hadbeen threatened and had taken a teachingpost at the university ofXiamen
(Amoy).
2. The temple is situated near the university ofXiamen.
3. In the original: "Xiao, snakes, and revenants". Xiao was an unpleasant
mythical bird whose repellent attributes included devouring its o wn mother.
4. The movement for literary reform in favour of "spoken" language and
literature whichformedpart ofthe "Fourth ofMay"culturaldemonstrations
in 1919. Lu Xun's irony is particularly directed against Hu Shi, who joined
in the movement at the beginning, quickly changed sides to become one of
its most bitter adversaries, but later claimed to have been its originator and
main architect. The term ' 'new culture ' ' was used by Hu Shi in a number of
articles on the history of the "Fourth ofMay".
5. Vol. I, No. 3 of the monthly magazine Yiban (Just So) published by Kai-
ming anddated 11 November 1926 contains an article by Ming Shi (alias Zhu
Guangshuan), entitled'Yutiandeshu (The rainydays book) in which it isstated
that in order to write good bai hua, i.e. "spoken language" it is necessary
to read wen yan i. e. the classics. The article goes on to say that this is the case
ofHu Shi, Wu Zhihui, Zhou Zuoren and Lu Xun, "although they may not
admit this themselves".
6. Writing in the "spoken language. "
7. Lu Ji (261-303) was a famous writer. Cao Cao (155-220) was a general
renownedfor his military prowess, and a politician. In his testament, which
Lu Ji readjust before writing thispoem, Cao Cao calledfor a simplification
ofthefuneral ceremonies governed by ancient tradition, but at thesame time
refused any sharing out ofhis "clothes offur"andofthe' 'ribbons decorating
the seals"; his last wishes also included instructions to thefemale singers at
his funeral.
English basedon theFrench translation oftheThe Tomb, byLuXun, translated
from Chinese under the direction ofMichelle Loi and the Lu Xun Research
Centre of the People's Republic ofChina. La Tombe was published by Edi¬
tionsAcropole in 1981, and is included in the Unesco Collection ofRepresen¬
tative Works.
French translation © Unesco
21
