è
\
Chiffchaff
Phylloscopus collybita
*
m (Ú
1
à
Every plant belongs to a species.
These plants have several features in common, but they can be
divided into five different species. Chives (Allium
schoenoprasum) grow in clumps, and have narrow bulbs and
narrow leaves. Ramsons (Allium ursinum) grow in clumps, and
have narrow bulbs and broad leaves. Leeks (Allium porrum) grow
singly, and have long cylindrical bulbs. Onions (Allium cepa)
grow singly, have round bulbs, and their flower stalks are
swollen. Garlic {Allium sativum) grow singly, have round bulbs,
and their flower stalks are not swollen.
Willow warbler
Phylloscopus trochilus
You don't have to look at these plants to recognize them each
species has its own smell.
Looks aren't everything
Although they look almost identical, chiffchaffs and willow
warblers belong to different species. The easiest way to tell them
apart is to listen to their song. But once you know they are
different, you can sometimes see small differences between
them.



THE EVOLUTION
OF EVOLUTION
by Pierre Thuillier
PIERRE THUILLIER, professor of the history of
science at the University of Lille III and the
University of Paris VII, is a member of the
editorial staff of the French scientific periodical
La Recherche. His interests in epistemology (the
theory and science of knowledge) and the
broader questions of the relations between
science and society are reflected in his Jeux et
Enjeux de la Science (Games and Stakes of
Science) published by Robert Laffont, Paris,
1972. His most recent book, Darwin and Co., was
published last year by Editions Complexe.
WHEN we think of evolution now¬
adays, our minds turn automati¬
cally to Darwin. Was it not he
who, in the mid-nineteenth century, explain¬
ed once and for all how the various forms of
life had been constituted? But there is no
reason why Darwin and his famous book of
1859, The Origin ofSpecies, should blind us
to the long and eventful history of transfor-
mism: a history that started before him,
continued long after him, and is doubtless
not closed. Evolutionism, it has often been
said, has evolved. As the historical sketch he
added to The Origin of Species proves, Dar¬
win was aware of this.
He began the sketch by alluding to certain
writers of Antiquityand it is quite true
that some Greek philosophers had vaguely
surmised that living organisms might have
undergone transformation. In the sixth cen- I
29

Empedocles of Acragas, 490 - 430 BC Georges-Louis de Buffon, 1707 - 1788 Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck, 1744 - 1829
iV tury BC, Anaximander of Miletus thought
that "man, at the origin, was born of
animals of another kind " . This was , he said ,
borne out by the fact that human children
take a long time before they can feed
themselves unaided. In the fifth century BC
another Greek thinker, Empedocles of
Acragas (now Agrigento) put forward
curious hypotheses about the development
of organisms: "heads without necks ap¬
peared on earth, arms wandered without
shoulders, and eyes with no forehead moved
hither and thither...". In his view, these
separate organs were brought together by
the influence of Love, and that was how liv¬
ing beings were formed. His work contains
the germs of a kind of natural selection: un¬
viable organisms (such as cows with human
heads!) became extinct, while those which
were properly formed survived.
This is why some historians have seen
Empedocles as a precursor of Dar¬
winism opinion that is difficult to sus¬
tain. A few authors of Antiquity, however,
had remarkable intuitions. Thus the Latin
poet and philosopher Lucretius, in the first
century BC, gave a very striking description
of the "struggle for life". He thought it
possible to account for the genesis of
animals by the laws of nature alone, without
invoking divine intervention. But however
interesting, such ideas were never
methodically or systematically developed,
and many centuries went by before more ex¬
act speculations were made. Not until the
eighteenth century did the first signs of
modern transformism appear.
The development of a sense of history
may well have played a part in the maturing
of new ideas in biology. Little by little,
theoreticians came to see social reality
(customs, institutions, culture) in evolu¬
tionist terms, and it is not too surprising that
this way of thinking should also have been
applied to the study of nature.
It should be remembered that Christianity
then dominated Western culture. According
to the most widespread interpretation of the
Bible, the different plant and animal species
had been created directly by God and were
immutable. It was a bold undertaking to at¬
tack that doctrine, especially since sciences
such as palaeontology and embryology were
still in their infancy. But a few bold spirits
ventured nevertheless to suggest that living
creatures might undergo "transmutations"
from generation to generation.
The French writer Benoît de Maillet, for
one, in a book published only after his death
in 1748, said that all the land species might
perhaps have come from corresponding
marine species. He suggested that fishes had
settled on the land and had given birth to
new animals, including birds. Similarly, sea
elephants had bred land elephants, and men
too had stemmed from sea creatures the
Tritons! Obviously Benoît de Maillet is now
seen as a gentle dreamer with an excessive
imagination. But around the same time,
other authors were formulating some highly
interesting ideas.
Science historians have noted, for in-


August Weismann, 1834 - 1914 J.B.S. Haidane, 1892-1964 Theodosius Dobzhansky, 1900 - 1975
stance, that around the mid-eighteenth cen¬
tury, Pierre de Maupertuis appears "to have
had a fairly clear notion of the processes of
mutation and selection". In his view, not
only could living creatures change acciden¬
tally from generation to generation, but
useful changes could be preserved and ac¬
cumulate, while ill-adapted specimens, con¬
versely, were doomed to disappear.
For his part, the naturalist Buffon seems
to have accepted that a limited transformism
was possible. He even wrote that it might be
conjectured that "all animals have descend¬
ed from a single animal which has over the
ages, by improving and degenerating, pro¬
duced all the races of other animals". We
must beware of exaggerating the importance
of such statements. But clearly, by the eigh¬
teenth century many naturalists entertained
the proposition of the variability of the
species. Charles Darwin's own grandfather,
Erasmus Darwin, drew on various con¬
siderations taken from comparative
anatomy, embryology, etc. to formulate an
evolutionist theory. He is generally viewed
as a predecessor of Larmarck, who in 1809
published a particularly important work: the
Philosophie Zoologique, or Zoological
Philosophy.
Lamarck's thought is often summarized
as follows: in order to adapt to their en¬
vironment, animals acquire new physical
characters which are then hereditarily
transmitted to their descendants. The usual
example is the giraffe: in order to reach ever
higher leaves and to meet new "needs", it
adopted, or so the theory goes, the habit of
stretching its neck, and passed the resulting
change on to its offspring. But Lamarck's
theory is far more complex. He does indeed
accept that changing circumstances indirect¬
ly cause a kind of evolution, but he also
asserts that life itself, through its own laws,
causes as it were a "progression" in living
beings. In other words, nature tends spon¬
taneously to complicate the "general series
of animals": all in all, environmental varia¬
tions are, if anything, disruptive: they in
troduce "anomalies" into the "general
scheme of nature". Lamarck did not suc¬
ceed in convincing all his fellow-naturalists,
but he did exert a lasting influence even
when his system had been exposed to very
severe criticism.
During the first half of the nineteenth
century, other transformist interpretations
were put forward. Examples are the French¬
man Etienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, and
the Englishman Robert Chambers, who
published in 1844 an anonymous book en¬
titled The Vestiges of the Natural History of
Creation. But there was nothing of the
nature of a breakthrough until the year
1858, when papers by Charles Darwin and
Alfred Rüssel Wallace were read to the Lin¬
nean Society of London, clearly setting out
the theory of natural selection. The follow¬
ing year, The Origin of Species was publish¬
ed. And this was a well-structured theory,
supported by a large number of specific ex¬
amples drawn from palaeontology, em¬
bryology, comparative anatomy and^

THE EVOLUTION OF EVOLUTION
biogeography, and providing a detailed ex¬
planation of the formation of species.
Darwin began by stating that the species
were populations made up of individuals
that could vary from generation to genera¬
tion. He then spoke of the continual "strug¬
gle for life" in nature: the animals, he said,
must not only face their competitors, but
must endure bad weather, heat, drought,
etc. He then brought in the idea of natural
selection, basing it on a comparison with ar¬
tificial selection: just as breeders improve
their stock through methodical selection, so
nature produced new species by selecting in¬
dividuals. Those which bore favourable
variations survived and multiplied, while
those which bore unfavourable variations
became extinct. Supposing that this
mechanism operated over thousands of
generations, Darwin said, then by
cumulative effects of tiny -changes, new
populations (meaning new species) would be
formed.
Darwin acknowledged that there were
several other evolutive processes such as sex¬
ual selection, use and non-use of organs and
the direct effect of circumstances. But in his
eyes, nautral selection played the principal
role. Properly speaking, as Darwin himself
recognized, the theory was not "proved". A
frequent objection, albeit one of many, was
that no species had ever been seen to change
into another. But Darwin was right to say
that his explanations made intelligible a host
of facts observed by specialists in palaeon¬
tology, embryology and other disciplines.
Several scientists opposed the new theory
but, in a few years, it won acceptance in very
many countries.
There were, however, weaknesses in Dar¬
winism. They were due in particular to the
fact that in Darwin's day, little was known
about genetics. Mendel's famous study of
hybrid plants, which marked the start of
modern genetics, was published only in
1865: Darwin never used the ideas it con¬
tained. But other scientists were soon to
undertake a revision of the theory expound¬
ed in The Origin of Species. While Dárwin
believed, for instance, in the heredity of ac¬
quired characters, the German August
Weismann, in the closing years of the cen¬
tury, asserted that such heredity was im¬
possible. That led to the rejection of the
concept of usage and non-usage of
organsbut the theory of natural selection
proper remained intact.
In 1900 there came a new development in
genetics thanks to the "rediscovery" of
Mendel's laws inspired by the Austrian
Tschermak, the German Correns and the
Dutch scientist De Vries. Paradoxically,
however, it did not at once contribute to im¬
proving Darwin's theory. Quite the con¬
trary, it was the occasion for a_conflict over
the nature of the variations through which
natural selection operates. The advocates of
Mendelism considered those variations to be
sudden and sweeping. Hugo de Vries, for
one, thought that evolution was the result of
spasmodic "mutations", of "leaps" that
32
suddenly produced new forms (muta-
tionism). But Darwin had for his part stated
that evolution was a continuous and
cumulative process involving tiny varia¬
tions. This led to a crisis in biological think¬
ing in the early twentieth century, which was
only really solved in the 1920s to 1930s,
when R.A. Fisher, S. Wright and J.B.S.
Haldane developed population genetics.
This discipline, which studies the way in
which genes are spread among populations,
made it possible to present Darwinism in a
more satisfactory form. Around the year
1940, a new overall conception which is
commonly called the "synthetic theory" of
evolution came into being, based essentially
on the work of Theodosius Dobzhansky,
Ernst Mayr and George Gaylord Simpson.
Under this theory, Darwin's beloved varia¬
tions were defined as mutations, meaning
chance accidents affecting certain genes.
The new synthesis not only took account of
progress in genetics, but incorporated
various findings relating to the concept of
species, biogeography, palaeontology, etc.
It was accepted by a large number of scien¬
tists and is still today, in its broad outlines,
the orthodox interpretation.
Recent developments in molecular
biology and biochemistry have made it
possible to analyse evolutionary phenomena
with greater accuracy and detail. We can
now follow under the microscope, so to
speak, the evolution of certain molecules
such as haemoglobin. By and large, the find¬
ings made in the various life sciences have
borne out the theoretical constructs discuss¬
ed above. It should not, however, be im¬
agined that all the problems have been
solved and that neo-Darwinian or neo-
neo-Darwinian theory has reached its final
and definitive form.
Even such apparently simple concepts as
adaptation and natural selection are subject
to various degrees of criticism. Some
biologists, for example, point out that it is
extremely difficult to ascertain exactly
whether a given gene has really been selected
for its biological "utility". In this regard,
mention should be made of the "neutralist"
theory of the Japanese M. Kimura, accor¬
ding to which many genes are neither useful
nor harmful from the evolutionary view¬
point, but merely neutral. Additionally, the
Americans Gould and Eldredge have recent¬
ly suggested a theory (known as punctuated
equilibria), which runs counter to the
generally accepted ideas. In their view,
evolution is not a regular and continuous
process, but one of relatively sharp evolu¬
tionary "leaps". These and other points
give rise to much debate, and neo-
Darwinian theory may well in future years
undergo major revision.
There has been much talk in recent times
of a new discipline that is also part of the
Darwinian tradition: sociobiology. Its pur¬
pose is to use biology to explain the social
behaviour of animals in general and of man
in particular. A preponderant role in the
birth of this science has been played by the
American Edward O. Wilson (Socio¬
biology: The New Synthesis, 1975). He has
formulated a vast theory which takes up the
essential lines of Darwinism but also draws
on genetics, ecology, ethology and other
disciplines. In his view, all social behaviour
has an underlying genetic foundation and
must be explained in that light: from the
biological viewpoint, it would appear that
individual organisms are designed only to
secure. the maximal reproduction of genes.
In other works, genes are "selfish": they use
animals (termites, geese, goats, chimpanzees
or men) to reproduce themselves, and social
behaviour such as sexuality, aggression or
religion should be seen as strategies to max¬
imize "genetic profit".
But Wilson has done more than formulate
theories. Building on the principle that
sociobiologists are best qualified in human
behaviour, he has claimed that they should
become the "new moralists" and guide the
planning of society. This far-reaching ambi¬
tion raises very many questions.
First we need to know whether this new
form of Darwinism rests on sound founda¬
tions. Here certain reservations may be
made. It is, for instance, by no means cer¬
tain that there are genes for altruism, con-
formism or homosexuality. Nor is it beyond
dispute that the development of human
societies, which is sometimes very rapid, can
be explained in terms of biological evolution
which is, in comparison, extremely slow.
Another question immediately arises: is it
the job of scientists in this instance,
biologiststo dictate ethical and political
standards to mankind? The Wilson case has
the merit of reminding us that this major
problem is not new. Darwin himself applied
his theory of evolution to the human race,
and was led to speak of "inferior races" and
to claim that woman too was inferior to
man less intelligent, less resourceful, less
courageous. With such testimony to hand,
more or less "scientific" arguments for
racism and sexism could easily be
fabricated! Similarly, the idea of selection
could easily lead on to formidable eugenic
projects to produce populations of
"supermen".
Such was not, of course, Darwin's wish.
But history demonstrates that dangerous
ideologies have often sprung up around
more or less suspect "Darwinian" ideas.
Perhaps a lesson should be drawn from this:
the development of evolutionary theories is
not only a "magnificent adventure in
science", but a cultural undertaking of im¬
mediate relevance to mankind. So let us ad¬
mire all those who, from Anaximander to
our times, have shed a little light on the
origins of life and of our species. But let us
hot forget that theories are only human con¬
structs. They may help us to see things more
clearly, but our future depends on moral
and social choices that transcend science,
even Darwinian science.
B Pierre Thuillier
