The fires of winter
A joint US-Soviet enquiry
into extreme old age
by Victor Kozlov
VICTOR KOZLOV, of the Soviet Union, is
director of the Department of Ethno-ecology of
the Ethnographic Institute of the USSR
Academy of Sciences. The author ofmore than
150 works, his writing and scientific achieve¬
ments have been recognized by the award of
the USSR State Prize and the N. Mikloukho
Maklai Prize of the Academy of Sciences. He
is atpresent participating in a joint USA/USSR
multidisciplinary research project on peoples
and ethnic groups with a high proportion ofper¬
sons of great age.
Born in 1805 Shirali Muslimov (above)
died in 1 973 at 1 68 years of age. He was
the oldest inhabitant of the Azerbaijan
SSR, which is itself exceptional because
84 per 100,000 of its population are
centenarians. Shirali Muslimov, who liv¬
ed in the village of Barzavu in the Talish
mountains, worked on the land right to
the end of his life. He is seen here with
most of the 200 descendants of whom he
was the proud progenitor.
10

THE increase in the numbers of
the elderly in many countries
has created the need to investi¬
gate the reasons for "the aging of the
nations". Current studies are seeking to
identify the economic, demographic
and social consequences of this
phenomenon and to help in the search
' for effective solutions to the problems it
raises in such fields as medicine, the
social services, and housing.
The first question which arises is how
long is the optimal life-span of a human
being? It has to be admitted that so far
science has produced precious little
about this matter. The biologically
"normal" life-span of homo sapiens
has not yet been established, and scien¬
tists have widely different opinions on
the question.
tumours. Such complaints are increas¬
ingly frequent as people grow older, and
it is almost as difficult to combat them
as it is to combat old age. Accordingly,
in some countries the average life-span
is rising beyond the age of seventy much
more slowly than might have been ex¬
pected. In Sweden and in some other
countries, it is predicted that the
average life-span, which is now seventy-
five years, will not reach eighty years
until the end of the century. However,
the average life-span for mankind as a
whole could, in certain social and
cultural conditions, reach ninety years.
Those who cross this age threshold are
called by gerontologists "persons of
great age".
The study of the phenomenon of
longevity is of great theoretical and
groups with a high degree of longevity
are found in Yakutia, in Tajikistan, in
Byelorussia and in the Baltic Republics.
It has also been established that the
longevity index is higher among some
national groups than others. In the
Caucasus this is the case notably among
the Balkars, the Abkhasians, the
Azerbaijanis of the Nakhichevan Auto¬
nomous Republic, and among the
Armenians of the Nagorno-Karabakh
Autonomous Oblast, whereas in
Armenia itself the average length of life
is scarcely higher than the average for
the Soviet Union as a whole.
In 1977 an agreement was concluded
between Soviet and U.S. scientists to
carry out in parallel work on "com¬
prehensive biological, anthropological
and socio-ethnographic studies of the
The youngest member of the "Nar-
taa" group of dancers and singers
(left) is a sprightly 70, the oldest is
1 20 years of age. The group, from
Soviet Abkhasia, won a Golden
Peacock award in an international
folk arts competition in Hungary
and also featured in a French TV
documentary film. Abkhasia's inter¬
national reputation for longevity
spread even further when US
ethnologist S. Benet wrote a suc¬
cessful book on The Long-Living
People of the Caucasus after
visiting the area.
Photo © Fotokhronika Tass, Moscow
Information about persons who have
lived to the age of 150 and over,
although not fully verified, has led some
specialists to claim that this is the nor¬
mal human life-span. Others, including
the author of this article, believe that
the average length of human life cannot
be deduced from isolated and uncheck¬
ed "records" of longevity and that all
the factors should be assembled and
analysed.
It can be said that in the economically
developed countries the struggle against
the external causes of death is almost
over. In these countries the main killers
have been for some time such internal
causes. as cardiovascular diseases and
practical interest because it brings a new
insight into the problem of "aging na¬
tions" and suggests ways of facing up to
an issue whose incidence varies greatly
from one country to another. Persons
ofgreat age are to be found in almost all
big cities and rural areas; nevertheless
there are certain areas where their
numbers are particularly great.
In the Soviet Union one of these
regions is the Caucasus. According to
the 1970 census, some 7 per cent of the
population of the USSR lives in the
Caucasus; nevertheless 16 per cent of all
the country's persons of great age and
35 per cent of those over a hundred
years of age live in this region. Other
peoples and ethnic groups with a higher
than normal percentage of long-lived
persons." In the USSR the work is car¬
ried out under the direction of the In¬
stitute of Ethnography of the USSR
Academy of Sciences in Moscow, and in
the United States by the New York
Research Institute for the Study of
Man.
This project is distinguished in two
ways from previous research on the sub¬
ject, notably that carried out by geron¬
tologists. Firstly, the phenomenon of
longevity is being studied at the group
rather than the individual level, and is
being observed over several decades.
Secondly, it is not the ailments of old
11

people and methods of treating them
which are being studied, but the causes
of the phenomenon of longevity, in
tandem with research in ecology and the
human sciences. This type of research
had hitherto not been carried out
scientifically.
In the USSR the first investigations
concerned the rural population of
Abkhasia and certain groups of
Georgians living there; in the United
States the first community to be studied
was Robertson, Kentucky, where most
of the people are of Scottish or Irish
origin. Research has also been carried
out as part of a slightly different pro¬
gramme among groups of Mennonites
in the State of Kansas.
To explain the phenomenon of group
longevity, Soviet scientists have put for¬
ward a series of hypotheses (genetical,
bio-reproductive, ecological, demogra¬
phic, psychological and socio-psycholo-
gical, economic based on work, hous¬
ing, living conditions, nutrition) on
which doctors, anthropologists, ecolo-
gists, demographers, ethnographers,
psychologists and other specialists are
working.
Today, now that the first stage of the
work is virtually complete, research in
the USSR is being concentrated on the
Azerbaijan area, and in the United
States there is a project to extend it to
the State of Kentucky.
The data produced so far are still be¬
ing analysed, and the final conclusions
will only be drawn when they are com¬
pared with data from other regions with
a high proportion of persons of great
age. Nevertheless, some points can
already be made in relation to the origin
of longevity and the problems of the
aging of the population.
The basic question is not simply that
a large number of persons aged over
ninety, or even a hundred, live in a given
area but that many of them are in
relatively good health, and continue to
work and take part in social life. In a
word, we are confronted with a
"natural" and fully acceptable solution
to the problem of the aging of the
population. This is today attracting the
attention of scientists and the interna¬
tional community.
Our research shows that group
longevity is determined by a combina¬
tion of factors. In the case of the
Abkhasians, ecological factors have un¬
doubtedly played a beneficial role,
especially the subtropical climate to
which the population has biologically
(physiologically) adapted in the'course
of many generations. Some aspects of
this adaptation have been reinforced
genetically and transmitted to their
At a hundred years of age, M. Avetissian is one of the oldest inhabitants of Soviet Armenia. He lives
in the village of Aknahpur, near Idzevan.
descendants. Anthropologists believe
that this adaptation has also been
reflected in the external morphological
characteristics of the Abkhasians in
their relatively small stature and their
muscular constitution. However, cases
of group longevity also exist in regions
where natural conditions are less
favourable. Thus it seems that the
essential thing is a good capacity to
adapt biologically, socially and
culturally.
The traditional diet of the Abkha¬
sians plays a vital role in the process.
They eat little meat and hardly any
animal fats, salt or sugar, but on the
other hand they consume lots of milk
products (especially cheese), fruit and
vegetables, precisely the diet recom¬
mended for old people. However, it
would be a mistake to subscribe to the
views of those scientists who consider
diet to be of pre-eminent importance.
The traditional diet of very old people in
Azerbaijan, for instance, includes large
quantities of meat and fats. This factor
thus admits of many variations. All the
same, research makes it possible to
deduce the existence of a certain "com¬
mon denominator" in persons of great
age.
In the regions we have studied, such
persons have generally lived all their
lives in the place where they were born,
and have always done the same kind of
work, in farming or in the home. The
country people end their working lives
gradually and many of them continue at
an advanced age to be as active as their
strength permits, working in the home,
12

and sometimes even in the fields of the
kolkhozes. They still see their circle of
friends, and take an active part in
various social activities. The situation
of those who live in the towns and cities
is quite different. Old people in an ur¬
ban environment often suffer from
what might be called "retirement
sickness", the result of a sudden break
in their working life, an interruption in
their former social relationships, a com¬
plete change in the pattern of their daily
lives. All this provokes nervous tension,
a growing sense of isolation and
uselessness and a feeling that they have
no more reason to live. City life does not
provide them with an opportunity to
replace the physical work they carried
out before retirement with another kind
of activity and leads to cases of hyper¬
activity.
Seeing their relations and friends
helps old people to preserve their in¬
terest in life, and the breaking of these
ties tends to reduce their mobility and to
bring about a deterioration in their
morale and health. Thus one solution to
the problems faced by old people is to
give them a chance to live near to their
children and their families. This would
allow them to keep up their old contacts
and would ensure that they received the
necessary care when they were ill.
It should also be borne in mind that
the number of people living alone in¬
creases with age, especially in the case of
women, who on average live longer than
men. Furthermore, it is usually more
difficult for widows than for widowers
to remarry late in life. Another factor in
the USSR is the heavy losses in men dur¬
ing the Second World War (1941-1945)
as a result of which almost a quarter of
all the women over sixty today have no
family. The Soviet social security
organisms and other organizations are
particularly concerned with old people
who are living alone and who are in
many cases sick and unable to work. In
this connexion, attention should be
drawn to the special decision of the
USSR Minister of Public Health con¬
cerning the "measures relating to the
organization of the medical protection
of old people."
In the rural areas we have studied, old
people live with the family of one of
their grown-up children (among the
Abkhasians this is traditionally the
family of the youngest son). They main¬
tain regular contact with their other
children, relatives and friends, who
usually live in the same village. Clan and
family relationships are particularly
strong among the Abkhasians: several
hundred people gather at weddings,
funerals and annual family reunions.
The traditional strength of these
family ties has a powerful effect in
reducing stress, especially in extreme
situations: when a person is fully sup¬
ported by those around him, it is as if his
burden of grief is lessened through be¬
ing shared with dozens, even hundreds,
of people. The traditional code of social
behaviour which prescribes that each
person should obey certain rules of
behaviour in situations of great tension
may also contribute to mental health
and longevity.
In all the ethnic groups we have
studied we have encountered a strongly
expressed liking for old people, who en¬
joy a privileged position in the family
and in society, high moral status and
universal respect. Perhaps this tradition
goes back to the once widespread in¬
stitution of gerontocracy.
The influence exercised by old people
on the course of events is perhaps not as
strong as it was but, especially among
the Abkhasians, they continue to play a
leading role in family councils, clan
assemblies and village meetings. In
everyday life care and attention are
lavished on them; at family gatherings
and meals they are given a place of
honour, in accordance with their age.
This source of social and psychological
comfort, which strengthens the feeling
that they are useful to their family, in¬
cluding the young generations, and to
the wider circle of village people, un¬
doubtedly helps to keep them active and
prolongs their lives.
It is hard to see how all the elements
of the traditional way of life of Abkha-
sian or Azerbaijan villagers could be
transplanted to a modern urban en¬
vironment in order to help solve the pro¬
blems of old people. But some of them,
notably the social and psychological
factors, are worthy of study not only by
specialists but by all who work for old
people.
The results ofour research should not
be considered as practical recommenda¬
tions on ways of living, diet, medical
treatment and other aspects of the sub¬
ject which must be tackled by geron-
tologists. All the same, these scientific
observations and conclusions may be
profitably used, for example, in plann¬
ing vast housing complexes, organizing
the public health system and the
geriatric services in given geographic
and ethnocultural regions, in protecting
the environment, and in making young
people aware of positive forms of
behaviour and community spirit which
may help combat stressone of the fac¬
tors which shortens human life.
I Victor Kozlov
Happy huntress A.P. Habarova,
right, is 94 years old. She lives on
the Kamchatka peninsula which ex¬
tends southward from eastern
Siberia. Along with Tajikistan, the
Soviet Baltic countries and the
Caucasus, Siberia is a part of the
USSR where people often live
beyond the age of ninety. The same
phenomenon is found in other parts
of the world including Colombia,
Ecuador and the United States.
Photo Y Muravin © Fotokhronika Tass, Moscow
13
