S ALL ABOUT ALICE
by Anthony Burgess
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited
LEWIS Carroll, who wrote Alice in
Wonderland and Alice Through
the Looking-Glass, was, in pri¬
vate life, a professor of mathematics at
the University of Oxford named
Charles Lutwidge Dodgson. He
latinized Lutwidge to Ludovicus or
Lewis and Charles to Carolus or Car¬
roll, and, under this name, produced
the first Alice book in 1865 and, the
second in 1872.
He produced other books as
well mostly on difficult mathematical
subjects. Queen Victoria, enchanted by
the Alice books, asked for all of Mr
Carroll's publications and was^
ANTHONY BURGESS, internationally known
British novelist, critic and man of letters, is cur¬
rently at work on his 45th book. His works in¬
clude A Clockwork Orange (1962, filmed 1971),
Nothing Like the Sun 11964) a fictionalized ver¬
sion of Shakespeare's life, and Here Comes
Everybody 11965) an introduction to James
Joyce. His most recent novel. Earthly Powers,
was published in 1980.
Above, Alice Liddell, on whom the character of Alice
was based, photographed in the late 1850s by Lewis
Carroll himself. Alice, Lorina and Edith Liddell were the
daughters of Henry Liddell, dean of Christ Church, Ox¬
ford, where Charles Lutwidge Dodgson (Carroll's real
name) was a lecturer in mathematics. On July 4 1862,
Dodgson rowed the three children up the Thames from
Oxford to Godstow for a picnic and it was during this
outing that he recounted the story of Alice's Adven¬
tures Underground which, with some additions and
revision, was published in 1865 as A/ice's Adventures in
Wonderland. Top left, pen and ink sketch of Alice (the
character in his book) drawn by Dodgson in 1886. Left,
Alice Liddell (seated) and her sister Lorina, in Japanese
costume. The photograph is thought to have been
taken by Lewis Carroll.

THE WHITE RABBIT: ...when the rabbit ac¬
tually took a watch out of its waistcoat-
pocket, and looked at it, and then hurried
on, Alice started to her feet, for... she had
never before seen a rabbit with either a
waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take out of
it... "Oh my ears and whiskers, how late it's
getting!"
by the delivery of treatises
on trigonometry and the binomial
theory. Lewis Carroll was also the first
of the great photographers, and his
studies of children especially of little
Alice Liddell, who was both the heroine
and the first reader of the two great
books have a charm and a mastery of
technique envied by the snappers of
today.
He also loved little girls and did not
like them to grow into big ones, though
he was vague about the moment of
change. He tried to kiss big seventeen-
year-old young ladies and was surprised
that their mothers should protest. His
love of girls, which he was too innocent
to interpret sexually, had perhaps
something to do with his desire to re¬
main a child himself. Although he prac¬
tised the adult art of mathematics,
THE CROQUET MATCH: ...the croquet balls
were live hedgehogs and the mallets live
flamingoes... The chiefdifficultyAlice found
at first was in managing her flamingo... Just
as she hadgot its neck straightened out, and
was going to give the hedgehog a blow with
its head, it would twist itself round and look
up in her face with such a puzzled expres¬
sion that she could not help bursting out
laughing...
8
aspects of the love of nonsense which
was prevalent in England in the Vic¬
torian age. There was no nonsense in
the rest of the world. When, in the early
years of the twentieth century, France
began to discover the delights of
nonsense, this was called surrealism,
and it was regretted that the British
were too old-fashioned to produce sur¬
realist writers or painters. But the
British had already produced their own
surrealists in the staid age of Victoria,
and of these perhaps Lewis Carroll was
the greatest.
Surrealism consists in destroying the
logic of ordinary life and substituting a
kind of logic of the unconscious mind.
Alice's adventures take the form of
dreams in which bizarre things happen,
but these things are based on a more
A MAD TEA-PARTY: There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house and
the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it; a Dormouse was sitting bet¬
ween them, fastasleep... "No room! No room!" they cried out when they saw Alice
coming. "There 's plenty ofroom!"saidAlice indignantly, end she sat down in a large
armchair at one end of the table.
which children hate because it is too
abstract, he did not really wish to have
the responsibilities of an adult.
He never married, he was deeply and
innocently religious, he liked to be cut
off from the dangerous outside world.
He was happy to be enclosed by the
walls of an Oxford college and to tell
stories to the little daughter of Dr Lid¬
dell, the great Greek scholar. But the
publication of the two Alice books
brought him fame. There was
something in them which touched
strings in the adult imagination and yet
pleased and continues to please
children. Carroll was a greater man
than he knew.
Both the Alice books are fantasies,
serious approach to language than we
can permit ourselves in waking life.
By language I mean, of course, the
English language in which Carroll
wrote; many of his dream-jokes are im¬
possible to render into other tongues. If
there is an insect called a butterfly, it
seems dreamily logical to have a bread-
and-butterfly, and Carroll's illustrator,
Tenniel, draws us one of these. The
flower known as a dandelion is a dandy
lion, hence it can roar. There is a school
in which the lessons get shorter every
day: the lessons "lessen." If your
watch stops, the dreamworld says that
time has stopped. The watch of the
Mad Hatter and his friends the March
Hare and the Dormouse has stopped at

teatime, so they must go on taking tea
for ever.
One of the characters who appears in
the looking-glass world is Humpty
Dumpty, who is a talking egg. His
name not merely describes him: it is
him (or he). An egg has a hump above
and a dump below. He is the most
dangerous, and yet the most persuasive,
philosopher of language imaginable.
He says "There's glory for you", and
he explains that "glory" means "a fine
knockdown argument." Alice protests,
but Humpty Dumpty says "It's a ques¬
tion of who is to be master, you or the
word." Words, in other words, can
mean what we want them to mean or
else what the logic of dreams wants
them to mean. Their normal everyday
meaning doesn't apply when we pass
through the looking-glass.
Alice's world is a world full of eccen¬
tric English Victorians disguised mostly
as animals. Like real grown-ups they
can be very rude or pompous to a child
like Alice, but in her dreams Alice can
answer back without being punished
for her effrontery. She is temporarily
living in a kind of Garden of Eden, in
which total liberty seems to be
possiblein Wonderland Alice can
change her shape and size merely by
drinking from a bottle that says
DRINK MEbut liberty is cir¬
cumscribed not by notions of right and
wrong but by mad logic. In the songs
she hears or sings herself this mad logic
seems to disappear, but there is
A PACK OF CARDS: "Off with her head!"
the Queen shouted at the top of her voice.
Nobody moved. "Who cares for you?" said
Alice (she had grown to her full size by this
time). "You're nothing but a pack of cards!"
At this the whole pack rose up into the air
and came flying down upon her...
tit say that, did you?
I In hni'i ho* promised
me iritli his urif own
mouth to to
"To send all lii^ horses
and all his men," Alice
interrupted, rather un¬
wisely.
THE LION AND THE UNICORN: "You don't know how to manage
Looking-glass cakes", the Unicorn remarked. "Hand it round first
and cut it afterwards. " This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obe¬
diently got up and carried the dish round, end the coke divided
itself up into three pieces as she did so. "Now cut it up", said the
fion as she returned to her piece with the empty dish.
substituted for it the spirit of parody,
which implies an existing logic in the
waking world. Alice knows very well a
song that goes:
Twinkle twinkle little star,
How I wonder what you are,
Up above the world so high
Like a diamond in the sky.
This becomes:
Twinkle twinkle little bat,
How I wonder what you're at,
Up above the world so high,
Like a teatray in the sky.
Why bat? Why teatray? For that
matter, why is a raven like a writing-
desk? We feel that if we dig deeply
enough we shall find our answers, but
there is no time for digging, except for
apples. If, in French, potatoes are
pommes de terre, they are apples in the
earth, and digging is quite in order.
It is the very English eccentricity of
the denizens of Wonderland and the^
HUMPTY DUMPTY: "Now
take a good look at me! I'm
one that has spoken to a
King, I am; mayhap you'll
never see such another; and
to show you I'm not proud,
you may shake hands with
me!"And he grinned almost
from ear to ear, as he leant
forward (and as nearly as
possible fell off the wall in
doing so) end offered Alice
his hand.

ALL ABOUT ALICE
world that endears them
to us. The White Rabbit, the Ugly
Duchess, the Queen of Hearts, the
White Knight, Tweedledum and
Tweedledee, marvellously drawn by
Tenniel, are also very fully characteriz¬
ed by Carroll. They speak as we would
expect them to speak, and they are full
of an appalling self-will and vigour. But
the men are less vigorous than the
women. It is a child's world of petticoat
government in which the women
mothers, sisters, governesses are near
and magisterial, as well as wantonly
cruel, while fathers are more distant,
nicer, and busied with their own eccen¬
tric affairs.
But finally the appeal of the Alice
books is to the creative imagination, by
which space and time can become
plastic and language itself diverted
from the everyday course of
straightforward communication. There
is a strange poem, which Humpty
Dumpty kindly explains to Alice, that
sums up the possibilities of the dream¬
ing world. It is called "Jabberwocky"
and it begins:
Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe.
All mimsy were the borogoves,
And the mome raths outgrabe.
"Slithy" is both slimy and lithe, to
gyre is to girate, to gimble is both to
gambol like a Iamb and to turn like a
gimlet or corkscrew. Humpty Dumpty
calls these "portmanteau words,"
because, like portmanteaux, several
things can be crammed into them.
James Joyce saw the possibilities of this
Jabberwocky language and, in his great
novel Finnegans Wake, which presents
an adult, not a child's, dream, he used
the technique. What, with Carroll,
began as a joke ends, in Joyce, as the
most serious attempt ever made to show
how the dreaming mind operates.
But we leave it to the psychologists
and literary critics to find in the Alice
books great profundities and profound
ambiguities. The Freudians have seen
sexual symbols in them, which Carroll's
innocent conscious mind could not be
aware of, and the Marxists have seen
images of social tyranny and revolt. We
are wisest if we become children again
and use the books to recapture a lost in¬
nocence. We must learn to identify
ourselves with a girl in a Victorian
frock whose hair is long and golden and
whose manner has the self-assurance of
a product of the Victorian ruling class.
To be honest, Alice is not a very nice
little girl. She is far too sharp and bossy
and proud. She lacks humility,
but and this is an aspect of the British
imperialist spirit she also lacks fear. It
requires great courage, at the trial of
the Knave of Hearts, with the Queen
shouting "Off with her head!", for her
to cry: "You're nothing but a pack of
cards!" and to see the chaos of the
mass of pasteboard that, a minute ago,
was an imperialist society whirling
about her head. She is transported to
mad colonial territories and retains
something of her sanity. She is very
British and very Victorian, but she is
also admirably and universally human.
H Anthony Burgess
LEWIS CARROLL (1832-1898)
Although a brilliant logician and the author
of a number of treatises on mathematics,
Charles Lutwidge Dodgson is remembered
today as Lewis Carroll, the author of two
outstanding books for children, Alice's
Adventures in Wonderland and Through the
Looking-Glass, which are among the most
quoted and most translated books in English
literature. Dodgson was also a fine photo¬
grapher and a fair artist. The original
manuscript of Alice was illustrated with his
own pen and ink sketches, but the first
published edition was illustrated by John
Tenniel, probably the greatest of the many il¬
lustrators of the two Alice books.
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE: They
were standing under a tree, each with an
arm around the other's neck... "If you think
we're wax-works", said Tweedledum, "you
ought to pay you know. Wax-works weren't
made to be looked at for nothing. Nohow!".
"Contrariwise", added Tweedledee, "if you
think we're alive you ought to speak".
DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE: ...she went back
to the table... end this time she found a little
bottle on it ("which was certainly not here
before", said Alice), and round its neck a
paper label, with the words "DRINK ME"
beautifully printed on it in large letters.
Drawings by Sophie and David Brabyn (aged
11), of the U.K., after Sir John Tenniel.
10
