Szymanowski
a great composer rediscovered
byjerzy Waldorff
and Arab music (which he discovered
while travelling in Africa). But he soon
found his own way, essentially Polish in
inspiration.
After his journey to Africa
Szymanowski visited Paris on the eve of
the First World War where he met Claude
Debussy, and London where he made the
acquaintance of Igor Stravinsky. As
described, not without humour, in Ar-
tur Rubinstein's memoirs, the meeting
with the outwardly cold and aloof
Stravinsky was not a success! Then
Szymanowski returned home by one of
the last trains in the summer of 1914. As
GREAT creative artists and their
works often have a chequered
fate. Vivaldi's music was only
discovered two centuries after its com¬
poser's death. Van Gogh, like many
other painters, lived in poverty; today his
paintings are valued at millions of
dollars. In some cases outstanding
creators are celebrated during their
lifetime but after their death their works
are temporarily and unjustly consigned
to oblivion. This has been the fate of
Karol Szymanowski, who was con¬
sidered to be one of the great European
composers in the 1930s.
Szymanowski was born on 3 October
1 882 in the little town ofTimoszowka on
the border of the Ukraine and Podolia.
It is a matter of coincidence that Joseph
Conrad (Jozef Korzeniowski) the great
English writer of Polish origin, the
famous pianist and statesman Ignacy
Paderewski, and the noted twentieth-
century Polish writer Jaroslav
Ivaszkiewicz were all born in this same
region of Poland. Two famous women,
Balzac's great love Ewelina Hanska, and
Karolina Ivanowska (later the princess of
Wittgenstein) who was the inspiration of
Franz Liszt, also came from the same
area.
Szymanowski had the good fortune to
be born into a family which was deeply
interested in the theatre, literature and
above all music. They did not stand in the
way of his vocation and allowed him to
study in Warsaw where he made friends
with the pianist Artur Rubinstein and the
violinist Pawel Kochans. These brilliant
performers later became the most
faithful champions of Szymanowski's
works in Europe and the United States.
Initially Szymanowski was influenced
by Chopin and Scriabin. In 1902 his
Study in B Flat, which Paderewski in¬
cluded in his repertoire, made him inter¬
nationally known. After 1906 his sym-
JERZY WALDORFF, Polish essayist and critic,
is Vice-Chairman of the Music Council of the
.Polish Ministry of Culture. He is the author of
several books on music including two
monographs on Karol Szymanowski.
Left to right, Grzegorz Fitelberg, Karol
Szymanowski and Artur Rubinstein, In Vienna, in
1912.
phonic work's began to be played by the
orchestras of Warsaw, Berlin and Vien¬
na. In accordance with the traditional
practice of that time, an ambitious
patron and man of taste, Prince
Wladislaw Lubomirski, offered him the
hospitality of his palace in Vienna and
recommended him to the "Universal
Edition" publishing house which was to
publish all his works except for the ballet
Harnasie, the Fourth Symphonie Con¬
certante, and the Second Violin Concer¬
to, which appeared under the imprint of
the Paris house of Max Eschig.
Szymanowski's compositions between
1906 and 1910 reflected his enthusiasm
for the work of Max Reger, Richard
Strauss, the impressionism of Debussy,
the guns began to thunder in the West he
was gripped by a fever of creativity and
began to produce a flow ofmajor works .
His First Violin Concerto, inspired by
the Polish poet Tadeusz Micinski's May
Song, is a hymn to love which .rises,
against a background of inexpressible
anguish. The Third Symphony (The
Song of the Night) for orchestra, tenor
and choir, is quite different; written to
words by the great Persian Sufi poet
Rumi (13th century AD) this .gigantic
work evokes the heaving of the ocean
through its rich canvas of sound, and
culminates in a meditation bordering on
ecstasy: "God and I are alone..."
Mity (Myths) are a suite for violin and
28

piano, the best-known piece being the
demanding Fountain ofArethusa. On his
way to Africa Szymanowski had spent
some time in Sicily, still imbued with the
heritage of ' 'greater Greece" , and where
he discovered Antiquity. The Myths are
a reflection of this revelation.
After the Treaty of Versailles the com¬
poser and his family returned from
Elisavetgrad, where they had moved in
1 9 1 7, to a Poland reborn. After 1 920 his
works increasingly drew inspiration from
folklore songs, dances, fiddler's im-
provizations, especially those of the
sobriquet, "romantic of modernity",
was fully deserved. As time went by,
however, his technique became increas¬
ingly refined and rigorous. His oratorio
Stabat Mater, universally considered to
be a masterpiece, was produced when he
was at the height of his powers.
Szymanowski's growing authority was
recognized when he was appointed direc¬
tor of the Warsaw conservatory in 1 927,
but the envy of some of his fellow-
musicians and government intrigues led
him to resign in 1932. This was a blow
from which he never recovered. But
Szymanowski did not need direct
mountain-dwellers of the Tatra massif.
But when he introduces popular melodies
and the rhythms of peasant dances into
such compositions as the oratorio Stabat
Mater, the ballet Harnasie, and the
Fourth Symphonie Concertante,
Szymanowski uses the same freedom and
orchestral refinement as a Prokofiev, a
Bartok or a Stravinsky.
He rarely abandoned the tonal system.
In his rare atonal experiments he went
close to the serial writing of Schoenberg,
without however employing a complete
twelve-tone system. He was attached
above all to the originality of melodic
lines and to their scintillation and éclat,
wishing to express in music the profound
and unchanging feelings of mankind. His
Poster for the highly
praised 1 936 Paris per¬
formance of
Szymanowski's ballet
Harnasie which had
received its première in
Prague the previous
year. In Harnasie
Szymanowski used
direct quotations from
folk music coloured
with echoes of Tatra
mountain airs.
Photos © Polish Institute, Paris
classroom contact in order to influence
such musicians as Grazyna Bacewicz,
Witold Lutoslawski, Tadeusz Baird and
Krzysztof Penderecki. Although at times
they resisted Szymanowski's "roman¬
ticism" these young artists nevertheless
profited from the lessons taught them by
the work of their older contemporary.
While the master was encountering
difficulties in his own country, elsewhere
his successes were bringing him recogni¬
tion as a leading figure in European
music. In 1929 he was awarded the Order
of the Italian Crown and in the follow¬
ing year he became a member of the
Prague Academy of Sciences and Arts.
In 1931 he was awarded the French
Legion of Honour, and became an
honorary member of the International
Society for Contemporary Music, to
which Richard Strauss, Manuel de Falla,
Maurice Ravel, Stravinsky, Bêla Bartok
and others also belonged.
Between 1924 and 1926
Szymanowski's First Violin Concerto
was performed by such musicians as
Sampigny in Paris, Pawel Kochanski in
New York, Stokowski and Huberman in
Vienna. Between 1929 and 1937, the
Stabat Mater was sung in Naples, Vien¬
na, Brussels, Paris, Klagenfurt, Warsaw,
New York, Dusseldorf and Chicago. The
ballet Harnasie was performed between
1935 and 1937 in a concertante version
in Cleveland and New York, and danc¬
ed in Prague, Paris, Belgrade and Ham¬
burg. Szymanowski himself was the
soloist when his Fourth Symphonie Con¬
certante for piano and orchestra was per¬
formed in Copenhagen, Moscow,
Amsterdam, Bucharest, Stockholm,
Paris and London.
Szymanowski's last great success also
brought him great distress. In 1936 his
ballet Harnasie was staged at the Paris
Opera to choreography by Serge Lifar
who danced the principal role. The critics
unanimously showered praise on the
composer. Unfortunately, a few days
after the opening night, a fire broke out
in the corridors and the ballet had to be
transferred to the Théâtre des Champs
Elysées. But there were no offers of fur¬
ther performances.
In 1937 Szymanowski died of tuber¬
culosis, an illness he had contracted in
childhood and one which was at that time
often incurable.
Two years later the Second World War
unleashed by Hitler swept through
Europe, destroying Poland and erasing
the great musician's name from memory.
Then, with the return of peace a certain
avant-garde which was in some cases
more attached to tradition than to in¬
novation slowed down the rediscovery of
a composer who, formerly dubbed a
"romantic" had in the meantime become
a "classic" because of the vigour and
beauty of his art.
In spring 1975 Szymanowski's opera
King Roger was staged at Sadlers Wells
in London by the New Opera Company.
It was a triumphant success and set off
a chain reaction, with more and more
performances of King Roger being put
on in various parts of the world. A recent
example: Szymanowski's opera scored a
triumph at the Teatro Colón in Buenos
Aires in autumn 1981.
The centenary of Szymanowski's
birth, inscribed on Unesco's world calen¬
dar of anniversaries, is a fitting moment
to contribute to the revival of his music
in a world which more than ever stands
in need of the beauty and peace which
music can bring.
29
