Henry I, 37th king of France (1031-1060).
Anna, second daughter of Yaroslav the Wise, prince of Kiev, who married
Henry I of France in 1049. j



FRANCE'S
UKRAINIAN QUEEN
by Sergei Vissotsky
THIS is the story of Anna, one of the daughters of Yaroslav
the Wise, prince of Kiev, as related in the ancient chronicles
of western Europe.
In 1098, Henry I Capet, king of France, sent a delegation to dis¬
tant Kiev to ask Yaroslav the Wise for the hand of his daughter
Anna. The delegation, which was surrounded by great pomp,
was headed, according to some sources, by Roger, bishop of
Chalons, and, according to others, by Gautier, bishop of Meaux,
accompanied by the court minister Gasselin de Chavignac.
Why, one may ask, did the king of France send these
dignitaries so far afield to the distant banks of the Dnieper, laying
them open to all the difficulties and dangers that beset travellers
on the highways and byways of Europe during the Middle Ages?
Could he not have found a bride in another European country
nearer home?
There were in fact good reasons for seeking a bride in distant
Russia, for Henry I's own father, Robert, had been excom¬
municated by the Pope for having married Bertha, his cousin four
CONTINUED PAGE 23
12th- or 13th-century
gold ceremonial head¬
dress of the kind worn
by Ukrainian noble¬
women. The pendants
shown at either side
contained aromatic
essences and are
typical of the Kievan
jeweller's art.

times removed, and the king wished to avoid a similar fate.
Moreover, Russia under Yaroslav had become a very powerful na¬
tion and was held in high esteem throughout Europe. All the rul¬
ing families were therefore anxious to establish an alliance with
the royal house of Kiev. These were the reasons which caused the
envoys of the king of France to set off on their long journey.
One can well imagine the impression produced on the French
delegation by Kiev. With its huge earth ramparts surmounted by
oak palisades, the Golden Gate in stone with the gilded dome of
its church gleaming in the sunlight, and the deep moat that en¬
circled it, the city was a truly impregnable fortress.
Within the gates, the visitors were struck by the grandiose pro¬
portions of the city which contrasted with those of western Euro¬
pean towns at that time. The residential areas were not as densely
populated and consisted of many wooden houses surrounded by
gardens and orchards. All along the route followed by the French
envoys were innumerable churches and chapels, the rich mansions
of the boyars (nobles), towers and palaces. The streets were lined
with great crowds who greeted the Frenchmen with loud cheers.
The pealing of church bells added solemnity to the
occasion.
The procession advanced slowly along the main street until it
reached the square before the great cathedral of St. Sophia with
its golden dome. From the gates of the archbishop's palace a
group came out to meet them headed by the clergy, the
voyevodes (dignitaries) and the boyars. After the official recep¬
tions, religious services and other ceremonials customary on such
occasions in medieval times, the ambassadors were informed that
Yaroslav had consented to the marriage of his daughter Anna to
Henry I of France. And so Anna began preparing for the long
journey which was to change the course of her whole life. To
reach France she probably followed the trade route which linked
Russia with Europe passing through Cracow, Prague and
Regensburg.
The wedding of Henry I and Anna Yaroslavna took place on
14 May 1049 in Rheims cathedral. Anna Yaroslavna had three
sons: Philip, Robert and Hugo. The eldest, Philip, was crowned
king of France at the age of seven, during his father's lifetime.
Anna refused to become regent but remained at her son's side
to educate him and guide him in the affairs of State.
In a letter to Anna written in 1059, Pope Nicholas II praises her
intelligence and virtues and exhorts her to bring up her sons as
chaste and good men and to assist the king in his State duties.
After Henry I's death in 1060, Anna's name appears side by side
with that of Philip on many French State documents. Thus Philip
I's charter conferred on the abbey of Soissons in 1063 bears the
signatures of Anna and her son. On the charter, next to the king's
monogram, are the traces of a seal and two crosses probably
drawn by the young king. Beneath these crosses in Cyrillic letters
is the signature of the queen-mother, "Anna-Rina". She had at¬
tempted to transcribe the Latin "Anna Regina" in Slavonic
writing.
In the little provincial town of Senlis, about thirty miles from
Paris, Anna Yaroslavna founded the monastery of St. Vincent.
French chronicles link the creation of the monastery to a vow
made by the queen before the birth of her first son, Philip. Today,
a chapel in Senlis built in those far-off times still bears the name of
Anna Yaroslavna. A life-size statue of Anna was later placed near
the entrance with the inscription: "Anna of Russia, queen of
France, founder of the church in 1060".
After Henry I's death, Anna and her sons left Paris and took up
residence in Senlis. During this period of her life she was loved by
the powerful feudal lord Raoul II the Great, count of Crépy and
Valois. One day, when hunting in the forest of Senlis, Raoul ab¬
ducted Anna with her consent and married her soon after. But
their happiness was to be marred by great difficulties. For Alpora
of Brabant, the count's wife, appealed to the Pope who declared
the marriage of Raoul and Anna null and void. Despite this, Anna
Yaroslavna continued to live with Raoul at his family estate in
Valois up to his death in 1074. The last-known signature of Anna
on a French document dates from the year 1075.
B Sergei Vissotsky
23
