a/	 fl%AHA\ /¡^mm/ mf0*mM&m
-**-..
I ft 4* ""^4G.
SrV
Photo © State Literary Museum, Moscow
Holograph manuscript from Dostoyevsky's notebook for Crime and
Punishment. "This is a psychological account of a crime...", he wrote of
the plot. "A young man expelled from the university..., living in the
direst poverty, the victim of certain bizarre 'half-baked' ideas that are in
the wind, decides out of lightheadedness and instability of thinking to
extricate himself from his deplorable situation with one bold stroke. He
decides to kill an old woman... a money-lender... There are no
suspicions of him. Then the psychological process of the crime unfolds.
Insoluble questions arise before the murderer, unsuspected and
unexpected feelings torment his heart... and he finally feels forced to
give himself up..."
14

The world of Dostoyevsky
by Elena Dmitrievna Mikhailova
FYODOR Mikhailovich Dostoyevsky
was born in 1821, in an apartment at
the Mariinskaya hospital where his
father was a doctor. He spent the first six¬
teen years of his life in these surroundings,
forming his first impressions of the "insulted
and injured" by observing the poor who
came to the hospital for treatment. During
these formative years he entered the world
of books through the works of Pushkin,
Gogol and Walter Scott. The death of his
mother acquainted him with misfortune at
an early age. Then, although he remained a
Muscovite at heart, he left Moscow for St.
Petersburg where he entered the military
engineering school.
The last year of Dostoyevsky's life is also
linked with Moscow. On 6 June 1880 he
delivered his celebrated speech on Pushkin
during the inauguration ceremony of a
monument to his favourite poet. This ad¬
dress, in which he affirmed the noble calling
of the artistic genius, who should preserve a
bond with the people and should aspire to
universality, stirred all Russia and stimulated
widespread debate and reflection.
In 1928, part of the former Mariinskaya
hospital was turned into the F.M. Dostoyev¬
sky Museum, a branch of the State Literary
Museum. Its exhibits consist largely of a
donation from Dostoyevsky's second wife,
Anna Grigorievna, which had been
presented to the city of Moscow in 1916.
Ever since then the Museum's collection has
continued to grow. The building is currently
being restored, and the Dostoyevsky
family's apartment is being entirely rebuilt. It
is planned that a literary exhibition will be
held on the first and second floors.
Dostoyevsky's creative activity will always
be associated with St. Petersburg (now Len-
ELENA DMITRIEVNA MIKHAILOVA, Soviet
philologist, is director of the scientific and metho¬
dological service of the State Literary Museum,
Moscow. She has organized many exhibitions,
both in the Soviet Union and abroad, and is the
author of a number of studies on museology.
ingrad) where he studied at the engineering
school and where the avant-garde writers
Belinsky, Nekrasov and their friends gave an
enthusiastic reception to his first novel, Poor
Folk. There too he joined the circle of young
writers, scientists, philosophers and officers
who had gathered around the 28-year-old
Mikhail Petrashevsky, whose attachment to
Utopian socialism they shared.
During their regular Friday meetings they
analysed the works of the French socialists
François Marie Charles Fourier and the
Comte de Saint-Simon, and those of the
Welsh Utopian socialist Robert Owen. They
recited Pushkin's poems and read articles by
avant-garde Russian journalists which had
been banned by the Tsarist censorship. The
group's activities were cut short in 1849
when its members were arrested and con¬
demned to death, a sentence which was
commuted at the last minute to one of penal
servitude.
Dostoyevsky was condemned for "having
had criminal designs to be deprived... of the
enjoyment of all his possessions and to be
deported to a fortress to serve a sentence of
eight years hard labour". The Tsar decided
to modify the sentence to four years hard
labour to be followed by service in the army,
in the full knowledge that by commuting the
penalty he made it harsher.
On his return to St. Petersburg, after ten
years of prison and military service,
Dostoyevsky again took up writing and jour¬
nalism. The creation of his most compelling
work, from The House of the Dead (1861 -62)
to The Brothers Karamazov (1879-80) is con¬
nected with St. Petersburg. In 1971, to mark
the 150th anniversary of his birth, part of the
building where he spent his final years was
transformed into a museum.
In the 1870s, the Dostoyevsky family
began spending the summer, and
sometimes the winter, at the resort of
Staraya Russa in Novgorod district. In these
surroundings he could work and also devote
more time to his children and to family life. It
was at Staraya Russa that he wrote A Raw
Youth, some chapters of 777e Brothers
Karamazov, his Pushkin speech, and many
page's of The Diary of a Writer. On 4 May
1981 a museum was inaugurated in this
country house whose original setting and
atmosphere have been scrupulously
recreated.
At Omsk, where Dostoyevsky served his
sentence of hard labour, preparations are
under way for the inauguration of a museum
which will be attached to the Historical and
Architectural Museum created in the house
of A.F. de Grave, commandant of the Omsk
fortress whom Dostoyevsky described as
"an extremely decent person", and who
entertained the writer as an equal. The
Dostoyevsky room will become the nucleus
of this museum which aims to present
a panorama of the literature of the entire
Omsk region.
After serving his term of hard labour at
Omsk, Dostoyevsky went to Semipalatinsk,
also in Siberia, to do his military service.
While there he worked on The House of the
Dead, and dreamed of returning to the
literary life of St. Petersburg. It was at
Semipalatinsk that he met his first wife,
Marya Dmitrievna Isaeva. "She was the light
of my life", he wrote. "She appeared at the
gloomiest moment in my existence and
revived my soul." The house he occupied at
Semipalatinsk between 1857 and 1859 has
long been a museum. A new annexe to it
has just been completed.
Another Dostoyevsky museum is current¬
ly being created in the nearby town of
Novokuznetsk, in the house of D.I. Isaeva,
where the writer visited his wife-to-be.
Finally, an exhibition on The Brothers
Karamazov and Dostoyevsky's other work
has been organized in the little house where
the novelist stayed during a two-day visit to
the monastery of Optina Pustyn, not far
from Kaluga, in 1878. The exhibition evokes
the impressions made on Dostoyevsky dur¬
ing his stay by his conversations with the
Elder Amvrosii, the prototype of Father
Zossima, a character in the novel.
The seven museums perform a dual task.
They provide visitors with an opportunity to
acquire a deeper understanding of the
writer's work as a whole, to enter the world
of his imagination, to understand his aspira¬
tions, his periods of discouragement and the
times when work poured from his pen, and
to grasp the full complexity of his creative
and philosophical quest.
15
