I GOHA
THE SIMPLE
OR
THE WISDOM
I OF FOLLY
by Georgia Makhlouf
The Syrian artist Nazir Nabah drew this illustration of
the story of the self-important Sultan who is convinc¬
ed that the moon follows him wherever he goes.
WHEN I first heard about Goha the
Wise Fool I was a little perplexed.
He was not the usual hero of
fairy-tales who saves nations or princesses in
distress, nor the flat, one-dimensional
character of stories that one laughs over but
soon forgets.
He was different, indefinable sometimes
the judge, sometimes the accused, the rob¬
ber or the robbed, the cheat or the cheated. I
couldn't make up my mind if one should
make fun at him or with him, sharing in his
bizarre wisdom.
He had been described to me as a
Lebanese peasant from a mountain village
who has to face the various tribulations of
country life. But I also met him in the guise
of a judge in a Cairo court-room, as a guest
of the sultan in the palaces of Baghdad, and
on a shopping expedition in the suqs of the
old city of Tunis.
But with all this, Goha remained true to
character, ageless and always accompanied
by his donkey who, whether friend or foe,
sticks to him like a shadow.
Goha is to be found everywhere in Arab
folklore. Unlike the typical characters in
most traditional literatures who are assigned
to a more or less set corpus of tales and
therefore occupy a clearly defined position
in the development of the plot, Goha is a
versatile, fluctuating character whose deeds
and words constantly change according to
the circumstances. He is part and parcel of
daily life and the comical adventures of
which he is the eternal hero are continually
updated to fit the socio-political conditions
of the day.
GEORGIA MAKHLOUF, of Lebanon, is cur¬
rently preparing a university thesis in Paris on
ideology in modern Lebanese children's
literature. She has worked on a number of
studies on the role of the mass media in Lebanon
and has written children's stories in Arabic.
This may explain why, despite his impor¬
tance and omnipresence in the collective
consciousness, few books have been written
about Goha. He is not a static character
automatically condemned to be eaten by the
wolf like Little Red Riding Hood. When he
meets the wolf there are always several alter¬
natives: Goha misleads him about his
destination, he leads him before the judge,
offers him sweets... and even eats him!
His multi-faceted character holds great
appeal for young audiences, probably
because of his "anti-heroic" behaviour.
Goha is often shown as a lazy, poor, ig¬
norant, dirty and dishonest individual living
on the fringe of society, outside the social
logic of work and productivity, but who
manages nevertheless to disentangle himself
from embarrassing situations through guile
or simple wisdom.
Though ignorant, Goha exposes the con¬
tradictions of official scholarship; establish¬
ed, sacrosanct standards do not impress
him. In an delightful scene in Jacques
Baratier's film Goha le Simple, the
scenario of which was written by the
Lebanese writer Georges Shéhadé, Goha
succeeds in setting at loggerheads two
ulemas of the famous Al Azhar university.
The first maintains that truth is straight, the
second that it is curved; the first that truth is
luminous, the second that it is obscure.
With his simple approach, akin to that of a
child who has not yet been warped by social
constraints, Goha appears wiser and more
knowledgeable than these learned scholars.
His relationship with his environment also
reveals several traits that are characteristic
of the child's universe. The way he falls
under the spell of things and the ease with
which he confronts Nature (very well
described in Adès and Josipovici's Goha), in
particular his relationship with his donkey,
recall certain aspects of the child's animistic
thought as identified by Piaget.
Goha has conversations with his donkey
who is all at once at faithful companion, an
enemy, a scapegoat and the mirror-image of
himself. To critics he often replies: "I have
lived so long with my donkey that I've
become like him."
Goha is also an eternal truant. In
Shéhadé's scenario he is sent to school by
his father who hopes that his son will
become a scholar at AI Azhar. But instead
of attending the madrassah (Koranic
school), Goha wiles away his days in the
shadow of an arcade and sends his donkey
to school in his place. Incidentally, the
donkey is completely at ease among the dull
and studious pupils.
When Goha himself becomes a
schoolmaster he practises avant-garde
teaching methods by getting his pupils to
teach one another.
In yet another tale, set this time in a draw¬
ing class, he becomes an adept of modern
art by depicting, instead of the bird the
teacher has told the class to draw, the
branch of a tree. When the time for the exer¬
cise is up, the teacher claps his hands for the
pupils to raise their slates exhibiting their
work. When he sees Goha's drawing he asks
angrily: "Where's the bird?"
"It flew away when you clapped your
hands", replies Goha.
This irreverent, non-conformist charac¬
ter, full of weaknesses and faults, who suc¬
ceeds in extricating himself from difficult
situations by inversing traditional values, is
very popular with children. By his example
Goha "shows that there are temporary solu¬
tions to the most pressing psychological dif¬
ficulties" (Bettelheim). Thus he is often
rewarded by the Kadi (judge) or the sultan
for his resourcefulness. His cunning and
shrewdness disarm his enemies and he
receives presents for getting out of tight
corners.
For a child there is something reassuring
in the sight of little, unimportant
Goha who is definitely on the side of the
poor and the weak defending himself sue-
26

cessfully and triumphing over people who
are stronger and much more powerful than
himself.
Nevertheless, Goha is unlike the usual
heroes of children's tales who are never am¬
bivalent but, on the contrary, strongly
polarized and form an opposition within the
story. Because of his versatility and the
variety of roles he plays, Goha cannot be
classed in the usual category of children's
characters.
In a historical study which attempts to
answer the question: "Did Goha ever
exist?", he is referred to as a Mukhadram.
This term was used originally to qualify
historical figures who lived both in pre-
Islamic times and during the period of
Islam's emergence, thus participating in two
different cultural universes; its meaning has
now been extended to describe someone
who is astride two worlds, but does not
belong completely to either, in other words,
an ambiguous and therefore very versatile
character.
In certain tribes the mukhadram is a
mediator in inter-tribal disputes: he does not
really belong to either tribe but is sufficient¬
ly familiar with both to serve as an in¬
termediary between them.
Without seeking to ascribe validity to this
historical theory (whether Goha ever existed
or not remains an open question) it points to
an important dimension of his personality:
fundamentally he is a "marginal"
character, who participates in different
social worlds but never identifies with any of
them completely. Both an adult and a child,
he is not anti-social, for he maintains a com¬
plex network of social relationships; rather,
he is an anarchist in spontaneous revolt
against the prevailing social order which im¬
poses its own vision of reality. In this respect
Goha is essentially ambivalent.
His subversive instincts expressed in the
struggle against oppression and brute force
sometimes lend themselves to political inter¬
pretations. The story of "Goha's nail", for
example, is so famous that it has become
proverbial. Goha is obliged to sell his house,
but he adds a clause to the contract under
which he remains the owner of a nail on the
wall of one of the rooms, and this clause is
accepted by the buyer. One fine day Goha
arrives at the house and hangs a decaying
carcass on the nail. The whole house soon
reeks with the smell. Goha is asked to
remove the carcass but refuses pointing out
that the nail is legally his property. The new
owner is appalled and finally has to aban¬
don the house to Goha.
When Goha's nail is mentioned today in
conversation it is taken to mean someone
who keeps the best for himself while appear-
Another inci¬
dent in the life
and times of the
inimitable Goha
as drawn by a
six-year-old
Egyptian girl,
Shainda Niazi
Lane.
ing to be disinterested, or it can allude to a
clause introduced into a contract in order to
thwart the beneficiary.
At the political level the story symbolizes
the people's struggle against occupation. In
a more recent tale about a water melon
Goha is shown as a dissident. The scene is
set during an election: red ballot papers have
been prepared for candidates of the ruling
party and green ones for those of the op¬
position. After the proclamation of the
results which have returned the ruling party
to power, Goha goes to the market and sees
a magnificent piece of fruit, a big green
water melon. He is delighted by its fine col¬
our and buys the fruit which is unfamiliar to
him. On returning home he discovers to his
surprise that the inside of the melon is red
and that he has been deceived.
Other aspects of Goha's personality make
him unlike the usual hero of children's tales,
as for example his disrespectful attitude
towards Arab social institutions such as
marriage, religious rites, the law.
By his pranks he pokes fun at religious
bigots, ridicules high-sounding phrases and
uses the Kadi as a cat's-paw.
In yet another story, Goha, who is about
to marry, has a house built and orders the
carpenter to "put the woodwork for the
roof on the floor and the woodwork for the
floor on the roof".
The carpenter expresses surprise at this
and asks Goha to explain: "Don't you know
that marriage makes everything topsy¬
turvy", he replies. "So if we turn things up¬
side down beforehand order will be re¬
established after marriage".
Goha is also a very poetic character, a sort
of Oriental Pierrot who sings while he runs,
for he likes to hear his own voice from afar,
and outwits two thieves who have challeng¬
ed him to climb a tree and pick fruit, by
unexpectedly taking his shoes with him:
"Perhaps I will find a path leading from the
tree-top," he explains "And if I do, I shall
need my shoes."
Goha forms an integral part of the collec¬
tive Arab imagination. Not only is he the
hero of folk tales, he is also to be found in
proverbs and popular expressions. When
business is bad it is customary to remark
that it is "like Goha's affairs". And when
people are faced with a situation that they
do not understand or with behaviour whose
motivations are unclear, they say: "Do you
know what tore Goha's tarbush?"
Goha has been updated in modern
literature, notably in the works of Moham¬
med Dib, Kateb Yacine and Rachid Boud-
jeba. In children's literature, too, there are
characters such as the dreamer, the
simpleton and the wise fool who recall dif¬
ferent aspects of his personality and Goha-
like situations. For example, the story of the
sultan who is convinced that the moon is
following him, since he sees it move when he
moves and stop when he stops.
The same kind of proble-n exercises
Goha: he is seen one day going down to the
bottom of a deep well, for he has seen the
fallen moon in the water. Once below he
looks up and is reassured when he sees that
the moon is back in its place.
Georgia Makhlouf
Goha and his donkey
pictured in a cartoon
from a Lebanese chil¬
dren's book.
Drawing © from Stories ofJeha by Rose Gorayeb. Dar al-Kitab al Lubnani, Tyre
27
