Saint Francis giving his cloak to a rich man fallen on hard times, one
of a cycle of 28 scenes from the Saint's life in the Upper Church at Assisi,
by Giotto (1300).
Photo © Alinari-Giraudon, Paris
TAKING flight into the realms of pure
fantasy, let us imagine that one
day Saint Francis knocked at our
door. What yvould happen? No doubt he
would begin by telling us about his own
times and what he had tried to accomplish
during his life. And this would be the point
at which some real problems would arise.
Let us imagine how the conversation
would continue. Saint Francis would re¬
mind us of his guidelines for living and right
away we would come up against great dif¬
ficulties. No doubt he would speak of
poverty and invite us to live the life of the
poor, advising his brothers to accept
neither church nor even the poorest house;
he would preach the Christianity of Christ,
the Christ of the Gospels who is the inspira¬
tion of the pilgrim church of the world, of
that church which is in eternal movement
because it pursues the notion of the
spiritual prey, souls that wait to be
educated and helped, ofthat church which
over six centuries does not appear to have
gone very far in that direction.
And what about us? We are still caught
up in a totally opposed vision, one which
cannot be reconciled with this path of
adversity and difficulty. Our goal is to live
in houses which are ever more comfortable
and richly appointed, to pray in churches
which best suit our tastes. Above all, we
strive to make of this same religion, of this
religion which links us through Saint Fran¬
cis to Christ, a centre of appeasement, of
satisfaction and, indirectly, of lassitude.
We enter the church to find peace; Saint
CARLO BO, /fa/f'an writer and literary critic, has
played a leading role in a number of avant-garde
literary movements, including hermetism, in
which such great Italian poets as Ungaretti and
Móntale have taken part. He teaches French
language and literature at Urbino, where he has
been rector of the university since 1950.
This article is taken from a longer study in
which the author, writing from the standpoint
of a Christian of the West, calls for a return to
the essentials of Franciscan teaching love,
peace and brotherhood between men and bet¬
ween the peoples of the world.
From riches to rags
FEW periods in history and few places in the world could have
seemed less propitious than the Italy of the end of the twelfth
century for the birth of the "seraphic saint" , the man whose
life mission was "to follow the teaching of Our Lord Jesus Christ
and to walk in his footsteps". For when Francesco di Pietro di Ber-
nardone was born, in 1182, at Assisi in Umbria, the peninsula was
torn with strifePope fought Emperor, Guelph fought Ghibelline,
bourgeois fought noble and city fought city.
The man who was later to found a great religious order whose first
rule was poverty was born rich. His father, Pietro di Bernardone, was
a wealthy cloth merchant, and with his good looks, his riches and his
romantic notions of chivalry, acquired from the chansons of the
French troubadours, Francesco soon became the acknowledged leader
of the worldly young blades of Assisi.
Thirsting for knightly adventure, in 1202 he took part in the war
between Assisi and Perugia but was taken prisoner at the battle of
Ponte San Giovanni at which Assisi suffered a crushing defeat. Releas¬
ed a year later he became seriously ill, but on his recovery he set out,
in 1205, to join the papal army. This journey was to be his "road to
Damascus". He had got no farther than Spoleto when he had a
vision in which he was instructed to return to Assisi and await a call
to another form of knighthood.
On his return to Assisi, in preparation for this call, he devoted
himself to prayer and solitude. He made a pilgrimage to Rome where
he experienced poverty at first hand, mingling with beggars and himself
begging for alms.
The call which he had been so patiently awaiting came to him at
the ruined chapel of San Damiano on the outskirts of Assisi. One day
a voice from the crucifix above the altar commanded him: "Go Francis
and repair my ruined house". Taking these words literally, he returned
home, took as much cloth from his father's shop as he could load
on to his horse and rode to Foligno where he sold both cloth and horse.
On his return he tried to give the money to the priest of San Da¬
miano, but his enraged father hauled him first before the civil
authorities and then before the bishop. Before the startled prelate's
eyes he stripped off his clothing which he handed to his father say¬
ing, "Until today I called Pietro di Bernardone my father; henceforth
I can truly say: Our Father which art in heaven". Whereupon the
astonished bishop gave him a cloak to cover his nakedness and he
set off to live in the forests of Mount Subasio. '
With family ties broken and material goods renounced he was free
to devote himself to God's work. Dressed now in rough hermit's garb
he set about restoring first the chapel at San Damiano and then the
chapel of Santa Maria degli Angeli, known because of its small size
24

If Saint Francis came to call
Would the message of the 'seraphic saint'
be heeded in the modern industrial world?
by Carlo Bo
Francis enters it so as to reinforce his desire
to fight against himself, against everything
which might give him a moment of tran¬
quility, a breathing-space, oblivion.
It is clear that, broached in this fashion,
our hypothetical conversation offers no
possibility of mutual understanding, the
Saint continuing to walk the highways and
byways of the world (certainly in another
form, dressed differently, and with the face
of an asocial, marginal figure condemned
by a society that excludes him). And yet
the first words he pronounces in our
imagination and across centuries of
Catholic tradition are simply these: "the
spirit of poverty."
The very principle of our economy is in
contradiction with the evangelical ideal of
Saint Francis. It is not for nothing that his
discourse is centred on negation: not to
possess, not to hold, not to accept. We are
impelled to give, to render what we give
acceptable and to discover those who are
poorer than ourselves.
The theme of true happiness is precise¬
ly this: happy and serene is the man who.
stranded far from home on a stormy night,
knocks ¡n vain at the door of the convent.
Saint Francis makes of this domestic
parable the main instrument of his genius
for spiritual individuation man finds his
salvation in the very moment that the world
abandons him.
In the depths of misfortune, continues
the disconcerting Saint Francis, this
trouble-maker we have welcomed into our
home, we discover the unique sign of
salvation. For the Saint hope does not
come from us or from any other man, but
Saint Francis' love of nature has come to be
typified by the story of how he exhorted his
friends the birds to sing the praises of God. He
regarded nature as the mirror of God and his
sense of brotherhood which extended not on¬
ly to his fellow men but to all God's creatures
found expression in his famous Cántico di frate
sole (Canticle of Brother Sun). This poem is not
only one of the most beautiful in Italian
literature, it is also one of the first to be writ¬
ten in the vernacular. Until the 13th century
almost all Italian literary work was written in
ecclesiastical Latin. When Saint Francis wrote
the Cántico In 1 225, not long before his death,
he pointed the way to such men as Guido
Cavalcanti and Guido Guinlzelli towards the
"dolce Stil novo", the "sweet new style" of
poetry whose praises Dante sang in the Divine
Comedy. Left, Graham Faulkner as Saint Fran¬
cis in Franco Zeffirelli's film Francis and the
Way to the Sun.
Photo © Télèrama, Paris
as the Porziuncola, which was later to become the centre of the Fran¬
ciscan Order.
There, on the feast of St Matthias, on February 24, 1208, he heard
the words from the Gospel with which Christ sent forth his apostles:
"Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip
for your journey,- neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves, for
the workman is worthy of his meat. And into whatsoever city or town
ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide until ye
go thence. " At last the meaning and purpose of his life seemed crystal
clear. Although not an ordained priest, he began preaching to his
fellow townsmen, quickly attracting around him a band of disciples.
On April 16, 1209, the rule of life he had drawn up for them received
papal sanction and the great adventure of the Franciscan Order was
launched.
Women, too, flocked to join him and three years later he founded
for them a second order that came to be known as the Poor Clares
after his first woman adherent Clare Offreduccio, a noblewoman of
Assisi. Finally, in 1221 , he formed the Third Order of Brothers and
Sisters of Penance, a lay fraternity for those who, without withdraw¬
ing from the world or taking religious vows, wished to follow the prin¬
ciples of Franciscan life.
Meanwhile the men's order had grown rapidly and was no longer
confined to Italy. In 1212 Francis had set out for the Holy Land but
was shipwrecked in the Adriatic and was forced to return home. In
1219 he went to Egypt where the crusaders were besieging Damietta,
and is said to have entered the Saracen camp and preached before
the sultan.
Ill health, which was to dog him for the rest of his life, forced him
to abandon projected visits to France and Spain. Besides, his presence
was needed in Italy where the continual growth of the men's order
made amplification and revision of the rule of the order imperative.
The new and final version of the Franciscan rule was approved by
Pope Honorius III in November 1223.
Exhausted by his many illnesses, which he called his "sisters" and
the many penances he inflicted on "Brother Ass the body", Francis
felt the need to withdraw from the external affairs of the order and
in the summer of 1224 he went with three companions to the moun¬
tain retreat of La Verna, not far from Assisi. Here, as he prayed on
the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross, he saw a vision of a seraph
with six wings. When the vision faded he found that his body bore
the stigmata, the marks of the wounds of Christ, on his hands, feet
and side.
As Christmas approached Francis returned to the Porziuncola and,
despite constant illness and near blindness, he spent the first months
of the year 1225 riding throughout Umbria on a donkey preaching
to the people. With his eye condition worsening his companions took
him to Rieti for medical treatment which proved unsuccessful. Then,
after a brief stay in Siena, he was brought home to Assisi where, on
October 3, 1226, he died at the Porziuncola. In 1228 he was canoniz¬
ed a saint by Pope Gregory IX.
25

from God who assigns us mysterious tasks
and has us encountertragic conditions on
our way through life. Grace is not a reward,
it is only the promise of a reward, of
salvation, the promise that our terror will
be transformed into joy and jubilation.
Our poor man, or, more accurately, the
poor man as we like to imagine him and deal
with him, is a completely passive being. We
mollycoddle the poor man, we send him to
sleep, we do everything we can to relieve
him of his moth-eaten coat of glory. We
give him something in the hope that he will
move on, and we even vouchsafe him a
few words of advice so that he won't
disturb our tranquillity. Saint Francis, on
the contrary, sees the poor man as a king,
Our lives, such as we have lived and are
living them, would appearto give the lie to
the dream and the reality of Saint Francis
and suggest that the natural character, nor¬
mality and enormous importance of our
temptations constitute basic proof of the
vanity and laughable character of Saint
Francis' dream, the dream of fraternity and
of peace through fraternity.
Herein we find one of the most disturb¬
ing and at the same time splendid aspects
of the Franciscan wanderings the clear
tendency to rebellion in the saint, the
tendency to defer obedience to his own
convictions. It would have been easy for
him to place himself at the head of a move¬
ment which challenged the "Signor Papa"
Saint John
Evangelist and
Francis of Assisi,
Greco (early
century). .
the
Saint
by El
17th
Photo © Anderson-Giraudon,
Paris. Prado Museum, Madrid
Saint Francis and Saint
Dominic. Detail from a
series of frescoes
painted by Benozzo
Gozzoll between 1450
and 1 459 in the church
of Saint Fortunatus at
Montefalco, Umbría.
and his own bishop. But it was in this very
context that Saint Francis understood that
truth is indissociable from obedience and
that obedience is very similar to the night
of storm and cold, a chastising experience
whose ultimate goal is the recuperation of
liberty. It is important to note, however,
that the obedience is not of a purely
mechanical kind, nor can it be replaced by
a facile escapism; it is an obedience, rather, .
which takes its toll in tears and blood.
The great story of Christianity has been
written with this obedience as its main in¬
strument, as Saint Francis, with his fear of
heresy and the tempting spirit of contradic¬
tion, was well aware. Nor, for that matter,
did he hesitate to bind his brothers to a
scrupulous observance of evangelical prin¬
ciples and the teachings of the Church. The
suspicion of theology arose from the idea
that carnal pride could return to our hearts
as the result of uncontrolled speculation.
What greater sacrifice could one ask of
a man than that of submitting to the
eradication of his own intelligence? We feel
that God gave us our brains to use in any
way we choose. Saint Francis, on the other
hand, absolutely denies this. For him the
intelligence is only a means of increasing
the love of God, and should be placed at
the disposal of whoever has been called
upon to act as our guide.
The precepts and recommendations
which his voice carries to us from that lost
century have been tacitly avoided, silenc¬
ed, for a long timefrom the moment, in
fact, that man began lookingto his own in¬
terest and seeking an equilibrium which
chance, our capacity for adaptation, and
the illusion of being alone in the world,
appear to have made possible. We have
stifled or, for the moment, we appear to
have stifled the cry of Cain, that very cry
that Saint Francis strove to banish from our
daily lives. Why render an account of our
acts, why renounce the spirit of liberty,
why make of obedience the very gateway
as the thorn that makes our flesh bleed and,
above all, as the face of truth.
In elaborating his teachings of love by
contrasts, Saint Francis advances the
spiritual meaning of poverty one stage fur¬
ther. He who hates us is a powerful figure,
resembling us yet menacing our property
area, trying to take from us our part of
power, of glory, of ambition. And Saint
Francis tells us that we should love him as
ourselves, as if this rich man was in reality
a poverty-stricken individual, as if in the im¬
age of this victor we could discover the
face of the beaten and insulted Christ.
It might be conjectured that God sent
Saint Francis into this world in the
footsteps of Christ in order to offer us one
more demonstration that the Gospels ex¬
tol a utopia. And this affords us the oppor¬
tunity to formulate a first objection to Saint
Francis and to Jesus: why preach things
which are so arduous, so difficult ¡n fact
as to be next to impossible to implement,
and which two thousand years of world ex¬
perience has shown to be so if not total¬
ly, at least in part?
26

to prayer? Saint Francis asked and con¬
tinues to ask much of us without ever
speaking to us of what we will be given in
exchange. At most he promises us
"perfect happiness", something that
nobody believes in these days. Like the
Christ of the Gospels, the Saint does not
lay before us hard and fast rules of sal¬
vation nor does he conjure up in our
anguished minds the mirage of gardens of
enchantment; we are merely men pointing
out to other men terrestrial paradises which
with time have come to form a single
"Eden" where everything is fulfilled in
murder and the exaltation of visible
conquests.
The strain of madness in Saint Francis'
preaching does not strike or affect us as it
struck and affected his contemporaries,
completely taken aback as they were by
his desire to dispossess and strip clean. The
effect on those who saw and heard him
preach in the streets and squares was one
of fury: he was at odds with the social
model of his time. As to us, we do not
remember him, we have eliminated him.
What was madness, the madness of God,
is today a curiosity. But perhaps we
exaggerate. If he has remained in our
memory for seven hundred years and if,
from Dante up to the latest' writers who
from time to time have felt tempted to rein-
voke his spirit, Saint Francis has appealed
to our intelligence, it is because his path,
temporarily dropped from our itineraries,
is not yet closed.
Will Saint Francis return? For the mo¬
ment we are limited to fantasizing concer¬
ning this possibility, to turning the question
upside down in the form of an hypothesis:
should he return. If he returns, if one day
he knocks on our paper door, what will filter
through the unending stream of other
news, of other messages? How will we
judge him and what will he himself find
most surprising?
When Saint Francis knocks at our door
(and this happens much more frequently
than we suppose), we only half open it; we
admit his legend into our homes and leave
his truths outside his patience, his par¬
don, his love. In the final analysis it is that
love alone that joins and reunites us all.
Why do we leave his truth of love outside?
Simply because we are incapable of this
love; the regime of consumerism, usury
and exploitation, the rule of do ut des (I give
that you may give) and the philosophy of
life which follows from it, have as their
primary objective the spirit of love, this
"good" that we inscribe on our standards
but which in reality we do not respect. This
"good" is only for us and we do all we can
to obtain it and to improve it on the prac¬
tical level. But, as Saint Francis saw, it is
never the good of others.
Saint Francis has lost, in the same way
that his dreams of a human community
freed from the harsh laws of economics
have not prevailed. The efforts which have
been made in other continents and which
have been inspired by his more generous
ambitions belong to written history and it
is unlikely that they will manifest
themselves again in written form. In¬
dustrialized societies have increased the
factors of social contrast which were
known in the time of Saint Francis, but let
us not forget that he foresaw the impor¬
tance of the problem and in his own way
succeeded in breaking it down to its root
causes.
Carlo Bo
jrr£was tall, raw-boned, emaciated;
Ê one ofthose men whose skeletons
JL JL seem visible through theflesh-
likeDon Quixote to whom he dedicatedhis
autobiography andfor whom he reserved
a special corner ofhis heart as the embodi¬
ment of the ideal man. Yet despite his
physicalsimilarity to and love of "TheMan
from La Mancha", Wifredo Lam was not
Spanish; he was a man of the tropics, a
Caribbean, a Cuban to his fingertips.
Lam was born in 1902 at Sagua La
Grande, Cuba, in the heart of a region
whose long and determinant history of in¬
termingling of peoples and cultures has
made it, in Lam's own words, "a privileg¬
ed geographical cross-roads, both a meeting
point andapoint ofdeparture". By his birth
Lam inherited thefourbasic elements ofthe
Caribbean ethnic intermix: African, Euro¬
pean and Indian, from his mother, and
Chinese, from his father.
After starting his study of painting in
Havana, Lam set out, in 1923, for Spain
where he was to spend a crucial period of
hislife. "When Iarrived in Madrid", Lam
recounted later, "I was like a country
bumpkin who had seen nothing. My first
visit to the Prado was a revelation ". Some
thirteen years later, in 1936 and 1937, he
played an active role in the defence of
MadridagainstFranco 'sforces, andat the
end of 1937 he moved to Paris.
Soon after his arrival in Paris Lam met
Picasso who introduced him to André
Breton and other figures of the surrealist
movement with which he wasfrom then on
closely associated. Lam 's encounter with
Picasso and the surrealists was to have a
decisive impact on his work which was to
be moulded by the twin influences of the
European intellectual and artistic avant-
garde and his deeply implanted Caribbean
roots. It was not long before this fusion
found material expression in thefirst ofhis
major works.
In 1941, fleeing the Nazi invaders, Lam
shippedout ofMarseilles with severalofhis
Parisianfriends. In ¡942 he reachedHavana
where the rediscovery, after an absence of
eighteen years, of his native land and the .
Black culture into which he had been born
galvanized his artistic imagination. In

