COMPUTER CONFIRMS
DARWIN WAS RIGHT
WHY did Darwin entitle his most
important work The Origin of
Species? Evolution is indeed a
process which involves the emergence of
new species; but it also encompasses
phenomena ranging in scale from, for exam-
pie, the extinction of the dinosaurs and the
development of mammals to the appearance
of insecticide-resistant strains of housefly.
Darwin obviously considered the forma¬
tion of species, by which he meant the
origination of new species through a process
of development from earlier forms, to be the
by Boris Mednikov
key to evolution, and that only by unravell¬
ing the secrets of that process would it be
possible to understand all the other
phenomena involved. But he failed to make
a distinction between the development of
varieties and the development of an increas¬
ingly complex hierarchy of genera, families,
orders, classes and divisions or phyla. We
should remember, however, that in
Darwin's time genetics as a science did not
exist and that he knew nothing of the work
of his contemporary Mendel.
There can be no doubt that Darwin's
Photo © Delarhaux et Niestlé, Neuchâtel, Switzerland
Towhee songbirds of North America.
thinking led him to the frontier which
separates the formation of species from the
development of more complex groups and
establishes a distinction, for example, bet¬
ween the origination of the domestic dog,
and that of the entire Canidae family. Not
without reason did he devote a whole
chapter of The Origin of Species to the sub¬
ject of hybridization within and between
species. Expressed in modern scientific
language, what had caught his attention was
the cessation of genetic interchange that oc¬
curs when a species is formed.
Today, it is possible to distinguish bet¬
ween micro-evolutionary and macro-
evolutionary processes. Micro-evolution
comprises the sum total of the developments
which occur within species, over relatively
limited geographical areas and during
relatively short periods of time (measured in
a few hundred or a few thousand genera¬
tions), and which culminate in the forma¬
tion of a new species or the separation of the
original species into two sub-species.
The mechanisms of species formation are
now fairly well understood. In plant and
animal populations alike, successive genera¬
tions are subjected over long periods of time
to environmental pressures which ultimately
result in the selection of inherited variations
best suited to coping with those pressures.
But where is the material for this process of
selection to be found? Firstly, in the pro¬
ducts of mutation, i.e. the accumulated
hereditary changes which are primarily caus¬
ed by modifications in the genetic structure
of the cells of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid).
The second source of variations which
enable selection to occur is to be found in
the process whereby bisexual organisms
reproduce themselves. Since sexual
reproduction permits the combination of
genes inherited from both male and female
parents, the number of possible combina¬
tions increases with each new generation.
The combinations which prove most suc¬
cessful are those which are most likely to
reproduce themselves. Little by little, the
characteristics by which the individuals
which form a population may be
distinguished are changed, until a new
species is formed.
Under normal circumstances, the genetic
changes which occur in this manner,
BORIS MIKHAILOVICH MEDNIKOV, of the
Soviet Union, is currently working in the fields of
molecular and evolutionary genetics and general
biology at the A.N. Belozersky inter-faculty
laboratory of molecular biology and
biochemistry, Moscow State University. The
author of more than a hundred works on
biological subjects, he has also written three
books for laymen: Darwinism in the Twentieth
Century, The Law of Homological Variability and
Axioms of Biology.
33

gradually separating one population from
others of the same parent species until it
becomes a species in its own right, preclude
interbreeding. Darwin quotes the example
of a rabbit population introduced from
Europe to the island of Madeira: after three
hundred years, the Madeiran rabbits had
changed in outward appearance, shrunk to
the size of rats and could no longer breed
with those of Europe.
The processes of micro- and macro-
evolution meet at the point where species are
formed. Here again, it was not without
reason that Darwin's interest was roused by
the infertility of hybrids from crossed
species. It is important to remember,
however, that when a population detaches
itself from the parent species and becomes a
new species, the micro-evolutionary process
continues in each, in the same manner as
before but along two distinct paths. Where
the new species and its parent stock were
formerly partners in the evolutionary pro¬
cess, each now becomes an environmental
factor as far as the other is concerned, and
the relationship of the newcomers to their
forebears may be a competitive one. In so
far as the differences between similar species
may be very slight it is not always easy to
draw a line between micro- and macro-
evolution. Quite often the formerly clear
limits which defined a species can be
broken, for example, when human activity
disrupts the ecosystem. An area straddling
the border between the southern part of the
United States and Mexico was formerly
shared, but with clear territorial demarca¬
tions, by two species of towhee songbirds.
One species frequented deciduous and the
other coniferous woodlands; today, as a
result of deforestation, an increasingly
hybrid population may be observed.
Although it would not be difficult to give
many similar examples, it is still correct, on
the whole, to state that micro-evolution
ends and macro-evolution begins at the line
of demarcation of a given species.
Macro-evolution comprises the ap¬
pearance and development on an enor¬
mous scale at times encompassing the entire
biosphere and over millions if not hundreds
of millions of years of the more complex
organizational structures in which in¬
dividual species are absorbed: genera,
families, orders, classes, divisions (for
plants), phyla (for animals) and kingdoms.
Because their dimensions are so great, it is
impossible to investigate macro-evolu¬
tionary processes with one of the most
powerful tools of scientific enquiry-
experimentation.
It was Hegel, I believe, who described the
historian as a prophet who foretold the past.
The same may be said of macro-
evolutionists. At the end of the nineteenth
century, Darwin's successors were for the
most part concerned with macro-
evolutionary issues. It was only after the
rediscovery of Mendel's laws in 1900 and the
stormy period of controversy during which
the science of genetics was born that the in¬
vestigation of micro-evolutionary processes
assumed its rightful place in the develop¬
ment of a more comprehensive theory of
evolution.
Today, the majority of scientists are in¬
clined to believe that there are no fun¬
damental distinctions between micro- and
34
macro-evolution and that they are merely
different phases of a single evolutionary
process. All the evolutionary phenomena
observed can be fully explained by modern
genetics. But this is not, however, the
unanimous view, and more than a few scien¬
tists consider that the evolution of supra-
specific groups follows entirely different
laws.
Richard Goldschmidt, who has been
responsible for some distinguished research
in the micro-evolutionary field, believes that
families, orders and classes are the product
of macro-mutations, that is, of extremely
radical changes in individual members of a
population. These individuals, that
Goldschmidt calls "highly promising
freaks", become the founders of new
categories. According to this thesis, macro-
evolution occurs by leaps and bounds; the
first bird suddenly flies up from the class of
reptiles, the first man walks away from the
class of man-like apes, and so on.
But this theory of macro-mutation begs
too many questions. It is hardly con¬
ceivable, for example, that the "highly pro¬
mising freak", thrown up as a "one-off"
example in a given population, would be
able to find a partner for the reproduction
of offspring.
Moreover, palaeontological evidence con¬
tradicts this extravagant hypothesis. The
founders of new groups differ only slightly
from the other members of the populations
from which they emerge. The primitive bird,
Archaeopteryx, was, after all, only a
feather-covered reptile, and our ancestor
Australopithecus, apart from his upright
posture, was virtually indistinguishable
from the apes.
All the examples of macro-mutation (of
the type which led to the development of a
second pair of wings in the Drosophila fruit
fly) in fact involve the reappearance of
earlier, rather than the emergence of new,
characteristics. They reflect the
phenomenon of atavism, as does, for exam¬
ple, the existence of a vestigial tail in some
humans. No genus, order or class can exist
and evolve otherwise than as an aggregate of
all the species it encompasses; indeed, it is
not orders, classes or other more complex
categories which evolve, but the species of
which they are composed.
Other explanations of macro-evolution
have been advanced, all of them leading in
the last resort either to the premise that it is
The first hominid,
this early form of
Australopithecus (or
"Ape of the South")
was a biped, walked
upright and was able
to run in the open
plains.
a process which occurs in fits and starts or to
the postulation of new laws governing the
appearance of more complex categories. In¬
deed, attempts to drive a wedge between
micro- and macro-evolution are renewed
with such regularity that one may be inclin¬
ed to ask whether there is not an objective
reason for this. May there not be something
in the very nature of our knowledge concer¬
ning the historical development of living
things which leads scientists along paths that
are marked out neither by facts nor by
logic?
Perhaps the main cause lies in our inabili¬
ty, for the time being, to observe the process
of evolution in anything other than ter¬
restrial terms. 'Let us imagine what would
happen if a visitor from outer space were to
pass judgment on human life in its entirety
on the basis of the biography of a single
earth-dweller. Some of his conclusions
would undoubtedly be correct, but he might
also be inclined to transform the chance
events of that individual's life into laws
which he considered applicable to mankind
as a whole.
The same is true where macro-evolution is
concerned. In the final analysis, the disap¬
pearance of certain groups of living
organisms and the progress and prosperity
of others depend in great measure on purely
fortuitous circumstances. Perhaps only
when we have discovered life forms on a
dozen other planets in the universe shall we
be able to distinguish what, in the process of
evolution, follows a certain pattern and
what is wholly accidental. Only then, to use
the language of statisticians, will the sample
be adequately representative.
Earlier I stated that experimentation was
impossible where macro-evolution is con¬
cerned. This is not altogether correct. Ex¬
periments can be conducted if we translate
the evolutionary process into computer
language. Three years ago I was able to take
part in a series of experiments carried out by
V.V. Menshutkina specialist in the
mathematical modelling of biological pro¬
cesses concerning the evolution of
segmented animals of the Arthropoda and
Chordata phyla.
The computer's memory was fed with
adequately detailed descriptions of a
primitive segmented worm and of a
primitive protochordate similar to the
creature which has survived until modern
times in the form of the amphioxus, a
worm-like marine animal. This primitive
species was subject to change; furthermore
these changes were a matter of chance and
were equally likely to be progressive or
regressive. In other works, what Darwin
called "Lamarck's nonsense of 'a tendency
to progression'" was not fed into the
computer.
Account was also taken of another rule of
Darwinian evolution: Natura non fach
saltum; violent changes of the type propos¬
ed in Goldschmidt's theory of macro-
mutation were excluded as possibilities.
At intervals in the operation (correspon¬
ding to approximately one million years on
the palaeontological time-scale), the com¬
puter was instructed to select the best-
adapted variations. "Outsiders" were
removed from the computer's memory and
their cells replaced by the most successful

competitors. Since the computer could
simulate a million years in nine-hundredths
of a minute, there was no difficulty in
reconstructing the process of evolution from
the Cambrian period up to the present.
The results of these experiments were
highly significant. I shall merely describe
here how the evolution of the chordates was
seen by the computer to have occurred.
After the computer had been running for
a period equivalent to 100 million years, the
initial data fed into the machine, which con¬
cerned the primitive protochordate (a small,
worm-like marine organism a few cen¬
timetres in length, with swimming muscles,
a notochord a rod made of gristle that ex¬
tends down the length of the animal and
supports the body and an enclosing
backbone, but without either a brain or
cranium), had generated the characteristics
of a great number of fish-like creatures with
bony skeletons and scales, some of them ag¬
gressive and predatory, others peaceful and
harmless. After 350 million years' worth of
operation, the computer announced a
creature which crawled up out of the water
on to dry land, and then went on to produce
the characteristics of amphibians, reptiles
and, eventually, mammals. And when the
operation had spanned the equivalent of
1,000 million years of evolution, a most
outlandish creature emerged: a vigorous
predatory animal with an extremely well
developed nervous system, travelling on
two legs, its forward extremities swinging
free. It was not difficult to recognize
in this phenomenon a mathematically-
modelled Pithecanthropus, or at least
A ustralopithecus.
All the subsequent experiments, which
were based on identical source-data and
programming, produced various results. Let
me recall in this connexion that the com¬
puter had been instructed to perform in ac¬
cordance with Darwin's concept of random
variation. In one experiment, fish emerged
on to dry land on three pairs of fins. In
another, the computer announced four-
legged creatures with arms, very similar to
the centaurs of mythology. The exercise
showed that in its details, macro-evolution
was an unpredictable process, and the same
is in all probability true where "real life"
evolution is concerned. It is unlikely that in
the future, however far our wanderings in
the Galaxy take us, that we shall find two
planets with identical biospheres.
There is another, no less important con¬
clusion to be drawn from the type of experi¬
ment to which I have referred. The evolu¬
tionary process simulated by the computer
continued satisfactorily under stable en¬
vironmental conditions. In all likelihood,
real evolution does not require disturbances
of catastrophic dimensions, such as the drift
of continents or the onset of ice ages, for
new forms of life to develop or old forms to
become extinct. Our experiments produced
moments when new species were suddenly
formed, and periods when species ceased to
exist, but in each case these phenomena
could be attributed to the influence of other
biotic factors in the biosphere. For example,
one experiment concerned a freshwater en¬
vironment which was for a long time
dominated by creatures which resembled
fish, except that they lacked jaws (similar to
the lampreys and hagfish of the
Cyclostomata group of animals); when this
environment was invaded by jawed fish
from the sea, the earlier population declined
rapidly; within a period of years it had vir¬
tually disappeared.
The most important conclusion of all,
however, is that Darwin's principle of
natural selection among random inherited
variations is perfectly adequate for the
mathematical modelling of progressive
macro-evolution. In my opinion, there are
no grounds for believing that the actual pro
cess of evolution on earth has occurred
otherwise.
In the light of the experiments I have
mentioned, it would appear advisable to
adopt an even more sceptical attitude to
every attempt to discern, in the macro-
evolutionary process, different causes and
mechanisms from those which Darwin an¬
nounced in 1859. Should we not be guided
by Newton's principle of simplicity: "We
are to admit no more causes of natural
things than such as are both true and suffi¬
cient to explain their appearances".
M Boris Mednikov
Evolution by computer
These drawings by Soviet scien¬
tist V.V. Menshutkin were made
from descriptions provided by a
computer during an experiment
designed to simulate the evolu¬
tionary possibilities of the chor¬
dates, one of the major groups
into which the animal world is
subdivided. The experiment was
performed using a chordate call¬
ed Amphioxus, a small worm-like
marine animal. Drawing 1 shows
the Amphioxus as it exists today
(above); a primitive ancestor of
the animal as imagined by
anatomists (centre) and (below)
the coded description of 24
characteristics of this ancestor
which may be listed as follows:
"A marine organism less than
10 cm long, elongated in form,
with segmental muscles, a
notachord (dorsal hollow nerve
cord), and spinal marrow. It has
neither brain nor cranium, no
pairs of fins nor other ex¬
tremities. It feeds on tiny par¬
ticles of mud which are absorbed
through its pharynx perforated
with branchial slits. It is fertilized
externally, lays tiny eggs, takes
no care of its young." Each figure
corresponds to a degree of deve¬
lopment of a given characteristic;
in the case of the brain, for exam¬
ple, from total absence to full
development. For each genera¬
tion, the random figures produc¬
ed by the computer only modified
the coefficient of a given
characteristic by one point more
or less; thus viviparity (the pro¬
duction of living young rather
than eggs) and milk feeding for
example, could not appear sud¬
denly, through an evolutionary
leap. The computer then sorted
out the different variants and
conserved the best-adapted. By
the 100th operation (the gap bet¬
ween each operation correspond¬
ed to approximately one million
years) various kinds of fish with
jaws and pairs of fins appeared in
the water (2). After 350 opera¬
tions a species emerged from
water onto dry land (3). After 800
operations a profusion of
predatory and non-predatory land
creatures up to 10 metres long
appeared (4). By the 1,000th
operation a predatory biped ap¬
peared, endowed with a highly
developed nervous system and
with the free use of its forward
extremities (centre of drawing 5).
1M1 M 11
11 11 11 11
1 1 12
li 6i
t-ioo
t--??o
t -- 1000
35
