CONSEQUENC
OF NUCLEA
ON 7-8 October 1981, under the chairmanship
of Professor Carlos Chagas, President of the
Pontifical Academy of Sciences, at the head¬
quarters of the Academy (Casina Pius IV, Vatican
City), a group of fourteen specialized scientists
from various parts of the world* assembled to ex¬
amine the problem of the consequences of the
use of nuclear weapons on the survival and health
of humanity.
Although most of these consequences would
appear obvious, it seems that they are not ade¬
quately appreciated. The conditions of life follow¬
ing a nuclear attack would be so severe that the
only hope for humanity is prevention of any form
of nuclear war. Universal dissemination and ac¬
ceptance of this knowledge would make it ap¬
parent that nuclear weapons must not be used at
all in warfare and that their number should be pro¬
gressively reduced in a balanced way.
The above-mentioned group discussed and
unanimously approved a number of fundamental
points, which have been further developed in the
following statement.
Recent talk about winning or even surviving a nuclear war
must reflect a failure to appreciate a medical reality: any
nuclear war would inevitably cause death, disease and suf¬
fering of pandemic proportions and without the possibility
of effective medical intervention. That reality leads to the
same conclusion physicians have reached for life-
threatening epidemics throughout history: prevention is
essential for control.
In contrast to widespread belief, much is known about the
catastrophe that would follow the use of nuclear weapons.
Much is known too about the limitations of medical
assistance. If this knowledge is presented to people and
their leaders everywhere, it might help interrupt the nuclear
arms race. This in turn would help prevent what could be the
last epidemic our civilization will know.
The devastation wrought by an atomic weapon on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki provides direct evidence of the
consequences of nuclear warfare, but there are many
theoretical appraisals on which we may also draw. Two
years ago, an assessment undertaken by a responsible of¬
ficial agency described the effect of nuclear attacks on cities
of about two million inhabitants. If a one-million-ton nuclear
weapon (the Hiroshima bomb approximated 15,000 tons of
explosive power) exploded in the central area of such cities,
it would result, as calculated, in 180 km2 of property destruc¬
tion, 250,000 fatalities and 500,000 severely injured. These
would include blast injuries, such as fractures and severe
lacerations of soft tissues, thermal injuries such as surface
burns, retinal burns and respiratory tract damage and radia¬
tion injuries, both acute radiation syndrome and delayed
effects.
Even under optimal conditions, care of such casualties
would present a medical task of unimaginable magnitude.
'Carlos Chagas, Rio de Janeiro; E. Amaldi, Rome; N. Bochkov, Moscow;
L. Caldas, Rio de Janeiro; H. Hiatt, Boston; R. Latarjet, Paris; A. Leaf,
Boston; J. Lejeune, Paris; L. Leprince-Ringuet, Paris; G.B. Marini-Bettolo,
Rome; C. Pavan, Sâo Paulo; A. Rich, Cambridge, Mass.; A. Serra, Rome;
V. Weisskopf, Cambridge, Mass.
The study projected that if 18,000 hospital beds were
available in and around one of these cities, no more than
5,000 would remain relatively undamaged. These would ac¬
commodate only 1 per cent of the human beings injured, but
it must be stressed that in any case no one could deliver the
medical service required by even a few of the severely burn¬
ed, the crushed and the radiated victims.
The hopelessness of the medical task is readily apparent if
we consider what is required for the care of the severely in¬
jured patients. We shall cite one case history, that of a
severely burned twenty-year-old man who was taken to the
burn unit of a Boston Hospital after an automobile accident
in which the gasoline tank had exploded. During his
hospitalization he received 140 litres of fresh-frozen plasma,
147 litres of fresh-frozen red blood cells, 180 millilitres of
platelets and 180 millilitres of albumin. He underwent six
operative procedures during which wounds involving 85 per
cent of his body surface were closed with various types of
grafts, including artificial skin. Throughout his hospitaliza¬
tion, he required mechanical ventilation. Despite these and
many other heroic measures, which stretched the resources
of one of the world's most comprehensive institutions, he
died on his thirty-third hospital day. His injuries were likened,
by the doctor who supervised his care to those described for

ES OF THE USE
R WEAPONS
many of the victims of Hiroshima. Had twenty score of such
patients been presented at the same time to all of Boston's
hospitals the medical capabilities of the city would have
been overwhelmed. Now, consider the situation if, along
with the injuries to many thousands of people, most of the
medical emergency facilities had been destroyed.
A Japanese physician. Professor M. Ichimaru, published
an eyewitness account of the effects of the Nagasaki bomb.
He reported: "I tried to go to my medical school in Urakami
which was 500 meters from the hypocentre. I met many
people coming back from Urakami. Their clothes were in
rags and shreds of skin hung from their bodies. They looked
like ghosts with vacant stares. The next day I was able to
enter Urakami on foot and all that I knew had disappeared.
Only the concrete and iron skeletons of the buildings re¬
mained. There were dead bodies everywhere. On each street
corner, we had tubs of water used for putting out fires after
air raids. In one of these small tubs, scarcely large enough
for one person, was the body of a desperate man who
sought cool water. There was foam coming from his mouth,
but he was not alive. I cannot get rid of the sounds of the
crying women in the destroyed fields. As I got nearer to the
school there were black, charred bodies with the white
edges of bones showing in the arms and legs. When I arrived
some were still alive. They were unable to move their
bodies. The strongest were so weak that they were slumped
over on the ground. I talked with them and they thought
that they would be O. K. but all of them would eventually die
within two weeks. I cannot forget the way their eyes looked
at me and their voices spoke to me forever..."
It should be noted that the bomb dropped on Nagasaki
had a power of about 20,000 tons of TNT, not much larger
than the so-called "tactical bombs" designed for battlefield
use.
But even these grim pictures are inadequate to describe
the human disaster that would result from an attack on a
country by today's stockpiles of nuclear weapons, which
contain thousands of bombs with the force of one million
tons of TNT or greater.
The suffering of the surviving population would be
without parallel. There would be complete interruption of
communications, of food supplies and of water. Help would
be given only at the risk of mortal danger from radiation for
those venturing outside buildings in the first days. The social
disruption following such an attack would be unimaginable.
The exposure to large doses of radiation would lower im¬
munity to bacteria and viruses and could, therefore, open
the way for widespread infection. Radiation would cause ir¬
reversible brain damage and mental deficiency in many of
the exposed in utero. It would greatly increase the incidence
of many forms of cancer in survivors. Genetic damage
would be passed on to future generations, should there be
any.
In addition, large areas of soil and forests as well as
livestock, would be contaminated reducing food resources.
Many other harmful biological and even geophysical effects
would be likely, but we do not have enough knowledge to
predict with confidence what they would be.
Even a nuclear attack directed only at military facilities
would be devastating to the country as a whole. This is
because military facilities are widespread rather than con¬
centrated at only a few points. Thus, many nuclear weapons
would be exploded. Furthermore, the spread of radiation
due to the natural winds and atmospheric mixing would kill
vast numbers of people and contaminate large areas. The
medical facilities of any nation would be inadequate to care
for the survivors. An objective examination of the medical
situation that would follow a nuclear war leads to but one
conclusion: prevention is our only recourse.
The consequences of nuclear war are not, of course, only
medical in nature. But those that are compel us to pay heed
to the inescapable lesson of contemporary medicine: where
treatment of a given disease is ineffective or where costs are
insupportable, attention must be turned to prevention. Both
conditions apply to the effects of nuclear war. Treatment
would be virtually impossible and the costs would be stag¬
gering. Can any stronger argument be marshalled for a
preventive strategy?
Prevention of any disease requires an effective prescrip¬
tion. We recognize that such a prescription must both pre¬
vent nuclear war and safeguard security. Our knowledge
and credentials as scientists and physicians do not, of
course, permit us to discuss security issues with expertise.
However, if political and military leaders have based their
strategic planning on mistaken assumptions concerning the
medical aspects of nuclear war, we feel that we do have a
responsibility. We must inform them and people everywhere
of the full clinical picture that would follow a nuclear attack
and of the impotence of the medical community to offer a
meaningful response. If we remain silent, we risk betraying
ourselves and our civilization. ES
