3
RAW MATERIALS
Global military consumption of
aluminium, copper, nickel and
platinum is greater than overall
demand for these minerals in Africa,
Asia and Latin America combined
ONE of the most striking develop¬
ments of the 1970s was the emer¬
gence of serious concern over the
availability of adequate supplies of oil and
minerals, that is non-renewable raw
materials for the support of human life and -
modern industry. Concern over supply has
come to rival the traditional focus on effec¬
tive demand as the key factor constraining
growth.
For the immediate future, the problem is
seen in terms of security of access to sup¬
plies of raw materials, not the exhaustion of
supplies pe/- se. All calculations and projec¬
tions indicate that there are ample materials
available in the earth's crust to meet the
world's needs for nearly every material
through the end of this century.
On the other hand, the end of this century
is less than twenty years away, so that real
natural scarcities are not such a distant
prospect unless one is prepared to assume
that timely discoveries of major new
reserves will be made, and that these
resources can be exploited technically and
economically.
There is considerable geographic concen¬
tration of the world's reserves of oil and
minerals: for more than a dozen industrially
important minerals the share of the three
largest reserve countries exceeds 50 per
cent. The significance of this becomes ap¬
parent when it is coupled with the fact that
the consumption of minerals is even more
highly concentrated geographically: the in¬
dustrialized market economies essentially
North America, Western Europe and
Japan consume more than two thirds of
the annual production of the nine leading
minerals. Consumption in the industrialized
Socialist countries is in the range of 20 to 25
per cent of the world total for most minerals.
The developing countries of Africa, Latin
America and Asia (including China) used
only 7 per cent of the world's aluminium
production in the period 1971-1975, 9 per
cent of the copper and 12 per cent of the
iron ore.
16
The major consuming nations have, as a
result, experienced a significant decline in
the degree of self-sufficiency in minerals.
The United States, for example, in 1950,
relied on imports for more than 50 per cent
of its requirements for just four industrially
important minerals: by 1976 the list had
grown to twenty-three minerals. Indeed, for
at least twelve minerals, United States
dependence on imports currently exceeds 80
per cent. Import dependence is even more
acute in the European Economic Communi¬
ty and in Japan, where imports provide 75
per cent or more of such critical minerals as
iron ore, nickel, copper, bauxite, chromium,
asbestos, manganese, cobalt, zinc, lead and
silver.
The anxiety over growing dependence on
imported minerals stems primarily from the
impact that a disruption of supplies would
have on the general economic health of the
consuming nation. Another major concern,
however, is the effects of this situation on a
nation's ability to wage war. There are
several dimensions to this issue, including
such negative ones as the increasingly ex¬
plicit consideration being given in recent
years to the possibility of the use of force as
a means of preserving access to needed raw
materials. The particular concern here,
however, is the magnitude of the consump¬
tion of energy and minerals for military
purposes.
The scale of global military activities sug¬
gests strongly that consumption for these
purposes is not trivial. At the same time, the
stress placed on the achievement of costly
qualitative improvements in weaponry since
the Second World War would mean that
this consumption has not increased com-
mensurately with global military expen¬
diture. Similarly, the spectacular rise in the
unit cost of weapons due to their complexity
and sophistication has contributed to a
gradual decline in the number produced.
It can also be inferred from the emphasis
on qualitative advances that the relative im
portance of iron and steel in military con¬
sumption has declined while that of
aluminium, titanium and other relatively
exotic minerals has increased. For example,
approximately 20 to 25 per cent of the
weight of current sophisticated combat air¬
craft is made up of titanium compared to 8
to 10 per cent for the models produced in
the 1950s. This metal is also beginning to be
used for the hulls of certain types of sub¬
marines. Similarly, aluminium has come into
extensive use in the superstructure of
modern naval vessels.
As a final example, the materials required
to build and deploy the 200 land-based
mobile, intercontinental ballistic missiles in¬
clude an estimated 10,000 tons of
aluminium, 2,500 tons of chromium, 150
tons of titanium, 24 tons of beryllium,
890,000 tons of steel and 2.4 million tons of
cement.
The table opposite shows our estimates of
the global consumption for military pur¬
poses of selected minerals. In order to con¬
vey some impression of the orders of
magnitude involved it can be pointed out
that, in the case of aluminium, copper,
nickel and platinum, estimated global con¬
sumption for military purposes is greater
than the demand for these minerals for all
purposes in Africa, Asia (including China)
and Latin America combined.
The final issue that warrants mention is
the consumption of petroleum for military
purposes. Petroleum is much more impor¬
tant for the military sector than for the
economy as a whole, its share being more
than three fourths of total military energy
consumption. Including indirect consump¬
tion, that is, including petroleum consumed
in the production of military goods and ser¬
vices, this has been estimated at 5 to 6 per
cent of total global consumption. Once
again the absolute magnitude involved is
very significant: 5 per cent of global
petroleum consumption is more than that
accounted for by France and close to one
half of the consumption in all the developing
countries combined (excluding China).

Drawing by Tim L'Express. Pans
Estimated military consumption of selected minerals
as a percentage of total consumption
Mineral
Aluminium
Chromium
Copper	
Fluorspar	
Iron ore 	
Lead	
Percentage
	 6.3
	 3.9
Manganese.
Mercurj y
Nickel 	
Platinum group
Silver. 	
Tin
Tungsten	
Zinc	
11.1
6.0
5.1
8.1
2.1
4.5
6.3
5.7
6.0
5.1
3.6
6.0
Sources : E. E. Hughes et al., Strategic Resources and National Security: An InitialAssessment ( Menlo Park, Stan¬
ford Research Institute, 1975). The Global 2000 Report to the President: Entering the Twenty-First Century
(Washington, D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office, 1980), vol. II, pp. 206-207.
17
