AN ASTRONOMER REFLECTS:
WAS DARWIN WRONG?
by Chandra Wickramasinghe
I can hardly remember my first encounter
with Darwin's Theory of Evolution,
but it was surely taught in a classroom
context at a very early age, long before I was
in any position to assess the facts. It was
presented, at least by implication, as a pro¬
ven unshakable fact. I was asked to believe
that lifeless inorganic matter sprang into life
by a process of random shuffling of
molecules at some distant time in the past on
our planet. I was asked further to accept
that the life that developed thereafter on our
planet was entirely the result of neo-
Darwinian evolution. The strong live on to
become stronger, the weak die to be buried
in oblivion. It impressed me as a great
theory, seductive and compelling, even
though it ran counter to my own cultural in¬
heritance of Buddhist beliefs that the
universe is eternal and that the patterns of
life within it have a permanent quality.
Neo-Darwinist ideas became firmly im¬
printed in my mind and they became part
and parcel of my scientific inheritance. I was
trained first as a mathematician and later as
an astronomer with a tacit acceptance of
NALIN CHANDRA WICKRAMASINGHE is
professor of applied mathematics and astronomy
at University College, Cardiff, Wales, and Direc¬
tor of the Institute of Fundamental Studies, Sri
Lanka. In 1962, while at Cambridge University,
Professor Wickramasinghe, who is of Sri Lankan
origin, was awarded the Powell Prize for English
poetry. The views he expresses in this article are
fully developed in two recent books. Space
Travellers: the bringers of life and Evolution from
Space, of which he is the co-author with Sir Fred
Hoyle.
current biological dogma. Since I did not
make a systematic study of biology until
about five years ago, I had not until this
time any opportunity of seeing for myself
what the facts really were.
The reason for my coming to challenge
accepted beliefs in Darwinian evolution
stems from my joint work with the British
astronomer Sir Fred Hoyle. In 1962 we
began work on the nature of interstellar dust
and we were led at this time to conclude that
dust grains in space must contain a compo¬
nent in the form of microscopic submicron-
sized graphite spheres. Then followed a long
and painful struggle to find out what else
there was in interstellar dust besides
graphite. In 1972, I found that organic
polymerslong chains of carbon-based
organic moleculeswere involved. Two
years ago we reached the conclusion that a
whole body of astronomical data pointed to
micro-organisms being present on a colossal
scale in space, some 1052 individual cells be¬
ing present in our galaxy. We found that the
way in which starlight of various colours
was dimmed by interstellar dust was in¬
dicative of the presence of living cells in
space, some of which had become selectively
degraded into graphite. We concluded now
with a considerable measure of confidence
that microbiology operated on a cosmic
scale.
In studying the spectral behaviour of
micro-organisms in the laboratory we next
noticed that a diagnostic thumbprint of
biology existed in the infrared wavelength
region. We compared laboratory data with
the observed behaviour of infrared absorp
tion for a star at the centre of our galaxy and
found a remarkably close correspondence
between microbiology and astronomy.
Bacteria seemed, therefore, to be present on
a galaxy-wide scale. These identifications
are, in the view of Sir Fred Hoyle and
myself, as decisive as any that could be ob¬
tained from a comparison between
laboratory data and astronomical observa¬
tions. More recently there has also been the
decisive discovery of fossil micro-organisms
in carbonaceous meteorites, bits of rock
that fall from the skies and which cannot
have any connexion with the earth. The
failure on the part of most scientists today
to recognize such obvious facts is due in
large measure to their early indoctrination in
Darwinism, a theory that tacitly implies a
beginning of life on the earth.
The facts as we have them show clearly
that life on earth is derived from what ap¬
pears to be an all-pêrvasive galaxy-wide liv¬
ing system. Terrestrial life had its origins in
the gas and dust clouds of space, which later
became incorporated in and amplified
within comets. Life was derived from and
continues to be driven by sources outside the
earth, in direct contradiction to the Dar¬
winian theory.
Recent evidence points to life first appear¬
ing on the earth about 3.8 billion years ago.
This life was in the form of micro-orga¬
nisms bacteria and micro-fungi now evi¬
dent in the earth's oldest sediments.
It would seem significant that life appears
in an instant, geologically speaking almost
at the very first moment the earth possessed
"A tornado blowing through an aircraft scrap-heap has a better chance
of assembling a brand new jumbo jet from bits of junk than life being
assembled from its components by random processes."
w& *A

a quiescent crust, an atmosphere and
oceans, at the very first moment in fact that
life was able to survive. Throughout sub¬
sequent epochs of geological time life
developed and evolved both in complexity
and sophistication. It is believed by neo-,
Darwinists that the full spectrum of life as
we see it today as well as in the past is ac¬
counted for by the steady accumulation of
copying errors and the consequent develop¬
ment of variety as a primitive living system is
copied billions upon billions of times. It is
stated according to the theory that the ac¬
cumulation of copying errors, sorted out by
the processes of natural selection, the sur¬
vival of the fittest, could account both for
the rich diversity of life and for the steady
upward progression from bacterium to man.
In our recent book Sir Fred Hoyle and I
have argued strongly against this proposi¬
tion. We agree that successive copying
would accumulate errors, but such errors on
the average would lead to a steady degrada¬
tion of information. It is ridiculous to sup¬
pose that the information provided by one
single primitive bacterium can be upgraded
by copying to produce a man, and all other
living things that inhabit our planet. This
conventional wisdom, as it is called, is
similar to the proposition that the first page
of Genesis copied billions upon billions of
times would eventually accumulate enough
copying errors and hence enough variety to
produce not merely the entire Bible but all
the holdings of all the major libraries of the
world. The two statements are equally
ridiculous. The processes of mutations and
natural selection can only produce very
Spiral nebula in
the Ursa Major
constellation.
minor effects in life as a kind of fine tuning
of the whole evolutionary process. There is
above all an absolute need for a continual
addition of information for life, an addition
that extends in time throughout the entire
period of the geological record.
Frequent and massive gaps in the fossil
record and the absence of transitional forms
at the most crucial stages in the development
of life show clearly that Darwinism is
woefully inadequate to explain the facts.
What the fossil record does show beyond
doubt is that new properties of life at the
level of expressed genes have been introduc¬
ed by successive, natural experiments. Only
when these experiments were successful did
the changes endure. Lines with unsuccessful
or inoperable gene addition simply died
away.
Gene additions could take place by the in¬
teraction between space-borne viruses and
viroids and the spectrum of life as it exists
on the earth at any give time. When the
structure of viruses was first discovered, it
was argued by some scientists that these par¬
ticles were the Iong-sought-for missing link
in the Darwinian picture between non-living
matter and life. Yet it was soon realised that
the proteins of viruses were far too com¬
plicated for this to be true. In fact the struc¬
tures of various viral proteins bore so close a
relationship to those in higher life that it was
thought at one time that these particles
might in some way be derived from higher
life. In our book Diseases from Space Sir
Fred Hoyle and I argued that our genomes
are chock-a-block with viruses and viroids.
Viral invasions could lead to epidemic
diseases as for example in the case of in¬
fluenza. Patterns of influenza outbreaks
clearly proved a direct space incidence for
the causative pathogens.
In our view every crucial new inheritable
property that appears in the course of the
evolution of species must have an external
cosmic origin. Although ape and man ad¬
mittedly have much in common,
biochemically, anatomically and physio¬
logically, they are at the same time a world
apart. We cannot accept that the genes for
producing great works of art or literature or
music, or for developing skills in higher
mathematics emerged from chance muta¬
tions of monkey genes long ahead of their
having any conceivable relevance for sur¬
vival in a Darwinian sense. Just as for the
case of the most primitive life on our planet,
all these properties had to be implanted
from outside. If the earth were sealed off
from all sources of external genes, bugs
could replicate till doomsday, but they
would still only be bugs; and monkey col¬
onies would also reproduce but only to pro¬
duce more monkeys. The earth would be a
dull place indeed.
Yet perhaps the most significant single
difficulty associated with the neo-Darwinist
view of life is that micro-organisms are far
too complicated. When bacteria were
created, or accomplished, or formed as the
case may be, it is true to say that 99.99 per
cent of the biochemistry of higher life was
already discovered. Some 2,000 or so en¬
zymes are known to be crucial over a fairly
wide spectrum of life ranging from simple
micro-organisms all the way up to Man. The
variation of amino acid sequences in these
enzymes are, on the whole, rather minor. In
each enzyme a number of key positions are
occupied by almost invariant amino acids.
Let us consider how these enzymes se¬
quences could have been derived from a
primordial soup containing equal propor¬
tions of the twenty biologically important
amino acids. At a conservative estimate say
37

Earthrise on the moon.
Photo © IPS, Pans
fifteen sites per enzyme must be fixed to be
filled by particular amino acids for proper
biological function. The number of trial
assemblies needed to find this set is easily
calculated to be about 1040'000a truly enor¬
mous, super astronomical number. And the
probability of discovering this set by ran¬
dom shuffling is one in 1040'000. This latter
number could be taken as a measure of the
information content of life as reflected in
the enzymes alone. The number of shuffl¬
ings needed to find life exceeds by many
many powers of 10 the number of all the
atoms in the entire observable universe. A
tornado blowing through an aircraft scrap
heap has a better chance of assembling a
brand new jumbo jet from bits of junk than
life being assembled from its components by
random processes.
Life, in my view could not be an accident,
not just on the earth alone, but anywhere,
anywhere at all in the universe. The facts as
we now see them point to one of two distinct
conclusions: an act of deliberate creation, or
an indelible permanence of the patterns of
life in a universe that is eternal and
boundless. For those who accept modern
cosmological views as gospel truth the latter
alternative might be thought unlikely, and
so one might be driven inescapably to accept
life as being an act of deliberate creation.
Creation would then be brought into the
realm of empirical science.
The notion of a creator placed outside the
universe poses logical difficulties, and is not-
one to which I can easily subscribe. My own
philosophical preference is for an essentially
eternal, boundless universe, wherein a
creator of life, an intelligence considerably
higher than ours, somehow emerged in a
natural way. My colleague Sir Fred Hoyle
has also expressed a similar preference. In
the present state of our knowledge about life
and about the universe, an emphatic denial
of some form of creation as an explanation
for the origin of life implies a blindness to
fact and an arrogance that cannot be con¬
doned. Just as the earth was proved not to
be the physical centre of the universe, it
seems to me equally obvious that the highest
intelligence in the world cannot be centred
on the earth.
M Chandra Wickramasinghe 58
"Just as the Earth was proved not
to be the physical centre of the
Universe, it seems to me equally
obvious that the highest intelligence
in the world cannot be centred on
the Earth."
z 2
