WRITING
FOR CHILDREN
IS NO
CHILD'S PLAY
by Michel Tournier
IN 1967 I published my first book, a
novel entitled Vendredi ou les Limbes
du Pacifique. It was a new version of
Daniel Defoe's famous Robinson Crusoe of
1719, countless "remakes" of which had
already been produced down the centuries.
For me the ground-rules were to remain as
faithful as I could to my model while, as it
were, discreetly and surreptitiously smuggl¬
ing into it all kinds of modern assumptions in
the realms of philosophy, psychoanalysis
and ethnography. I should add that I had
just taken the competitive exam for teachers
of philosophy, and was stuffed full of Jean-
Paul Sartre and Claude Lévi-Strauss.
A later re-reading of my novel made me
realize its inadequacies and how far short I
had fallen of my first ideal. The philosophy
stared me in the face from every page,
weighing on the story and holding it back. I
very quickly felt the need to rewrite the book
in a leaner, tauter form, adding purely nar¬
rative episodes and weaving the philosophy
more closely and deeply into the story; not
changing it, but concealing it. And so, using
Vendredi ou les Limbes du Pacifique as a
kind of draft, I wrote a new book not a line
of which was copied from the first called
Vendredi ou la Vie Sauvage, (Friday and
Robinson: Life on Esperanza Island).
And that was when the surprises began.
The first was to discover that I had written a
children's book. Yes indeed, the brevity and
clarity of the story, the pace of the plot
everything made of this little novel a
popular "classic" of the future in the proper
sense of the word: one that is read in class.
Meanwhile, and this was the second sur¬
prise, I couldn't find a publisher. For at the
same time, I discovered how "children's"
publishers or the corresponding departments
MICHEL TOURNIER is an internationally known
French writer. Notable among his published
works, which have been widely translated, are:
Vendredi ou les Limbes du Pacifique (1967;
published in the USA as Friday and in the UK as
Friday or the Other Island/, Le Roi des Aulnes
(1970; The Erl-King) which won the Goncourt
Prize, and Les Météores (1975; Gemini/ He has
also written books for children, including Pierrot
ou les Secrets de la Nuit (1979).
"Beside himself with excite¬
ment, Friday climbed to the
top of a tree. He had
brought a telescope with
him and he trained it on the
approaching ship which was
now clearly visible." In
Michel Tournier's book Ven¬
dredi ou la Vie Sauvage (Fri¬
day and Robinson: Life on
Esperanza Island), from
which these words are
taken, Robinson elects to
stay on the island whilst Fri¬
day leaves for Europe on the
ship. Not entirely satisfied
with his earlier book. Ven¬
dredi ou les Limbes du
Pacifique (Friday or the
Other Island, 1967), in which
he had taken up and examin¬
ed in depth the theme of
Daniel Defoe's Robinson
Crusoe (1719), Tournier set
out to write the story again
in a leaner, tauter form.
When the new version. Ven¬
dredi ou la Vie Sauvage, was
published in 1971, he
discovered, to his surprise,
that he had written a book
for children!
of the major publishers work. Vendredi ou
les Limbes du Pacifique had been published
by a dozen foreign firms. Those that had a
"junior" section unanimously rejected Ven¬
dredi ou la Vie Sauvage and the specialized
houses proved just as unwelcoming. Why?
Because the children's book trade operates
by laws that absolutely ban all genuine
literary creativity.
Those laws impose a ready-made idea of
children stemming directly from the nine¬
teenth century and a mythology that is a
compound of Victor Hugo and Queen Vic¬
toria. In the United States, the world of
children's books has long been dominated by
the Walt Disney factory. The specialized
publishing houses live in terror of the
watchful gaze of parents' or booksellers'
associations and a certain kind of press,
which together make up a vast network
where whispers play their part. The publica¬
tion of a children's book that fails to comply
with the requirements of this censorship not
only means that the press and booksellers
will boycott it, but discredits the entire out¬
put of the publishers, henceforth viewed as
"suspect". Hardly surprising, then, that any
original or creative work is automatically
refused by reading departments.
In most cases, standard moulds baptized
Drawing © Georges Lemoine, courtesy of Editions Gallimard-Jeunesse, Paris
"collections" are produced, each with its
own collection editor, in which pseudo-
writers unwearyingly cast their made-to-
measure, pre-programmed products. The
"audience" for each collection is described in
an "identikit" picture giving its age, sex and
social status. In many cases, the entire
operation is dominated by a political or
religious ideology. Should the unfortunate
author of a work that is original and hence,
unlike any other knock on the door of one
of these fortresses, his manuscript will for
politeness' sake be kept for a few days, but it
won't even be read.
All this was ten years ago. Thanks to the
success of my novels, some publishers have
finally accepted my Vendredi ou la Vie
Sauvage. But many of them were purely
literary or even avant-garde publishers, with
no previous experience in children's books.
This brought me to question seriously
whether there was any reason to speak of
children's books. Closely considered, the
idea of a "junior library" is fairly recent: it
dates to the very period of the Victorian
myths about children that I have just de¬
nounced. But what about Perrault's Fairy-
Tales, La Fontaine's Fables or Lewis Car¬
roll's A lice? And what about such classics as
the Grimm and Andersen stories, the Orien-
33

WRITING FOR CHILDREN IS NO CHILD'S PLAY
^tal legends, Selma Lagerlöf's Mis Holgerson
and Saint-Exupéry's Little Prince? Quite
simply, I feel we must unflinchingly recall
that except for Selma Lagerlöf, none of these
authors was writing specifically for children.
But being geniuses, they wrote so well, so
clearly and so concisely qualities that are
rare and hard to achieve that they could be
read by everyone, even children!
To me this "even children" has come to be
of major and even commanding importance.
It is a literary ideal that I strive, with infre¬
quent success, to attain. Frankly, at the risk
of scandalizing the reader, I maintain that
Shakespeare, Goethe and Balzac are marred
by a defect that I find quite unforgiva¬
ble children cannot read them. For my
part, I would gladly sharpen my pen and
recast my other novels, Le Roi des Aulnes
(The Erl-King), Les Météores, Gaspard,
Melchior et Balthazar, in purer, less clut¬
tered and more chiselled form: in a word, so
that even children could read them.
If I have not done so, the reason is not
natural laziness it would be a gigantic
undertaking but because it would achieve
nothing. Adults would not read these
"children's stories" and nor would children,
because no "children's publisher" would
agree to handle such "non-standard" books.
But on one occasion at least I have achiev¬
ed my ideal. For years I had tried to weave
into a perfect adventure-story, with a power¬
ful metaphysical foundation, the three prin¬
cipal characters of Italian comedy, Pierrot,
Colombine and Harlequin. I finally succeed¬
ed. The result is a short story some thirty
pages long entitled Pierrot ou les Secrets de
la Nuit. My chief publisher having opened a
"junior section", I managed to persuade him
to take on this "children's book", which he
published separately from his collections, in
a format that the house has never used
before, rather as some towns used to map out
a "red-light district" and surround it with a
kind of cordon sanitaire. It should be said
that two years later the book's popularity
was such that it was included in one of the
firm's regular collections, much as a son
previously cursed and driven out by his
father is welcomed back into the family
when he has made his fortune. Be that as it
may, these thirty pages for which I would
exchange all my other work cannot find a
publisher abroad.
Since the second version of Vendredi
became so popular, I am constantly asked to
speak about it to schools in France and the
French-speaking countries. I listen to the
children's questions and try to answer them.
They are no more "childish" than those that
adult readers ask: indeed, rather less so on
the whole. Their bluntness always strikes at
the heart of the matter: how long do you take
to write a book? How much do you earn? If
there are spelling mistakes in your
manuscript, what does your publisher say?
How much truth is there in your stories?
From these and a hundred other questions
I have learnt a good deal through the
answers I was forced to find, it being a prin¬
ciple of mine always to answer frankly and in
full. The last question in particular calls the
entire literary aesthetic into question. Need I
recall that Marthe Robert calls her last book
La Vérité littéraire? (Literary Truth?).
I begin my reply by writing on the black¬
board a quote from Jean Cocteau: / am a lie
that always tells the truth. Then I tell them
about the origins of Defoe's Robinson
Crusoe (often the children have read my
Vendredi). There was the true story of the
Scottish helmsman Alexander Selkirk, who
was cast away for four years and four
months on Mas a Tierra island in the
Pacific, and that is what inspired Defoe to
write his novel. Now we know Selkirk's story
from the report of Captain Woodes Rogers,
who found the castaway and brought him
back to civilization. But who has read it?
Nobody but a handful of specialists. Defoe's
Robinson Crusoe, on the other hand, enjoys
enormous international popularity to this
day.
Why is it that fiction has so much more
hold on the minds of men than the plain
truth? The question is momentous, and he
who found the answer would hold the key to
masterpieces. Without making any such
claims, let me none the less try to cast a little
light on the enigma.
What is really most remarkable about
Defoe's tale is that reading it alone is not
enough. Indeed, in my belief, very few
people read the full authentic version. The
strength and value of the book lie in the fact
that it prompts an irresistible urge to rewrite
it. And that is why, as I said earlier, there
are countless versions of the story, ranging
from Jules Verne's Mysterious Island and
Giraudoux 's Suzanne and the Pacific, to
Wyss's Swiss Family Robinson and Saint-
John Perse 's Images à Crusoe.
Some masterpieces and it is this that
places them at the summit of world litera¬
ture contain an incitement to create, a con¬
tagious spirit of creativity. Setting the
reader's inventiveness in motion is for me, I
admit, the pinnacle of art. Paul Valéry used
to say that inspiration is not the state in
which the poet writes, but the state into
which he hopes to bring his reader. I think
that saying should be made the banner and
foundation of a new aesthetic.
But does this not imply that the first
criterion of a work of literature is its educa¬
tional qualities? Montaigne said that
educating a child is not filling a vase but
lighting a fire. I don't believe it could be any
better put. And for me too, the sign of my
victory is the flame that I sometimes see in
the eyes of my young readers, a living source
of light and heat that my book has kindled in
a child. A rare reward, but priceless, and one
that redeems all the effort, all the loneliness
and all the misunderstandings.
H Michel Tournier E !
