H.M.S. Beagle in the Straits of Magellan
t i ' i i i tií~i T-Ti TT-rr-rj
1 - Mr. Darwin 's seat in the Captain 's cabin
2 - Mr. Darwin 's seat in the poop cabin
3 - Mr. Darwin 's drawers in the poop cabin
4 - Azimuth compass
5 - Captain 's skylight
6 - Gunroom skylight
She was rigged as a bark; her masts were strongly supported by squarer cross-trees and tops, and by
larger rigging than usual in vessels of her tonnage... Abaft the main-mast were four brass guns, two
nine-pound, and two six-pound. The skylights were large; there was no capstan; over the wheel the
poop-deck projected, and under it were the cabins, extremely small, certainly, though filled in inverse
proportion to their size. Below the upper deck her accommodations were similar to, though rather better
than those of vessels of her class. Over the quarter-deck, upon skids, two whale-boats, eight-and-twenty
feet long, were carried; upon each quarter was a whale-boat twenty-five feet in length, and astern was a
dinghy. (Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of His Majesty's Ships Adventure and Beagle between the
years 1826 and 1836).
18

THE VOYAGE
OF THE BEAGLE
Prelude
On September 11th (1831) I paid a flying visit with Fitzroy to the
Beagle at Plymouth. On December 27th the Beagle finally left the
shores of England for her circumnavigation of the world (...).
These two months at Plymouth were the most miserable which I
ever spent, though I exerted myself in various ways. I was out of
spirits at the thought of leaving all my family and friends for so
long a time, and the weather seemed to me inexpressibly gloomy. I
was also troubled with palpitations and pain about the heart, and
like many a young ignorant man, especially one with a smattering
of medical knowledge, was convinced that I had heart-disease. I
did not consult any doctor, as I fully expected to hear the verdict
that I was not fit for the voyage, and I was resolved to go at all
hazards.
(Darwin, Autobiography)
The departure
After having been twice driven back by heavy south-western
gales, Her Majesty's ship Beagle, a ten-gun brig, under the com¬
mand of Captain Fitzroy, RN, sailed from Devonport on
27 December 1831. The object of the expedition was to complete
the survey of Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, commenced under
Captain King in 1826 to 1830; to survey the shores of Chile, Peru,
and of some islands in the Pacific; and to carry a chain of
chronometrical measurements round the world.
(Darwin, The Voyage of the Beagle)
The landlubber
Nobody who has only been to sea for 24 hours has a right to say
that sea-sickness is even uncomfortable. The real misery only
begins when you are so exhausted that a little exertion makes a feel¬
ing of faintness come on. I found nothing but lying in my ham¬
mock did me any good. I must especially except your receipt of
raisins, which is the only food that the stomach will bear. On the
4th of January we were not many miles from Madeira, but as there
was a heavy sea running and the Island lay to Windward it was not
thought worth while to bear up to it. It afterwards has turned out it
was lucky we saved ourselves the trouble: I was much too sick even
to get up to see the distant outline.
(Darwin, letter to his father, 8 February 1832)
At noon lat. 43 South of Cape Finisterre and across the famous
Bay of Biscay: wretchedly out of spirits and very sick. I often said
before starting that I had no doubt I should frequently repent of
the whole undertaking. Little did I think with what fervour I
should do so. I can scarcely conceive any more miserable state than
when such dark and gloomy thoughts are haunting the mind as
have today pursued me.
(Darwin, Diary, 30 December 1831)
Darwin is a very sensible, hard-working man and a very pleasant
messmate. I never saw a "shore-going fellow" come into the ways
of a ship so soon and so thoroughly as Darwin. I cannot give a
stronger proof of his good sense and disposition than by saying
"Everyone respects and likes him" (...).
(Captain Fitzroy, letter to Captain Beaufort, 5 March 1832)
Crossing the line
We have crossed the Equator, and I have undergone the
disagreeable operation of being shaved. About 9 o'clock this mor¬
ning we poor "griffins", two and thirty in number, were put
altogether on the lower deck. The hatchways were battened down,
so we were in the dark and very hot. Presently four of Neptune's
constables came to us, and one by one led us up on deck. I was the
first and escaped easily; I nevertheless found this watery ordeal suf¬
ficiently disagreeable. Before coming up, the constable blindfolded
me and thus led along, buckets of water were thundered all
around; I was then placed on a plank, which could be easily tilted
up into a large bath of water. They then lathered my face and
mouth with pitch and paint, and scraped some of it off with a piece
of roughened iron hoop: a signal being given I was tilted head over
heels into the water, where two men received me and ducked me.
At last, glad enough, I escaped: most of the others were treated
much worse: dirty mixtures being put in their mouths and rubbed
on their faces. The whole ship was a shower bath, and water was
flying about in every direction: of course not one person, even the
Captain, got clear of being wet through.
(Darwin, Diary, 17 February 1832)
The Captain
And now for the Captain, as I daresay you feel some interest in
him. As far as I can judge, he is a very extraordinary person. I
never before came across a man whom I could fancy being a
Napoleon or a Nelson. I should not call him clever, yet I feel con¬
vinced nothing is too great or too high for him. His ascendancy
over everybody is quite curious: the extent to which every officer
and man feels the slightest rebuke or praise would have been,
before seeing him, incomprehensible. His candor and sincerity are
to me unparalleled: and using his own words his "vanity and
petulance" are nearly so. I have felt the effects of the latter: but
then bringing into play the former ones so forcibly makes one
hardly regret them. His greatest fault as a companion is his austere
silence, produced from excessive thinking: his many good qualities
19

are great and numerous: altogether he is the strongest marked
character I ever fell in with.
(Darwin, letter to his sister Caroline, dated 25 April 1832)
The Tropics
Decidedly the most striking thing in the Tropics is the novelty of
the vegetable forms. Cocoa nuts could well be imagined from
drawings if you add to them a graceful lightness which no Euro¬
pean tree partakes of. Bananas and Plantains are exactly the same
as those in hothouses; the acacias or tamarinds are striking from
[the] blueness of their foliage: but of the glorious orange trees no
description, no drawings, will give any just idea: instead of the
sickly green of our oranges, the native ones exceed the portugal
laurel in the darkness of their tint and infinitely exceed it in beauty
of form. Cocoa-nuts, Papaws, the light-green Bananas and
oranges loaded with fruit generally surrounded the more luxuriant
villages. Whilst viewing such scenes, one feels the impossibility that
any description should come near the mark, much less be over¬
drawn.
(Darwin, letter to his father, 26 February 1832)
I can only add raptures to the former raptures. I walked with the
two mids, a few miles into the interior. The country is composed of
small hills, and each new valley is more beautiful than the last. I
collected a great number of brilliantly-coloured flowers, enough to
make a florist go wild.- Brazilian scenery is nothing more nor less
than a view in the Arabian Nights, with the advantage of reality.
The air is deliciously cool and soft; full of enjoyment, one fervently
desires to live in retirement in this new and grander world...
(Darwin, Diary, 1 March 1832)
During our stay at Brazil I made a large collection of insects. A
few general observations on the comparative importance of the dif¬
ferent orders may be interesting to the English entomologist. The
large and brilliantly-coloured Lepidoptera bespeak the zone they
inhabit far more plainly than any other race of animals. I allude
only to the butterflies, for the moths, contrary to what might have
been expected from the rankness of the vegetation, certainly ap¬
peared in much fewer numbers than in our own temperate regions.
I was much surprised at the habits of Papilio feronia. This butter¬
fly is not uncommon, and generally frequents the orange-groves.
Although a high flier, yet it very frequently alights on the trunks of
trees. On these occasions its head is invariably placed downwards;
and its wings are expanded in a horizontal plane, instead of being
folded vertically, as is commonly the case. This is the only butterfly
which I have ever seen that uses its legs for running.
(Darwin, Journal, April 1832)
I find the peep of Tropical scenery has given me a tenfold wish to
see more; it is no exaggeration to say, no one can know how
beautiful the world we inhabit is, who has only been in the colder
climes. The chief source of pleasure has been to me, during these
two months, from Nat. history. I have been wonderfully lucky with
fossil bones some of the animals must have been of great dimen¬
sions: I am almost sure that many of them are quite new; this is
always pleasant, but with the antediluvian animals it is doubly so. I
found parts of the curious osseous coat, which is attributed to the
Megatherium; as the only specimens in Europe are at Madrid
(originally in 1798 from Buenos Ayres) this alone is enough to
repay some wearisome minutes. Amongst living animals I have not
been less fortunate. I also had in September some good sporting; I
shot one day a fine buck and doe, but in this line I never enjoyed
anything so much as Ostrich hunting with the wild Soldiers, who
are more than half Indians. They catch them by throwing two
balls, which are attached to the ends of a thong, so as to entangle
their legs: it was a fine animated chase.
(Darwin, letter to his sister Caroline, 24 October 1832)
Tierra del Fuego
I will describe our first arrival in Tierra del Fuego. A little after
noon we doubled Cape St Diego, and entered the famous Strait of
Le Maire. We kept close to the Fuegian shore, but the outline of
the rugged, inhospitable Statenland was visible amidst the clouds.
In the afternoon we anchored in the Bay of Good Success. While
20
entering we were saluted in a manner becoming the inhabitants of
this savage land. A group of Fuegians partly concealed by the en¬
tangled forest, were perched on a wild point overhanging the sea;
and as we passed by, they sprang up and, waving their tattered
cloaks, sent forth a loud and sonorous shout. The harbour consists
of a line piece of water half-surrounded by low, rounded moun¬
tains of clay-slate, which are covered to the water's edge by one
dense gloomy forest. A single glance at the landscape was sufficient
to show me how widely different it was from any thing I had ever
beheld.
In the morning the Captain sent a party to communicate with the
Fuegians (...).
The chief spokesman was old, and appeared to be the head of
the family; the three others were powerful young men, about six
feet high. The women and children had been sent away. These
Fuegians are a very different race from the stunted, miserable
wretches farther westward; and they seem closely allied to the
famous Patagonians of the Strait of Magellan. Their only garment
consists of a mantle made of guanaco skin, with the wool outside;
this they wear just thrown over their shoulders, leaving their per¬
sons as often exposed as covered. Their skin is of a dirty coppery-
red colour.
(Darwin, Journal, 17 December 1832)

The next day I attempted to penetrate some way into the coun¬
try. Tierra del Fuego may be described as a mountainous land,
partly submerged in the sea, so that deep inlets and bays occupy the
place where valleys should exist. The mountain sides, except on the
exposed western coast, are covered from the water's edge upwards
by one great forest. The trees reach to an elevation of between
1,000 and 1,500 feet, and are succeeded by a band of peat, with
minute alpine plants; and this again is succeeded by the line of
perpetual snow, which, according to Captain King, in the Strait of
Magellan "descends to between 3,000 and 4,000 feet. To find an acre
of level land in any part of the country is most rare. I recollect only
one little flat piece near Port Famine, and another of rather larger
extent near Goeree Road. In both places, and everywhere else, the
surface is covered by a thick bed of swampy peat. Even within the
forest, the ground is concealed by a mass of slowly putrefying
vegetable matter, which, from being soaked with water, yields to
the foot.
(Darwin, Journal, 17 December 1832)
climate, where gale succeeds gale, with rain, hail, and sleet, seems
blacker than anywhere else. In the Strait of Magellan, looking due
southward from Port Famine, the distant channels between the
mountains appeared from their gloominess to lead beyond the con¬
fines of this world.
(Darwin, Journal, 20 December 1832)
The Andes
The appearance of the Andes was different from what I ex¬
pected; the lower line of the snow was of course horizontal, and to
this line the even summits of the range appeared quite parallel. At
long intervals, a mass of points or a single cone showed where a
Volcano had or does now exist. It hence looked more like a wall,
than a range of separate mountains, and made a most complete
barrier to the country.
(Darwin, Diary, 17 August 1834)
There was a degree of mysterious grandeur in mountain behind
mountain, with the deep intervening valleys, all covered by one
thick, dusky mass of forest. The atmosphere, likewise, in this
The descent on the eastern side of the Cordillera is much shorter
or steeper than on the Pacific side; in other words, the mountains
rise more abruptly from the plains, than from the alpine country of
Chile. A level and brilliantly white sea of clouds was extended
f\ Ascension Island
\ St. Helena
ith Atlantic Ocean
Cape of Good Hope
21

beneath our feet, and thus shut out the view of the equally level
Pampas. We soon entered the band of clouds, and did not again
emerge from it that day. About noon, finding pasture for the
animals and bushes for firewood, in a part of the valley called Los
Arenales, we stopped for the night. This was near the uppermost
limit of bushes, and the elevation, I suppose, was between seven
and eight thousand feet.
I was very much struck with the marked difference between the
vegetation of these eastern valleys and that of the opposite side: yet
the climate, as well as the kind of soil, is nearly identical, and the
difference of longitude very trifling. The same remark holds good
with the quadrupeds, and in a lesser degree with the birds and in¬
sects. We must except certain species which habitually or occa¬
sionally frequent elevated mountains; and in the case of the birds,
certain kinds, which have a range as far south as the Strait of
Magellan. This fact is in perfect accordance with the geological
history of the Andes; for these mountains have existed as a great
barrier, since a period so remote that whole races of animals must
subsequently have perished from the face of the earth. Therefore,
unless we suppose the same species to have been created in two dif¬
ferent countries, we ought not to expect any closer similarity bet¬
ween the organic beings on opposite sides of the Andes, than on
shores separated by a broad strait of the sea. In both cases we must
leave out of the question those kinds which have been able to cross
ithe barrier, whether of salt water or solid rock (1).
(Darwin, Narrative, 23 March 1835)
(1) This is merely an illustration of the admirable laws first laid down by
Mr Lyell of the geographical distribution of animals as influenced by
geological changes. The whole reasoning, of course, is founded on the
assumption of the immutability of species. Otherwise the changes might be
considered as superinduced by different circumstances in the two regions
during a length of time.
The ladies of Lima
There are two things in Lima which all Travellers have discussed;
the ladies tapadas, or concealed in the saya y manta, and a fruit
called Chilimoya. To my mind the former is as beautiful as the lat¬
ter is delicious. The close elastic gown fits the figure closely and
obliges the ladies to walk with small steps, which they do very
elegantly and display very white silk stockings and very pretty feet.
They wear a black silk veil, which is fixed round the waist behind,
is brought over the head and held by the hands before the face,
allowing only one eye to remain uncovered. But then, that one eye
is so black and brilliant and has such powers of motion and expres¬
sion, that its effect is very powerful. Altogether the ladies are so
metamorphised, that I at first felt as much surprised as if I had
been introduced amongst a number of nice round mermaids, or
any other such beautiful animal. And certainly they are better
worth looking at than all the churches and buildings in Lima.
Secondly for the Chilimoya, which is a very delicious fruit, but the
flavour is about as difficult to describe, as it would be to a Blind
man some particular shade of colour; it is neither a nutritive fruit
like the Banana, a crude fruit like the Apple, or refreshing fruit like
the Orange or Peach, but it is a yery good and large fruit and that is
all I have to say about it.
(Darwin, Diary, 29 July 1835)
The Galapagos Islands
The natural history of these islands is eminently curious, and
well deserves attention. Most of the organic productions are
aboriginal creations, found nowhere else: there is even a difference
between the inhabitants of the different islands. Yet all show a
marked relationship with those of America though separated from
that continent by an open space of ocean, between 500 and 600
miles in width. The archipelago is a little world within itself, or
rather a satellite attached to America, whence it has derived a few
stray colonists, and has received the general character of its in¬
digenous productions. Considering the small size of these islands,
we feel the more astonished at the number of their aboriginal be¬
ings, and at their confined range. Seeing every height crowned with
its crater, and the boundaries of most of the lava-streams still
distinct, we are led to believe that within a period, geologically re¬
cent, the unbroken ocean was here spread out. Hence, both in
space and time, we seem to be brought somewhat near to that great
factthat mystery of mysteriesthe first appearance of new be¬
ings on this earth...
(Darwin, Journal, 8 October 1835)
I industriously collected all the animals, plants, insects and rep¬
tiles from this Island. It will be very interesting to find from future
comparison to what district or "centre of creation" the organized
beings of this archipelago must be attached (...).
(Darwin, Diary, 26, 27 September 1835)
When I recollect, the fact that the form of the body, shape of
scales and general size, the Spaniards can at once pronounce, from
which Island any Tortoise may have been brought. When I see
these Islands in sight of each other, and possessed of but a scanty
stock of animals, tenanted by these birds, but slightly differing in
structure and filling the same place in Nature, I must suspect they
are only varieties. The only fact of a similar kind of which I am
aware, is the constant asserted difference between the wolf-like Fox
of East and West Falkland Islds. If there is the slightest foundation
for these remarks the zoology of Archipelagoes will be well worth
examining; for such facts would undermine the stability of Species.
(Darwin, Ornithological Notes)
The men of Tahiti
In my opinion, they are the finest men I have ever beheld; very
tall, broadshouldered, athletic, with their limbs well-proportioned.
It has been remarked that but little habit makes a darker tint of the
This fine water-colour by Con¬
rad Martens, who was the
Beagle's official artist for nine
months, depicts the scene at
Port Desire on Christmas Day
1833, when the crew went
ashore for a day of relaxation,
sport and games. In the left
foreground a group of sailors
are playing a game called
"slinging the monkey". A crew
member, the "monkey", is
slung by his feet from a tripod.
In his hand he holds a piece of
chalk. Other seamen gathered
round flick at the "monkey"
with twisted handkerchiefs.
Meanwhile, the "monkey",
working up a swinging motion,,
attempts to mark one of his
comrades with the chalk. When
he succeeds, the person so
marked takes his place as the
"monkey". In the background
the Beagle and the Adventure
are seen at anchor. The initials
"R.F." in the top right hand cor¬
ner indicate that Captain Robert
Fitzroy had checked the sketch
for authenticity. The pencilled
note at the bottom, in the Cap¬
tain's hand, which reads "Note
Mainmast of the Beagle a little
farther aft. Miz. Mast to rake
more", shows that Fitzroy was
not entirely happy with the
artist's positioning of the
Beagle's masts.
22

skin more pleasing and natural to the eye of an European than his
own color. To see a white man bathing along side a Tahitian, was
like comparing a plant bleached by the gardener's art, to the same
growing in the open fields. Most of the men are tatooed; the orna¬
ments so gracefully follow the curvature of the body that they
really have a very elegant and pleasing effect.
(Darwin, Diary, 15 November 1835)
Sydney
Here we arrived on the 12th of this month. On entering the har¬
bor we were astounded with all the appearances of the outskirts of
a great city: numerous Windmills Forts large stone white hou¬
ses, superb Villas, etc., etc. (...).
From Sydney we go to Hobart Town, from there to King George
Sound, and then adieu to Australia. From Hobart town being
superadded to the list of places I think we shall not reach England
before September: But thank God the Captain is as home sick as I
am, and I trust he will rather grow worse than better. He is busy in
getting his account of the voyage in a forward state for publication
(...).
From K. George Sound to Isle of France, C. of Good Hope, St
Helena, Ascension, and omitting the C. Verds on account of the
unhealthy season, to the Azores and then England. To this last
stage I hourly look forward with more and more intense delight; I
try to drive into my stupid head Maxims of patience and common
sense, but that head is too full of affection for all of you to allow
such dull personages to enter.
(Darwin, letter to his sister Susan, 28 January 1836)
The homecoming
On the last day of August [1836], we anchored for the second
time at Proto Praya in the Cape de Verd archipelago; thence we
proceeded to the Azores, where we staid six days. On the 2nd of
October we made the shores of England; and at Falmouth I left the
Beagle, having lived on board the good little vessel nearly five
years.
(Darwin, Journal)
The voyage of the Beagle has been by far the most important
event in my life and has determined my whole career (...).
I have always felt that I owe to the voyage the first real training
or education of my mind. I was led to attend closely to several
branches of natural history, and thus my powers of observation
were improved, though they were already fairly developed (...).
Looking backwards, I can now perceive how my love for science
gradually preponderated over every other taste. During the first
two years my old passion for shooting survived in nearly full force,
and I shot myself all the birds and animals for my collection; but
gradually I gave up my gun more and more, and finally altogether
to my servant, as shooting interfered with my work, more espe¬
cially with making out the geological structure of a country. I dis¬
covered, though unconsciously and insensibly, that the pleasure of
observing and reasoning was a much higher one than that of skill
and sport. The primeval instincts of the barbarian slowly yielded to
the acquired tastes of the civilized man.
(Darwin, Autobiography)
