Through youthful eyes
JO celebrate the anniversary of
the proclamation of the Univer¬
salDeclaration ofHuman Rights
by the United Nations General
Assembly on 10 December 1948,
Unesco, with the assistance of the
French National Commission for
Unesco, has organizedfor the last few
years at Unesco House in Paris a
"Youth Day for Human Rights".
A different theme is chosen each year
in response to internationalevents. This
year it was inspired by the decision of
the United Nations to convene a World
Assembly on Aging in Vienna from 26
July to 6 August 1982.
The 1982 Day was therefore devoted
to the deliberations ofyoung people on
the problems ofaging and the rights of
the elderly. It was attended by more
than 400youngpeople aged between 12
and 18, from several French and inter¬
national educational establishments,
members ofthe Unesco Clubs ofseveral
'different regions of France, teachers,
associations ofretiredpeople, members
of senior citizens' clubs and of the
Université du Troisième Age de Paris X,
and various specialists in geriatrics,
gerontology and psychotherapy.
On thefollowingpages wepresent the
findings ofa questionnaire on the elder¬
ly and aging prepared by the French
Federation of Unesco Clubs and a
survey on the general situation of the
elderly in the United States ofAmerica,
Banglcdesh, Japan, the United
Kingdom, France, Iran, Canada, and
the Republic ofKorea, by the students
of the American School ofParis.
lime stands still and the years tall away as this rrench grandpa reads to his grandchildren,
potential source of mutual enrichment, the relationship between grandparents and grandchildren
is threatened in many societies today not by a barrier of age but by geographical separation.
22

1. WHAT YOUNG PEOPLE THINK
ABOUT THE ELDERLY AND AGING
Results of the questionnaire on the elderly and aging
prepared by the French Federation of Unesco Clubs and sent
to young people between the ages of 12 and 18, living in
France and representing more than forty different na¬
tionalities. More than 400 replies were received.
^ on their attitudes, customs, religions, political systems and
ideologies. Whatever the society, an old person is happy if he
lives with his family.
They "hope that they are better treated than in Europe",
but add "that it is possible that things are worse...".
Eighty-five per cent think that their fates are very different.
The vast majority compare the position of the elderly in
Europe with that ofold people in Africa, Asia, Latin America
and the Arab countries.
In traditional societies, what is important is that old people
continue to be looked after by their families (even if they no
longer have all their mental faculties...) until their death.
They are respected for having generated life. They represent
knowledge and wisdom, and are sometimes venerated "as a
kind of demigod". They serve as an example and are con¬
sulted for their advice and when important decisions need to
be taken. They teach the young. They are listened to and
feared. They are seldom rejected. The elderly patriarch heads
and unites the family. "In fact, one has to be old in order to
be taken seriously"... "The word of our elders is the Word
itself"... "their word is gold"...
In Europe, on the other hand, elderly people receive more
assistance, health care and welfare facilities from the State,
but "their psychological suffering is greater", since they are
not ' 'looked after' ' by their families. When they are no longer
useful for looking after the younger children, they are put into
homes. They are rejected by the other generations and much
less respected than in other societies. Their situation depends
to a great extent on their former profession: a Swiss banker
can afford cruises, while a farmer will work in his garden and
take a rest.
Others think that in some Arab or Latin American coun¬
tries, elderly people are worse off than in Europe. "They do
really hard work, and are sometimes ill-treated, excluded
from society, and abandoned, suffering from leprosy or
crippled, in the streets... They are left to die... There are no
old people's homes to take them in, and no social welfare. For
these countries, the first priority is to help children to survive.
Those who have no family are very wretched. . . In some tribes,
they are considered a nuisance because they need looking
after. . . " They must stay active and useful until they are worn
out, in most cases in order to have enough to eat and not
starve to death.
Certain countries were specifically mentioned:
In Spain, Portugal and Italy, elderly people are respected.
It is the children's duty to look after their parents until their
death. (Same thing in Japan, USSR, Iran, China...).
In Israel they participate fully in life until the very end...
In the USSR they are isolated.
In Japan they grow old more slowly, because they go in for
sport.
In China, a married man used (until recently) to accord
greater importance to his mother than to his wife.
In the United States the elderly suffer from the "youth
cult", but on the other hand, they are better integrated, since
they prepare for their retirement at an early age.
Eskimos, old people leave the community to go out and die
in the snöw, so as not to be a burden to their tribe.
Many young people came to the conclusion that ' 'a country
increasingly abandons its old people as it develops".
The insatiable curiosity of the
child who wants to know what it
was all like before he was born is
written into the expression of this
little boy from the Republic of
Korea.
Photo © Denis Stock, Magnum, Paris
Below left, a Filipino grand¬
mother uses an abacus as a
teaching aid. In the Philip¬
pines the elderly often
watch over the house and
pre-school children while
employed adults are out at
work.
Photo CR. Villamarin, Unesco
reflect on what they managed to do when they were young. . .
to pass on their experience, their wisdom, perhaps to uncover
hitherto hidden artistic talents...".
"I think it's wonderful to stand back and see the world
from a distance!" They think that old age is "a door giving
on to another life' ' , which is different, but which can be fruit¬
ful and pleasant, with leisure pursuits, travelling and many
other activities. They think that they will remain active, and
young at heart, will keep in contact with young people and
help them with their experience. They will be loved, for they
will have known how to make the best of life. They will look
on the bright side of life and will not get bored because they
will give their lives a meaning. "If one accepts old age,
everything should work out all right".
They think that "it's nice to grow old... every age has its
joys, and to stay young for ever would be monotonous...".
"I am happy to be 14, but I'll be just as happy to be 70."
Several of them expressed reservations: "As long as you're
in good health... as long as you are young in spirit and live
with young people... are not destitute... are not put into a
home... have something to keep you occupied... and that
everybody else grows old too."
"I'm not very worried about wrinkles, but I really don't
want people to call me old ! "... "I don't want to be one of the
elderly straight away, as I am only 12, but I would like to live
long enough to become elderly." In any event, they would
rather be elderly than very elderly... one states that, when
retired, he would rather belong to a Club for young people
than for the elderly...
Sixty per cent do not want to grow old, because "they will
no longer be independent", and they do not want "to bother
other people... be a burden on their family... be ill... be in¬
firm, lose their faculties, no longer be able to express
themselves... to suffer... to be sad, no longer able to enjoy
themselves, or run about... to lead a monotonous life, get
bored, have to do without everything... to be completely
useless, to have no future... perhaps to be put into a home,
alone and unvisited... enclosed between four walls or behind
a window all day... to be cut off from the world, abandoned
by the young, ignored by everybody."
They are frightened of being very miserable, of feeling the
end approach: "You feel your departure from the world
gradually approaching... I would feel like a dead leaf."
Some grow angry on the subject: "Who could possibly
want to grow old? I like being young, it's better, it's fun!... ^-
25

I'd rather die than grow old! At the age of fourteen I'm
already sorry that so much time has passed... I don't want to
grow old, to give up my place to others... The thought of
growing old fills me with anguish."
"It's horrible to be old, I prefer not to think about it, you
become ugly, lonely, a widow (perhaps), ill, your parents are
dead, you cry when you remember the past, you can't go in
for sport any more, you have no end of troubles, you spend
your time sitting alone with nothing to do".
How would you best define the state of old age?
Physical infirmities are most often mentioned: loss of self-
reliance, dependence, illness, disabilities, pain and suffering.
Loneliness and isolation from the outside world. When
people no longer take an interest in what is happening around
them, when they are no longer able to adapt to modern life,
when they can no longer communicate, when they no longer
understand young people, when they feel "left out of
things", when their own family treats them "like a piece of
furniture", when they feel that they are useless (but "as one
is never useless, one ought never to be old")...
The decline of intellectual faculties: memory, creativity:
"old age means the end of being creative, of doing anything
individual".
The end of one's working life, retirement. "A man who is
no longer active is a dead man... I would no longer have any
reason to stay alive and it would be better to die at once, rather
than to drag out the years in suffering...".
Old age is also boredom, the monotony of life, no longer
caring about things. It is sadness, losing any taste for and en¬
joyment of life, melancholy, "waiting for death to creep up
inch by inch", the fear of death.
"The fact that old age means loneliness, uselessness, being
a burden, shows that society has no awareness whatsoever of
the problem."
"Old age is a return to childhood."
"Old age is wisdom."
"Old age is only a stage in life like childhood, adolescence
and maturity."
' 'There is no such thing as old age, there is only life; it is like
a whole day passing . "
Dove, a deserted village in France's Cévennes hills. The drift to towns
and cities has altered the "extended family" way of living in industrializ¬
ed countries. It is now happening In many parts of the Third World, caus¬
ing a breakdown in traditional systems of care and responsibility for the
elderly who are left in the villages to fend for themselves.
