Mother tongue
and the brain
A Japanese specialist's surprising discovery
by Howard Brabyn
ENCLOSED in the protective armour
of the skull, enveloped in several
membranes and surrounded by a
shock-absorbing cushion of fluid, the brain,
a lump of wrinkled, pinkish-grey matter the
size of a small cantaloupe melon and
weighing around 1,360 grammes, is at the
origin of every thought, feeling or action of
which man is capable
Packed into this confined space are an
estimated ten thousand million neurons,
microscopic nerve cells that constitute the
working units of the brain, grouped into
millions of individual circuits that each per¬
form a function assigned to it by heredity or
learned by experience.
The brain, of course, is not a purely
human attribute. Even the most primitive
forms of animal life have an organ that
might be crudely approximated to a brain.
Only in man, however, has the brain
elaborated sufficiently to be able to cope
with language, the evolutionary gift that
enables us to communicate what we have
learned and to pass down from generation
to generation our collective experience and
memory.
Over the past hundred years, scientists
have attempted, with considerable success,
to map the brain and to determine which
cells control which activities. They have
discovered that the brain is divided into two
hemispheres, each controlling the physical
functioning of half the body. For some
unknown reason, the nerves from the body
cross over in the spinal cord before they
reach the brain. Thus the left arm, left leg,
etc., are controlled by the right half of the
brain, while the right side of the body takes
its orders from the left hemisphere.
Specialization of the two hemispheres,
however, goes beyond purely physical con¬
trol. In 1861, the French surgeon Paul Broca
discovered the area of the brain involved in
HOWARD BRABYN is editor of the English
edition of the Unesco Courier.
articulate speech and furnished the first
anatomical proof of localization of brain
function; and in 1874, the German
neurologist Carl Wernicke located the area
of the left hemisphere concerned with com¬
prehension of spoken or written language.
In more recent years ever more refined ex¬
periments have shown that in about ninety-
five per cent of people, in addition to
language, the left hemisphere controls such
logical processes as mathematics, while the
right hemisphere is involved in non-verbal
activities of a more artistic or emotional
nature.
In fact, three centres of the left
hemisphere of the brain are involved in
language skills (see diagram). In Wernicke's
area words are selected from the verbal
memory. If writing is involved, the muscles
of the hand are alerted. If speech is to be
used, Broca's area, which controls articula¬
tion, comes into play. When vision is involv¬
ed, another centre known as the angular
gyrus acts as a link between Wernicke's area
and'the visual cortex.
Ever since Broca and Wernicke, this
lateralization of the speech function in the
left hemisphere of the brain has been one of
the major themes of neuropsychology. A
great deal of current research involves
observation of how normal people respond
to auditory stimulation given separately to
the right and left brain hemispheres.
A leading figure in this field of research,
professor Tadanobu Tsunoda of the Medical
Research Institute of the Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, has been conducting ex¬
periments on right or left brain dominance
for some fifteen years, and in a paper
presented at a Unesco symposium held in
Athens in April 1981, he revealed some of
the astonishing findings of his research.
These findings have important implications
for education and give the lie to certain
deep-rooted racist assumptions.
The story began in 1965, when professor
Tsunoda undertook a series of experiments,
with a group of normal Japanese subjects,
aimed at determining ear-dominance for a
group of vowel sounds and spoken syllables
in the Japanese language. It should be
borne in mind that left ear dominance for a
particular sound indicates right brain
dominance for that sound, and that right ear
dominance indicates left brain dominance,
since the auditory nerves of each ear in large
part connect with the opposite side of the
brain.
Professor Tsunoda had devised
sophisticated techniques of auditory
stimulation using delayed feedback (see box
page 12 for detailed explanation) designed
to test how the brain distinguishes various
types of sounds, such as mechanical noises,
vowel sounds and synthetic tones, and to
establish with remarkable precision which
brain hemisphere is dominant for a particular
sound.
The tests, repeated over a number of
years, each time with native Japanese sub¬
jects, conclusively indicated right ear (left
brain) dominance for both spoken syllables
and what are known as "steady-state"
vowels in Japanese. So far, however, there
was nothing particularly unexpected in
these results.
Tsunoda then continued his experiments
by replacing human vowel sounds with syn¬
thetic noises resembling vowel sounds in
structure. Analysis of human vowel sounds
showed the existence of a series of
characteristic frequency peaks known as
formants. Using a synthesizer, it was possi¬
ble to probe deeper by filtering out certain
formants. He discovered that two condi¬
tions had to be fulfilled for a synthesized
sound to cause right ear (left brain)
dominance: the frequencies of the formants
had to be inharmonic and there had to be a
certain minimum degree of frequency
modulation.
This stage of the experiments showed
that the brain is capable of detecting the
structural features of sounds and that left or
right brain dominance is determined on the
basis of the structure of sounds heard. It
was noted that human vowel sounds, sobb¬
ing, laughter, insect chirping and other
10

Motor Cortex
I
E
Primary visual area
Angular gyrus
Wernicke's area
Although the two hemispheres into which the brain is divided
appear to be symmetrical in structure, they are not identical in
function. Language skills are located In specific areas of the left
hemisphere (above). The mechanics of speech are controlled by
Broca's area while Wernicke's area functions as a word retriever
and selector. When language depends upon vision, as in reading
and writing, the angular gyrus acts as a link between the primary
visual area and Wernicke's area.
natural sounds all have frequency modula¬
tion and inharmonic combinations and that,
among the Japanese subjects tested, these
all induced right ear (left brain) dominance.
The true significance of these findings on¬
ly became fully apparent when, in 1972, by
pure chance, professor Tsunoda applied his
tests to his first non-Japanese subject, a
Frenchman. To his surprise he found that
the French subject showed marked dif¬
ferences from his Japanese subjects in the
patterns of cerebral dominance in response
to the same auditory stimuli. After further
experiments with both Japanese and non-
Japanese subjects, professor Tsunoda
became convinced that the difference bet¬
ween them was due to the influence of the
mother tongue.
Professor Tsunoda proceeded to build up
overwhelming experimental evidence for his
theory. Altogether he tested fifty-seven
speakers of West European languages such
as English, French, Spanish, Italian, German
and Swedish; fifteen Chinese speakers (Pek¬
ing, Canton, Shanghai and Taiwan
dialects); seventeen speakers of Korean; as
well as a number of native language
speakers from Vietnam, Cambodia,
Thailand, Indonesia, Israel and Africa.
The results of these tests were con¬
clusive. They indicated that "steady-state"
vowel sounds as well as pure tones induced
left ear (right brain) dominance, while
syllables elicited right ear (left brain)
dominance. Only native speakers of Polyne¬
sian languages (Tonganese, Eastern Sa-
moan and Maori) showed the same
dominance patterns as the Japanese,
displaying right ear (left brain) dominance
for both vowels and syllables and left ear
(right brain) dominance for pure tone
sounds.
To answer the question as to whether the
difference between Japanese and non-
Japanese might be genetic, twenty second
and third generation Japanese emigrants
were tested. Of these twenty, eighteen who
spoke Spanish, Portuguese or English as
their mother tongue until the age of eight
showed Western-type dominance patterns.
The remaining two, who were educated in
Japanese until the age of nine, showed
Japanese-type dominance patterns. In con¬
trast to this, two Americans and four
Koreans who were brought up in Japan
showed the Japanese-type dominance pat¬
tern. The difference in patterns was
therefore clearly caused by the auditory and
linguistic environment and not by genetic
factors.
Despite these differences in brain
dominance patterns it is still correct to con¬
sider the left hemisphere as the "verbal
brain" in both groups of people because
their left hemispheres, in both cases, are
dominant for syllable sounds. But what is it
that makes Japanese and Polynesian people
exhibit left brain dominance for both vowel
and syllable sounds whereas other people
show right brain dominance for vowel
sounds and left brain dominance for syllable
sounds?
The answer seems to lie in a common
feature of the Japanese and Polynesian
languages: the presence in them of a large
number of vowel-only words and words
with two or more vowels combined with
consonants. In these vowel-dominant
languages vowels are as important as con¬
sonants in the cognition of words and
sentences. As a result, vowel sounds are
processed in the left or "verbal" hemisphere
of the brain because for those languages
they have the same importance as any other
speech sounds. What is more, any natural
sound with a vowel-like spectrum is also
processed mainly in the verbal hemisphere.
11

Test 1 Test 2
Right
Sound to right
ear delayed
0.2 seconds
Left Right Left
Sound to left
ear delayed
0.2 seconds
Synchronous tone
at a constant
intensity of
40 decibels
Delayed auditory
feedback relay
In Test 1. orderly tapping is
disrupted at 55 decibels,
i.e. at an intensity of
15 decibels above the constant
synchronous sound.
Electronic switch,
sound source and
amplifier
Delayed auditory
feedback relay
In Test 2. orderly tapping is
disrupted at 75 decibels,
i.e. at an intensity of
35 decibels above the constant
synchronous sound.
The two tests show a right ear (left brain) advantage
for this type of stimuli of 35 minus 15 = 20 decibels.
The key tap brain-dominance test
When we speak, we hear, simul¬
taneously, the words we utter, and nor¬
mal conversation Is controlled by this
"auditory feedback". If, however, we put
on headphones incorporating a delaying
device so that we hear what we have said
about 0.2 of a second later, then our
speech becomes disturbed.
Professor Tsunoda's brain-dominance
test is based on this phenomenon
(known as "the Lee effect"), but instead
of testing a subject's speech perfor¬
mance he asks him to tap out con¬
tinuously a rhythmic pattern on a key
similar to those used for transmitting
messages in Morse. Each tap on the key
produces a short pure tone and, when
this is fed back synchronously to both
ears through the headphones worn by
the subject, he is able to maintain con¬
tinuous, correct tapping patterns; but,
just as with speech, when the auditory
feedback is delayed, the rhythmic tapp¬
ing pattern is disturbed.
The next step is to feed synchronous
sounds to one ear while sending the
same sounds, delayed by 0.2 of a second,
to the other ear. The subject is told to tap
out a continuous, stable sound pattern
and to concentrate his attention on it as
it is fed back synchronously to one ear.
At the same time low-intensity delayed
sounds are fed to the other ear. As the in¬
tensity of the delayed sounds is gradually
raised above the constant intensity of the
synchronous tones, it becomes extreme¬
ly difficult to maintain the correct tapp¬
ing pattern and the threshold at which
orderly tapping is disrupted (the delayed
auditory feedback or DAF threshold, as it
is called) is measured.
When the process is repeated with the
hearing channels transposed, the
delayed auditory feedback thresholds of
the two ears can be compared and we
can establish which ear (and therefore
which hemisphere of the brain) is domi¬
nant in a particular test subject for a
specific sound. Remember that right ear
dominance means left brain dominance
and left ear dominance means right brain
dominance, since the auditory nerves
from each ear cross over and connect
with opposite sides of the brain.
In the first of the two hypothetical
tests illustrated above the DAF threshold
is reached at 55 decibels, that is, at 15
decibels above the constant intensity of
40 decibels of the synchronous sound be¬
ing fed to the left ear. The hearing chan¬
nels are then switched and the second
test is performed. In this case the DAF
threshold is reached at 75 decibels, or 35
decibels above the constant, syn¬
chronous decibels this time being fed to
the right ear. Comparing the two DAF
thresholds it can be seen that, for this
particular subject, the right ear (left
brain) advantage for this type of stimuli
is 20 decibels (i.e. 35 minus 15). In other
words, the subject has been able to con¬
centrate better on the synchronous tone
in the right ear than on the same tone in
the left ear. The right ear (left brain) is
therefore dominant for this specific tone
for this particular subject.
This key-tapping method can be used
to measure ear (and therefore brain)
dominance for many kinds of sounds, in¬
cluding vowel, mechanical and en¬
vironmental sounds.
Professor Tsunoda sums up his findings in
the following terms:
"The dominance patterns of the Japanese
people for various sounds suggest that their
function of emotion, together with the
language and language-based logical func¬
tion, is based in the verbal brain. In contrast
the brain of the Western person clearly
specializes the language and related logical
functions in the verbal hemisphere and
separates the function of emotion in the
non-verbal hemisphere (see diagram).
"In the Japanese people, sounds related
to emotion are processed in the left brain,
and this left brain dominance becomes firm¬
ly established as speech ability is developed.
Then the left brain also becomes dominant
for emotional functions as a result of the
established link between emotion-related
sounds and emotion-related experiences.
"The same processes apply to non-
Japanese people with respect to their right
brain dominance for emotion-related sounds
and functions. It can therefore be said that
the laterality of emotion is acquired through
the mother tongue.
"I believe that the mother tongue differen¬
tiates the way in which people receive, pro¬
cess, feel and understand sounds from the
external environment. The mother tongue is
closely related to the development of the
emotional mechanism in the brain. I conjec¬
ture that the mother tongue acquired in
childhood is closely linked with the forma¬
tion of the unique culture and mentality of
each ethnic group."
H Howard Brabyn
The song of the cricket
At a critical moment in his research on the
brain Professor Tsunoda was seated in
front of his recording apparatus unable to
work. Through the open window he could
hear the chirping of a cricket. Idly he
switched on his recorder, but when he
played back the recording he was
astonished to find that the sonogram
showed a remarkable similarity in the
sound structure of the cricket's song and
the vowel-sound structure of the Japanese
language. Further experiments showed that
this was true of other natural sounds such
as the rustle of the wind, the sound of
running water and the breaking of waves,
as well as of human non-verbal sounds,
such as sighing, that convey emotion.
Because of their similarity to vowel sound
structures, all these sounds are processed
in the left or verbal hemisphere of the brain
in people of Japanese or Polynesian mother
tongue, whereas they are processed in the
right brain hemisphere in people of non-
Japanese or Polynesian mother tongue (see
diagram opposite page, above). This, says
Professor Tsunoda, is because, unlike most
of the world's languages, in which
consonant-vowel-consonant syllables
predominate, the Japanese and Polynesian
languages are marked by the presence of
many vowel-only and vowel-consonant-
vowel words. This may also in part account
for a marked characteristic of written
Japanese, its poetry, literature and art the
many references to nature and natural
sounds. Opposite, an illustration for the
famous 11th-century Japanese literary
masterpiece. The Tale of Genjl, by the 17th-
century artist Sumiyoshi Gukei.
12

Comparison of brain-function patterns
Japanese Pattern
Left Hemisphere Right Hemisphere
Language \ i
Vowels «	,1
f=E
_) Consonants
9 Human voices
P Animal sounds
Singing of insects
The sounds of
traditional Japanese
musical instruments