Many of Darwin's critics objected that no fossil remains had been found of intermediate or transitional forms
which, according to his theory, must have linked up the species. The finding, in 1861, of the Archaeopteryx fossil
did much to silence these criticisms. Archaeopteryx had bird-like characteristics such as wings and feathers, but
like the reptiles it had claws at the end of its forelimbs, teeth and a long bony tail.

THE PROBLEM
DARWIN SOLVED
by Isaac Asimov
THE notion of biological evolution is
quite old. It began when biologists
tried to classify living things. The
Greek philosopher, Aristotle, was among
the first to do so, back in the fourth century
BC.
Eventually, in 1737, the Swedish botanist,
Carolus Linnaeus, worked out a system in
which living things could be arranged into
ISAAC ASIMOV, of the USA, is internationally
known as a popularizer of science and a science
fiction writer. His huge output ofpublished works
reflects the variety of his interests which include:
literary criticism, psychology, mathematics,
mystery, poetry and humour. In 1979 he publish¬
ed his 200th book, assigning the same number to
two works: Opus 200 (Houghton Miff/in), an
Asimov anthology, and In Memory Yet Green
(Doub/eday), the first volume of his
autobiography.
12
different kinds (species), similar species
could be gathered into groups, and these
into groups of similar groups, and so on. It
became possible to draw a diagram
separating all of life into a few chief
branches, each of these into smaller
branches, and each of these into still smaller
branches, until one finally ended with in¬
dividual-species, rather like the individual
leaves of a tree.
Imagine that through some magic, all we
could see of a real tree were its individual
leaves distributed in space. Would we sup¬
pose that somehow those leaves had just
sprung into existence where they were?
Surely not! We would suppose they were
part of a tree which had grown from a
simple shoot, developing branches and
sub-branches from which the leaves grew.
In the same way, scientists began to
wonder if there might not be a "tree of life"
that grew something like an ordinary tree; if
present-day species might not have
developed from simpler species; and those
from simpler species still; until originally all
had developed from one original form of
very simple life. This process is called
"biological evolution".
Through the 1800s, scientists discovered-
and studied objects in the rocks that were
called "fossils". They had the shapes of
bones, teeth, shells and other objects that
had once been alive, but they must have
been trapped in rock for millions of years
until they had slowly turned into rock
themselves.
These fossils were forms of life that were
not quite like living species, but were related
to them. The fossils filled in earlier branches
CONTINUED PAGE 16

Of mice and moths
Darwin's theory of natural selection was
based on four ideas about species. It is easy
to follow the steps in Darwin's argument if
we apply these four ideas to a living
population...
1. More than enough offspring
All species are capable of producing more
than enough offspring to replace
themselves.
One pair of mice can produce a litter of
about six offspring as many as six times a
year. Within six weeks, these offspring
could produce litters of their own.
If all these mice survived and continued to
breed, just imagine how many mice there
could be...
Why isn't the earth covered with mice?
Although a pair of mice can produce far
more than enough offspring to replace
themselves, the numbers in any population
tend to remain more or less the same,
because not all the offspring survive to
reproduce.
Text and photos © Courtesy of the National History Museum, London
13

A mouse might be eaten by a predator.
2. The struggle to survive
The environment may affect an individual's
chances of survival.
All living things interact with their
environment. The environment provides
food, space and suitable surroundings to
live in, but it also includes competitors and
predators. So, in any population, not all
individuals survive to reproduce...
Or it might not find a mate.
Or it might not be able to get enough food.
3. Some important differences
Because individuals are not all identical,
some are more likely to survive than others.
No two mice are exactly alike, and some of
the variations between them may affect
their chances of survival.
Not all mice are the same colour-
darker than others.
-some are
Against a dark background, the pale mice
are easier to see, so they are the ones more
likely to be eaten by owls. The dark mice
are better adapted to this environment, and
are more likely to survive and produce
offspring.
14

4. A question of inheritance
Some characteristics are passed on to the next generation.
Some of the variations between individuals are inherited.
For example, mice inherit the colour of their coats.
In an area of dark soil, dark mice are less likely to be
seen by predators, and they have a better chance of
surviving to reproduce. So their characteristics are the
ones most likely to be passed on to the next generation.
In the next generation, there will be a higher proportion
of dark mice than before.
If conditions remain the same, the proportion of dark
mice in the population will continue to increase. Over many generations, the proportion of well-
adapted individuals in a population is likely to
increase. Darwin called this process natural
selection.
Natural selection provides an explanation of
how the characteristics of a population can
change as individuals become better adapted to
their environment.
Peppered moths changing with the times.
One effect of natural selectionthe characteristics of a population can change.
Peppered moths are fairly common in
Britain.
Several species of birds eat peppered
moths, taking them from the tree
trunks where they rest during the day.
During the nineteenth century, the
moths' environment changed
dramatically. Before the Industrial
Revolution, most tree trunks had a
mottled, grey appearance because they
were encrusted with lichens.
. Towards the end of the century, soot
and smoke from factories killed most
of the lichens and blackened the trees
in many industrial areas.
Compare the two environments. In
each situation, which moths are more
likely to survive and leave offspring?
These two collections are typical of the peppered moth populations
around Manchester in 1850 and 1900.
15

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 12
in the tree of life, and gave hints as to the
way in which particular species of life had
evolved. For instance, there were horse-like
animals that lived millions of years ago.
They were small to begin with, and had as
many as four hooves on each leg. As time
went on, other species were found which
were larger, and had fewer hooves, until
finally the modern horse came into being.
There were other animals that left no
descendants, like the magnificent
"dinosaurs", huge creatures that were
related to modern reptiles (particularly
alligators), which all went out of existence,
or became "extinct", 65,000,000 years ago.
Even though many scientists began to
suspect that biological evolution had taken
place, it didn't sound very convincing
because no one knew how it could take
place. What could possibly make one
species change into another? No one had
ever seen a species change. Cats always had
kittens, dogs had puppies, and cows had
calves. There were never any mistakes.
The first scientist to make a serious at¬
tempt to work out the how of evolution was
a Frenchman, Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck.
He thought it arose out of the way in which
organisms lived. If an antelope fed on the
leaves of trees, it would spend its life
stretching its neck to reach leaves higher and
higher on the tree. Its neck would grow
slightly longer over a lifetime of stretching,
and its young would inherit the slightly
longer neck. It would stretch it still further
until finally after a long, long time, the
giraffe would have developed. This is called
"evolution by inheritance of acquired
characteristics."
It didn't work. In the first place acquired
characteristics aren't inherited. You might
cut the tail off a mouse, but its young will all
be born with tails that aren't even shorter
than normal. In the second place, how did
the giraffe get its splotched coat, which
blends in so usefully with the background of
splotchy shadows cast by trees, thus hiding
it from its enemies? Can the giraffe have
tried to be splotchier? Of course not.
Then, in 1859, Darwin's The Origin of
Species introduced a real solution to the
problem.
He considered that living organisms
generally have more young than can
possibly be supported by the food supply. If
all the baby deer that were born grew up to
be adult deer, generation after generation,
there would soon be enough deer to strip the
trees and vegetation and all would starve.
This doesn't happen because only a few of
the baby deer live to become adult. Most are
eaten by other animals. There is competition
among the baby deer, so to speak, to see
which can remain alive long enough to have
baby deer of their own.
Consider this, too. When you study
young animals, you find they are not exact¬
ly alike. There are always some differences.
Some are a little stronger than others, or a
little faster-running, or have a colour that
blends in a little better with the background
and hides them, or whatever. In the com¬
petition to grow up safely, some have ad¬
vantages that work in their favour, in other
words. They're the ones that are more likely
16
to grow up, and pass their characteristics on
to their children. These characteristics, you
see, are not acquired, they are inborn. They
are "natural variations."
Human beings take advantage of the
natural variations in their domesticated
animals and plants. They select horses that
are faster, cows that give more milk, hens
that lay more eggs, sheep that have more
wool, wheat that grows more ears of grain,
and see to it that those in particular give
birth to young. In this way, over the
thousands of years that people have
domesticated animals they have developed
breeds that are far different from the
originaland far better, for human
purposes.
Nature does this too. It selects, from
among the young, those that have a better
In 1866, an Austrian Augustinian monk,
Gregor Johann Mendel (1822-1884),
published an article entitled Experiments
with Plant Hybrids which laid the
foundations of the science of genetics. His
work went unnoticed during his lifetime
and it was not until the turn of the century
that its full significance was recognized.
Although they were contemporaries,
Darwin was unaware of Mendel's work
and his views on heredity were purely
speculative. Mendelian genetics filled this
gap by providing exactly the mechanism of
heredity required for evolution by natural
selection.
chance; those that are faster and can outrun
their enemies; those that are stronger and
can beat off their enemies; those that are
cleverer and can outwit their enemies; those
that have better teeth and can eat more effi¬
ciently, and so on.
In this way, horse-like animals grew larger
and stronger, and developed fewer hooves
per limb so as to be more efficient in runn¬
ing. This is through selection, not by people
but by nature. It is "evolution by natural
selection." Since people work with in¬
telligence, they can produce noticeable
changes in a few generations. Nature works
hit-and-miss, however. Often the better
organism manages to get caught by an
enemy through a stroke of bad luck. Evolu¬
tion by natural selection can require millions
of years, therefore, to form new species.
The ingenuity of Darwin's notion of
natural selection, and the careful way in
which he presented observation and reason¬
ing in this book, convinced some scientists
at once. As time went on, it convinced
more. Nowadays, scientists generally ac¬
cept biological evolution on an essentially
Darwinian basis. They accept the impor¬
tance of natural selection as the chief driving
force of such evolution.
There were, however, problems from the
start, and in the century and a quarter that
has passed since Darwin's books, many im¬
provements and advances have been made.
For instance, natural selection depends on
inborn variations but how are these preserv¬
ed? Suppose that a particular colour ar¬
rangement is useful as camouflage and that
an animal with that colour is more likely to
survive. It may mate with an animal with a
different colour arrangement and if the
young have intermediate colours, tne advan¬
tage will be lost.
In the 1860s, however, an Austrian
botanist, Gregor Mendel, experimented
with pea plants that showed different
characteristics of one sort or another. He
crossed one with another and observed the
characteristics in the seedlings as they grew.
It turned out that characteristics did not
blend into intermediate forms. Thus, if tall
plants were crossed with short ones, some of
the seedlings grew tall and some grew short
but none were intermediate.
Mendel published his results, but his
paper was ignored. It was not till 1900 that
other botanists coming up with similar
results looked through scientific journals to
see what had been done before and came
across Mendel's paper. Mendel had died in
1884 so he never knew that he had founded
a new science: "Mendelian genetics".
Mendel had supposed that there were
some sort of objects in organisms that con¬
trolled the individual physical characteristics
of those organisms; and that these objects
were passed on from parents to children. In
1879, a German scientist, Walther Flemm-
ing, discovered thé tiny chromosomes inside
the nuclei of cells. Once Mendelian genetics
was re-discovered, it was quickly seen that
the chromosomes were passed on from
parents to young and that this took place in
such a way as to account for the manner in
which characteristics were inherited. The
chromosome was considered to consist of a
string of "genes", each of which controlled
some particular characteristic.
These genes consisted of large molecules
of "nucleic acid" which produced replicas
of themselves each time a cell divided. Each
new cell thus had the characteristics of those
from which it arose.
However, the replica was not always pro¬
duced perfectly. Tiny accidental changes
might be introduced in the molecule. These
changes are called "mutations". It is the
mutations that produce the differences bet¬
ween one individual and another. It is the
mutations that are responsible for the in¬
born variations among the young that make
natural selection possible. Natural selection
allows some mutations to flourish and
others to die out, and as different mutations
survive here and there, new species form.

Parent generation
<
E
First generation
Second generation
AA
tall
0 0 0 0
A '\
\
X
y t
V
X
N 1
Aa Aa Aa Aa
tall tall tall tall
0 0 0 .0
i /
< \/' NJ \ ,
AA Aa Aa aa
tall tall tall small
Gregor Mendel's experiments with pea plants have entered the
history of science. He started by crossing a pure-bred tall variety of
pea with a pure-bred short variety. As the diagram above shows, all
the first generation offspring were tall, because, although each plant
carried both a tall character gene (A) and a short character gene (a),
the tall character gene (A) was dominant. Of the second generation
offspring, however, about a quarter inherited only the short
character gene (a) and thus the pure-bred short variety recurred in
one out of four cases.
By 1927, an American scientist, Hermann
Müller, showed how one might actually pro¬
duce mutations by bombarding organisms
with X rays, which change the atomic ar¬
rangement in the genes. In 1953, an
American, James Watson, and an
Englishman, Francis Crick, explained the
detailed structure of nucleic acids, and
showed how a particular molecule produced
its own replica and how it might make a
mistake in doing so.
All this strengthened and improved the
Darwinian theory of evolution by natural
selection.
Meanwhile, since Darwin's time, more
and more fossils have been found, and more
and more has been learned about the
behaviour of living organisms and their in¬
fluence on each other. The actual details of
evolution which organisms descended
from which and through what kind of in¬
termediate stepsbecame better known.
In addition, it was found that natural
selection did not always work with
mechanical certainty; there were other fac¬
tors involved.
For instance, chance played a greater part
than might have been thought. Where there
were small populations of a particular
species, it might be that mutations that
weren't particularly useful would be
established just because a few lucky breaks
insured that those individuals possessing
those mutations would happen to survive.
In fact, nowadays some scientists, such as
Stephen Gould, are thinking in terms of
evolution that proceeds very slowly most of
the time, but quite quickly under excep¬
tional circumstances.
When there is a huge population of a
species, it may be that no mutation can
establish itself against the existence of
numerous individuals with other mutations.
What's more, a few lucky breaks this way or
that wouldn't be enough to push evolution
in one direction or another. The species
might then continue without much in the
way of change for many millions of years.
On the other hand, if a rather small
population ofthat species is isolated in a dif¬
ficult environment, it becomes much more
possible that sheer chance will cause some
mutations to die out among them
altogether, while others survive in con¬
siderable numbers. Under such conditions,
evolution will be faster and new species may
be formed in merely thousands of years.
It is these intervals of rapid change that
might be the chief agent for driving evolu¬
tion forward.
As things stand in 1982, then, we can
summarize the status of biological evolution
as follows :
1) Just about all scientists are convinced
that biological evolution has taken place
over a period of billions of years, and that
all present species, including human beings,
have developed from other species that ex¬
isted earlier.
' 2) Just about all scientists are convinced
that the manner in which biological evolu¬
tion has taken place is essentially that
described by Charles Darwin; that natural
selection among inborn variations is the
basic key.
3) Scientists who study evolution
nowadays are in deep disagreement on some
of the details of the evolutionary machinery,
and we cannot yet tell which side will win
out in these disputes. However, whichever
side wins, that will not affect the general ac¬
ceptance of Darwinian theory, along with its
modern improvements, as the basic descrip¬
tion of how life developed on earth.
H Isaac Asimov
17
