The woman revolution
by Han Suyin
CULTURE is defined as an assembly
of spiritual and material values, at¬
tainments and beliefs, knowledge
and skills, which produce a corpus with
a distinctive identity. This body of thought,
behaviour and social customs is transmitted
by the group or groups practising it to suc¬
ceeding generations as its "culture".
Inter-cultural communication is not new.
Throughout the millennia man has travelled
in groups or singly, and his culture has been
influenced or has influenced other social
groups with which contact was made.
Trade and immigration, exploration,
religion, colonial conquest have all been
promoters of cultural change and interac¬
tion. This is intensified today, when
technology makes even the most remote,
hermetic ethnic groups accessible, vulner¬
able, and their cultures subject to change.
One factor in this increasing inter- '
communication is the ongoing woman
revolution. In all cultures and social groups,
womankind is undergoing a process of
change; and this changed status is occurring
through both a conscious movement on the
part of women, and the increasing mastery
of technology.
Woman, as well as man, is a cultural and
economic reality. Yet all studies of historical
development, in the main, ignore or obscure
the role of woman within her own cultural
pattern. She is treated as marginal, not
pivotal, to the historical development of her
group.
Yet, in the maintenance or rejection of
cultural values, in the affective and physical
shaping of the children-successors to the
culture, in the transmission and communica¬
tion of skills and knowledge of all kinds, in
the acceptance of new economic and social
developments, the role of woman is fun¬
damental to any society and to the cultural
survival of any group.
Woman as creator of wealth has been
totally ignored. Yet the development of
30

MINORITIES AND MIGRANTS
Class and racial and culturalfeatures distort the very conceptions of literacy, knowledge and
intelligence, and, since these cannot be truly objectively measured, the children of migrant
and minority groups become the victims of institutionalized procedures that preserve the
status quo. The failure of the migrant in the classroom is therefore a continual self-fulfilling
prophecy, generated by widespread and often imperceptible discriminatory practices.
Classroom scene in the USA. Photo © Jeanne Hamilton, New York.
civilization, from spinning and weaving by
hand to the industrial manufactures of to¬
day, require woman's labour. Woman the
consumer is also a factor in the economics
of any country. Throughout the ages, the
role of woman as wealth accumulator has
been slighted. Her role as traditional teacher
of arts and language and skills, in dance and
music and singing and many other fields, is
taken for granted and not properly valued.
As a keeper of tradition, as an educator
and communicator, and in the creation of
new needs, new aspirations, in literature and
poetry and painting, in science and in
politics, woman has played a role in the
enrichment and continuity of cultures.
Yet the vocabulary of so many of these
cultures is a masculine one; expressing man
deciding, ruling, designing existence; leaving
woman a "marginal majority" to silence
and to submission.
The oppression of womankind is, in the
history of humanity, the very first of all op¬
pressions exercised by the male sex towards
the fellow-being. "Before all other exploita¬
tions came the exploitation of the female"
says Engels. This universal exploitation
shows a striking uniformity in its patterns of
feminine oppression and enslavement,
despite the variety of the devices employed.
Not least, indeed of first importance, is the
use of physical strength, since physical
strength was accounted, for so long, a male
"superiority". Even today, among civilized
societies, the use and abuse of physical force
goes on. From mutilation such as foot-
MIGRANTS. In both the towns and countryside of the developed world
migrants form a wretched population of outcasts from society, virtual
outlaws, who are socially and culturally excluded. This sub-proletariat
lives precariously in the worst possible social conditions, in unhealthy, in¬
sanitary dwellings, with no cultural advantages, receiving little or no in¬
struction orprofessional training and, as a result, working in unfulfilling,
ill-paid jobs.
Immigrant workers in the shanty-town at Saint-Denis, on the outskirts of
Paris. Photo Bruno Barbey © Magnum, Paris.
binding to other forms of cloistering; from
sexual slavery to the ill-treatment of
widows, from rape (and the scandalous
lightness with which it is still regarded even
in the west) to wife-beating... physical force
is still one of the methods used to cow
woman into submission as an inferior.
But it is in the domain of the mental and
the metaphysical that this oppression has
been most subtly and tenaciously developed
into "cultural values". The utilization of
pseudo-virtues, man-made; of so-called
"sacred" or "God-given" laws; of man-made
laws, legalizing the violation of woman as a
person... all this still goes on, and still in¬
habits the many cultures of the world today.
Religion has played its role in this
shameful oppression. Christianity has, for
centuries, been the total negation of the
teachings of Jesus Christ, who elevated
woman to her rightful place as an equal per¬
son. Confucianism denied woman her
human identity; she was an object, the pro¬
perty of the male.
Yet Taoism, and Buddhism, as well as
Jesus, were world changers recognizing the
essential equality of woman. Taoism is
founded on the duality of the universe; the
Ying and the Yang, male and female, equal,
inseparable, complementary. To diminish
the one is to deny the other.
For centuries, in the West, learned men
and renowned scholars have found abundant
31

THE STATUS OF WOMEN
Any attempt to change the status of women elicits the expression of
deeply rooted opposition and attempts to create equal educational
and better employment opportunities are no exception. The
arguments justifying inaction are numerous but usually based on a
certain conception of women 's traditional role and a fear that, if
this is changed, there will be a breakdown of moral and cultural
values.
(1) In societies where many if not most women are employed, they
do not enjoy the same opportunities for advancement and are not
prepared through their education and training for higher status
jobs; it is acceptable for a woman to be a teacher but not an ad¬
ministrator, a laboratory assistant but not an engineer, a secretary
but not an executive, a field labourer but not a tractor driver or a
farm manager.
Photo Marc Riboud © Magnum, Paris
(2) In some societies it is feared that promoting literacy among
women will lead to dire consequences. In others, primary and
secondary general education for girls is accepted as natural, but
education for employment or for the exercise of a profession is
regarded as useless and perhaps undesirable.
Photo International Labour Office, J.P. Laffont © Sygma
(3) While conventional statistics show that women's working roles
are, at best, secondary or complementary to thefamily income, the
reality in developing countries is that women increasingly are the de
facto heads ofhouseholds with full responsibilityfor their own and
their children 's survival.
Photo © Olivier Martel, Paris
*T>
32 * 1"

justification both for racial discrimina¬
tion the exploitation of the other human
being and for the oppression of
woman the inferior being.
The establishment of cultural patterns
based upon woman's inferiority is
widespread, and it has been continuous for
three millennia.
This intra-cultural injustice is the fun¬
damental flaw, vitiating all dialogue, all
communication, not only between the two
halves of humankind, but also between all
human beings.
Today, an opportunity is given to redress
this injustice, through the ongoing woman
revolution which is taking place.
As we confront a world where inter¬
cultural dialogue must be based on essential
equality, the share that womankind must
have in the decision-making processes of
shaping a jusi future is crucial.
In other words, intra-cultural equality
must be achieved, to make inter-cultural
equality, a dialogue between equal human
beings, valid, responsible, and fruitful.
Otherwise the same pattern of superior/
inferior, dominant/repressed, will continue,
both materially and spiritually, to poison
relations between humans.
In the struggles for national liberation of
our twentieth century, as many women as
men fought side by side; but when in¬
dependence was achieved women, even
those leaders who were an inspiration to men
to do battle for justice and freedom, were
denied the fruits of victory and relegated to
"traditional" roles in the "culture" to which
they belonged.
Yet there are exceptions. One of them is
the Chinese Revolution. From its onset, in
the early twentieth century, women, un¬
binding their feet, played a most important
role in the revolution; and when Liberation
came, they were not returned to feudal op¬
pression. Indeed, China is one of the coun¬
tries in the Third World where the
authorities in power back woman as an equal
person to the fullest possible extent.
"Without the emancipation of woman,
man cannot be liberated" said Mao Tsetung,
thus echoing the French social theorist
Charles Fourier who in 1793 had said that all
social progress is conditioned by the progress
of woman towards her own emancipation.
Gisèle Halimi, the renowned woman
lawyer, writes that: "Woman has a global
vocation for revolutionary change."
The word "global" is significant. Just as
there is a striking uniformity in the methods
devised by man to oppress and to exploit
woman, in so many cultures, so is there a
similarity, a basic and identical foundation
for woman's revolt against this oppression.
All women's movements in the world,
therefore, can help and mutually support
each other. For the struggle is the same. For
economic equality. For ordinary human
rights, against female sexual slavery, against
rape and physical abuse, against the thou¬
sand and one legal and illegal ways in which
women are diminished, stunted and
betrayed. "Our struggle is your struggle".
And this platform of communication, across
all cultures, is one which is becoming in¬
creasingly apparent to all women.
Whether among the toilers of India, or in
Latin America; in the liberation movement
33

of affluent America, or elsewhere, though
different in degree, the aims are the same: to
become full persons, in their own right.
As Roger Garaudy says in his book For
The Advent Of Woman: "All these
movements [for feminine liberation] are
one... with a global character... far more so
than the national liberation struggles have
been...." The woman revolution is by its
very nature international, global, inter¬
cultural and intra-cultural.
Technological progress has helped the ris¬
ing consciousness of woman's liberation. A
major factor has been contraception. Birth
control, pioneered in the early twentieth
century by a woman (Margaret Sanger) is to¬
day known, accepted, by women the whole
world over. It is changing, altering the con¬
cepts of woman towards herself. No longer
a mere breeding machine, it enables her to
assume her own personality and potential. It
has, for the first time, given her the right to
own her own body; to decide when she
wants a child, or not.
This change in mentality is enormously
significant. In other ways new technologies
have made obsolete the "superiority" of
physical strength. Skill and intelligence is
displayed by women working computers and
other machines, or engaging in work of high
intellectual calibre. And all this merely
points to one thing: to the end of the tragic
waste of woman's potential, inventiveness,
and intelligence. The world has indeed im¬
poverished itself for some millennia by
discriminating against the brain power of
half of humanity, but now the opportunity
has come to utilize it.
Woman's intelligence and her right to
participate in decision-making affecting the
world's future do not mean a competition
with man, but a partnership. Her approach
to problems will certainly be different, and
her contribution lies precisely in that
difference. 	
Whereas masculine sociologists and
philosophers tend to start their mental ex¬
ploration from intellectualized assumptions,
women are more likely to proceed from liv¬
ed experience than abstract ideation, from
observation, and concrete aspects of living,
rather than from "rational reasoning" or
"logic".
This used to be derided as "feminine in¬
stinct" or "intuition", a "biological", non-
intellectual expression of the woman's
mind. But perhaps this is what the world
needs, and certainly woman's perception of
inter-cultural problems will be all the more
enriching because her wisdom and per-
cipience will not make her reject what is dif¬
ferent as "incomprehensible". There is far
too much obsession with logic, with reason,
which is merely the reduction of an argu¬
ment to the limits of its own assumptions. In
the presence of dissimilar cultural patterns,
"logic" and "rationality" often err.
Whereas common sense, an "intuitive"
perception and appreciation of differences,
and an acceptance of them, will be enriching
and productive.
In our changing world, where all cultures
are changing so rapidly, intra- and inter¬
cultural progress can only become coherent,
harmonious, when woman enters as a full
human being into the dialogue of our dif¬
ferent cultures, as an equal participant in all
the affairs of our planet Earth.
H Han Suyin
COPA DEL MUNDO DE FÚTBOL *?' ESPANA 82
SPORT
As a means of expression that is independent of language, and in¬
stantly understandable to all, by the evidence it provides of the
fundamental equality of men and peoples, by the opportunities it
affords for encounters between individuals and teams from widely
diverse countries, sport can and should pave the way for men to
live together in a reconciled world.
Fiesta, a poster by the Catalan artist Joan Miró for the World Cup
now taking place in Spain. Poster © Société de Production des
Affiches Maeght, Paris.
34
