TfcTH.C
TO BUKfrifl
TKblMtJ
THE BIRTH OF A LANGUAGE
KIEV came into being in the fifth cen¬
tury at the cross-roads of the trade-
routes linking Asia to Europe and
northern Europe to Byzantium. At this
period the Slav tribes which are thought to
have been living in the territory between the
middle course of the Dnieper and the Bug
began to pour towards the north, west and
south.
At the same time the language they had
long shared began to diversify, giving birth
to the languages of the southern and western
Slavs. In the east, however, in the region of
the middle Dnieper, the southern and
eastern Bug, the upper Dnieper, the Volga,
the Don, and Lake limen, the tribal dialects
VITALY MAKAROVICH RUSSANOVSKY, of
the Ukrainian SSR, is a corresponding member of
the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences and secretary
of its department of literature, languages and
linguistics.
by Vitaly Russanovsky
of the eastern Slavs retained their common
characteristics, fusions and secessions
notwithstanding.
These eastern Slav tribes eventually form¬
ed a social organization of a pre-feudal
kind. Craftsmanship developed, and the
communities joined together to form States.
The ninth and tenth centuries saw the birth
of the first feudal State in the Slavic east:
Kiev-Rus.
Many tribes lived in the immense area of
Kiev-Rus which at the time of the great
princes Vladimir and Yaroslav the Wise
stretched across the vast plains of eastern
Europe. From the heroic legends of these
tribes grew the unique culture of ancient
Russia, with its chronicles, patriotic epics
such as the Tale of the Host of Igor, its
frescoes and mosaics of great beauty. These
peoples all used the same spoken language,
Old Russian, but where the written language
was concerned the situation was more com¬
plicated.
After the introduction of Christianity into
Russia at the end of the tenth century, ec¬
clesiastical books written in Old Slavonic
began to be copied in the Balkans. Old
Slavonic was quite closely related to Old
Russian, and the two languages became in¬
termixed. Old Russian acquired many scien¬
tific and philosophical terms from Old
Slavonic, which in its turn tended towards a
simplification of forms along the lines of
Old Russian. In this way the literary
language of Kiev-Rus came into being.
Local variants from different regions were
later engrafted onto the common trunk.
Major historical events had repercussions
on the linguistic evolution of Kiev-Rus. In
the twelfth century the powerful Russian
State split into a multitude of feudal
princedoms which warred constantly among
themselves for the throne of Kiev and,
12

Minerva, goddess of wisdom, is depicted at the head of the
scholars of Kiev in this late 17th-century engraving by Ivan
Chtirsky. In the background are the buildings of the
celebrated Mogila Academy, one of the centres of cultural
life in the city. The classical-allegorical style is typical of the
Baroque period.
**» 3 8 76*%^
rfdtitímiKíi
G il OR ¿H CM M
runnuru
tf i Ùfi H Hfl c&íK 66HY* ut-
E/fcn«rM.G/wkn«ñ jfiu^« TU«
WM ¿TtWAtfinCTlfjinrA l"qA\
íjuntas
T-PlKOy ô rufWM nu (¡ni £f**r»
ÍP i
y
Title page of the first book of grammar of
the Ukrainian language, compiled at the
Sorbonne, Paris, by a Ukrainian student,
Ivan Oujevich, in 1643. A facsimile edition of
this work, an essential tool for the study of
the Ukrainian language, was published in
Kiev in 1970.
weakened by the fighting, were overcome by
nomad invaders from the eastern steppes in
the middle of the thirteenth century. When
the invading hordes retreated, the territory
on the banks of the Dnieper came under the
control of Lithuania. Then, in the sixteenth
century, the south-western part of the area
became part of the kingdom of Poland. This
is why, in the west, south-west and north¬
east of the old Kievan State, three languages
developed: Byelorussian, Ukrainian and
Russian respectively. The ancestry of all
three can be traced back directly to the
language of Old Russia.
The sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
which saw the struggle of the Ukrainian peo¬
ple to throw off the cruel yoke which denied
them their identity as a society and as a na¬
tion, were an important period in the history
of the Ukrainian language. They saw the
birth of a polemical literature of exceptional
richness, which emerged in defiance of at¬
tempts to crush the cultural originality of
the Ukrainian people and to impose
Catholicism on them. During the same
period the Ukrainian language was widely
used in business, and for administrative and
legal documents. The first plays in the
Ukrainian language were written at this
time. The reunification of the Ukraine and
Russia in the middle of the seventeenth cen
tury had a strong influence on the develop¬
ment of the language.
The end of the eighteenth century and the
nineteenth century constitute the golden age
of literature in Ukrainian language, first in
poetry and then, after 1850, in prose. The
Ukraine was divided between two empires,
Russia and Austria-Hungary, between
which relations were difficult. Teaching and
the publication of bqpks in Ukrainian were
restricted and even punished. In spite of this
unpropitious political background, the
Ukrainian language provided such great
writers as Shevchenko, Franko, Lesa
Ukrainka and Kotiubinsky with a flexible
instrument with which they could create a
gallery of unforgettable characters.
But it was only after the October Revolu¬
tion that Ukrainian became a means of com¬
munication extending to all fields of social
life: as the language of secondary and higher
education, of science and culture, of radio
and television, theatre and cinema, the press
and the business world. Today countless
masterpieces of world literature have been
translated into Ukrainian, attesting to the
language's development, the richness of its
vocabulary, the diversity of its resources and
its capacity to contribute to the fulfilment of
the spriritual life of the Ukrainian nation.
H Vitaly Russanovsky
13
